O, son, you see this is a book on surgery?
And if it is a matter of understanding, or if there is a need to explain something further, it is said to be done by hand.
And prepare the way for the treatment by using the tools necessary to deal with the second ailment, which is called gout in the case of an inflamed toe:
Then apply your knowledge of anatomy to understand the location and nature of the pain within the patient.
The name Hippocrates is used to describe a condition affecting the patient's legs and feet.
That's that many do not know about anatomy, so many are mistaken, for which reason this book has been written to teach the science of anatomy.
This text describes a medical procedure involving a woman's throat.
And so he used another doctor who would use the other tools on the man to treat him, but the man died on the third day.
And I knew by the size of the stone and the location, that the patient would die.
Here's the translated sentence:
And so, if the intestine is in distress, it will be relieved by cautery.
E yeu es que you have made an incision, and another cushion will be placed on their legs.
Mays, however, the pain in the joints was confirmed to be gout, so that the patient would not suffer further.
and he who is skilled in surgery will be able to treat them.
And if the cause of illness comes from a melancholic humor, the patient needs to be treated for gout.
And so it is necessary for you, sons, to know that it is also necessary to use a cushion on their feet.
Then I have put cushions in the places where the pain is present on which the patient was experiencing discomfort, so that the pain would be relieved.
And so you should apply your cauterizing tools with faith and firmness.
And may your weapons be used on their thighs to reduce the fear of terrible diseases that prevent them from being healed, for in those diseases it is difficult to find a cure, but by using the best methods, you can alleviate these diseases through the grace of God.
When pain in the legs is caused by cold humors, it is customary to call it gout. Do not be a doctor who only treats cushions, but rather treat the whole body.
This book is divided into three chapters.
This is the beginning of the first chapter. This is the first chapter on treating ailments in the body through the use of purging and cauterization.
This is the second part of the book. The second chapter describes how to treat wounds caused by inflammation, such as those found in gouty feet.
The third chapter, on restoring the dislocation of the foot, is called gout.
The patient must be treated by a physician, who will determine the proper course of treatment based on their condition.
And by the way, I believe that you have already spoken about the long and subtle nature of this illness, called gout by the doctors, which is why a lot of people are so familiar with the pain of gout.
And if you want to cauterize as a treatment method, it is important for doctors that they use it as a last resort.
This text suggests that the practice of using cauterization for gout treatment was common in medieval times.
Guessed Translation: And if the patient is suffering from a condition that causes pain in the feet, it is considered a good practice to apply cauterization to the affected area.
Then he's already experienced the need to use cushions for support.
Then apply to the body and another on their legs, but don't let the intestine come out.
Let the other doctors be consulted in the case of others.
And so on the patient's intestine, which you cauterize only in the case of simple wounds.
"And if it is necessary to cauterize the foot, one must apply the hot cautery to the legs.
And if it is necessary to open the surface of the foot, it is customary to use a cushion during the operation.
They will know that gout is best treated in the spring.
And if the cautery be used for pain, it is important to know where the evil lies.
And if he has a burning pain in his bowels, and you put a cushion on him, he will need no further treatment.
When the physician sees that the patient's body has been infiltrated by the pain but they are unable to find the cause of the pain, they are said to have a condition called cuyler.
Mays is the Latin word for "but" or "however", so the translation might be:
A common practice for treating gout was to apply cautery to the affected area to relieve pain.
E la mays es that which is used to treat pain in the legs,  and the last resort for those who suffer from gout.
This practice is a remedy for those who are suffering from illness; it's a cure-all that doctors use when they don't know what to call it. And when there is a cushion placed upon their legs, they say it is a proper cure for gout.
The ancients say that cauterization with gold is better than with iron, except for the use of a golden cautery on the legs.
And so you will apply a cushion to the affected area, the size of which depends on the severity of the illness, and place your hand on the body where the disease is located.
Then apply cautery gently on the leg.
And if it is necessary to open the chapter again and again, I would be happy.
The first chapter.
And when the patient has a pain in their limbs, you should know that the cause of such pain is often attributed to trauma.
And the treatment for this condition is by purging, as needed based on the person's constitution and age.
E aprop places the patient's feet on a cushion.
And then place your hand on their legs to prevent it from being affected by other things. But you should also know that there are other ways to describe the application of a cushion on the body.
And so, you have seen to the patient's legs, and now you must treat them carefully.
E aprop leva la cushion under their and keep its position.
And then apply a small poultice to the patient's legs and let it rest there.
And then you place your hand on their leg to prevent the body from suffering further harm. And apply the four-part medicine to their location.
Then they say that the plague is a disease which is truly a terrible thing, then you should consider applying honey to the patient's arm, and if it's necessary to use other remedies on their arms, they will need another remedy.
And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot.
And a cushion should be placed under the bone to prevent pain.
And other things that are in the bones of the body, And they say that the pain is caused by bad humors in the head.
Then your hand should be placed on the affected area to ensure proper treatment.
Mays, E se curable with a hot cautery; the pain in the foot can be cured by applying a cushion under their feet, or by placing a cold cautery on the foot itself and another one on the chest.
And a cushion must be placed on their legs for that pain.
Chapter two.
Then apply your hand to the affected area.
When in all the body you have already opened with a pointed tool, apply a poultice to the affected area. And then apply heat to the head of the patient, where the veins are. The foot was opened by gout and a cushion is placed on it to treat the swelling caused by a medical procedure. And if the patient's legs are in pain, they should be treated by the physician to prevent them from being affected by other diseases.
When the hot iron is applied to the body, you must carefully consider the location of the application.
This is the title of a chapter, likely indicating Chapter 3.
And on the hot irons.
Then you should apply two types of remedies to the affected area: one for when there is pain from the sharp inflammation and another for when the inflammation spreads.
When a surgeon makes an incision to remove the excess blood from the body, they must take care to avoid the vein, arteries, and capillaries. Then apply a cautery to the affected area of the patient's temple.
Then leave the patient's stomach to be left in its proper place for three days.
And apply an ointment to their feet so that they are healed.
E se tu are in good health, you will have to be very careful about which medicines to use.
And may this be done with fire in the manner of a cushion under the skin.
This medical text describes how to treat gout in the feet.
And then carefully apply cautery to the area of pain.
And if the amount of the quantity is less than that of the other, then the patient has a cold in the foot.
And then you have already placed a cushion on their legs.
And if you wish, apply a cushion to the patient's feet.
Chapter four.
Then apply the treatment for gout.
When you are treating someone for a disease related to blood or heat, if the patient has gout, apply the knife to the area near the joints and prevent them from opening up again.
Therefore, hold the jaw steady to prevent injury while treating it.
E layessa the operation on the patient's legs.
And then, the patient's legs should be treated according to their condition as described in this book.
If you see that the pain in the foot is tolerable, cauterize it then.
And if you have already decided to treat one ailment, use two cauteries for better effect.
Chapter 5.
On the treatment of burns on the foot.
When there is pain in the lower leg, they are treating their lower leg with a poultice and should be treated with a poultice for the other leg, if necessary.
When there's pain in the joints, doctors may apply it to the legs, but this doesn't mean it's truly gout. E si you are experiencing pain in your foot, you should apply cautery to the area.
Then use a hot cautery on the area to treat the affected part.
In this case, the correct translation for "Capitol .vi." would be **"Chapter six"**.
A cushion should be placed under the patient's foot.
And if the patient's legs are stiff and cold, it is treated with hot irons.
The patient's legs are swollen from a blockage or something similar.
When you care for someone, use three cauteries.
And if there's a pain in your body that is only in your legs, you should know that it is commonly called sciatica.
And if there's an opening in the right side of the groin, you should cauterize it with a small cautery, and another for the left (side) as well as the other on their (left) (foot) use another cautery to apply heat to the patient’s body.
The form of the instrument is as follows, etc. (it refers to the rest of the text). But the pain that is felt in the joints is often called gout.
And apply a bandage to hold the wound open so that it heals properly.
Chapter 7
This refers to cauterization, a treatment for old, established gout using a cautery tool.
And when the body is affected by the infiltration of bad humors, it is called gout. And the way to apply it is by using the method described above.
Then apply the cauterization to the area of the patient's stomach; then treat them with a hot cautery.
Chapter 8.
The pain of forgetting is treated with fire by placing a cautery on the patient's legs, among other methods.
The patient's body was covered in pain from head to toe.
And if it's necessary to apply cauterization to the head or make incisions in the legs, they will be described in the following sentences.
Then put your hand on the part of the body where the pain is located, and apply a cautery to the foot. And according to the method described previously, it should be applied to the leg or foot.
Then apply three hot cauteries to the affected areas on the body. And if you don't have a cushion, use a bandage to hold the joint.
Mays le malaute es un French phrase for a type of pain in the body, especially in the joints, which doctors might incorrectly diagnose as something else.
And if it is already healed, it should be treated as described by the doctors.
This passage refers to a surgical procedure where the doctor would identify and treat issues related to the foot and also be careful to avoid complications during the procedure.
And thus he/she was burned and softened by cauterization.
and the patient's pain is located on the head, in the area that needs to be treated.
And if it is necessary to treat a patient's body with humors in their illness, they will be given cushions on their limbs, and treated with a hot iron. And so then you should apply the hot oil cautery to that area.
Chapter 10.
This refers to the treatment of seizures using cautery.
Then apply a cautery to the affected joint.
Therefore, it is necessary to modify the brain at the beginning of treatment when the pain is severe, as we have discussed.
And if it is a child who doesn't respond to other remedies, then cauterization might be used.
E aprop pause la mani over the area of the body to prevent the other, and then cauterize the leg's loc while the patient sleeps. And if the pain is severe, they are tolerated by the patient.
And if you have to use another hand (or tool) for cauterization, do so with a hot cautery.
If the patient is a child, the application of the cautery should be done more delicately.
Chapter 11
This is about the treatment of melancholia.
If the causes of melancholy are damp and cold humors, then treat them accordingly.
If it is necessary to apply a cautery treatment to someone suffering from melancholia, it can be done by placing a cushion under their head or feet.
And a proper cauterization is done by placing a cushion on their head.
And if the pain exists in its proper place, it is considered a different ailment.
And apply a cushion to their knees and other areas where needed; and if necessary for the lower limbs, it is best to use a cushion on the patient's legs. And if it is necessary to warm something on the fire, it is called by them (the doctors) as a cushion for their knees. Then place a cushion under that which has been taken by gout.
This text already exists in a language similar to Italian, so the translation should be in English.
And then place your hand on the body of the patient.
And if the pain is in the feet, apply cold-water compresses.
And so the cauterization of the legs will be treated.
And if a cushion has been placed on the legs to prevent a patient from experiencing pain during the operation.
And let him stay there for a few days.
Then cauterize the surface of the patient's head, if they are already open for treatment.
When treating an illness in the head, one should use a cushion to prevent the spread of heat from the hands.
And if you cauterize it, the blood will be cauterized; apply your medicine accordingly.
And now it is necessary to apply knowledge to their knees, which are inflamed.
And if it is necessary to treat a hernia, then you must hold your hand on their legs.
This chapter discusses how to treat gout by applying hot cautery to the affected area.
And if it is necessary to apply cautery to the affected area.
Gout, which is characterized by inflammation in the joints and pain caused by excess uric acid, is often treated with medication. And if you have to treat a patient for the ailment of cold humors, then use a cautery on their whole body.
Chapter 14
De cauterizatio de nas est a cushion for a cushion for the nose.
If your treatment does not work for the patient, then use a different method to treat them. And then put a cushion on their legs and another on their feet.
And guard your legs from other ailments, and do not touch that which is not gout.
And this is how you apply cauterization.
Chapter 15.
Then return the patient's eyelids to their place.
Then cauterize that eyelid with a hot cautery
And if you want to cauterize the patient, place the cautery on their temples. And the physician will know where to apply the cauteries.
This is why doctors used to call this illness “the disease of kings”.
Chapter 16
Then you must cauterize the patient's eyelid.
The patient's bowels are being treated with cushions if the pain is on the surface or occurs in the joints.
If you have a hot iron to apply to the patient's foot, it is best for the body to be treated with a cautery.
And thus when one has gout, it is treated by the physician.
And so you should place another cushion on their legs or feet if necessary.
And then apply heat to the patient's legs with the cautery.
Then, carefully apply the cautery to the affected area.
And if you see the eyelid of the patient already raised, another sensation on the leg, and the hair on the foot elevated, then it is considered a sign of good health.
And so raise your hand to the patient's foot, e.g., if they are in pain, and for three days keep it elevated. And so the doctor heals the patient's ailment by bringing them back to health.
Then apply it on the legs, so they are supported, when a patient has pain in their eyelids.
Mays it means: If you have hair on the eye, then use that to apply heat to the area around the eye, which may be used for treating a condition called a stye (an infected eyelash follicle).
And thus the patient is healed by medicine's power.
And you have already placed your hand upon the patient's chest, so that the patient can be warmed and their body does not cool down too much.
When joints are inflamed, it is customary for doctors to refer to it as gout, and if it’s in the foot, it is common to apply a cushion under the affected area.
Then apply hot cautery to the affected area to relieve it.
And if it is necessary to cauterize the patient's flesh, it is done by heating another area of the body, such as the thigh, with a hot instrument.
Gathered around the patient's legs, you should be watchful and diligent to apply medicine as described in the text.
And this is the way to treat them with another type of cautery that uses the myrtle leaf.
A person who burns their skin can be considered unlucky, for they are a victim of the heat from the burning inflammation.
The path to knowledge in this field is now open for me to learn.
Another cushion should be placed on the legs, and another on the feet, and the patient's hands should be placed on their knees.
E si un'altra cosa che fa male al corpo should be translated as:
When you treat a fistula, or apply this treatment to the affected area.
And place a cushion on their feet, for the patient will be in pain if you don't.
And if you already have the intestine open, you should use a cushion to hold the patient's hands.
This is a reference to the other parts of the body being affected by cauterization.
When the pain is localized to the other parts of the body, it is called gout. And if you want to know more about what the doctor wants to know, then consult the ancient medical texts.
But nevertheless, you should know that which is done by the hand in the case of a servant, who is a skilled craftsman in his work.
Then place a cushion on their chest, and another over the legs. Then apply a cushion to the affected area.
Then make a small incision near the patient's groin to allow access to the other parts of the body.
And if it is necessary to use a cautery on their legs or foot, they should be treated similarly to the way one would treat the body when a member has been affected by a burning pain.
This time, if he/she doesn't get better, then use harsh remedies.
Then understand that the patient's legs are cauterized on their location, so they should be kept in place.
And if it is not healed with points by itself, it must be administered through the nose and the fistula should be treated according to the usual method.
Capitol .xviii. translates to Chapter 18.
The cautery is applied to the affected area of the leg, and the patient's legs are held in place.
Inflammation in the gums, often affecting infants.
And since you have opened the space between the legs, so to speak, the patient will be cured if they continue to be treated.
The patient's legs are being treated by the doctor for whatever ailment he has, which is what is typically done.
And if the patient suffers from pain in their limbs, you must place your hand on the patient's chest.
And place your hand on their legs to prevent the intestine from being opened.
Chapter .xix.
This refers to treating a fistula by cauterizing the opening in the intestine or other body part.
And if the patient's tongue or palate is already inflamed, then use a hot poker to cauterize the area.
Therefore if the pain comes back, it is necessary to burn the bone or cleanse the corrupted organ.
This document describes medical practices in the past.
Single-line translation:  When to apply cauterization to the teeth and treat the swelling from the gums.
When the joints are inflamed by humidity, treat them with cautery in a specific way, using appropriate methods to prevent pain from radiating up the body.
And then place your hand on their thighs to prevent them from becoming inflamed.
E aprop le malautia e i has un dia que s'ha de fer an instrument de cauterizatzio.
Chapter .xxi.
Of cauterization for toothache.
Frigid humors are treated by drawing out the cold using a burning stick or a hot iron.
A cushion should be placed on the patient's legs, especially if they have pain in their joints, so that the body can be cauterized.
And if you must make cuts, be careful that the incisions are made in the direction of the foot's muscle fibers to minimize scarring.
When a toothache occurs, apply a tool to the affected area.
But if there is heat in the body, but only in the legs or feet, the pain will be mild.
Then apply heat to the affected limb, but be careful to avoid burning the skin; take note if the pain there comes from the same type of ailment.
This is the form for empressio used by doctors to prevent the body from becoming too swollen.
And if it is necessary, cauterize as you deem appropriate.
And this is the form of the lancet?
Another one
On the treatment of gout.
When gout is caused by phlegm, it is treated by applying a poultice to the affected part of the body and cauterizing it with a heated iron, and when the other symptoms are present, the patient may be given another treatment.
And if the abscess is small, you should put the hot cautery on it for three days, as needed.
Then apply the ointment to that place and treat them with bandages.
The following is a translation of the first sentence, based on the provided examples:
And apply a cushion to their legs and feet.
Then the patient's bowels are affected, and you must use a tool to open their foot (a cautery).
Then apply a hot cautery to the throat and chest only a little bit, on the throat and legs.
And cauterize their other legs. And if you want to mark an area for cauterization, apply it to the patient's clavicle.
Then apply your hand to that area of the body, ensuring the patient's legs are supported by cushions.
Make a note of the next chapter.
This is a Latin-like phrase, likely meaning: "Of the burning lung and cough"
Then apply the proper treatment for the patient's illness, which requires using two cauteries to burn out the impurities in the body from their ailments.
And if you wish, use your own cauterization tools to perform the treatment.
E siam cura la hora de loe curare.
And the cautery should be placed in the following way.
Chapter 25.
Et autre place the cushion on their legs.
When the pain occurs in the head or foot, it is best to treat the pain according to the following method: (place your hand on the area where the affected part is located), e.g., if a cushion is placed under the patient's feet and the patient needs to be treated for another type of ailment.
And thus they are said to be suffering from two-fold pain.
And if there's inflammation within the patient's body that affects their intestines or another part of their body, then apply a cautery to those areas with a hot iron.
And when there are humors that cause swelling in the body, apply cautery to the affected area.
Then apply pressure to the wound so that the patient's legs are calmed, and the patient's condition is improved, and prevent the intestine from being exposed to the air.
And if the patient's body needs to be cauterized, apply the cushion to their legs.
E aprop reducat the other sources for the second line of the translation are in the original language, but here you will find the meaning translated into English:
This is a Latin-like phrase that means "of cauterization of the stomach".
Then treat the affected body part with whatever remedies are appropriate to the patient's condition, and if your doctor recommends it, with a cautery.
And if the depth of the burn is the cause of pain in both feet.
And if you want to cauterize the intestine or have already done so, the cushion is placed under the patient's foot.
And if it is necessary to cauterize the stomach, the amount of skin should be burned as is needed for the treatment, according to the patient's condition.
Then apply the proper name for that type of pain.
Then apply a cautery to the affected area.
Translation: When the body becomes affected by excessive coldness, which can cause pain in the joints.
And if he has a pain in his legs, they are to be treated according to the nature of the pain, as one would treat a person's pain in the legs.
And do not press on their legs.
And if the pain is on the legs, it is called the old gout; but if the pain is in the foot, it's called a "siat" or "juxtaposition".
Then you can use a cautery to make incisions on their legs, carefully avoiding the area of the intestine where the cushion is placed.
The author is advising to be careful with cauterization for gout, as it can be dangerous.
When there is pain in the joints and a burning sensation in the body, it is customary to call it gout.
When there are signs of inflammation in the feet, it is called gout.
At that point, if a boil appears on the foot, you should know what to do.
And if it is in the intestines, pain will be felt.
Then you should apply the cautery to the patient's body when they have a fever due to humors, as previously described. And cauterize it with a hot iron, to cauterize it means to burn it with fire.
Then take care of that one with other remedies.
And if they are suffering from their ailment, the doctor will know what's best for them.
In the 29th chapter.
When applying a cautery to treat an ailment of the body, especially in the feet.
This way you will cauterize the foot, by using this method you can stop the inflammation that causes gout.
Then apply a hot compress to the affected area and use smaller cushions for the rest of the body parts.
E tu has opened the area between the legs, and you are holding your hand over them.
This translates to:
Perhaps: This is a tricky one, but I believe it means "May the patient be treated with a cautery device when using it on the legs of the patient".
Here's the translated sentence:
Of the cauterization of the spleen.
When you cure a disease in the leg with a cautery, you must use three or four cauterizations.
Thus, the patient has some form of pain in the legs or feet.
And if you wish to cauterize the legs, the patient must be cauterized.
And so the other manner in which the patient's legs are cauterized is called gout.
And so the patient's leg should be treated with a cautery as needed.
Then return to the body the two things, you see, that are already placed on the body, and then apply your hand to the affected area.
And you have already taken away four cushions.
And if you are burning, cauterize with three cushions.
Then place your hand on their chest to prevent further gout flare-ups.
The patient's body will be covered by a cushion.
And if it is necessary, treat them for dropsy.
Then apply a cushion on the patient's legs.
This could be translated as: And when you are treating the patient for gout, use two cauterizers on the legs, and one cauteri on each side of the abdomen (the affected area) and one on the right foot. And if the patient's legs are involved, you should apply the cautery to the area that needs treatment.
And so they put the cauterizer in place under the patient's legs, and apply it for a long time.
When the doctors use cauteri to drain humors from the body, they should be careful not to burn the patient's skin.
Then the patient's foot is cauterized with a hot iron.
Gout is caused by an imbalance of the humors in the body.
And then apply hot iron to the legs for the ailment of that condition.
When the body is subjected to a heavy dose of medicine, it may cause the patient to be thirsty and want to drink lemonade.
Then apply the cauterization method using two cauterizing irons. The patient's legs are cauterized, both knees are placed on the cushion.
Let the doctor apply treatment to the affected area.
Aprop then you place a cushion on their legs and they will be healed.
The text appears to be describing a surgical procedure for treating gout in a somewhat archaic manner.
And for the cautery of their legs.
Nothing is said about what "a cushion" refers to, so we can only guess at its meaning in this context. It's likely referring to a specific medical treatment involving the use of cushions for support or positioning, but without more information, it's impossible to know exactly which one.
And if the pain is in the joints, and the doctors say it's due to an overabundance of humors that are concentrated in the legs, it is necessary to cauterize the affected area.
Then apply heat to the cushion to treat the patient's condition.
This refers to the process of cauterizing hemorrhoids.
Then apply three poultices to the affected area, which we have described as if the patient were suffering from a corrupted nature.
And if you want to apply heat to an area, use a hot cautery; and when the pain is in the legs or feet, it is customary to apply it with a cushion on their face, for they are cold.
This refers to the use of specific medical treatments in a later section.
And if you want to talk about the burning or pain that arises from their burning, then call it cauterization.
When you have removed the ailment from their legs, apply a cushion to the area where the pain was felt. Then apply your hand to the affected area.
If you have to remove a hand from the patient's thighs, do so carefully, as they are easily damaged.
This text describes the treatment of gout in a way that suggests the use of a cautery tool was common for medical purposes.
This chapter is about the practice of treating ailments.
And then put your hand on the affected area to help stop bleeding.
When nature does not return the bowel to its place, it is another who is responsible for the use of cushions, and it is placed on the patient's legs, a cushion on which the surgeon should have placed their hand.
Therefore, when there are fistulas on the body, apply a cautery to the existing fistula and thus prevent the spread of corruption.
And if you are treating a patient, use a cushion for their ailment. Then put the cushion on their knee to test the effectiveness of the treatment.
And apply the cautery to the body as needed, one time or two times, depending on the amount of corruption.
When there are burns on the legs or feet, do not apply heat to the body.
Then put your hand on their place.
When the patient's foot is sealed, e if you are successful in placing the cushion on their legs, and another cushion under them.
And if you are dealing with a hot humor, apply a cold compress to the area.
When there's a need to apply cautery to the body, it is customary for doctors to use special techniques depending on the location, such as applying it to the legs or chest.
This is the treatment for gout.
When there are pains in the thighs, it is customary to call them gout.
And so, as they say, you must cauterize the second of their small bones.
Capitol 38.
Then apply the cautery to treat the bladder.
Then place your hand on the patient's leg to prevent the urine from becoming stagnant and apply the cautery to the area you wish to treat.
If it's the foot, the pain is caused by humors being held back; it's a matter of expertise to know how to apply cautery.
And another hot iron on their legs, and another on their feet, is used to treat the patient.
E si es un cossai, la qual sia est de la persona.
And then apply a heated cushion (to treat) the affected area.
And so it is customary to use three cauteries for a disease called gout.
Another source text says that there are many causes for gout, but they all have one in common, which is inflammation.
On the subject of dislocations of the hip, then we are talking about dislocation of the ankle.
When there are dampness and gout, another medicine must be used. And the patient's legs are being treated by the physician.
Then there is a need to apply cauterization to the legs of the patient when they have been separated, as well as to the areas where the skin has been burned, in case the patient's body becomes too cold.
And if you want to make points on their legs, it is customary to use the appropriate tools for cauterization.
Then if you are not present, the doctor will use a hot cautery to treat the affected area.
And if the doctor performs a cautery on the other foot, he will be able to cure it.
Chapter xli.
On the cauterization of the sciatic vein.
A physician should treat the ailment of the thigh with leeches or a cushion to keep the patient comfortable.
The manner of treatment with a cautery is determined by whether it is done with medicines or with fire.
The patient's legs were opened by cushions to relieve pressure on the feet. "Then apply cautery to the feet."
Mays some other diseases be treated by placing the cushion on their leg so that the patient's legs are close to the body already have four cushions.
And if you wish to apply cauterization, have it done by a skilled person in the presence of someone who can administer a cautery.
And this is the way to treat a pain that has settled in the thigh with cautery.
This refers to the use of leeches in treating the pain associated with gout.
And if the physician's tools are used to treat the pain in their legs, they use a cushion to control the pain in the feet.
And if one has a pain in the feet, they should apply cauterization.
When pain affects the patient's feet, it is customary to apply a cautery to them.
And if necessary, you should use a heated iron to cauterize the legs and feet of the patient.
"Then apply cauterization to the affected area, as needed." And then apply cold to the belly, and death will be avoided.
And if there is a need to treat a patient suffering from pain, you should cauterize both legs together, according to this method.
When they are ready to be cauterized, apply a cushion to their legs.
And you should place three fingers on the foot of the patient to make three points.
This describes the treatment of gout using a hot cautery to relieve pain in the joints. Therefore, the wound should be cauterized in one go.
And if the disease has lasted for three days, close the wound and let it heal.
This should be translated as: "These are the writings of Albucasis" or "Avicenna's" (depending on context)
And if you are suffering from gout, it is necessary to apply cautery to the foot.
Mays cauteri are medicines for pain in the body.
Then return to the site of the pain and apply a cushion to it.
Then apply a hot compress to the affected area.
Then apply the cushion to the patient's legs so that they don't bleed out.
And if it is necessary to apply a cushion to his legs, then apply it on their surface, and allow him to move his limbs freely; this is the cure for the condition of the patient's humors.
Then apply a poultice to that place in the leg where the pain is felt.
And if the pain is in the leg or foot, apply a poultice to draw out the inflammation.
This refers to the way in which medicines are administered in a specific manner. When preparing to treat the patient's legs for gout, use two tablespoons of alkali for each ounce of the body, place one cushion on their knees, another being used below their feet, and another placed on the affected area.
And the cushion will help to remove the water from the affected area, and you will have to use the best possible cautery for that purpose.
And now place a cushion on the patient's body to reduce the pain.
And if you apply a cautery to some medicines, and these are applied to the other medicines, they will be hot and burn.
And if you want to relieve the pain of an ailment, put it in the cushion of the cushion of the patient's leg.
And so it is necessary to make a point on the legs of the patient or in the area of the body where the pain is found.
And if it is necessary to apply a cushion to the chest of a patient suffering from gout, then proceed with the treatment.
And if you have to operate on the patient's body, use cushions for support.
Then you should know that these medicines are used to treat gout.
And if you want to know how to treat a person suffering from pain in the feet, just as the Romans treated it with a hot iron.
Then apply a poultice to draw out the moist humors from their body. And if you are to apply a cauterizing tool, then make sure to use a cushion on the patient’s body.
This method of burning the patient's feet.
"Gout is caused by an excess of humors in the body, which affects the joints on the legs."
Of the legs, leg pain
Some translations are wrong.
And then they cauterize them, which is what causes the pain in the foot.
And if it is customarily to apply a cautery on the thighs, it is called gout.
And there comes a cushion so that the patient's legs are cushioned, and you have applied cautery to the foot.
When pain in the foot persists, they are likely to be caused by something other than gout.
The text from the treatise translates to: "Chapter 43."
At its beginning, the pain of the illness is caused by a burning sensation.
Gout, a painful condition, often affects the body's surface, particularly the feet.
And if you are treating a patient who has a sore back, apply a cautery to the spine and place your hand on their stomach.
And so when you cauterize the legs to prevent further pain, you make a mistake. Then place a hot poultice on the foot to draw out the infection.
If you want, cauterize the two lines between the legs and the body. The pain is caused by something wrong in the patient's body.
Then apply the cautery to the affected area, and proceed cautiously.
And so the physician should be careful that it is not applied to the nerves.
Chapter xliv.
This is likely a description of a medical procedure involving the burning of a part of the body to treat gout.
And if there are painful swellings in the joints, it is called gout by doctors.
And therefore, if the patient has a cold humor that causes pain, they will be cured by using the hot method.
And if you need to cauterize anything, use a cautery to burn it.
This sentence means "use another for the thighs" in English.
Then apply a hot cautery to the legs. And if pain occurs in the other joints or bowels, it will be necessary to use a cautery on them, but if it's in three or more joints, then you need to use a different one for each part.
And if it is necessary to use cauterization on the body, you will need them to be placed carefully so as to avoid burning the flesh.
And if the patient has two legs, administer the cautery to their feet.
Then return to their original locations if you have already treated the patient's inflammation.
Then apply a cauterizing tool to the affected area of the body and use it as a cushion.
Then apply the other cushions to the patient's feet, legs, and thighs.
When leeches are applied to the foot, it is necessary for the physician to use caution.
E si a guess that the intestine was already opened up in Translation 4, you are implying a medical procedure, which means the patient has been diagnosed with something requiring medical attention.
This is a translation from Latin or a Romance language, likely referring to a medical procedure for treating joint pain.
And for a cushion to be placed on the leg, which is also used by physicians for the treatment of those who have been affected by the windiness in the legs.
And then you should place the cushion on their feet, and another cushion on their legs.
And apply heat to the affected area and another on their feet, in order to treat them with a cauterization of the pain.
And place your hand on their arm which has been opened by the cushion.
It is said that the patient has been given a cushion to prevent further pain in their body. And if your foot is cold, apply a cushion to the affected area.
And if you have to place a cushion on their feet, the patient's foot will be affected by the pain.
And then place the cautery on the cushion you have applied to their legs.
Then you should know, if a patient has a problem with their bowels, they are said to have gout.
When you are about to treat someone for their legs, you must be careful not to burn them.
And if the pain is caused by cold humors, place a less intense cautery on their legs.
E aprof they should be placed under the fire for three days.
And if you do not have another cautery, then the patient has a fever.
And if the patient's legs are not sealed, the disease will spread.
And so that the patient's belly isn't touched by the cushion during treatment.
Then apply the proper treatment for 40 days, and if necessary, continue to administer the remedy.
And you should apply this remedy for reducing the humors to the whole body, so that he might be healed.
And if you are going to cauterize a rupture in the belly, perform the procedure on the lower third of the leg, so that the muscles of the legs or the abdomen do not pull it out.
And if it is necessary to apply a cautery to the patient's feet, they are already burned by the fire:
And put another, the other being lighter than the first; but let the patient be treated carefully by the physician.
This sentence refers to using a cautery tool for medical purposes.
Then apply a cautery on their foot.
Then you should apply hot cautery to the affected joint.
And for every part of the body, they have different sizes and shapes.
If the pain persists, apply another hot iron to the affected area; if the pain is in a joint, use the hot iron on the affected joint, and if the patient's body has other areas of pain, those should be treated with a cold cautery.
The chapter title is "Chapter XLVII" which translates to "Chapter forty-seven."
The text describes a medical procedure for treating leprosy.
Then they should be treated carefully so as to avoid further harm.
Then if you want to cauterize the affected area on the patient's body, then consider the following:
And if you cautery an area, it is customary to have it cauterized.
And if you have already been bitten by a snake on the foot, it must be treated with cauterization.
And then place your hand on their feet, and do what you can to soothe them, or at least prevent them from burning through the skin.
E alcunas others es que la personne's has already been burned by a hot iron are placed on their back.
And if the doctors say you have gout, it is because something in the body has caused the pain.
And if there are few veins, which are great or small in number, it's customary for them to be called "las" by doctors and "other" by other specialists.
Then return the patient's body to health by using a cautery tool.
Chapter XLVIII.
Then apply it to the area affected by the burning sensation.
Then apply a cushion to the affected limb as needed.
And then the patient's body is now being cauterized with a hot iron. And thus apply a salve so that the (gouty) pain is alleviated.
And if it is necessary to burn the affected area for some reason, they must be placed there in the correct position.
This is the first English translation:
Gout is a disease caused by an excess of humors in the body, which affects the joints and causes them to become inflamed and painful.
And apply cautery on their thighs, as needed.
Then apply the medicinal cauterization to the affected area.
And when that happens to a patient, then apply a poultice if it's necessary to treat them.
Capitol .l.
The patient has been treated for humors, which are often thought to be caused by an excess of blood in the body.
And if the cancer is starting to spread, then cauterize it again with a cushion under the affected area.
The first text seems to be describing the use of cautery in treating a patient's leg pain.
And so, let's say that the patient has been treated with cautery as we have already mentioned.
Chapter 51.
And if it is necessary to apply cauterization to the body's limbs.
Then return the patient's foot to its natural position on the leg, or let them rest there if you are worried about their condition.
Then if the patient has gout, let them apply a cushion to the affected area.
And if there are painful sores in that place, let the patient be treated with fire to cauterize the intestines.
Chapter 52.
And then apply a cautery to the corrosive parts.
You are treating a patient with dry burns.
Therefore, apply heat to the area where the patient suffers from pain.
Then apply cautery to eradicate the corruption from all parts.
Then apply a hot poultice to the affected area for three days, and if necessary, cauterize with hot iron and treat with cautery.
And so it is necessary for a person with a cold humors to be treated.
And if the patient's body has a lot of heat, it is hot, and you see that it is good for them, the treatment is to do another three days of purging.
And then the one who wishes to cure them will apply a cushion to their medicine. And yet they have been burned with fire.
And therefore, you must use the sharpest tool in the medicine chest for that which requires a cushion on the legs.
The following text is written in a language that resembles Latin, but is intended to be translated into English.
This refers to a treatment for the disease of gout.
Gout is called by doctors a hot, burning pain in the joints.
You have already seen to the patient's needs; now they need a cushion under their feet.
And then, put the other cushion on their knees, and another on their legs. And let it stay there for three days until the pain subsides. Then place a bandage on the legs to hold them in place and prevent further infiltration.
And apply to the location which is a wound in their hand, the cure for gout.
And if your body has become inflamed, you will need to cauterize the area that is affected by the ailment.
And if there are other causes of pain in their body, then put a poultice on their legs and another on their feet.
And then treat them with a poultice applied to the area where the gout affects the legs and another placed on the abdomen.
And so forth for the feet.
When doctors use this term, they are referring to a condition that affects the legs or feet.
Then apply a cautery to the affected area.
And if they are not already trembling, use the cautery to make them tremble less.
Capitol .lv. should be translated as **Chapter 50.**
Then apply heat to the affected area, preventing the patient's body from being exposed to the cold.
The patient's leg is to be treated as if it were already a wound.
Then apply a cautery to the thighs to expel the humors.
Another then be their cure for treating gout with evacuation.
Capitol lvi. is the 56th chapter in the original text.
The patient has an injury to their intestines.
And if it is necessary to apply a poultice to the affected body part, use a cushion for the which is on the patient's legs, because they have been treated with an arrow, or a poultice for the knee pain.
A hot cautery should be used when the patient has pain in their joints, which is what the doctors call gout.
And if you have a small amount of oil, put them in the cavity of their body and use it to lubricate the instruments.
And then place a small cushion on your patient's foot to prevent the pain.
And then apply a hot cautery to the legs.
Then make sure to protect the nerves from further damage.
E sapias que il es necessary to apply a poultice to the abdomen with four applications of heat.
And if it is necessary to apply a poultice to the legs or feet, you should call it "gout" by the way.
And if you see that there's no cure for the physician, he should be in the right frame of mind.
Doctors use cushions for comfort and cushions for surgery.
Then place a cushion on the head to cover it.
Then, I will treat the patient's pain in the feet.
Then you will need to learn about the treatment of the legs and other parts.
This sentence likely describes the treatment of gout, which was a common ailment in the Middle Ages. And you must accompany all such pain with fear and trembling.
And so if there is no other cause, you should apply the cautery to your legs or feet to prevent harm to the patient from the cushion placed beneath them. When joint pain is so severe that it causes death in a person's body, you should know that the doctors call it gout.
And it is from these things that doctors know it is pernicious.
A quo versify the patient's body.
And use it to describe the treatment of those with illness and those who are healthy.
Oh, son, protect him, for he is in his right mind.
And if you are treating a problem in their legs, use cushions to support them under the affected area and provide relief.
Chapter one.
And so that the child may be treated.
Sapias que when the child is born, it is necessary to use other methods.
When there is a hidden cause for the ailment.
And if I am to be called a doctor, then I will say I have already treated such things in children.
And if you have already opened the area under their leg, and another cushion has been placed on it.
This pain caused by the inflammation of the foot or ankle can be treated with a cautery.
When the pain is in the foot, it must be treated with both heat and cold applications.
E donc si la humiditat es mays augmentada e l’autre, in the other leg.
And if the pain is in the bones, it is often caused by an imbalance of humors. And if you wish to cauterize their bowels, use three burns.
And if it is necessary to treat the patient's intestines and use it for other purposes.
E per la part del pe, et al'altro their size.
And place a cushion on their legs, to prevent the blood from flowing out.
This is the second chapter.
When there are painful swellings in the legs or feet, physicians should apply heat to them.
The pain is caused by the pressure of the humors on the nerves in his body, causing the patient's foot to swell.
Then place a cushion on the patient’s feet if the intestines are being treated.
And if you want to, put your hand on the patient's thigh and use a cautery tool to make incisions where needed.
And so, if there are two or more cuts on his legs, it is called gout in the modern sense.
And if the patient's body does not allow for the use of a cautery, you will need to cauterize the area between the legs and the foot, which is necessary to be done with a cushion under it.
And if the patient's blood is thick and impure, you can treat it using the method of applying heat to the affected area.
And consider that if there are other causes of illness besides gout, one should seek them elsewhere.
And to heal that which is treated by the treatment of the patient's own body.
E if you have already identified the cause of the pain in the afflicted body part, the text says to treat it with a cautery.
This means you'd be using your hands to apply heat to the area where they are located, as a treatment for pain.
When there is a pointed pain in the foot, apply a cushion to the head or chest of the patient depending on the location, but use a hot cautery for acute gout as we have already shown.
The method for treating those who are afflicted with the disease in the cushion (a.k.a. the bowels) is known to only a few men.
And if the patient has a pain in their legs, they should place a cushion under them and apply a soft cautery to the affected area. And if it is necessary to treat the ailment of the patient's feet, you will apply your hand on their legs. Gualtieres, you must use a tool to pierce the skin in order to drain the infected area.
And if you want to open the wound of a disease, you should do so gently, and carefully apply a bandage after the incision.
And if you want to cauterize a vein on a patient's leg, then apply heat to that vein for three days.
And if they have a great pain, hold a cushion over their chest.
And then make a cut in the area that is being treated, which should be done during that time to allow for proper cauterization.
And if you wish, cauterize that which is in the joint with a hot iron, but be careful to avoid burning the bone, and use caution when applying it to the surface of the thighs.
And if you are working on a patient who has hot humors, that is what is done to relieve them.
And if you are working with a patient's leg that has been affected by gout, it is necessary to draw out the blood from their foot, and treat it with dry medicines, which are used for healing.
Then apply a cautery to the legs or use other methods to draw out the blood from the affected area. And if there are no causes for it to be called gout, it will be called gout only by its symptoms.
And if you have an opening in the legs, apply a cautery to prevent the spread.
This is how you apply a cautery.
And apply the cauteries on the two sides, as it were, to the body. The text describes how to treat a patient experiencing intestinal or digestive issues with a cautery tool.
Therefore, when there are gout attacks, it is customary to place a cushion under the affected limb.
And this is the best work; the rest are light.
Then if the pain is in the foot, they have already been treated.
Chapter four:
This refers to the care of a wound caused by an injury or by the condition of gout.
And if the patient's condition is that which is called gout, and the remedies are applied to their legs and to the veins, and the other remedies are applied to the area of the body where the pain is located.
And if you are in pain, the patient's leg will be treated for gout. And if it is necessary to make points on their legs, they are applied to the surface of the joint, one cushion at the base of the nose, and one to the knee.
And to protect yourself from the pain of their intestines, you must place a cushion on the legs, and hold them back. And if it be necessary to burn the flesh of anyone who has been treated with three cauteries.
And if there is an opening or dryness on the body, you use another bandage to dry them.
You have already treated the legs with cauterization. The first sentence translates to: "The surgeon must be careful that the incision does not cut into the skull." Then apply heat to the patient's second incision. And then put the patient's body on a cushion and use another instrument to treat them.
Another way to say that a patient has fallen ill with an ailment.
The above text is a Latinized version of medieval Italian medical terminology, and the phrase "Mays que sia" likely refers to "it must be."
Another person should hold the patient's legs in place while they are being treated.
Then you will stop pain in the body from affecting the legs and another will be placed on the patient's thighs to prevent a rupture.
Then on the third day, apply a bandage to the affected area.
This text from the 5th chapter of the treatise.
> This refers to using a cushion to relieve pain in the legs caused by a condition called sciatica.
When joint pain is caused by a buildup of humors in the body, they should be treated with cauterization.
Then apply a hot needle to the patient's body in an area where there are no veins or arteries.
Dry up all the blood from the wound with a cloth or dry sponge, to prevent the pain by the heat of the cautery. Place a cushion under the feet after applying a poultice.
Then put four parts of resin under their skin.
The text you provided appears to be in a fictional language made up to look like Latin or a Romance language. It's difficult to provide an accurate translation without knowing which specific words are meant to be translated and how they relate to each other grammatically.
This refers to treating an ailment in the legs called "aurea" by doctors.
So the doctors placed their hands on the patient's legs.
And so if the patient has gout, which causes inflammation in the joints? And if the patient has a cold humor in the foot, place a cushion under them.
And if it is not gout, it is called something else.
Then they are to be treated with bloodletting.
And if it is necessary to cauterize a wound on the foot, it is said that it should be done in the same way as for any other part of the body where the doctors use it. E aprop extratte the cushion to be placed on their legs for treatment.
Then, if your pain is caused by an excess of cold humors, they are called gout. And then place a cushion under their legs to help them.
This refers to a process of applying a hot iron to the affected part.
The translation of the first sentence is: And if you want to cut out the pain in the foot, you should do so in the manner of the natural vein, so that the incision will be made in a way to avoid cutting into the intestines. Then, if the fissure is in the shape of a crescent moon, you should use a tool to apply a cushion to the affected area; the physician will know how to treat it.
And when the patient is suffering from gout, administer the cure by applying a cushion to the affected area, as needed, after first considering the causes and symptoms. Then apply a cushion to the affected area.
And if you think that the patient's body is affected by a cushion of vapors, apply another in the same way.
Then apply a cauterizing tool to the area around the ankles and on the feet to make the feet feel better. And so you must use force to keep the thigh from being touched by another.
And so you must use force to keep the thigh from being touched by another. The patient's condition is treated with a cushion-like object.
And if there are many pains in the legs, they should be treated with a cautery.
Then apply the appropriate remedy to the patient's legs, as it pertains to them.
Apuros from the previous statement are a good sign the patient needs to be treated by an experienced healer.
And if you are certain there is some cause for it, take a lancet to make an incision or puncture. And if you have a strong desire to see the patient's leg healed, you should know that you must take care of their body.
Mays you may find the medical treatise that explains how to treat them.
When there are fluids that build up in the body, apply medicinal remedies to the affected area. Make a cushion be placed on the legs (or another object) to support the person's feet.
And so if you are in need of cauterizing someone's legs or a part of their body, they should be cauterized with another method. And if you want to know if the patient has gout, examine the foot for inflammation.
E aurelia he  is that has an infection in his/her ears. And if the patient has a hot temper, they are likely to be labeled as having the gout.
Chapter 7
And for healing, we must treat the ears.
Then, for some cases, the surgeon places a pointed cautery on their own body to avoid cutting the intestine, and sometimes a hot cautery burns the stomach or foot (or other affected areas) to relieve the pain.
Then apply a cushion to the area affected by the condition, so that the patient's body doesn't move or cause pain during the treatment, making it easier for them to endure the procedure.
When you reach the point in the treatment where they are being healed, it is customary to place a cushion under their head. And so if you see the symptoms, treat them with a cautery.
And if it is necessary to apply a cushion on the foot, then you should use a cushion on their legs instead.
Then apply a poultice to the patient's area, place a cushion under them, and be careful not to use it on a newborn, or on an open wound.
Then apply a hot cautery to the patient's spine.
Et autre se debe thruste, e aquesto es for the bodyth to be good and strong.
And if you wish to make an opening in the wound, then apply a cushion of cloth, and place a poultice on top of it.
This text describes the symptoms and treatment of humors in the body, which suggests that the language may be referring to a specific type of distillation process used for treating medical conditions caused by inflammation or pain.
Chapter 8.
So if the patient has a pain in their feet, you should put your hand on them.
Some doctors believe that some of the pain is caused by the cold settling in the eyes of the patient.
Thus, a cure for gout is achieved by applying a cautery to the affected area.
When there's pain in your body, use a delicate cautery on those areas.
The best way to treat it is with cauterization by fire, and in some cases, other treatments may be necessary.
This refers to a remedy for an ailment affecting the body and requiring treatment in multiple locations.
This sentence is referring to a medical procedure being done on a patient.
The above text refers to the use of cauterization for treating gout.  It's a common practice in many cultures to use a hot iron or other heated instrument to apply heat to a specific area (in this case, the foot).
This sentence describes the application of a cautery tool on a specific area of the body during surgery.
And if it is necessary to cauterize, they should be considered as having gout.
Therefore, I will provide a translation for the situation described in the first sentence.
And if it is large, then you will need to adjust it by fixing the leg pain.
And if a small amount of the ointment is used, no harm will come to them.
And if a cautery has been used to burn away the excess flesh on the body, this is called a cauterization.
And if you want to make incisions on the legs, then use another incision for the treatment.
Chapter 10
And if it is necessary to cauterize the eye, hold it steady with another cautery.
Source text: Axcirnath es que'l vessament d'un humors in un nen del cos.
and so it is called by doctors "a cushion on the leg" or "a sore in the feet. "
The patient's cushion must be placed carefully so that no other fluids escape from the incision.
Mays if the body's humors are out of balance, the condition is called gout.
So they are placed on their legs and if it is necessary to apply cautery to them, place the cushion there.
It is said to be caused by a blockage in the digestive system.
Then you should place a cushion on the patient's leg, so that the wound does not open further.
And if there is a need to apply a cautery to their legs, they should do so in a way that avoids the patient's pain.
Then apply a warm compress to the area where the cushion is placed.
When there are poultices and bandages, the patient's leg will heal.
Chapter 11
Of the ways in which the patient's body can be treated, some are best done by hand.
The first three lines of this text are in Latin.
Then place your left hand on their chest so as to prevent them from being pierced by the needle.
And so if pain comes into the eyelid, apply it on their limbs; and use cushions to support them.
Then, if you wish to treat a condition that causes swelling in the eyelids, which is also known as the eyelid humors are diverse, a physician should determine the type of treatment needed based on the cause and severity of the condition.
Then apply heat to the area with a spatula, beginning on the tear duct and continuing down to the smaller tear duct. And then place your hand on their legs to prevent it from spreading.
Then use a cushion to protect the patient's anus during surgery.
And so you will apply it to the patient's joints for three days or four.
But if you wish to stop the plague, you should apply a cushion, and use another instrument to make a cut, allowing the patient to be cured.
This refers to the "good operation" of a person's health, and that the person with the pain will be fine.
And if it is necessary to apply cautery to the patient's legs, one should use three hot irons, so that the intestines may be treated with a special type of myrtle ointment.
And if they are not able to do so, then use an agula to hold the place open and make a point on their chest.
And then apply a suture to those parts of the body that are affected by the plague.
If you have a cushion for the pain in the thighs, apply it to the affected area.
And if the skin on their face is converted into other skin, then you must use that in the case of the injury to the patient's eye.
Then place your hand on their chest to prevent the pain from spreading there. and the rest of the time it is called gout. And if you are already treating the extremities, use extreme care when applying the poultice to the legs.
And if there are humors that have spread to the eye and other parts of the body, it is customary to call it gout, and it's treated by applying a hot compress to the affected area, which would be under the control of the physician.
Mays es un cauterization tool used to treat illness by burning.
Therefore, when there is a need to apply cautery to the body, the patient’s eyelid should be elevated by the hands on their chest
And then, according to this method, you will have fixed the pain. And if it is the intestine or another body part that is swollen, apply treatment to the affected area.
And if there are no other issues.
It refers to the patient's legs with their legs being in need of a good cushion.
If the pain in your joints is caused by an imbalance of humors, you should use cauterization on your feet. Then apply the cushion on their legs.
And so if you have an opening made in the legs for them, because they are a sick person, then do something else.
And to the patient's legs put the cushion under them, and then hold it in place.
And then apply the needle to the patient's eye, which already has been placed in the natural space of their thighs.
And then apply it to the skin directly.
And if a patient has a pain in the leg that is caused by a cold humor, then it is caused by a cold humoral imbalance.
Then apply the cushion to the patient's legs and another cushion placed on the abdomen.
And so you should leave the patient alone for two or three days, so that the pain will be relieved by itself.
And then the long cushion is placed on their legs, and the other one, the patient's own hand, should be applied to the affected area.
This chapter describes how to treat a wound on the foot of a patient who has gout.
This refers to treating someone for a condition called "ehacratir" (likely a misspelling of "ecraser," meaning "to crush" in modern French).
When a cushion is used to treat an illness by applying it to the limbs, it is called gout.
"And if it is necessary to open up the cavity of the foot, then you should know how to do that which is called another, but for your knowledge, let me say that it is called “autre” because it is a more common ailment.
And let it be known that you should not use cauterization for those causes which cause a return of the heat to the body, but let it be known to the physician.
Usa your hand on the area to treat it with a poultice of oils and herbs.
And the way to heal you from the pain in your limbs is to apply the proper treatment.
And if you have to apply heat to the area affected by the pain, it's important to use the correct cushion for the treatment.
Chapter 14
Another other cushion should be placed on their feet.
This is a true gout, which is also called alessi
Then apply other similar methods to their legs, or if you want to use on another part of the body.
Then the foot was treated with a poultice and the other, which may be a pointed reference to a treatment for gout.
Then apply a cautery to open the parts already exposed in the patient's body. Then return to the patient's thigh and apply pressure, keeping the leg closed.
The patient's joints will be sore after you use a hot cautery on them.
And if it is necessary to burn (the flesh) with cautery, use a lancet to make small incisions.
When a person has a wound in their legs, they must be given a cushion under their legs, so that they can't feel it.
Use cushions to soften the pain caused by hardened humors.
The correct answer is **is a medical treatise in a language similar to Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French, but likely none of them perfectly.** And for the rest, they put a hot iron on the flesh to separate it from the outside.
And in the discussion about gout, which occurs on the legs, there are different types of treatments.
And so, the surgeon should always prepare the patient's body in such a way that they are ready to receive the operation, or the natural return of their form, as it were.
Chapter 15.
This means: When joint pain is caused by cold humors that cause swelling in the legs, the hand or arm of the doctor will be placed on their leg to stop them from doing so.
Then apply a cautery to the eyelid, so that it may be cauterized.
And you have to place a cushion under his body so that he can be burned, but gently, as burning is done with caution.
When there are multiple fluxes, the patient will be given something to eat or drink, and they will use something else to stop the pain.
Then put your hand over the area to prevent gout from spreading further.
And then apply a cauterizing tool to the affected area.
Chapter 16
The text describes a method for treating a condition (likely gout) by applying pressure to the affected area.
Then the patient's body is said to be affected by cold humors when they have pain in their legs.
Both sides of the tear ducts are closed off so they don't affect the eyes.
If there is a need to cauterize the patient's foot, then apply another heated iron to the wound. And if the patient’s foot has been treated for swelling by someone who uses their hands to move the joints back into place. And then you should cauterize the leg of the patient.
Then, by incision, you have removed the intestine from its place.
And if there are ulcers that have been treated with another kind of treatment.
And take care that the patient’s legs do not have their skin pierced.
This is a bit tricky, but I think it means: **"And if the pain persists for several days, then cauterize it."**
And if it is difficult to get the needle into that area, the doctor will recommend using a cushion instead.
And if you wish to make incisions, use a sharp tool to open the vein at the bottom of the foot. And if you are skilled, you can treat gout. Then if you apply heat to the patient's legs, the pain will subside.
And apply a hot poultice to that area, and if it is necessary, close the wound or wound opening in the legs, and place another on their feet.
Then perform the operation again on the legs, which are usually the location of gouty pain.
A cushion will be placed under your body, and another is used to hold your feet in place during the treatment.
And apply a cushion to their tear ducts, so that they may not be harmed by the procedure.
When the physician applies cautery to the affected area, apply a cushion to protect their legs from pain.
And so apply the cautery to their legs, as needed.
The patient's body should be covered during cauterization to prevent pain from spreading through the body.
This is the first text in the language of the patient's condition.
And let it be understood that you have placed the cushion on the patient's leg.
When you have finished applying the cushion to the foot, place your hand over the area for which you are using the cushion so that the patient will feel relief.
And if it is necessary to apply heat to the body, the doctor's use of cautery is customary for this.
Then apply heat to the legs, but always ensure that the affected area is treated naturally or by other means first.
Capitol .xviii. Capitalis, e.g., "Chapter 18."
On the subject of collecting knowledge from the patient's body, they are to be explained by their own proper cause.
When the body is stiff from illness, it is difficult to move freely.
Therefore, you must first understand the nature of the ailment before treating gout in the foot.
And place your hand over the patient's body to make sure it stays in place.
And thus you have two parts of the body to consider.
Then carefully cauterize the patient's veins.
And if you have applied cautery to the veins of the foot, do not use it on the other veins.
And then you should apply a poultice to cure the patient's illness.
Then place a cushion on which to rest the affected area when you have drawn out the inflammation.
And then place a second cushion under their legs, and apply pressure to them.
And this is the form in which the body is affected by gout.
Chapter .xix.
A little bit of blood will come out from the leg when you reduce it.
And if you cure it (the ailment) with a hot iron, it is necessary to place another cushion on it so that the other members are not burned.
Therefore, when the bone is exposed and has inflammation or pain, use a cushion to elevate the leg.
And if the foot needs to be treated, apply it carefully, as if it were your own hand you were treating (another use case for the phrase "it's a subtle ailment").
And then, place a cushion on the bone or area that has been affected by the cold humors.
And then apply the cauterizing tools to treat them.
And if the pain persists for 40 days, the patient should be considered to have a serious ailment, possibly requiring medical attention.
And if you can't find them, the cushion will be used to show where the pain is located on the leg.
The feet are often affected by cold humors, but cauterization should be used carefully.
Then, place a cushion on the patient's tear ducts to alleviate pain.
Therefore, if the gout attacks are treated with a cauterizing instrument, that is what they do when the disease is in the feet.
Therefore, because the flesh of the body is hardened, one can apply a cushion to the affected area.
Nothing in the provided text suggests that the original meaning should be translated literally.
And then apply a cushion to the affected area.
And when joint pain is treated, it is customary to place a cushion under the patient, and to continue applying cushions to the patient's body so that there are no complications or injury.
Then fold the cushion in four folds under the patient's legs.
Then place a cushion under them, and apply your hand to their legs. And apply hot cupping on their legs; another method for the thighs.
Then apply a bandage to the joint and hold it straight.
And then if it is necessary to use a cushion under their legs as they are mentioned to be used.
If the pain persists in the legs, cushion it and use heat to relieve it.
Chapter .xxi.
Then place a cushion under their thighs, if they are to be treated.
This appears to be a description of a medical procedure, possibly for treating an injury or illness.
Then place another cushion on the foot to prevent further bleeding.
And by using cushions, the pain in the legs may be soothed.
And if the humors are heated, the patient's hands should be kept warm with a cloth.
Let the patient's bowels be covered, and another be placed on their legs.
Another hand could be placed on the chest or thighs of the patient.
This is about the treatment of their wounds.
This illness is called gout, and it affects the body in specific ways.
And so you treat the patient's illness by applying a cushion to the affected area, and you use it as a remedy for the ailment.
And if it doesn't descend below, apply a cautery to them, and apply your hand to the area below the other.
Mays is a good thing to know.
And so if you have already opened the area affected by the illness, you should use hot water to treat it.
And if it is treated, then it should be healed.
Another hand is placed on the patient's chest, preventing them from moving.
This refers to the treatment or cure of the ailment.
Now you must apply your knowledge to the treatment of the patient's ailments.
Then you will apply a cautery to the foot's location to reduce inflammation.
And if the pain is in the left eye, it is best to use the left hand; if the pain is elsewhere in the body, then the right.
and then the other side of the body is treated in the same way.
And if the body's pain is relieved by the doctor's touch, place your hand on the patient's limb to help.
Then place your hand on the foot to prevent further infiltration by the joint pain.
The first line translates to:
And if the pain persists, use a poultice on the affected area.
Therefore, if you have made a few punctures, then place another cushion on their legs to prevent the inflammation from spreading.
And thus, you will know when a patient has been affected by the illness.
The patient suffers from gout in his foot.
And if you are not obese, or your body's humors are unbalanced, use these methods to treat it.
And therefore, you should apply a poultice to that which is the cause of pain in the joint, and keep it closed by placing your hand on top.
And then apply the cautery accordingly.
When it comes to the patient's body, apply a cushion and prepare for its use by using a hot cautery.
And if one needs to stop the flow of blood from the body, then apply a cautery to the affected area.
And for the patient who has not yet been treated for their condition, it should be applied to the third day.
Then apply the other cushion to their legs, and another one to their body, and hold the opening of the wound closed.
And then apply the hot iron to the affected area, if necessary, to treat the inflammation. And if you have already opened the space between the thighs, use light cautery there.
And if an abscess appears in the body, it is treated by cauterizing it.
When the pain is severe, they should place a cautery on the face and a cushion between their thighs.
And the doctor will know what to do about the rest of their treatment.
The disciple is not exempt from the operation if it is necessary to cauterize the skin or use leeches.
And so has already been applied to the body of the patient, and if you want to make a burn on their thigh, they should be burned
And perhaps you have never seen a cushion be used for a joint pain treatment.
And these are the types of illnesses caused by the imbalance of humors.
When the patient's legs are open, they are placed on their back, so that the body part may be treated by the physician.
Capitol .xxiv. translates to **Chapter 24**.
Then, apply a bandage to the wound.
This describes other ailments that resemble scorpion-like growths in the nose or polyps; this disease resembles a swelling or growth in the nose, which may be due to a variety of causes. And if the patient has flesh that is cancerous, it is a condition where the flesh is inflamed and red; if it is pale in color, it is a sign of a different nature, such as a tumor or abscess.
Therefore, if you want to do something about the pain in the patient's body. When there's a need to reduce pain in the foot, apply pressure on the area where the pain is. This is a sign of illness, put your hand on their foot and apply a treatment to the leg and another to the affected areas.
And then place something in the cavity near the nose. Mays si le nas are you already have been treated for a while and still feel pain in the sinuses.
And if the humour does not flow as it should, then it is called gout by physicians, and it is what they say they have to do with their body.
A person suffering from swelling or pain in the joints is treated for that condition by doctors who are experienced in dealing with such things, which is known as treating a case of gout.
E then put your hand on the patient's foot, so that the painful inflammation does not extend to the rest of the body.
Here comes the translation of the first line: This is a bit tricky, but it seems to be describing a medical procedure.
And if it is necessary to remove the venom from the flesh:
Then apply a cushion to the affected area for treatment.
Then use a hot cushion for treatment.
E aquesta lu purgantz ye'n tengas de los met:
And if the metal is silver or gold, it is called a silver or gold-like inflammation.
If you are burning anything that's hot, use a canula to make a hole in the body of the patient, and apply the cautery there.
Chapter 25.
And if you see a red mark on the face near the eye, then call that a tear.
They are putting a poultice on the legs of the patient.
And if you wish to know how to make a cushion for the foot, you should use your hand to apply it. And if it is necessary, apply a poultice to it.
Then, if the pain is caused by other things besides the cold humors, the patient should be treated for those.
When applying a cautery to the affected area, it is customary to use a cushion on their chest to prevent pain.
E aprop reduce la partz del metges e jus li ha de dir.
And if there is a wound on the nose or lips, hold the patient's hands to prevent them from being touched.
You know that in this case, only a few people are involved in such an operation.
And if the plague is present in the patient, treat them with a cushion under their chest and another on the legs, and then apply it to the wound if it is in the area of the thigh.
And if the joints are already separated, they may be treated with a poultice and cauterization. Adjust the two lairs of the patient's body, and place on them a bandage and apply a poultice to the affected area.
When the patient has a cushion under their thighs, a surgeon can be used to sew up the wound.
Then apply the appropriate cautery to the affected area.
When bloodletting is needed on your legs, use a cushion to protect them.
The pain affects some people's hands more severely than others, and there are many variations in the severity of symptoms.
And so that you may know that if you have an injury to the foot or other parts, it is best to cauterize the wound, applying a cushion to the thighs and another to the area around the wound.
**Capitol .xxviii.  is translated as Chapter 28.**
"This means that the gums are swollen."
A large number of doctors used to think that pain in the feet was caused by the humors already being present in the body.
And then apply a poultice to the area.
Then cauterize that flesh, and if necessary, use a cushion to prevent you from injuring a second area.
In the xxixth chapter.
Then apply a cushion to their teeth.
When you are working on the teeth on the surface of the body, they should be treated by a dentist, otherwise known as a dental surgeon.
And then place a cushion under the patient's legs and apply heat to their body.
If you have a cushion under your arms, you should apply it to the affected area.
And you know that the patient's teeth are the ones that are treated by them as they are accustomed to using a cushion for their feet. E per cushion the intestines or other organs that are protruding from the body.
Capitol .xxx. is the Latin-based translation for the following text:
On the eradication of teeth.
When the intestines are being treated for pain by removing them, it was a sign that you are a skilled doctor.
When the tooth extraction is complete, you should apply a cushion to the affected area.
And if you have to pull teeth, start by making small incisions around the tooth and then place a cushion under your hand so the intestine doesn’t come out.
And if you wish to cauterize the leg or the bowels.
And thus if there is no other way to heal, it's customary for doctors to use a hot iron to remove something from the patient's body.
This sentence describes the use of a cushion in treating a toothache.
And if you have to work hard on the patient's gums because of pain.
And if you are treating someone for an ailment that prevents them from riding their horse in ignorance.
And if the patient needs to be treated with cauterization, then do so by applying a cushion to their legs.
Then apply heat to the affected area, and the body will be warmed by the application of the cushion.
When using forceps or tongs on the feet, be careful not to damage the skin or cause further harm.
And if you are going to use the fire on them, good for the other servant.
And if they are experiencing pain from the use of tools or weapons from India.
Of the pain that can be caused by the humors you should know how to treat it.
And if you have to remove a tooth or extract bones from a fractured jaw.
When you pull out a tooth, if it is one that has been pulled out, the patient will need to be in a state of controlled pain.
When they have pain in their legs.
And if you don't have good control of the patient's pain with forceps, you can use these tools to help them.
And if your small intestine or bowels are inflamed, apply heat to the affected area.
And if you have already opened the place where the pain is.
Then make sure the second instrument is triangular and very fine.
And then there are two assistants who stand by each side of the patient, ready to assist. And if the patient's teeth are affected by other ailments, these are the tools used to treat them.
And if it is necessary to apply cauterization to the affected area.
And then you apply cauteri to other parts of the body, as well.
The ancients believed that the type of illness was indicated by the location of the pain.
Then when the foot has been made to be pierced or another on their legs, these are the instruments that are used for them: a knife for cutting, and forceps for holding the bone in place so that it will not move during extraction.
And so that the swelling in the foot subsides, apply a bandage after cauterization.
And if someone suffers from a disease caused by humors being out of balance, then it is a good idea to use hot needles on them in order to cure the illness.
Gout is caused by an imbalance of humors in the body, particularly when the patient's legs are affected.
And from the treatment of the teeth, the patient will be treated by others.
Then burn the affected area should they have no other ailment, but if they do, call for a doctor, who will be able to tell you what to do.
E que tua another day to apply their hands on the patient's teeth.
Translation 4: When the pain is caused by a stone or bone that protrudes from the body, we must remove the stone or by a tool.
Then place your hand on the patient's feet to prevent pain from spreading to other parts of the body. And then the body, and the soul of the body is healed, and the person is given a cushion to place under them.
And you should treat the tongue with another type of cautery so that the other part of the body can be healed.
And if it is necessary to treat the pain caused by a physician.
Then apply the gold or silver ointment to their legs already affected by the condition.
And if the patient has a wound on the knee or other such parts of the body they are treated with cauterization by a doctor who knows the proper way to apply it.
and apply the cautery to the affected joint(s) using a hot needle. Apply leysment to the affected area, if necessary.
And so you must apply a cushion to their foot that will prevent the pain from spreading.
The patient's body is treated by applying forceps to hold them in place and use of a hot cautery to remove the excess humors. And place a cushion on their legs.
And you have to be careful with the foot so that it does not become swollen or ruptured.
And if you see two humors from the same person, then put your hand on their head and say "This is the way to do it."
And then they are burned by the cauterization.
And so, it is called gout if the pain occurs in the legs.
And if a member is affected by a pain caused by cold humors, and that pain is in their foot, then they are said to have the gout.
Then apply the poultice or cautery to the affected area on their feet.
And from the ligament which is connected to their feet by the tongue.
This sentence appears to be about ligaments and their potential role in causing pain.
Let the patient be treated with cauterization for the treatment of their condition.
If the patient experiences pain in the joints or has a gouty condition, the doctor will be careful to avoid confusing their symptoms.
If you are careful, the pain in the foot will be eased.
And if necessary, apply a poultice to the affected limb after the initial treatment.
This describes what a physician should do if a patient has a blockage in the intestines due to gout. Then place it on their legs, so that the pain does not spread.
This refers to gout, which is a form of arthritis.
Then apply the same cushion on their feet.
And if the pain is severe, apply another cauterization to the area; otherwise, it is a simple gout.
Then apply the treatment to the patient's legs.
And if the pain is in the foot, and it's felt in the feet, and the person has a sharp pain, place a cushion under their foot, so that they can no longer feel the pain.
E si es, that is, if you must do a cushion for his/her grief.
Then apply the appropriate remedies to restore your health to its proper state.
The meaning of "Capitol .xxxvi." depends on the context. It could refer to a section or chapter number in a book or treatise.
This describes how to treat an injury if you need to use the information for treatment in the future, you can refer back to this text.
When the patient's body has been afflicted by the fire of illness, such as the throat, you must place a hot iron on their neck, to apply cautery to the affected area.
And if the pain is severe in the legs, do not touch them; they are only to be treated with a poultice on the affected area.
When one needs to cauterize an area, such as if there's pain in the foot.
E then you should consider whether the doctor has already treated them for the ailment, so the patient is in their normal state.
And if it is made of silver or iron, use a knife to make them better.
And if the pain is in the legs or feet, it is best to use a hot cautery. And so treat them with whatever remedy will address the cause.
And so treat them with whatever remedy will address the cause. And if a person has a slight limp or stiffness in their gait, it is called a "forcep" by doctors.
And if a cautery is present, apply it to the bowels so that they are kept in their place.
And then apply a poultice to the wound on their leg.
Mildew, if you want to avoid its harm, can be treated by poultices made from herbs, or by boiling and reducing the amount of moisture in the environment.
And then apply cautery to the legs in order to treat the other ailments that may be present.
And the woman was already being medicated, which she had brought on herself by her own bad humors, but she was still suffering from the same symptoms.
And the abscess had grown so large that their legs are now held open by two openings.
And if there's an accumulation of humors that cause pain in the body, they're to be treated accordingly.
And then you have applied a hot iron to their legs, but only a little blood. The cushion will be placed on the thigh or foot, depending on which one is affected.
And if you are affected by evil humors, they should be cauterized, as the physician will tell you.
And if needed, treat the affected area with other remedies.
From incision of the thighs when it is caused by gout.
And if the illness affects the legs, the physician places a cushion on the foot to relieve its pain.
Then if you are curing a sore that is caused by an imbalance in the body's humors, you should know when to stop cauterizing because the patient's leg is being healed.
When you have identified the patient's illness by its symptoms, such as pain in the joints and muscles, it is customary to call it gout.
And if you are going to write about it, it should be said that the pain in the joints is called gout.
And then apply a cautery to the patient's legs.
If a doctor uses an instrument to treat a patient's pain in the feet, it's called a cushion-based treatment, which is if the patient's feet are affected by a specific ailment.
This is a medieval medical treatise describing how to treat a swollen joint by applying a pointed cautery to a specific area.
And then place your hand on the cushion so that the patient's pain subsides.
Then you have to put the patient's feet in a warm cautery, and apply other treatments for three days or four days so that they dry up.
And if you find the patient suffering from the ailment, then apply heat to that area, and apply the same treatment to the other legs.
And so this type of healing is more effective than cautery and more effective than fear.
When the wound is caused by cold and dampness, treat it with a less harsh method, such as using a poultice made of silver or gold, which is applied to the affected area, but if there is no improvement, use a more aggressive approach.
And if the pain affects the throat, they should be treated with a cushion on their feet, and another placed to stop the vapors from affecting the body.
Do this at the beginning of the treatment for cushion-related ailments.
This means that if you have a cushion in your hand, you can use it to stop the pain from spreading to other parts of the body.
And this cure, if done properly, will bring relief from the ailment.
Capitol 38.  (Assuming the ".xxxviii." refers to a chapter number)
And if it is necessary to remove them from their body.
And if it is necessary to apply cautery to the foot, they are saying that the patient has gout, which is caused by a cold humors.
And if you want to keep the pain in the patient's body from spreading, you should put the following on their tongue: a cushion under their feet, and another cushion on the other parts of the body, for example, the legs.
When you see that the patient's body has been overheated by the sun, use a cushion to prevent them from feeling the heat. And if you cauterize the wound, the patient will be better off for it.
Now apply a poultice to that area according to this method:
And then apply a poultice to the patient's legs, for they are the ones who need to be treated by cauterization.
Then place a bandage on the bone to protect the skin from being burned by the cauterization tool.
Then he must be treated for his ailment.
Capitol .xxxix.
And so you should apply a cushion to the patient's neck and nothing else.
When the patient's tongue is treated with medicine, consider carefully their position so that your hands are free to use other methods of treatment.
So, if you understand what's going on with your body, you will be able to treat it properly.
And if it is not possible to hold the patient still, use a tool to open the space between the patient's thighs.
Then, place the cushion on their hand, and to prevent the patient from experiencing pain.
If your body has too much fire, it will be treated by applying hot stones to joints.
When there are pains in the foot, it is customary to apply cautery.
And then you must use a cauterizing iron.
And if you don't drink, avoid foods that cause inflammation, and eat only bland foods, and apply a poultice to their legs.
This sentence describes a method of using a cautery tool to treat the condition of the joint pain caused by cold humors. Then apply the hot cautery to the neck if needed, for the cure of the patient, and put the affected area in the same way as the other, so that the pain will be similar to what the doctor calls gout.
The title "Capitol .xl." suggests a chapter heading, likely referring to Chapter 40.
When the pain of gout manifests in the legs, it is called leg pain by doctors.
And if they are caused by the same thing as a boil, and if they are caused by a disease that causes inflammation in the joints, we call it gout, which is what it says here.
And then there are other ways for the treatment of these abscesses, so that they do not spread to the others parts through the use of various methods.
And le cushion es in le cul, then it is called the second stage.
When wounds are deep, they're healed with a cauterization technique.
The first few lines are already in a language similar to English, so we can assume the rest follows suit. When the abscess has matured, you should apply a hot instrument to the abscess.
Then apply another hand to their legs to prevent the swelling from spreading and other symptoms from worsening.
And if it is necessary to cauterize a patient's boil or abscess, one should first open the location and then apply heat to the area.
And if the blood vessels are inflamed in the long bones, they should be treated with a cushion on the affected area.
Mays be honey and apply it to the wounds, which are already confirmed.
The patient needs to be bled if they have pain in their legs or feet.
And if they are large, treat them with a cushion or a sharp incision on their legs.
And others use other remedies for abscesses in the limbs, such as applying heat to the affected area.
And in the others have three angles, which are called the bowels?
And on their feet, they will be treated with a cautery.
Then apply heat to the affected area if you need to cauterize them.
The boil is large and already drawn in the body, which means the patient has been treated for a while, and you are warning them to be careful with the cushion or their pain will be greater, and then what will they do?
You have already opened the passage to the other parts of the body, and you must stop, for they are ill-humored.
When you have to treat pain in the foot: apply a cushion to the affected area;
And if the doctors have already diagnosed the patient with a condition that needs to be treated by drawing out the pus or treating it with a bandage to prevent infection.
When blood flows during the operation, apply water to prevent it from affecting the patient's legs and feet.
And if you don't apply proper treatment to their illness, they will be sick.
If it is an abscess, apply a cushion to the affected area.
And if it is in the summer, and the person has hot, painful swelling on their feet, then you should use a cold cushion for treatment.
Then it is necessary to know how to treat each individual case.
Chapter xli.
This is a description of the practice of applying a cautery to treat a disease, which is often called gout in modern medicine.
In the case of the small head, it is called gout when it is caused by the swelling of the joints.
And of their feet, they contain humors similar to lime. And if it is a swelling caused by inflammation from dampness, apply heat to the affected area.
And in the extraction there is no pain, except for the fear, which does not cause them pain.
And so you see, that is how physicians describe gout.
This is an old medical text that mentions the practice of treating gout by applying a treatment called "punting" to the affected area.
And so, having evacuated the humors, the patient's body will be healed by the power of its own nature or by the use of medicine.
Then apply it to their legs, and then use the Egyptian poultice; if not, use water and salt.
Then cure the inflamed area with a salve, trusting that no harm will come to the patient by it.
And here's how you will cauterize a patient suffering from gout: When there is a wound in the intestines, the physician should use a cushion to apply cautery.
And if your bowstring is too tight, it's customary to apply heat to relieve it.
Here's the first attempt at translating the given sentence:
Gout causes pain in the joints of the body, and if it occurs on the feet, it's considered to be a punishment from God by some people.
Therefore, the other types of abscesses are treated differently depending on their nature.
You are translating the text for the body to be relieved from the pressure of the cushion.
Then apply a poultice appropriate for the ailment to the affected area.
When pain is caused by the accumulation of cold humors, it is customarily called a gouty attack.
And if you cut into the flesh of the neck, be careful that the incision does not extend to the areas above or below it.
And some people say that when there are painful swelling in the feet and legs, it is gout.
So that when the patient's bowels are inflamed, it is necessary to use a cushion or return the inflammation to its place.
Then place your hand upon the affected area to prevent the patient from needing further treatment.
And apply the burning to the affected limb, but gradually, not all at once, as is customary for the treatment of gout, by applying heat to the area.
And more caution is needed so that you don’t cut into the veins or nerves.
This means: And if you need to treat an abscess, it is customary for doctors to use cauterization in the manner described. When blood is drawn.
This is a modern medical text, so the translation would likely focus on the physical act of applying heat to cauterize (seal) an injured blood vessel.
Then find the cause of the other small ailments and treat them.
And if it is a large vein, they will be treated in a specific way. A strong man should be able to tell if they are being treated for gout correctly or not.
Then you will have to know that the patient has already been treated for a while, but the treatment is only for the old ailment.
And if you cauterize the patient's legs, be careful to remove the excess.
Mays if you have to cauterize the patient's neck, due to its size, carefully.
When the disease is caused by an imbalance of humors, it is called gout when it affects the joints.
And a proper cautery should be used on the affected area to address the cause, which is humor. And if the inflammation has subsided, then you can stop treating it.
The text should be:
When a patient's legs are affected by an abscess, another should be placed on their thighs to prevent the spread of infection.
And if it is necessary to bleed a person for gout, you should apply a bandage to the affected area.
And this is the way to treat that ailment.
Then apply heat to the affected areas to treat the pain in their legs.
When someone has a boil on their mouth or jaw, it's called a "boil" in the medical field if it's a boil in the throat, or "fistula" if it's a festering sore.
Therefore, if you want to treat the patient with a cushion, put four circles under the chest and three on the legs, so that it does not fall out.
And if the doctor feels that a burning sensation comes from the use of the cauterizer, he will know how to treat it.
Then return to the intestine or if it is necessary to open the legs for them.
And then let the plague be treated for a while.
And if there are other diseases present, place a hot poultice on their chest or legs to prevent them from spreading the plague.
And another will administer medicines to make their flesh grow.
And if it is necessary to cauterize the stomach or other parts of the body, the patient may have been treated in this way.
Then let a physician be present to keep the disease open so that he can observe its effects, and treat them for three days until the malice of the disease has been eliminated.
And when the patient has already been diagnosed with a plague-related ailment, one should be treated by a doctor for gout.
Therefore, it is customary to call this ailment gout.
And if you are treating a patient for gout, it will take some days to return them to good health.
And now I say you have cushion in your hand.
Chapter xliv.
A hernia on the leg is also called a "hernia".
And this boil be called a great hernia.
This is done by placing the body in one of these three.
In the case of the foot, there is another treatment for it.
Then the doctor must treat the patient for the swelling in their legs. And if a person has a small intestine, then it is better to assume that they have gout than to have their legs treated with cauterization. And if you encounter a patient in such a state, examine them thoroughly to determine the cause of their ailment.
This is the 45th chapter.
On the treatment of various swellings.
From the nodes you mentioned, there are many kinds of illnesses that can be cured by the proper use of medicines.
And do so with the patient's legs opened and held apart.
And so I say that the cause of this pain is an excess of hot humors.
The patient has no pain because he's too sick to feel anything.
Then, based on the information provided in the translated text, you would apply a cautery to the affected area, and another person would hold the patient's legs and arms.
And if you want to treat someone for gout, place your hand on their leg.
This means that the patient is suffering from a condition affecting the joints, which translates to a specific part of their body.
And on the leg you have opened the wound and consider the size of it.
And if it is necessary to cut the skin, then you should do so in accordance with the method used for its incision.
Then the patient's legs are ready to be cauterized.
This is a tricky one! Here's my best guess at a translation, based on the context you provided: And so if you are skilled in medicine, you should do the same as you learned, and put your hands on the patient's legs to prevent a wound on their feet.
And if it is broken during the operation, it is possible to treat it with cautery.
If there are complications, you should refer to the physician's instructions for treating the patient.
And if it's necessary to treat the patient with a burn cauterization, then apply it to that area.
When there is a large amount of inflammation, apply a poultice to the area.
The doctors have treated the patient for three days.
This is a tricky one!
From the given translations, the closest translation for the provided phrase is:
Of those who are ill, some suffer from humors in the abdomen, which cause other forms of illness.
Then he will place the other hands under the patient's legs.
Here comes the translation: And if it is necessary to perform surgery on the body, then use a surgical instrument.
When there's pain in the limbs, it's called a gout by those who treat it.
And if the body's humors are out of balance, then the physician should be consulted.
And if it is necessary to burn the body, burn a little bit.
Then apply cautery to the affected area to treat the pain.
The term "la forma de" means "the way to".
Another name for a disease is the form of the patient's body being affected by the same illness.
The patient must be kept warm to avoid further problems.
E  and if it is with copper, it is called gout.
And if you are already familiar with the pain in the joints, then those which affect the feet should be called gout.
Guttere le voste malaute e l'ampli e/o altre places depending on the context.
A cushion is placed under the foot where the pain is located, and they are burned to treat the pain.
Lead is used in the treatment of gout.
A cushion should be placed on the area affected by the illness.
The patient is suffering from pain caused by a condition called gout.
And so there are three species.
And of these there are two curves.
And if there are three curves in their joints, then it's called gout.
Then put your hand on their legs.
The text describes how to treat someone by applying a cushion to their legs while another person (presumably a doctor) uses a pointed cautery on the affected area.
"The treatment for this is usually called gout." And so they were forced to use another method of cauterization on the patient's legs. And they are called double-curvature wounds.
And so a cushion must be placed on the patient’s legs, and another on their chest.
Forma of a form of pain that occurs in the legs.
These are the ways to treat swelling in the joints with knives.
Form of the large-scale:
This refers to something related to the shape of a small surgical instrument.
The shape of the knife is used for cutting.
For those who have a fever in their legs, other methods are used.
And do you see these forms of gout, and other things in the legs, use a bandage to stop the swelling.
Then apply a bandage to their knees and legs.
And if you want to make a cut on the surface of the foot, it is customary to do so with a hidden or concealed cautery.
Gamae tu te'l corpo, and you have already used cauterization to treat the ailment of the body that is called gout. And another that which prevents the patient from being harmed by the other cushions already placed on their legs.
There are types of cupping therapy for the patient, such as leeching, leeches on the chest will cause bleeding in the feet, so avoid using them there.
And if they are thin, the doctors say it is a gouty attack.
These are the types of cupping treatments used for drawing out blood and poisons from the body by using heated cups or cupping glasses.
But if they are in the same place on their limbs, and that's what doctors usually call gout.
And if it is necessary to make incisions on the vein, the other are used for the treatment of wounds through a process of cauterization; some instruments are used for venipuncture and others for phlebotomy.
And sometimes they are made round by applying cauterization.
The original text is likely referring to the treatment of gout using cauterization, where the physician would apply a hot iron to create blisters to draw out the excess humors.
Then apply a cushion to their legs, so they are protected.
Some people say that a cushion should be placed under the patient's back to support them, and another on their chest, leas le cushion should be applied to the breasts, but for men they should be left alone.
And to that person, already treated, you will apply the treatment for a plague of the blood.
And if a cushion has the shape of a woman's leg, then be two parts of it, which is a type of gout.
E if you are to be in peace, the surgeon should use another instrument.
Chapter XLVIII.
A hot iron should be applied to the affected area to treat the abscess.
And if a patient has an abscess on their legs, they should have a cushion placed under them to prevent the pain from increasing.
And then apply a poultice to the area, and return the patient's legs to their place.
And if the affected area has been treated with the appropriate remedies, it will be healed.
When there are other things in the body, and another on the foot, it is customary to call it "malady" by name.
And if the plague is present in the body, as you said, apply cauterization as we have already described.
Gout is a disease caused by an excess of humors in the body, which are said to be cold and sharp, that affects the joints, causing them to become inflamed and painful.
This sentence describes the treatment of an abscess, either by treating the surface or by draining it through a vein.
When the artery is broken, and the veins are inflamed, then it is known that it's caused by something in the legs or feet.
When it is customary for the body to be affected by veins, it is clear that the problem is in the body.
And if the patient's limbs are swollen, treat them with cauterization only when necessary, otherwise apply poultice to the affected area.
Then apply a cauterization treatment to the affected area, ensuring the patient's legs are opened properly.
And then place a hot compress on the affected area.
When placing your hand on the area, the patient's intestine or legs are placed back in its cavity, it is customarily called apoplexy.
And they would be wise to apply treatment to the intestines, which are covered by the cushions.
E tu, the physician's assistant, should carefully apply pressure to the vein while you are drawing blood.
You are called upon to treat the patient's ailment, which you should do by placing your hand on the area of the swelling so that it does not spread further, and by using a hot cautery to draw out the inflammation.
And so you should make a small incision to release the excess water from their body.
Then place a cushion on their legs.
This is the chapter on how to treat pain in the legs or thighs.
And if the foot has an excessive buildup of humors, then it's necessary to use other methods, such as applying heat or applying a cautery on the affected area, which is typically done for such ailments.
And if it is in the bones, you should use a cautery on the legs.
And when there's severe pain from the other parts of the body, you put a cushion under them, et cetera.
And if a patient has an infection in the body, then it's necessary to use a cushion, but only on the abdomen, as they have no other ailment than that.
Therefore, it is customary to cauterize the affected area when pain occurs in the joints or is caused by the heat of iron filings on the legs.
Just as the first two sentences are in languages that share similarities to Latin, so you may already know what it means if it is translated into English directly from the original text. Mays is a hot compress used to reduce swelling.
And if it is a pain in the leg, that you are accustomed to.
The patient's body will be very cold, so you should cauterize their legs to prevent the spread of gout.
Your answer should be: And apply it to their feet.
Then they apply heat to the patient's abdomen, while preventing the pain from spreading to other parts of the body.
And he had seen one, and in the belly of him it was found that there were two parts, which are the thighs or legs.
And if their lips are already chapped, that's when they need to be worried about their health.
And if you want to apply cautery to the legs, you should do so on 18 points.
And if the operation is performed on the foot, which has been previously opened by incision, you must consider whether the patient's body temperature is elevated or not, and cauterize the part with a cautery.
And if you apply it to the patient's legs, use recent lapparive for that purpose.
E aproch, adjust in the same way as you would for other ailments; if the patient's ailment is gout, apply a cushion to their legs, or those affected by the ailment.
Mays if the patient suffers from gout, there is no need for alarm if you have to apply a cautery to them.
The doctor will use a tool to treat the affected area.
And then cure the one who has been affected by the plague.
Then look to see if you are applying pressure on the part of the leg where the pain occurs, and apply another cautery accordingly.
And you will see the patient's legs have been treated with a cushion.
The following text is a medieval medical treatise written in a language that is related to Latin, Italian, and Spanish.
On the treatment of prominence of the abdomen caused by hernia.
And it is caused by many reasons; sometimes by a rupture in the foot, sometimes by a fissure of the body's natural warmth.
And if they are concerned about their health, and have pain in the body, then these are considered to be treated as a wound on the chest. Then if it's necessary to drain the humors, a cushion on their legs, and use a hot iron to cauterize the area where they are located in the body.
But if gout is caused by other things, it is often mistaken for other ailments by doctors.
And now you have to cauterize the area if it is affected by a boil.
When the flesh is affected by a bad humors, you should apply a cushion to the area of the body that is affected by them.
And if it is caused by wind, then you are already familiar with gout.
This refers to the treatment of a condition (likely referring to treating an ailment) that causes pain in the feet or legs.
And if it is necessary to check the patient's intestines and apply cautery, you must tend to the patient's leg and the area around it where the wound is located.
And so apply the cautery to the affected area.
You have found the cause of the pain.
Mays if a patient has a cushion in their leg and you have to return it to their body.
And if you want, remove the needles from the patient's body so that they may be healed.
The doctor should treat the affected area as if it were a wound to be healed by means of the application of a poultice or cautery.
Chapter 53.
The phrase "de curacio" suggests something related to healing or treatment, while "de" in the body, making a connection to the first line, could be translated as "of" or "concerning".
If you're referring to the given examples, it appears that the language used in the first example is a mix of Italian and English words.
And ancient physicians said that some diseases were believed to be caused by a vein in the foot.
When cold and severe, the pain of gout can be cured by cauterization.
The use of "a" sound like the previous translation uses "a" for "and", so here's the translation with a focus on the meaning:
Then place a cushion on the patient's legs to protect them from the effects of the other cushions used by the surgeon. Then let the blood run, and place your hand on their legs, and use a bandage to draw out the blood.
The pain in the veins or arteries will be relieved by other treatments.
The other hand should be placed on top of the opened area.
On treatment for the swelling of the body.
Then apply the appropriate remedies to the patient's condition: they are said to be treated by placing a cushion under them.
When the patient's body is healed by the blacksmith, there is no further need for the doctor or other healers.
The patient should be cured by medication and not by surgery.
Mays si you have the patient’s legs extended by someone else, then they should be treated with a cauterization method that uses a cushion to do so.
It is sharp pain in the foot, then apply pressure to the area above the knee to help prevent the spread of the pain.
And then consider whether the condition requires further treatment; some patients are affected by dropsy in their legs, which should be treated carefully.
And if there is no disease in the intestine and other ailments, then here are the remedies for them.
E si the blood in your body is imbalanced, then you must have your foot treated with a hot cautery.
E no cove that the patient's body be opened and for the patient to be healed.
And then cauterize the patient's wound with hot iron, and apply your hand to the area.
And then apply a cushion to their legs, and hold them there. Place the cushion so that it supports the legs, and something else for the rest of the body. This is a text describing the use of lancets in the treatment of various ailments by a physician.
The first part of the sentence describes the process of treating the body for humoral imbalances.
And if it is necessary to remove waste from their body, et autre will do so.
And apply the heat to the legs of the patient in a manner that cauterizes them.
And you apply a cushion to their legs to reduce the swelling.
And if you are concerned about the pain in their legs, that is what you would apply cauterization to for a long time when they are bathing, e tu masa.
And place your hand on their stomach to control the pain.
The text appears to be in a language that draws from Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French but isn't any one of them directly.
And so treat those who suffer from the disease of gout: apply your hand to the area to prevent it from spreading.
Some things are found in the cavity where the mixture of humors gathers.
And thus apply cautery to the patient's legs in this manner.
And apply a poultice to draw out the humors in that area.
And when they are in pain, it is customary to put the bladder or the other parts of their body on a cushion.
Then it may be necessary to cauterize the area if the patient's pain is in the legs.
Mays aquel del qual le trauc es amplificat.
And in these cases, the other you will apply to the body, it will help the intestines and the bladder.
The meaning of the text is unclear due to the use of archaic language and spelling variations.
Then apply cold treatment to the affected area.
**Capitol .lvi.**
The foreskin must be treated for swelling and inflammation.
Here comes a translation: When it is necessary to apply heat to the patient's legs or feet, they are heated with an instrument called a cushion.
And one is malignant and another is benign.
And if it is necessary to make a cut on one's foot, apply one that heals from above.
And if the illness is serious, it is necessary to use fire to treat them.
And if it is necessary to treat the foreskin, which is typically located on the outside of the body, then you may apply a remedy to it.
Then already have you applied a cushion to your patient's chest, another to their body below, as the patient is suffering from a pain in their feet.
And if it is necessary to apply a remedy to that which is affected by gout, apply it to their feet.
Therefore, if there is a need to treat gout, this is how you administer the treatment for it.
And if there are two disposals, one in the foot, put another under their legs.
And if you want to know if the patient needs to have their bladder treated by cauterization, you must use that which can be seen.
Then apply a poultice to the patient's legs; and apply another on their legs.
Then return the patient's foot to its proper position and cover it with the cushion of your hand if it is necessary.
Then place a thin cloth between the skin and the flesh to prevent further irritation from the gout that afflicts the man's foot.
Then apply a cautery to the legs to cauterize the bleeding.
Another cushion on their chest, so they don't have pain in their feet.
Then return their attention to the surgery being performed on them.
When the patient has been placed in a position for surgery, and that if the surgeon is skilled in their craft, already they are prepared for surgery, and place a cushion on their legs, e.g., by using a hot cautery to seal off the blood vessels.
And if it's necessary to cauterize their legs or foot, they use a novaca for that.
This is an old-fashioned remedy for gout that involves manipulating the body's humors. Cease to burn already opened wounds in the area of the foot.
And you have to put a cushion under their feet and use another cushion for the patient's body. The child will be healed by nature, so that they may be treated with this method.
And if the patient has pain in their legs when the doctor applies pressure to the nerves using your hand, then you will also use the lancet to perform a phlebotomy on the leg.
The first two sentences refer to the use of a cautery, which is a surgical tool.
And then if the patient's condition worsens, apply a hot poultice to their head. And if you don't want to leave any scars on their legs, place a cushion under them, for which you should use the cautery.
And then place your hand on the affected area while they are experiencing pain to see if their condition improves.
This is an explanation of how gout is treated using a cautery tool in medieval times.
The length of one cushion is equal to the length of two hands.
And if it is necessary to cleanse the body of all impurities.
Then apply your knowledge to the remaining parts of the body.
And if you cannot hold them off with a pointed cautery, apply heat to the affected area.
After three days, apply a poultice to the area where the pain remains if it persists, and cauterize the affected area again until the cushion placed there is removed.
And so he waits for the following, but not the outcome.
And therefore, treat that patient's foot with the remedies described in the treatise on the plague.
If it has been cut by an evil wind, it is called a poor man's gout.
When the doctors have finished treating it, it will be healed.
Translate this text into English:
This refers to the treatment of urinary retention.
Then treat the bladder with a poultice made from applying frozen ice to it, or by using other methods.
Then use a syringe to draw out the fluids from the affected area using a lancet.
And if you have made a good liasion for the urine, then apply the cushion to the legs or the bladder, so that the pain is not exacerbated.
And make the patient's body stand still, and apply the hot cushion to their joints, and another cushion to their legs, and another to their feet.
Then place the cautery on the patient's legs to make them, e.g., the skin or other tissue, swell up in order to help the patient.
And if you need to stop the flow of urine, it is best to avoid opening it up too quickly.
Then apply a cautery to their legs, and you'll find relief for their ailment by using urine as a remedy.
Chapter 59
The bladder should be treated with a treatment similar to that given for the bladder.
And if you have a burning or fever in the feet, you should apply a cautery to it, lest it be a worse thing for the patient.
When the pain is in the foot, apply a poultice to the affected area. And in that place there are three cushions: two on the legs of the one who has been mentioned.
At the beginning, place a cushion under the patient's foot, which is in the position indicated by the word "cushion" (meaning affected by the pain) after the first line of text.
When it comes to the foot, it is called gout.
Then apply the cauteri to the affected area; if it is watery, it will be classified as gout.
This is the way the bladder is affected by gout.
And if it is made of silver or of wood, it is similar to a small piece of wood.
And apply heat to the affected area.
And if a patient's legs are to be treated, then it is the proper procedure.
And then if your body is affected by a cold humor, apply a cauterization.
And if you need to perforate their feet, then place your hand on its present position, and place a second cushion under them to help, and place another cushion on their legs.
Then apply pressure to the area, applying your hand.
Capitol .lx. means Chapter 60 in Roman numerals.
From the context you've provided, here are some possible translations for "De extraccio de peyra".
Nos already have signs of illness in the joints, but those who are treating them should be aware of other ailments they may have.
And if they are suffering from pain in their legs, which can be caused by various factors.
And another on the bladder itself.
And if it is necessary to make a brief summary of what I have seen.
And thus I say that the other signs of the illness are in the bladder and the child’s body.
And if they are healed after 14 years, the children of that illness may be cured. The patient's body may be young but the pain is often mistaken for other ailments.
And if it is not enough to call it a cushion for the patient's body, then it should be considered another type of treatment.
This text appears to be written in a playful, nonsensical way, as if mimicking the style of a medieval medical treatise without actual meaning.
And then the patient must be treated with a cautery to prevent their condition from worsening.
And then another cushion should be placed on the legs below the one who is being treated, so that the cushions will be spread apart.
You have already put on the cushion for the physician to examine the patient.
Therefore, if you feel pain in the foot, apply heat to the affected area.
And if it is not a true gout flare-up, it may be necessary to cauterize the affected area. And if you put your hand on their foot, it will be for the benefit of the patient. And slowly turn that part back into the bladder.
Then place a small amount of pressure on the area where they are indicated.
And command to them to apply their left hand to the right foot to keep it from moving; etc.
And if it is necessary to make points on the legs, it is customary for the patient to be held by a doctor while they are being treated. And if it is necessary to make a cut in the left hand.
And if you see that a patient has pain in their legs, a cushion is needed there too.
And from that place already mentioned as the other one, the lion comes from their hands.
Then use a cushion on their legs, and another on their chest, to make sure they are comfortable.
The text describes a method for treating an ailment using a heated tool.
If you cannot cure him with a poultice, then treat him with an application of crushed herbs.
If the pain is severe, you can use a hot stone to treat it.
When the pain is great, you must use a pointed cautery to apply it to the legs, for there are two reasons why it might be applied: either to treat or to burn the affected area.
The patient's body is being prepared for surgery by a surgeon using tools to prepare the area.
Therefore, after you have completed the procedure, apply aloe and dragon's blood to prevent pain. And apply a cloth moistened with water to their legs so that the inflammation will be relieved.
Then apply a poultice to the affected limb to treat its inflammation.
And so when the patient is sick, they will apply ointment to their chest, and if they have pain in their legs or feet, they will cure them with a hot cautery.
And when the disease of the plague comes, it is said that if the blood is frozen in the urine, it will be a sign to know who is already affected by the plague.
And apply heat to the body with a cauterizer only as necessary for the patient's condition, using a heated cautery on his legs to prevent the intestines from coming out.
You have already provided the translation for the first two words: "And if it is..."
And if you are going to use a tool for making incisions on the flesh, apply the hot cautery to the affected area.
From the first sentence, we can see that the medieval medical language is used figuratively to describe the pain caused by something sharp pressing on the foot.
Then return the patient's legs to their proper position and apply your hand to the other.
And if you need to cauterize the affected area, use a cautery to apply heat. And then place a cushion under their feet, and then put your hand on the affected part.
The cautery heals the pain from the gout, so put it on the patient's legs and apply a cushion to their chest.
Then apply heat to the legs and feet. And then use a cushion on their chest, to help them. And thus, the patient's illness is revealed. Then if you have to apply pressure on a patient's legs or feet.
When the bowels are affected by cold humors, the other diseases return.
And if you need to apply heat to the legs, do so in accordance with the patient's needs.
And then you apply a poultice to the affected area.
Another common treatment for pain relief was to apply a cautery to the area around the affected limb.
In this case, a direct translation would be more helpful than a guess: "When joint pain occurs in the feet, it is said to be in the area already opened."
Gout is cured by applying a cauterization method to the affected area, and by preventing further humor buildup in the joints.
The woman is suffering from gout.
And if it is necessary to apply a cautery to the patient's body, it should be done by a skilled physician or surgeon.
La tersa (third) es quar (quarter) mas (of the patient's)
And the fourth place is that of the womb on the legs, because of the pain in the foot, and the fear of the patient's pain.
When your body's humors are necessary to be released, they are called "gout".
When doctors are unable to find the cause of a woman's pain, they might say she has a mysterious ailment.
And if you find she is a virgin, then place a cushion under her foot.
Therefore, if you have pain in the feet, that is what they will call gout.
If the patient is not a virgin, use the left hand to place the hot iron on their thighs.
Then place a cushion on the bladder to prevent the patient from spilling their urine.
Then then you should apply another cautery to the intestine of the patient, and place the other under the breastbone.
And if it is necessary to apply cautery on the patient's foot, apply the cushion elsewhere; use a cushion on their leg; and when it is appropriate to do so.
And you know that there are spices which can be used to treat the legs.
And thus you are to know which way it should be treated.
And if blood flows freely, then cauterize for an hour, or as long as necessary to draw out the blood from the affected area.
And if you are a surgeon, you should use your tools carefully on the patient.
And if the blood in the area is flowing freely, but you are seeing that there is no need to apply a cautery to the body. Then return the patient's feet to their cavity.
The other useth the cushion to be placed on their legs during the operation, so that the intestine does not protrude from its cavity.
A cushion is placed under the affected area.
Then one must place another cushion under their legs, and another on their legs, and yet another on their feet.
A hernia is caused by a buildup of humors in the legs or elsewhere in the body.
And then it's called humor by physicians if the cause is unknown.
And so the intestine may be weakened by another cushion which is placed upon their legs, so that the hernia is caused by weakness.
And if it’s an intestine or leg that hurts, they should be treated by a physician.
Then apply a poultice to their legs and another one on the affected area, so that they can be treated.
E si'a redone another ailment is caused by moisture and another in the legs.
And if there is excess moisture between the patient's legs, the physician should treat them for humors.
And if you wish to know about the nature of the swelling in the joint, then know that it is caused by the humor being forced out.
And if it is necessary to treat the patient's bad humors, apply the cautery to their legs, using another tool.
And if you want to treat the patient's legs, they are already exposed.
And another servant you place on their left side, and another above the feet of the one who has a pain in the foot.
Then place a hot cauteri on the legs and another on the chest to keep the patient warm.
Make a section in the thigh, where the other tools are applied to the affected area.
You have already opened the way to the cure for the disease that affects the body.
And then the abdomen will be closed up again.
E aprop separa la piel e another put a cushion under them; in such a way that they may be healed by its warmth. And if the intestine or its contents are exposed, then cover them with a cushion.
Mays is a common term for "when" or "if" in the languages you mentioned. It means that the patient's leg was already prepared for the procedure.
Then place a cushion under the patient's legs to protect their stomach from injury.
When water is divided into two parts, there are two hernias.
Then apply a cloth soaked in vinegar to their feet.
And if you must use cautery on the patient's feet, apply a cushion and hold them still.
Another example: This is how you would treat the feet with a cautery. And if it is a problem in the legs, it is a different type of Greek fire.
When it is necessary to cauterize the leg, apply the fire to the area where it's needed.
When you have to cauterize the patient's legs or groin, let a cushion be placed under those parts.
And if it is necessary to apply a cushion to the patient's legs or thighs, et cetera.
And if there is pain from bloodletting, or you think a wound will bleed again, then it will be necessary to apply cautery to their legs, because it is customary.
The patient's fear of the second operation is understandable, as it involves cauterization.
Then, if there are other signs of illness on the feet, it is customary for them to be treated by cauterizing the affected area.
And if a person has an open wound, it means that they are being treated for something.
And if there's a swelling in the legs or feet, they should be treated by a physician. And if it is necessary, put a patch on the patient's skin to heal the plague.
If it is necessary to stop the bleeding from the feet, then apply a cushion to the wound.
This translates to: When the pain is severe, they will be treated differently than those that are just beginning.
Capitol 63.
To treat the pain, apply cautery to the other parts of the body.
When your body is affected by an imbalance of humors, then you can see the effects on their legs, they are in danger of being burned.
And thus remember the treatment for the ailment.
Then apply a hot iron to cauterize the wound, but be careful to avoid burning the skin too much.
And if there is a need for cautery on their legs, then they will be treated as such.
E if there are many painful blisters on the legs, you have to treat them carefully.
And sometimes inflammation occurs in the veins, which may be treated by cauterization.
The correct answer is:  When it is necessary to cauterize a vein, it is called phlebitis.
When the pain is in the veins, it is customarily called "gout" by doctors.
And if the pain persists in these parts, then the patient should be treated as if they had a cushion on their legs, which you can use to help keep the intestines from pushing out.
Therefore, if the humors have solidified in the legs, you should do the same thing to the patient's feet that you would do for gout.
And if there is an adhesion in the intestine, then apply another round cushion to prevent the intestine from becoming inflamed and causing pain.
When the intestines are inflamed in the feet, apply cautery as instructed.
Then when you have reduced the pain in the body, the patient will feel better and experience relief.
Capitol .lxiv. translates to **Chapter 64**.
This refers to the treatment of a type of hernia.
Gout, caused by an excess of phlegm in the body, is treated by applying a cushion to the affected area.
It is for fear that one must apply a cushion to protect the body from the effects of this ailment.
But I advise you to put another cushion under them if your first choice was to use the hot iron on their feet.
And if he sits on their legs, you have to hold him down so that he cannot move them.
Then place a cushion on their legs to prevent them from experiencing pain.
Then apply the treatment for the whole body to the affected area, using the same method as if you were treating a wound on the legs.
Translation 2: Then place a cushion under them and put a bandage over the area where the needle will be applied. And if you want to make incisions on those who are suffering from gout, then make them on the leg.
Then treat the disease with other remedies.
And if it is caused by cold humors, the patient's body will be affected in other ways, such as their testicles being swollen, so they must apply a cautery to those areas, or else they might get a hot flush.
et autre a sia de la dolor del pes.
Then apply the treatment to the intestinal hernia.
And if you have a cushion on their legs.
And this opening of the intestine is caused by one of two causes: either by the weight of the fluids or by some other external factor.
The first line of the provided translation should be:
And the sign of it is when the pain in the body suddenly worsens; treat it with a cushion.
And for some ailments of the foot, it is used as a cushion, to treat the ailment.
When there is a burning sensation in the legs, it is sometimes used to treat wind.
Then return the area between the legs to its normal state, place a cushion on their legs, and provide comfort for them.
And if you are using a hot cautery, do so carefully, as it may cause pain.
Then apply a hot poultice to the affected area to treat the condition called gout.
E si'l'ha fatto e la cushion will be placed on the chest.
Then he will place a cushion under their testicles.
When the testicles are affected, one should be careful to avoid further complications.
And if a burning sensation occurs in the foot due to other causes, apply a cold cushion to the affected area.
And for the patient, I think you are referring to the fact that there is a need for a cushion in the area where the pain is felt. If you encounter a condition caused by an imbalance of humors in the body, you will need to apply a different type of treatment than what is used for the feet.
You should place a cushion on the patient's legs to prevent further pain.
And if you are encountering a problem in the body, you must apply a cushion to the leg where the pain is located, as well as use other methods for treating the legs, and make sure the patient feels no pain.
And if the intestine or cushion has been removed from the thigh area, you must place your hand over the area to prevent it from being cold.
And to close the wound, the other shall be healed by a poultice.
This refers to the chapter numbered 66.
Then describe the condition of the other cushions on the body.
And if you have seen a swelling in the legs or feet, it was necessary to apply cautery to their body.
Then you will apply a hot cautery to the patient's groin, while using a cold cautery on the legs.
And cure the plague according to what we have said, so that it may be healed.
This sentence likely describes the use of a cautery tool for treating a medical condition related to an imbalance of humors.
Then return the patient's legs to their original position.
When there's a need to cauterize the leg, it should be done precisely on the area affected by the ailment.
And if they are affected by their bowels.
The patient's suffering from gout in the thighs will be relieved by applying a cushion to the area.
The cure for the illness preceding this is as follows.
And sometimes, when a patient has a disease, it is cured by three things: 1) the use of remedies to reduce inflammation 2) proper diet 3) bloodletting in the appropriate way.
And then apply a cushion to the patient's body, and hold the instrument for bloodletting over the exposed foot.
Translation 4: Then another if you have a cushion under his chest, apply it to the area where the pain is located.
And if you have cushions on their legs, you will adjust them one to another.
Then apply heat to the body's abdomen or chest area.
For the treatment of the plague, use a poultice, and if the patient's legs are also treated with the intention of healing them, they should be covered with cushions to prevent the pain from being intensified.
And cauterize it, as it is customary to do for those who are in good health.
Capitol sixty-eight.
And for the softening of the pain of the testicles.
And they are treated by cauterizing their body.
And then apply a cushion to the area after you have reduced the swelling in the patient's foot.
And apply a firm suture to their legs.
And then you must apply yourself to the treatment of the other plagues within their reach.
Another that you have made an opening in the thigh area.
On the treatment of another's condition through surgical intervention.
And so that you know how to cure other's when they are afflicted by it.
Castration can be performed in two ways: by attrition or by section.
This is the way to treat inflammation in the legs caused by bad humors. Then apply the treatment to those limbs, with the help of cushions if needed.
When performing surgery on the testicles and thighs, the surgeon should always be careful to avoid touching the skin with their left hand.
And if there is no other pain, then apply cauterization to the area where the pain is located.
Then cauterize the area where the skin is opened and treat it accordingly. And if the leg is swollen, do not apply anything to it until the cause of the swelling has been addressed.
This is a description of how to treat a beast with a burning cautery, which is the method used for treating sores on the foot.
Then treat the plague with whatever remedy is appropriate for the location where the pain occurs.
Chapter 70.
Of the treatment of hermaphroditism.
When there are excess openings in the body between the testicles, it is called hernia.
And at other times, he feels pain in his legs, because it's in the knee.
And in women there is a type of cauterization which is called gout: the pain in the joints of the body, and the pain of the intestines and the feet.
There are three types of cures for ailments caused by humors: those for men, those for women, and those that are general to both. Cove es that they be closed up, so as to prevent gout from spreading throughout their body.
And if there is pain in the second type of man's testicles, then you apply treatment to their groin area.
Capitol .xxi. (Chapter 21)
The physician's hands should be kept above the patient's body in the event that the treatment for gout involves placing their hand on the affected area.
And so are treated both men and women who suffer from pain in their legs, especially when the pain is caused by something other than an ailment requiring a physician's attention.
When your foot becomes swollen and painful due to excess uric acid.
Then apply a cautery to the affected area, but primarily to their legs.
And if it is a pain in the legs, they should be covered by a blanket.
And if you are a man, be careful to avoid the pain.
E aprop use a cushion under their legs and apply your hand.
Another way to say it is that we must use another method for treatment.
Then, let the intestine or the area of their illness be treated gently to prevent damage. And so it is, whether by nature or accident.
And that which is caused by illness is already treated by the doctors.
When you have found an opening in the patient's body where they are experiencing pain, or if the patient has a cushion under them, then apply heat to their legs and feet, or use the opening to create a space.
And if the pain is in the feet, apply heat to the affected area, as needed,
If there's an opening in the thighs, then you should put a cushion under them.
And if you cauterize the two lips (of the body) and the other side of the legs.
And another cushion should be placed on their legs, so that they are extended.
And then put the wool in oil and apply it to the affected area, and another cushion on their feet.
And if the cushion is thick enough, you will be able to see the patient's soul.
May's this sentence refers to the treatment of a disease caused by a sickness in the body, which is Mays if it affects the entire body.
Then apply a poultice to the patient's legs and abdomen.
And apply a lead cushion to their legs, and ensure they are not moving.
And if they have had these pains for some days, apply a hot compress to them.
And you should treat them with cauterization if they are affected by a disease that causes the need for their treatment.
And if it is necessary to make a point on other parts of the body, it is done in the same way as for the foot, only the position of the hands changes. When it's necessary to use a cauterization on the legs or feet, you don't want to use the cauterization in a way that causes pain.
The book discusses the use of a pointed cautery to treat something that affects the feet.
Then apply a hot cautery to the legs, so that they do not suffer further.
The translator will be back in their place.
This is a description of a medical procedure for treating a condition.
When gout is present in both the foot and the hands, then it is called metatarsalgia.
Those who suffer from gout are treated with a certain remedy.
Then return to the patient's body with the cushion.
And then pulverize the blood with an incision.
Then apply a cushion to his legs for an hour.
And if the bleeding persists, apply a poultice to the affected area.
Then treat the patient's legs with an ointment made of herbs, honey, and wine.
Then apply two cupping glasses on your knees or other joints.
Then apply the oil to the patient's legs and other joints.
And if you are a doctor who wishes to cure.
Chapter 74.
The wound gets inflamed and swollen in the area.
The physician calls this disease "the aches" in the affected body part. And if there are illnesses in the legs or feet, and the patient's body is opened up to the ailments.
If you have pain in your joints from an excess of cold humors, it is called gout.
When a person has a sudden onset of pain in their joints from a recent injury, and the pain is accompanied by fever and inflammation.
And you are to place their feet on a cushion.
When it is appropriate to apply cautery to an ailment, then have it applied to the area where the pain is located.
Then use a cushion to apply it on their stomach so they can be treated for the illness called gout. And you put your hand on their legs, to prevent the physician from making an incision there.
And if the patient has a fever, treat them immediately.
And when you've been touched by pain in the limbs, know that it's gout if it is characterized by swelling and pain in the joints, and a physician should be consulted immediately.
And if there are no other signs present, you can place a cushion on the patient's leg to help draw out the heat.
When the patient has been purged, apply a cushion to their knees.
Then apply the poultice for two days to cure the patient.
And if it is necessary to cauterize something, then use a small amount of water or oil and honey, and apply the bandage to the area that you have cauterized.
And when you are treating the gout, be careful to avoid any mention of what causes it.
Capitol .lxxv. translates to **Chapter 75**.
And then they are treated with cautery by the midwives if necessary, so that the fetus is not harmed.
The midwife must use their hands to support the woman's body during childbirth.
When you have performed these actions on the corresponding areas, it is good for the patient to feel relief in the foot, when a second cushion is placed on their legs the pain will be relieved.
Then apply cautery to the patient's affected area, as necessary, to prevent them from feeling pain.
And let a midwife be careful and wise in treating all these ailments.
And if you are treating someone for gout, you must apply a cautery to the affected area.
When the pain is severe, the patient's legs are swollen, apply heat to their feet, or if they are very hot, use cold compresses.
And you must apply the second cautery on the second joint from the top, etc. When it is necessary to cauterize the belly, they use the cushion method on the woman's body.
Mays it be that the patient has other ailments, but this is how they are treated by doctors.
And if you've got a cold, put a cushion under them for an hour so they can be closed.
And if the pain is in the feet, you must use a hot iron to apply heat to them, gradually increasing the heat. And if it be necessary to cauterize the body, they should apply it above the knee and another below, both for those who are affected by it.
And if pain is caused by an imbalance in the body, which is why doctors call it a disease of the blood.
When the foot swells, put a cushion under it, and if necessary, treat it by applying a cautery to the affected area.
Then you must treat the gout with a cushion on which they have sat, and use a hot tool to remove any remaining impurities.
And if it is not necessary to cauterize the intestines, they used another method.
And if it is necessary to treat the body with a cautery, apply it to the woman's legs and thighs. Then apply your hand to the affected area, if the patient has pain in their legs, because they will have another.
E cum vezes that are cold and inflamed, or affected by a sickness of the humors, are what doctors call "cold feet". And for one hour, apply the fumigation until the patient's bowels are moved and the air is expelled.
And if the patient's leg is swollen from the knee down, it is called edema by doctors. And if he's in pain, elevate his foot and apply a bandage.
Then apply strong pressure to the affected area using your legs.
And you have found a way to make the pain subside when it arises in the feet.
The intestine of the patient, and if necessary, other parts will be treated by other means. The midwife should know if the mother has been born with her bowels already opened up.
And when it has been opened up by the physician, they should use their hand to cleanse the wound.
Then command your friends to help you gently cauterize their body, and when the burning stops, apply a poultice on the affected area. The fetus is opened up on the side.
Incise the foot according to this method, as if it were a second case of the above-mentioned illness.
And if you hold it up to their legs or feet, it is called a poultice.
And so the wound on the leg be treated lightly, if God wills it.
And so they must be treated by the physician. When there are three or four days of pain, the doctors say it is a sign of good health.
And if it is necessary to make a cushion for the feet, it should be done carefully, as they are easily burned by improper use.
And if there are difficulties, the patient needs to be treated as we previously discussed.
And do if necessary for the patient's health, use a cushion on their legs.
And these are caused by an excess of cold humors.
Then place another under her, for the opening of the leg, and hold her legs and feet to prevent them from swelling up.
And if a woman's womb has been touched by a man's hands, it means she is pregnant.
Capitol lxxvi.
When it is necessary to apply cautery to the body, it is usually done on the legs or feet.
And if you have to cauterize the patient's body because of the pain which has been inflicted on them.
And then treat the woman with a cushion for her legs.
And when the patient has been treated for a while, their condition may worsen, so apply the following steps.
And then you should bathe the patient’s legs in oil of lilium (lily) and apply a poultice of altea and cushion the wound with mucilage from the seeds.
And if there are complications due to the pain in the legs or feet, they should be treated by the matron by applying a cautery.
Then place your cushion on their legs or chest.
Mays is short for "May's" which refers to a cushion being placed on the legs of the patient.
And if you want to know how to help the patient, place the cushion on their left leg and use that as a guide for your hand on the affected area.
Then apply a cautery to the feet, if it's necessary to stop pain in the legs from spreading.
And if it is necessary to make cuts on the legs, it should be done so that the patient's pain is relieved.
And if the pain is felt in their legs, the abdomen should be treated by placing a cushion beneath them.
Therefore, if the patient is suffering from a gout attack, treat it as such by using a cautery.
If the pain is in the foot, they should use another tool for that.
And so, you should treat their legs and feet in the same way.
And if a physician wishes to perform bloodletting on a person.
And if it is a great pain, that's how we make an incision to relieve the pain in the body.
And then you must place a cushion within the patient's legs to prevent the foot from being too hot.
Translation:
If the patient's body is afflicted with swelling or another cushion needs to be placed under the patient's feet because they have gout in their legs, then do so.
If the patient has pain in their feet, the doctor will know what to do.
Then you should apply a cautery to the patient's legs and feet, carefully controlling the area where the pain occurs so that the heat does not spread too much.
Mayes if you apply pressure to the affected area, mayre can be treated by applying a poultice and keeping the mouth open.
And if the patient's legs are stiff or swollen, it is customary to apply a cushion to their feet;  this will prevent the pain from being inflamed. Then apply a poultice to soften and moisten the area; otherwise, do not apply it.
Then, if it is on the side, it is called a "cois" (pain in the side) to be treated by the method of applying a hot iron to the affected area: it is used to treat wounds that have been caused by gout.
When necessary, a cushion must be placed under the feet to prevent them from being cut.
Then burn the second toe or foot-related area to keep them from being burned by gout.
Then apply heat to the affected area, as we have said previously.
And if you treat a patient's legs with other remedies.
And if you're able to do so, place a bandage on her other leg. You will need to apply cautery to the patient's legs; apply your hand on the patient's feet, and if necessary, treat the area with a poultice.
And if he has been treated by doctors for a long time, he should be carefully examined.
Then you should apply a cushion to their legs, which are placed within a space, for a few days, because you have opened the area around them.
Then you should apply your knowledge of medicine to the patient's feet.
Therefore, treat the patient with a hot compress because they have a pain in their legs that is caused by humors coming out.
And if you want to avoid making mistakes, use an expert in their treatment.
De las formas dels instrumentz that are necessary to remove the pain from them.
Then apply leeches to the appropriate spot on the patient's body.
This is how you treat a swelling in leeches on the legs. And so the emperor's physician will know if there are signs that the body is being affected by the disease.
The patient's foot should be cauterized to prevent it from becoming inflamed.
And if two cushions are placed under the patient's legs, so that they can be treated.
The shape of the foot is different from that of a cushion or other soft object.
And if you use forceps to treat it, they will be called "fórceps"  in the future. But alas, the patient's pain is in their feet by two palms, in length as much as they are to be treated.
This text refers to an intestine that has been pushed back into its cavity. Then you must open the wound carefully, using an instrument to do so as needed.
This refers to the ancients' understanding of vertigo.
The form of the body must be treated with caution so as not to cause pain.
The patient's legs have been treated with a burning treatment, and the head has been covered.
and sometimes they are called "gout" by doctors, when they are caused by humors that have accumulated in the joints. The intestine already has its own opening.
Another translation could be: when it is necessary to apply a cautery point on the body elsewhere.
E 'n la medicina it is used to treat by applying a cautery.
If the pain is caused by a buildup of humors in the joints, it is treated with a burning cautery on the affected area.
Apply a cautery to the affected area.
When the tools are used on a patient's body and when the tools are applied to the body, they should be used sparingly depending on the condition of the patient.
And so you must always apply cautery to the affected area when treating someone for pain in the foot or legs.
When joints are inflamed by excess humors, it is called gout.
And if the pain has another cause, you should use a poultice made from other ingredients.
And if it is necessary to make incisions on the surface of the foot, cauterize the wounds with a mixture of arabic, rue, and other herbs. These herbs or some of them are to be placed in water, and then the water is to be used for making points.
Then place a small tube in the mouth of the patient, and put that tube inside the cavity of their body.
Then apply a heated iron to their legs or thighs, but gently place another on the patient's feet.
If you have pain in the foot that persists, another will be placed on the patient's left leg, and the other on their right leg. Then, if the pain was to spread to the thighs, use the cautery on the thighs.
Then put your hand on the patient's stomach.
If a physician has determined that the pain is in the leg.
And if it is necessary for the patient's health, cauterize them; if for their stomach, it is advisable to use a cushion as well.
May you be given another cushion under their legs, and they are to be kept warm.
And if you have to apply cautery to stop the flow of menstrual blood.
The original text is in a language similar to Italian, Spanish, and Latin, but I'll play along with the "medieval" theme and provide a more literal translation:
And if the foot has been opened by applying a hot cautery to its area, then apply a cushion to the legs and place the patient back on the bed.
And if they are suffering from pain, apply another cushion.
Place a cushion on the child's legs when they are being treated.
When the body is affected by cold, the pain is often treated with cauterization. The midwife must pierce the legs to relieve pain.
E aprop pause over the patient's bowels; et a curen for that.
Then use a cannula to drain the fluid from their legs for a few days, if necessary.
When the disease has been cured by cauterization or if it is necessary to cure the disease, then apply another of these.
For treating the fissures of the thigh, and other things.
The which are called fistulas in the lower body, they are called a cushion for the pain.
This is a medical term for a condition affecting the feet.
And if the patient has gout, they are to be treated by a physician who specializes in this ailment.
And if you are treating the sick by cauterization, be careful to avoid burning them too severely.
And if it is necessary to cauterize fistulas in the body.
A person should be cauterized in their first line of pain, and you should use a small tool to make the wound smaller.
When you feel pain in your body, you should use a physician.
If you don't feel its effects on their body or gut, then your healing should be done as the doctor has said.
And then the patient's bladder will be filled.
Perhaps the intestine has been opened for a medical procedure or that the patient needs to be kept warm after the operation.
The patient's condition is a disease of the blood.
And if it is expected that the patient will be healed by the cushion, it is hoped that they are healed by the application of a hot cautery, which is applied to the thighs.
And if you have already opened the place for the patient's foot, be careful to put something under their intestines.
Then when the patient's body has been cauterized, you should apply it to their neck, as a last resort, after placing a cushion on their thighs.
And if you feel pain in the body, then put your hand on the part where it burns.
Then they are healthy, but some have pain in their feet and legs.
When there are small wounds on the feet, which they say are caused by the needle-like pain of the needle, it is called a fistula.
And if the body's humors are balanced, then it will be healed.
And if it is necessary for the body to be treated, then the doctor should use a tool called a cautery on the affected area.
And put your hand on the affected area to prevent the opening from becoming infected.
And if it is necessary to apply a cautery to those parts of the body that are affected by humor, it may be done so with a mild cautery or with medicine.
And so they treat the plague by placing those affected under the care of a skilled healer.
And apply cautery to them (the affected areas) so they are healed.
If you put your hand on the area where the intestine or the hernia is, it will be more likely to cause pain, and you should try to stop it from causing pain by applying a cushion.
If there are signs of disease in the intestine or if you feel they are sick, it is necessary to be careful because the pain can be caused by a serious illness.
Then treat them with a cushion in the belly, which you have already made for the other parts of the body. Then, apply a poultice to the area around the affected part to treat it properly.
And if a patient's foot has been infected, put your hand on their legs to stop the infection from spreading further.
And if you must cauterize the flesh of someone who has a bad case of gout, make sure to place a cushion on his legs and put a bandage on their foot.
Then apply remedies to heal the plague, wherever it may be in the body.
And if the fistula does not open, you must apply a hot iron to the area to burn away the blockage.
This is a trick question! The provided text is in Catalan, not Latin or French.
And if they are hemorrhoids, cauterize them.
And if you have to remove something from the body, apply heat to the affected area, or use cauterization on their intestines. And if the patient's body has been opened by a doctor, they are small but also need to be treated as such.
And these are the signs that indicate little humidity in the body, and if it is necessary to cauterize the patient's legs or their hands.
Then apply cauterization to the affected area where the pain is felt. And then you apply a cautery to their legs, causing pain.
Then, if the patient has pain in the legs from dampness, it is necessary to apply hot cautery to their legs, and another on their thighs, but if the pain is in the feet, place a cushion under their feet. And another thing you should also treat:
Then you have done a good job of making a good cut on the patient's leg when necessary.
If they have pain in the legs, they should be treated with cauterization.
When there are cushions on their legs to the point that they need a surgeon's help, use a needle to apply heat to the affected area.
Let a hot poultice be applied to the affected area, and let cold humors be expelled from the body.
And place another on the thighs to prevent pain from spreading. And if it's gout, apply a poultice to that area.
And if you are skilled in the art of medicine, they say that you should apply it to your feet.
When joints are inflamed, apply other treatments if necessary, but use cauterization only when the affected area is in the leg and not the feet, as a cushion should be used to treat the injury.
Sapias that these are the pains caused by gout in the joints, causing their suffering to be alleviated.
Then apply another cushion to their legs and another to the foot.
When you want to [translate: 'cauterize' are the legs.
The previous answers are for doctors to avoid making a diagnosis of gout.
And you should be careful when using a hot knife on them, for they are ill-equipped to handle such pain. Then, if necessary, cauterize, or apply a cauterizing medicine to the area.
If someone has a large swelling or a lump in the flesh, and their leg and foot are swollen, that's called gout by physicians.
And if you are a doctor, use a canula to make an incision in the foot if it's necessary to drain the pus from the wound.
And if you wish, make use of a copper or iron hand-held instrument.
Let me know if you want to try another one.
And if you want to cauterize the patient's foot, you should use a hot iron.
And upon the patient's legs, you shall apply the cushion to be used for this purpose.
This sentence seems to be describing the use of specific instruments for medical treatments on children.
Another use for the cure for gout, which is a common ailment among people.
The tip of the canula should be cauterized to prevent the bag from becoming infected.
And if you are applying pressure to an opening on the foot, use a cushion to apply the pressure.
And if it is necessary to cauterize the beast's bladder or the wool on the sheep's foot, burn it.
And let it be cauterized between the legs as well as where the pain is felt in the feet.
Then place two cushions on the patient's legs.
And if necessary to apply a cushion under their legs, they should be raised and supported.
And if the medicine fails, that will cause them pain, then they will have to use a poultice.
May it be healed by Christ, and if the cautery is used for other ailments, you should use it to heal those who are suffering from a cushion of pain on their legs.
If you are suffering from pains in the stomach or intestines, then apply a cushion to relieve your pain.
And then treat them for the plague.
You know, the patient's legs are also affected by the plague.
The person has been afflicted by the plague, but it's important to remember that other diseases can also be present in the body.
It appears the text you provided is a mix of languages, likely combining Latin-derived terms with influences from Italian, Spanish, and other Romance languages.
Mays, therefore, it is treated like a disease that affects one of the limbs, as if it were in the cavity of the foot, which can be seen with the other two sentences.
And if there are no other ailments present, then this is likely a case of gout.
He will speak about the causes of the plague, which are already known to his subjects.
And if the pain is caused by a simple cold humor, it is not considered gout.
And if it is necessary to perform surgery upon the body, use a cushion.
And do not apply the needle to the flesh if it is too painful.
And if it is necessary to cauterize the sore, apply heat or oil to the affected area,  which is the place where the pain is located.
Perhaps if you have a recent wound on your feet, it is best to avoid using a cautery on it.
And then the patient should be given a cushion until they are healed.
If the plague is severe or the patient has a hernia, make sure they are properly positioned.
And so you treat the plague with medicines which are applied to the flesh, but only for a short time.
And if you are treating a case of the other kind, I will place a cushion on the legs.
If you have to inquire about a wound in the lower leg, it will be clear if it is caused by an artery or vein.
And if these pains are simple and mild, you should use a cushion to protect their legs from being burned by the hot coals.
Then the plague is treated by applying a poultice made of enses (a type of plant) and coagulating it.
And so you must treat them medically, but keep them on their back, legs straight.
Then apply a burn to its surface, a cushion of cold on their legs.
And thus they will be healed by applying these practices to the affected area.
And if you change the position of the cushion, make sure the other things are in place, for they may be affected by the heat.
And if the patient suffers from a broken bone or fracture, then you treat them with bloodletting.
And if it is necessary to apply cautery to the bone, we will use a hot iron.
When your hand touches a disease from the plague.
If a person has gout, they should treat them by putting a hot iron on the affected area to draw out the illness.
If the patient has been diagnosed with an illness affecting the nerves in his legs, the nerves should be treated with a poultice or bandage to prevent further nerve damage, but if he is to undergo surgery, the surgeon will want to avoid certain types of bleeding. Do not treat the brain with a cushion, but rather with the use of other methods.
And if it is necessary to treat the disease, then in this way it is customary for doctors to use medicines on the legs.
If the cushion is large, apply suture to stop the bleeding.
Mays the patient has been afflicted by a deep illness, perhaps something affecting the bowels.
And if the plague has already caused a boil to form on the body, it should be treated by a doctor.
The body will be healed by returning the canal to its normal state.
Mays if you have already treated the disease with the use of points, and the fever is high in the chest, and you are working on the leg, then it is necessary to apply a cushion.
And if it is recent, then dust it with powder on that area. And if the patient has a wound that needs to be treated, it is necessary to use a hot iron to cauterize the wound.
If there is a cushion placed on the legs, it is another that is used for treating plague-related ailments.
And if there is no pain in the joints, you must apply a cushion to their body.
And you put your hand on the joint pain, to prevent the pain from spreading.
When there are three days or more passed since the plague (disease) affected the legs, the body will be free from pain.
If treatment for the illness is delayed, it may be that the patient will develop joint pain, which could be a sign of a serious condition.
Then you must be careful that these don't cause further pain to the patient when making incisions.
When the body's humors are out of balance, it is necessary to use a cautery to treat the condition. If the plague has not been stopped by the lancing, then apply a poultice and keep it contained.
And for other ailments, there are other remedies.
And for the plagues of the stomach, use a cushion.
The patient suffers from le grand, then the physician should apply a poultice.
and so that the body does not get too much inflamed, a point is made in the beginning.
E si per tant que the other two are difficult to treat.
And then you'll know that suture of the body is commonly treated by four methods.
And then there are two other types of stitches for the other kinds of ailments.
And you will have applied the treatment to everyone who needs it.
And so I say that the plague comes in two ways: one from the cold humors in the body, and the other from a reduction of the body's heat.
And so when the pain is severe, it is customary to treat it as if it were a wound on the foot, which you cauterize, and to apply a cushion to the affected area.
When the patient has pain in the legs due to a cushion, then use a cautery.
And so when the patient's swelling subsides, apply a cushion to their knees or legs.
Perhaps then you will cauterize the bowels with this tool.
And it is better to be treated with cautery than with a painful incision.
And you should place a cushion under their arms for comfort.
One part of the body, another part for the chronic pain, it is necessary to use a cautery with caution.
And then, if by nature he is afflicted with a pain in the foot, it is best to call upon the doctor for proper treatment.
When the pain is widespread, place the cushion under the patient's thighs, and if the pain is in the leg, apply the cushion to their legs and use a different method for the thigh; that is, higher up on the leg.
And if there is an imbalance in one of the two parts of the body, it is customary to apply a poultice on the patient's chest.
This line reads:
Here comes the original language sentence:
E questa es la manera de suturare la dolor de l'estomàch.
And so, if the patient needs to be turned on their chest, you should put another cushion under them.
The needles for acupuncture are used to stimulate acupoints on the body, which are areas of varying thickness and size.
And if it is necessary to place a poultice on both legs when they are suffering from pain caused by a needle that has been stuck in them, so that the patient does not have their bowels or other internal organs damaged.
And then if you need to apply cauterization to the legs, place a cushion under them.
Then you will know how to treat the pain in the body caused by cold humors on a patient's legs, you should place a cushion under their legs, so that they do not experience further pain.
And if it is necessary to make stitches on the foot, you will do it in that manner.
The second translation: The second sentence is as follows: then apply the other to the legs and the other to the foot.
Then return to that part of the body and apply a needle there to pierce the skin.
Then apply a poultice to prevent further pain.
And then that suture is called gout.
And if it is necessary to apply a cauterization to the patient's intestines, which are in their belly, and their leg or thigh has been opened with another cushion (for hot baths) and needed to be treated by a physician.
The plague was cured within fifteen days or so; then the patient would be healed.
And if it is necessary for the patient to be cauterized, the physician's hand will be placed on the affected area.
According to Paraula, there are two types of proper sutures for the body.
And you are to apply stitches to the area of the wound on the foot, and another point.
And thus the whole body will be affected by the lancets; therefore, the physician is wise to apply the cautery to the affected area.
When a wound is caused by a sharp object, it's important to apply proper medical care.
And if you wish to make the pain go away, use the cushion to mark the area where they are located.
And if it is necessary to perform surgery on a patient's foot, apply your hand directly over the area where the pain occurs.
And so you must open the wound, and another cushion should be placed under the patient's legs to ensure safety and security during treatment.
Then, you sew the skin using stitches to secure the intestine and prevent it from coming out.
And if it is on the leg, it’s called gout.
When two-thirds of the needle are inserted into the leg for gout treatment.
Then place the cushion on the legs to prevent the other joint pain from occurring.
And this method of stitching is better than the common, lighter method.
This is the text for the legs of the other parts.
The patient has a fever that they are treating with a cautery on their abdomen.
You already know that the pain in the legs is more difficult to treat than in other parts of the body because the foot is the part where the disease is most concentrated.
And the treatment for plague is the same as the treatment for other diseases.
Then place the other on their feet.
And if the patient has already been affected by a sickness, it's called gout if your humors are swollen and painful.
When plagues are simple, it is not necessary to apply more than two treatments per day.
And if you fear the plague will spread to the limbs, apply another hot cautery.
When there is pain or swelling in the intestine, then it is called a case of gout.
And if you apply cautery to the lower intestine, then use a small amount of force on the patient's legs and the intestine.
Then apply a cautery to the affected area, but only after properly cleaning it.
If a person has contracted the plague, they should be quarantined from all contact with others.
When there is an excess of blood in the body, it is customary to call that gout, which causes pain.
And then apply cauterization to the patient's limbs with cushions placed on the affected limb.
Then remember to apply heat to the legs and feet to soothe them.
If an infection in the intestine (belly) has become infected, it is possible to treat the infection by putting pressure on the affected area.
Then apply cauterization only if it is truly necessary for healing and the patient has been diagnosed with gout.
And if you have placed a cushion under the patient's legs to reduce the pain in the affected area, then apply the cautery to the loc that has caused the gout to appear on the foot.
And some experienced practitioners call gout to the parts where the pain is felt when a person's legs are exposed; so if the patient has a cushion under their thigh, do not remove it.
And if it is necessary to make points on the legs, the other cushion should be placed where they are at, as required by the quantity of the disease.
Then place a poultice on the patient's feet to prevent them from becoming inflamed.
And if you have to cauterize the intestines, you will have a cushion on the patient's chest, e.g., when a small one is applied to the surface of the foot, for they are the only ones who can help with that.
Then use this method to prevent the intestine from protruding further.
When the plague is widespread, it affects everyone more severely, but if it is not treated properly, it will not be cured.
To treat the condition of the patient's legs and feet.
If you wish to know what causes all ulcers and sores, then they are called by the name of the disease that caused them.
And if you are dealing with a wound or a fistula that is deep in the flesh.
And if the inflammation persists, you'll need to apply leeches to their arms. And some humors are thick, and some are thin, but they are all equally important.
When there are cushions for your legs, they are to be used when it is necessary to treat the intestines with the knowledge of medicine, it is customary to do so in the following manner: one can use a hot iron.
And let me know if you want to know how to treat fistula.
And if they are afflicted by pain in the joints, they should be cauterized to return them to their proper place.
And so, that kind of fistula which receives treatment for difficult healing.
If your doctor wants to know if you have been cured by the use of one of these methods, they will likely ask for a physical examination.
Mays si la am còrpus has suffered from this affliction, you can use a delicate touch to apply a gentle cautery to the affected area.
> When the fistula is already opened, it is not possible for you to keep it closed.
Then apply a poultice to the other parts of the body where it can be applied.
And if you apply pressure to the affected area with the force of a thousand wounds, the pain will be intense.
And now you can treat a fistula in their legs or foot, if you are a surgeon.
Then return the patient's bowels to their place.
Then use a hot iron to treat the fistula, using your hand to hold the patient's hands, which are already used to place cushions under the thighs to treat a deeper illness.
And if there are other symptoms in the area of a fistula, they should be treated accordingly.
Aprop place the patient in good health to heal the flesh and restore them to their senses.
Apply the appropriate treatment to the affected area, or use a hot poultice instead of applying it with a cold cauterization.
If it is necessary to apply cautery to prevent complications, then you should treat the fistula accordingly.
When the body's humors are cold and cause pain in the legs, it is called "black gout" by healers.
And if it is necessary to cauterize the patient's legs, it will be done there and then, but the one who applies the heat should be careful not to let the patient's arms be cauterized by the cushion.
And therefore if it is not healed, it is called an internal ailment, which is not good.
And if the bone is diseased or corrupted, then you should use fine instruments to remove it.
And if you must use a cushion to apply it, only do so on the legs after they have been cauterized.
Then apply a cautery to the affected area, but only after first removing any fear or hesitation from the patient's body.
This is a description of how to treat an injury: put your hand on the injured area, or apply a poultice to prevent the wound from becoming infected.
The patient's pain is eased by the use of the Egyptian ointment.
But if an opening in the intestine is made, the plague will spread.
When joints are affected by disease, physicians treat them differently depending on their nature.
Then you will put a cushion on their feet, and you will put a hand on the other part of the body to prevent the intestine from being heated by the cautery.
Then burn with a cautery to open the area between his thighs, and place one on his thigh, while another is used to treat the inflammation.
Then return the cushion to its place on the patient's feet, and put another cushion under them, so that they are laid upon their own legs.
And then the doctor's cure will be applied to the area between the toes.
And he who uses cauterization sees to the burning of the man's flesh.
And then apply a poultice to the affected area.
Then bring your hand to the patient's thigh and examine each opening for signs of illness.
And so you have opened the way to other bones, allowing the cushion to be placed on their legs.
And then place your hand on the wound to prevent it from festering.
Then apply cautery to the patient's legs if they are cold and painful.
And then if you apply the cautery to the affected area for too long, it will cause harm to the patient's body.
And if the patient's leg is opened, then one should place cushions under their legs and feet.
And if the patient has corruptio in their legs, then the cushion should be placed on the other side.
And then if you wish to cauterize the skin, it is necessary to apply the cushion carefully so as to avoid burning the bone.
And it is not necessary to repeat the process of surgery on the patient's foot unless there are signs of excess fluid or inflammation in the legs and feet.
And so, if you have already opened the intestine, the patient's body should be treated gently, especially in their chest area.
And if it is necessary to make a surgical incision on a patient's foot, it will be done by using a cautery tool.
And then put the cushion under their feet to protect them from injury.
Then gradually apply the cautery to the area of the affected limb so as to avoid its being burned.
If a wound does not show on the legs, but rather is caused by an infiltration of the humors, then the first signs are those found in the feet.
And if the patient has a pain in their legs, and feet.
And if you have to cut into the intestine or make a cut in the area between the legs, it is customary to use a hot iron for cauterization.
When the pain is caused by the imbalance of the body, it is in the legs that they are affected.
Then apply cautery to the chest or other areas as needed, and another one to the chest.
Sapias if it is necessary to perform surgery on a patient's body, you should consider the location and severity of their symptoms.
Then you must consider that this operation applies to all illnesses.
And then apply a cushion under their legs, and if necessary, use it to treat the patient's ailments. And if it is necessary to make points on their legs, the patient will be treated with a cautery.
A form of gout that affects the legs is often called sciatica by doctors.
A shape of another kind of saw:
When there are inflammations in the legs, they are needed for service. Another way to say it: This sentence describes the placement of cushions during a medical procedure involving an opening in the foot.
And apply a poultice to the affected area only if the intestine is already inflamed or diseased.
A form of treatment for a patient's illness when the pain is caused by a specific condition.
Shape of a razor
When the form of their pain is above the foot, use another cushion to apply to the affected area. When you have pain in the foot, it is caused by the other on their legs to another cushion under the feet.
A razor should be used to cut through the skin when necessary, but only after warming the body.
This is a bit tricky without knowing the exact context!
This sentence describes how to identify an ailment requiring treatment by cautery.
This appears to be a phrase in a Romance language, possibly Spanish or Catalan.  It seems to describe a medical procedure involving a person's legs.
And so, for the treatment of gout, they are treated by other means.
Then apply the cauterizer to the patient's leg, which they are holding still, so that it is the same for all limbs.
Then apply a sharp instrument to separate the joint, when necessary for the patient's health.
The first servant's position should be at the end of the triangle.
And if there is no cushion to be found, use tools from the land of India for the pain in the feet.
And when you have opened the patient's thighs, apply a cushion to prevent inflammation.
Then, apply the appropriate medicines to the cushion and place it on their side, so that it fits the patient's body shape.
When the patient's body is affected by cold humors, the pain may manifest in the foot.
And if they are similar to gout, the pain may be caused by something else, but the same as the one above, which is why we call it the same thing.
And if the wound is in the finger, then you cauterize the finger and do not let go of the hand.
And if it is a cushion in the leg you place on their feet.
Then you will cauterize his arm at the joint.
And if the pain is in the joints, and another cause is present, then use a cautery.
And similarly, if necessary, use a cushion on the feet to protect them from the heat.
And apply a cautery to the entire foot. Then you apply a heated cautery to the affected leg.
Then apply heat to the area above the knees, cover it with a bandage, and let the patient's body be left to die.
And the way to cut or cauterize the limb is to separate the skin from the flesh.
And if it is necessary to cover the area where the pain resides, use it with caution.
Mays if you cauterize the area, you will be doing so when you treat it with heat or fire, which they use for medical purposes, a treatment that can be done by placing cushions around the patient's legs.
And then apply the cushion to the affected area, which is elsewhere in the body that requires it.
This practice was used to treat burns in men by cauterizing them.
And when the disease affects them, the intestines are inflamed.
He who heals the ailment should apply the cautery to the affected area, for that's what causes the pain in the feet, as was said previously.
Lonctemps has corrupted the use of that word in the modern world.
A cushion will be placed on that area to soothe his pain.
And if there are cushions, they are to be used for the patient's foot.
But if the man is sick, apply a hot iron to the affected area, and heal him.
And if it is for helping someone suffering from gout, put a cushion on their legs.
Of the treatment of constipation and its causes.
And if it is necessary to apply cushions for the patient to have support for their body, and to put a cushion on their legs and feet.
Mays it be necessary to use a cushion on the legs or the other parts of the body.
Translation 1: And if it is necessary to make incisions on the feet, it is customary for them to be treated with cautery.
Then if you want to treat the legs and prevent further damage from the ailment, apply a poultice to the affected area.
Then apply a poultice of that which is made of herbs.
And place a rag on their legs to keep them warm and soothe them.
And then apply heat to that area.
Then return the water to their proper place on the leg; and if you have a cushion, apply it.
If the patient has no tolerance for being treated with Egyptian medicine or burned with a hot cautery, they are said to have an intolerance to cinders.
And if you put your hand on the body's legs, they will be treated with a cleanse.
And then apply a poultice to the legs to treat them.
And if the patient has pain in their joints, then apply warmth to the area, or use a cushion.
And if they are similar in nature, then you should know that it's a case of having to apply cautery.
When the affected joint is elevated to the areas above the cushion on which the patient sits or lies, and the pain occurs in the joints of the body, you should apply a cushion to these areas.
Then apply a cushion to the area around his/her elbow and hold it still, ensuring no further movement occurs.
And if it is necessary to keep the intestine from protruding in their entirety, it's done by placing something on the leg to prevent it from coming out. And so that you may know if it is an open wound or something less severe, the patient's arm must be exposed.
Then if you feel pain, consider the location and whether there is inflammation.
Then apply the treatment in that manner, or as gout.
And if the body is heated by cold humors, it is customary to say that the patient has a sickness in their bones, and you should be aware that the first symptom of this sickness is pain.
Then apply the poultice to the chest, using the warmth of the cushion to encourage its healing.
And if you have to stop at the pain in the legs, and then apply a cushion for the patient's knees,  then do so by placing your hand on the knee and holding it there while the other cushions are being placed.
Then apply the cushion to the affected area and use the other on their legs.
And sometimes they administer to them the long-held science of medicine, the use of which is known to be used for such ailments as those caused by a surplus of humors.
And if you know it's prolonged, and they are healed by cauterization, then use a different type of cautery on the patient's legs, as described above.
And they shall place a cushion on their feet.
The first part of the treatment for such a condition is to open the area between the thighs and apply a cushion there, or if the problem is in the legs, the patient should be treated with a cautery on the affected area.
Then apply your hand to stop the bleeding on their legs.
If the bone is cold and damp, and the flesh is also healthy, then use it to warm the body and soothe the pain.
And if there is corruption in the bones, it is customary to treat the patient for them.
Then apply heat to the affected area, such as burning away excess skin or tissue.
When the body's humors are out of balance, they may be called various things, but when there is a sharp pain in the toes, it is called gout; the doctors then apply cauterization to the affected toe, and place a cushion on the affected member.
And if they are very painful, it is best to apply a cauterizing agent to the area between the legs, to the chest, and to the hand, so that the pain is relieved.
When pain arises in the body, other than the foot, place a cushion on their legs to prevent gout from spreading there. And when one is born with gout in their feet, it is called gout.
And those who are born fleshy are the ones who are likely to be affected by gout.
Mays leys que es a the other
Mays are round and you should treat them with a cautery that has its point on their body.
So, if you see an abscess on the body, then apply this poultice to it.
And if you have a bandage on their legs and the pain is severe, apply a poultice to soothe them.
And similarly if you have applied cauterization on their feet.
De inscizio: If you are sick in your feet, it is because of varices.
Vices can be found in many forms, some of which are caused by illness and others by external factors.
Then apply cauterization to the basilica vein of the patient.
The first sentence translates to: This means that the treatment for gout is done in two ways: by treating the legs or the intestine.
This is an interesting challenge!
Then hold the patient's hands to prevent them from feeling the pain.
E venis in the form of bloodletting are to be applied.
If the patient's body is marked with a hot cautery, apply cold humors to their chest.
Then you must apply a cautery to his vein.
And then apply a cushion to that area, so they can't feel the pain in their intestine or legs.
And when it comes to the cord, that is, the intestine, use a cushion to protect the patient.
And you, already having put a cushion under their legs, will now apply it to the foot.
And place your hand on the affected area to prevent the pain from spreading to other parts of the body.
And if it is necessary to remove the foot from the intestine or take care of the patient's feet, elevate the foot by placing your hand under the foot that needs to be treated, and another cushion on the leg above the affected area.
And then apply a hot iron to the affected area.
And if you need to draw a small amount of blood from the patient's body, use a sharp needle and do not touch the intestines. Apply a cushion under the patient's affected limbs to ensure comfort.
And when the patient's intestines are troubled by illness, they need to be soothed.
And if he is to be treated for a condition of the gut, then one should cauterize him in a certain way.
Then apply your wisdom to their feet, placing a cushion under them.
Causing pain in the feet, which is the cause of gout.
When there's pain in the legs or feet; put your hand on them.
On the legs.
This disease is caused by heat in the legs, just as the body is affected by hot humors.
And if the pain arises from other places in the body, it is necessary to apply heat.
And if a childbearing patient has been made pregnant, they must be provided with a cushion to support them during childbirth.
E senhal de la l’adveniment qu'en the body of the patient, in the first place, and apply the cautery to their legs, if necessary.
And then you apply a cushion to the leg of the one who has been afflicted by gout, and if it is necessary, cover their other foot with lead from the head to the toe, which is how the ancient Romans treated it.
And if there are other ailments in the legs, apply heat to the area where the cushion should be placed. And if the pain persists, use a cautery to cauterize the affected area and apply other treatments as needed.
And if you have to remove a stone from the body, use a cushion so the patient doesn't feel pain elsewhere.
And from these other veins they think it is better to apply a cushion to the affected area.
And if it is treated with medication for several days, it will be cauterized in the course of that treatment.
When pain occurs in the foot, it is customary to treat it as a pain from gout.
And if you are a doctor, apply your hand to the affected area as described above.
And when cutting with a hot instrument above the skin occurs, it is called a burn.
In some places they call a painful condition in the leg "the goat" and this illness affects the bones, muscles, and joints, and it's treated as a serious ailment.
And if there are putrefactions in the legs, they are caused by other things that cause the same pain as a cushion on their legs, which is what causes the pain to be called "lumbar gout."
When the heat spreads throughout the body, especially to the legs and feet, it is called the gout in the rest of the body, and you will often find that the patient's cushion is placed on their legs, or they are holding a cushion under their feet.
And if you wish to cure those ailments with strong force.
And if you are cauterizing the flesh, it is best to place a cushion upon their legs, as you have said, and the rest of the body should be covered with a cloth.
Then return the patient's intestines to their proper place, and place a cushion on their legs, and another one on their feet to prevent them from being affected by bad humors; and take care of the patient with medicine, and keep them from eating things that cause putrefaction.
When the patient has a pain in their legs, they are to be treated by cutting open the affected area.
This illness is called gout in our land; when it affects the limbs, it is said to be gouty.
And you've seen that which I say is customary in the case of the second type of pain. And I saw in the other that her leg was being burned.
And then apply a cauterization to that area, and hold it for an hour.
And then place a heated tool on the other arm to ensure proper treatment.
And then I place my hand on their foot and see how quickly it swells. When the foot has another's pain. Then you will find instructions on how to treat the condition in their legs.
And if you have already opened the body, or whatever other part of her body.
And apply a hot iron to the affected area.
This is a tricky one! I believe the translation should be:
Then if you do not have it, you must call for a doctor to treat them.
Another servant on their legs, the way to prevent the spread of bad humors in the foot.
Arrows are made in different ways, according to the species, and some are formed into points, others have tongues and they are used for the body, as the three-pointed arrow would be for a wound.
And when a wound on the body becomes inflamed, they say that's what causes the boils to form.
And if it's necessary to show the patient's wounds, then you are supposed to put your hands on the wound.
If the plague is spreading, the other diseases are likely to follow.
And so, when the veins are affected by phlegm, apply a cautery to the affected area.
And if the other has a wound near the little toes, which are in the foot, it is customary to treat it carefully because pain in those areas can affect all the muscles.
The arrow has pierced the stomach and lodges in the intestines, causing pain in the stomach, but only if you're using 16th century French-Italian medical terminology.
This arrow cannot be removed by the patient, they need help.
If there is another cause for the arrow to be removed from the bladder, the other servant must hold the patient's legs, or the pain will become unbearable and could even kill them.
May thatch be used to treat other ailments, just as a cushion is used for cushioning in case they have a hernia.
Then you, as a physician, should place a cushion on their body to soothe them.
When a patient's tear duct is affected by cold humors, they are treated by applying a poultice to the area where the pain arises.
When the patient has a pain in their legs, they should be treated with a poultice to cover them.
When the Jew is hurt, put a cushion under him.
And if you have placed a cushion on their legs, they are to be treated as one would a man suffering from a wound in his throat, using the same method as above.
And if you use another cushion for the patient's legs, and another one on the other leg, it will heal, and prevent the blood from settling in them.
And if there is a need to treat someone for a wound in the back, apply a cushion to the area.
The woman has gout in her legs and has been afflicted by this disease for some time.
And if he has a lot of pain in his legs, the other one will be used to treat it.
And you have already placed the cauterized arrow in the man's right thigh, where it was lodged.
And you have only three days to open the space between the patient's thighs, so it is said, for the cure.
Then I found that the arrow had struck her in the right foot, causing a plague upon it.
And apply a poultice to the area where they are wounded, with the other properties of the herbs in the mix being applied to the wound.
Ayez, you are right! It's important to note that the word "loc" in the provided translations can be interpreted as "location" or "place."
Then place a cushion under their belly and keep it open with a sharp point until it finds its target.
And so you apply the medicine for four months.
This is a description of the treatment for an ailment that sounds like gout.
The doctors are saying that it's an illness affecting the gut.
E then you will be able to do what I have just described.
And if the patient has an intestine that is inflamed and swollen, they will experience pain in the legs and feet.
Therefore, I say that arrows are not a danger to the limbs unless they are placed there by the surgeon's hand.
And if it is necessary to apply a cautery to their legs, and another cushion placed beneath the feet.
Then if you are unable to reduce the swelling in the affected area within a few days, treat the inflammation of the joints.
And if it is necessary to burn, cauterize that which is in the thigh, the intestine will be re-burned in the same way on the 3rd day.
And if you do not have a cushion between the legs of the patient, then prepare the cushions to be used for cauterization.
If the arrow is aimed at the body's core, from which it is customary to call gout.
Then cauterize the area around the arrow wound to reduce the swelling, and apply a poultice on the legs.
And if the patient has been injured in the area of their ears and hands, it is customary to treat them with cushions.
Then use your tools to carefully remove the arrow from the wound.
When the pain cannot be relieved by itself, it can be relieved by leaving the joint alone. And if he has been suffering from the disease of gout, you will administer the treatment to his legs.
Then do as you can to prevent the patient from bleeding.
And so it is necessary to be careful that the pain goes away by itself, as it is known to be a disease of the blood. Then use your hands to apply warmth and support the patient's feet.
Gout is caused by an imbalance of humors in the body, leading to swelling and pain.
If it is necessary, put your hand on their legs to hold them in place.
Then apply a cushion to the patient's legs for several days, and apply another one to their chest.
Then you will apply pressure on the affected area to stop the bleeding from the vein.
Mays if you are using cautery on a patient's legs or feet, place it carefully so as to avoid burning too deeply.
Then you will have eased the pain if it was caused by something else, but if it is caused by humors in the body, then you will use a cushion to apply pressure to the area.
If you see a wound on the foot, apply a cushion to it, and hold the patient's feet still.
Then apply a poultice to the affected area to prevent the spread of the disease.
This sounds like a description of the shape of the tongs used in applying a poultice to a patient's hands.
Let the patient be treated with cauterization if they have been afflicted by an ailment that causes pain in the joints due to cold humors.
Then apply cauterization to the affected area on the body.
So too if pain occurs in the lower legs or knees, does it mean a cushion is needed on the chest?
And on bloodletting for veins that are affected by something like gout, you must know that the pain can be prevented from returning to the body.
And so on their legs they apply their hands to prevent the pain from spreading in the body. And if there are veins that are inflamed, the patient's leg pain is attributed to an imbalance in their body, and the other veins are inflamed by the fire, and they feel it in the legs.
And if there are three veins in the foot, one is wild; and that vein should be treated with a pointed cautery.
The young man has a cushion placed on their legs due to the pain in the ears, which is caused by humors.
Then you have already prepared the patient for bleeding and placed cushions under their legs and on the area where they are bleeding.
Then you apply the lancet to the patient's leg, and apply another cushion to their foot. And apply the cautery to the hand of the patient. And if it is a long incision, cauterize it, so that the pain in the feet does not spread to other parts of the body;
Then place your hand on their legs, and let the other be healed.
And already the book has spoken of the use of cauterization on those who are suffering from bad humors.
When pain arises in the two arteries, and they have placed a cushion on their legs, it will be necessary to use another for the treatment of gout.
And you will see that the patient's pulse is strong and steady.
And elevate the skin above the bone where the pain occurs, which you have done by opening up the patient's legs, and then place the hot cushion on the affected area.
And then the patient's body should be treated with a poultice to relieve pain.
And so it begins the description of the treatment at the beginning of the book.
And if it is necessary to bleed a patient for their illnesses, the old method is used.
And the quality of the patient's condition is known by the physician.
Then, to make the pain go away, you would cauterize the affected area.
And some remedies are used for the patient's ailments, so that it could be used to treat other ailments as well.
The young man has been treated by skilled physicians for vein-related ailments, and they have placed cushions on his legs and hands so that he might be healed.
The quality of the bandage is important for healing the patient.
Then apply a tourniquet to the leg, so that the blood vessels are compressed.
And apply to the patient's body.
And may the physician treat diseases that cause pain in the face and legs, and especially if it's an old case of sharp facial pain.
And if the patient's body is still feeling bad, then put your hand on their legs, and another hand on their chest, and another hand on their ankles.
Cove that you should be treated slowly and carefully with bloodletting.
Mays le means may this be done, and in the case of a patient with leprosy or other diseases, you use a hot cautery to make incisions.
Then the nature of the patient's illness is known, et el seient in its place.
And to alleviate pain in the legs, they would apply bandages to soothe them.
And then, after the plague has left the body, apply the other two remedies.
And so you should apply the poultice to the veins, lest it become another ailment.
The type of cut made for small veins should be done with careful observation and attention to the patient's left and right sides.
If you are unsure about which of the two organs is affected, make an incision on the side of the greater pain.
And then apply another cautery to the other leg.
Another translation: Another method for treating wounds caused by cold humors is to apply a cautery to the veins of the legs, and the wound itself will be cauterized.
And if the pain is in the foot, it is called gout.
Then, in a moment, when they are bleeding, a person's foot should be cauterized.
And the wound should be cauterized by placing a hot iron on it,  and the patient’s limbs are to be treated carefully, as if with a cushion placed under them, while applying a hot iron.
And if it is necessary to treat the body with cautery, then you should apply it to their legs so that the veins are not full (of blood) but rather open up for treatment.
And so if the patient's foot has been opened, it is customary to use a cushion for support.
Then apply the tourniquet to the patient's arm for a bloodletting procedure.
And if you want to apply a leech to someone's legs, the other will be careful to use a cushion for them to avoid pain.
And if the disease does not affect the other parts of the body, then make sure it's not in the foot by examining its location on the body.
It should be done to the arm only when it is necessary to understand the nature of the illness.
Then, when the disease affects the legs or feet, it is customary to call it gout if it is caused by cold humors.
And if you see blood in the phlebotomy, apply a bandage immediately.
And it is called a cold, or other illness, in the case of the patient's foot pain, apply a cushion for several days to the area.
When the pain is caused by the veins in the legs being constricted, you should apply a hot cautery to the area where the pain occurs.
Then apply the following treatment if the patient has a disease.
And if you are going to bleed the patient, place your hand on their arm near the small veins.
The bloodletting should be done on the veins of the arm, according to the practice of doctors.
This sentence translates to: "When you perform bloodletting on the legs or feet, it is customary to adjust the location of the bloodletting; if they are very thin, adjust the location to where the vein is close to the surface.
And if it is necessary to bleed the veins or another vein.
Leeches are applied to the head for bleeding when they are needed.
If you wish to cauterize the intestine or other parts, such as the feet; it is how the surgeon uses a cautery on the patient's foot, if he wishes to treat it with another method.
When your hand is burned, but not by an actual fire, it's good to apply a cushion.
Le primier (first) refers to the first vein, which is the one that is cut into for bloodletting.  The other veins are mentioned as a sign of good health.
Then, let's be careful to use the word "cautery" in its proper context:
The bloodletting was performed by a skilled barber surgeon.
When a woman is pregnant in the fourth month, she's already had a cushion placed on her thighs, but she's given no care for the next seven months.
And if he wants to be treated for an ailment of his bowels, put a cushion under his legs, so that the bowels are not affected by the surgery.
This text describes treating ailments with bloodletting.
Then another think about the medicines used in the treatment, or if necessary, apply them to the patient's feet, while placing cushions under their legs and a hot compress on their body.
And if it is necessary to cauterize the patient's foot, apply a cautery to the affected area.
So let them perform the phlebotomy as the hour of the third hour is needed.
The animals’ feet should be treated by a physician.
And if it is necessary to treat a patient's body with fire, they need to be present in the presence of a physician.
This translates to "And if there is pain in the area below the knee, you should apply a cushion to the affected area."
Then place a cushion under their arms, and then use a tourniquet to constrict the blood flow to their arm.
And if the patient has a cold humors problem, they should be treated by a doctor.
And if there's pain in their legs, you should apply a cautery to the affected area.
And if you have already performed bloodletting on the patient, you will need to stop the bleeding quickly.
Therefore, the physician must be consulted for all these causes.
And if it is necessary to treat the intestine, apply heat to it, and if the pain is in the foot, you should place something under their legs and apply heat there.
And if a boil forms on the leg, or if the patient experiences pain in the legs, use a cautery to treat them.
Then apply the cauteries on the patient's legs to perform bloodletting.
And if the patient has a slight illness, you will sometimes have to open the vein opener on their legs.
When your body is cold, you will be treated with cautery. And when the pain of gout appears in the legs, they are also called for, that which causes the pain to be felt in other limbs.
And so also apply an oil to the veins that are in the same way affected by the hot water.
Eten the wound has been opened by a bloodletting, it is necessary to apply a cushion soaked in vinegar and salt.
And if it is necessary to apply cautery to that area, another one will be applied.
And if you wish to have their legs remain closed for a few days, it is best to apply a cushion or some other support to their legs or feet to prevent them from opening up further.
The "other" one must be treated using the treatment used for them on their feet.
And then place a hot compress on your legs, so that the pain in the feet does not return.
And if you apply a poultice to the wound on the foot and keep it covered, it will heal.
And so, you must apply the cautery to the legs of every man.
And if the pain is in the knees, the thighs should be covered.
And if there’s need to make a bloodletting on the foot, apply a tourniquet above the ankle to constrict the blood flow in the leg.
And if the patient's condition requires cauterization, treat them immediately with cautery.
And if it is necessary to draw blood from the vein, let it be done by venesection, not a burning.
This practice, called phlebotomy, is similar to bloodletting but safer because it involves placing a cushion on the patient's foot instead of making an incision in their foot.
Then apply heat to the affected area, but only after you have already placed a cushion under their feet, as if they were swollen or inflamed.
Then apply cautery to the patient's legs, and place a cushion under them.
Then apply a poultice to the area to prevent the patient from being bled.
And you treat the other causes in the body for evacuation.
For the second time, I don't know what 'E qui vol' means in this context.
Mays that he has been treated for phlebotomy, the patient may be subject to it for nine hours at a time.
Here comes the second source sentence.
Mays when the joint pain comes from a disease of the bowels or other ailments, then it becomes necessary to use your hand to apply a cautery to the affected area to prevent gangrene.
And if you are in doubt about the flow of blood from the vein.
When the patient's health is failing due to a blockage in the vein, a light cauterization on their legs with a cushion will be applied gently.
When the vein is inflamed, it is treated by placing a cushion under the patient's thighs for support, and another on their chest, while others attend to the pain.
When your bowels are full, they will need to be emptied.
And then apply a cauterization to the vein, because you are dealing with a blockage in the arm, which is the way they describe it as “flea bites” on the flesh.
And if the patient has a fever, do not apply cautery to their legs or feet until the redness subsides.
And then the patient's intestines are to be cauterized; other than that, the patient should be kept safe.
The patient's legs are wide apart, and they are being cauterized.
When you are called upon to cauterize a member.
When the days are cold, you are excused from applying the cure for summer sickness.
And so the operation on the vein is done.
When the right side of the body is affected, it is customary to perform bloodletting on the liver.
And if the doctors have diagnosed the patient with a medical condition, they will be treated with a cushion under their feet.
And if you wish to make incisions on your body, they are treated by the surgeon, but if the doctors say it's necessary to treat a cushion or cushion-related condition, then that is another matter.
Then apply a cautery to the affected area.
And similarly, when treating the feet, you should use a cushion to support the leg being treated.
Perhaps it's a bandage on the left side that is used to treat the leg ailments.
And for the incision to be made on their legs and arms as well.
And similarly, to prevent the pain from returning, it is customary in the art of healing to place a cushion under the patient's body during a bleeding operation.
When there is pain in the legs, hold them on their sides and put a cushion under them, and hold another over the patient's vein.
And so the pain in the feet is relieved by placing a cushion on their legs.
When a doctor wishes to cauterize the surface of a body part, it is customary to apply pressure to the area surrounding the wound.
And if there's a need for bloodletting on the legs, proceed with the cutting.
Then you will cauterize the wound in the patient's leg to remove the blood from the wound.
And if the phlebotomist makes a mistake in the first incision, he should repeat the operation on his own hand as well.
And if it is done by another method.
Then apply a bandage to their chest, and let them hold your hand when they are in pain from the sciatica.
And here is the meaning of the term "the opening of the body of the patient's arm" in the context of the treatment:
And the nature of the ailment in the legs is such that they are affected by other ailments above, which have been put on the cushion.
Therefore, when you have to treat the pain caused by the intestines, apply the following methods.
And if it is necessary to apply cauterization to the foot, then place a cushion under their body; do so elsewhere on the body as needed.
And if you translate it to "of the veins" in the body, you must place your hand there, and another on their foot, and keep it open.
And another cauterization method is to apply a cautery to their legs and open the location of the pain.
The way to use the other methods is by treating them as if they are for the treatment of a patient suffering from gout.
And for corns, you need a cushion, or a bandage.
The wind-blowing to be treated by the doctor, they are applied in two ways: one by making cuts on the body, and another by drawing blood from the patient's body, and the other by a method that uses fire.
And if the swelling in their foot is severe, apply cautery.
And if they are to be applied to the lower body, use cushions for them.
Then apply cauterization to the veins only when using a heated cautery for medical treatment; because it is dangerous to use it on the wrong part of the body, where it might burn the skin.
Glossing over the illness at the start of the month, we should apply heat to the affected area by using a cushion to warm the patient's feet and applying another to the body to prevent inflammation from spreading.
Therefore, if bloodletting is done on the body, it should be applied to the affected area for two or three hours.
And if there are other things that cause pain in the neck, they are due to the heat of the head being too great or weak.
This location is for cauterization, which is customary if the pain is caused by humors in the foot or joints.
And if there's anyone who suffers from the ailment, they should be given a cushion.
And it is customary to use a hot iron on them, but they should only be cauterized if necessary.
And if it is necessary to apply a poultice or use a cautery on the patient, apply it to the affected area.
This refers to the application of alcohol to the foot as treatment for pain.
And if you are touched by the cold, you will be called forth to apply heat to the area affected.
And if there are pains in the extremities that cause pain elsewhere, such as gout in the eyes or limbs, they should be treated by making points on those parts.
And command the blood-letter to be careful when applying the cauterizer so as not to cause bleeding.
And if it is necessary to cauterize the lips, they should use an instrument for that purpose in order to avoid damage to the surrounding tissues.
And if a patient's body has been cauterized, then apply your hand to their back, while keeping one on each foot.
And if you wish to draw blood from the basilica vein and the basilica vein in the foot, it is necessary to use a cushion under their knees and another on their arms, so that the opening of the veins may be made.
And command the patient's body to be exposed for cauterization, as the physicians are accustomed to doing in cases of pain affecting the foot, they will also use a hot compress on the site.
And place a cushion on their legs and apply another to the groin.
When you're sick, it is customary for doctors to diagnose you with a disease if the physician believes it is appropriate.
This sentence describes a treatment for gout in which bloodletting is performed on the legs to relieve symptoms caused by its buildup of excess humors.
A butchery of the flesh will cause gout to worsen.
And of the cauteries to their legs.
And if you put a cushion on their legs, they will be free from the pain. Then return the patient's body to its original state, and avoid further aggravation.
And then you should scrape the surface of the intestine or another part of the body, and consider that they have done well to place a cushion under their feet.
When a man has been cauterized, he should be placed on his back.
And tell the attendant to make the incisions deeper (or more extensive) and widen them.
And if there is no improvement from the cushion when you put it on their leg, then use that place for cauterization. When doctors treat gout, they often use bloodletting to try and cure it.
If you have an excess of phlegm in your stomach, the doctor will apply three cauterizations to the affected area.
And then slowly release the blood from their foot while applying pressure to stop the bleeding.
And if we wish to try bloodletting or leeching, then we need a doctor who has experience with such procedures.
And this is the kind of pain that affects the depth of the body, which is the part beneath the skin, and they are already under a cushion, his hands on their chest
When a hot poultice needs to be applied to the affected area, apply the following: oil of rosemary, lavender, and other soothing herbs.
And if it is a large amount, you should apply a cautery to their feet or legs.
If the pain is in the joints and caused by an imbalance of humors, then a physician might say that the patient has gout.
And if the cause of his ailment is due to a hot humor, then apply a poultice of something cold to stop the pain.
And for those who have large amounts of excess fluid, they should be treated with camphorated oil.
You should treat them as if they have a fever and apply a poultice to them for an hour or two.
Quid est quo est le bloodletting to be done.
At the beginning, you must consider whether to use a bandage or apply poultices with vinegar, because that is what the bandages are used for.
Then apply heat to the legs if it appears as a cushion.
And for that which has the complexion of a suffering person, especially if they are in pain, place a cushion on their legs.
And if it is necessary to bleed the patient, use a cautery.
E beure que’ls beneficia or so que lu are, but I think it's important to note that this is just a guess based on limited information.
If you burn the belly or legs with cauterization, then apply cushions to the liver, and if they have pain there, treat them for gout.
And if the blood needs to be drawn from the vein on the foot, then apply the cushion to the leg where the blood needs to be drawn.
And then you apply a poultice to the cushion if they are in pain.
E semblantment fa means "And if you are similar" in Catalan, which doesn't directly translate to the Latin-esque phraseology.
And these are the treatments used by doctors on the afflicted joints; and if they use heat, that should only be applied to the affected area, gently so as not to cause further harm.
Then place a cushion on their legs to apply pressure on the affected areas.
The patient needs to be treated with a hot compress if there's no other treatment available.
Forma de ventoza es un metodo de la medicina.
This sentence is likely describing a medical procedure. It suggests that in cases where there are problems with the patient's legs (perhaps swollen) or their body's fluids (humors), they should be treated by placing a cushion under the affected area to protect the intestine.
And if it is necessary to prevent the patient from dying.
And if the patient has great pain, it's usually called the gout.
And place a leech on the legs of the children or young adults, as well as others.
And the quality of that which causes the pain in their feet is fire, and you have already placed a cushion under the patient's legs, but they must be protected from the heat of a fire.
Then place a cushion on their chest, apply it to the patient's legs, so that they have the hot coals.
E si have already been mentioned in the text above.
Then apply a leech to their legs and body to balance the humors.
This refers to a treatment method where a larger blister draws out more fluids better than a smaller one, so it is likely:
Capitol .xcvii. translates to **Chapter 97.**
Gout is a disease that affects the joints, often in the lower extremities.
And if he is afflicted by gout, it is necessary to use cold treatments.
Then if you have to treat someone for gout, cauterize the area of the body that is affected by the pain.
Then place a cushion on their legs and apply your hand over the other parts of the body.
And if it is possible to make an intestine or hernia go away, then do so.
And if you have to make a cut on their legs, use vinegar to treat it.
And if it is long-lasting, the doctors would call it gout, and they say the patient's skin is inflamed.
When the blood is thick, it's good to apply a cushion, or if they have a lot of pain, then apply it directly to the affected area.
And so, you should put leeches on them to draw out the blood, if it is necessary to use leeches for the treatment.
And if leeches are applied to the body, apply another to the feet.
When you want to stop bleeding, apply crushed charcoal or a poultice to the area.
And thus begins the description of the treatment of the third stage, known as restoration, of the disease. This chapter is essential for the practice of medicine; it deals with fractures and dislocations.
O son the bones of a man affected by the pain of gout.
And for this reason, doctors should use another cushion to cover the patient's genitals and treat their pain in the legs with cautery.
E apropos, put the patient in a position to help control their bowels.
Then take the patient's body as it is, and I will tell you how to treat them.
Chapter one.
And another on their legs, which they should apply to the affected limb to help with inflammation, pain, and swelling. When translating "Cove donc" into English, it refers to the word "gout" as used in the context of the original quote.
Then, if you have a problem with their bowels, they should be treated with a cautery and cauterized.
And if you have to apply a cushion to the patient's flesh and limbs, it is best to do so under the guidance of a physician.
And then one should return the affected joint to its proper position, applying pressure as needed.
E therefore when the bone is broken it is necessary to restore it.
Then apply cauterization to the affected area if the pain continues in the leg or on the foot.
But then nature heals the broken bone, so too shall she heal all that is broken in them, as if by fire to be made strong.
And thus it is necessary to place a cushion on the limbs of the patient, as we have previously said.
Then return the patient's intestines to their cavity.
And I have seen the pain of gout in the patient's leg, distinct from other ailments.
Mota's body has been cauterized to prevent further harm. E aysi on,  the text describes diseases or conditions affecting the body, such as rheumatism and gout.
And if it's necessary to cauterize the intestine, they should be burned on the leg, and there should be a reminder about the difference between the two.
And then treat them as needed. The pain is in the legs and feet because the patient needs to be known to feel it.
Therefore, when there is no apparent joint pain or inflammation, then there is no cushion needed on the body part.
If there are possibilities of the pain being due to a hidden cause in the intestines or a small wound, then use a cushion under their legs for that purpose.
And if you know that they are experiencing pain in the legs, it is customary to call it sciatica if it is in the leg muscles or a swollen foot if it's in the foot.
And after the apostema has subsided, he will be cured by applying a poultice to the affected area.
And for those who are knowledgeable, they know that you should apply cauterization to the bone when it's necessary to treat the patient.
Then apply cauterization to the patient's legs.
If pain in the bones arises, treat it by applying heat to the affected area; if it is a small bone, use two cords or bandages to treat it.
And so let your hand be placed where it can help you see the natural shape of the intestine and its natural treatment methods.
And be careful when using cautery, so that you don't burn the healthy tissue while applying it to the affected area.
Then do you see that the patient's bowels are well covered by your hand?
Then keep the patient's legs still so as to avoid inflammation and pain.
Translation 1: The quality of the narrowing of the body is the one that causes the pain in the joints; so if you have to treat a constricted joint, the treatment depends on the type of narrowing.
And for those who are small, like the arm or leg, use a cushion to cover them.
And if you cover those that are thin or swollen in the legs, it should be treated as a disease of the larger joints.
Then you can begin treatment for those who have been afflicted by the illness.
And if necessary, open the leg for a wound to be made on the site of the fracture. Then gently open the area around the fracture.
Then take a bandage and wrap the injured area to prevent swelling.
Then you should pay attention to the patient's skin, for if there are signs of a twisted or broken ankle, it will be necessary to take care of it.
Then, when the patient has a flare-up of pain, apply heat to the affected area.
And be wise in choosing the proper way to cauterize the intestine, as it were.
And if you have a fracture in the foot, then apply a larger bandage to the area.
Then you see if they are milder in size and delicacy than normal.
And then you will place the cushion on their legs.
And if a patient has pain in their legs or feet, they are said to have a bad case of gout.
Some people may have a wound in the leg, which is why you should apply a cushion to it.
You see that cushion there, you should know that it is placed on the affected area, which is why it is called "another cause."
This refers to the use of a cushion as a tool for applying pressure in a medical context, likely during childbirth or surgery.
And if you have to apply powder to the legs, etc., it's on the body, use the cushion to make the leg stay in place.
And if the patient has pain in their legs or feet, they should be treated by a skilled surgeon.
Then use a poultice of this type to heal the body.
A cushion under the patient's hands will help them to avoid pain.
Then apply a cushion under their feet to prevent them from having a gout attack.
And if you have to place your hand on the legs so they are covered in a cushion of warmth.
Then return the hand to its proper position.
Another method to treat the pain: take fig leaves and poppy, make an ointment of them.
Take a small amount of marshmallow root, one part altea, one cushion of rye, and one of chamomile and apply to the affected bone with wine.
And if he has to be cauterized, put a cushion on his legs, and another on his feet.
When a patient has a painful inflammation, it's best to treat them with a poultice made from these herbs: mallow, melilot, chamomile, balm, etc.
And if the patient has a wound or injury that requires cauterization, use a sharp tool to cut away the inflamed tissue.
This statement describes how to treat a broken bone in a way that sounds similar to the treatment of a broken leg:
This text describes how to treat someone who has suffered an injury or illness resulting in pain in the legs and feet.
"If you have pain in your foot, and if it is caused by the cold humors that cause swelling or gout, I'd say you're likely to be seen by a physician." Then apply the cautery to the patient's location or use it on their place and if necessary their legs.
And apply a cushion to the affected limb and keep the patient's legs elevated for an hour.
And he put the small cushion back on their legs and applied another one.
Then place your hand on the affected area to treat the patient's illness.
When the limb is affected by the ailment, allow it to rest, for it is customary for the injury to be called "gout" when the joint pain occurs.
E ayusta in the place of the cushion.
This Latin phrase means: "And if you place a cushion on them (the fractured area), it is prohibited for food to reach this area."
This is a complex task, but I'll give it a shot!
For I have never seen a person's bowels be so inflamed as they are by those who are prone to gout.
Of course, there are cushions for its support.
And the causes of fractures are varied, some being caused by a blow to the bone, while others are due to other factors.
And for the treatment of the ailment, a cauterization should be done to prevent the spread of the disease.
And if this bone is broken, then you are close to their death.
And if a fracture is present in the bone, it is called capillary fracture.
And if there's a fracture in the leg, it's called a bone-related ailment by the other name for it, which is gout.
Then apply a hot cautery to reduce the swelling in the joints.
And if the pain is caused by these conditions, they should be called "pessas" because they are separate from the bones in the legs. And let the patient's leg be held in place.
And so the patient's legs are opened up and treated using surgery on their chest and the foot.
And especially if the disease is severe, a physician should place a cushion between their limbs and keep them covered in bandages.
And if it is necessary to cauterize the bone for treatment of a fracture, they are treated differently from those in the flesh.
And if your foot is affected by an injury, it is best to have the patient's legs brought up to the chest in order to avoid further damage.
In such cases, the patient's leg is affected by the disease we call gout.
If you are already suffering from gout, it is best to avoid cold temperatures.
E si'l ha escutat (or "it is")  and the injury is serious or deep-seated, one must be careful to avoid further damage.
And if you find that the patient has a light fever, apply a cushion under them.
And if you encounter a boil, let it be opened by a physician, who will place another under it, and another for the bloodletting.
And there are two types of operation.
Then you should apply heat to the bones in a precise manner, for this type of gout requires a specific treatment method.
And apply the ointment to the affected area as soon as possible.
And therefore it is necessary to apply different cushions from various places to the patient's body, which are applied to their legs.
And if the pain in their foot persists, apply a cushion to the area where the patient's foot is located.
And if the bone is strong and hard, place your hand on their legs to prevent them from being cut.
This sounds like a description of the surgical treatment for a hernia.
And it is convenient that you put a cushion under the patient's feet if they have pain in the legs e.g., to ease the pain.
Then treat them with a cushion placed on the bone, as long as they are able to be placed under their legs (the affected area) because the bone has been pierced by the needle of the instrument.
And if a surgeon has said that the patient's pain is caused by the first incision, then they are to be given another cushion, for the pain is caused by something subtle, just as we have said, and it should be treated accordingly.
And you must keep your hands on them so they don't touch anything sharp.
And if you are concerned about the other's cushion being used by a person who has already been separated from the body, you should know that it is no longer necessary to worry.
You have already opened the area between the patient's legs; you should apply a poultice to keep the cushion from being too loose on their feet.
And if your legs are exposed to the cold, you will need to use a cushion or something similar to support them, and then apply a cautery to the area around the affected bone.
Then treat the lentil-shaped area (the lens) as if it were a lentil-shaped wound.
And apply your treatment to their legs, striking them with a hammer or placing a cushion under the other leg.
When there is a cushion under your leg, you place it on their body.
When the bone breaks, it can be used to treat bones.
And when you have a cushion over the patient's thighs and feet to prevent the pain from spreading further.
You have already translated the first part of your question.
And then there is cause that all those who have studied in that area will know what to do. And here comes another who has been in pain and they have put a cushion on his legs.
And if it is necessary to apply oil, use a second cloth for another plague.
And let the patient be given a cushion for their legs, if they are suffering from gout.
Then you must apply these medications to the affected area to prevent them from spreading further.
And if you have applied cauterization, apply it carefully to avoid harming them.
E therefore if it is necessary to cauterize the patient's legs, they should be treated by applying a burning tool to them as described in the previous lines.
Then if the pain is caused by that illness, use three parts of rose oil.
And there are three chapters in the book that follow the medical practices for the treatment of the body, which is why it's called "the gout."
When the nose is broken, and needs fixing.
And if a bone in the foot is broken, it's called gout, but the rest of the body should be treated with a cushion to protect the joint.
If a member has been broken, the patient should be treated as needed by a cushion, and the rest of the body parts are treated with another type of treatment. And if you have a cushion to cushion the pain.
When the pain is in the most prominent part of the nose, one should apply a poultice to that area, and another poultice should be applied to the other parts of the body.
Then make them apply a cautery to two parts of the body.
And if it is possible, restore the cushion to its place on the patient's legs; and the rest to the patient's body.
E put a cushion on their nose if they have a cold, but don't use a hot cautery there.
And so that the patient has been placed on a bed and covered in order to protect their body from the cold.
And sometimes there are wounds in the nose that are treated with cauterization with a cushion on their face to protect the other side.
And this cause, if you wish to use it, is treated with hot water.
And if they are afflicted by a boil, treat it with poultice of wax and another cushion, with which the boil should be treated.
If there are any pustules on the patient's body, they should be cauterized with a cushion of flaxseed meal and the application of a poultice will help heal them.
When there are small fractures in the foot, they should be treated with cauterization using tools appropriate for that purpose.
When there's a plague within the nose, apply a cauterizing tool to burn away the affected area.
Chapter 4
When the jaw is dislocated.
Observe the jaw for signs of gout: if the fracture is on the surface, and you find the bone to be inflamed or painful, then treat it as such.
So if the patient has an injury to their body, a hot iron should be used on the injured area.
Then apply traction to the jaw if necessary, for that's where the fracture should be addressed.
And you must place a gold tooth-picking splint on their broken teeth if they are to be repaired by a skilled craftsman.
And when they are closed, the other sources are consulted for advice on the best treatment.
And if you judge that the patient has already been altered in some way, then apply a poultice to the affected area after three days.
And so if the cushion does not fit well, apply another to the body and fix the position of the bones, and they will be healed in three weeks.
And then if a person has an abscess while awake, they should be treated as I have explained.
And if the fracture is in the region where the bone is affected by gout, the patient's legs should be treated carefully.
And if the plague is present, then you should immediately cauterize the affected area.
Then apply the appropriate poultice to the affected area on the foot if necessary, or use another poultice for those who suffer from pain in their feet due to a wound, e.g., one caused by an arrow.
Chapter 5.
This is when it is necessary for the patient to be healed.
There are three ways to treat a fracture in the leg.
And if the patient has a fracture or injury, treat them lightly and they will have pain in their bones.
And if the patient has a fracture, they should apply a cushion to the wound and use a cauterization tool for other injuries.
And then place your hand on the patient's legs to help them.
And if the patient has a cushion on their legs, they need to be put on their feet, and they need a cushion for them.
And if you cannot apply cautery to the patient's shoulder, then use another method for applying cautery.
And you place a cushion on his legs to help him heal.
And if you want to treat someone for pain in their joints, apply a cauterizer to the area.
And if it is necessary to apply a cautery to the intestines, use a cushion for that purpose.
And if the patient is suffering from a cold humoral condition in the thigh, the other leg will be treated similarly.
Mays the pain of the patient be reduced by the operation; as if the patient has an ailment in the legs, they have already placed cushions on them during surgery.
And if you are treating a swelling caused by an infected boil, the other two will be adjusted to reduce the swelling.
And if there's little disruption, then use a cushion.
Then apply a cushion to the affected area to treat the pain.
And so, if the legs are not broken, the cushion should be placed under them.
And if the pain is in the shoulder, apply the cushion to the area around the collarbone, so that the intestine or hernia does not protrude further out.
And if there is a need to cauterize the joints (if they are swollen) in the next twelve days, it is best to do so after the swelling has subsided.
And apply the bandage to their legs, allowing the intestines to heal.
And if it is necessary to cauterize and comfort the affected area, that's what they say takes xxviii days.
The sixth chapter begins.
The treatment for a dislocated shoulder is to surgically set it.
The spatula is broken in the place of the patient's foot, but only on the margins.
And so when the bone is broken, one must know how to set it back together (with the use of a cauteri) — or reduce it.
Then pause the pain to be measured by the cushion, applying your knowledge to heat the body and treat the patient's condition.
If the patient suffers from the disease of gout, you can then apply a bandage to the affected area.
Then strengthen the area around the feet, as the physician's duty requires.
And consider the foot to be treated as in the case of those whose legs are weak from gout, and whose intestines or other organs are affected by them.
Then the doctor will place his hand on the patient's hand.
And the spatula will be restored in .xx. days or in .xxv. days.
And then when it is done, you should know that there is nothing to fear from the dissolution of the ligaments in the legs, which are located on the body's lower part.
And if you have to treat the affected area with cautery, do so carefully, using your hands to hold the skin in place.
Chapter 7
Of the restoration of bones in the foot.
The foot has been opened by the physician, and the cushion has been placed in the patient's chest to draw out the inflammation.
Then apply a cauterizing treatment to the affected bones so that the pain will be less intense.
And if it is necessary to apply cautery to the breastbone, or to another bone in the body.
The physicians call this condition a gouty attack when the patient's body has too many humors in its system.
When you cauterize the patient's legs, apply a cushion to support them.
Chapter 8.
And for the restoration of the shores of the body, when they are injured.
And to know that the pain in the joints is caused by injury, it can be said that it is a gouty pain. And the examination is not hidden from the doctor's perception.
And then apply a splint to their legs and apply poultices to the injured bones.
And then you will know if they have a cushion in their hands or are suffering from pain in their legs.
And so the doctors are already treating their condition.
Then if you are treating inflammation caused by the humors in the legs, it's important to use other treatments.
And if it is a heavy pain, if they do not want to be in agony.
And if it is necessary to cauterize them, do so on their legs while they are still experiencing pain.
Then place your hand on the patient's body to ensure the cushions are placed correctly, and then apply another cushion to their legs, and another to the chest.
And if you want to cause pain in the feet, it’s called “fratura” or “fracture”, so they say it doesn't hurt as much as other conditions.
And then apply to the affected area a cushion to elevate the body's temperature.
You have already opened the source for the ailment; you will find the cure in the revelation of the nature of the ailment.
And if the humor in the patient’s body is stagnant, then you should use heat on the side where the humor is stagnant.
This refers to the treatment of a patient's foot with a cautery, possibly for an ailment related to bloodletting.
This refers to a specific area of the body where a cushion should be placed for support.
And if it is necessary to use a cautery on the spine, apply it carefully. And so you must know that if the patient has a pain in their legs, or elsewhere, which is described as sharp, sudden pains, they are generally good for them.
And if you cauterize the area between their thighs, it will be cured.
And if you want to know if the patient has or has not been healed, you must consider their physical state.
If gout is the cause of pain in the joints, place the cushion on the patient's legs during treatment to prevent them from becoming infiltrated by the humors.
And if there is no other cause for the pain, the cause is better and lighter.
And if the intestine or cushion is placed on the patient's spine, it is called a cushion-burning.
And thus you will bring relief to the patient's pain by applying remedies.
When you have to apply cautery to the patient's bone because of a wound from the operation, it should be applied to the area where the bone was previously exposed.
When you have broken a bone, put your hands on the hips, and the rest of the body is carefully burned in order to avoid pain in the legs, then place them under the thigh and another on their feet if necessary.
And if you feel pain in your legs, apply a bandage to them, and allow the patient to rest and heal.
Chapter 10.
Then apply the treatment for gout.
And if the body is affected by humors that cause pain, then apply heat to the affected area.
Then you apply your hand to the area above their broken bones.
Then return the patient's hands to the body's natural position.
Then you must apply a hot poultice to the fractured area. E then apply a hot iron to cauterize the other parts of their body.
Then apply a hot iron to the affected area to treat their ailment on the leg.
The first part of the text is about gout being caused by an imbalance in bodily humors.
If you are experiencing pain in the bones, then treat them.
Chapter 11
And then apply heat to the affected area.
The physician will call it gout.
Then, if there are cushions to be restored for the patient, use another method.
Two weights are used to apply pressure to the body during surgery.
And if the patient has been treated for the ailment, but they are still suffering from pain in the limbs, then the doctor will use a hot cautery to treat them.
And if the patient's bowels are in distress, the doctor should apply cauterization to them carefully.
And if you are in the position to apply the other end of the wound to the thigh, it is customary for two cushions to be placed under the patient, at the side of the wound, one above the fracture and the other below.
And if you want to cauterize the fracture, use a hot cautery.
And if the injury is near a muscle, apply a cushion to the injured area.
Similarly, if the injury is near a joint, put a cushion on their leg, and another one on their foot.
Then apply a poultice on their joints.
Mays, if necessary treat the swelling in the legs with a poultice.
And apply the poultice to the patient's arm for their leg pain.
If you don't prevent the patient from moving, hold their arms down firmly.
And then they should be used for pain in the feet.
And you place three cushions under the affected area; one for the patient's leg, and another for their foot, and another to be applied directly to the site of the injury.
And then strengthen it with bandages on the side of the abdomen.
And then you have a straight line over your legs to be used for cauterization if necessary. And when pus gathers in the joints, it is called gout.
Then when treating someone, you must be careful to place the cushion on their legs.
Then apply a cushion to the legs as needed, just as we have done with the patient's foot.
And then consider the location for three days, so that the food does not cause harm to the patient's body.
Mays three days must pass before you can loosen the bandage.
And so the patient should be treated for their ailment with a cushion placed on their stomach.
And you must place cushions under them to ensure comfort during treatment.
And then place a cushion under their feet to stop them from being thin.
Here comes the translation:
And if the fracture is severe, it will take a few weeks to two months for the body to heal.
Another person's hand should be placed on the foot for another to be used as a reference, if necessary.
Then apply a cushion under their arm, and then on their legs, etc.
Two bones are being composed (composed of) as two parts of the body, the one small, the other large, which are called a small part of the body are above their feet, where the pain is located, and you must apply a cushion to the smaller bone in that position.
And so, the pain in the foot will be relieved by applying the cautery to the appropriate areas.
And when it is broken, healing the slightest injury can be difficult.
And when the body is broken open, it's difficult to heal.
And two bones are already held in place for the patient's body, and another cushion on their legs.
Therefore if the patient has a broken bone, it is appropriate to place a cushion on their legs and use a hot iron for cauterization.
When the fire is hot, it must be used carefully.
And if the two are together, they should be strong together.
And if you have a pain in their foot, you should know that it is caused by pressure upon the ear.
And if it is necessary to cauterize the leg of the patient, so that the heat does not reach the other side.
And upon the legs, apply the poultice to reduce pain and inflammation.
And so place a cushion under their legs in order to achieve the best possible position.
And if your body's humors are out of balance, then in the case of the bones, you are affected by gout, which is why a pointed tool is used to treat it.
And if you are treating an injury to the leg, apply heat by using another method, and place your hand on the other side of the body to prevent the spread of inflammation.
Therefore, if a wound is in a single place, it's known as a boil.
When the pain is in the legs or feet, it's necessary to use a hot iron for cautery.
And you are wise to know that the stars on the arm are called "stelas".
And if you wish to apply a cauterization, a cushion should be placed upon their feet to prevent the pain from becoming more severe by applying it directly on the affected area.
And when a bandage is applied to the injured area, it should be soft and smooth.
And consider the patient's leg and the thigh bone as the most important. And if a wound or injury occurs to the body, use warm water to wash it.
And let it be cauterized, if necessary.
Translation: Then apply a cautery to the legs.
Then you must consider if it is necessary to treat the ailment with a cautery.
Mays a person has already been afflicted by gout, they will be in pain for days or weeks.
And another servant on their chest will cause them to sleep.
And if the patient's body is such that the disease can be cured by applying a cautery to certain points, they will be cured in xxviii days.
This chapter discusses the treatment of the disease, stating that it's appropriate for it to be treated as a specific type of ailment called "malaute" which may have been a common term used in medieval medical texts for a variety of ailments.
And if there are fractures in the leg or foot, then apply a cushion to their legs.
Know that it is necessary to know that the patient needs a cushion for comfort.
And if a patient's hands are injured by a fall.
And then the doctor applies a poultice to the patient's leg.
Then apply a poultice and bandage to the affected area.
When the body is weak, use a cushion to support its abdomen and use a bandage to protect the wound; use the long, thin cushion for the leg.
And if it is necessary to cauterize, apply a bandage on their legs, and treat them as they deserve.
Then if the fracture is outside the body, you should apply a cushion to the affected area and carefully place their legs back in their proper position.
And if there is a fracture in the legs, apply a splint to hold the bones together.
Mays es que la lesa engualhat, o le auricular, or le other, be in the legs and elsewhere.
E consider the following for your recovery — e si es necessitat: E, tu.
When there's pain in the legs and feet, apply a poultice directly to the affected areas.
For the restoration of the bone of the leg.
The bones are broken by their own malice, and they declare the person to be suffering from gout.
The patient's injury is best described as if being treated with cautery.
And if he has a fracture, then cauterize the bone at the site to prevent further damage.
When the doctors have to treat something, they will use one of the methods I've mentioned in the other sentences.
And if the patient's injury is to the leg, it should be treated with another method of cautery on their body.
And if you have a cushion, place the other one on his legs. The text refers to treating an abscess (Translation 1) and mentions using a cushion for support during the process.
Then apply a bandage to the affected area.
And then apply heat to the legs and use a hot cautery.
And so you have opened the space between the legs of their cushion, and placed a cushion on that area and another on their bones.
Then return the patient's legs to their place and the other servant will be fine.
Then the patient's intestines are inflamed and swollen, and you must apply heat to the location of the pain in their bowels.
Then place two cushions on their legs to prevent the intestine from being injured.
Then apply a bandage to hold the incision closed and prevent infection.
Then you must apply the cushion to the legs after you have removed the herniated part.
It is customary to cauterize the other parts of the body when treating this type of fracture in the leg.
"And if the patient's body is not already afflicted with a disease, it will be necessary to apply a cautery to his or her legs."
And if the patient has been suffering for forty days or more, or less, depending on the severity of the illness.
Chapter 15.
This refers to restoring something to its original place.
This is a description of how to apply a bandage for a broken bone.
Then apply this treatment to the legs or feet as well.
And then the patient's intestines are to be re-enforced where necessary.
And upon that round place where the patient's pain resides, you will apply a poultice.
Then consider all the positions on the body where the patient experiences pain.
Chapter 16
And another for cushion under the leg.
Then a cushion is placed on their legs when they are held in place by another hand.
And if there are injuries to the arm or body, for that matter, the operation is the same.
And if the patient's legs are broken, it spreads to the whole body.
And if the patient has a pain in the leg bones, it is called "trinquat" (likely meaning "painful") due to the finest (of the) humors.
And if the bone is fractured, you should apply a cauterizing treatment to help those with such conditions.
Then place your hand on their feet to help them with pain relief.
But if the pain is in the legs, they call for a cushion under them, and the doctor's help.
When there is an intestine or something else in the body, which is necessary for the lower body to be healed, you apply a cauterization to those parts.
And then you cauterize the area around the foot.
And apply two cushions to their legs, and a second one on each side.
Then place a cushion under their foot as needed to soothe them.
And if it is necessary to cauterize the wound, you should apply it to the leg, where the pain is located.
Then cautery was used for the other ailments I mentioned, such as to treat them from the inside.
Gout is a disease that affects the joints.
And placed a cushion on their foot.
Then apply cautery to the affected area to stop the bleeding.
And then apply pressure to the bones of the affected limb with the other cushion, as you would do for the pain in the foot.
Then place a cushion on the feet and apply pressure to the area where the pain is felt.
Then apply a cushion to the patient's feet.
And if it is necessary to treat the foot, apply a hot poultice.
And if on the third or fourth day, the patient has pain in their legs or feet.
This translates to "And if the patient has gout, the pain will be intense." And cushion the foot with a cushion of the proper size for the patient's condition, so that the intestines are properly aligned.
You have already opened the foot's cavity, and you will now treat them based on the quantity of the old wound.
And so that the physician may treat with proper care and attention to the details of the injury.
Capitol .xviii. translates to Chapter 18.
And if you need to be treated for pain caused by a broken bone, use the following method:  (for a woman)
When a woman's bowels are inflamed, it is treated with a poultice applied to her back.
And place it on their legs, if they are cold and shivering, or near the heart of a man.
And then apply the poultice to the affected area.
Let the patient be kept in this state for seven days or so.
And if you wish to remove a portion of the sheep's bladder, put a canula of the same size in the hole.
When near the affected area or if the intestines are affected, you'll need to apply a bandage for the duration of the treatment.
And if a bone is broken, a hot poultice is applied to the area to help it heal.
And es que the patient's joints have been opened (in this case, caused to be inflamed) but they are not in their proper place, and another treatment for a cushion under the skin was used.
And placed in the opening of that body, which is the way you treat a man's foot for three days or so.
Capitol .xix. should be translated as Chapter 19.
Then restore the broken bones in the legs.
The first part of the body to be affected by the plague in an operation.
Then if there are issues with blood circulation or wounds, use cauterization only if absolutely necessary.
And if the wound does not fester, then apply cautery to the wound.
When you see an abscess, restore the patient to their health by treating the ailment in the proper manner.
Mays, if it is necessary to cauterize the bone, the wound is treated with another.
Mays tu am the length that is necessary for the doctor to prepare and treat the patient's ailment; the doctor applies cauterization to the affected area, which is seven days long, and their treatment requires a physician.
And in these cases, the patient's legs are swollen due to the inflammation.
The patient's body will be affected by pain in various ways; if the pain is severe, they may need to have their limbs cauterized.
And then you should place your hand on their legs.
And if there is pain in the joints or muscles, then the patient should be treated carefully by a physician.
And if the pain is in their legs, they should have their hands elevated.
And then apply a poultice to that joint so the pain will not spread.
Then apply cauterization to prevent further complications.
When a patient has a bone that can be reduced, and you are unable to reduce the bones in their foot, use cushions to support their legs, and hold the affected area of the leg gently but firmly with your hand.
And then put a cushion under their hands (to soothe the pain), and another on their legs to prevent them from becoming stiff.
And if the bone is returned to its natural position, then you should apply another cushion to their leg or thigh, so that the joint in the leg does not become inflamed.
And if you apply the cautery to a wound during your summer restoration, it will be necessary to use a poultice to treat the inflammation.
Then leave the intestine or plague to run its course and let the patient regain their strength.
Then if you are careful, they will be able to avoid spreading disease and causing harm. If you have a weak constitution, you are prone to pain in the legs and feet.
Then use firm bandages to bind the legs in those cases, but put cushions under them for comfort.
When you have come to treat one or two patients with the plague, use a hot iron to apply cauterization to the affected area, as we shall administer it to them in the same way as we would administer it to others.
Therefore, apply the cautery to the intestine or leg of the patient, if there are signs of infiltration on that day.
If your illness is neither in the joints nor on the feet, it is translated as "the plague." And so you apply cauterization to the body between the legs when they are affected by heat.
When you apply heat to the area of the foot, it is customary to place a cushion underneath.
And you should know that this is what doctors use to treat the other, which are in the body already, and for twenty days or more, you should apply a cushion (to stop) the spread of plague.
Line 1: The twentieth chapter.
The treatment for gout, which affects the limbs, includes the use of cauterization.
This is how they will know that it's good to treat it with the use of a cautery, and the patient's pain in their feet is from bad blood.
when the pain in the joints is caused by cold humors, apply a poultice of cooling herbs to the affected area.
It is said that the condition of gout is characterized by a blockage that causes pain in the joints.
Mays (meaning: perhaps) if the patient has a disease or illness related to humors that are caused by a specific part of the body being affected.
Chapter .xxi.
Then restore the bones to their proper place, and apply cushions to prevent them from moving.
When a fracture is healed, and their ligaments are restored to their proper place, the patient will be able to move their legs freely, but they may still need to use other supports for stability.
If someone has gout, they should be treated by a doctor who specializes in that ailment.
Then apply a poultice to the area so that it heals naturally.
A hot poker should be used on the area to prevent the body from being opened.
And for treating broken bones, allow surgery to be performed on them.
If the intestine or the foot is affected by a twisted intestine, you must be careful.
This is a common treatment for those who have too much uric acid in their body.
And when the pain is in the recent past, apply a cushion to the affected area recently by those who have been stung by a bee.
And if it is necessary to apply a mild cauterization to the body.
And if it is necessary to treat the patient's legs, make sure to use a cushion for the knees, e.g. a cushion for the knee and another for the foot, and another one that prevents the pain from spreading.
The intestine or a cushion on its legs are for the purpose of reducing inflammation in gout.
This phrase is likely referring to a medical condition, as seen in the context of Translation 2:
This sentence describes how gout causes pain and inflammation in the joints.
Therefore, when the patient has a dislocation, it should be reduced quickly, for if it is delayed, the joint will become painful and difficult to treat.
And for that reason, the legs must be kept warm to prevent pain from occurring in the feet.
When the patient's body is afflicted with the condition known as gout, it is customary to leave one cushion under their legs for support and to let the other leg rest in a warm bath.
And every member should be treated with the respect of their place.
E if you are skilled in medicine, you should know that the physician treats the patient according to their knowledge of setting bones; they will attend to the patient's legs first, then the head, then the feet.
And another place (a cushion) be placed on the patient's legs.
Dislocation from the jawbone should be treated by a doctor.
If you are dealing with a person who has dislocated their intestines, they can be treated by gently moving them back into place after loosening the muscles in the area.
When the pain is so severe that it causes other ailments to appear, it's a sign that the body needs attention.
May your joints be free from injury or pain.
And then treat the dislocated part.
When there are many aches, they should be treated with warm compresses.
And so when the body is exposed to cold humors, which are commonly known as causing pain in the feet, then you should apply this to the patient's ankles, and another use a cloth to cover their legs.
When there's a need for a cure, it's cauterized; when there's a need to keep them from moving, a cushion is put on their chest.
And you should administer to them a cushion under their arms and another on their legs, so that they be healed.
Then there comes a time when the two mandibles are dislocated due to their position, it is necessary to use cushions for support and apply a cushion on the patient's belly so they do not suffer further damage.
And when you see that the patient's condition worsens, use hot cautery to draw out the poison and bring relief.
Chapter 25.
And when the shoulder bone is dislocated from the muscles, then place a cushion on their arm.
The forks are placed under the intestines, preventing the pain from spreading to the lower limbs; then they were ready for the operation, they put their hands on the patient's body while a cushion supports the leg of the patient.
And if it is necessary to be cauterized, the patient's body will be healed. And thus the patient's health will improve, if you apply a hot cautery to their body.
And then apply it to their legs and feet.
May the pain in the patient's body be relieved by your physician.
And if you are in pain, place your hand on their leg to calm it down.
And so if your body's muscles are inflamed, they will be treated by reducing the inflammation in the affected area.
E a la persona que se le ha de apply the cautery, make sure to place a cushion under their legs.
And for the reduction of muscle displacement.
Know that the doctor is wise, but he only applies his knowledge to those who have not been touched by evil influence.
And if it is caused by a cold humor, it is called the gout.
And so you are to cauterize with difficulty, for in those cases where there are few fleshy parts, it is said to be difficult.
Some men are stricken by gout, which is caused by an excess of humors in the body.
Then, if it is necessary to cauterize the leg, they should place a cushion under the patient's thigh and hold them in place.
It is known that the dislocation is painful, so you should treat the injury carefully and avoid touching it, as well as the patient's other joints, which are more sensitive to pain.
Then apply a bandage to the affected area where the wound was closed, and apply a cushion on the patient's foot or leg if there are open wounds.
And for this dislocation, a cushion is used to treat it when it is recent or in the case of a fresh injury.
And the minister gently applies a burning tool to the patient's body, wherever it is needed.
Perhaps if the pain is in the legs, it might be called "cometh" by a doctor, but the cure is different if it is for the whole body or for the foot.
Then you apply a hot poultice to the affected area of the patient's foot.
Then place the patient's hand on your right arm to apply the poultice. Mays if it is light, you can put a hot iron on their legs to prevent further dislocation and then apply a cautery.
And so you should apply your hand to the other parts of the body, namely: if leeches are found on the legs, then you should use a mortar pestle to grind them up; if the patient's pain is localized, and the patient is strong enough.
And if it is difficult to reduce the swelling from the illness, use another method for treating the swelling, not by applying heat to the entire body.
And if there are other cushions placed upon their legs, it shall be covered with a cloth so that the patient may not feel the pain.
Then apply a cushion to the patient's intestine and extend his hand on the body of the patient.
And if a poultice or cauterization is needed, place your hand on the affected area, which is usually the foot, to help guide the application of the cushion.
And when the patient's health has deteriorated due to illness, apply strictures from the muscles on their feet, as if for gout.
And if it is necessary to apply cautery to the patient, they should be cauterized.
Then use a cushion to support the patient's food.
If one has three or more dislocated joints, they should be treated with a method called cupping.
And if at that point a patient has had a fever for seven days, the illness will be incurable, and they will not be able to have their temperature lowered by any other means.
This is a description of how to treat injuries in a traditional way.
And if the pain affects their feet, the other leg should be treated with cautery.
And if the patient's joints are affected by cold, then apply cauterization to their body to help them return to their natural state.
Then apply the proper name for the pain in the patient's body.
This refers to setting a bone or treating an injury where something has been dislocated from its usual position.
Sapias that which you read on the Internet is likely to be inaccurate.
Then apply your hand to their limbs as a doctor would do for someone suffering from gout, and do not allow the abscess to be treated by anyone other than yourself, for the pain caused by it is great.
E si es necessitat que puntz sia faytas, it is necessary to place another surgeon’s hand on the patient’s, e las doas mas, so that they can be used to help reduce the swelling.
And if the patient has pain in the joints due to an ailment, they should be treated as a hot or cold case.
And if the joint does not obey the reduction, then they are difficult to treat.
And they will apply two cushions to each part of the body.
And if it is necessary to treat a wound on their arms or legs, use a bandage for the wound.
When the doctor touches the joint, they place a cushion under them to avoid further inflammation.
Then treat the wound with album for the healing process.
Then apply a cushion under their leg, and to their thighs.
This refers to a situation where a person's hands are being treated for an illness that causes pain in the joints, but they have to be left open until they are healed, and then you can stop treating the whole thing.
And if you need to make a distinction between the different types of pain in the foot, apply a cushion to the area. And place a heated iron on the affected area. Then put the cushion under their legs.
And if you wish to apply the treatment for gout, which can be caused by cold and dampness in the body, use a hot cautery to treat the affected area, and apply a poultice to soothe the afflicted part.
**Chapter 28.**
Treating the dislocation of the foot, you must use a cushion to prevent further harm.
When the joints are dislocated, they are treated with a cushion on their limbs, or with other means.
And if it is reduced to a point, this will make the patient's condition better.
May that which is called "gout" in the modern age be understood as being similar to what was previously known as "the gout."
And so he would be called a good man; but he has a cushion under his foot, and is tired from making points on the feet of others.
The intestines are often affected by gout.
And if the intestine or the belly were to cause harm, they are to be treated with cauterization for five days; then the physician should apply a hot poultice.
Then apply heat to the affected area and keep it closed off by pressure or bandages.
In the following body, e.g., text, we see that the meaning is shifting from Latin-based languages to something more like a medical procedure.
And now, concerning the treatment of dislocation of the fingers.
Then burn the skin on their legs wherever they have a pain in the bowels.
And when he is injured in the joints, the doctor will place the dislocated finger back into its place.
And then place your hand on their finger to prevent the herniated part from dislocating.
Then apply a bandage to the affected area.
And when the disease is severe, it may require a second cautery to be applied for several days after the first.
When you apply heat to the body, it's the first step in treating a dislocated foot.
And similarly, it is called gout when pain is caused by swelling in the legs.
Capitol .xxx.
From the patient, remove the bone from the legs.
Then apply heat to the affected area, for that is how you cure the pain in the body, by placing a cushion on the legs and another on the feet, and holding the afflicted foot.
And when the patient is unable to keep the intestine in its place, it is customary to have two cushions used: one for the affected area and another for the leg or foot.
Therefore, it is known as "reuma" in the Catalan language.
So, if they have a fever or pain in their legs, they should place a cushion under them.
Mays in the human body, its presence being diagnosed by a physician, am leys head, may be treated with various remedies.
The patient's legs are already treated but I don't know what "am" refers to in this case.
Then let them be treated by a doctor.
And if it's necessary to cauterize the intestines, it is placed under the cushion in the leg.
Then another cushion or other things are placed on the foot to keep them warm.
And let it be known that the other side of the body should be treated similarly.
And if there were two or more burns already on the leg, then it is customary for doctors to treat that area.
The doctor holds the patient's feet to provide strength and prevent them from slipping out of place.
If the table does not fit this form, then use a three-foot long cushion for the patient's knees. And if the patient's body needs to be treated with a cushion, then place the patient's intestines on their back and use another cushion for the rest of the body.
And if you want to cure them, then apply this treatment.
When the patient's legs are affected by gout, they are to be treated with a cushion on them.
A cushion is placed under their arm to avoid pain in the long bones.
And if you have found the tendons that are causing the pain in the patient's leg, then place them back into their proper position.
E aprop deves place un MINISTER to help the patient's body heal.
Then apply a poultice to draw out the pain, but only after the joint has been heated by a hot iron.
And if you want to treat the illness by applying a cushion, use that which I have just mentioned for healing the other illnesses.
If the illness lingers for a long time after the initial treatment fails, apply medicine to the area for a long time.
When your joints are swollen or in pain, you can use this method to relieve them.
Of humors that afflict the limbs, one should apply heat to the joints.
And then apply heat to the patient's legs to treat a dislocation.
la menta, la ja ha fet lo seu treball on the body parts are concerned.
The intestine can be affected by four different types of gout.
And if it is necessary to perform surgery on the foot, the pain will be felt in the other parts as well.
Then the patient has an injured leg, which would be the same as the leg of a man who has gout.
And if he has pain in his joints, it is called a dislocation.
When there is pain in the joints, and especially in the feet.
When joint pain occurs because of an injury to the body, it is customary for the patient's leg to be treated with a special cushion.
May this be the cure for your ailment?
Mays in that place where the dislocation is recent, and is one of the four types of pain, it is said that a cushion should be placed under the patient's legs.
And now if you are going to treat a patient with strong pain, use a cushion on their back and apply heat to the affected area.
And let him be treated by means of letting out blood from the legs or foot, so that he may be healed.
And the rest of the body is suspended by its own weight.
And this type of inflammation affects all four limbs.
And if the dislocation returns, then it's considered to be a good thing by the people who have been trained in this art.
When the intestine has been cushioned, the patient's arms and legs are extended to prevent pain in the limbs.
When the intestine or the bowels are affected by cold humors, they will be treated by a physician.
And if the pain is caused by a specific type of humor that needs to be treated by the least skillful physician.
When gout occurs, apply a strong bandage to the affected area.
And let it be that the intestine or the hernia is in pain for four days, it is said to be a proper gout.
And if it is necessary to apply a cautery, then hold it two hands’ lengths away from the patient and use it only as needed.
And then place a cushion under the patient's body, in order to make them stronger and hold their strength together.
And in the reduction itself, the affected limb must be treated carefully so that the bones can be properly set back into place.
And if the body's humors are affected by both, then a cushion for the other parts of the body and another for the foot, and the one in the chest (for the hernia) prevents the body from being overwhelmed.
When treating an illness, it is necessary for the doctor to apply a compress on the affected area.
And if the dislocation is in the legs, they should be held open by applying pressure to the affected area.
E tu las cuestas en the body are necessary for the blood to flow freely under the patient's legs and the cushion to be placed on the earth, a bit behind their feet, e per lo que havem dit.
When joint pain occurs, it's important to apply pressure to the affected area.
And so when you have to apply a cushion to the affected area, it is customary to place your hand on the thigh, but if it is necessary to do so with a hot water bottle.
Then compare one leg to the other.
When the pain has subsided, you can remove your hand from the affected area.
And if you see any cause for the ailment, apply a poultice to it, and let it remain three days.
And so the patient's feet are to be kept in place by the cushion for a few days, until the pain subsides.
Gout is caused by an imbalance of humors in the body.
And then treat the dislocation.
The patient has three types of pain:  a cushion is placed on their leg when you are applying heat to treat inflammation.
The signal for you to apply a splint to the patient's limb is when they have pain in their bowels or feet.
This is a humorous attempt at translating Latin, but I think it's safe to say that it's about using a poultice for pain relief in the legs.
And if your legs are affected by a strong pain, put a cushion on their chest.
And then apply a bandage to the affected area after three days or four days.
Let the patient rest for a few days so that the inflammation can subside.
When the joints are affected by gout, apply cauterization to the affected area.
And if it is necessary to treat inflammation in the feet.
On the treatment of the dislocation of the ankle.
Then apply another poultice to the affected area to prevent the swelling from dislocating further.
And that he has been injured in his legs, it is necessary to have a doctor call it by its proper name.
And if there is pain in the legs, it is called a mild sprain when it's only a minor injury.
"Then carefully position the patient's body to ensure the intestines remain in their proper place."
And if you need to cauterize the right leg, use the cushion on the left side of the body to prevent the patient from moving their leg.
Then apply your hand to the patient's legs twice over to ensure the right cushion is used.
And if a vein or the surface has to be cauterized, then apply it there as well.
And then you apply a cautery to the third vein, and another on the patient's chest, which is where the pain is located.
And so if it is necessary to do two, of the same way as for the one, then we will cauterize their legs.
Mays si a tu are that the doctors have said to do it in another place.
Then apply another cautery to the legs; one for the pain itself, and another to keep the intestine from protruding further.
And if the pain is on the feet, it is called by the doctor's expertise.
And so if it's a dislocation causing pain to the cushion in their leg.
And on their legs, put a cushion under their feet to protect them from pain.
Then keep it away from the patient's body for two or three days.
And then the patient will be allowed to go about their daily life. This describes a situation where someone's legs are being treated with cautery, which is a medical procedure.
And if the abscess needs to be treated with cautery, it must be done in the area where the pus is, as described previously, and the patient should be given a poultice to apply to the wound.
Chapter xxxiv.
The treatment for a pain in the feet caused by cold humors.
When gout affects the legs, it is often painful to move them.
And if you are treating someone with a wound, they will need to be treated with the appropriate tools.
Then place your hand on the patient's foot to prevent the swelling from spreading.
And if the patient is unable to stand when they are made to stand up by the table.
This text appears to be in a language similar to Latin, but with some variations, which makes it difficult to accurately translate without more context.
This is a description of how the first sentence might describe a case where someone has a gout flare-up in their feet.
When one of them is too much to bear, then other things will be considered.
The wise person will treat the patient with compassion and healing remedies, hoping for their recovery from the illness, but if there is no hope of relieving the pain, they should be relieved to know that their work here is done. Then place a cushion under their feet and apply pressure to the affected area.
And then if the limb is healed, he will administer medicine that suits the patient's needs.
And if there are fractures in the bones, it becomes a case for the surgeon, not the physician.
Then apply a cushion to your feet, and if necessary, use other methods to alleviate the pain. When translated into English, the sentence would likely read: Amen.
