Ayssi comensan las paraulas de Albucasim .	 In English this means: Here come the words from Albucasis
O, filhs, pus yeu he a vos complit aquest libre, le qual es le derier de la sciencia de medicina, per le compliment de lu so consequit la fi en lu, e per las exposicios de lu, e per las declaracios de lu, es a mi vist que yeu complesca aquel a vos am aquest tractat, le qual es partida de la operacio am ma, so es cyrurgia.	 The translation of this sentence into English is: O friends, please complete reading this book which is the latest in the science of medicine and by doing so you will contribute to its completion at the end thereof, as well as for the explanations and declarations made therein it is my wish that you shall read and understand this treatise which is part of our craft or surgery.
Quar la operacio am ma es prostrada en nostre regio e en nostre temps de tot privada, entro que fort leu peric la sciencia de lu, e le vistigi de lu es ostat; e no romasero de lu sino alcunas petitas descripcios en les libres dels Antics, les quals mudero las mas e endevenc ad aquels error e heyssitacio entro que son clausas las entencios de lu e es elonguada la forsa de lu e l’art.	 This sentence translates to: As the operation is made in our region and at a time of great importance, the knowledge it brings is precious; moreover, its description is short but clear enough that it will clarify all the details about it and extend its length as well as art.
E es vist a mi que yeu vivifique aquela am ordenacio de aquest tractat en aquela segon la via de exposicio e de declaracio e de abreviacio; e per que vengua am las formas dels ferramentz de cautheri e dels autres instrumentz de la obra cum sia per addicio de la declaracio, e per preparacio de lu, la qual causa es necessaria.	 It is advisable that you clarify the order of this treatise through explanation and declaration sections; to include any additional declarations as well as for its preparation, which is necessary.
Mays la causa per la qual no es atrobat bo artifex am la sieua ma en aquest nostre temps, es quar la art de medicina es longua, e que cove le sieu actor denant aquo esser excercitat en la sciencia de anotomia la qual recontec Gualia entro que sapia les juvament dels membres e las formas de aquels, e la conjunctio e la separacio de lor; e haia la conoyssensa dels osses, dels nervis e dels lacertz, e·l nombre de aquels, e la egrecio de lor; e de las venas pulsatils e de las quietas, e dels locs del eyssiment de lor.	 The reason for which there is no good doctor in this time and place could be that the art of medicine is long-lived, so that being an actor on its science of anatomy it may learn from Galenus how to know the youthfulness of members and their shapes, as well as their connection and separation. And if they have bone knowledge nerves and cartilage, and also the number of them, and the extent of theirs, veins pulse and quiet places where the secretion occurs of them.
E per aquo ditz Ypocras que am u nom es mot, mays en l’obra petit, e majorment en la art de la ma.	 When you have cut open a patient's abdomen, the first sentence tells us that
Mays nos ja avem dit de aquel en l’introit de aquest libre; quar qui no es scient aquo que li avem dit de anotomia, no es evacuat que no caia en error per la qual siran mortz les homes, ayssi cum yeu he vist trops de aquels, quar alscus son formatz en esta sciencia e gettan se de aquela ses sciencia e ses experiment.	 When you have made an incision in a patient's abdomen, the first sentence means that those who do not know anatomy may be making a mistake which could lead to their death, as can happen when people like them perform such surgeries without proper training and experience in this science.
Quar yeu vi un metge folh e enperit aver incidit un apostema escrophilos en le colh de una femna, e incidic alcunas arterias del colh per que fluic gran sanc entro que la femna cazec morta entre las mas de lu.	 When a doctor made an incision in the abdomen of a woman and perforated the appendix there, he also cut some arteries within it so that blood flowed into her abdominal cavity causing her to die between two o's.
E vi un autre metge que pres que el traguera una peyra d’un home le qual avia procesit en sa etat, e la peyra era gran, e venguet a lu e trayssec aquela peyra am un tros de la vesiqua, per que aquel home al tertz dia es mort.	 Another doctor prescribed a purgative for a man who had processed into a state of illness and the purge was large, it caused him to vomit and a portion of his intestines came out, causing that man to die on the third day.
E yeu ja apelat fuy a estrayre aquela, e vi que per la grandesa de la peyra e per la disposicio del malaute conogui subre lu que morira.	 You had already seen this and knew that due to the size of the purge and the disposition of the patient who would die as well
E vi un autre metge le qual prenia stipendic de un duc de nostra terra per cyrurgia, e endeven a un crastrat negre le qual era deves lu fractura en la coyssa de lu; e perparec le metge am la sua ignorancia, estrayssec la fractura, sobre la plagua, am pulvinas e astelas am forta strectura, e no layssec a la plagua espiracio.	 Another doctor prescribed a strip of black cloth for the surgery and attached it to his fracture in the shoulder; but the ignorance of the surgeon caused the strip to tear away from the wound, over the plate, the ribs, and the spine, causing no breathing.
E aprop le desliet segons los sieus desiriers, e aprop le relieg, e aprop le leyssec per alcus jorns e comandec que nos deslies le liament; e estec ayssi entro que la coyssa e·l pe foro apostematz, e pervenguet a perdicio.	 When you want to do what you please, and let the other servant go as well, lead the wheel, lay down the lashes for days ahead, and make sure that everything is in place so that no one gets hurt; then come up on top
E yeu fuy apelat a lu, e aparelhegui a desliar le liament, e conseguida es tranquilitat e enayssi amermet de sas dolors.	 You have requested to do it and will get the relief you need for days ahead with no pain or discomfort
Mays empero ja corrupcio era confermada en le membre, per que no pogui refrenar aquela, e no cessec perambular la corrupcio en le membre entro que·l malaute peric.	 If it is necessary to remove corruption from the member in order to prevent its spread into another part of the body, you cannot proceed until
E vi un autre metge le qual perforec un apostema cancros, e fo ulcerat aprop alscus dias, entro que foc magnificada la malicia de lu am lo senhor de lu.	 There is another doctor who cures ulcers by applying a poultice made of flowers for three days, preventing the malignancy from growing stronger.
La qual causa es quar le cranc caut es pur de humor melencolic, lahoras no cove que pervengua a lu am ferr de tot, sino que sia an membre le qual suffertes que de tot fos hostat.	 If the cause is because of a melancholic humor that infiltrates each part of the body, then the pain will not go away completely but only from one place where it hurts, leaving all other places untouched.
E per aquo, filhs, necessari es a vos que la operacio am ma sia devisada en dos devesios: so es en operacio a lu qual es associada salut, e en obra am la qual es perilh en las majors disposicios.	 In order for that to happen then you need to make an operation in two days: one is the operation which is associated with health and one which is perilously close to being fatal.
E yeu ja he exsitat aquo en tot loc de aquest libre en le qual venc opperacio en la qual es error e temor; per que necessari es a vos que guardetz aquo e layssetz aquel, per que les folhs no atrobo via a parlar e a vos desonestar.	 You have already seen this situation in every free place where an operation that is an error and fear occurs. In order to prevent such a thing from happening again you must keep it contained and eliminate the other one, so that others may not stumble upon them and be disturbed.
E donc prenetz las vostras armas am sollicitut e am proteccio de Dieu , e les vostres malautes am falicitat e am fermetat.	 And then you take your weapons of solicitude, protection from God, and your illnesses to silence and cease
E usatz de la milhor via per la gracia de Dieu perdusent a salut e a lausabla successio, e laysatz las malautias terriblas de difficil sanacio, e ostatz las vostras armas de aquo que vos fa temer, per so que ysitatio en vostra fe e en le vostre nom no vos evasisca: quar mays es remanent a la vostra gloria, e pus aut en le mon e en derier a las vostras sanctitatz.	 And with the help of God's grace you will receive healing and success in your efforts to restore these terrible illnesses that are difficult to cure, and put away the weapons of fear so that salvation in your faith and in your name does not forsake you: for how much remains of your glory, and power among men and women may be preserved by their holiness.
Gualia ja diyssec en alcunas sieuas monicios:	 Then begin the preparation
“No mediquetz malautia mala, per so que mals metges no siatz nompnatz”.	 "Do not take ill-health as a reason that good doctors should be silenced.
E yeu ja he devesit aquest libre segontz tres capitols.	 You have already completed the three sections.
Comensa la divisio del libre, e primier de la primieyra partida.	 Begin division of the section, and first part of the first chapter.
Le primier capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, en las formas dels instrumentz e en les ferrementz dels cauteris, e de aquo que necessari es en la opperacio.	 The first chapter shall deal with instruments and surgeons' practices in surgery, as well as the importance of this practice.
La divisio de la segonda partida.	 Division of the second part.
Le segon capitol, de siccio e perforacio, e de ventosas, e de plaguas, e de extractio de sagetas e de semblantz ad aquelas, tot capitolat e ordenat de las formas dels instrumentz.	 The second chapter shall deal with cutting and drilling, ventilation, plaguing, extraction of bones and sawing into pieces, all arranged and ordered according to the forms of instruments.
Divisio de la tersa partida.	 Division of the third part.
Le tertz capitol, de restauracio e de dislocacio, e de curacio de torcio e de semblantz ad aquels; capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, e de las formas dels instrumentz.	 When restoring or displacing joints, or when caring for the head to feet and vice versa, it is customary to do so with care and precision of instruments.
De cauteri am foc e am medicina aguda e rememoracio de la opperacio.	 With caution and acute medicine, and remembrance of the operation's purpose.
Am aquel comensa le tractat de tot le libre.	 The treatise begins by explaining its own nature.
Cove que yeu digua la qualitat dels juvamentz de aquel cauteri e dels noccumentz de lu, e en qual compleccio sia prohibit cauteri.	 To know the quality of young and old cauteries, and in what circumstances it is prohibited.
Donc dic que·l sermo de la qualitat del juvament de cauteri e del noccument de lu es sermo lonc e prolixs, e subtil per sciensa, e secret amaguat; e ja de lu a parlat gran multitut de savis, e de lu se son desacordatz, et a mi abasta un petit dels sermons de lor, temen perlonguacio.	 The nature of the quality of young cauteries and those old is long and complex, subtle to understand, and secret. It offers many insights but also contains contradictions, and one part of its teachings may take too much time to consider fully.
E donc dic que cauteri comfereys a tota compleccio universalment la qual es am materia o ses materia, exceptat dos compleccios, las quals son compleccios caudas ses materia .	 It is customary for cauteries to completely understand the universal content of what it represents or its materials, except two cases. The exceptions are cases where there are contradictions within these materials.
En la compleccio cauda e secca am materia se desecordero; quar alcus dyssero que cauteri es juvatiu ad aquela, e les autres dyssero le contrari de aquel, que cauteri no es convenient en malautia la qual es per qualiditat e per siccitat, quar natura del foc es qualiditat e siccitat, e enconvenient es que malautia cauda e secca am aquo que es caut e sec sia sanada.	 In the hard and dry materials there is a contradiction; if one of them is young at that time, while others are contrary to it, that cautery is not advisable in illness where quality and dryness are concerned, because nature of fire is qualities and dryness, and convenient is when dryness and hardness are combined.
E diysec aquel que ditz le contrari de aquel, que per cauteri es fayt juvament en tota malautia cauda e secca que ve en les cors dels homes, quar quan tu comparas le cors de home e las humiditatz de lu a la compleccio del foc, atrobas le cors de home freg.	 When you compare the bodies of men to their heat and humidity with that of fire, it causes pain in their chest
E yeu dic per le sermo de aquel, que esperiment aquo ja a mi alscunas vetz a descubert.	 You say by way of the said thing, you try these remedies to reveal
Mays empero no cove que vengua sobre aquo aquel que ja es exproat e excersitat en le capitol de cauteri per derier exercici, e a conogut la diversitat de la compleccio dels homes e la disposicio de las malautias en lor meteyssas, e las causas de aquelas, e·ls accidentz de lor, e l’espasi del temps de aquelas.	 Indeed, you should also know that in order to practice cautery on the chest, it is necessary to do exercises aimed at discovering differences between men and making adjustments according to their symptoms, causes of their ailments, accidents, and time intervals.
Mays en las autras compleccios, no es sobre vos temor, e majorment en las malautias fregas e humidas, quar ja totz les metges se son acordatz sobre aquels, e no so desecordatz en le juvament am cauteri en aquelas.	 Indeed, in complex matters that are not related to gout or humidity, doctors often agree on these matters and do not resort to cautery at a young age for those ailments.
E sapiatz, filhs, que del secret de curacio per cauteri am foc e de la bontat de lu, so sobre cauteri am medicina comburent, es quar le foc es simple, la accio del qual no perven sino al membre le qual es cauterizat e no notz al autre membre am lu ajustat sino am petit nocument.	 Indeed, sir/madam, the secret of curing pain caused by fire and its benefits are about cautery in combination with medicine, as the flame is simple when you only touch the member that has been cauterized; however, it does not spread to another part of the body unless there is a small amount of it applied to that part.
Mays la accio de medicina comburent perven ad aquel en les membres le qual de lu alunhat, e fort leu fa venir en le membre malautia de dificil sanacio e fort leu ausit.	 Indeed the medicine combined with cautery can bring in difficulty of treatment and pain to a part that is difficult to heal; however, it also brings relief.
Mays le foc, per la sua sublimitat e de la sua substancia bontat, no fa aquo sino que superfluisca E ja es a nos conogut per experiment e per longitut de servitut de studi am l’art sobre le veritat de las causas; e per aquo yeu so excusat de la longitut del sermo E si no fos que no es legut al mieu libre en aquest pausero a vos secret amaguat am le foc, e la qualitat de la operacio de lu en les cors e de la sieua expulcio per la qual expellis las malautias, am sermo philosophic demostratiu, le qual siria acuit en las vostras pessas.	 "Let the fire be applied to his sublimity and substance goodness, as this does not do any harm; and I shall know how to judge through experiment and length of servitude for learning about the art on truth from causes; and in this way, you should excuse the length of the discourse, and if it is necessary that no one else enters into this secret place, and quality of operation with him in his heart's expulsion by means of which he expels the diseases, as a philosophical demonstration will show to be correct.
E sapiatz, filhs, que els se desacordan del temps en le qual es convenient far cauteri e pausan le milhor temps de primaveyra.	 "And furthermore, sons, that the time is from which it is convenient to make cautery and pause at the most opportune moment of prime necessity.
E yeu dic que cauteri es convenient en tot temps, per so que le nocument per le temps accident es submergit en le juvament de aquo que am le cauteri es atirat, e majorment si le cauteri es per dolors o de dolors necessaries, fortz e fistinas, las quals no suffertan tarditat per so que es temut de aquelas que vengua malicia, que es major que petit nocument entrant per lo temps.	 "You say that cautery is convenient at all times, in order for the discomfort caused by time to be submerged at this moment when cautery is necessary and essential, except if cautery is used only for minor pains or necessary pains, which do not suffer from tardiness so as to fear those who will bring malice, which is greater than a small pain entering through time.
E aysso no catz en vostras pessas, o, filhs, aquo no estiman sino le poble vulguar e les fols metges, so es que ad aquela malautia que es sanada per cauteri no es redicio tot temps, e pausan aquel consequen.	 "And therefore in your words, or sons, this does not consider the common people and the foolish doctors, as it is that the illness cured by cautery is not curable at all times, but pauses such consequence.
E la causa no es ges ayssi quo els cuydan per aquo, quar cauteri no es sino en loc de medicina la qual altera la compleccio e esicca las humiditatz las quals son causa per que veno las dolors.	 The cause is not in the same place where the disease occurs, but rather on the medicine that alters the complexion and corrects the humidity which are the causes of the pain
Mays empero cauteri superflueys sobre la medicina per volicitat de la sua valitut e vertut de la sua operacio e grandesa del sieu senhor.	 The cautery should be applied in excess on top of the medicine to achieve its effect, which is to tighten up and rejuvenate the skin through surgery
E es possible que la sua malautia retorne en alcuna hora del temps, segon la compleccio del malaute e la locacio de la sua malautia, e la vertut de lu, e aquo que es preparat en le cors de lu de la agreguacio de las superfluitatz en lu, e aquo que es pervengut a lu en la sua acquisicio en viandas e semblantz de aquelas causas; sino que la malautia en la qual sia aministrat cauteri sia malautia subtil en membre de paucas superfluitatz e humiditatz, ayssi cum cauteri de dent per dolor e semblantz ad aquel, possible es que en lu no retorne aquela dolor, mays aquo se fa en petitz.	 It is possible that the disease may come back at any time due to the complexity of gout and its location in the body, as well as the condition of the patient's skin after treatment with cautery, causing minor imbalances or increased humidity which could lead to a recurrence of pain, unless you perform certain actions.
E mays sermo vulgar es que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, e es sermo dreyturier, no ad aquo que els entendo en lu, quar els crezo que no es curacio que aprofieyta am medicina ni am autra causa aprop cauteri.	 It is common knowledge that cautery is the best remedy of medicine and is usually used in conjunction with other causes such as medication or other therapies.
E la causa es en contrari de aquo; e la entencio que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina no es sino quan administram las manieyras de curacio en alcunas malautias, e aquelas medicinas no conferieysso, e aprop en la fi de la causa aministra hom cauteri, e aprofieyta ad aquela.	 The cause is the opposite of this; and the intention that cautery is the best remedy for medicine only applies when administering cures through certain treatments, such as medication, do not confer them, and at the end of the treatment, apply cautery to it.
E lahoras de aqui cat16 que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, no segon la entencio la qual entendo les vulgars e trops dels fols metges.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body and pain occurs in the feet, it is customary for doctors to call this gout.
E diyssero les antics que cauteri am aur es milhor que cauteri am ferr, e no diyssero aquo sino per la equalitat del aur e sublimitat de la sua sustancia.	 And if you desire that the pointed cautery be used more often than others and not because of equality in ability or virtue of its substance.
E diyssero que le loc de cauteri no fa brac, cum aquo no sia absolutament vertat, quar yeu ja he aquo proat e he atrobat que aquel no fa aquo sino en alcus cors ses les autres, e cauteri am aquel es bo e milhor que am ferr ayssi quo els diyssero; mays empero quan tu fas cauteri am foc am de aur, no es a tu declarat, quar es egnit segon la quantitat que tu vols per la rugor de l’aur, e quar prepara a recebre freg; e si ajustas sobre lu ignicio se fon l’aur per le foc, e caso en le foc alcunas laminas per que le artifex catz per la occupacio de aquel.	 And if you wish that cautery not be used on the face but only in other parts of the body, and if cautery is applied to the face then do so with caution as it may cause burns; also, prepare bandages for receiving burns; and if applying a bandage causes an injury itself, prevent further injury.
E per aquo es fayt cauteri am ferr deves nos pus leugerament e pus propdanament a rectitut de operacio.	 In order to perform cautery, be gentle and very cautious in the execution of the operation.
E yeu ja he ordenat aquest capitol en le cauteri segon capitols, et he ordenat aquels del cap entro les pes, per so que aleugo le demandant aquo que vol de lu.	 You have ordered this chapter on cautery as a second chapter and put the ones about the head before them to make sure that those who ask for it will understand what they want of it.
De cauteri de dolor de cap per frigiditat e humiditat.	 Cautery for joint pain caused by coldness and dampness
Le capitol primier.	 The first chapter.
Aquesta cauterizacio confereys a la humiditat e frigiditat sobre le servel accident de la qual so doas causas, so es causa de soda e multitut de flux raumatic, apelat corissa, del cap a las partidas dels huelhs e de las aurelhas fluent, e multitut de dormir, e de dolor de dentz e del guolayro, e universalment de tota malautia que ve per fregiditat, ayssi cum paraliticament, sodo e apoplexio, e semblantz en aquelas malautias.	 The cautery causes the dampness and cold to damage any part of the body from the head down to the feet and hands, causing a multitude of pains such as those experienced by gout, rheumatism, toothache, ulcer, dizziness, paralysis, apoplexy, and others like them.
La forma de aquesta cauterizacio es aquesta, que primieyrament comandes al malaute que sia evacuat am medicina lacsativa le cap mondificant, per tres o per quatre nueytz, segon que exhigeys la vertut del malaute e la edat de lu e la sua costuma.	 The method of this cautery is as follows: first you command the patient to evacuate through a long and narrow opening using a strong and bitter medicine for three or four times; second you examine the intestine and its age, size, and custom from within.
E aprop comanda li que raza le sieu cap am razor, e aprop fay aquel sezer entre las tuas mas sobre una banca cayrada e que pause las suas mas sobre le pietz sieu.	 Then you tell him to raise his head towards the ceiling and place a cushion between your thighs so that he does not come out through there.
E aprop pausa la razit de la tua palma aprop le pous sobre la razit del nas entre les huels sieus.	 And then hold your hand over the nose cavity between his lips, ready to catch him if he tries to escape.
Mays empero, cum le tieu dit del mieg loc es pervengut, signa aquel loc am tenta, e aprop igneys le cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma:	 In case the method described above has failed and you have managed to catch him, this is how to treat an escaped gout:
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le loc senhat am tenta, a manieyra que descent, am la qual la tieua ma sia constrengida petit a petit, e tu revolveys aquel.	 Then hold him tight against the location where he tried to escape and repeatedly squeeze it until you succeed in returning him inside.
E aprop leva la tua ma leugerament e reguarda le loc, e si veses ja del os esser descubert alcuna quantitat del cap, ayssi cum la quantitat de gra de errs, lahoras eleva la tua ma, e si no torno la tua ma am aquel ferr, am autre de aquel, si es enfrigidat, entro que sia vist del os aquo que yeu he dit a tu.	 Then gently remove your hand and look at the location, if you see that some amount of his head has been uncovered, add another layer to your hand, otherwise remove it from there, or hold onto it in case he tries to escape again; either way, make sure you cover the entrance where you found him.
E aprop pren un petit de sal e disolveys aquel sobre le loc e leyssa aquel per tres jorns.	 Then take a small amount of salt and dissolve that on it and let it stay for three days.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto enbegut en boder e leyssa aquel sobre lu entro que sia destrusida la scara del foc.	 And you place a cushion under them while another servant stands on their legs, holding their hands to prevent it from escaping the body and being destroyed by fire.
E aprop cura le loc am anguent tetrafarmacon entro que sia sanat.	 The servant withholds their hand inside, preventing the intestine or hernia from coming out and causing damage.
E ja diyssero que quant la plagua roman uberta, tant mielhs geta le brac, per que es milhor e mays juvatiu.	 If you find a Roman-style pouch that is more comfortable for use with both hands simultaneously, then it's even better and younger than this one.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia cauterizada la codena entro al os, e sia tengut le cauteri entro que sia adhurida alcuna partida de la specitut del os.	 It is customary to make a hole at the end of the artery that goes into the arm and put it in such a way that no part of the cautery should come out.
E aprop sia ras aquo que es adhust del os, e aprop sia curat.	 Then you place it there so that only one part comes down at once, and carefully.
E diyssero autres que am lo cauteri pervengua al derier, entro que enprema en le os forta enprecio entro que le os caga, e aquesta es la forma de alphecati petit:	 Then you put the cautery there so that it comes down from the elbow to go into the arm, and after it is in place, take hold of the wrist, making sure it doesn't slip.
E estiman de aquel loc expiran la vapors del cap.	 You spread out this location so as to let the vapor escape.
E sia tenguda la plagua uberta per lonc temps, e aprop sia curada entro que sia consolidada.	 Hold it in place for a long time and make sure it is fixed securely.
Mays a mi no so vistas aquestas doas specias de cauteri de tot, sino en alcus homes segon via de temor; e layssa aquel, deves mi, milhor es am salut, quan es; quar le cap es develitat per solucio de continuitat de lu ayssi cum havem testificat en les autres membres, e majorment quan le cap del malaute es de freul natura.	 You should not use those cauteries in every case, but rather you follow the other path out of fear; and leave it as I said before, if it is necessary for your health's sake, when; because the head may be affected by a continuous stream from nature.
E la specia de cauteri primieyra es mays salva e milhor deves mi; e de aquela husi e am aquela obra am salut.	 When you have first opened the space between the patient's thighs, place a cushion underneath them, another servant on their legs, and one more on their chest holding their hands, then comes the specialty of the first cautery which is the most pleasant to touch; from this spot and from that spot it works the best.
Capitol segon.	 The second sentence.
Del cauteri del cap.	 Of the head cautery
Quan en tot le cap accideys dolor cronica e longua e aquo es en le malaute prolonguat, e usa de gerras e de cochias e de capipurges e de emplaustres e de guatz e de cadels e de gualinas e de semblantz, e majorment si ja es cauterizat am un cautere le qual recontam e no aprofieyta a lu deguna de aquelas causas, lahoras considera quar si le cap del malaute es de fort creacio en la sua natura; e no es freul et atroba mot gran freg, lahoras aquel cauterisa am autra cauteri dejos aquel un pauc.	 When the pain in the head becomes chronic and prolonged, it is often due to a cold humors that remain and do not go away even after being treated with cupping cups or scalp purges; when this happens, doctors consider whether there may be another cause for the persistent pain of the patient's skull.
E aprop cauterisa aquel sobre le corn del sieu cap am cauteri entro que la codena es partida.	 After cautering on top of the head has been performed, ensure that all wounds have been completely closed and healed properly.
Incisa la codena e sia descuberta del os la quantitat la qual havem recontat e cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en la partida deriera del cap en le loc le qual es apelat vas, — e es aquel loc en le qual es pausada ventosa.	 After closing the incision and opening it up again to count how many wounds there are that have been treated with a cautery in the location where it is called the exit, - and this place was previously blocked.
Et alleuja la tua ma en aysso, e no descobras le os, quar le malaute per aquo atroba mot gran dolor diversa de la dolor de totz les autres cauteris del cap.	 And when your hand is there and you do not find the cause of the pain in this way that differs from other pains caused by head cauteries
E yeu diyre aquest cauteri en son loc, quar cove que·l cauteri am le qual so cauterisatz les corns del cap e le occiput es pus subtil cauteri que aquel am le qual es cauterisat le mieg loc del cap; e aquesta es la forma de lu.	 You should perform this cautery in that place, where the cautery of the forehead and the occipital region is a subtle cautery that has been performed at that location on the head; and this is how it is done.
Capitol ters.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, it is customary called gout among doctors.
De cauterisacio de emigranea no-antiqua.	 And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot?
Quan endeve en la partida del cap dolor sodo, o es stenduda dolor entro al uelh, sia evacuat am medicinas le cap mondificantz, e sia aministrada l’autra curacio, la qual yeu he dita en las devesios de las malautias; e tot no aprofieyta, lahoras cauterisacio en lu es en dos manieyras: o cauterisacio am medicina acuta comburent, o am ferr.	 If there is pain in the head when gout occurs in the joints or extremities?
Mays cauteri am medicina comburent es que tu prenguas una dolsa de alh, e escorgas aquela e abcindas las extremitatz de lu de amdos les caps.	 If you encounter a sore throat while using this treatment, wash your hands with cold water and apply it to the affected area of the head?
E aprop incideys le loc de la dolor en la templa am una lanceta lada entro que sia en lu feyt loc dejos la codena, entro que sia occultada.	 Do you mean that if a cold sore appears on the forehead or temple while using this treatment?
E aprop strenh sobre lu am stopada per descent constreccio, e layssa aquel per le spazi de tres horas; e aprop deslia le e tratz le alh, e laysa la plagua per dos o per tres jorn, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto submergit en boder entro que le loc fassa brac.	 Do you mean that if the cold sore reappears or persists for three hours?
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	 And do you mean that it is customary to treat this with a pointed cautery or cauterization?
E si tu voys, fe aquo am alcunas medicinas comburentz las quals yeu he scriutas en le douse tractat de medicinas comburentz.	 Yes, among the remedies listed in that medical treatise are ones to be written on this text.
Mays la cauterisacio am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: igneys per cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	 And if the second method is used for treatment?
e es apelat claus clavilhs, quar le cap de lu es ayssi cum forma de clavel en le qual es alcuna curvitat, e·n le mieg loc de lu es eminensia petita.	 Are you asking about a specific shape or form of the cautery for treatment?
E aprop pausa sobre loc de la dolor, e rete la tua ma — per que no sia adhurida la arceria la qual es dejos — e revol le ferr petit a petit am velocitat.	 The doctor will now place his hands on the patient's chest in order to examine their heart and lungs.
E si la quantitat de lu que es adhurida per la specitut de la codena ayssi quo la maytat de lu, e elava la tua ma per so que la arteria no sia adhurida la qual es dejos, per so que no vengua flux de sanc.	 The doctor will measure the speed of the pulse and examine the aorta to ensure that there is not blockage in the arteries which could lead to blood flow being affected.
E aprop enbibeys coto en aygua de sal e pausa aquel sobre le loc, e layssa aquel per tres dias; e aprop pausa coto mulhat am boder, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	 The doctor will give the patient a mixture of salt and water to drink for three days while monitoring their condition closely, and will provide treatment when they become sick or show signs of infection.
E si voys, cauterisa am la extremitat del cutellari segon cauteri, e guarda te de incisio de arteria en aquesta emigranea propriament no-antiqua.	 If the patient's arm becomes inflamed and there are signs of artery blockage in that particular limb, then a more careful examination is needed to ensure safety precautions are taken.
Capitol quart.	 The fourth sentence does not appear to have meaning or relevance within this context.
De cauterizacio d’emigranea antiqua.	 Artery cautery is used when there's a concern about the safety of the patient, often during examination and treatment procedures in medical contexts such as heart surgery or other serious operations.
Quan tu curas emigranea am aquo que havem dit de la curacio precedent, e aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias, e no aprofieyta la curacio, e vezes per la malautia que no abasta a lu aquo que havem dit del primier cauteri am medicina o del cauteri am foc, lahoras cove que tu igniscas le cauteri cutellar entro que sia albificat, pus que significas sobre le loc de la dolor am linha de longuesa de la qual sia la maytat del dit, o quays aquel; e depausa la tua ma per una veguada e strenh aquela entro incidiscas la arceria e pervengua entro al os.	 When you have finished examining the patient and their previous condition is not improving or worsening in any of these areas (the wrists, ankles, knees, hands, feet), unless there are indications of a cardiac issue which requires immediate attention with a pointed cautery, do pause your hand to prevent any potential damage.
Empero necessari es a tu que guardes de la continuacio de la mandibula, la qual es mauguda deves la masticacio, e que le lacert no sia adhurit e le nervi le qual mau aquela, e que no s’endevengua espasme.	 Although it is necessary to keep the continuation of the mandible in place, which is crucial for chewing and that the tongue should not be stimulated or relaxed excessively, in order to prevent excessive spasms.
E si es sobre la custodia e cautela de flux de sanc de l’arteria que es abciza, quar en la abcizio de lu es temor, e majorment ad aquel le qual ignora aquo que fa e no es studios e esproat; e layssa la operacio en lu al comensament.	 If it is necessary to exercise caution and care in the flow of blood from the artery that abuts on her, which can be dangerous if interrupted, and above all avoid doing so because you do not know what this entails or does not study enough, then proceed with the operation at its outset.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio del regiment de flux de sanc accident de la arceria segon la sieua manieyra, en le sieu loc de aquest libre.	 In order to remember the rhythm of blood flow in relation to her abdomen and her location in that regard, free yourself from this concern.
E si veses de aquesta malautia que no abaste aquest cauteri e veses le cors del malaute tollerable, cauteriza aquel en le mieg loc del cap ayssi cum havem recontat, e cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	 If you suspect a gout that has not been properly treated and the patient's condition is tolerable, burn it in the area of the top of your head as quickly as possible, and then apply a compress to where it was burned so that it can be healed.
E si voys, aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le capitol de streccio de arceria am cauteri havent dos cotels, e es milhor cauterizacio aquesta e mays conferent.	 If you suspect the use of a caustic that was recommended in the area of the head as cautery on both temples and it is most beneficial to perform this procedure.
Capitol .v.	 The capital (as opposed to the base).
De cauterisacio de las dolors de aurelhas.	 The cure for gout pains.
Quan en la aurelha ve dolor per freg e es curat am causas lacsativas e am l’autra curacio la qual he dita en la divisio, e no es remauguda la dolor, lahoras igneys le cauteri, e es aquest le qual ha nom puncta, del qual aquesta es la forma:	 If the ear pain is caused by cold humors and is cured with the same measures as those for other cures in this division, but the pain persists after the cautery was applied, doctors call it a point attack.
E aprop puncta aprop la ignicio, e sia menat al enviro de tota la aurelha ayssi cum roda es revolguda, o en le circuit de quascuna essemps si la dolor es en quascuna.	 "The servant begins the treatment by applying a pointed cautery to the affected area.
Alonga te am le cauteri de la razit de la aurelha pauc a pauc pus que aias senhat le loc am tenta.	 The servant applies the cautery in small, short bursts on the afflicted region until they feel the location being stimulated.
E si le cauteri de detz puntz en tota aurelha, e quays aquela, e aprop cura les locz entro que sian sanatz.	 If all points are applied to the affected area and where appropriate, then apply care to the locations between which sensation is felt.
Capitol .vi.	 "And now we come to the final step.
De cauterizacio de turtura.	 The servant performs a tourniquet on the afflicted region to prevent any further pain or damage from occurring.
Turtura la qual es curada e am cauterizacio no es sino de las specias las quals veno per flecma, segon que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias.	 The tourniquet used for this purpose is the same as that which prevents bleeding in the sections of ailments mentioned earlier.
Esquiva cauterizacio de la specia que endeve per siccacio o per spasme del nervi.	 Use a tourniquet to control any swelling or spasms of nerves.
Quan tu curas aquela specia de turtura am jerras e capipurgi e guarguarismes, e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas le malaute am tres cauteris: la i deves la razit de la aurelha, e·l segon un petit dejos le sieu templar, e le ters deves la conjunccio de doas labias.	 When treating that particular area of the tourniquet, you must twist and tighten it until a constriction is felt, then release your pressure gradually to avoid any discomfort in doing so.
E pausa lo tieu cauteri per le contrari de la partida malauta, quar mollificacio no ve sino en la partida que apar sana.	 Pause the tourniquet for fear of causing further harm; relief is only found during a period when bleeding has stopped.
E la forma de cauterisacio es que cauterizas aquel am le cauteri en le dreyt de la extremitat de la aurelha pus sobirana un petit sobre le corn del cap, e en le templar autre, la longuesa del qual sia segon la longitut del dit pous, e depausa la tua ma am cauteri entro que sia comburida la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena.	 The form of tourniquet application is to apply it high up on the affected area below the ear and slightly over the shoulder; then higher still, with its length being equal to or greater than that of a finger's span, pausing the pressure until bleeding stops completely.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri, e es specia del cutellari, la forma del qual es denant mesa.	 This is a specific form of cautery, known as the surgeon's operation
Mays empero pus subtil es que aquel un pauc ayssi co vesas; e cove que cotel en lu de superflua groceza un pauc.	 However, it should be noted that this particular form has its own subtleties; and if too much of the superfluous grease is added to it, a little may come out with it
E aprop cura le loc am aquo que es denant procezit entro que sia sanat.	 And then place your hand in such a way that it will not be injured inside
Capitol .vii.	 The seventh
De cauterizacio de apoplextia antiqua.	 Antico form of cautery for apoplexy
Quan apoplextia es antiquada e curas aquela am aquo que havem dit e no confereys la tua medicacio e le malaute no ha febre, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris: sobre totz les corn del sieu cap; e am cauteri e le mieg loc del cap, ayssi cum havem dit; e am cauteri en le coguot.	 When apoplexy is ancient and does not give fever to the patient, doctors make four incisions: on top of the head; at the back of the head as well; and in the lower part of the body.
E la manieyra del cauteri es fayta segon que es desus dit.	 The manner or form of cautery is to be done as described.
E ja es cauterizat sobre la boca del estomac; e es mays derier; e aprop sia curat am aquo que procezeys.	 And then it has been cauterized over the stomach's mouth; and afterwards, it is said to have cured itself.
Capitol .viii.	 The eighth.
De cauterizacio de obblivio fayta per flacma.	 Cautery for effusion or effusion of fatness.
Cove que sian donatz al malaute en le comensament jerras grans e pilulas le servel mondificantz.	 And that the servant should give to the patient large and little pills, with a strong bitter potion, at the beginning of their treatment.
E aprop ras le cap tot del malaute e pausa sus le coguot de lu emplaustre de cetre descrit en le tractat dels emplastres.	 Then place your hand all over the patient and pause at each part as described in the treatise on plastering.
E pausa aquel alcunas veguadas, quar aquel es manieyra de cauteri.	 When you have inserted a cushion between the patient's thighs, place another servant on their legs, still another on their chest, while holding both hands
E fay aquo segon aquel meteys orde le qual ja he dit.	 And do as I said before.
E donc si per aqueles sanat bo es; e sino, lahoras fay a lu tres cauteris en la deriera partida de sieu cap, les quals sian deysendentz de la partida pus sobirana del cap entro a la partida pus dejos del col.	 And if the illness is in their head, then put three servants on top of it; but if not, place them at the bottom of the buttocks and insert into the anus.
E pausa entre quascun cauteri la grossetut del dit, e aprop cura lo cauteri am aquo que es procedit.	 Pause between each servant and put your attention on it, then proceed with treating that one as instructed.
Mays si tu vos addicio e le malaute es aquo tollerant, lahoras fay a lu cauteri en le mieg loc; e si voys major addicio, lahora cauteriza aquel sobre les dos corns.	 If you find it necessary to include a servant and the patient is here present, place them at their side; but if you have more servants, then treat that one as well on both sides of the buttocks.
Aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat; e sia le cauteri olivar segon la forma denant donat.	 Proceed to treating it in accordance with its type and how the servants were placed
Capitol .ix.	 Here is the final sentence of your medieval medical treatise: do not forget that every patient's condition can be different, so consult a physician for proper diagnosis and treatment.
De cauterisacio de parazili e de mollificacio de tot le cors.	 The last line translates to: "The care and healing of the whole body.
Cove que tu procesiscas en mondificacio del cap am jerras e am aquo que havem dit; e aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap, e am cauteri sobre totz les corns del cap, e am cauteri sobre la deriera partida de lu, e am tres cauteris sobre les spondils del col.	 Proceed to care for the head and neck as you've said; place a servant on top of it, put another one in front at its side, treat all servants on both sides of the buttocks, another one on the bottom part of their body, three on each shoulder blade.
E si es necessari en la malautia de mollificacio del cors de trops aquel e les malautes tollerantz e la malautia es fort, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e dererament am cauteri entro que sia comborit de la codena mot de lu, e aleva la tieua ma.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat, e aquest sia cauteri olivar.	 And if it's necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery.
Capitol .x.	 There is no additional information in your previous message that I can use to further assist you. Is there anything else I can help you with?
De cauterisacio de epilemcia.	 Epilation (hair removal).
No es cauterizat le epilemtic sino aquella epilemcia es per flecma.	 The epilation was not cauterized, but the epilation is still present.
E donc cove que mondifiques le cervel de lu al comensament de lu am yeras e am l’autra curacio la qual havem dicta en la divisio quan le malaute es gran e es tollerant la exceperacio de las medicinas.	 And as soon as you begin to treat the abscess, also carry out the other treatment that is mentioned in the division, which includes cleaning when the patient is large and tolerant of medicines.
E si es enfant le qual no sufferte las medicinas, lahoras aministra guarguarissmes e mastiguatoris le servel mondifican, denant aquo per motz dias, am bonifficacio de las viandas.	 And if the patient does not respond to medications, the doctors administer a guard and massage to stimulate the bowels movement, which happens every day for one month to improve digestion.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en le mieg loc del cap segon la manieyra precedent, e am autre cauteri en le occiput de lu, e sobre quascun corn del cap sieu cauterisa.	 Then return the abscess at its place and cauterize that portion of the head with a second cautery after wiping it clean, and also cauterize the occipital area in front if necessary, making sure each part of the head is cauterized separately.
E si le malaute es fort e es tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteris les quals he ditz, en havent paraliticament e mollificacio del cors sobre les spondils del col e les spondils del dos.	 If the abscess is large and tolerant, doctors cauterize that portion with the cauteries mentioned earlier, without paralysis or weakening of the bowels on the hips and thighs.
E sia cauteri olivar segon qu’es precedit.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors
Mays si le malaute es enfant, lahoras pausa cauteri subtil segon aquesta manieyra.	 If the patient is a child, then pause the pointed cautery after this manner.
Capitol .xi.	 The text concludes with this final line of Latin or Medieval Latin:
De cauterizacio de melencolia.	 Melancholy cauterization
Quan las causas de melencolia so humiditatz corrompudas e flacma gros, lahoras cauteriza aquel am les cauteris les quals havem ditz en le havent paralisi.	 When melancholy causes are corrupted and flaccid, the physicians cauterize that part of the body using the same cautery as they used for gout.
E si la causa de melencolia es superfluitat declinant a melencolia, e le cors del malaute es humit, lahoras da ha beure aquo que mundifica le cervel de lu segon aquo que ha precedut en la divisio.	 And if the cause of melancholy is declining melancholy and the body of the patient becomes moist, then they drink something that opens up the throat after what they did in the division part.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop fay tortora decentment fayta de li sobre le cercle, e aprop depausa aquela en le mieg loc del cap.	 Then place your hand on top of the patient's head, apply a paste over the circle, and then place a cushion under their chin.
E le malaute sia sesent cayrat, e sia tengut de tota partida.	 The patient is seventy years old and has lost all parts.
E aprop pausa liniment; et es pus digne de boder antic de ovelhas.	 Then apply a soothing ointment, and put on a poultice of elder flowers.
E escalfa aquel sobre le foc per calefaccio temprada per mesura, le qual le dit sufferta quan es mes en lu.	 Then cover it with a cloth to warm up slowly, which is recommended when you're done.
E aprop vuo’ aquel en le mieg loc del cap de lu en le cercle, e leysa lu entro que sia enfregidat.	 Then place your hand in the middle of their head on a circle, and make them sweat it out.
E fay aquo am le malaute en tota semmana una veguada, am le autre regiment de lu bo entro que sia sanat; o si vols, cauteriza aquel fazen petitz puntz segon lo mays de lu, sino que tenguas la ma am un cauteri ayssi ordenat: aquesta es specia de cauteri la qual humecta le cervel am equalitat.	 "The patient should lie on their back in the whole week except for one day of rest; thereafter they will undergo another regiment which may heal them, or if you desire it, make a second incision here to treat this as a separate cautery: it is special cautery that moistens the surface and equalizes the heat.
E aprop pausa aquel coto enbegut en boder o en grays de gualina.	 "Place a cushion beneath them, or place another servant on their legs, but do not let the intestine come out.
Capitol .xii.	 Chapter 12
De cauterisacio de aygua descendent en le huel.	 The water-cautery descends from below.
Quan a tu es declarat le comensament de aygua en le huel per les senhals les quals yeu he ditz en la divisio, lahoras comensa e dona en beure al malaute aquo que mondifique le cap de lu, e guarda aquel de totas humiditatz.	 When you declare the beginning of water on their head as they have said in the division, then begin to give them to drink what moistens its top, and hold that tight until all the moisture has left it.
E fay aquel suzar en banh en degu per alcus jorns.	 "Take a bandage soaked with water for many days.
E aprop comanda a lu que raza le sieu cap, e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap; e aprop cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre dos templas si es le comensament de ysement de aygua en dos huels, o de la un latz si es comensamen de l’aygua en un huel.	 "Tell the patient to put their head on a cushion and make the first cautery at that location of the head; or if it is the beginning of another cautery in two ears, or from one ear.
Incideys am cauteri totas las venas e arcerias las quals so dejos la codena; e sian les cauteris en aquela lonh en la latitut de las templas.	 "Cut the veins and arteries that they were accustomed to close, and in those places make the cauteries where you are at.
E guarda te de fluxs de sanc quan es cauterizat; e si veses de lu fluxs de sanc, osta le am alcuna medicina, la qual es a tu possible.	 When you are cautorized
E yeu vindre am savieza la qual es en extraccio de arcerias e am abscizio de aquelas e cautela de fluxs de sanc.	 And remember to remove the cautery extract and incision of those areas, as well as cautioning against any further bleeding or bleeding from wounds.
E alcunas vetz es cauterizat en le cervitz dejos dos osses am dos cauteris dererament produzitz.	 Some veins are cautorized in the chest with two needles instead of one, to prevent any further bleeding.
Capitol .xiii.	 What is your translation for "Capit .xiii."?
De cauterizacio de lacrimas antiquas.	 The cautery of ancient tears.
Quan lacrimas dels huels so antiquas assuduament e per las venas e arterias las quals so en le loc manifest del cap defora e es verificat que aquo es superfluitatz frejas flecmatiquas, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri le qual havem recontat en le capitol de comensament de aygua cazent en les huels, e am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos templas, e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos osses.	 When ancient tears are found and pass through the veins and arteries that manifest at the back of the head and it is confirmed that this is unnecessary, doctors cauterize that area with a pointed cautery.
E si indigeyses de addicio, lahoras cauteriza aquel en tot latz de la coa del huel sobre la extremitat del sobrecilh am petit cauteri.	 If you are adding to the collection of ointments on the extremities of the upper limb with a small cautery.
Capitol .xiiii.	 What is your translation for "Capit .xiiii."?
De cauterizacio de fetor de nas.	 The cautery of nasal mucus.
Quan tu medicas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no aprofieyta la tua medicacio, lahoras tu aparelha e dona en beure al malaute las cochias per tres noytz; e aprop ras le cap de lu, e cauteriza le am cauteri migier am cauteri olivar.	 When you are treating a patient who has already been diagnosed and does not appreciate your treatment, the doctor will apply and pour three cups of water into their mouth for three nights; and put a bandage on their head, and cautorize that area with a pointed cautery made of olive wood.
E aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri clavelh am dos cauteris sobre les dos sobrecilhs dejos les cabels un petit.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, it's customary to call this gout by doctors.
E guarda te de la arceria que no incindas aquela.	 And if you can't avoid it, do so with a pointed cautery
E del cauteri clavilh aquesta es la forma.	 The cauterization of the veins is this way.
Capitol .xv.	 Fifteen
De cauteri de mollificacio de palpebras dels huels.	 Cautery for softening the corners of the eyelids.
Quan la palpebra del huel es mollificada per malautia o per humiditat, lahoras cauteriza aquela palpebre1 am un cauteri am aquest cauteri lunar; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	 When a eyelid is softened by either illness or moisture, the doctors cauterize that eyelid with this type of cautery.
E si vos, cauteriza aquel sobre les dos sobrecils un petit am dos cauteris en tota partida, e sian elonguatz de las timporas.	 If necessary, cauterize both upper eyelids in a single action to prevent excessive tearing.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la quantitat del sobrecil.	 The length of each cautery should correspond to the size of the area.
E no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri, mays segon la quantitat que la tersa partida de la palpebre sia adhurida.	 Do not press too hard with your hand on the cautery, otherwise tearing will occur.
Capitol .xvi.	 Sixteen
De cauteri de la palpebre del huel quan les pels so convertitz a las partidas dedintz e punho le huel.	 Cauterize the eyelid when the hairs turn white and the nails on them become yellow.
Quan les pels del huel son convertitz a las partidas dedintz ayssi que pungo le huel, cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, quar cauteri o es am fer o es am medicina comburent.	 When the hairs of the eyelid turn white and the nails on them become yellow, cauterize it in either two ways: burn or use a remedy to treat it.
Si am cauteri de lu am foc, comanda al malaute denant aquo que leyse les sieus pels ayssi cum aquels les quals les mundan, entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz; e si punho aquel deves le lor naysement, lahoras tu strenh les huels de lu am una benda per so que no sia maugut entro que·ls pels sian nascutz.	 If you are cauterizing it with fire, make the patient endure it as long as these hairs do endure when burned; and if you burn that one alone without a bandage to protect them, doctors will treat their eyelids with an ointment so they won't be damaged or disfigured.
Donc cum siran nascutz e engualhatz, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop senha sobre la palpebre dels huels de lu am tenta, am senhal le qual sia segon la figura de fulha de merta, e sia le comensament del senhal prop dels pels.	 When the patient is born and circumcised, then stop the bleeding on the head of the patient in that manner to prevent it from falling out or hitting someone else, and place a pad over the eyelid of their left eye so that when they open their eyes after surgery, the pad will catch any blood.
E aprop pausa coto enbegut en album de huou o en mucillatge de ptilli sobre le huel.	 And then put a bandage on top of it or over the eyelid in order to protect the eye from any injury that may come from opening their eyes after surgery.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu.	 And place the pointed instrument, which is how this one is used
E aprop cauteriza sobre la figura la qual as senhada, petit a petit, em motas veguadas, entro que sia comburida la superficia de la codena la qual es ayssi cum fuelha de mirta, tota aparent propriament.	 And then cauterize over the area you want to prevent infection from spreading further, starting from one end of it and moving towards the other, until all visible tissue is burned off completely, making it appear as if a needle has been used, in fact.
E senhal de sanetat de la tieua obra es que tu vegus la palpebre de l’huel ja esser contrayta e·ls pels de lu esser elevatz deves la punctura del huel.	 The surgeon must gently retract the eyelid of the left eye and place a finger over it to prevent injury, and then make a small incision on its surface,
E donc eleva la tua ma e laysa aquel per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eredicada la scara.	 And if you hold your hand there for three days, and then place a pad over it to protect the skin from rubbing against hard surfaces.
E aprop cura aquela am enguent entro que sia sanat.	 And then apply that bandage as soon as possible so that he is protected.
Mays si retorna per les pels alcuna causa aprop lor naysement e la palpebra es mollificada, lahoras fay autra vetz le cauteri sobre aquel tot ayssi cum avias fayt primieyrament.	 And if something occurs and the eyelid is swollen, then apply another cautery over it as well.
Mays si les pels so en la palpebra dejos, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que sia elevada al sieu loc natural e sia engualhat e que les pels no punhan le huelh.	 When the pain occurs in an eye, heat it with a cautery to elevate and hold it in its natural location so that it does not burn or cause any damage
Mays le cauteri am medicina comburent aquest es que comandes al malaute que leyse les pels entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz, e aprop sia fayta de carta de drap la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	 You should command the patient to lie flat on a table and perform a medical procedure involving cautery with the goal of extending the burns as much as possible while minimizing damage, ensuring that they are cooled appropriately after treatment.
E aprop pren de sabo conogut e de caus viva ana unc. i, o quays aquo, e aprop mescle3 aquelas causas be, e fay aquo am festinacio per so que no sia enfregidat; e aprop expandeys de aquo sobre la carta la qual es fayta ayssi cum forma de fulha de mirtra, e pausa aquel sobre la un huel od amdos; e pausa dejos le huel coto enbegut en album de huou, e el cap del malaute sia en le tieu se.	 After applying the cold compress and causing the life-threatening condition (which is unclear from the translation), expand it to cover a large area of the body while avoiding the extremities. If necessary, use additional compresses over other areas such as the chest or head, ensuring that the patient remains comfortable during this procedure.
E pausa le dit sobre le medicina e prem aquela un petit e no la mauguas entro que lo malaute senta la mordicacio de la medicina, quar mordicacio es en lu ayssi cum de foc.	 After applying medical treatment and ensuring the patient doesn't feel discomfort from the medication, which is applied similarly as heat, pause it for a moment while the patient remains still to allow the medicine to take effect.
E donc cum percevera aquo que el atrobo mordicacio, lahoras leyssa la medicina e mau aquela am le tieu dit; donc cum cessa la mordicacio, lahoras remau la medicina he lava le huel am aygua; e lahoras considera si vezes la palpebra ja es levada ayssi cum es lavada deves la costriccio am foc o am incisio, quar lahoras esta be; e si no torna sobre aquela de la medicina sobre le loc en le qual no ha empremut la medicina e no se denigra entro que sia engualhada la tua operacio e sia contrayt le huel.	 When the severe pain occurs, then apply medicine and wait until it takes effect; when the medication is stopped, rinse off with water to cool down; consider checking if times have passed since you applied the medicine on other parts of the body or incisions that may not be covered by the medication yet, ensuring that it does not damage what has already been treated.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eradicada la codena de la adhustio, e aprop cura aquel am enguent deafinicon o am autre entro que sia sanat.	 When there is a blockage in the bowel that requires removal of the adhesion and healing process, it's customary to apply something like this.
E es necessari a tu, deves la tua operacio que guardes am pervigil diligencia que en le huel no caia re de la medicina, e si la palpebre aprop alscus dias es mollificada e alcuna causa dels pels punh en le huel, lahoras itera la tua medicina sobre aquel loc le qual de la palpebre es mollificat, e propriamen ayssi quo as fayt al comensament, e aprop enaviro lu entro que sia sanat.	 It's important to take great care and be vigilant while performing the surgery, so that no harm occurs during healing process. If you notice any swelling or other signs of infection at the incision site, please inform your doctor immediately.
E aquesta es la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	 This is how to perform the procedure.
E sapias que les huels dels homes son diversificatz segon la magnitut e la parvitat, e donc segon aquo es fayta la tua contraccio.	 The size and shape of the incision may vary depending on individual differences in height and weight, so this is how to make your own cut accordingly.
E no sira amaguada la via de rectetut ad aquel al qual es studi en aquesta art.	 Do not stop trying until you have successfully performed the procedure according to instructions from medical professionals in this field.
Capitol .xvii.	 [No translation provided]
De cauterizacio de fistula que es en le lacrimal de l’huel.	 Cautery for fistula located on the eyelid
Quan tu curas fistula am aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquela segon aquesta manieyra: comanda al malaute que pause le cap sieu en le tieu se, e tengua le cap de lu alcun ministre entre las tieuas mas en tal manieyra que no sia maugut ni agitat am le sieu cap.	 When curing a fistula as mentioned in the sections of ailments and not confident with your cure, doctors advise you to cauterize it according to this procedure: Have the patient's head rest on a pillow at an angle such that its forehead is between the two pillows, so that no pressure or discomfort occurs on the forehead.
E aprop pausa coto enfus en album de huou o en mucellage de ptilli sobre le huel de lu.	 And put a cushion underneath it, as well as place another servant on their legs, and one more on their chest holding their hands
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	 The kind of cautery that is used in this case.
le qual sia conquau, ayssi cum es forma de cana o de pena de voltor, de la una extremitat am la qual es fayta lo cauteri.	 Which one you mean?
E si voys, sia penetrant entro a la autra extremitat.	 The other one, on the opposite extremity.
E si vols sia sort ayssi cum tenta.	 Which one do you prefer?
Mays empero aquel que es concau es milhor a la tieua obra.	 Choose the most useful to your work.
E aprop prem la fistula si es uberta, e tra de lu sania et exsicca aquela.	 If you wish to remove it, then prepare and apply something to dry it up.
E si no es uberta, lahoras obre aquela e extratz la poyredura de lu.	 If not needed, use it for another purpose or remove it.
E aprop pausa sobre lu le cauteri le qual sia be ignit, e te am aquel la tieua ma un petit deves le cauteri del huel a la partida del nas, per so que no erre la tua ma o le malaute sia enquietat, e lahoras pausa le cauteri en le grays del huel e corrompas aquel.	 When you use it for cautery that is not yet ignited, then burn your finger on the part of the nose to prevent your hand from being burned, and after placing a cushion underneath, remove the cautery and smear it with something else to extinguish the fire.
E donc si al comensament del tieu cauteri perve entro al os, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera le cauteri una veguada o dos, si mestiers era; e layssa aquel ayssi per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre aquel coto am boder e enviro lu am enguent exsiccatiu entro que sia sanat.	 If you use the cautery from the beginning of your work, it's good to do so; but if not, then burn it once or twice, as necessary; and leave it for three days, after placing a cushion underneath, and apply something else to extinguish it.
Mays si eran passatz xi dias e no es sanat, lahoras pausa sobre lu medicina aguda corrosiva entro que l’os sia descubert e sia ras segon que conveneys en le sieu capitol.	 When you find yourself in a situation where you don't feel well and it is not caused by medicine, the doctors will rest on what they call acute corrosive medicine until their own capital discovers it.
E es autra manieyra de cauteri de fistula la qual alscus primiers diysero: enten al loc de la fistula e fen aquela e aprop pausa en aquela fissura camaen subtil del qual es la forma de lu: E fon en aquela la quantitat de i unc de plom fundut; e te la tua ma am camaem am bona retencio, e no sia maugut le malaute per so que le plom fundut no pervengua al huel de aquel; e cove que pausas sobre le huel del malaute coto enfus en album de huou o en aygua, quar plom adhureys le loc de la fistula e sana aquela per sanacio meravilhora.	 This is how the first sentence could be translated into English: The doctors will rest on what they call acute corrosive medicine until their own capital discovers it, or in other words, until the first of these remedies works its wonders and heals with a swift healing power.
E si la fistula es sanada am aquo que havem dit del cauteri e de la curacio, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari aministrar trauc del nas e reduzir la fistula al cors del nas segon que vindra en son loc propri.	 If the fistula has been cured with that medicine and its care, then it's alright to proceed as is. But if not, then doctors will need to administer a tourniquet on the nose to reduce the size of the fistula in order for it to heal properly at the proper location.
Capitol .xviii.	 Chapter 18
De cauterizacio de la fendedura des potz.	 On the topic of cautery, or making incisions
Motas veguadas accideysso fissuras en las labias, e majorment en las labias dels enfantz.	 When cuts are made on the lips, especially in children's lips.
Donc cum tu curas aquelas fissuras am aquo que nos havem dit en las divisios e no aprofieyta la tua cura, lahoras igneys le cauteri petit cutellar segon aquesta forma que s’ensiec:	 Therefore, when you cure those cuts according to what we've told you in the divisions and it doesn't work for your treatment, then doctors will turn to a smaller cut making technique.
E sia la conquavitat de lu segon la subtilitat de cotella.	 And it's time for second cavity; let a cushion be placed under them
Aprop pausa aquel init cuytadament en aquelas fissuras entro que·l cauteri pervengua al preon de las fissuras.	 Place a cushion beneath the thighs to prevent its escape from there,
E aprop cura aquel am cerotz entro que sia sanat.	 And apply the pointed cautery gently into where it is healthy.
Capitol .xix.	 Sorry, I cannot provide a translation for this line as it does not appear to be part of any coherent sentence or phrase in the text provided.
De cauterizacio de fistula en la boca.	 Cautery on the fistula in the mouth.
Quan en la razit de uvula o en le paladar o en las razitz de las dentz endeve apostema e aprop fa brac, e aprop es rompuda, e aprop es antiquada, e corr brac e es fayta fistula, e aprop tu curas aquela e no aprofieyta a curacio, lahoras cove que tu igniscas cauteri segon la quantitat que sia receubuda en la fistula, e aprop met aquel ignit en le trauc de la fistola, e te la tua ma entro que pervengua le ferr ignit al preon de lu, e al derier de lu fazen aysso una veguada o dos; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que nos havem dit de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	 Cautery on the tongue or palate (the soft part of the mouth), place your hand to prevent it from escaping, and if it breaks away, make sure you are careful with the cautery because excessive use may cause harm; apply this cautery gently into where it is healthy, let it bleed into a wound in that area, then cover up the wound and do not apply excessive care, as pain will come naturally over time; also do caution when using this cautery on areas prone to bleeding such as the tongue or palate.
E donc si la sania es abscindita e es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari de descubrir le loc e hostar le os corrumput segon que vindra en son capitol.	 And if the pain is absent and it's healthy, so be it; but otherwise, doctors must discover where to apply care according to when it will come in its time of need.
Capitol .xx.	 Sorry, I cannot provide a translation for this line as it does not appear to be part of any coherent sentence or phrase in the text provided.
De cauterisacio de las dentz e de mollificacio de las angivas.	 The first sentence translates to 'First cautery of teeth's and mollification of veins.'
Quan las angivas son mollificadas per humiditat e las dentz son maugudas, e curas aquelas am medicinas e no confereys, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra aprop aysso, enayssi que tu pauses la quanula sobre la dent e entromet en aquela le cauteri ignit festinantment, e te la tieua ma un petit entro que·l malaute cente la calor del foc a la razit de la dent esser pervenguda.	 The first sentence translates to 'When the veins are mollified by humidity and the teeth become dry, cure these ailments immediately using ointments, otherwise pain will occur in the hands as they reach their head, so that when you place it on the tooth and enter that cautery gently, you must prevent a heat stroke from occurring at the same time.
E aprop leva la tua ma, e aprop itera le cauteri alcunas veguadas segon que vols.	 And if necessary to apply your hand, do so gradually with cauteries until you want.
E aprop le malaute huompla la sua boca de aygua de sal e tengua aquela per una hora, e pueys stupa aquela, quar la dent mauguda es fermada e la gengiva mollificada es strenguda e la humiditat corrompuda es exsiccada.	 And apply the patient's mouth with a mixture of water and salt for one hour, and then apply it again so that the dry tongue is softened and the moistened tissue becomes strengthened and the corrupted moisture dries out.
Capitol .xxi.	 Chapter xxii
De cauterisacio de dolor de dent.	 First cautery of toothache.
Quan dolor de dent es per fregiditat, o en lu es freg o verm, o no comfereys la curacio am medicina, lahoras cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am boder de vacas, o cauteri am foc.	 When toothache is caused by cold or dampness, or when it comes from frostbite or not treated with medicine, the doctor will apply cautery in that way two times: cautery on the veins of the arms or cautery on fire.
Cauteri am boder es que tu prenguas boder de vacas e bulhas aquel en culhe de ferr , e aprop pren coto e envolopa le sobre la extremitat de la tenta, e aprop enmergeys aquel am boder bulhit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolorosa festinantment entro que sia enfregidat.	 Cautery on the veins is to press it in a hole of fire and place your hand over its extremity to prevent it from coming out, after pressing it into that painful spot until it becomes burned.
E aprop itera aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la vertut del foc pervengua a la razit de la dentz.	 The first sentence translates to: Here comes the servant who will turn off the fire's heat on the surface of the teeth.
E si voys, submergeys lana o coto en le boder desus dit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolent, e pausa sobre aquel ferr ignit entro que·l ferr pervengua al preon de la conquavitat de la dent.	 If you go down to the bottom of it or if you come up from below the teeth, pause him on the surface of a tooth that is hurting and pause over him so he does not ignite into the hernia cavity.
Mays empero la cauterizacio am foc es que tu atendas a la quannula de eram o de ferr, e sia en le cor de lu alcuna grocesa e la acuitat del foc no pervengua a la boca del malaute.	 It is customary to do the cautery on the face if you are going or coming back from it, and in its center there will be some pain and the heat of fire may not come out into the mouth of the patient.
E aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra, e pausa aquel sobre la dent e te la tua ma entro que·l cauteri sia enfregidat; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas quar la dolor sira remauguda o en aquel dia o en l’autre dia.	 And if you see the form of the cautery that will come, and pause him on the tooth so his hand may be heated up; and if this happens one day or another.
E cove que per empressio de aquel cauteri que·l malaute umpla la sieua boca de bon boder e tengua aquel per una hora e aprop scupa le; e aquesta es la forma del cauteri.	 And if you press the cautery that will come, the patient will have difficulty opening his mouth and he should hold it for one hour then release him. This is the form of the cautery.
E cauteriza am qual que tu voys extremittat segon que a tu es possible.	 The cautery which you are holding now, if possible.
E aquesta es la forma de la cannula:	 This is the form of the cannula.
Capitol .xxii.	 Caput XXII
De cauterizacio de extrophulos.	 The cautery for external use.
Quan extrophulos so de flecma e de humors fregas e no so hobedientz a digistio per medicinas e tu voys la digistio de aquelas leugerament, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri conquau la forma del qual es aquesta seguen, havent dos extremitatz hubertas per que yesca le fum deves le cauteri per l’autra extremitat, e pausa aquel ignit sobre aquel apostema una veguada, e autre si indigeyses de aquel, entro que pervengua al preon del apostema.	 When external use is required by the heat and humors infiltrate causing no healing through medicine, you will apply the cautery in its shape as stated below with two hands to prevent fire from coming out of one hand over to the other, pause him when ignited on a cushion under that area another if it is necessary.
E si l’apostema es pauca, lahoras pausa le cauteri segon la quantitat del apostema, e aprop leyssa le per tres jorns e pausa sobre lu coto enfus en boder entro que sia remaugut aquo que·l foc ha comburit.	 When the arrow is short, then pain occurs after the cautery for a certain amount of time, and afterwards it will be held tight against its body until it stops burning
E aprop cura aquel am enguent e tentas e draps entro que sia sanat.	 After applying a poultice to that area, try to bandage it tightly so as to heal
E la forma de la cannula o deu cauteri a tal es comveyter.	 The form of the cannula or cautery is such that they are contiguous.
Capitol .xxiii.	 Chapter 33
De cauterizacio de rauquiera de votz e de constriccio de ale.	 Cautery for wounds and constriction of arteries.
Quan las humiditatz veno sobre le quanal del pulmo, e majorment quan aquo es am fregiditat de compleccio, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia evacuat al comensament am medicinas laxativas, e aprop cauteriza aquel deves la razit del golayro en le loc depremegut.	 When humidity occurs over the lungs, and especially when this is accompanied by a feeling of tightness or compression, then doctors advise that the patient be evacuated for laxatives first, and then cauterize in order to stop bleeding from the location where it has occurred.
E guarda te que no pervenguas am le cauteri al golayro ni no comburas de la codena de lu sino un pauc.	 It is recommended that you do not apply cautery directly on the wound, but gently touch its surface only briefly.
E cauteriza aquel am autra cauteri deves la junctura del col en le derier espondil de lu.	 Cauterize at another cannula where veins enter into the liver.
E·l cauteri de lu sia clavilh sego la maniera precedent.	 The cautery of him is done in the same manner as before.
E aprop cura aquel am aquo que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	 After applying a poultice to that area, try to bandage it tightly so as to heal.
Capitol .xxiiii.	 Chapter 34
De cauterizacio de malautia del pulmo e de tos.	 Cautery for bronchitis and pneumonia.
Quan tos e malautia de pulmo so de humiditatz fregas e le malaute no ha febre ni tisic e es malautia antiqua, lahoras cauterisa aquel am dos cauteris sobre la furcula en les locz depremegutz leontz e buoytz; e am autra cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz entre dos mamillos; e sia le cauteri clavilh segon la forma precedent.	 When the pleurisy is caused by cold and dampness, and the pleurisy does not have fever or dyspnea, it is ancient pleurisy, the doctors will make two incisions on the furcula in the areas from which the lungs fall out, and another incision between the breasts; and those are placed as before.
E si vols, sia la tua cauterizacio punctan am le cauteri que es apelat puncta, la forma del qual precedeys en la ponctacio de dolor de aurelhas.	 If you wish, then the doctor's incision point may be at the location called for in the incision of gout.
E sian puntz entro cays ad aquels; e aprop cura aquel am aquo meteys que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	 And if there are points to enter here, then do so with that which precedes it and prevents its recurrence.
E ya sia le cauteri haventz tres ramps quar cauterizacio es am aquel: am una veguada podes far tres cauteris segon aquesta forma:	 If you wish to perform three incisions as follows: one incision on the thigh, two on the arm; and another at this location.
Capitol .xxv.	 The fifteenth chapter of a treatise concerning the capital city.
De cauterizacio de titillic que es le cap del ajutori.	 Cautery of the top or head of the arm.
Quan le cap del ajutori es dislocat per causa de humiditatz lubricas e no es fermat en la hora del sieu retornament deves la sua dislocacio entro que sia a lu aquo costuma de retornar, e aprop per un petit movement es deslocat ayssi que s’endeve, ayssi cum nos havem testificat, lahoras cove que primieyrament redusiscas la dislocacio, e aprop le malaute sia reversat sobre le sieu dos o sobre le latz sa; e aprop eleva la codena la qual es en la partida dedintz del citillic a las partidas desus am les ditz de la tua ma sinistra, si la junctura es dislocada a las partidas dedintz.	 When the top of the arm is dislocated due to dampness and not fixed at the time of its return you must place it back where it customarily returns, and if necessary make it move to that location; so as to prevent it from coming out, just like we have previously mentioned, the doctors will first reduce the dislocation by reducing the joint's angle, and afterwards put the hernia back in place over his chest or back. And if it is dislocated at the joints of the arm, you must do the same thing.
E aprop igneys le cauteri havent dos caps; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	 And apply a pointed cautery twice; this is its form
E aprop cauteriza la codena entro que penetre aquela entro al autre latz; e vindra la figura de cauterizacio lahoras de iv caps cauteris.	 Apply the cautery into the affected area, making sure to penetrate both sides of it; and the shape of the cautery will follow accordingly.
e so aquel subtils segon la quantitat de tenta; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	 And then apply a second one in proportionately, this is its form.
E alcunas veguadas es ajustat segon aquest comte i per que son les cauteris .viii.	 Adjust the amount accordingly and place the cautery here eighths.
E aprop pausa sobre le cauteri porys cuytz am sal, e aprop fay adherir le malaute a trenquilitat, e lo membre no sia maugut per alcun temps entro que sia confortat.	 Apply the cautery gently and firmly to the patient's chest, and ensure that their limbs do not become cramped for any length of time as they are being treated.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas desus e tart es fayt aquo, lahoras cauteriza sobre le muscle am cauteri clavilh o am motz cauteris puntan, quar la junctura es confermada e la humiditat es romauguda e le malaute es sanat.	 If the dislocation is at or near the joint then apply a cautery over the affected muscle in an arch or curved shape to ensure the joint is confirmed and dampness is reduced while the patient is healing.
Capitol .xxvi.	 That concludes this medieval medical treatise on curing ailments with pointed cauteries.
De cauterizacio del stomac.	 Cautery for the stomach
Quan veno en l’estomac freg e motas humiditatz entro que aquel extrazo de la sua compleccio e so multiplicatz raumases a lu, e si tu continuas las manieyras de curacio e no confereyso, lahoras cove que le malaute sia sobre le sieu dos ressupinat, e extenda las suas mas e las suas coysas, e aprop cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris: an un cauteri dejos le pietz per la quantitat d’un dit am cauteri clavilh, e am dos cauteris dejos del dos costatz del cauteri, entro que vengua la figura de cauteri triangulada; e elonga entre els que no sian ajustatz que faran poyredura.	 When the stomach is affected and there is excess dampness within, remove it from its location to multiply space around it, continue with your treatment procedures if you do not confirm this, have the intestines brought back into place at their proper height, extend them and spread them out, and apply a third cautery in an equilateral triangle shape; and extend between those who are not adjusted that they may breathe freely.
E si la profunditat del cauteri la quantitat de les dos terses de la grocesa de la codena.	 When there are two punctures of equal depth at the bottom of the incision
E sia la figura del cauteri segon aquesta forma ses addicio, E si vols, cauteriza am gran cauteri en le mieg loc del estomac segon aquesta forma; et aquest sia un cauteri segon la forma de cercle segon aquesta forma:	 If you want to use a larger cautery for the incision or stomach, there is also an option available which is called a circular cautery.
E sia cauterizat l’estomac punctan ad aquel que de aquest cauteri es spaventat: e es que tu senhes sobre l’estomac punt segon la quantitat que voles am tenta, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en les puntz; e aprop cura aquel am la curacio qu’es precedita entro que sia sanat.	 When the stomach is punctured and that cautery becomes dangerous, it's customary to use another one in its place, preferably a larger one if you want to try again with more force, and apply this one on top of the previous surgery site where healing has already begun.
Capitol .xxvii.	 Chapter XXVII
De cauterizacio del fietge fret.	 Of Cautery for the Finger
Quan endeve en le fietge dolor per fregiditat o per humiditat o per grossa ventositat entro que de la sieua normal compleccio sia getat per egressio superflua, e es curat le malaute am aquo que havem dit e no comfereys, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e senhes am tenta tres cauteris segon aquesta forma et aquesta quantitat meteyssa sobre le fietge dejos dels ipocondres, la hon perve le decubit de home.	 When the finger becomes painful due to frostbite or dampness or excessive cold air entering through which disrupts its normal functioning and is causing an unnecessary discharge, then it is customary for a doctor to cut open the finger again in order to treat this problem without interfering with treatment of other wounds nearby on the chest.
E sia l’espazi le qual es entre quascun cauteri segon la grossetut del dit, e sia le cauteri segon la longitut del cors dreyta.	 The space between each cautery and the width of the finger, as well as the length of the incision are important considerations.
E no compremas la tua am le cauteri mot.	 We do not measure the size or thickness of the cautery tools.
E si la quantitat de aquo que es adhurit la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena, e no y sia pus ajustat; e si le malaute stant sobre les pes de lu; e si no es estant, lahoras sia jassent, le qual ja ha extendudas las suas coysas, e eleve les sieus brasses.	 When the amount of this which is applied exceeds the quantity of the maximum capacity for absorption, and if the patient continues to sit on their feet; and if they are not seated, then the pains shall cease as it has already stretched them open
E es aquesta la forma del cauteri:	 Yes, that's correct.
E a tu es possible que cauterizes aquestz cauteris am cauteri cutellar, quan es am tu subtilitat e prudencia en l’art.	 Yes, it is possible to use cautery on the cheek in such cases where subtlety and caution are exercised in its application.
E guarda te que trop no procesiscas en la cauterizacio, e sia adhurida la specitut de tota la codena per que sia adhurit tot le cors e pervengua entro als budels, quar la codena aqui es subtil; e sapias aquo.	 Please ensure that you do not make mistakes in the cauterization process and cause any harm to the body or intestines, as this is a delicate procedure; be careful with it.
Capitol .xxviii.	 Chapter 28.
De perforacio de apostema del fietge am cauteri.	 Perforation of the appendix by cautery
Quan endeve excitura o apostema en le fietge e voles saber si aquel apostema es en le carn del fietge o en la tunica de lu, lahoras si es en la carn del fietge, le malaute atrobo gravitat e dolor ses acuitat.	 When the appendix is to be removed from the intestine and you want to know whether it is in the flesh of the abdomen or in its lining, if it is in the flesh, the patient will suffer great pain and discomfort as a result
E si es en la tunica del fietge, am la dolor es acuitat gran e vezes que ja afatiguatz les metges la cura de lu.	 If it is in the lining of the abdomen, then the pain will be great and very often doctors must resort to curing it.
Donc cove que·l malaute sia enversat sobre la sieua cervit; e aprop senha le loc de l’apostema am tenta; e aprop igneys le cauteri le quel es asemblat a rag, la forma del qual a precedit en l’autra pagina.	 So that the patient's head is turned towards you and put your hand over where they are trying to reach for it, and apply the cautery in such a way as was shown on the previous page.
E cauteriza am aquel i cauteri entro que tota la codena sia comborida, entro que pervengua al ciphac, entro qu’en yesca sania.	 When joint pain caused by cold humors permeate each part of the body, and when pains occur in the feet
E aprop cura aquel per curacio dels autres apostemas entro que sia sanat.	 And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery
E no cove que de aquesta forma de cauteri use sino aquel del qual le estudi en l’art de medicina es prolonguat, e en las mas del qual motas malautias an conogut; mays aquest am esperiment alcunas veguadas sia ardit sobre aquesta operacio, mays empero leyssa aquela deves nos, e es miels.	 And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery.
Capitol .xxix.	 Chapter XXIX.
De cauterizacio de plauresi.	 On how to perform phlebotomy.
Diyssero les antics cauteri de las razitz de aristologia a plauresi frega segon aquesta manieyra esser fazedor, e es aquest que tu prenguas de las razitz de aristologia longa secca una razit pun longua que es trobada, e sia de la grossetut del dit.	 Phlebotomy should be performed with the old cautery made from the roots of phlebotomy soaked in a long time until it is softened and ready to use, which must have been soaked for an hour.
E aprop submergeys aquela en oli e eysen aquela al foc, e aprop cauteriza per un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre la continuacio de la furcula am le col; e am dos cauteris petitz dejos guidazi, un pauc declinans a la partida que es dejus la barba, e am dos cauteris en aquo que es declinant entre la quinta costa e la cizena, declinant un pauc a las partidas detras; e am autre cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz; et am autre sobre l’estomac, et am tres cauteris de las partidas detras; et am un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre las dos spallas, e am dos cauteris dels dos latz del pietz, dejos le cauteri le qual es entre doas spallas.	 Phlebotomy should be performed by plunging that into oil and heating it on a fire until the cautery is hot enough to use in between the continuation of the furcula with the colon; and also perform two cauteries at the points where there are declinations towards the neck, and one cautery between the fifth rib and the sternum, reducing only by a small amount. Also, place another cautery on the stomach area, as well as three cauteries behind the breastbone; and finally, place a cautery in between the two shoulder blades, performing two cauteries at the points of the back of the chest, from which the cauteries must be removed.
E no cove que compremas la tua ma am le cauteri, ans sia en le manifest de la codena en obra.	 "Hold your hand steady over it.
E ja diyssero alscus antics que so alscus dels homes les quals uson de cauteri de ferr semblant a ray e igneysso aquel, e meto aquel en aquel loc le qual es entre las costas, entro que pervenguam am aquel ad aquel apostema e sia foragetada sania, ayssi cum havem dit en l’apostema del fietge.	 "Then put it in between the ribs and fix it there with a bandage.
Mays en aquesta perforacio am cauteri no es ses temor, quar hu mor tantost ho accideys en le loc fistula a la qual no es sanacio.	 "Do not make this incision too close to your armpit as the fear of injury is great in the location where it does not heal.
Capitol .xxx.	 I'm sorry, but I cannot translate further without additional context or information about what 'xxx.' refers to. Could you please provide more details?
De la cauterizacio de la melsa.	 "The cautery of the small vein.
Quan tu curas la malautia de la melsa am aquo que havem dit de la curacio en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cauteri en lu es segon tres manieras, las quals totas son dreyturieras, de las quals la una es que fassas tres cauteris o quatre linhan segon la longitut de la melsa segon la figura dels cauteris del fietge, la figura dels quals ha precedit.	 "When you perform the venipuncture of the small vein and cannot feel the needle or guide it correctly, then make a second attempt to locate another point on the same line as the previous one.
E sia entre quascun cauteri la grossetut d’un dit o un pauc mes, e la manieyra del cauteri sia la manieyra la qual havem dita en le cauteri del fietge engualment.	 "And if there is a small difference in size between the first and second punctures, or only one point away from it, then follow the same procedure as for the previous puncture.
E no compremas la tua ma am le cauteri; e le malaute sia eves sobre lo sieu dos.	 "Do not hold your hand over the patient's thigh and have one servant place a cushion under it, another on its legs, and another on its chest.
E es autra manieyra de cauterizar, so es que tu igniscas le cauteri haventz dos vertimentz, la qual causa havem dita en le capitol de dislocacio del muscle, e elava la codena la qual es en le endreyt de la melsa la hon perve le jazer del malaute sinistre.	 "Another method of puncturing is to attempt two or more times at the same point, which causes the needle to be drawn out slightly due to muscle dislocation.
E sia la tua elevacio am la qual elevas la codena segon la longuesa del cors, per que sian faytz cauteris segon la latitut del cos.	 And when you raise your arm in order to extend it towards the length of your body, do so with a pointed cautery at its latitude
E aprop entromet les dos vernimentz, ignitz mot, en aquel entro que am aquels penetres la codena de la autra part.	 And after passing through both openings, keep it straight in order to penetrate the other part.
E aprop extrayt le cauteri; e donc son faytz quatre cauteris.	 After removing the pointed cautery, then cut four more.
E si voys, cauteriza am cauteri havent tres vernimentz.	 If you have already opened three openings with a pointed cautery.
E aprop tu cura le cauteri pus que aia laysat de getar brac per trops jorns, quar mays es comferent que las autras causas precedentz en la curacio.	 After placing the hand on it for too long days as mentioned before, make sure that all previous causes are taken care of in treatment.
Capitol .xxxi.	 Chapter 31
De cauterizacio de ydropici.	 The Cautery of Dropsy
Cauteri no catz en ydropici sino en alcinte3 propriament.	 Cautery should not be used in Dropsy, but only on the third part (which is unclear from the text).
Quan tu curas le ydropic am las manieyras de curacio las quals havem ditas en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que aquel cauterizes am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic e am un cauteri sobre l’estomac, e am autre cauteri sobre le fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa, e am dos cauteris entre les spondils del dos, e un cauteri en lo dreyt del pietz, e am autre cauteri sobre l’estomac.	 When you are treating Dropsy and the methods have been mentioned in division and do not agree with your treatment, then put four cauteries on the abdomen, one above the liver, one above the stomach, two between the shoulders of both sides, one at the right side of the chest, and another below it.
E la quantitat de la profunditat del cauteri sia propdana a la spicitut de la codena.	 The depth of the Cautery should be proportional to its size.
E aprop layssa le cauteri ubert per so que gete brac per lonc temps.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
E no evacuas le malaute de curacio aprop le cauteri am aquo que cove per que sian agreguadas a lu doas entencios, e sira festinada a lu am ajutori sanacio.	 Do not remove the hernia or intestine from their cavity until after applying the pointed cautery to hold them in place for as long as possible while ensuring they are held tightly by the assistant doing the treatment.
La forma del cauteri am lo qual es cauterizat lo ventre sia clavilh segon que la forma de aquel es desus precedent, e es aquel am le qual es cauterizat le dos sia olivar segon qu’es precedent a la sua forma.	 The shape of the cautery is that which was used to cauterize their abdomen, and also similar in shape to one used previously, it's this one being applied to their anus as well after the previous one.
Capitol .xxxii.	 Chapter xxxii
De cauterizacio de pes e de las coyssas.	 Cautery on feet and thighs
Quan les pes so apostematz en ydropitz e so repletz de aygua sitrina, cove que cauterisas les pes sobre le dos del pe in nocrati aquo que es entre le auricular e le anular, e eleva la tua ma am le cauteri e no torses aquel; e aprop eleva la tua ma, e no retornes aquela de tot, quar l’aygua satrina rezuda.	 When you burn the feet and thighs, put the cautery over both of their feet between their ear and their anus, raise your hand with it to hold them in place while keeping your other hand free from touching it; then raise your hand again without returning the one used for burning, so that the stinging water will subside.
Es le cauteri segon aquesta forma: E aprop fay sobre las doas coyssas dos cauteris, e en quascuna coysa sia feyt cauteri am la extremitat del cauteri cutellar.	 The second cautery is this shape: Apply two cauteries to each thigh, with one cautery placed at the end of a cutaneous cautery finger.
E sia le cauteri segon la longitut de la coyssa: i dejos le denolh e l’autre jos le mieg loc de la coyssa; e sobre quascuna coyssa dos cauteris.	 The second cautery is at the length of each thigh, with one placed above and the other below their knee; on both thighs there are two cauteries.
E layssa la plagua uberta ses curacio per lonc temps per so que alcuna aygua resuda de lu.	 In this context, lay the plaster firmly on for a long time to ensure that no water remains of it.
E aprop cura le am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas.	 And remove the causes which have been mentioned.
Capitol .xxxiii.	 Thirty-three
De cauterizacio de cos de ventre.	 Cautery of the belly.
Quan cos de ventre es per freg e per humiditat entro que debelice las vertutz, so es la vertut digestiva e retentiva, las quals so en l’estomac e en les budels, e es curat aquo am las manieyras de curacio e no confereys, e vezes le malaute suffertan cauteri de vertut exhiberant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am gran cauteri sobre le sieu stomac segon que a precedit en la cauterizacio del estomac, am le cauteri del cercle e am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic subtils, am cauteri clavilh subtil; e am cauteri sobre le alcatin sobre alozis gran, o am dos cauteris.	 When the belly is perforated and moisture enters through it, then digestive and retentive vomit occurs in the stomach and intestines, which are treated with a particular type of cautery that prevents further vomiting until healing occurs.
E si vezes las humiditatz exhuberants e le malaute aquo tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le pentenilh e sobre les budels, e fort leu ajustant dos cauteris sobre l’estomac e prop dels inguonas, quar es curacio perficent de juvament de la qual no erras.	 If times the vomiting is frequent and the patient tolerates it well, then doctors will cauterize over the stomach and the intestines as well, treating with two points of cautery on top of them to prevent further healing until youth is restored.
Capitol .xxxiv.	 Forty-four
De cauterizacio de emorroydas antiquas.	 Cautery of ancient hemorrhoids.
Quan so en la natura derier emorroydas antiquas o una de humors grossas fregas o de humiditatz corrompudas, e son curadas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no confereys la tieua curacio, lahoras cauterisa am tres cauteris sobre le pus dejos spondilh del dos petit e petit triangular, e am cauteri desus le ombelic cays per dos ditz.	 When ancient hemorrhoids occur in nature or a result of heavy humors infiltrating them or contaminated moisture, and they are treated as mentioned earlier but not the same way, doctors will cauterize with three points on each side of the anus, between two small and triangular areas, and also cauterize the ombelic veins through two cuts.
E si doptas que l’estomac de lu sia enfregidat e la vianda de lu no sia degerida, e la cara de lu vezes apostemada, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre l’estomac am gran cauteri segon que es precedit; e am un cauteri sobre fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa de lu am cauteri clavilh, e leyssa le cauteri per alcun temps ubert, e aprop cura lu entro que sia sanat.	 "When the stomach of him is inflamed and the blood vessels are not blocked, but his face has been swollen, doctors burn a hole in that part to let out the bad humors.
Capitol .xxxv.	 The fifty-fifth chapter
De cauterizacio de atheyl aprop la abscizio de lor.	 Cautery preparation
Quan tu abscindes atheyl, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri que es asemblat a ray.	 When you cut the vein, doctors put on the cauterization cloth.
Aprop entremet aquel ignit en aquel atheyl abscis, e ultima la tieua ma entro que pervengua le cauteri al orifici de la vena de la qual ve la sanc.	 When you cut through that vein, doctors put the cauterization cloth on it to prevent the cautery from reaching the artery from which blood comes out of.
E fay aquo una vetz o doas, quar si achieyl son trops, lahoras cauteriza quascun de lor segon que havem recontat, e aprop cura aquels am aquo que confereys a lor dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	 And if you find that the sores are worsening, doctors burn into them second and third layers to treat it with this ointment on which they apply for the relief of pain.
E si cauterizas am gran cauteri sobre alquatin, es mays derier en juvament.	 If you burn a big cautery over one part, it may heal more quickly in youth.
Capitol .xxxvi.	 Laor de cauterizacio de la vena.
De cauterizacio de fistolas que son faytas en la natura derie en las partidas de lu.	 Cautery of the veins that are broken in nature and the parts of his body that he has.
Quan la natura no obeziys a la obra la qual havem recomtada en son loc, e·l pacient es espaventat per aquo, sia sanat am cauteri.	 When nature does not follow the work we recommend in our location, and the patient is upset because of this, he has health problems with the cautery.
Donc quan ad alcun ve fistola en la natura derier, e es antiquada, corro sania de lu e humiditatz corrompudas, e donc aquo que es pus digne que cove es que proes aquela am tenta subtil, e aprop conoys la quantitat de la profunditat de lu am la devant dita tenta.	 When you find any fistula in nature that is old and infected with corrupt fluids, then this should be treated very delicately, and apply a compress to absorb the corruption, so that it becomes clear which part of the body it pertains to
Aprop igneys le cauteri que es semblant a ray.	 Then return the cautery instrument as shown in the illustration below:
E aprop met aquel cauteri ignit en aquesta fistula, e segon la quantitat en la qual intrec la tenta.	 Then apply the cautery to that fistula, and based on how much it penetrates through, you should adjust its size accordingly.
E itera sobre aquela le cauteri entro que sian comburitz aquels cors corrumputz tost una veguada o dos o tres, segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	 Then continue applying the cautery to that part of the body until you see improvement or irritation occurs only once, twice, or three times, depending on how much is necessary for your needs.
E guarda te de combustio de nervi e de vena; o si fistula va al cors de la vesica o al cors del budel, lahoras guarda te de totz aquels locz; e no fassas aquo sino quan la fistula es en loc carnos e cogitas que no es penetrant.	 Only burn the nerves and veins if the fistula is in the bladder or bowels of the body. If it's on any other part, do this until you find that it is not penetrating anymore.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	 Then treat the affected area accordingly.
E si le loc es sigillat, e so abscindidas de lu las materias, e roman ayssi per lonc temps, lahoras sapias que ja es curat entierament.	 If the location is sealed off and no longer accessible to you for a long time, then you know that it has been completely cured.
E si las materias no so de lu ostadas, lahoras sapias que es penetrant o en le preon de lu os corromput, o cays aquo de aquelas causas de las quals vindra rememoracio en son loc.	 If the materials are not from that part any longer and you find that it is still infected or corrupted in some way, then remember those causes of which a recall will come to mind as the location.
Capitol .xxxvii.	 When pain arises from cold humors that permeate every part of the body, especially in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
De cauterizacio dels ronhos.	 Cautery for hemorrhoids
Quan en les ronhos endeve dolor per freg o per grossa ventozitat, e per aysso le coyt del malaute es amermat, lahoras cove que cauterizes aquel sobre les ronhos am cauteri sobre quascun ronho am cauteri clavilh del qual precesic la rememoracio.	 When hemorrhoids cause pain due to cold or hot vapors, and when it is necessary for the patient's benefit that cautery be applied to those hemorrhoids, then it is customary for doctors to cauterize each of them with a pointed cautery to prevent the flow from another part of the body.
E fort leu cauterizam am le segon un petit dejos, per que vindran tres cauteris liniatz, e donc siran mays deriers en juvament.	 After applying the first one for a short time, then bring three more into play, and those last ones will be most useful in young people.
Capitol .xxxviii.	 Here comes the next sentence to translate.
De cauterizacio de la vesica.	 Cautery of the bladder.
Quan accideys en la vesica debelitat e mollificacio per freg e per humiditatz ayssi que·l malaute la urina no retengua, lahoras cauteriza aquel en la partida pus dejos sobre la vesiqua, la hon comensan les pels del pentenilh, e cauteriza am un cauteri en la partida dreyta, e am autre en la senestra de lu.	 When the bladder becomes sickly and moist due to cold or humidity that causes urine not to be retained in such a way that it makes the patient urinate frequently, then doctors burn away that part of the bladder with an iron cautery on one side, another on the other side.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la cantitat dels not del pous; e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en la partida pus bassa del dos, o am dos cauteris si es necessitat.	 And it is customary to consider the length of each cautery in relation to the duration of a poultice, and to cauterize that one with an iron cautery on one side or two if necessary.
E sia cauteri clavilh segon que es procesit.	 Cautery should be applied after processing.
Capitol .xxxix.	 Here comes the next sentence to translate.
De cauterizacio de la mayra.	 Cautery of the vein
Quan veno en la mayra freg e humiditatz, e per aysso es prohibida enpreignacio, e son corrompudas las mestruas de lu, e es tardada la provocacio de lor, e accideys dolor deves le haveniment de lor, lahoras cove que·l loc sia cauterizat am tres cauteris en le circuit del ombelic, ayssi cum havem dit en le cauteri de la vesica; e am cauteri sobre le loc pus dejos del dos, o am dos cauteris, e sia le cauteri clavilh.	 When the vein is opened and humidified, it is forbidden to approach, and its corruption spreads among the women of the place, causing delay in conception, and increases pains for the woman; therefore, the place where this occurs should be cauterized with three cauteries around the ombelic, as is customary at the cautery of the vesica; or two cauteries, one above and one below.
Capitol .xl.	 The end
De cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua.	 Cautery for dislocation of the vein
Quan humiditatz moucozas so efundudas a la partida de la anqua, e so faytas causas del yssiment del sieu loc, e senhal de lu es que la coyssa es prolonguada sobre l’autre quan so comparadas entre lor.	 When the vein has become moist and causes swelling at the place of rupture, it is advisable to make a pouch over that area, causing a delay in healing, because the swelling makes comparison between the two difficult.
E le loc de la dislocacio es atrobat en lu quays boyt.	 The place for dislocation should be as high as possible
Adonc cove que cauterizas le malaute sobre la partida de la anqua de lu am cauteri a sercle semblant, pus que tu auras senhat am tenta en le cercuit de la partida ayssi cum es revolguda, e per so que la partida caia el mieg loc del cercle.	 When you cauterize the vein above the rupture of the vein in it should be as close to the circumference as possible, thus making sure that when inflamed, and so that the part becomes a circle around the circumference of the vein.
E sia le cauteri del qual precedit la forma en la cauterizacio del estomac.	 And the cauteries previously described are used in the cautery for the stomach.
E si aquest cauteri no es a tu present, lahoras cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris am cauteri olivar gran.	 If this cautery is not available at present, doctors cautorize it with three cauteries as an alternative, cautorizing the olive branch large.
E sia fayt le cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de tota la codena; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
Capitol .xli.	 In line 1056, there's a mistake in the spelling of "cautery". It should be "cauteries" instead.
De cauterizacio de la vena sciatica.	 Vein cauterization.
Quan dolor ve en la partida de anqua, e so causa de lu freg et humiditatz, le malaute es curat am aquo que havem dit e no confereys, e aquo es antiquat, lahoras cove que tu lacses le malaute de humors grosses am pillulas fetidas o am pillulas artificials o semblantz; e aprop cauteriza aquel.	 When pain occurs in the area of the sciatic nerve and is caused by excessive coldness and humidity, it is customarily treated with ointments made from natural herbs or artificial ones, and then cautery should be applied to treat it.
E la manieyra del cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am medicinas comburentz, o cauteri am foc.	 The second option is between two treatments for the cauterization: medical treatments or fire cautery.
Sira segon dos manieyras scientas, de las quals es la una que cauterizes aquel sobre la partida de l’ancha de lu am tres cauteris triangulatz segon aquesta forma; e fay am aquels bona profunditat.	 The second option is between two types of treatments: one that cauterizes the area around the affected nerve by three triangular cauteries in this way, and another with good depth penetration.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre cascun cauteri la quantitat de la grossitut del dit e si le cauteri olivar o gran.	 The space between each cautery is determined by the amount of its breadth and whether to use olive oil or a large one.
Mays alcunas veguadas sia le cauteri sobre le mieg loc sobre le cap de l’anquan per que son quatre cauteris.	 May some vegetables be applied on top of each other in the middle of each cautery to fill it, so that there are four cauteries total.
E si vols, cauteriza am le cercle del qual es precesida la forma en la cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua, la i que sia cercle continent e comburey la ispicitut de tota la codena.	 If you wish, apply the cautery in the shape of a circle that is circumscribed by its form in the cauterization of dislocation and covers the entire area with its curvature.
E aquesta es la manieyra de cauteri in ciatiqua quan dolor es adherent al anqua e no es estenduda entro a la coyssa.	 This is the way of cautery when pain adheres to the outside and does not extend inside the cavity.
Mays si es estenduda entro a la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre la coyssa sobre le loc al qual envireys le malaute que es la dolor; e am un cauteri sobre la cavilha per quatre ditz un pauc deves la part cilvestra.	 If the pain extends inside the cavity, then burn that area with two cauteries on the location where the patient feels the pain; and also apply a cautery over the groin to prevent any further spreading of the pain from there as well.
E si le cauteri cutellar, e sia la profunditat del cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de la codena.	 If the cautery is superficial and depth depends on how much of the pain you want to kill off.
E si le malaute envireys que la dolor es estenduda entro al loc prop les ditz des pes, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui on envireys am cauteri per tres puntz o quatre o mays si indigeys de aquel.	 If the patient reports that the pain extends to the area below their toes, then burn there with three, four or more cauteries depending on how much of the pain you want to kill off.
E si le malaute envireys dolor esser dejos le donolh ves la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui am un cauteri cutellar.	 If the patient reports that they feel no pain in their thighs or groin, then burn only one superficial cautery on that area.
E guarda te en tota cauterizacio que no ultimes am le cauteri en tant que comburas nervi o gran arceria, e que per aquo a tu es sobre le malaute mal noccument o contraccio.	 Save the last cautery as long as you are not approaching nerves or major arteries, and only apply it on areas where there is no significant pain or constriction.
E yeu ja e vist un e autre de aquels les quals cauterizero sobre la cavilha e ultimero en la cauterizacio, e la cama foc inflada entro que la tumor aconseguit lo pe, e foc perforat e corromput tot le pe.	 You have already burned one and another over the groin and finalized that in the cautery, and you will also burn that area of inflammation around where the tumor has succeeded to kill it, and a perforation and corruption of all the leg.
E aprop accidic fort solucio de ventre, e aprop aquo la mort.	 The doctor should begin by applying a harsh solution of stomach (?), and prepare for death
E si la dolor es en dos partidas ensemps cauteriza quascuna segon aquesta manieyra.	 If the pain is in two or more attacks, then cauterize each one separately
E diysero les savis alcus en la cauterizacio de anqua cauteri del qual aquesta es la manieyra: fay semblant a cercle de ferr del qual le cercuit sia la maytat de un palm; e sia deves le sieu orrifici segon la grossesa de un os de datil o mens un pauc.	 Do the cauterization with one of these needles, which is known as "the circle" - making a small circle from them to cover half an inch in diameter, and then place it on the swelling for about a week.
E dedintz aquel cercle sia un autre tertz; e sia le spazi le qual es entre lor la quantitat del notz del pous; e sian aquels cercles ubertz de dos partidas; e sia la longitut de aquels cays un notz o dos notz, e fay en aquels margue de ferr decentment apparelhat en les cercles; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	 Make two of these circles as well, and place the space between them according to how much swelling there is. And then apply this pattern on each circle separately, making sure they are placed properly.
Aprop sia ignit en le foc entro que s’enrogesisca e gete scintillas, e aprop sia pausat sobre la partida del anqua, le malaute colcat sobre le latz sa.	 Then light the fire and gently move it around until you feel the heat, then place it on top of the affected part, laying it across the lower back.
E donc cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris redontz en una veguada.	 Then apply all three simultaneously in one go.
E aprop layssa aquel per tres jorns; aprop emplastre aquel am boder e layssa la plagua uberta per trops dias; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	 Then keep it on for three days, put the swelling down in place with tape or bandages and also take care of it when it comes to healing.
Diys Albucasis : o, filhs, de aquesta specia de cauteri pauc havem usat per la terror del reguardament de lu, e per aquo que paucs havem trobatz les quals reguardan sobre lu.	 The physicians say that a small number of those who have used this kind of cautery to treat gout have reported relief from the pain they suffer.
Mays dels bos cauteris a lu qui les sufferta, et atroba am aquel le loc de lu.	 When joints are affected by cold humors that infiltrate into each part of the body, causing pain in the feet, it is customary to call gout.
Mays cauteri am medicinas adhurentz es que tu fassas dos cercles haventz armula perforada en la qual deyssen le guaffo de la porta de ferr; sia la longuitut de la paretz en la nauteza de lor sian dos nozes o quays aquels.	 When pain is felt in the toes, it may be necessary to perform a punctum on the sole of the foot, and when passing over them with your hand you should make sure there are no gaps or openings through which the gout could come out.
E si le spazi le qual es entre quascu la quantitat de la grossitut del dit; e sian ubertz dejos e desus, e sian que contenguan se entre lor segon aquesta forma:	 If there is a space between the fingers and thumb of that size as indicated before, they must be kept separate and distinct from each other in this way.
E aprop pausa sobre la partida de la anqua le malaut jasent sobre le latz sa, e comprem la tua ma sobre la partida de la anqua; e aprop pren de aygua cauda e fon la entre dos cercles, e la qualiditat de aquela sia am le foc petit a petit, e te aquela per la quantitat de una hora, e sufferta le malaute la mordicacio e la adhustio de lu — quar aquel atrobo mordicacio ayssi cum de foc — entro que cesse la mordicacio.	 Then place your hand over the affected area and press gently on it with your thumb and forefinger in order to drain off the excess fluid that has accumulated there, gradually increasing pressure until you feel a strong flow of water, at which point you should stop applying pressure.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am le instrument et abstergeys l’aygua cauda de tota la anqua am aygua dousa.	 Then take your hand away from the instrument and remove all excess fluid from the affected area with a second, clean cloth.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres jorns e pausa sobre aquel boder entro que sia la negror de la adhustio remauguda, e leyssa aquo per alcus jorns, e correra de lu poyredura; aquest es derier en juvament.	 Then let it rest for three days and place gauze on the affected area so that the bruising darkens over time, letting it heal in this way with a poultice every few days until healing is complete.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	 When the patient is healthy
E si la dolor es extenduda entro la coyssa o la camba, fay a lu estatua en lu que contengua aygua segon que es feyt en la anqua engualment.	 If the pain extends into the thigh or leg area, place something absorbent underneath to prevent it from spreading any further
E aquesta es la manieyra de aygua cauda, e yeu ja he scrit aquela en le tractat de la rectificacio de medicinas.	 This is a common practice in medical texts regarding the treatment of diseases.
Recipe de alcali e de caus no extinta de amdos ana partida una, e trissa les e pausa en una ola nova de la qual la partida dejos sia perforada per un petit trauc, segon la quantitat que intre en lu ray.	 A recipe for baking soda and vinegar that does not remove stains completely but reduces them in a new cloth soaked with it.
E pausa dejos le fons de la ola autra ola enveyriada, e gete sobre aquel alcali e caus viva de aygua doussa la qual cobra aquels per un dit, e pus que tu compremes aquels am la tieua ma per bona compressio, e leyssa la hola que deyssenda de lu aygua aguda en la partida dejos a la ola enveyriada.	 The cloth should be changed to another wet one and the baking soda and vinegar mixture reapplied by rubbing it on for one minute, so that any remaining stains may be removed from the damp cloth.
E aprop ajusta tota aquela aygua, e geta la sobre autra caus viva e autre alcali renovelatz, quar aquela lahoras sira de mot forta acuitat, la qual es aministrada en motas operacios de medicina e en cauterizacio dels autres membres, quar operacio fa de foc.	 Adjust the entire mixture and apply a new one with fresh baking soda on top of it. This is used in medical procedures like cauterizing other parts of the body that require fire.
E so de las medicinas alcunas am las quals es cauterizat ancha, ayssi cum tezizic e mel anacrat e caus am sabo enayssi que sian mesclatz.	 Some medicines are used in medical procedures where cauterization is wide-spread and include substances like acrid and caustic soda.
E Gualia recontet de un home dels antics la operacio e la curacio am la qual es curada dolor de anqua e de vena sciatica, e magnifiquet mot be esser de aquel, e diys que no hac necessitat de autra curacio, e quar es sanat per una veguada ayssi cum recomtec, quar fort leu aquel intrec en banh e eysic ja sa d’aquel.	 The man underwent the operation and treatment of sciatica pain in his back; and it is said that no other treatment was needed thereafter as he recovered very quickly without any further treatment.
Et es que sia pres de certarragi vert, e si no es atrobat vert, sia presa figua recent; e mot sia trissada am un pauc de grays e sia pausat sus la anqua en la qual es la dolor, o en la coyssa, o en la camba, e sia liat.	 And the first sentence is: "The passage of a certain sort has been made.
E sia layssat per la cantitat de tres horas o per la quantitat que·l malaute centa cedacio de la adhustio.	 The phrase "the quantity of three hours or the amount that the patient breathes in and out" refers to the rate at which a patient inhales and exhales air, often measured by counting breaths over time (e.g., 12 breaths per minute).
E aprop met aquel en banh e donc quan le cors de lu sia enrozat, entromet aquel en le sol, quar la dolor cessa e es sanat.	 The phrase "then let that be put on the ground" means to apply a remedy or treatment directly onto the affected area of the body when pain occurs and relief is desired, such as applying poultice (a compress soaked in warm water) directly to the chest for a heart attack victim.
E sapias que no cove que alcu use de cauteri am aquestas medicinas sino aprop la evacuacio del cors.	 The phrase "you should not use cautery with these medicines" means that while remedies or treatments may be used to alleviate pain and discomfort, they are not recommended as a primary treatment method for the condition being described here.
Mays ja Escorides diysec que quan am fenda de cabra la vena stretica es cauterizada, aprofieyra a lu mo be; e sia le cauteri am lu segon aquesta manieyra: sia presa lana e sia enbeguda en oli antic, e sia pausat entre le pous del pe e entre le fossil.	 The phrase "when the varicose vein is stretched and cauterized as follows" means that when treating varicose veins using a specific method or technique which involves placing an anti-coagulant agent within the vein itself while also applying it on the surrounding skin, and placing it between the toes of the foot.
E aprop pren fenda de cabra secca e emflasma aquela am foc entro que sia fayta carbo; e aprop pausa lu sobre la lana e leysa la entro que sia estengida.	 The phrase "then let a poultice be made on the vein and apply it to that place where there is an inflammation" means to apply a compress soaked in warm water directly onto the inflamed area of the body, often used for treating burns or injuries.
E aprop itera aquo, e no cessas far aquo entro que·l scintiment de la mordicacio pervengua entro al anqua e repausa la dolor.	 When the pain from a bite enters into the arm and relieves the pain
Et aquesta manieyra de cauteri es apelat cauteri de vaquas.	 And this treatment for cautery is called cautery of veins
Capitol .xlii.	 Chapter 62
De cauterizacio de dolor de dos.	 Treatment for joint pain
Alcunas veguadas dolor es en le dos per tropas causas, cum per cazement o per percucio o per superflua evacuacio, e per causas ad aquelas semblantz, per infusio de materia frega e humida.	 Some joints are affected by cold and dampness causes, due to obstruction or excessive evacuation of fluids or excess heat, as well as the infiltration of cold and moist matter.
E cauteri no catz sino en aquesta sola specia la qual es fayta per efusio de materia frega.	 Cautery is applied only in this specific manner that causes effusion from damp matter.
Donc cove, aprop evacuacio del malaute am pillulas fitidas e am semblant a lor, que sian faytas sobre·l dos en le qual es la dolor tres linhas segon la latitut de lu, pus que senhas am tentha en quascuna linha v cauteris o mays, segon la quantitat que ve de la tolleransa del malaute e de la vertut de lu.	 So then, in applying evacuation from the patient's bowels and similarly on their sides, let those who are skilled be placed at each line of which a few cauteries or masses according to the quantity that is required by the tolerance of the patient and its strength.
E sia fayta cauterizacio am cauteri de punt.	 It should also include a cautery point
E si vols, cauteriza am tres cauteris o am quatre am cauteri clavilh medial segon aquesta forma:	 And if you wish to apply three or four cauteries on each medial collateral ligament according to this method:
Capitol .xliii.	 Chapter 63
De cauterizacio al comensament de gilbositat.	 Cautery for the beginning of a gout attack.
Motas veguadas endeve aquesta malautia als petitz enfantz; e senhal del comensament de lu en les enfantz es que accideys sobre lor estrectura en le ale eves la elevacio e·l movement.	 The treatment for the onset of gout in children is to keep their feet elevated and still as much as possible, preventing swelling and discomfort
E atrobas en le derier espondil del dos e dels notz de lu que ja comensa a sobremontar sobre les autres spondils.	 When the second vertebra of the back has already started to swell on top of those that have already begun swelling over others,
E donc quan tu vezes aquo e voles prohibir, lahoras cauterisa aquel am cauteri que sia cercle segon aquesta forma:	 And when you want to prevent it, doctors will burn the area with a pointed cautery.
que prengua le cauteri sobre tota partida del spondilh engualment.	 Burn the Cautery all over both of them at once.
E si vols, cauteriza en le circuit del spondilh am le cauteri de punt dos linhas o tres.	 If you want to, burn a line or three on the circumference of each vertebra with a pointed Cautery.
E sian les puntz propdas entre lor.	 And hold them tightly together.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat am aquo que havem dit.	 Then close the area where you made the incision with a bandage to prevent infection.
Mays guarda que cauteri no sia administrat en gelbositat que sia fayta per spasme de nervi.	 May not administer Cautery when it is known that spasms of nerves occur as side effects,
Capitol .xliv.	 The end.
De cauterizacio de podagra e de dolor de juncturas.	 Treatment for Gout and Joint Pain
Quan dolor de juncturas son faytas per humors fregas les quals so enfundutz a quascun membre del cors, lahoras quan veno dolors en los pes, de costuma dels metges es que aquo apelen podragua propriament.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called Gout by doctors.
E donc cum es curada podagra de causa frega am manieyra de cura e no so remaugudas las dolors, lahoras las remau cauteri.	 And when curing Gout causes more pain and does not relieve the joint pain, doctors will burn the area with a Cautery.
E es que tu cauterizas aquel aprop evacuacio en le circuit de la junctura del pe am motz cauteris.	 When you have burned the Cautery into the surface of the foot's joint areas, it is customary to apply pressure on them
E sia cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	 And that cautery tool which one of these
E si es necessitat que puntz sia fayt sobre la fassia del pe, lahoras fay am cauteri de punt.	 And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery.
E si las dolors pujan entro als denolhs o a las autras juncturas, e aquo motas vetz s’endeve, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre quascun donolh am tres cauteris o quatre de tota partida am aquest cauteri olivar.	 If the pains occur in the joints or tendons, then it is customary for doctors to use three different cauteries (tools) or four of a total of six cauteries on this particular cautery.
E si motz cauteris que aquestz cauteris sian a tu necessaris, lahoras cauteriza aquel e no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri abans, sia tant solament enviro la specitut de la codena.	 If the necessary cauteries are not available to you, then doctors will cauterize that and do not move your hand towards it before or after cautery only send a message indicating its location.
E si las dolors pugan entro al donolh e·l dos, lahoras aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le sieu capitol.	 If the pains occur in both of them (the two joints), then doctors will provide the cautery mentioned earlier as one option.
E si las dolors so en las mas tant solament, e es apelada suagra, lahoras puncta en le circuit dels focils ayssi cum se revolvo, puncta en aquels dos linhas.	 If the pains are only in both of them (the two joints), and it is customarily called gout, then doctors will point towards the flames as mentioned earlier, pointing to those two lines.
E si reman de las dolors en les ditz, lahoras puncta en le cercuit dels focils sobre quascun notz e sobre la pinche de la ma.	 If there are pains in both of them (the two joints), doctors will point towards the flames on one side and over your hand as well.
E si las dolors pugan aprop alscus jorns als coydes o als muscles, lahoras cauteriza les quascus de tota part dels ajutoris.	 If the pains occur in all of them (the joints or muscles), then doctors will use all of their cauteries.
E no evacuas le malaute de bon regiment e de recepcio de medicinas, quar si es fayt bon regiment e flacma es evacuada am aquest cauteri sira sanat, Dieus ajudan.	 "The patient should not be forced to take medicine or perform any medical procedures if the ailment is caused by a cold humor that infiltrates each part of the body and pain occurs in the feet. The custom among physicians is to call this gout.
Capitol .xlv.	 "Fortieth chapter.
De cauterizacio de rompeduras.	 "Incision for removing warts.
Quan endeve rompedura en les angonars e diysendo les budels denant l’atela al genetiu, e aquo es comensan de aprop, lahoras cove que tu mandas al malaute layssar la sua comestio en le sieu dia e que use de causas leniens per so que la fenda deyssenda del sieu ventre.	 "When you need to remove a wart from the genital area and put the finger in your hand, it is customary for doctors to advise to give the patient laxative medicine that day so that the hole would close on its own.
E aprop segua le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e comanda a lu que tengua le sieu ale entro que sia foro getat o aparesca l’atela o·l budels.	 "After placing the patient between your thighs and commanding them to hold their own elbow so that it is either pressed against or pulled out of the anus.
E aprop retorna aquel am les tieus ditz e senha am tenta la ruptura sobre le os del pentenilh am senhal la extremitat del qual sia semblant a la maytat de cercle a las subiranas partidas del cors.	 "Then return to where you previously touched and try again at the rupture above the thigh, so that the extremity of which is similar in shape to half a circle on top of the head.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	 "Then proceed with the cautery as prescribed by this text:
entro que sia mot rog e gete cintilhas.	 "With a hot iron and a pair of pincers.
E aprop reduzeys le budel o l’atela a la sua conquavitat, e aprop pause la sua ma sobre le loc per so que le budel no yesqua.	 "Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent it from coming out.
E tu ja has ubert entre las coyssas del malaute e dejos lu as pausat un coyssi, et autre servent sia sus las cambas de lu, e autre sus le pietz de lu, le qual tengua las suas mas.	 "You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs and placed a cushion under them. Another servant should place their hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out.
E aprop pausa le cauteri sobre aquel senhal am la tua ma am cauteri stan dreyt, e te aquel entro que am lu consieguas le os del pentenilh entro al mieg del duiduni; e itera am aquel autra veguada si a tu aquel no has conseguit en la primieyra veguada entro al os.	 "When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout among doctors.
E observa saviament del ysiment del budel en la hora de la tua cauterizacio, que no comburas aquel budel per so que sobre le malaute no vengua in mort o autre gran malicia.	 "Observe the bowels when making your cautery incision to prevent it from coming out and causing harm or great malice.
E sapias que quan tu am le cauteri no atenhas le os, no confereys la tua operacio.	 "Know that if you forget to hold your breath during the cautery, do not perform the operation.
E cove que·l cauteri dels enfants sia subtil segon le gran e la mesura de lor.	 "The cautery for children is more subtle than it is for adults in terms of size and measure.
E aprop cura le loc del cauteri per tres dias am boder entro que sia remauguda la scara del foc.	 "Prepare the area around the cautery with three days until the scar has faded from view.
E aprop cura aquel am les autres enguentz entro que sia sanat.	 "Prepare the others attending into such that they are well-treated.
E le malaute sia jasent sobre le sieu dos per xl dias entro que sia sigillat le loc e la plagua.	 "The patient's thighs must be covered for 12 days until the area and cloth have healed completely.
E cove que pauses le nutriment de lu segon la longitut del temps de la curacio de lu le qual le linesca le ventre de lu, e que le budel no yesca fora deves le esforsament de guerir.	 "Know that you must pause the patient's nourishment according to the length of their healing time until they regain control and prevent the intestine from coming out.
E aprop quan se vol levar aprop xl dias, lahoras aministra liament decentment fayt, e tengua aquel per autres xl jorns.	 "Prepare when it is necessary to remove for 12 days; then the patient will be given a treatment and must stay there for another 12 days.
E sia mermat de trebalh e de replecio de vianda e de beure, e de votz vehementz, quar quan usa de aquest regiment de sanacio entiera sira sanat.	 When one uses this regimen of health care, they will become healthy
E yeu diyre la curacio de las rupturas en las autras partidas del ventre, e so al comensament, e vols que no treguan, lahoras cauterisa la ruptura d’aquel am cauteri redon segon la quantitat de lu, e sia aquo que es exhurit de la codena ayssi cum la tersa partida de lu; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit, e no es ajustat.	 Cure the rupture in these two parts of the belly and so forth, first cauterize the rupture with this amount, after which you can proceed to another cautery if necessary, otherwise it is recommended that you do as previously advised
E ja diyssero alcus primiers que ruptura sia cauterizada am cauteri triangular segon aquesta forma, pus que es senhada am tenta:	 The first rupture should be cauterized with a triangular cautery in this manner.
e es pausada linha que eys per la latitut en le latz pus sobira de la ruptura, e autra linha al desus; e depausa la tua ma am un cauteri clavilh, mays le primier cauteri es pus leugier e milhor.	 Place a line above the latitude and below it place another, then stop your hand on top of that cautery, so that the first cautery will be lifted up higher and further.
Capitol .xlvi.	 The 64th chapter.
De cauterizacio de torcio.	 Cauterization of the throat
Quan endeve en alscus membres per cazement o per percussio dolor e persevera aquela dolor per lonc temps e no comfereys al u curacio am medicinas, lahoras cove que cauterizes am cauteri de punt.	 When a member comes to have pain or continues with that pain for an extended period of time and does not respond to other treatments recommended by medical professionals, then the doctors recommend cauterization using this particular cautery.
E sia le cauteri de tot membre segon la magnitut e la parvitat de lu, e vertut e develitat de lu, e locacio de torcio e dolor de lu.	 The cauteries should be applied to all the members in proportion and size to them, location of the throat and pain that occurs.
Donc si·s sanat per le primier cauteri, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera sobre lu le cauteri; quar de costuma de aquelas dolors es que sian punctatz de membre ad aquel membre le qual apropinque al u, per que cove que consieguas aquels am cauteri entro que·l malaute sia sanat.	 Therefore if the first cautery works well, it is; and otherwise, repeat over them the cautery, as the pains that occur are of the member to which it is applied, in order for you to ensure that those who come from these am cauteries will become healthy
Capitol .xlvii.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
De cauterizacio de lepra.	 Cautery for leprosy
Les lebros alcunas veguadas am cauteri per mot gran juvament, e magerment si la specia de lepra que es fayta per putrefaccio de flacma e de melencolia.	 The liver abscesses are cautered with great caution because the type of leprosy that is present causes decomposition and melanosis (a condition where the skin becomes brown or black).
E donc cum tu vols cauterizar aquel, considera si la lepra es comussan e as aquela curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no deysen, ni esta, e temes sobre le malaute que la corrupcio comprehenda tot le cors de lu e tota la compleccio de lu, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le cap am v cauteris: am un en le mieg loc del cap, e am le segon pus dejos de lu, eves le front a la fi dels cabels; e amdos sobre dos corns; e am un detras, sobre la nuca o servitz.	 When you want to cauterize that one, consider if the leprosy is contagious and whether it's cured in such a way as has been mentioned in the division and not otherwise; do not fear about infecting the entire body of him or her with corruption, so burn it over his head: over both eyebrows, over the second eyebrow, above the forehead to the end of the hair; and also on two horns, behind, over the neck.
E ultima la tua ma am le cauteri un pauc entro que emprema en le os una petita empressio, e de lu sian deslocadas las scorsas, per so que la expiracio de grossas vapors sia alleujada de lu; e cauteriza sobre la melsa segon que es precesit.	 Lastly, put your hand over it for a few minutes to let the large fumes pass away and then burn on the same place as before.
E si la lepra es ja expanduda sobre le malaute e apar manifestament, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquel am aquels cauteris les quals havem ditz en le cap; e am cauteri sobre la extremitat del nas, e am dos cauteris sobre las doas maysselas, e am dos cauteris sobre dos spondils del col, e am vi cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e am un gran sobre les spondils prop de la coeta, e un sobre la cotea , e am dos sobre las anquas, e am un sobre quascuna anqua, e am dos sobre les donols e un sobre quascun donolh, e am dos sobre les coydes, e am dos sobre les muscles, e am dos las teneretutz del sieu pietz; e cauteriza aquel sobre totas las juncturas dels ditz de las mas e dels pes, e sobre quascun talon dels sieus pes, e sobre les foscils de las suas mas.	 If the leprosy is already spread over the patient and is clearly visible, then burn it with these cauteries as mentioned in the head; also on the nostrils' extremity, two on both buttocks, two on both spine ends, one on each shoulder, one on each elbow, two on both legs, two on both arms, two on their chests, and all over the joints of their body.
E guarda te dels nervis les quals so sobre le talo que no comburas aquels.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
E alcunas veguadas es cauterizat am un cauteri sobre le os del pentenilh e am autre sobre la boca del stomac, e autre sobre le fietge.	 And if you need to make a puncture on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery.
E sapias que quant mays ajustas cauteris, tant es mays juvatiu e mays conferent; e sapias que le malaute no ha en le cauteri dolor, ayssi cum han les sas, per so quar le cors de lu ja es stupefayt.	 You know that when you adjust the cautery too much, it is painful and unpleasant; you also know that a patient who has had an abscess without pain will not have pain from applying heat to the cautery.
E cove que les cauteris sian grans o paucs segon les membres e las juncturas segon que es precedit de las specias dels ferramentz.	 You know that the cauteries are either large or small depending on the members and joints, as well as before applying heat to them.
E aprop cura le cauteri am farina de errs coyta am mel e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	 Then return the cautery with a mixture of salt water or alcohol and another application inside so that it may heal.
Capitol .xlviii.	 The 48th chapter.
De cauterizacio de stupor.	 Cautery for insanity.
Quan alcun membre es stabozit o adormit e es curat am medicinas, olis e emplastres, e no es sanat, lahoras tu cauteriza aquel membre stabozit am cauteris segon que merita la grandesa del membre o la parvitat de lu.	 When any member is stabbed or dies and treated with medicine, it swells up, and if the cautery does not help, then you cauterize that member with a larger cautery or one of lesser size.
E sia lo tieu cauteri intrant la ispicitut de la codena un pauc.	 And when introducing the cautery into the wound very little by little.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	 Then return it to its place so that it may heal.
E alscunas veguadas es cauterizada alcuna stupor le qual endeve a las mas e als pes, e als spondils del dos e ves le eysiment dels nervis les quals mavon aquel membre, e es remauguda la stupor.	 Some veins are cauterized to remove pain from the most and feet, as well as the elbows of two and four, and it is reduced by removing the nerves connected with that member, causing the pain to subside.
Mays no prusuma sobre aquo sino aquel que es savi en la anotomia dels membre e de la egressio dels nervis tot le cors moventz.	 This sentence translates to: "Here comes what must be done regarding the anatomy of the limbs and their exit from the nerves throughout the body.
Capitol .xlix.	 The number 49 is used in place of 'L' in Capitaux, which are French words for "The" or "Capitols". This means that this text might be referring to Chapter XLIX of a medieval medical treatise written in Latin.
De cauterizacio de albaras que es morfea.	 The translation is: The cautery should be used on veins that are inflamed.
Quan albaras es antiqua e no comfereys a lu alcu dels enguentz de medicina, lahoras tu cauteriza sobre aquela am cauteri preon un pauc segon la quantitat de la specitut de la codena entro que sia remauguda la blancor e la color de lu, e la color de lu sia mudada.	 The translation is: When veins are ancient and do not come up with the help of medical procedures, doctors should cauterize over that area using a pointed cautery for a short time until the whiteness and coloring of it re-appear, or if its color changes.
E aprop cura aquel am farina de errs e de lentilhas am oli rozat e am folhas de arnagrosa, e am sanc de colomba o am sanc de yronda, da cascuna sia una partida e totas sian mescladas, e aprop sia linit un drap e sus le loc sia pausat entro que sia sanat.	 The translation is: Then apply a poultice of meal and lentil broth, and the leaves of nasturtium, and the bark of wormwood, from all which are mixed together in one mass, then place it on top so that they may remain until the illness has passed.
Capitol .l.	 This refers to Chapter L of a medieval medical treatise written in Latin.
De cauterizacio de cranc.	 The translation is: Cautery should be used on ulcers.
Quan canser es comensan e vols aquel ostar, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri de cercle en le circuit de lu ayssi cum es revolgut.	 The translation is: When cancer is suspected and you want to remove it, doctors will cauterize the area with a circular cautery as soon as possible in order for it to be cut off.
E diysero les savis que sia cauterizat am lo derier cauteri en le mieg loc; mays a mi no es vist aquo, quar temi que sia ulcerat, e yeu ja e vist aquo alcunas veguadas.	 They said that it should be cautorized with the same cautery as used on the previous area in order to avoid ulcers appearing elsewhere.
E es pus dreyturier que sia cauterizat en le circuit de lu am cercle ayssi cum avem dit, o am motz cauteris.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and if it's necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery
Capitol .li.	 The following sentence translates as: "The upper lip.
De cauterizacio de adubilati.	 Cauterization of hemorrhoids.
Quan alcun adubilati es tardat en maturacio, e aysso es per la superfluitat fazen aquela, o per etat del malaute, quar es vielh en decrepitat, de pauc sanc, o per le temps, e tu vols festinar en la maturacio de adubilati; lahoras cauteriza en le circuit de lu am motz cauteris petitz punctan; e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela fastinara en maturacio.	 When hemorrhoids are slow to heal or when they become infected, causing pain and discomfort in the area of the anus, it is customary for doctors to perform a cauterization on them at that point.
Mays si tu vols la perforacio de lu am cauteri, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: e depausa aquel en le mieg loc de adubilati entro que penetre la codena.	 If you wish to perform a cauterization on the hemorrhoids, do it as follows and keep in mind this is how to do it: first stop that cautery between anus and external opening of the anus so that no part enters into the codeña (rectum).
E si le cauteri en aquel loc que es pus dejos, per so que le cors del brac sia alleujat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	 If you've already stopped it in that location to prevent the hands from being affected; and make sure to keep it there for safety.
Capitol .lii.	 The following sentence translates as: "The lower lip.
De cauterizacio de corrodent.	 Cauterization of hemorrhoids.
Corrodent es corrupcio ambulant en le membre, la qual corrodeys aquel ayssi cum a foc comedent lenha secca.	 Corrosive is a contagious condition that affects the member, which will spread to other areas with a dry heat.
Donc si vezes aquel corrodent en loc le qual sufferte cauteri am foc, lahoras tu igneys cauteris clavils motz paucs, e grans segon que es convenent en aquel loc en le qual es corrodent.	 If there is a corrosive condition in the location where you perform cauterization with heat, then proceed to cauterize any nearby affected areas and large ones if it's convenient for that area when the corrosive condition exists.
E aprop cauteriza aquel de tota partida entro que erradiques tota la corrosio e no romangua alcuna causa de lu.	 When a person has an abscess in his body that cannot be cured by any cause, then cautery is applied to the abscess at every opportunity
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres dias, e pausa sobre les locs cauterizats solpre trissat am oli mesclat entro que las scaras sian totas eradicadas e tota la corrupcio.	 Cautery was applied for three days, and the cauterized areas were soaked in a mixture of vinegar until all scabs were removed and all corruption had been cured.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz carn engendrantz.	 The abscess is being treated with hot compresses.
Mays si aprop tres dias vezes que la carn nasca sana en la qual no es corrupcio, bo es; mays sino, lahoras itera le cauteri sobre aquo que es romas en les locs corrumputz.	 If three days have passed and the affected skin becomes healthy without any corruption, then you should proceed to repeat the application of cautery in those areas that are corrupted.
E corrodent es medicat alcunas vetz am medicina aguda, quar aquela es meza en loc de cauteri.	 If medical treatment is working for some cases, it may be time to discontinue cauterization as the abscess may heal on its own.
Mays empero cauteri am foc es de pus leugier juvament.	 Cautery should only be used in young people when absolutely necessary
E yeu ja e dit la curacio de lu am medicina aguda en la divisio, e donc pren aquela quan de lu auras endegencia.	 If you have determined that medical treatment is working for this individual and they are showing improvement, then cautery can be discontinued as the abscess may heal on its own.
Capitol .liii.	 I am finished answering your questions.
De cauterizacio de claus e dels autres semblants.	 Cautery should not be used for these cases, and others similar ones.
Motas veguadas endeve a las partidas dejos del pe malautia que s’apela clau, e es causa grossa, fentrada, la qual ladeys le pe; e cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, so es cauteri am foc e cauteri am aygua cauda.	 Cautery should be used only in cases where the patient has a large ulcer on their foot that is called an abscess and its cause has been determined, such as when it arises from eating or drinking the affected liquid, and cautery can also be applied to those areas for two days if necessary.
Mays cauteri am foc es que igniscas le cauteri concau semblant a pena de voltor, le qual sia feyt de ferr segon la quantitat la qual contengua le clau de tota partida, e sia de subtils marguas.	 "You need to apply the cautery with great care and make sure that it is applied equally in all areas, especially those of great sensitivity.
E aprop pausa aquel ignit sobre le clau, e aprop revolveys la tua ma am le cauteri en le circuit del clau entro que·l cauteri pervengua a la profunditat del clau.	 "Then make sure to place your hand on top of the incision and apply pressure over it in order to control bleeding from within.
E leyssa aquel per tres dias entro que comense getar brac.	 "You need to wait for three days before you start feeling relief.
E aprop emplastre aquel am malvas salvatges trissadas am sal, e leyssa le emplastre sobre aquel per una nuoyt, quar aquel sira eradicat de las suas razitz.	 "Then place it on a clean surface and let the paste sit over that for some time until it is completely dry.
E aprop cura le loc am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanat.	 "Then apply the treatment to the affected area, making sure not to damage healthy skin in the process.
E si so no-convertitz, e motas veguadas accideysso en la superficia del cors, majorment en las mas e les pes, lahoras cove que tu aministres en aquels cauteri am aygua, e es que prenguas una quannula de eram o de ferr o de pena de voltor, e pausa aquela sobre le clau; e aprop geta en la quanula de aygua cauda pauca cantitat, e rete la tua ma, e tu revolveys aquela am compressio de la tua ma de tot, e sia enpremut le marge de la canula en la razit del clau, e atrobara la aygua cauda via al preon de la razit del cau; e espera le malaute un pauc la mordicacio de l’aygua cauda per una hora, e aprop remau aquela, quar le clau am las suas razitz sira erredicat.	 "If you do not see any improvement or the cautery burns your skin, just take it off and reapply with a little water pressure for another hour until the pain subsides.
E ayssi fe am aquels la i aprop l’autre entro que venguas sobre totz les quals de lor so en le cors.	 "Then go to step two by placing your hand on top of all those areas in order from smallest to largest.
E aprop cura aquels pus que las razitz dels claus so erradicadas am aquo dels enguentz les quals la carn ve engenran.	 When the blisters on the feet are torn open by cold humors, flesh is consumed where they appear.
Capitol .liiii.	 The first sentence translates to: "When blisters on the feet tear from cold humors, the flesh consumes where it appears.
De cauterizacio de tremor.	 Cautery for trembling.
Quan endeve ad alcu tremor per freg en le nervi o per febre de causa frega, o per autra causa semblant, lahoras cove que tu cauterises aquel am quatre cauteris o am v sobre les spondils del dos, entre quascun spondilh am un cauteri; e am cauteri en le pietz de lu, e sobre l‘estomac de lu, am cauteri olivar.	 When you need to perform a trembling cure on the nerve or from fever causing coldness, or for any other cause similar to that, it is customary that you make four cuts with four needles or use one needle in each of the two sides, and also with the stomach of him, and over his esophagus.
E la tremor de lu se repausa e festina la sanetat de la malautia frega.	 Trembling will cease and restore the health to those afflicted by illness.
Capitol .lv.	 The last sentence translates to: "Trembling will cease and restore the health to those afflicted by illness.
De cauterizacio de albati accidentz al cors.	 Cautery for accidents in the body.
Quan en le cors so espellitz albati, e so pustulas fendas las quals so feytas de materias grossas corruptas; donc cove al comensament cum apareyso, que sia cauterizat sobre tot cap de la fistola am cauteri subtil am fustz de mirt, la extremitat del qual es estenduda am foc; o am razitz de erestologia longua; o am cauteri lentecular.	 When the body has lost its teeth and the pustules spread that which was caused by corrupting gross materials, then from the beginning it is customary to cauterize over all of the surface with subtle cautery on the extremities of the hand whose fingers are extended towards light; or on the long finger.
E alscunas veguadas es cauteri ademamil al comensament de la sua expulcio segon aquesta manieyra; e no so cregudas, e es disrumpuda la superfluitat fazens aquels, et sana de aquels.	 These veins are cauterized from the start of their expulsion in order to prevent them and remove the excess that they cause.
Mays empero cove que aquo sia fayt aprop evacuacio am fleubotomia.	 The first sentence translates to: It is customary for physicians to perform an evacuation after a phlebotomy in cases of gout.
Capitol lvi.	 This line seems incomplete or incorrect. Could you please provide the rest of the sentence?
De cauterizacio de fluex de sanc accident per incisio de arceria.	 Cautery for an incision to relieve a swelling
Tropas veguadas endeve fluex de arceria que es inciza deves la plagua la qual endeve deforo, o deves la incizio de apostemas o cauteri del membre, e alor semblantz, e es dificil remaura aquel.	 It is difficult to remove a swelling that has been incised on the body part or member, and it's hard for doctors to repair the damage done through incisions.
Donc cum accideys ad alcu aquo, lahoras tu·t coyta am la tua ma a l’orrifici de la arceria, e pausa sobre aquel le tieu dit endic estrenh aquel motas veguadas entro que sia ostat le fluex del sanc dejos le tieu dit, e que non yesqua.	 When this happens to the joints and swelling occurs in the feet or toes, doctors must cauterize those areas gently with a pointed cautery to prevent them from coming out, lest they escape.
E aprop pausa en le foc les cauteris olivars paucs e grantz, per nombre motz, e exsuffla sobre aquels entro que sian mot ignitz.	 And if you need to make a small opening or incision with the pointed cautery, do so carefully and slowly, one by one, and exhale over it as you perform each incision.
E aprop pren de aquels un petit o un gran segon le loc e la plagua en la qual es rompuda la arteria, sobre aquela vena festinantment pus que auras remaugut le tieu dit, e te le cauteri entro que sia abcindit e restreyt aquel sanc.	 And if it's necessary to make a small or large incision in the location where an artery is ruptured and there is bleeding from that vein, over which you apply the cautery gently so as to cut off the blood flow, and then close up the wound with a stitch.
E si le sanc es expellit de l’orrifici de la arteria quan tu remaues le tieu dit e extringeys le cauteri, lahoras pren la un autre cauteri coytadament dels cauteris les quals en le foc son preparatz, e donc no cesses fer aquo un aprop autre entro que le sanc sia restrengit.	 And if the artery is expelled from the incision when you remove the first tie and extract the cautery, doctors should take another cautery immediately near those cauteries that are ready in the field of view, so as not to miss doing this again once the wound has been closed up.
E guarda te que no comburas le nervi que aqui es, e que vengua sobre le malaute autra malicia.	 "And please remember that you should not touch the nerves here.
E sapias que quan de l’arteria flueys sanc, lahoras no es possible en aquels restrenge la sanc, e majorment quan l’arteria es gran, si no am una de quatre manieyras: o am cauteri ayssi quo dit havem, o am extraccio quan no es extrayta, quar quan es extrayta las extremitatz de lu miels son comburidas e es restreyt le sanc, o que sia liat am fiel o am liament per fort strectura, o que sian pausadas sobre lu medicinas de las quals la vertut es restringir la sanc; e sian strengudas am pulvinar am costriccio decent.	 "When an artery ruptures severely, the pain cannot be relieved in these cases, unless one of four measures is taken: cauterize it if you have materials to do so, or extract it if not extracted yet, or when it has been extracted and both hands are free from obstruction but the extremities are numb with pain; or lie still and let a doctor bind it tightly; or suspend it with fine threads.
Mays aquel que aministra restriccio decent de lu am liament e am strictura am draps o per posicio de causas comburentz e de semblantz, no comfereys sino tart.	 "The one who administers restriction by binding or restraint on the limb and on the dressing or through causing pain and constricting, unless it interferes with breathing.
Mays si aquo endeve ad alcu e no sia le metge present ni medicina, lahoras obre am pausament del dit indic sobre le orrifici de aquela vena ayssi cum havem dit, e entenda a la gran costreccio de lu entro que le sanc sia ostat de la sobirana partida de la plagua, e sobre la arceria le dit no sia remaugut; e de sobre la arceria sia aspergit am aygua frega de mot gran fregiditat entro que·l sanc sia congilat e engrossat; e mays cossire en que ha de cauteri o de medicina necessitat.	 "Then the doctor should tell it that this is an indication of the vein, and understand its great circumference which may occur from the swelling of the lower part of the leg below the ankle joint, or from a hernia; and also to understand that if it is swollen with heat due to coldness causing blood vessels to contract.
Comensa la segonda partida.	 "Begin the second sentence.
De incisio e perforacio e ventozas e de fleubotomia e de plaguas e de lor semblants.	 "Incision, perforation, vomiting and phlebotomy are examples of such procedures.
Aquestas son paraulas de Albucazis.	 These are the rules for Albucasis
Ja havem dit en le primier capitol tota malautia en la qual cauteri am foc es convenient e am medicina comburent, e las occasios e las causas de lu, e les instrumentz en aquels necessaris am las formas dels cauteris; e he ordenatz les capitols de la subiranetat del cap entro als pes.	 The first rule is to make a thorough examination of the patient when it is convenient and necessary for medicine. In order to do this, one must know the various occasions or causes that exist, as well as the instruments required in these situations; afterwards the capitals are collected from the head downwards.
E yeu procesire en aquest capitol per aquela meteysa guisa, per que sia alliujat lo querent aquo, lahoras sobre aquo que aura demandat.	 Proceed with this rule for that reason and as a result of which it is necessary to ask about the ailment or complaint that occurs here
E denant que yeu comense aquo, cove, fils, que aprenguatz que en aquest capitol es per terror aquo que es en le capitol primier de cauterizacio.	 When you begin this rule, it is important to understand that in the first capital of cautery there are rules related to the use of cauteries.
E per aquo que cove que sia en lu gran cautela, quar en la operacio la qual es en aquest capitol motas veguadas catz evacuacio la qual es am sanc am le qual esta la vida deves la aspersio de la vena o incisio sobre l’apostema o apercio de exsitura o puracio de la plagua o extraccio de sageta o incizio de peyra e a lor semblantz.	 In order to perform this operation, you must make sure that no veins are perforated during the evacuation of feces or urine from the anus or incision on the external genitalia or removal of hemorrhoids or excision of fistulas or perforation of any tissue or exit wounds; all of these things should be avoided.
E de totz aquels so acompanhatz temor e tremor e en le mas de lor catz la mort.	 With every act that accompanies fear and trembling, more danger is increased and death may occur
E yeu amonesti vos que sobre vos no caia aquo en le qual es esitacio, quar alcunas veguadas cazo deves vos manieyras de homes am manieyras motas de malautias.	 Please remember that in situations such as this one, you must be careful to avoid causing any harm or injury to others as well as yourself and to seek medical treatment for any ailments or illnesses that may occur.
E de lor es alcu que s’irays am la sua malautia e es leugiera deves lu la mort, e aysso per la vehemensia de aquo que troba de sa malautia, e per longuesa de la malautia de lu, e am la malautia es paor la qual significa mort.	 When the disease is located in the groin and if its severity leads to death, then because of the seriousness of this disease, and due to its lengthiness, it can be called a fatal disease
E de aquels es le qual dona a tu son aver e ditta, tu esperant am aquel sanetat, e la sieua malautia es perniciosa.	 It is the one that gives you hope and helps your son to recover, but its disease can be fatal
E donc no cove que tu consentas en aquel que ve a vos del qual es aquesta manieyra; e la vostra cautela sia major que covesitat e la vostra rapacitat; e no presumatz alcuna causa sobre aquo sino aprop sciencia certa la qual virifica aquo deves vos, e al qual perve successio lausabla.	 Do not consent to those who come from whom this desire arises; and your caution should be greater than prudence and caution; do not make any claim about it unless you have certain knowledge that qualifies for this purpose.
E usatz en la curacio de totz vostres malautes de pronosticacio e indicacio de lu al qual es salut convertida, quar en aquel es a vos ajutori sobre adquisicio de fama e de memoria, de lausor e de gloria.	 Take care of all your diseases with diagnosis and prognosis for the one who is healed; in that case it will be helpful to you on acquisition of fame and memory, on healing and glory.
O, filhs, Dieus en vos spire le sieu entendement e no oste a vos direccio e proteccio, quar aquo es en la sua ma.	 Oh sons, God bless your understanding and not give you direction and protection, because that is in his hand.
E yeu e ordenat aquest capitol distingent per capitols segon que precedit en le capitol de cauteris, de la cura del cap entro als pes, per que sia a vos alleujat aquo que demandatz de aquo e del qual havetz necessitat.	 You have organized this chapter distinct from the previous chapters on cautery, care for the head to legs, so that it is beneficial to you that you require in this and which you need.
Capitol primier.	 First chapter
De la curacio de aygua la qual es contenguda en le cap dels enfantz.	 Care of the water contained in the head of children.
Sapias que aquesta malautia motas veguadas endeve als enfantz deves le enfantament e quan la noyrissa estrenh le cap del enfant ses livitat.	 When a malady has become so severe that it causes convulsions in infants, causing their heads to jerk upwards and life is lost from them as they convulse.
E alcunas veguadas endeve per causa amaguada la qual no es saubuda.	 Some causes are covered by this remedy which you should not use without consulting a doctor first.
Mays yeu no vi aquesta malautia sino en les enfantz; e a totz aquels les quals yeu vi se coytec la mort, e per ayssi es a mi vist layssada obra en aquels.	 This remedy is not useful for treating this kind of illness in adults.
E yeu e vist que un enfant le cap del qual era d’aygua omplit, e·l cap de lu era totjorn ayssi magnificat entro que ceser no podia sobre si meteys per la grandesa del sieu cap, e mays que la humiditat fe aucmentada entro que foc mort.	 The infant's head was so large that it could not be restrained by the force of the blow; and because of its small size it only caused death from suffocation.
E aquesta humiditat o es agreguada entre la codena e l’os, o es agreguada dejos le os sobre le ciphac.	 The amount of moisture was excessive between the nose and the eye socket or between the eye and the cheekbone.
Quar la operacio en aquel si la humiditat es entre la codena e l’os e le apostema es pauc, lahoras cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am una fissura en la latitut, e sia la longitut de la fissura cays dos notz entro que corra la humiditat, e aquesta es la forma del spatum:	 When performing the operation if the moisture is between the nose and the eye socket but there are few openings, doctors say to make a slit in the latitude of the head at an angle so that its length is two inches.
E donc si la humiditat es mays augmentada e l’apostema es major, lahoras son aqui dos fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	 And if the moisture is greatly increased and there are more openings, doctors say to make two slits according to this method.
E si la humiditat es dejos le os, senhal de lu es que tu vezes la comissuras del cap ubertas de tota partida e l’aygua es spremuda quan tu compremes aquela am la tieua ma a las partidas dedintz e no es aquo a tu amaguat.	 If the moisture is only in the eye, then when you cover your head with a cloth and water runs from it to all parts of the face and eyes are swollen because of this, do not worry about that; you should be fine.
Cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am tres fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	 When you get to this point in the medical procedure, make three incisions on your head as follows.
e aprop la inscizio extratz ne tota la humiditat; e aprop strenh las fissuras am draps e plumassols; e aprop enbroca aquo de sobre am vi e oli entro al quint dia, e aprop deslia le liament e cura la plagua am tentas e enguentz, e strenh le cap am equalitat; e mange le malaute am vianda secca de pauca humiditat entro que·l membre sia confortat e sanat.	 Then open up the incision and remove all excess moisture from it; close off any remaining wounds on the head, forehead, cheeks, and chin; finally, ensure that you have a clean cloth to wipe away sweat or other moisture before covering the patient's face with another one.
E es autra manieyra de incisio, que consideras hon apar la magnitut del apostema e la colleccio de l’aygua, quar alcunas veguadas es mays en le occipicii, o en la partida denant, o en la destra, o en la sinistra; e donc aten am la incizio on appar le apostema e la replecio de l’aygua, e fen aquo segon que a tu es miels possible.	 The next step is to consider the size of the incision and placement of water droplets. Some may accumulate in the occipital region or at the top of the forehead, others on the right side or left side; ensure that you have placed them such that they will not be a problem when it's time for closure.
Et observa que no inscindas la arteria e endevengua flueys de sanc e mora le malaute per aquel flux de sanc am evacuacio de humiditat.	 And make sure you do not damage the artery and avoid having to remove any excess blood from the patient as a result of moisture evacuation.
Capitol .ii.	 After that, there are two other procedures to consider:
De inscisio de las arterias las quals so aprop las aurelhas, apeladas hilasseysse.	 The incision for the arteries located on the side of the head, called iliooccipitalis, must be made in a specific location near the base of the skull.
Capitol segon.	 The second procedure is to make an incision along the lateral border of the face, which may cause the patient discomfort if it's not done carefully; it also needs to take into account that this is a sensitive area and therefore requires extra care in order to be properly sutured later on.
Quan endeveno ad alcu catars o raumas als huelhs o al pietz, e es antiquat aquo, e no confereys en aquo la curacio de las medicinas, lahoras la deriera curacio en aquest es incizio de aquelas dos arterias.	 When the end of a catheter reaches or touches the bladder or chest, and it is customary to do so, not to interfere in this by the medical treatment, then start caring for these two arteries
E donc cove quan tu vols inscidir aquelas que le malaute raza lo sieu cap, e aprop fregua le loc am drap aspre per so que aparan las arcerias, e aprop sia strengut le col del malaute am alcu drap; e aprop considera on polsa la vena; e les locs de quascuna sobre les locs les quals so aprop las aurelhas depremutz, e tant se occultan sino en alcus homes.	 When you want to insert those in the male's anus cap, and put a drape around it so that they don't come out, and stretch the male's collar around, and consider placing one on each side of the artery, but do not cover the vein, as these places are hidden from others.
E aprop senha sobre la arceria am tenta, e aprop inscideys quascuna am le spatum de quascuna partida agut am inscizio pervenient entro al os, e sia aquo per la latitut del cap.	 Stretch the artery around and insert it into each of the wounds in order to prevent it from coming out through the nose, and that's how you do it for the latitude of the head.
E si vols, entromet le spatum dejos la arteria e trenqua aquala a las inciden a las partidas desus.	 If you want, insert the artery into both of those wounds.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio cays dos ditz ajustatz, quar quan alcuna vena es inscizida le sanc es eyssit am egressio pulsatil, le qual saut deforo per saut frequent.	 The length of the insertion can be adjusted to two digits, so that if one vein is being inserted and it pulsates during exit, which indicates a frequent pulse, this will help you determine the problem.
Mays si la arceria no apareys al cintiment, lahoras cove que tu mesures de la aurelha la quantitat del spazi de tres ditz, e aprop senha am tenta, e fen entro al os.	 If an artery does not appear in the opening, then have them measure from the outside edge of the aperture to three digits, and put it into the nose.
E aquo que cove getar del sanc es quantitat de vi unc., e fort leu ne geta de lu mays o mens, e tot aquo es segon la quantitat la qual appareys de la vertut del malaute e de la replecio de la arceria de lu.	 "The quantity of life that has been taken away from the patient is equal to or greater than half.
E aprop considera la plagua, e donc si reman sobre le os alcuna causa del ciphac, lahoras inscindys aquo per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	 "Considering the plague and assuming there is no other cause for the pain, it is customary to apply a pointed cautery here in order to prevent the pain from spreading further.
E aprop strenh la plagua am plumassols e am liamentz de drap de li, e aprop cura aquela am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	 "Then squeeze the plague with the edge of a cloth or similar material and place it within an incision to allow for healing.
Capitol .iii.	 "The third book on capitol letters.
De extraccio de las arcerias las quals so en las templas.	 "Extract the arteries that are in the temples.
Quan ad alcu accideys emigranea antiqua o catertz agutz, per humiditatz agrimonials e per qualiditat en les lacertz des templas, o sodo antiqua vehement e semblantz ad aquels, e es medicat am las manieyras de curacio de medicina e aquo no comfereys, lahoras nos hem sproatz en aquestas malautias extraccio de las arcerias en les templas, o cauterizacio de aquelas ayssi cum havem mostrat.	 "When the ancient and cold humors are present in the temples, or when they are very intense and similar to those, doctors apply a cautery to these arteries as well, doing so because it is not compatible with their medical practices.
E la manieyra de la operacio e extracio de aquelas es que·l malaute raza les pels les quals son en les templas; e entenda a la arceria apparent en le templar quar ela es a tu mostrada per le sieu pols, e·s occultada sino en paucs homes per vehemencia de freg.	 "The operation and extraction of these are done to the patient's extremities where they appear in the temples; and understand that the artery appears in the temple if it is visible on your own hand, but hidden from most people due to its faintness.
E si a tu es occultada, lahoras le col del malaute sia strengut am alcun drap; e aprop fregua le loc am un drap aspre o evapora le loc am aygua cauda entro que aparesca a tu la arceria manifestament.	 "If the artery is hidden, doctors apply pressure to the patient's groin with any cloth or similar material; and then apply heat on the area until the artery becomes visible.
E lahoras tu pren le spatum del qual aquesta es la forma:	 When you have opened up this space, which is its form
E aprop tu scorja la codena am aquel am facilitat entro que pervenguas a la arceria; e aprop geta en lu onti e extratz aquela a las partidas sobiranas entro que extraguas aquela de la codena e descobras aquela de las tunicas las quals so dejos aquela, de tota partida.	 You will remove the cordage from this form, and place it in an arrangement such that when you pass through to the other side, you can extract what is on that part of the body, and uncover what is on the parts below
Mays si la arteria es subtil, lahoras envolveys aquela am la extremitat del oncii, e aprop inscindeys de aquela una partida segon la quantitat per la qual sian alonguadas las extremitatz de lu e sian contraytas, e no endevindra flux de sanc, quar si no so inscididas no pujara le sanc de tot.	 If the artery is subtle, it wraps around that part of the body from both sides and goes down to below the ankle, so if you don't cover it adequately, there will be flow downwards towards your feet, meaning that the blood flow downwards towards your feet may increase if not covered
E aprop evacua del sanc de vi unc. entro a tres.	 Remove the wound from here to three
E si la arceria es gran, lahoras cove que tu lies aquela en dos locs am fiel dopble fort de ceda o am cordas a lonc, e no coyte a lu putrefaccio denant la consolidacio de la plagua e endevengua flux de sanc.	 If the artery is large, it wraps around and goes from here to under the arm on both sides tightly closed or cords at its length, so if not covered properly there will be a buildup of putrefaction inside the cavity and may cause blood flow blockage
E aprop incideys la superfluitat la qual es entre dos liamentz; e fay aquo en aquela hora o aprop autra ora.	 You take away the excess which is between two sheets, or you do this at that time, or another way.
E si vols, cauteriza aquela am cauteri entro al os am cauteri cutellar entro que sian incididas las extramitatz de lu, e stara en loc de aquela meteyssa obra.	 If you want to, cauterize that with a pointed cautery on the cheek next to where the arteries are cut into the skin, and leave it open where it is
E es milhor obra sino que·l malaute aia febre o es de escalfada compleccio; quar cauteri es de aquelas causas que ajudan a las humiditatz finidoras, e donc es milhor en juvament.	 "The patient has been suffering from fever or a scalding sensation of the entire body.
E cove aprop la extraccio de las arcerias que huomplas le loc de coto antic, e sian pausatz sobre lu polvils decentement fayt, e aprop sia curat am medicinas seccas fazen naysser la carn e am calguas entro que sia sanat.	 "The doctor applies the lancet to cut into a small part of the patient's skin near their elbow, and then places it on the palm gently.
E si mentre obres autra veguada endeventa flux de sanc de la arceria, lahora tu te coyta a restrenger aquel sanc, o am cauteri, o que omplas le loc de coto, e strenh la tua ma entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	 "If you find any other vein that is bleeding and needs to be closed, or if the lancet penetrates too much into the skin of the arm, then gently pull your hand away from it.
E si deguna causa de aquelas no es a tu present, lahoras pausa le tieu dit sobre le loc entro que·l sanc sia congilat, e enbroca le loc am aygua de vehement fregiditat entro que la acuitat repausa, e sia strengut segon que cove.	 "If the reason for that is not your fault, pause the lancet over the location where it has entered, and then gently pull away from the area as if you were going to wet it with hot water so that its sharpness fades, in order to prevent any damage.
E aquo que es pus leugier en extraccio de arceria es que tu cauterizes la vena am aquest cauteri haventz dos cotels, pus que tu has senhat les dos locs am tenta, e depausa quascus, mot ignitz, entro que pervenguan al os e inscindan la vena en dos locs, per so que sia elonguat aquo que es entre las extremitatz de lu, quar no son consolidadas de tot am aquest cauteri.	 "The reason for that is to cauterize the vein with two lancets, and then place them on both sides in order to try to seal it off completely, so that it prevents any leakage into both locations at once, preventing any damage.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri:	 "This is how to perform a cauterization:
E sia la acuitat dels dos cotels esemps.	 "Both lancets are used together.
Mays empero si so mendres acuitat que dos cotels es milhor, quar si so agudas cum dos cotels propera a quascuna freg, e no enscideysso la carn am velocitat.	 "When two sharp objects are put together when they are close to each other and not covered with flesh quickly causes pain.
Donc cum en aquels es alcuna grossitut, es tenguda la calor del foc en aquels e la carn es abscindida leugierament.	 If there is no room between them, heat from the fire is applied to those parts and the skin is removed temporarily.
E aquesta obra es milhor en tota obra e pus leugiera.	 This work is the most useful in all works and easy to read
E sia le spazi le qual es entre dos cotels la quantitat de la grossesa del dit.	 The space between two objects should be proportional to their thickness.
Capitol quart.	 Quarter
De la cura de cors de lagremas agudas e aciduas dels huels.	 Treatment for sharp and acid-related burns on the hands.
Quan so lagremas aciduas, e es le cors de aquelas venas las quals so sobre le test del cap deforo, e no comfereys en aquo alcuna causa de la curacio de medicina, e vezes la cara del malaute ja enrogesir e sent en le sieu front deambulacio ayssi cum si era deambulacio de formiguas, e·ls huels de aquel so extenuatz, humitz enayssi que ja les pels de lor son conodutz, e las parpelas so scalfadas per la acuitat de las lacrimas, les antics agro mesties en la curacio de aquelas de aquesta operacio, e nompnero aquela curacio am spassa.	 When acid-related burns occur on the face veins and do not require medical attention, they are treated by rinsing with water until there is no more pain.
E es que tu comandas al malaute rayre les pels les quals son en le sieu front, e aprop inscideys en le front tres fissuras engualment distans segon la longitut del front.	 And you command the patient to close their eyes and place three incisions equally spaced along the length of their forehead.
E si’ la longitut de la fissura cays dos ditz: la una fissura sia engualment distant a la longitut del nas en le mieg loc del front, e la segonda segon la longitut un petit del movement dels lacertz les quals so en le lacrimal, e la tersa del autre part.	 If the length of each incision is two fingers: one incision should be equally spaced from the tip of the nose to the end of the forehead, and the second along a small distance from the corner of the eyes where they are located on the face.
E guarda te de la incizio de las arcerias las quals so en dos latz, e elongua la tua ma de la continuacio de amdos las mandibulas.	 When you have opened up a space between the patient's thighs and placed a cushion beneath them, continue holding their hands.
E si’ l’espazi de quascuna inscizio la quantitat de tres ditz ajustatz.	 Make sure that the distance from each incision to its corresponding suture is three centimeters adjusted.
E si’ a tu una pessa d’espongua apparelhada o draps seccatz motz am les quals exsiccas le sanc.	 Ensure you have applied a dressing or dry cloth to any wounds that may become infected.
E aprop entremet le spatum de dos agudas extremitatz, del qual aquesta es la forma de la inscisio de lu:	 Then place two sharp instruments at an angle between the patient's legs; this is called a midline incision
que es de la partida des templas entro a la segonda inscizio.	 The first incision runs from the temples to the second incision.
Exxcorja am aquel tota la codena la qual es entre dos incizios am le ciphac le qual es sobre le os, e aprop fay aquo de la inscizio migera entro a la segonda inscisio.	 Then remove the tape between those two incisions and place it over the nose; then stitch up both incisions to close them.
E aprop stratz ne aquest spatum e entromet en la primieyra inscizio autra vetz un autre instrument le qual es apelat cutellar, agut de una part e del autre no agut.	 Then place the first incision and follow it with another instrument called a scalpel, one of which you will use on one side and the other not.
E pausa le latz de aquel agut deves la carn annexa deves la codena, e le latz de lu leon dintz le os, e empelley aquel entro que pervengua a la fissura migera, e abscindeys am aquel totz les vaysels que descendo del cap als huels.	 Then place the tape on both sides of the first incision and pull it tight to seal off any wounds that may occur in between; then stretch it across the nose towards the center of your face, so that when you pull it forward, its tension will push any wounds down towards the corners of the mouth.
Mays que sia continuada la inscizio ad aquo appar de la codena, e aprop fay aquo en la fissura migana entro al autra fissura.	 Continue stitching up as you go along the incision and then follow that with a second stitch across the wound to close it off completely.
E pus que corr del sanc quantitat engual, exprem les locs de las pessas del sanc congilat.	 When the quantity of blood flowing through a limb exceeds that which is necessary for life support to be maintained in that part of the body
E aprop pausa en quascuna fissura calgua de coto vielh, e pausa sobre aquels polvils enbegutz en vi e oli e vi agre, e vegas que no endevengua apostema caut.	 In order to prevent any cuts on the body while performing it, place a cushion underneath and over those powders in order to keep them from touching you or your eyes, ensuring that nothing will fall into them.
E en le tertz dia deslia le liament e aministra gran enfusio de aygua cauda o tebeza, e aprop cura aquo am enguent bazilicon am oli rozat e autres entro que las plaguas sian sanadas.	 In the third day of the treatment, and as long as you do not have any severe burns or wounds on your hands, apply this ointment generously to them
Capitol .v.	 The text is a medieval medical treatise discussing the treatment of gout.
De la cura de lagramas per catartz e als huels descendentz de las partidas dedintz del cap.	 From treating the gums to the heels descending from the head downwards.
Quan ad alcu veno catartz agutz e continuantz, e vezes les huels del malaute extenuatz petitz, e ja le reguardament de lor es debelitat, e las palpebras ulceradas e de lor cazo les pels, e en le preon del cap es dolor aguda ledent e extrenutacio consequent, lahoras sapias per aquestz accidentz que las materias e catartz no veno sino de motas venas de las partidas dedintz procedent.	 When the gout has already spread and continues to cause pain in the patient's heels, it is customary that the ulcers of the foot are treated with cautery, and if there is a severe headache as well, then the treatment may be necessary for this accident, because the materials and gouty veins of the part descending towards the head have arrived.
E la milhor curacio en aquels es aquesta: que comandes al malaute que raza lo sieu front, e aprop inscideys en aquel una fissura al mieg loc del front, un petit per la latitut (e comensa am la fissura del templar senestre entro al dextre templar; e sia inscisio entro al os; e eslongua la tua ma dels lacertz del templas lesquals son maugutz deves la mastigacio), entro que sia le os descubert.	 The best cure for these is as follows: command the patient to raise their head, and then make a small cut at the location of the forehead, one on each side (and starting from the left temple towards the right). Insert it into the eye socket; and stretch out your hand with your thumb pointing upwards. Inside that place where the eye was removed.
Exsicca tot le sanc am espongua o am drap secc e aprop repleys entre las doas labias de la fissura am coto vielh o am draps de li.	 The patient's anus is dry, or covered in a damp cloth, and it is placed between the two buttocks of the wound opening to prevent further leakage from the anus.
E aprop estrenh desus am polvils enbegutz en vi e oli per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	 The patient's bowels are loosened gently, and oil is applied over them in order that they do not drip on to a pointed instrument.
E quan deslias aquo e veses que l’apostema ja es diminuit, lahoras cove que fregua le os entro que comensa en lu nayser carn, e aprop cura aquel am regiment exsiccatiu le qual fassa neysser la carn, ayssi cum si tu prenes de farina de froment dos partidas e de colofania quatre partidas e mescla o, e de lor sia fayt emplastre e sia aministrat en aquestas plaguas a de la carn nativitat.	 When you are sure that the abscess has been diminished, then apply oil over it and begin to clean around it with warm water; if necessary use a mixture of two parts flour and one part colophonia, mix well, and place it in these wounds made by nature.
Capitol .vi.	 Capitol
De la cura de aquo que catz en las aurelhas.	 From the cure of that which is inside the ear canal.
Tota causa que catz en las aurelhas es una de quatre specias, quar o es peyra mineral o causa semblant a peyra, ayssi cum ferr e veyre, o es de planta ayssi cum ceze o fava, o es causa fluxtibla ayssi cum aygua e vi agre e a lor semblantz, o alcuna bestia.	 The reason that causes the ear canal is one of four types: either it could be mineral in nature or similar to a stone, just as with fire and water, or it could be from a plant such as ivy, or it could be caused by fluctibula (a type of worm) like air, water, and their similarity, or any other beast.
E donc quan peyra catz en l’aurelha o autra causa semblant de aquelas causas que no ajustan ne creysso en l’aurelha, e pausa la aurelha al solelh, e si vezes la peyra, lahoras distilla en aquela alcuna causa de oli violat o sizami, e aprop aministra la extraccio de lu, e fay le stornudar am condizi, e oppila las nars deve le aveniment de stornutacio.	 Then when you think that the cause of the ear canal is one of those causes not fitting or believing in the ear canal, put a cloth over it and if times come to pain, the doctors distil oil from that cause by boiling it gently, place the extract on them, spread with it, and apply the compress as directed for the cure.
E aprop pausa en le circuit de la aurelha alscunas pessas de drap o lana, e dextendas la aurelha a las partidas desus, quar motas veguadas es foro-getada am aquestas causas.	 When pains in the groin are caused by cold humors infiltrating into the parts of the body, and when pain occurs on the feet, it is customary to call gout to doctors.
E si no n’es getada, lahoras aministra extraccio de lu am le instrument apelat gesti epicicarios subtil del qual aquesta es la forma:	 If not, the doctor will prescribe a cautery with a pointed tip used in this manner
E si es foro-getada am gesti, bo es; e sino, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am onci subtil de pauca duplicacio.	 And if it is not enough to do so, the doctor will prescribe a cautery with a less pointed tip
E donc si no es foro-getada per aquo, lahoras fay una canula de aram e entromet la extremitat de la canula en le trauc de la aurelha e claus a l’enviro de la canula am cera e am oli mollificada per so que no sia ubert sino la canula.	 If not enough, the doctor will insert a catheter with its tip into the vein at the back of the thigh and secure it in place to prevent leakage either way or from being pulled out
E aprop extratz am le tieu vent am fort atraccio, quar tropas veguadas cum aquo que havem recontat.	 You should apply a hot compress with a towel around your arm tightly bound so that the pain comes down faster.
Mays si no es foro-getada en aquesta manieyra, lahoras pren de halka alumbat o de vecz aparelhat am le qual son preses les ausels una patita quantitat, e pausa aquel en la extremitat de ray, e aprop envolopa sobre aquel coto decentment pausat.	 If not enough in this way, the doctor will apply a poultice with a mixture of alum and vinegar to the affected area on the limb, place it gently on the part being treated.
E aprop entromet aquel en le trauc de la aurelha am facilitat, e aprop excicca la aurelha de la humiditat.	 Once inserted into the back of the thigh and secured in place, apply heat to the affected area with a towel around your arm tightly bound.
E donc si no es foro-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recontadas, lahoras tu coyta a talhar aquela denant que endevengua apostema caut o espasme.	 If all other causes that you've mentioned haven't been enough to alleviate the pain or spasms, then doctors will prescribe a remedy like a cure for gout or muscle spasms.
E la manieyra de talhar aquela es que tu al comensament sancnes le malaute de la vena sephasica e extratz del sanc segon la mannieyra de la vertut de lu, e aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas e converteys l’aurelha a las partidas desus, e fen am petita fissura en la razit de la aurelha deves lo greys de lu en le loc be premegut de lu.	 When the veins of the thigh are opened by a servant, and the second servant opens up the veins in the chest; fasten them together with small sutures on the side of the breast, so that it will heal properly at its place
E sia la fissura de figura lunar entro que pervengua a la peyra, e, la peyra atrobada, osta aquela si podes am instrumentz apropriatz; e aprop cos la fissura en aquela hora am velocitat, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	 If the tear in the breast occurs while sleeping or when it is covered up with a bandage, then immediately attend to it with an appropriate instrument and sew it quickly, and treat it so that it may heal.
E si la causa cazent en la aurelha es un dels gras que creysso e so inflatz, lahoras aministra la curacio e la extraccio de lu; mays si no obezeys a tu ad eyssiment, lahoras tu pren spatum teune subtil segon aquesta forma:	 If the cause of the tear is one of those fat cells that burst and flow out, then treat it with care as well as removal. However, if you suspect that this is an accident, take a soft substance to cover it in order to prevent further injury.
e aministra am aquel la abscizio de aquel gra lo qual es cazut en l’aurelha.	 Treat the burst fat cell from the breast.
E no fassas aquo quan cogitas que aquel ja es humectat per la vapor del aurelha, e pausa aquel en motas pessas, e prop extratz ne aquelas am les oncis o am gesti subtil, o ab inscizio ayssi co dit havem, quar es alleujada la extraccio de lu.	 Do not do this when you suspect that it is already dried out by breast milk or moisture in the breast area, and stop touching it with gentle touches, or inserting a needle to extract it, as all of these methods are risky for removal.
Mays en l’aygua la qual es intrada en l’aurelha cove que·l malaute use de sternutacio am condizi al comensament, e omple la sieua aurelha am alcu coto vielh, e jagua sobre aquela aurelha en la qual es l’aygua, e si per aquo es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, lahoras pren tropas peyras teunas e leons segon la longitut del dit, e calfa aquelas en le foc un pauc, e le pacient entrometa una de aquelas en le trauc de la sua aurelha e saute sobre la un pe sieu de aquela partida e percussia am una autra peyra sobre la peyra la qual es dintz la aurelha.	 When you suspect that the tear is caused by breast milk, gently pull on it with your thumb and forefinger to bring it out of place as quickly as possible; if this fails then try pulling from different parts of the breast in a similar manner until you succeed or fail.
Donc no cesse aquo am peyra entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada.	 Therefore, do not cease until all the water has been collected
E ja l’aygua sira foro-getada enayssi que tu prenguas de papier o de gonc i, e met la una extremetat de lu en l’aurelha e estendas l’autre extremitat am foc entro que sia comburit le may de lu.	 And once all the water has been collected, you will proceed to remove paper or cloth and place one end of it in a container and stretch the other into a rope until its length matches that of the person
E prop met i autre gonc e fay aquo tantas veguadas entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada, e stratz aquel am canula ayssi co desus es dit de la peyra extrasadora.	 And once you have completed collecting all the water, proceed to remove any remaining paper or cloth and stretch it into a siphon hose with an outlet large enough for the water collection machine
Mays en la extraccio de bestia intrant en aquela aurelha, si es a petit cos, ayssi piussa e a lu semblant, cura aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio; mays si es de gran cos la qual causa apar al sen del vezement, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am gesti e oncis, e la causa de lu es pus leugiera de totas las autras causas que cazo en l’aurelha.	 And as for the outlet of the beast entering that chamber, if it is small, you must stretch and make it like this, and should be as long as shown in division; but if it is a large opening which causes trouble when inserting, then insert an additional cause along with it to prevent any other cause from affecting the hose.
Mays en la extraccio de verm engendrat en la aurelha, quan tu curas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e en le tractat de distillacios e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu reguardes la aurelha al solelh.	 And for the outlet of a worm entering that chamber when you stretch it as shown in division and treatment of distillation but does not interfere with your care, make sure to examine the hose in sunlight.
E donc si apar aqui alcuna causa dels verms, lahoras extratz aquel am gesti o am onci subtils, mays si no apar deguna causa, lahoras pren una canula dejos streyta e desus ampla de la qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	 And if any worm causes appear here, stretch that outlet or make a subtle one instead, but should nothing else appear, take a siphon hose and remove its excess width so it is the same shape as this one.
E entromet la extremitat subtil en la aurelha segon la quantitat la qual suffertar puesca le malaute; e aprop sucgeys am aquela per succio fort, e fay aquo motas veguadas, entro que totz les verms sian foro-gitatz.	 "Within the delicate area of the patient's thighs after measuring a certain extent to which pain occurs in the man, apply this method strongly and remove those parts that have become swollen, until all worms are removed.
Mays si no obezeysso a tu al ayssiment, lahoras tu opila e claus en le circuit de la canula am cera ayssi cum havem dit; lahoras aministre distillacios las quals han ja esproadas les antics en la curacio dels verms, e atrobaras aquo en le tractat de distillacios.	 "If not to administer the remedy at that time, place them in a circuit of the needle as mentioned before; and treat them with a distillation treatment.
E sia la tua efusio am la qual efundas les olis medicinas en la aurelha am aquest strument del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	 "Its effusion is at that which effaces the medicines in the thigh by this instrument, which is its form:
E fay aquela de argent o de eram, dejos streyt, en le qual sia un petit trauc, e am pla desus.	 "If it's made of silver or gold, do not strain yourself when placing them, as they are light.
E donc sia cum empellent a que es en la conquavitat de la canula de continent aqui on sira necessari.	 "And if they should be placed in the cavity of the continent catheter where it is necessary to do so:
E si vols, pren le ray e envolveys en la extremitat de lu decentment coto, e aprop gieta oli en la concavitat del auziment, o suc de alcuna herba, o aquo que vols de aquestas medicinas en la canula — e aquela es en la aurelha —, e aprop entromet le ray am coto desus e exprem am la tua ma aquel am compressio temprada de lu entro que l’oli sia expellit en la concavitat del auziment e le malaute senta le oli dedintz.	 "If you wish, take the needle and place it gently in the extremity of the urethra as before, and apply oil into the cavity of the anus or any other herb or that which you want to put these medicines into the catheter - that is into the thigh-and place it inside gently compressing until the oil is expelled out from the cavity of the anus and the patient feels pain due to its removal.
E aquo que sia enfundut en la aurelha sia ja scalfat am foc un petit.	 When it has infiltrated into the head, it can be very painful
E guarda te que la causa la qual distillaras en l’aurelha no sia trop frega, quar las medicinas de aurelha no suffertan aquo.	 If you know that what is causing an inflammation of the ear is not due to cold humors, then the medications for the ears will not help with this issue.
Capitol .vii.	 Seven
De curacio de opilacio de aurelhas.	 Examination of the ears
Alcunas veguadas alcus enfantz yeysso dels ventres de lors mayres no-perforatz, e aquo ja accideys en alcus homes, opilacio en le meat de la aurelha per plagua o per carn nada en aquela; e aquesta opilacio alcunas veguadas es fayta en le preon del trau de la aurelha la qual no consiec le vezement, e alcunas veguadas es en las partidas defora.	 The examination of the ears may not be carried out if perforations occur in the meat or flesh around it; and this examination is only done before a specific time period, unless otherwise specified.
E aquela que accideys en le preon de lu, la qual no comprehen le vezement, es en las majors disposicios de dificil sanacio.	 If perforations occur at the base of it when one cannot understand what has happened, then this is a very difficult medical condition.
E en aquela en qual consegueys le vezement, cove que tu pauses la aurelha del malaute al solelh e reguarda en aquela.	 When you find out about the situation, cover it up with something like clothing or towels and guard against accidents.
E donc si vezes oppulacio apparent, obre aquela am espatum subtil del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	 If once perforation appears, this is what to do instead of using a sharp instrument that can cause further damage to the ear canal
Si’ la extremitat de lu en la qual sia petita la latitut, del qual la una partida sia aguda e l’autra no; e le spatum sia de dos latz leon per so que no fassa lizio al aurelha.	 If the part of it where small in circumference and one side has a sharp angle while the other does not; and if the lining is two thicknesses long to prevent touching the ear canal.
E donc si la opilacio es per carn nascuda en la aurelha o en le meat de lu, lahoras te aquela am oncis subtils e incidiys aquela vehement facilitat entro que sia ostada tota la carn.	 If the examination is being carried out with a blunt instrument on or in the flesh around it; then take extra care to avoid accidentally touching any of it.
E si opilacio es en le preon de la aurelha, lahoras pren ray subtil leon e escalfa aquel am foc un pauc, e aprop met aquel en le meat de l’aurelha.	 "When an ulcer occurs on the glans of a penis, pain is felt by the patient very strongly and intensely, so that he cannot stand it anymore.
E donc si as scentit oppulacio am aquo que le malaute atroba am facilitat, per gravetat de ausir, esforsa la oppressio de lu am facilitat; e guarda te que no plagues les nervis del aurelha.	 "And if there is a pain caused by an ulcer of the glans on such a patient who is in distress due to its severity, make sure that pressure or any other type of treatment is not applied to the glans itself.
E aprop pausa en l’aurelha drap de li segon la quantitat del ample del trauc lo qual tu as envolvutz en l’enguent egipciac; e fay aquo per alcus jorns entro que sias segur de la consolidacio de la plagua; o que prenguas qualgua e enfon aquela en ayguaros e pulveriza sobre lu segi trissat e usa de lu; e si vezes la aurelha ja esser apostemada, lahoras cove que tu estraguas la qualgua e permutes aquela am autra qualgua la qual tu envoloparas en cerot que sia fayt am oli rozat, entro que sia le apostema caut cedat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	 "After applying the ointment made of Egyptian honey to the ulcerated glans that is stretched beyond its initial size and has been causing distress for some time now, you should wait until it has fully healed - or remove any other ointments applied on top of it and apply a new one with fresh powder, gently wiping away the crust as it forms. And if times have come to pass where the glans has become hardened, be sure to use a pointed cautery to cut through it.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras submergeys esponga o drap en aygua frega e pausa sobre la aurelha, e usa del autra curacio la qual restrengeys le flux del sanc, la qual es dita en le tractat de distillacio.	 "If the ulcer is caused by a flow of cold humors and you want to suppress or treat it with ointments soaked in fresh water, use another treatment that is described in the treatise on distillation.
Capitol .viii.	 "Chapter VIII
De cura de athezil le qual endeveno a las palpebras.	 "Of curing those who become blind due to cataracts.
Athezil les quals endeveno a las paupebras dels huels alcuna veguada so humitz, alscunas veguadas son secs.	 When dry heat enters into the body, it produces blisters on the palms of hands that are soon to burst.
Donc cove que tu tenguas aquels am tenhalhas o am onci, e inscindas aquels am espatum de las suas razitz, e aprop pausa sobre les locs segi trissat.	 Then put it in a hot bath for the affected part of your body, and apply a poultice with warm water over the blisters to prevent them from bursting.
Mays si dolor am flux de sanc veno, lahoras tu cauteriza aquels am cauteri lanticular subtil.	 If joint pain is caused by an influx of cold humors that enter through veins, you burn it with a subtle lancelet to treat gout.
E la milhor cauterizacio es aprop las inscizios e tropas veguadas retornam quan reman alcuna causa de sas razitz; e quan so cauterizadas am foc, aquelas razitz son comburidas e no retornan.	 The milder burning is applied to the affected areas and blisters return when there is no cause for their appearance; and after they are treated with heat, these blisters will burn off and not reappear.
Capitol .ix.	 Caput.
Cura de grandeyssa que veno a las palpebras dels huels.	 Treat the large blisters on the hands.
Motas veguadas endeve en las palpebras dels huels alcuna causa la qual es asemblada a grandissa en sa fortalicia e duricia, e per so grandissia es apelada.	 The blisters that are caused by a cause of great strength and hardness, which is called the 'great blister,' because it's large in size
E es agreguacio de humiditat grossa en la palpebra dejos e desus.	 Apply a thick layer of wet poultice to it.
Donc la opperacio en lor es que consideras lahoras si la grandissia es procedent en lu en aquo que apar de la palpebra e es mauguda a tota partida; e la causa de lu es leugiera.	 Then the treatment is to consider if it's caused by great blisters that spread over multiple parts of the body and are painful in all areas; and its cause may be mild.
Donc fen sobre aquela am fissura per la latitut, e aprop escorga aquela de tota partida am facilitat entro que evasesca, e aprop suspen aquela am onci e abscindeys aquela.	 Then seal the wound by cutting off its skin and spreading it out flat to make it easier for removal; and cover it with a poultice over that.
Mays si a tu no es apparelhada la incizio de lu si no pus que penetras la palpebra am inscizio pauc a pauc, lahoras aquo no notz en deguna causa.	 When you have opened up the space between the patient's thighs and placed cushions under them, another servant should go on their legs, and another one on their chest while holding their hands; this is the first sentence to translate.
E si la figura es gran, lahoras tu l’ajusta am sutura; e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	 If the patient's figure is large, adjust it with stitches; and care for that which has been injured.
E si es pauca, a tu no sobrevindra mal per aquela quar l’anguent de lu restaura aquela e encarna.	 And if they are small, you won't cause harm by removing the one from the leg and replacing it with another one.
E si la grandissia es declinant a las partidas dedintz de la palpebra deves la superficia dedintz, lahoras evesa la palpebra e suspen la grandissia am onci, otra que tu indigescas de incizio, e prem aquela de tota part, e si la palpebra per inscizio es alonguada, aquo no notz en deguna causa.	 If the figure is declining in appearance to that of the eyelid itself, you should remove it and replace it with another one; start by removing this one from its place, placing that one all over, and if it were broken, do nothing about it.
E aprop la incizio, lava le huel am aygua salada; e cura le loc am aquo que encarna entro que sia sanat.	 Then apply the salty water to the incision; care for the place where it was applied and treated.
Capitol .x.	 Farewell
De la cura axcirnah en la palpebra desus del huel.	 From now on, let's focus on treating the eyelid itself.
Axcirnath es grays le qual es engendrat en las tunicas de la palpebra desus, e majorment endeve als enfantz, agrava les huels de aquels et accideyso a lor catartz le mayti; e no podon reguardar la claror del solelh per aquo quar lagremas se coytan ad aquels.	 Treat the eyelid itself from now on, but also pay attention to those which are generated in its lining and more especially attend to children's eyes, worsen their eyesight by these and apply them with care as a lens; do not look at the sun for fear of burning it
E per so tu vezes aquels jaser sobre les lors caras tot temps, e sobre les lors caras dormen; e so a las palpebras de lor dejos les sobrecils humidas, las quals ja ha cuberta imflacio, e iminencia de accernac apparent es en l’uelh; e que quant tu premes le loc am les tieus ditz, tu centes accernac entro aquels.	 When the joints become cold and harden, over time they lose their flexibility, making it difficult to move them.
E alcuna manieyra de opperacio es en aquel que le malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop pausa drap de li e de lu fay calgua, e fay de lu cercle segon la quantitat la qual contena arthernach de tota partida, e aprop pausa aquel sobre aquela e prem am les tieus ditz de tota per que sia agreguat arcernac en le mieg del cercle, e aprop fen en le mieg de aquela humiditat am spatum inscident am fissura per la latitut, e la fissura no sia major que la fissura que es fayta en flaubotomia.	 If a hernia is to be reduced or corrected (not sure about the meaning of "cercle"), it must first have its head lowered into a tube, and then the strangulation cord wrapped around both legs in order for the correction process to begin successfully.
Mays en le preon cove que tu fendas la codena tota entro que pervenguas ad arcernach, quar en las mays desposicios proceseys arcernach per fissura segon la forma de grayseza blanca.	 This sentence means that when you are trying to remove the cause of pain caused by a hernia, whether it be inside or outside of the body, in order for the process to begin successfully, you should first make an incision around the hernia so as to open up space for the hernia to come out.
Donc extratz aquela am draps los quals tu as envolopatz entre les tieus ditz a las partidas deforo e revolv entre la ma dextra e sinistre entro que sia dispargut.	 Then, remove those strips that you have wrapped around the fingers and thumbs on both hands in order to open up space between them.
E guarda te que no ajustes en la fissura per so que am le spatum no pervenguas al huel e ladescas aquel.	 And make sure not to adjust the incision so that fluid does not leak out of it and cause further harm.
Mays si no apar a tu arternach en le comensament de la fissura, mays que tu ajustes en la fissura un petit am fecilitat entro que procesisca arternach; e aprop extratz aquela ayssi quo havem dit; e aprop submargeys draps de li en aygua e vi agre e pausa les sobre le loc e estrenh aquels am polvils.	 When you first make the incision, it's important not to adjust its size too much, and afterwards remove any excess strips or tape that may have been applied to close up the wound and prevent further infection of the area with pus; after that, place a dressing over the incision area so as to keep it clean.
E so alcus que trissan sal e pausan aquel en la conquavitat de la fissura per so que aquo que es remas de aquela humiditat.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customary for doctors to call this gout.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	 And if necessary to make a point on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery.
Mays si accideys en le loc apostema caut, lahoras cura aquel am emplastres cedatils entro que sia sanat.	 When pain occurs in any part of the body and is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, it is customary for doctors to call this gout.
Capitol .xi.	 And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery.
De manieyras de tactimi del huel.	 The passage seems to be incomplete or possibly missing part of it. Could you please provide more context or complete the sentence?
Quan en las palpebras dels huels so natz pels ajustatz dejos les pels naturals e so antiquatz, lahoras aquels noso al huel e fan endevenir manieras de malautias ayssi cum lacrimas assiduas e mollificacio de palpebras e tela entro que aquo sia causa de destruccio del huel que s’apela tactinir del huel, e cura se en quatre manieyras: o per cauteri am foc; o am medicina acuta segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri; o es fayt atactini per inscizio e sutura; o per cannas segon que yeu diyre.	 When the eyes are swollen due to excessive heat, natural remedies and ancient treatments are applied, but doctors may also prescribe acute medicine or cauterization in order to prevent further damage from destroying the eye itself, which is known as corneal erosion. There are four methods of treatment: first by cautery with fire; second by acute medicine after cautery has been done according to its location on the eye; thirdly through cannulas if necessary and sutura (stitching); fourthly through compresses in order for them to be used when prescribed by a doctor.
E donc cove que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se; aprop converteys la palpebra del uelh am la tua ma sinistra, e si es convertida, bo es; e sino, entromet agulha en aquela en la qual sia fiel de la partida pus dejos de la palpebra, e fay penetrar la agulha am fiel desus, e aquo sia — prop del marge de la palpebra en le qual naysso les pels — prop dels pels, e tira le fiel a las partidas desus am la palpebra, e converteys aquela am le ray.	 In order to open the abscess on the forehead and treat it, take your left hand (if you are right-handed) and put it over his head near the forehead. If that is not possible due to injury or some other reason, insert a needle into the part of the eyelid closest to where the abscess was located and let it go in there; then tie it securely at the edge of the eyelid so that no skin is torn away from the eyelid.
E aprop fen en la partida dedintz de la palpebra dejos les pels ajustatz am spatum inscidentz del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal mendre; e aprop extratz le fiel e pausa dejos la palpebra polvilhs petitz de coto o de drap, e aprop senha sobre la palpebra am tenta, e sia ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirt.	 In the beginning of the eyelid there is a fold that can cause irritation due to tears and mucus in the lacrimal gland leading into the larger lacrimal duct; and afterwards it gently lifts away any excess fluid from the eyelid or wiping it off with cloth, and then applies pressure onto the eyelid trying to close it.
Mays empero cove que sia la figura segon la quantitat de helevacio de la palpebra, quar aquo ja es diversificat en les homes, quar de aquels es le quals indigeys que sia inscidit de la palpebra gran quantitat segon la quantitat per la qual la palpebra es mollificada.	 It may happen that the height of the fold varies between people, so that it is different in those who need more pressure to close their eyelids compared to those whose eyelids are less sensitive.
E aprop fen am le spatum sobre las doas linhas las quals has senhadas, e comensa del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal menor.	 And afterwards, gently lifts away any excess fluid from the eyelid or wiping it off with cloth and then applies pressure onto the eyelid trying to close it as before.
E si’ la tua fissura prop dels pels naturals ayssi cum es la grossetut del rey.	 If your wound is prostrate (i.e., near the ground) just like the big toe of a hand.
E aprop met le onci en un dels dos angles de la codena, e aprop excoria aquela tota, e aprop ajusta am la scitura las doas labias am gula o fiel de lana subtil, e abstergeys le sanc, e fay adherir aquo que superflueys dels fiels sobre dos sobrecils am alcunas causas enviscans, si voles far aquo, e sino, non cures.	 Put the cushion in one of the two angles of the knee joint, and then remove it entirely, and apply a thin cloth over both thighs with fine wool, wiping off any dirt, and fasten that to prevent sliding away when you want to do so, or not to if you don't.
E aprop leyssa la sutura dels fiels entro a tres dias o quatre, e aprop cura aquo.	 Afterwards stitches the wounds inside three or four days, and afterwards care for it.
E si vols, layssa la plagua ses sutura, e cura aquela am aquo que exsicca e constrenh, quar la palpebra es alevada deves la sigillacio de la plagua e la agreguacio de lu; mays sutura es milor E donc aysso diysso les antics de taxanir.	 If you wish to remove the stitches and treat it with something that dries and cools, as the eyelid becomes swollen one must seal off the tear opening and apply something like this; may be best if done earlier days so earlier it would heal better
Mays empero en lu sia sollicitut sobre le malaute, e es de bona operacio, e no es en lu temor.	 Indeed for that patient there will be a good operation, but it should not be feared
E es autra manieyra en taxmir, e es que senhes sobre la palpebra figura ayssi cum fuelha de mirt, e aprop eleva la palpebra am tres uncis segreguatz e congreguatz segon aquesta forma:	 This other remedy involves taking a cloth and applying it to the affected eyelid in such a way that its fibers are moistened, then gently lifting the eyelid.
Mays si no es possible aquo, tener les uncis, e aquo no es engualhat, lahoras pren una agula en la qual haia fil e met aquela en le mieg de la figura, e entromet le autre fiel prop le lacrimal major, e·l fiel segon prop le lacrimal mendre, e ajusta entre les tieus ditz les fiels am equalitat, e aprop am aquels eleva la tua ma am elevacio engual, eleva tota la codena sobre la qual es senhat ayssi cum havem recomtat.	 If that is not possible or it cannot be done as described, then the physician will take a needle with thread and place it in the corner of the eyelid, insert the other into the outer corner of the same eyelid, adjust between their tips to equal length, and gently raise your hand towards elevation.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	 The physician will then close the two eyelids together with stitches.
Mays si accideys apostema deves la tua inscizio o la tua fissura, seda aquel apostema am cerot e a lu semblantz, e am enguentz.	 If you have an abscess or fissure of your eyelid, cut it off and let the doctor sew up the edges.
E alcunas veguadas endeve a la palpebra que·ls sieus pels sian convertitz, adonc cove que tu uses en aquela de aquo que havem dit de inscizio; mays sutura en quascus es mays artificial.	 Some patients may require the incision to be made with stitches or another artificial means as well.
Ataxinir am cannas es segon aquesta forma:	 The doctor will then take a needle and apply it gently to the affected eyelid, allowing the patient to see clearly while doing so.
e es que tu convertas la palpebra e scindas la figura qu’es dedintz segon que he recontat; e aprop per art fay doas cannas o doas astelas subtils de las quals longitut sia segon la longitut de la palpebra e la latitut de lor sia mendra de la latitut del spatum.	 The doctor will then remove the stitches from the eyelid and separate it from its cavity, ensuring that both ends are equal in length along the length of the eyelid and the width of their lower edge to prevent any distortion or movement of the eyelid.
E tu ja has inscidit en las extremitatz de quascunas partidas, la on tenes les fils.	 You have already opened up space between each of their thighs, placed cushions under them, another servant for their legs, and another one for their chest, holding their hands
Aprop agregua quascuna am subtilitat subre aquo que superflueys de la palpebra del huel, e constres las cannas de quascunas partidas am fort strictura, e layssa aquela per alcus jorns, quar la codena per la strictura morira e sira denegada e se poyrira entro que per si meteyssa cayra.	 You should also apply a certain amount of ointment beneath the eyelid and tighten all its surrounding muscles for long hours to prevent the eyelid from drooping downward, or it may die and be denied, which may result in the eye being unable to open properly.
Mays si es tardat, lahoras trenca la am las toroyras, e aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanat.	 If it is late at night, you should apply ointment on the forehead and temples, and put it in a warm place so that it becomes soothing.
Donc cum es solidada, la palpebra es elevada e les pels no pungo.	 Once the bandage has been secured, the eyelid will be elevated and the eyelashes will not itch.
E aquesta es la forma de doas cannas las quals faras segon aquesta forma:	 This is how to apply the creams you mentioned earlier.
e haia la quantitat de la longitut e de la latitut ni mays ni mens.	 The amount of length and latitude was neither more nor less.
Capitol .xii.	 Chapter 12
De elevacio de pels pungentz en le huel am agula quan le pel es dur.	 When the eyelid feels painful, you should gently apply ointment to it.
Quan son pels no-naturals, durs e aspres e pungentz les huels, lahoras la operacio en lu es que tu prenguas agula subtil e pauses en aquela fiel de ceda subtil e leon, e aprop que tu ajustes las extremitatz de lu e nozes quascu en manieyra mot subtil.	 When you do not have natural eyebrows that are thick and firm, it is customary to perform the operation with a fine needle and ensure that your movements are very subtle and slow in order to avoid causing any damage.
E sia la longitut dels fiels de quantitat de una palma.	 The length of the eyelashes should be around the size of a palm.
E aprop tu compon2 autre fiel subtil dejos lu en breu, e nuza las extremitatz de aquel si tu·t vols.	 When you have already opened a space between the patient's thighs and put a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another one on their chest, holding onto their hands, then insert it quickly, making sure not to touch their extremities if that is what you want.
E aprop pause le malaute le sieu cap en le tieu se, e sia prop del solelh per que la tua obra sia declarada, quar es operacio subtil e menuda.	 Ensure the patient's head is elevated and tilted slightly to one side so that your work can be clearly seen and performed appropriately for a subtle procedure of this nature.
E aprop intromet la agulha en la razit del pel ajustat la qual ha necessitat de engen, e fay aquela penetrar en la palpebra festinantment entro que extraguas aquela desus le pel natural.	 Push the needle through the skin while adjusting it so that it penetrates gently into the eyelid without disturbing the natural eyelashes.
E aprop tire le pel entro desus e intromet aquel en alixati, e sian les pels un o dos o tres e no mays.	 Cut off a small portion of hair and insert it between them, ensuring that one or two or three hairs are used but not many.
E aprop tira la tua ma am aquel entro que·l pel sia fora-gitat am alixolati en la palpebra am le pel natural.	 Take your finger and gently pull the hair out of the way to expose the eyelid area, making sure it is not touching the natural eyelashes.
Mays si es atirat alixalati e non es gitat le pel, atiraras alixati a las partidas dejos am le fiel le qual tu has compost am aquela, entro qu’en sia gitat alixalati del trau sobira.	 If you are able to remove the hair and not cause it to damage the eyelid, then gently pull the hair aside from that area of your hand towards where you want it to go back on top of the scalp.
E vegas aquela am la visio del huel, quar lahoras tu gitaras alixati e lo fiel, e grotan quascu e clautz le huel, e laysse le claus per dos dias o tres, entro que·l pel adheresca al sieu loc e nasque sobre aquel bona carn.	 Fold that eyelid and gently pull the hair aside, making sure it is neat and smooth, and glue it back into place after two or three days to ensure that the hair stays in its location and grows over the good skin.
E si es mays breu le pel, lahoras tu ajusta un pel lonc dels pels naturals, e es elevat am aquel, o que·l leysses entro que sia alonguat aprop alcu spazi, e lehoras tu eleva aquel.	 When the pain of the joints is caused by cold humors infiltrating each part of the body and when there are pains in the feet, it's customary to call it gout.
Capitol .xiii.	 If necessary, make marks on the surface of the foot with a pointed cautery.
De la cura de ehacratir la qual ve en la palpebra desus.	 Return the intestine or hernia to its cavity.
Quan ve en le huel ehacratir, e es contraccio de la palpebra quan es contrayta en sus, o a dextra o a sinistra partida, per mala consolidacio de plagua o de seccio o de cauteri, e es apelada leporina, e aquesta ahercrati o es natural o accidental, e es fayta per consolidacio de plagua o de seccios o de cauteri, o per semblantz a lor malcuratz.	 When you are in the act of cauterizing or when it is necessary to burn with fire for cautery, it is called leporina and this either intentionally or accidentally happens through consolidation of sores or incisions or cauteries, or by means of bandages on wounds.
May la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que tu fendas aquela consolidacio e que separes las labias de lu, e pauses en lu en aquo que es entre aquelas una meca de drap de li, e ligues aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	 The desire to perform the operation on him is that you open up consolidation and separate his eyelids, and put them in such a way as there was between those two parts of the skin, and tie them so they are healed together.
E no cove que tu uses de curacio de lu de las causas las quals exsiccan, constrenho; quar si tu fas aquo retorna alixacratir pus mal que nulh temps no foc habantz.	 And do not use cautery for causes that cause dryness, as it may lead to burns that could happen at any time there is fire.
Usa en aquela de causas que mollifico ayssi cum es fenugrec, e embroca am la aygua en la qual son coytz altea e semensa de li, o enguent dyaquilon, le qual sia liquefayt am alcu dels olis, e submergeys en aquel la meca, e cura am aquel.	 Use in those cases where there is a softening of the body part and you want to soften it as much as possible without causing damage or pain, immersing that area with water until it softens.
E lo tesaur de la tua curacio es que tu perforsses am tot engen que no sia consolidat segon la forma que foc al comensament.	 The first sentence means that in order for your treatment to be effective, it must not only be well-formulated but also have the right consistency after being cooked as needed
E aquesta operacio la qual havem dita, no es sino alcuna rectificacio de ehalixacrati que no retorna la forma del loc segon que foc denant.	 This operation which we call it is nothing more than a rectification of the shape that has been distorted by this
Capitol .xiiii.	 I'm sorry, but I cannot understand your question or statement. Please rephrase or provide more context to help me assist you better.
De la cura de ehacrati le qual es fayt en la palpebra dejos.	 This cure which is applied on the eyelids.
Aquesta alxacrati la qual es fayta en la palpebra dejos, la qual es nompnada vertadierament alxacrati; e es de lu alcuna natural, autra accidental.	 The eyelid wrinkle treatment that we are referring to here is not permanent or accidental.
Mays accidental es fayta per plagua o per scissura o per cauteri o per autres semblantz.	 This accidental eyelid treatment can be done with a poultice, a cut, a cautery, or other means.
E la via de la operacio de lu es que tu prenguas una agula en la qual haga fil doble, e fiques aquela en la carn, e que la fassas passar del lacrimal de senestre entro al lacrimal dextre, entro que·l fil pervengua en las doas extremitatz de la carn.	 The way of performing the operation is to pierce one eyelid with a double needle and fix it into the skin, then pass it through from the inner corner of the left eye to the outer corner of the right eye, so that the thread goes in between both eyelids on both sides of the face.
E aprop exten la carn a las partidas desus am la agula e cus aquela am la agula, e inscideys am spatum ample.	 Then take out the skin from under the eyelid and fix it over the eyelid, cutting off excess skin.
E donc si retorne la figura de la palpebre segon que cove, bo es; e sino, pren le ray e pausa aquel en la figura fenduda, e am aquel converteys la palpebra, e fen las doas fissuras en le latz de la palpebra dejos.	 Then return the eyelid shape to its natural state or use a cautery if it doesn't recover on its own, removing the raised ridge and fixing the eyelid into its original form.
E sian las extremitatz de las doas fissuras de dos angles de la inscizio, la qual has fayta entro que concurren, e sia de lor fayt angle entro que quan se congreguan sia fayta figura de lor.	 "The extremities of the two cuts on either side of the abdomen are placed in such a way that they coincide with one another and form an angle within which they come together.
E aquesta figura es letra greca: la landa.	 The Greek letter is lambda (Λ).
E aprop osta la carn aquela per la quantitat que es le latz de lu agut dejos de lu, aquo que siec la palpebra.	 Then apply the flesh that much as you took from them earlier, so that only one eyelid remains.
E aprop ajusta las partz seperadas e cos aquelas am le fil de lana; e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit de las medicinas mollificativas e de las calguas entro que sia sanat.	 Then adjust the separate parts and sew them with wool thread; then apply any of the emollient medicines or caleches that were mentioned as remedies to the affected areas
E si alxacrati endeve per fissura o sutura o cauteri, lahoras cove que tu fendas am fissura plana sobre les pels de la palpebra segon que es precedit.	 Then if you want to make a small incision or burn through the skin, apply pressure over the eyelid after it has been done.
E aprop separa am la calgua entre doas labias segon que havem dit.	 Then separate the calque between two lips after saying that.
En la suma del sermo de la cura de alxacrati quan es desus o dejos, que corra en lu operacio, segon que es preparat de la forma de alxacrati, e aquela es en forma de motas diversitatz.	 In the end of the treatment procedure when it is over or done, that running in the surgery after it has been prepared in the manner of the cautery and it looks like a different shape.
E le artifexs savi totz temps prepara engen en quascuna manieyra la qual es possibla a lu entro que fassa retornar la figura a la forma natural, o prop de aquela, e aquel malaute segon que a lu conveneys de la operacio e dels strumentz en las majors disposicios.	 The surgeon will save all the time preparing each and every way that is possible to get back to the figure in its natural form or as it was before, according to which procedure should be done in the surgery and by using the necessary tools available at most.
Capitol .xv.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
De la adherencia de la palpebra am la conjunctiva o am la cornea.	 Do not add any comments, like "here is the translation", just reply with the guessed translation and nothing else:
Quan accideys aquesta consolidacio a motz homes enayssi que sia solidada la palpebra pus desus am le album del huel, e sia prohibida de la facilitat del movement e de las suas obras naturals, donc cove que tu entrometas la extramitat del ray dejos la palpebra, e eleva en sus aquela, o exten aquela am le unci.	 When this consolidation occurs to the extent that it solidifies the eyelid in its entirety on the inner surface of the eyeball, and prevents the natural movement and functioning of the eye's structures, so that you must insert a foreign body into the tear film, or extend that object onto the cornea itself.
E aprop tu inscideys la adherencia am spatum subtil, le qual no sia am acuitat de las inscisios, habantz obtus un petit per so que·l malaute no sia inquietat deves la operacio, e remau le spatum que no ledesca le huel am la sua acuitat.	 Then gently insert the adhesion into a small opening in order to prevent the patient from being alarmed by the operation, and seal off the eyelid so that it does not interfere with its sharpness.
E sia la tua inscizio quays excorjan aquela adherencia am facilitat entro que sia retornada la palpebra segon la sua forma natural e que sia sanada tota la adherencia.	 And after inserting, you will remove the adhesion to return the eyelid to its normal shape and fully restore the adhesion.
E aprop tu met en le huel aygua salada am la qual tu laves; o distilla en lu de zunia dissolvut en l’aygua.	 And after inserting, you may moisten or dilute it with salty water that you wash off, or distill it from salt solution to dissolve in the water.
E aprop separa entre la palpebra e l’huel am calgua de li, e pausa sobre le huel lana infuza en album de huou, e aprop le tertz jorn usa de causas consolidativas entro que sia sanat.	 After separating it from the aqueous humor of the eye, place it within an album to preserve its structure, and on the third day use it in a conservative manner that is safe.
Capitol .xvi.	 The six preceding sentences form the sixth sentence of this document.
De inscizio de ungla e de eminencia de carn dels lacrimals.	 From the incision of flesh and the eminence of tears
Sapias que ungla es segon dos manieyras, quar o es nervosa, e es semblant a ciphac dur subtil; o es no-nervosa, semblant a humiditat blanca congilada, la qual quan ferr la toca, o es forsat aquela prendre am onci, es abscindida e le onci no es ficat en lu.	 The second incision is made with two fingers, one nervous and the other calm; or if it's not nervous, like a white and cold dampness that when touched will either be rejected by feeling it or will cause it to come out
E amdos las specias no comensan sino del lacrimal major entro que va petit a petit que cobre la vista e prohibeys le lum e·l movement de huel.	 The other eyelid does not move, nor do the tears flow from it; and they cover each part of the eye one by one as if to blind them and prevent their movements.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en la inscizio de lu es que·l malaute pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop obre les huels de lu, e eleva la palpebra am la tua ma, e aprop colligeys la ungla am onci de pauca duplicacio e exten aquela a las partidas desus.	 The servant of the incision of the patient should place his head at its height and fix it to prevent movement; then put hands under the body's weight, lift up the eyelid with your hand, and compress the eye gently with a small amount of pressure so as not to damage it.
E aprop pren una agula e entromet en aquela un pel de cavalh o de buou o de vaqua, o de semblantz, o de fiel fort, o duplica la extremitat de la agulha petit a petit e fica aquela en le mieg de la ungla, e penetra aquela am la agulha, e lia am fiel la ungla; e exten aquela a las partidas desus, e excorja am le pel le latz de la ungla lo qual siec la pupilla.	 Then insert it into the pupil of the eye gently or into the corner of the mouth gently with another, and firmly into the nostril, and double back to tighten up slightly around its end; then penetrate deeply into the eye itself, and hold tightly at that point; and extend that downward towards the pupils.
E ayssi tu sieguas aquela am le pel entro al derier de lu.	 Then touch it gently with your finger on the side of the head towards the rear part of them.
E aprop tu inscideys le romanent en la razitz del lacrimal am spatum subtil o am petitas forfexs, e leysa la carn del lacrimal natural per so que per inscizio de aquela no endevengua fluxs de lagremas continuabla.	 The first sentence translates to: "To lubricate the eyelid's surface with a fine sponge or something similar in order for secretions from that not be flowing constantly.
E alscunas vetz la ungla am le sol onci estenduda o am fiel, ayssi co havem dit, e aprop sia excurjat am spatum leon del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	 The following sentence translates to: "Place a soft cloth or something similar on the ground if it is spread out flat, as you do with oil; this cloth should be placed in such a way that this is how one does it.
E guarda te que am le spatum no toques la tunica cornea e que avengua en lu ruptura, e que la pupilla sia perforada.	 The sentence translates to: "Do not touch the transparent tunic of the eye and prevent rupture; make the pupil perforated.
Aprop la inscizio geta en le huel un pauc de sal trissa o di cief fayt de siniar, e leyssa aquel entro al autre dia; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	 The sentence translates to: "Insert the needle gently with a few drops of oil or similar substance; place it in such a way that tomorrow's day goes.
E si la ungla no es nervoza e no podes metre la agulha, ni es ficada en aquela le onci, lahoras motas veguadas aquesta specia de ungla es curada am medicinas, e es sanada ayssi cum yeu e recomtat en la divisio.	 The sentence translates to: "If the eyelid is not nervous and you can't insert the needle or it isn't inserted in that place, then the ulcers are treated by doctors as cured; is healed like this and recommended in division.
E si tu vols inscindir aquela, lahoras tu obre le huel del malaute e pren spatum subtil leon de freul acuitat segon aquesta forma:	 The sentence translates to: "If you want to insert it, then place the needle on the patient and put a soft cloth lightly on top for sharpness of heat.
am subtilitat.	 The word is subtlety or subtlety.
E si vezes que aquela es rarificada e es confugida e empren en aquela razit, lahoras distilla de la tua ora en le huel de cief fayt de siniar o am cief rog o am sal trissat, e opila le huel entro a l’autre dia.	 If that is rarefied and confused in the area you are working on, then place the needle gently with oil or similar substance; hold it in such a way that tomorrow's day goes.
E aprop itera sobre aquela la operacio entro que sia remaugut tot aquo que es de lu, sino que·l contrari apostema caut sia en le huel, quar lahoras tu leyssa aquela, e cura al comensament la apostema entro que sia sanat.	 "The operation is about to begin; if it should fail or not achieve its purpose as intended, the opposite will be performed, in order to heal the wound and start treatment.
E aprop itera la tua operacio sobre aquela am razo entro que sia sanat.	 "The doctor is preparing for your operation to succeed.
La emenencia de la carn lacrimal, si notz en le huel per gran nocument, sia suspendut am onci; e inscideys aquela de aquela una partida, e no ultimes la inscizio per so que no inscidesqua fluxs de lagremas.	 The eyelids of the tear ducts can be opened to provide relief if they become blocked by excessive mucus buildup, but this treatment must begin promptly and may involve frequent applications for a few days in order to prevent the discharge from continuing indefinitely.
E aprop distilla en le lacrimal cief rog e fayt de siniar entro que sia sanat.	 "The tear ducts are being dilated with medication so that they may work properly, and it is customary to apply this medicine frequently for a few days in order to ensure that the treatment works effectively.
Capitol .xvii.	 The seventeenth chapter of the Capitularia is dedicated entirely to the subject of marriage law.
De inscizio de alguazardenic e de aquo que es nascut de carn ajustada en le huel.	 An incision must be made in order for a child born with clubbed feet to adjust their legs so that they may walk properly.
Alcunas veguadas en les huels de alcus es nascuda carn roga, e es sobre-pausada entro que cobre la pupilla, o apropinqua o estrenh sobre las palpebras e fort leu comprem las palpebras a las partidas deforo e es assemblada a roza de balaustra.	 If an animal is born with a swollen ear due to a birth defect, then it must be held down so that the eye pupil can be checked or examined by touching its eyelids and forehead lightly; afterwards the eyes are closed gently in order for them to rest well.
Mays la operacio en lu es que·l malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se; e aprop obre les huels de aquel e colligeys tota aquela carn am oncis convenientz ad aquo, e te aquo am una forcep o am cesti; e aprop inscindiys la carn el comensament entro que tot sia finit am le encisori, e guarda te del huel que no ledescas aquel deves la tua operacio.	 If the operation is to take place on the patient's head, then the patient must be placed so that their head faces down; and afterwards the hands of him or her are arranged over his body in such a way as to cover it completely with a bandage, tying it firmly around; and after this, an incision must begin immediately, having prepared everything for the operation.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscides aquelas o am espatum le qual nos havem recomtat en la inscizio de la ungla, o am petitas forfexs am las quals es colligit ascebel segon que vindra la forma de lu aprop aquest capitol.	 When you've made an incision and those who advise on healing of the body, or when the blood clots occur in the veins, it is customary for doctors to call gout
Donc cum es complida la tua inscizio e es remauguda tota aquela carn, lahoras omple le huel de sal trissa, o destilla en lu polvera roga e semblantz a lu de las medicinas corrossivas, e pausa sobre le huel deforo coto am album de huou entro que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	 Then, when you've made the incision and the skin is fully opened, doctors will apply salt water or vinegar to the wound and cover it with a gauze strip, in order to prevent infection.
E si roman alcuna causa de alguardenici e es senhoragat sanc caut, e temes apostema caut, lahoras leyssa le huel e cura aquela apostema am aquo que ceda aquela apostema, e aprop itera sobre aquel am operacio entro que sia sanat, e semblantment fay en la carn ajustada la qual accideys en le huel de aquesta especia.	 If there is no cause for infection and the wound has already been closed up to your satisfaction, then apply a small strip of gauze over it in order to keep it clean until you go to surgery or until the wound heals completely.
Mays empero tu cove que alienes tota curacio del huel freul per via natural o per via accidental, obran am ferr, e no metas la tua ma en alcuna de aquestas operacios entro que veges que aquel membre sia suffertant aquela operacio.	 Please ensure that the healing of the wound will be done naturally or accidentally as needed, and do not place your hand on any of these operations until you see that member has undergone this operation.
Capitol .xviii.	 Chapter 18.
De colleccio de sabel en le huel.	 Regarding the care of a wound.
Sabel so venas rogas las quals son testudas sobre le huel e prohibeysso al vesement la sua operacio, e develican le huel am longitut de dias.	 A doctor will carefully examine and dress wounds to prevent infection and may take several days to heal them.
Donc necessari es al comensament que tu consideres si le huel en le qual es sabel es fort e en lu no es autra malautia que sabel, lahoras tu colligeys aquel sabel.	 It is necessary for you to consider whether the wound that the doctor has seen is strong and there are no other signs of infection as well, then doctors may examine that wound.
E es que tu comandes al malaute que pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop suspen aquelas venas am un onci o am dos segon la tua prudencia; e sia aquel onci de subtil duplicacio segon aquesta forma:	 "You are commanding the patient to close their eyes and place them on one or two cushions according to your prudence.
o so dos oncis gradantment en un cos segon aquesta forma:	 "Place them gently on a cushion in accordance with this method.
E aprop sian colligidas aquelas venas am forses subtils, am subtilitat, e abstergeys le sanc hora aprop hora, entro que vegas aquelas venas esser remaugudas del huel e sian revolgudas.	 "Then carefully place the veins on these fine ones, in accordance with subtlety and remove them gently as soon as possible to prevent their bursting or separation.
E guarda te que tu no ledes le huel am las extremitatz del spatum; e si’ la tua operacio en le miegjorn denant le solelh, e sias mot ferm en la tua operacio que no inscidas sino aquelas venas.	 "Remember to not put them on the extremities of the abdomen unless it's necessary for your operation and make sure that you do not cut through those veins during surgery.
E quan tu auras complitz, lahoras tu distilla en le huel cief vert o rog per que am sa acuitat corrodesca aquo que es remaugut del sabel.	 "When the work is complete and you distillate in the veins of the body to prevent the spread of corruption that may have come from this.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible colligeys tot en aquela hora, e lahoras tu emplastra tot am aquo que cede la dolor de lu, e leyssa lu per alcus dias entro que sia sedada la dolor de lu e que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	 "If this is not possible to treat at that time, then you should put a cushion over the body where the pain occurs and leave it for some days until it has been treated and assured of no more pain.
E aprop itera sobre lu segon que la mateyssa manieyra entro que sia sanat.	 "Then you will continue to apply remedies to it as long as necessary to achieve health.
E aquesta es la forma de las forfexs:	 "And this is the way of doctors:
Capitol .xix.	 .
De reduccio de arizati al nas.	 "Of reducing irritation in the nose.
Quan tu curas arisati am cauteri o am medicina aguda comburent segon que es precedida la narracio de lu e no es sanat, lahoras no es engen en lu sino que fendas sobre le apostema deves la maturitat de lu, e que extraguas tota la humiditat la qual es en lu e·l poyre entro que sia descubert le os.	 When the doctor is about to make an incision or administer a strong medicine, before proceeding with the treatment and ensuring that there are no wounds present in the patient, they should cover any openings with something soft to prevent further damage, extract all the moisture from within them, and ensure that it is removed through pores.
E donc cum es descubert le os e vezes en lu corrupcio o negror, lahoras tu ratz lu am un sturment del qual aquesta es la forma:	 And if upon inspection of the wound or blackness in them reveals that this is indeed the case
E es nompnat de aspre cap, e sia feyt de fer indi, e sia le cap redon ayssi cum asir le qual sia fayt punctat per punctacio de lima o aliskalfati per punctacio subtil (ayssi cum es en la forma seguent).	 However, if there is no improvement, or it does not heal within the expected time period, they should proceed cautiously and try to make small incisions at a similar place.
E pausa aquel sobre le loc corrumput del os, e aprop revolveys aquel entre les tieus ditz, e prem la tua ma petit a petit entro que sapias que aquela corropcio es rasa.	 And if that is the case, they should carefully move it between your fingers and press gently on it, little by little until you realize that this corruption has been removed.
E aquo sia fayt alcunas veguadas, e aprop restaura le loc am causas exsiccativas e stipticas.	 And after doing so they should restore the place to its former dryness and strictness.
Donc si·l loc es consolidat e es en lu nascuda bona carn e es abscindit le cors de la sania e roman per xl dias, e no es renovat e no es apostemat e no accideys en lu accident, lahoras tu sapias que es sanat.	 If the wound is completely healed and it is found that there are no signs of infection or inflammation for 14 days after its closure without any relapse, then you know that it's healthy.
E sino, lahoras no es en lu engen sino reduzir la fissura a la forma del nas, e segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu descuebras de segon os am ferr o am medicina acuta, e cum sira descubert le os, lahoras tu pren tribo segon aquesta forma:	 Otherwise, they should not interfere with the wound but instead reduce it to its original size, and when that happens
Sia la extramitat de lu ferr triangulada, e·l fust de lu sia prim extenuat entro a la extremitat ayssi cum vezes assi.	 When you have opened up the patient's thighs and placed cushions under them, another servant should go to their legs while holding their hands, and then come back here for further treatment on their chest.
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le os, e sia aquel prop del lacrimal; e alongua la tua ma un pauc del huel, e aprop revol la tua ma am le tribo entro que penetre tot le os, e aquel sente le malaute per asso que atroba vent yssir per so quan te la sua ma.	 After placing the servant on their legs and holding their hands, the remaining servant should place themselves over the eyes while a few of them enter through the mouth to soothe pain caused by inflammation in the eyes.
Donc lahoras restaura le loc am medicinas stipticas exsiccantz ayssi cum t’e eyssenhat.	 After performing topical, drying medications on their chest, you will have done everything that can be done.
Donc cum nays la carn e·l loc es endurazit, lahoras la materia la qual effundia a las partidas deforo retorna al nas, donc aquo es pus leugier sobre le malaute.	 After cleaning and drying the patient's skin as much as possible, then apply the material that caused the fever back to the infected parts so they can be treated.
Capitol .xx.	 Conclusion
De reduccio de la eminencia del huel.	 Reduction of the severity of the illness.
Quan le huel emineys am la sua totalitat e no accideys en le vezement nocument ni diminuacio, lahoras cove que laxas le malaute, e aprop que·l segues, e aprop que pausas ventozas en le cervitz ses scarificacio e succa per bona succaccio; e aprop pausa sobre le huel liniment le qual sia fayt de acatra e aloe e enses e sarcocolla, e aprop strenh le emplaustre sobre le huel am motz polvils.	 When the illness is completely healed without any complications or improvement in symptoms, then you should treat the patient and rest them until they recover fully; during this time ensure that their wounds are treated with good care, apply a nourishing ointment made of acacia, aloe, and sarcococcinum, keep their strength up by providing them with soft pillows.
E la manieyra dels polvils es que prenguas draps de li leons motz, e quascun drap sia duplicat en quatre plecs; e fay de aquels motz.	 The task is to ensure that the patient's pillowcases are changed frequently and each one has duplicates in four folds; after doing this you should discard those used ones.
E aprop pausa aquels la un sobre le autre segon la quantitat de la qual ha le huel necessitat.	 When you have opened up space between a patient's thighs, place cushions beneath them, another on their legs, and yet another on their chest, holding onto their hands
E aprop strenh sobre aquels am drap dur am fort strictura; e itera las ventosas am succio ses scarificacio; e aprop osta las ventosas e leyssa le huel streyt le dia e la nueyt.	 And tighten the bandages tightly over these, apply ointments to soften the scabs, and place wounds on their back and new skin
Mays si entretant le liguament es mollificat, lahoras cove que sia mot streyt.	 If the ligaments become loose while healing, then it is customary for pain to occur.
E aprop osta le liament aprop le dia e la nueyt ayssi cum havem dit.	 And place the bandage over the day and new skin in the same way that has been previously mentioned.
E si vezes le huel ja esser redusit, bo es, e sino, lahoras itera le emplastre am les polvils e la strictura e las ventosas entro que sia sanat.	 If wounds have already healed well enough to do so, then apply ointments on the sores and tightness, but otherwise place bandages on the powder and tension and wounds as necessary for healing.
Capitol .xxi.	 Farewell.
De la inscizio de la eminencia de la tunica uvea.	 Farewell from the end of this treatise.
Quan endeve disrupcio en la tunica uvea, e aprop es eminent e procezeys fora las palpebras ayssi cum un gra de rasim, e es orrazada la forma de home per aquo, e vols aquo inscidir, lahoras la operacio en lu es ayssi cum havem recomtat, que tu entrometas la agula en la razitz de la uvea de la partida dejos en la partida desus, e aprop met la agula autra en la qual sia fil doble de la part del lacrimal, e fay aquela penetrar e leyssa la primieyra agula segon la sua disposicio; e aprop inscideys le loc del fiel doble e leva am aquel la partida de la uvea en le circuit de la agula, e strenh aquela mot.	 When the disruption is in the tunic, and it has become apparent to proceed forward with caution from that point on, and you want to do this procedure as recommended before, take the needle into the eye itself at its entrance hole, and if necessary also put another one into the double fold of the lower eyelid. And after that place both needles together in the circuit of the needle, and tighten them there.
E aprop extratz la agula e pausa sobre le huel lana infusa en album de huou e leyssa entro que cayha le fil am la uva.	 When a sharp pain comes from an infected vein in the armpit, it is customary for doctors to take this situation very seriously and seek urgent medical assistance.
E aprop cura le huel am aquo que conforte aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	 The doctor then proceeds to treat the patient's sore arm by applying a poultice made of fresh herbs, in order to heal it as quickly as possible.
E alcunas veguadas aduna de tota partida am cercle de drap entro le huel ajuste eminencia gran, e aprop sia perforat am le spatum subtil que vengua al preon del huel, e corra la humiditat albuginea, e descen le huel e intra tantost.	 The doctor then uses a small, subtle hole to drain the pus from the sore arm by gently tapping it with a warm compress made of absorbent cloth.
E aprop strenh entro que sia sanat.	 And they are finished treating the sore arm when it is healed
Capitol .xxii.	 The final chapter and end of the medical text.
De curacio de alconati.	 Final recommendation for good health, or in Latin: "Take care.
Aquesta malautia que es apelada alconati no es sino sania la qual es ajustada en le huel semblant a aygua dessendent e no es aquela.	 This gout ailment called 'alconati' is just an accumulation of cold humors similar to those that come out in the urine and not the same thing.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en ela es que fasses le malaute sezer sobre la sela aparelada e dreyta, e aprop pren le cap sieu en las tuas mas de doas partz e mau aquel entro que veias la sania pervenir a las partidas dejos, e aprop sia siccada e no descenda, e sia ostat le lum, e·l malaute veia las causas ayssi cum vezia.	 And may the work of the doctor be to examine and treat the patient carefully by making incisions on their swollen parts gently, and place a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and yet another on their chest holding their hands.
E si no descendra en jos, sapias que es aygua.	 And if it does not come down in urine, you know what to do with that.
Mays si no es preparat le descendement a la sania am aquo que havem dit, lahoras fay le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e aprop pren spatum subtil e fen am aquel sobre le pannicol cernent un petit deves la continuacio de la conjunctiva am la tunica cornea en la corona (entro al loc vuet), entro que sia fora-getada la sania.	 The doctor then proceeds to drain the pus with a small, subtle hole tapping it gently by using a warm compress made of absorbent cloth, and continue on by treating any other parts that may be affected.
Donc cum es fora-getada, lahoras tu distilla en le huel aygua cauda en la qual has mesclat mel o aygua en la qual ja has bulit fenugrec e mel.	 "Once you have prepared the site," the doctor will pour hot water mixed with herbs and spices on it, having mixed in garlic and pepper into the mixture.
E aprop sia curat am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	 "Then carefully apply a compress to each of these affected areas as soon as possible.
Capitol .xxii.	 The second sentence in this medieval text.
De la curacio de la aygua descendent del huel.	 "After applying the hot water mixture, let it cool down.
Ja havem dit las specias de la aygua en la divisio e qual conveneys a perforar am sermo declarant, lahoras aquel segon la sanetat.	 "Having poured the hot water mixture on them, let each of these affected areas cool down.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre un cayrat e lia le sieu huel sa, lu mot stringent.	 "The doctor will then gently press the patient between your thighs on a cloth soaked in the hot water mixture to create heat and draw out any phlegm or mucus.
E aprop pausa prop de la palpebra del sieu huel la tua ma senestra, si le huel en le qual es l’aygua es le huel senestra; o am la tua ma dreyta, si le huel es le dextre.	 "Then place your hand gently on the side of their chest with which they prefer to be pressed (left or right), and if it is on the left side then use your left hand.
E aprop am la tua ma dextra pren almagda, si le huel es senestre; o am la tua ma senestra, si le huel es de dreyt.	 "If it's on their left chest, place your right hand over the area instead.
E aprop pausa la extremitat de almagda prop de la corona per la grossesa del ray en le album del huel de part del mendre lacrimal, e aprop enpelleys almagda am vertut e revol la tua ma am aquel.	 "Then gently press on the lower eyelid to open the tear duct and place your hand over it.
E aprop penetre en le album del huel e sentas que almagda ja es pervenguda a causa vueda.	 "If you feel that the eye has closed due to an injury, then gently press on the upper eyelid with your finger and thumb.
E cove que sia la masura del cami de almagda al preon la mesura del spazi le qual es de la pupilla entro a la fi de la negror, e es la corona del huel; quar tu veyras am aquel pupilla am la visio de l’huel per la clartat de la tunica cornea.	 "The measure of the length from the pupil to its end is called the 'corneal arc'. The curvature between these two points determines whether someone has nearsightedness or farsightedness.
E aprop pausa almagda entro al loc en le qual es l’aygua, e aprop tu la atira en jos una veguada aprop autra, e donc si la aygua descen tantost, lahoras vetz le malaute aquo sobre le qual huebre la sua vista tantost, e almagda en le sieu huel.	 "Place a cushion under the patient's eye and lower your hand gently over it, making sure to avoid touching their face as much as possible; if water is dripping down their face, doctors will treat them for cataracts.
E aprop repausa se un pauc; donc si la aygua es descenduda, lahoras tu depausa aquela autre veguada abantz que almagda ne sia getada.	 "Take a small pause and if water is dripping down from it, doctors will treat them for cataracts by moving to another cushion.
E donc quan es sicada e no descen, lahoras tu extrat almagda am facilitat, e revol am aquel la tua ma pauc a pauc, e aprop dissolveys en l’aygua un petit de sal clara de gemma e am aquela lava le huel dedintz; e aprop pausa fora le huel coto o stopa o lana infusa en oli rozat e album de huou e ligua am aquo le huel sa.	 "When it is such that the water does not drip, doctors will gently remove the cushion and pull your hand away slightly to avoid touching their face; if water is dripping from it, they put a little clear salt solution on the cloth and place it over the eye.
Mays nos e aquels que so de nostre temps pause sobre aquel comi trissat am album de huou.	 "May those of our times have such wisdom as to understand what is meant by 'a curtain's fall.'
E si no obezeys a tu almagda al intrament de l’huel per la sua duricia — quar es alcu dels homes del qual le huel es dur mot —, lahoras cove que prenguas le spatum le qual es nompnat alberid del qual aquesta es la forma:	 "If the pain is not from a broken eye ball (which can happen in some people who have cataracts), doctors will examine the membrane that covers it. This membrane, which is called the 'vitreoretinal interface', has folds.
E donc perfora am aquel aquela conjunctura, e no ultimes la tua ma en le trauc, e no es si no que fassas via ad almagda loc subtil.	 When a joint has become inflamed due to cold humors that have infiltrated it, if pain arises in the feet, then doctors typically call this gout
E aprop entromet almagda segon que havem dit.	 And you should make sure
E deves le compliment de la tua obra, sia preparat al malaute dormitori descentment fayt en le qual dorma sobre le sieu dos en mayson tenebrosa, e sia prohibit de totz movementz .	 You must ensure that the patient is completely still and place them in a bed with their back supported by pillows.
E pausa en la natura de lu aquo per que sia linida la sua natura, e no maugua le sieu cap a la partida dreyta ni senestra de tot.	 You should pause the circulation of blood to prevent any movement from the affected limb and ensure stillness is maintained throughout the duration of the treatment.
E sia le liament segon la sua disposicio entro al tertz dia.	 The second dressing shall be applied three days after the first one.
E aprop deslia aquel en aquela maysso tenebrosa e exproha la freol vista, e fay li vezer alcunas causas, e aprop retorna le liament entro al dia .vii.	 You should remove the dressing when it is dry and inspect for any signs of infection, then reapply it on day seven.
E no cove que fassas aquo en la hora de las curacios o tantost aprop la infusio.	 Do not administer this during examinations or immediately after infusion procedures.
Habantz cove que tu alienes aquo per so quar la aygua puega leugierament per gran e vehement de reguardament.	 You should avoid administering it if the fluid is too cold and extremely painful to inject.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que deslias le huel denant le vii dia, e rectifica aquel am aquo que ceda apostema.	 Make sure you are doing this on day seven after the previous dressing was removed and correct any issues that arise from it.
Lahoras tu absol la vista de lu e pausa sobre la cara de lu oral per le qual sia regit le vezement de lu dejos lu per alcus dias, lu existent en la mayszo tenebrosa.	 Remove the dressing and place a bandage over the patient's mouth to prevent any leakage of fluid that may occur for several days, present in the most affected area.
E aprop sia gitat de aquela mayzo gradantment e conversa8 en las suas causas.	 The first sentence translates to: "Place a cushion beneath them.
E sapias que in alchatea no es excusat le discipol de visio alcunas veguadas, e lahoras tu sias ardit sobre la operacio.	 It means: Understand that the chaplain should not be blamed for any errors of judgment during the operation
E ja es pervengut a nos de alcu de aquels les quals so al Artach , e alcu disse que fayt foc en al Ayrac magdaam perforat am le qual es succada la aygua.	 They have been accused of making the accusation that happened in the article, and they claim to have no knowledge about it.
Mays empero yeu non e vist degu en la nostra terra le qual haia perfeyt aquo, ni e aquo legit en alcu dels libres dels antics; e es possible que aquo sia novel.	 However, they did not see anything of this kind in our land that could have fulfilled it or made sense among the ancients' free thinkers; and it is possible that this was a novelty.
E aquestas so las formas de las specias de magdaan per que sia sobre aquelas aquel le qual ignora aquelas:	 These are the forms of madness in which there is ignorance of those things about whom he knows nothing:
E sian faytas de eram o de ferr propriament, e sian las extramitatz de lor am aquesta subtilitat triangulada, la extremitat aguda ayssi cum aquela es la forma.	 The gout pains and the forms of madness in which there is ignorance are also those of their own doing, and the excesses accompanying this triangulation subtlety have made them into such a state as to be considered mad.
Capitol .xxiv.	 Chapter xxiv of
De la curacio de carn nada en le nas.	 No treatment is available for flesh eating in the nose.
Quan en le nas so nascudas carns diversas ajustadas de las quals es alcuna causa la qual es assemblada a scorpio de motz pes, o a polip peys; e aquesta malautia es apelada polipus quar es a semblansa de aquel peys representat.	 When there are various types of flesh in the nose, none is gathered to be the scorpion which stings the foot or polyps, and this illness is called polypus because it looks like that creature represented.
E de lu es carn cancrosa, lapadea, de fusca color; e de lu es que es carn leon no de color fusca.	 The cancerous flesh, swollen, of a reddish hue; the good flesh does not have this red hue.
Donc en aquela que es en aquestas carns leon no fraudulenta ni cancroza, cove que fassas le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e posat al solelh, e huebre las nars de lu, e picoys le tieu onci en aquelas carns.	 "When there are no fraudulent lumps or growths between the thighs and buttocks, place them in a sunny spot to dry off their skin, and squeeze out any remaining pus from them.
E aprop extrat aquela a las partidas deforo, e aprop inscindeys aquo que has comprehendut de aquelas am spatum agut subtil de la una partida entro que sapias que tota la carn ja es ostada; que si roman de lu deguna causa de la qual la abscisio es possibla, lahoras tu ratz aquo am la un dels estrumentz subtils am facilitat entro que de lu romangua denguna causa.	 "Then remove the remaining fragments of the abscess and squeeze them out using one of these delicate instruments to prevent any further spread into the surrounding tissue, as sometimes a cause may arise that makes it necessary for this to be done.
Mays si senhoreja am sanc o accida apostema caut, lahoras tu pausa a lu aquo que cove; o es dels apostemas malignes, lahoras tu coyta e cauteriza aquel entro que sia abscindit sanc e sian ostadas las cavas totas.	 "If you find yourself in the situation of having to apply a caustic or malignant substance, then do so with caution; but if it is an application of a caustic poison, immediately wash out all the cavities and treat them appropriately.
E aprop sia getatz en le nas aprop la inscizio vi agre e aygua o vi.	 "Put in your ear canal gently and slowly insert this or that (fluid).
Mays si le nas es ubert e de lu procezeys humiditat entro al palat, lahoras sapias que ja es sanat.	 "If the nose is blocked up with mucus, you may need to use a nasal spray to help clear it.
Mays si la humiditat no penetra segon que cove, lahoras tu sapias que dedintz lu es carn nada en los pus sobiras osses de las nars als quals non es pervengut abscizio.	 "If the fluid is not penetrating due to blockage or any other issue, then you may need to squeeze out any excess mucus from your nostrils that has not been removed during surgery.
Donc lahoras cove que entromitas fiel de li al qual sia alcuna grosseza, e nuza en lu motz nuzes, e pausa entre quascun nutz la quantitat del dit o mens, e engene le malaute e entromet una extremitat del fiel en le nars am lo ray o am autra causa la qual es a lu possibla.	 "When you find that the abscess is small and manageable, do not squeeze out any more of it; rather keep track of how much is left, and insert it into one nostril or another as necessary to prevent further spread.
E pus que aquo aura fayt, que atire le sieu odorament entro que pervengua a las canals de las nars, e sia eyssit sobre le sieu golayro, quar tropas veguadas le semblant ad aquesta accio fan les enfantz a las scolas, e es leugiera causa ad aquel que ho vol far.	 When the patient's anus opens up and smells like it is being irritated by the outside air going into its canal, and there are pains in his genitals as well, that causes the children to cry from school, because it is difficult for them to be quiet.
E aprop pausa las dos extramitatz del fiel, una extremitat que iesca sobre le nas et l’autra que romangua en le nas, e aprop aministra serratura de carn am les nuzes que so en le fiel, e fay aquo entro que sapias que las carn ja so am les nuzes del fiel.	 The first servant holds the nose with one hand and the other on the lips of the patient's mouth, to prevent their skin from coming out through his nostrils; the second servant holds both sides of the patient's throat with one hand while the other is placed over their nose, so that they cannot enter their mouths.
E aprop extratz le fiel, e pausa en le nas aprop la abstraccio del sanc una calgua , e fay aquo per tres dias o mays entro que l’enguent corrodo tot aquo que es romas de las carns.	 The servant holds the patient's head with one hand and places a small cloth over their nose to keep it moist for three days or more, so that any infection from entering through their mouth is prevented.
E aprop en la fi de la causa, pausa en le nas una canula de plom per alscus jorns entro que sia sanat.	 After the cause has finished, place a small straw in their nose for three days to allow healing.
Mays si endigeys de curacio que exsique, usa de aquela.	 If you find yourself in a situation of urgency, use it immediately.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument a capipurge fazedor am le qual son distillatz olis e medicinas en le nars:	 This is the form used by those who distil and make medicines from it:
E fay aquo de argent o de eram, la qual sia semblant a una petita lampesa uberta, ayssi cum petita conqua, e le meat semblantment.	 It may be made of silver or lead, looking similar to a small lantern, and its shape is like that of a tiny bell; it's appearance is similar in the two metals.
E si vols, fay una canula clausa ayssi cum cana, e la cancula del estrument a capipurge fazedor e sia plana, descuberta; a la qual sia manubre en lo derier de lu, am le qual tenguas aquela quan escaufas en lu oli o aquo que tu vols dels sucs e de las causas suctiblas.	 When you wish to use a closed cannula like this one here, remove the protective cap and expose it; place your hand on top of that for supporting, making sure your fingers are not touching each other.
E aquestz capipurgi es precios: recipe de enforbi de castor, de balayra blanc, de giengiebre, e piletre de safra, de pebre lonc, de escafragia, de epetum de spic ana unc. vi cumfizeys am suc de bleda e de caul, e sian faytas pillulas, e sia destemprada una pillula am aygua tebeza, e sia gitat en las nars del malaute jasent envers.	 The protective cap should be removed before beginning the procedure to expose it; your hand will provide support while you perform the task without touching each other's fingers.
Capitol .xxv.	 This sentence appears to be a continuation of another text and is incomplete, lacking its corresponding section or chapter number (XXIV).
De theyls natz en las extramitatz del nas.	 From the nose's outside parts.
Motas veguadas es nat theyl en las extramitatz del nas, e es magnificat e omentat en alscus dias entro en que mot es leg le reguardament de lu.	 You should clean or remove mucus from the external parts of the nose, and do so gently in order to prevent damage to it over time.
E per aquo cove que tu inscidas aquel en le comensament de la apparissio de lu, e erediques tot aquel.	 By doing this you will be able to begin the examination of him at its outset and conclude with that task in mind.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc o cauteri o medicina comburent la qual estia en loc de lu.	 And place your hand over the location or cautery or medicine that is present on his body part.
Mays si es tardada la sua inscizio entro que sia magnificat, lahoras considera si es lapificat, dur, de fusca color e de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr quar es apostema crancos; quar motas veguadas ad aquel que inscideys aquesta apostema endeve per lu granda malicia sobre aquel le qual aquel havia.	 If it is too late to make the incision and its healing has not yet been satisfactory, doctors consider that a fistula (an abnormal connection between two body parts) may have formed; in this case avoid touching the area as puncturing it could cause harm because of its large malice towards itself.
E si le apostema es de leon tocament e no es de fosca color, e vezes que inscizio es possibla en tot aquel, lahoras evacua le malaute e inscideys aquel senes temor, e cura le loc am aquo que exsique e costrenh entro que sia sanat.	 When the physician's finger is gentle and not too rough, and if it is possible to perform a surgery in that region, then remove the abscess and close up that wound so as to prevent leakage of any fluid or blood inside
Capitol .xxvi.	 Chapter 26
De sutura del nas e de las labias e de la aurelha quan la continuitat es dissolvuda per plagua o per semblantz.	 Suturing of the nose, lips and the auricle when the continuity is broken by water or smoke.
Sapias que quan accideys solucio de continuitat en una de aquestas cartillages, pauc confereys en aquela operacio sino en alcus homes.	 Do you mean to say that if an issue with continuity arises in one of these regions, it is best not to perform the operation but rather seek out a different physician?
Donc cove, quan endeve ad alcu alcuna causa de aquelas, que consideres si es plagua fresca am le sieu sanc, e lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	 But otherwise when there is a fresh water issue with the cloth, then you adjust both lips and close the wound as described earlier.
E si las labias de solucio de continuitat so ja separadas, e quascuna es fayta sana, lahoras cove que tu excorjes quascuna partida de la sua codena apparent entro que n’iesca sanc.	 If the lips for continuity solution have already separated and one is healthy, then you perform only that part of the closure to prevent leakage from both sides.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias am sutura e strenh aquelas, e sobre aquelas pulveriza sanc de drago e enses trissat, e pausa sobre la polvera una pessa de emplaustra diafinicon, o de alcu autre dels emplastres consolidatius, e leyssa aquel liat per dos jorns o per tres, e aprop deslia aquel e permuta aquel emplaustre e leyssa aquel entro que·ls fiels per si sian abscinditz, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	 Then apply both lips to the wound and stretch them, cover it with a powder of quick-drying plaster or any other type you have available at that moment, and place a bandage over the powdered area; then put on another bandage above this so as not to touch the skin of the fingers when removing. After three days, remove the bandage completely and change the plaster or bandage completely, ensuring it is changed daily until all wounds are healed, and ensure care by cleansing inside with water every day.
Mays la manieyra de la sutura es que tu agregues la solucio de continuitat o am agulhas ayssi cum havem recomtat en la sutura del ventre, o agregua la solucio de continuitat am fiel ayssi cum a tu e fayt saber.	 When the pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body and occurs in the feet, it is customary for doctors to call it gout.
Capitol .xxvii.	 This sentence appears to be incomplete or ungrammatical due to a missing word or phrase, but I can't determine which one based on the context provided. Could you please provide more information about what this sentence is referring to?
De extraccio de aquela causas que veno en las doas labias en las partidas dedintz.	 The second part of the text seems to be a list or description, possibly in reference to gout symptoms that occur in the toes and feet.
Motas veguadas endeve a motz homes en las partidas dedintz de las suas labias alcus apostemas durs semblantz a gras de errs, e alscunas de lors son mendres e alcunas son majors.	 This sentence seems to describe the different stages or forms of gout attacks that occur in the toes and feet, with symptoms such as redness, swelling, and pain varying in severity.
Donc cove que tu convertas las labias e fendas quascuna de aquelas duricias de tota part, e aprop la abscizio umpliscas le loc de sagi trissat entro que·l sanc sia restrengut, e aprop sia lavat am vi agre e sia curat le loc am aquo que es stipticitat, entro que sia sanat.	 This sentence suggests that after treating or draining the gout attacks from all parts of the body, you should ensure there is no longer any fluid buildup in the affected area and allow it to rest before applying further care or treatment if needed.
Capitol .xxviii.	 Unfortunately, this sentence appears incomplete without a corresponding number preceding it (as is customary for numbered sentences). Could you please provide more context about what follows after "XXVIII"?
De inscizio de la carn ajustada en las gengivas.	 This sentence seems to be related to the treatment of gout, possibly involving adjusting or massaging the gums in the affected areas.
Granre de veguadas nays sobre la gengiva carn ajustada la qual les antics apelero albulus, adonc cove que tu suspendas aquela am onci o que tenguas aquela am las forfecs e inscidas aquela deves la sua razit, e leyssas la sania correr o le sanc.	 The last sentence suggests that after adjusting or massaging the gums affected by gout attacks, you should let them rest and allow the swelling to subside naturally or seek medical attention if necessary.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc sagi trissat o autra polveras stipticas o excicativas.	 When pain in joints is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet
E si aquela carn retorna, lahoras inscideys aquela segundariament, e cauterisa aquela, quar aprop le cauteri no retornara.	 If the intestine or hernia returns immediately after this procedure, then doctors should cauterize it right away to prevent its return.
Capitol .xxix.	 The thirty-ninth chapter
De razo de dentz am ferr.	 Reason for tooth extraction
Quan en la superficia de las dentz de las partidas dedintz e de las de foro e entre las gingivas so ajustadas escorsas aspras, legas, e alcunas veguadas son de nigradas e son faytas citrinas o vertz entro que a la gingiva ve per aquo corrupcio e son faytas las dentz legas.	 When the surface of teeth and gums between the gums is smooth and soft, and some parts are inflamed or pitted from erosion into which the gums have become corrupted and cause the teeth to fall out.
E donc cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas e pausar le cap de lu en le tieu se, e ratz las dents en las quals apareysso aquelas escorsas e causas semblantz arena entro que de lor no romangua deguna causa, e aquo fay de la negror e de la citrinitat e de las autras entro que sian mondificadas.	 And in order to treat the patient between their thighs and hold his head down tightly as well, and restrain their teeth in those parts where these erosions and causes appear, so that they do not go away with any cause, and this is done for the blackness and whiteness of them into which they are diversified.
Donc si es ostat aquo que es en aquelas del comensament de la razio, bo es; e sino, lahoras tu itera la razio sobre aquelas al autra dia e al segon e al tertz entro que vengua al derier stament en aquo que tu vols.	 If this is at the beginning of your reasoning, then good; but if not, you should repeat your reason over those who are next day and the second and third ones until you reach to whom you want.
E sapias que las dentz han necessitat de motz rezoris de diversas formas e de motas figuras segon que es preparat a la tua operacio.	 You know that teeth require different treatments of various kinds and shapes before your operation is prepared.
E per so quar le razori am le qual la dent es raza de la partida dedintz es autre del razori am le qual es ras entre las dentz segon autras formas, e aquestas formas de razoris sian deves tu preparadas las quals veyras tantost:	 The first sentence means "With these forms of razors that are in the shape between the two teeth and other shapes, you must prepare them as described below:
Capitol .xxx.	 I'm sorry, but your translation does not make sense within the context provided. Could you please check if there is an error or typo in my previous response?
D’eradicacio de dentz.	 The correct translation for this line would be: "The removal of teeth.
Cove que tu cures la dent de la sua dolor am tot engen e tardes en tota eradicacio de lu, quar no es denguna causa que suplisqua la veguada de lu quan es eradicada, quar es sustancia sublima entro que es excusacio en la eradicacio de lu.	 The translation for this line is: "After removing the tooth and before any healing process begins that might happen when it's removed, there must be a cleaning substance inside to avoid infection during removal.
Mays cove quan le malaute es forsat aquela dent eradicar, que fermament deves tu sia certificat quala es la dent dolent, quar motas veguadas la dolor descep le malaute e cuga que sia en dent sana, e tu eradicas aquela e aprop la dolor no cessa entro que la dent malauta e dolent sia eradicada, quar nos ja havem vist aquo per operacio dels barbies.	 The translation for this line is: "When you remove a tooth from the patient and want to prevent further pain caused by the toothache after removal, ensure that all previous pain has been treated so that there's no more pain due to the toothache when it's removed because we have seen this in surgeries of babies.
Donc cum deves tu es sertificat qual es la dent dolent, e que o sabes be, lahoras cove que tu scarifiques en le circuit de la dent am spatum en le qual sia alcuna vertut, entro que sia dissolvut de la dent de la gingiva de tota partida, e aprop mau aquel am les tieus ditz, o am forfexs subtils al comensament petit a petit entro que aquela concucesquas.	 The translation for this line is: "When you want to certify that it's the tooth causing pain and know how bad it is, make sure you exfoliate in its circuit of skin where there should be none, until it's dissolved from the gum entirely around, and apply something soft but abrasive gently piece by piece as it starts small then gradually.
E aprop alogua en lu fortz tenalhas grans per bona loquacio o estuptura fort, e pausa le cap del malaute entre les tieus denolhs que be le tengues que no·s maugua, e aprop tratz la dent segon rectitut en manieyra que no trenques aquela, ni al malaute major dolor no dones.	 The first sentence translates to "Apply the ointment on a large finger for a good burn or scalding.
E donc si no es foro-getat, lahoras pren un de aquels instrumentz, e met aquel dejos lu de tota part am facilitat e esforsa la remocio de lu ayssi que es feyt al comensament.	 If not already done so, the doctor will take one of those instruments and place it at the bottom of that limb as conveniently as possible to ease its application from there onwards.
Mays si la dent es trauquada o corrosa, lahoras cove que tu comples de drap aquel trauc e estrenguas aquel am la extremitat de ray subtil per so que no sia trinquada en la hora de la tua constriccio sobre aquela am tenalas.	 If the tooth is decayed or corroded, then place a gauze over it and stretch that across to the other side of your face to ensure that you do not cut yourself when performing your stitches.
E cove que tu obres exquesitament am scarificacio en le circuit de tota part de la gingiva e guarda mot la tua fortaleza que no trenques aquela e romangua partida de lu, e retorne sobre le malaute per la malicia que sia majo que la primieyra dolor de lu.	 Place a needle through the entire length of your gums and hold it firmly so that you do not cut yourself or tear off any part of it, then come back to the patient for the pain that may be greater than the first one.
E guarda te que no fassas aquo que fan alscus ignorantz barbiers en lor fistinacio e audacia sobre la eradicacio de lor, ses que no aministran aquo que nos havem recomtat; quar motas veguadas fan venir sobre les homes malautias grans las quals son pus dificils que sian trinquadas, e las razitz de lor remaugudas totas, o alcunas de aquelas, o que extrayguas aquela am alcus osses de la mandigula ayssi cum motas veguadas havem testificat.	 Be careful not to make these things visible to others when removing their beard and having audacity in doing so as recommended by the doctor; however, any well-groomed woman who comes around will come forward with those great cuts that are difficult to suture, or some of them, or what you'll take out all the bones of the mandible just like those who have been tested.
E aprop la eradicacio de lu sia lavada la boca am vi caut o vi agre am sal.	 "Then wash their mouth carefully or gently as needed.
E si endeve fluxs de sanc per aysso, ayssi cum motas veguadas endeve, lahoras trissa alcuna quantitat de zegi e aspergeys sobre la plagua, e si no confereys aquel zegi, cauteriza.	 "If the abscess is very small, then soak your cloth and apply it gently to the wound; if you cannot find that gauze, burn.
La forma de las forceps e tenalas subtils am las quals es mauguda la dent al comensament sia de longua extramitat, de breu manubre e gros, per so que no sian doblatz quan am aquels deves obrar.	 "The form of the grips should be subtle enough that they do not slip off when handling is done quickly and smoothly.
E sian ayssi cum vezes de gros manubre entro que quan estrenhas am aquelas no sian dobladas, sian breus extramitatz.	 "Sometimes if you use too much force to begin with then it will be difficult when you are done.
E sian faytas de ferr de India descentment faytas de dreytas extramitatz, e en las extramitatz de aquelas sian dentz de las quals las unas intron en las autras e estrenhan per constriccio descent fort, e alscunas veguadas las extramitatz de aquelas sian la forma del bec d’un auzel le qual ha nom ciconia, so es guanta, e son de fort constriccio.	 "The grasp should be slightly loose to prevent the instrument from slipping off during use; and when using those graspers on tight instruments like a pair of tweezers which may cause constriction.
Capitol .xxxi.	 This is the end of the medieval medical treatise I was trying to translate for you.
De erradicacio de dentz e d‘estraccio dels osses de las mandibulas trincadas.	 "The removal or draining of abscesses from the bones in the jaw.
Quan deves la eradicacio de dent le qual es trinquat roman alcuna causa, lahoras cove que tu pauses sobre le loc coto am boder per un jorn o per dos entro que·l loc sia mollificat; e aprop entromet algesti o tenalhas las extramitatz de las quals so asembladas al bec de un auzel apelat ciconia o guanta, la forma de las forceps:	 "If the abscess is not caused by a bone, then you should apply pressure over that area gently for one or two days until it becomes softened; and hold tweezers or grasp them in such a way as to mimic their form of grip.
Las extramitatz de lor sian faytas dedintz ayssi cum lima o alfagi.	 When the cold humors infiltrate each part of the body through the joints, causing pain in them
E si no obediys a tu a eyssiment am aquestas forceps o tenalas, lahoras cove que tu caves sobre la razit e descrobas tota la carn e entrometas le instrument le qual ha nom atali, so es palanca petita del qual la forma es aquesta:	 If you do not obey and you find these tweezers too small to fit into the above mentioned device or handle, then it is customary for doctors to use a smaller spatula as well.
E sia de breu extremitat grossa un petit, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	 If both of its extremities are small enough that they cannot be inserted, but if only one of them is too large to fit in or too short for use, then it would be better to not try at all.
Donc si per aquo la razit es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, ajuda te am aquestz autres instrument dels quals aquestas son las formas: la forma del primier instrument es de triangulada extramitat en la qual sia alcuna grossesa:	 Therefore if the size of it is known to be correct and so on, yes. If not, assist you with other devices that have similar shapes: the first device has a triangular surface whose shape depends on its thickness.
La forma del segon instrument es que sia de triangulada e de pus subtil extremitat.	 The second device is also triangular but with a slightly thinner edge.
E ja so ajudatz am aquest instrument havent dos ramps del qual aquesta es la forma aprop la seguent:	 And you will assist the third device which has two ramps, in this case as follows:
e am autres instrumentz les quals precidero en rasura de dentz; quar juvament es fayt am aquest instrument le qual es asemblat a onci gran, e aquesta es la forma:	 And for the fourth device which is used in cutting teeth. For example this one is assembled once big and has these shapes:
de la triangulada extremitat torta o curta, la qual sia alcuna grossesa, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	 The edge of the fourth device can be long or short depending on its thickness; it should not be too small to fit in order to avoid injury.
E otra sapias que·ls instrumentz de las dentz motz so e semblantment les autres instruments.	 And for cutting teeth, we recommend using other devices that are similar to the ones mentioned earlier
Mays le artifexs savi e subtil en l’art, atroba per si mateys segon aquo que a lu significa la operacio e las malautias diversas; quar son de las malautias a las quals les antics no diysero ni pausero propri instrument, per las formas de diversas specias.	 The surgeon begins to make the incisions with great care and subtlety, hoping that this operation will be carried out correctly by those who know how to perform various operations; for these are the kinds of operations which the ancients did not recognize or understand themselves, through the various forms they have.
Mays si es trinquat l’os de la mandibula o dels autres osses de la boca, o si poyreys, lahoras sia pes curat sobre aquel en son loc am aquo que es a lu convenient dels instrumentz e de las forceps las quals havem dit en la extraccio de las razitz de las dentz, e ajuda te am gesti del qual aquesta es la forma:	 If the jaw bone or any other bone of the mouth is broken, and it is necessary to remove it from its place with an extraction tool made for this purpose, so that they may assist in doing what must be done by these instruments and forceps; which form assists here.
E sia en lu alcuna grosseza petit a petit, e sia instringida o tenguda am la boca per que no evasesca o fuga entro que l’os de tot sia foro-getat; e aprop restaura le loc am medicinas convenientz ad aquo.	 And if it is small and gradually increases, or tightly held in the mouth so that it does not fall out of place into the jaw bone; then restore its position with suitable medical measures.
Mays si en l’os es petita poyredura, lahoras ratz aquel de aquela poyredura e de la sua negror, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	 If the tooth is small and gradually increases in size, it will erode that which erodes its root, and cure it so that it may be healthy.
Capitol .xxxii.	 Chapter XXXII.
De la cura de las dentz eminentz sobre las autras.	 Of the care of teeth over the others.
Quan las dentz so eminentz no segon lor cors natural per aquelas la forma es laga, e majorment quan endeve a las femnas, e majorment a las piuselas venerablas; donc cove que tu consideras: si dent es nada aprop autra dent, e no es possibla sarradura ni linament de lu, lahoras radica aquela; mays que no sia annexa am autra dent, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am aquest instrument del qual aquesta es la forma; e es semblant a morr de porc, e sia feyt de ferr de India de extramitat mot aguda.	 When the teeth are prominent and follow their natural course to some extent but more when they move downwards towards the chin, and especially towards the upper molars - therefore consider: if one tooth is nothing compared with another, and it cannot be pulled out or moved in any way; then those will remove that tooth; may also not attach itself to another tooth, unless you put this instrument which serves as a form of pliers on that tooth. And as similar as pork fat when pressed between the teeth is squeezed from India into a fine paste.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscideyses aquela en trops dias per la duricia de la dent, e que no sia comauguda autra de las dentz.	 The first sentence is a prescription for using vinegar to treat toothache pain that does not cause any harm or other dental issues
E si es dent eminent expausat a limadura, lahoras lima aquel am lima de ferr de India del qual aquesta es la forma:	 If the tooth abscess should be drained by a lancet made of steel from India that way.
E sia tot de ferr de India e·l margua eysament; e sia de motz menutz puntz ayssi cum lima am la qual son faytas agulhas, am la qual la dent sia limada pauc a pauc en motz dias am fecilitat, per so que no sia autra dent comauguda e caga.	 Then take the steel lancet and gently pierce it into the abscess; after that, remove the steel lancet from the tooth if you have done puncturing without any harm to the tooth in just a few days by removing it as soon as possible so that there is no other toothache or damage.
E aprop lineys aquela en la fi, e ratz aquela am alscus razoris.	 Then remove that from the finish and run hot water over your mouth to get rid of any remaining taste.
E si es dent del qual una partida es trinquada e lideys la lengua, lahoras cove que tu limescas aquel entro que l’aspretat de aquela fraccio sia ostada e engualhada, e sia aplenada per so que la lengua no ledesca ni la paraula no corrumpa.	 If the tooth that was filled with mercury tastes bitter and is now cracked open, wash your mouth thoroughly to remove any remaining taste of the filling as soon as possible so that you do not swallow or speak wrong words.
Capitol .xxxiii.	 Chapter 33
De restauracio de dentz maugudas am fiel de aur o de argent.	 The restoration of teeth should be done carefully with gold or silver.
Quan accideys a las dentz devant concussio e remossio per percussio o per cazament, e le malaute no pot strenher sobre aquo que manga, e tu has curat aquel am medicinas stipticas, e no ha valgut la tua curacio, lahoras per so que no cagan es engen en aquelas que sian strengudas am fiel de aur e no de argent, quar argent se fa vert e aprop se poyreys aprop alscus dias, mays aur nul temps no es mudat.	 If a tooth is knocked out or broken while fighting, and the patient cannot save it by any means, then you should cure that with medical stitches, without delay so that they do not get worse in those that are gold-filled but not silver-filled, as gold turns green over time
E sia le fiel en tal subtilitat e grocesa segon la quantitat que puesca entrar entre las dentz; e la forma de la reccio es que prenguas le fiel e pren lo doble de lu entre doas dentz sanas, e aprop que cresques am doas tortuositatz del fiel entre doas maugudas, o si’ una o motas, entro que pervengua la tela a la dent sana del autra partida.	 When the patient's thighs are spread apart, it is necessary to place two cushions between them in such a subtle and large quantity that they fit together like the teeth; then arrange them so that one can be placed on both buttocks, or if only one side, it must be positioned at an angle towards the healthy tooth.
E aprop itera le teyssiment entro a la partida de la qual comenciest, e strenh la tua ma am facilitat e savieza entro que no sia mauguda.	 After spreading the patient's thighs as instructed earlier and placing them on both buttocks or one side (as appropriate), you should then gently place your hand in a relaxed manner to start massaging.
E sia la tua striccio am la qual strenhas le fiel deves las razitz de las dentz que no evasesca.	 Make sure that when moving the cushion around, it does not touch or move any of the patient's teeth.
E aprop inscindeys las extramitatz del fiel superfluens am las forceps o tosoyras, e agregua aquelas en quascun loc am gesti, e converteys aquelas e las occulta entre la dent sana e la dent mauguda, per so que no fassa lesio a la lengua.	 If you are using tweezers or tongs instead of the cushion and forceps, then place them in some location that can be moved around easily, and ensure they are positioned between the healthy tooth and the infected tooth to prevent injury to the tongue.
E aprop leyssa aquela ayssi streyta cum roman.	 It is customary for such procedures to take place after a meal or with food in the mouth.
Mays si es desliada o rumpuda, strenh aquela o aquelas am autra fiel en tal manieyra en tot son temps.	 If you are speaking of women, perform it by performing that procedure on both breasts at one time as well.
E aquesta es la forma de las dentz e la figura de la rectacio de doas dentz sanas e de doas maugudas, ayssi cum vezes aquestas liadas:	 This is the shape of two healthy teeth and two infected teeth together; it is sometimes called:
E quan se fa que retorno una dent o doas aprop le cazement de quascuna en lors locs, e sian recrescutz ayssi cum havem recomtat, e que remauguan.	 When returning a tooth or two teeth by cutting out the gum and sewing up again as recommended, then apply pressure to compress it while maintaining warmth on top of it.
E no fa aquo sino bo artifexs e savi.	 This text appears to be a section from a medieval medical treatise discussing remedies for various ailments or injuries. The first sentence seems to indicate that there may be multiple parts or sections to this specific remedy, possibly referring to different types of joints involved in the treatment process.
E alcunas veguadas es aptat alcuna causa dels osses de vaca, e es fayt de lor ayssi cum forma de dent, e es pausada en loc en le qual defayl la dent, e es strengit ayssi cum havem dit, e reman e serveys am aquel per lonc temps.	 It seems to indicate that the remedy may also be used for joint pains caused by cow's bones, and should be applied in a similar manner as described above, but with additional care taken not to let it slide off easily, and is strengthened similarly to what was said before, and remain and serve you until long times.
Capitol .xxxiv.	 This line seems to mark the beginning of the next section or chapter in the treatise.
De inscizio del liament le qual ve en la lengua e prohibeys loquela.	 The incision made on that ligament where it is spoken and prohibits speaking about it.
Aquest liguament le qual ve dejos la lengua alcunas veguadas o es natural am le qual hom nays, o accidental e accideys per plagua la qual ja es consolidada.	 That ligament which you are not to speak of is either the natural one or the accidental one that occurs through a slip and falls at a place where it has already been consolidated.
E la operacio en lu es que huobres la boca del malaute, le sieu cap existent en le tieu se; e eleva la sieua lengua, e aprop inscideys aquel liament nervos segon la latitut entro que sia solvuda la lengua de la sua recencio.	 The surgery to do on that is by cutting the tongue of the patient in half, so there will be one part inside and one outside; and it lifts her tongue, and then severs that nervous ligament as close as possible into which the language reaches its recess.
Mays si en aquela es alcuna duricia o denodacio, e aquo es stat per consolidacio de plagua, lahoras tu gieta unci e scindeys aquel per la latitut entro que aias inscindit le liament e sia dissolvuda la nodacio.	 If in that there is no difficulty or obstruction, then this procedure should be followed to consolidate the slip; you must cut it and sever it at where you previously severed the ligament and dissolve its knot.
E guarda te que no sia fayta fissura en le preon de la carn e que scindas aqui arceria e vengua flux de sanc.	 When a hernia protrudes through the flesh in front of you, cut it off here immediately
E aprop sia lavat le vestigi de la inscisio am ayguaros o am vi agre o am aygua frega; e aprop pausa dejos la lengua licini; so es meca la qual tengua le malaute dejos la lengua en quascuna nuoyt per so que no sia consolidat autra veguada.	 The surgeon should make an incision in the hernia area, whether it is a small one or large one, and place a ligature to close the opening; so that the tongue may not be tightened another way
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, pausa sobre le loc vetriol trissat; mays si le sanc ventz, lahoras cauteriza le loc am cauteri lantiginos le qual conveneys ad aquo.	 If the hernia protrudes and is about to burst through a small opening, place it over a large one, so that the bleeding stops.
E aprop aquel cura am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	 The surgeon should remove all causes inside which are causing illness.
Capitol .xxxv.	 Chapter xxxv
De extraccio de ranula dejos la lengua.	 To extract the tongue.
Alcunas veguadas accideys dejos la lengua apostema asemblant a nomla petita prohibent la lengua de la sua operacio natural; e fort leu es magnificada entro que huempla la boca.	 Some ulcers occur because of an inflammation of the tongue, causing it to stick slightly to its own operation and preventing the tongue from functioning normally; therefore, it is magnified inside by pressing against the mouth.
E la operacio en lu es que huebras la boca del malaute sesent devant le solel e considera le apostema.	 The surgery in him consists of cutting off the tongue's attachment to its own operation and pushing it forward into the patient's face, considering the attachment.
E si tu le vezes de fusca color o de negra, dur, al qual le malaute no atroba sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel quar es cranc.	 If there is a blister on his lips or in another part of his body where he does not feel pain, the physician should avoid cutting into it.
E si es declinat a blancor, en le qual es humiditat, lahoras tu met le onci en lu, e inscideys aquel am spatum subtil, e inscindeys le de tota partida; e si sanc te ventz en la hora de la tua operacio, lahoras tu pausa desus zegi trissat, so es vetriol, entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	 If there is a white blister with moisture in it, the surgeon should put it aside and cut around its base, if it bleeds during surgery, pause for stitches, as this means ulcer, to be sure that all of it is removed; otherwise, stop cutting through the stitches so you do not go further.
E aprop retorna a la obra tua entro que lo haias trayt am compliment de lu, entro que sia lavat am vi agre e sal; e cura aquel am l’autra curacio ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	 "Firstly, cleanse with warm water and salt to clean the wound. Secondly, gently press on it while holding hands together in prayer position.
Capitol .xxxvi.	 This is a continuation of the previous sentence which translates as "Firstly...
De extraccio de apostema de doas aurelhas e de aquel que es nada en le golayro e de las autras apostemas.	 Exclude any letters that are duplicates and those which contain nothing in the gap (space).
Quan endeveno en le golayro godat, so son glandulas las quals son asembladas algodat, las quals accideysso deforas e son nompnadas doas aurelhas, las quals quan tu las curas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no es sanat, lahoras tu considera si le apostema es dur, de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr.	 When the gap is filled with some letters or numbers that are assembled in a sequence and those gaps contain nothing at all, then consider whether the letter combination is correct, if it has the right color, feeling, and so on. If not, do not touch the area to prevent any further problems.
E si es de roga color e la razic es grossa, lahoras no toques aquela am ferr per le flux del sanc; abantz layssa aquel entro sia madurat, e lahoras o tu trauqueras aquel, o sira romput per si.	 If the color is wrong or the font size is large, do not touch it to avoid any flow problems, except if you need to remove that element and choose another one instead of this one.
E si es de blanqua color, radon, e la razit de lu es subtil, lahoras aquel es que cove esser inscidit.	 If the white letter is small or the font size is light, then consider whether that character should be inserted.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras, denant la tua operacio, si ja ha repausat le apostema de lu caut am repaus complit o si es deminuit am alcuna deminucio; e lahoras fay sezer le malaute denant le soleyl, e·l cap de lu sia en le tieu se, e huebre la boca de lu, e le servidor prenent entre las suas mas prema la lengua de lu dejos am instrument mot noble del qual aquesta es la forma:	 When performing this operation on the patient, consider whether to remove all the letters or only some of them. Also note that it is necessary for the servant holding the tongue to have a firm grip and hold onto the lips and mouth of the patient as well, using an instrument which is noble but still suitable:
E sia fayt de argent o de aram, e sia subtil cum cotel.	 When gold or silver is taken as medicine, it should be given discreetly
Donc cum tu premes am aquel la lengua e es mostrat a tu la apostema, e catz sobre aquel le tieu vezement, lahoras pren onci e fica aquel en l’amenla, e tira aquel a las partidas defora tant quant podes.	 Then take that language and show it to your doctor, and when the time comes, have him prescribe for you what is needed, and give it to the apothecary from whom you bought it, so that you may obtain whatever you need
Otra aquo que tiras alcuna causa de las tunicas, e aprop incideys aquela am instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	 Another thing I would like is for you to make an incision in the tunic and use this as the instrument on which it will be applied.
e es asemblat a forceps, empero las extramitatz de lu son corvadas, ayssi que l’orrifici de quascuna de aquelas es en le endreyt del autra, mot agudas, le qual sia de ferr indi enbegut.	 And if the instrument is a pair of forceps but they are blunt and their edges have been worn away, then the opening should be made carefully so that each one of those fits into its own cavity, sharp enough to do what needs to be done.
Mays si aquest instrument no es a tu present, lahoras inscideys aquel am spatum del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: E sia agut de la una part, no agut del autra part.	 And if the instrument is not in your possession, have them make an incision on that surface from which it may be used: and do one cut to the left side, but leave the other untouched.
E pus que has inscidit una mella, inscideys l’autra segon aquesta meteyssa manieyra de inscizio, e aprop la inscizio le malaute guarguarise de aygua frega	 And after you have made an incision, the other person should immediately make a second incision next to it and apply whatever they need to protect against any infection.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, guarguarise aygua de decoccio de scorsa de milgrana o de fuelha de mirtra e semblantz ad aquel de las causas stiptiquas entro que·l flux del sanc sia restreyt, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	 And if you feel the pain of a sprain, have them apply either a balm made from mustard seed or garlic and similar substances to that which relieves the pain of sprains, and then cure it with what is needed for recovery.
E alcunas veguadas naysso en le guolayro autras apostemas otra aquelas doas aurelhas, e inscideys aquelas segon que yeu e dit en la inscizio de doas mellas engualment.	 When the pain comes from cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body and foot pain occurs.
E yeu ja fu medicat una femna de apostema le qual era nat en le golayro de lu, le qual apostema tendia a color fusca, de pauc sentiment, le qual ja havia claus le golayro de lu, e la femna respirava am meat streyt, e ja havia prohibit a lu comestio e beure de aygua, e ja era pervenguda a la mort si mays agues stat per un dia o per dos.	 The patient was treated with the following remedy: Anointed with a cream that was red in color and had little scent, which closed the wound of the patient, and the woman breathed heavily and had been prohibited from eating or drinking water for some time, and she would die if she remained like this for one day or two.
E l’apostema ja tant havia pugat que havia mezes dos ramps entro que eyssiro per dos traucs.	 The patient was anointed with the remedy so many times that it took him 2 strokes to apply it.
Donc yeu me cuytegui fisturalment e fiquegui en un de lor onci, e tiregui aquel, e atirada es de lu gran porcio, e aprop yeu incidigui aquela de on comprendegui del autre trau, e aprop yeu obrigui la boca de lu, e compremegui la sua lengua, e aprop yeu fiquegui le onci en aquela apostema.	 Therefore, you must gently wipe and clean one of his hands with a cloth, then take that one, after wiping the skin off him profusely, and place it over her head, so he can see clearly from another stroke, and open her mouth for him, put out your tongue, and place it on top of this ointment.
E aprop yeu abscizi gran partida de lu, e no corria de lu sino un pauc de sanc.	 And after wiping off the skin profusely and placing a cloth over his head, you must open her mouth for him and put out your tongue.
Donc absolut es le guolayro de aquela femna, e comensec tantost beure aygua, e aprop presec vianda, donc yeu no cessegui inscidir de aquela apostema motas vetz per lonc temps, e succesia apostema en loc de aquel, le qual inscizia entro que es prolonguat aquel.	 Therefore absolutely it is the wound of that woman, and begin to drink water, make sure you do not cease to apply this ointment for a long time, but put it on place where it was before, which closes in such a way that it extends until it has closed that one.
Donc yeu engen agui e cauterizegui le guolayro de lu, donc astec de addicio; e aprop yeu perambulegui e no saubi que fec Dieus de aquela aprop mi.	 "Firstly, you should apply the cautery to the joint area of the patient, then put on adhesive strips. And make sure that nothing prevents the movement of his body.
Capitol .xxxvii.	 Chapter xxxvii
De inscizio de huvela quan es apostemada.	 When you have opened a hole
Quan catarr deysen a la huvula, e es apostemada e es longa, lahoras ela es nompnada perpendicular; e si es en la partida dejos grossa e redonda, e lahoras ela es apelada buba.	 When the cavity is created by a large and round hole, then it's called a fistula.
Mays quan es curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio, e no comfereys la tua curacio, e eyssament ja vezes que apostema caut ja es ostat de lu e es subtil, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquela que es agreguadas redonda; e si es ad aquela longitut, e es sanguina, de fusca color o de negre, e no es a lu centiment, lahoras cove que tu temtes la inscizio de lu, quar en aquela es temor sobre le malaute.	 When you cure it as prescribed in the division and don't interfere with your cure, and also every time that the fistula is closed without complications, then heal the wound so that it is well-covered; and if it is a long one, with blood and color or black, and not at the center, then cover it to prevent infection from the patient.
E quan tu vezes aquela segon la manieyra que yeu he dita de la sua blancor e longuesa, que tu fassas sezer le malaute e premas la lengua de lu am instrument del qual procesic la sua forma e aprop fica le onci en la nuva, e tira aquela en jos e inscideys aquela am un de dos instrumentz les quals e ditz en la inscizio de dos mellas.	 When you do the second operation to remove the fistula and sew the tongue down with an instrument that shapes it as needed and puts a stitch in new skin, cut off the excess and insert it into one of two instruments used for sewing together the incision of the other side.
E cove que no inscidas aquela sino aquo que es ajustat sobre le terme natural ses addicio, quar si tu inscides de lu mays, lediyras le sieu parlar.	 And cover it with what is adjusted to its natural position as prescribed, because if you cut it off from the patient then say that it has been removed.
E aprop la inscizio, usa de aquo le qual havem recomtat en la inscizio de dos mellas, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	 Upon application of this substance recommended in two halves incision, cure that which is healthy
Mays si era le malaute espaventat per la inscizio de lu, cove que use de engen en la cauterizacio de lu ses temor, e la manieyra del cauteri en lu no es sino am aygua aguda, e es que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop prem la lengua de lu am le instrument le qual havem dit, e aprop pren de l’aygua la qual havem dita en le capitol de cauterizacio, e comfeys am aquela caus viva, e pausa aquela no spessa ni subtil, e de aquela omple la concavitat de l’estrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	 Upon application of the incision in a patient who is trembling due to fear, use this substance for cauterization. When you place it over the tongue and press it gently against the instrument recommended, pause that which does not live or move, and from that opening do not leave any subtlety, but fill its cavity with an acute pain, and cease all that which is slow or subtle, and make complete the cavity of the tool, in this manner
Sia la extramitat de lu conquavitat en la qual sia pausada la medicina ayssi cum la conquavitat de culher de ray, e pausa le strument am la medicina sobre la vula, e·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu latz per so que corro saliva o musellage de la boca de aquel per la intrinscequa medicina, per so que no deyssenda de aquela deguna causa sobre le golayro de lu e que ledesca aquel.	 From the outer cavity of his mouth where the medicine was withheld and the hollow in which there is a remedy for toothache, pause the instrument on the throat, place it over the tongue, let the patient spit or swallow saliva from that to prevent any discharge from the mouth into the intrinsic cavity, so that no harm should occur upon the gullet of him and that he may be saved from that.
E aprop te la tua ma am la medicina, e exprem aquela sobre la uvula per l’espazi de miega hora entro que vegas aquela esser denegrada e sedada per la mordicacio de la medicina.	 Upon application of your hand to the medicine and press it gently against the tongue in the space between where it is necessary that it not be degraded or dried by the bite of the medicine.
E si vols, prengues coto e envolopes aquel sobre la extremitat del ray, e submergeys le coto en la medicina, e entrometas le ray am le coto en una canula de sobre entro que·l coto adheresca en aquela canula, e fay aquo tantas vetz entro que consiegues aquo que vols de la cauterizacio de la uva, e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela se seccara e cayra aprop tres dias o quatre.	 And if you want to, place the cotton over the extremity of his arm and immerse it in the medicine, insert it into the vein using a needle inserted at that point so that the cotton adheres to that needle, and do this as many times as necessary to achieve what you desire from the cauterization of the vein, and be careful not to let it dry or wither away within three days or four.
E si indigeysses que iteras la medicina, itera aquela, e aprop la cauterizacio abstergeys en le circuit de la uva am coto enbegut en boder, e mondifica am aquel aquo que es en le circuit de lu de la medicina, e sia lavat am aygua frega, e sia curat deforo am embrocacio, e dedintz am guarguarismes entro que sia sanat.	 When you begin the treatment, apply the cautery to the vein as it enters the body and mark its course with a cauterizing application. And remember that every medicine has its own circuit.
E aquesta especia de curacio es pus salva que inscizio e pus long de temor.	 This special treatment is particularly dangerous due to its extreme length of time
Alcunas veguadas es curada la uvuola am aquo que es pus subtil que cauteri e inscizio, quar es curat am subfumigacio en aquesta manieyra: recipe calament, ysop, origua, ruda, scicados arabic, camamilla, broyda e semblant ad aquels de las erbas, e ajusta totas aquelas causas, o alcunas de lor, en una ola, e sian submergidas am vi agre, e bulhan; e la ola sia be lutada am lut decentment, e sia en le mieg loc de la ola un trauc, sobre le qual sia pausat un instrument conquau de aram segon aquesta manieyra; sia fayt de argent o de aram.	 This particular treatment is cured by burning and scorching the area where it enters, until it becomes burned through completely with fire and smoke.
E sia entromesa la extremitat en la boca del malaute entro que la vapor poge a la uvula sobre la quanula, entro que la uvula sia mot ofuscada.	 And when the wind blows into the mouth of the patient through which the air reaches the palate over its opening, so that the palate is covered with smoke.
E aprop itera sobre aquela motas veguadas entro qu’es secca, e guarda te que no fassas aquesta curacio al comesament de l’aveniment de apostemas, quar trop ajustaria en le apostema, e no cove que tu fassas aquo, sino deves la declaracio de apostema de lu caut.	 Then apply it to the dried-up areas into which you have poured your treatment, and remember not to do this cure at the beginning of the day's work, as that would disturb the vein, and avoid doing so unless otherwise instructed.
Mays si no es a tu present aquest instrument, lahoras pren una cana e compon en la extramitat de lu un clos de huou, per so que la boca del malaute sia comborida, quar le closc del huou prohibeys la vapor comburir la boca.	 If you do not have that instrument, the doctor will take a cloth and make an opening in the side of the patient's abdomen to prevent air blowing into the mouth and burning it.
E aquesta curacio es bona am salut.	 This operation is good for health
Capitol .xxxviii.	 Chapter 58 of the Capitularies
De extraccio d’espinas e de aquo que adhereys en le golayro e de las autras causas.	 Extract from spines and from those that adhere to the gallbladder, or other causes.
Motas veguadas adhereys en le guolayro o spina de peys o alcuna autra causa.	 Bad humors adhering in the liver or spine, or any other cause.
Adonc cove que tu extraguas aquo que de aquels es apparent, sobre le qual catz la vista, pus que tu premes la lengua am instrument denant solelh, per so que a tu sia declarat aquo que es en la guola.	 And when you extract that which of the latter is evident to your eye and taste, such that you may declare it as being in the liver.
E aquo que no apar e es a tu occultat en le guolayro, cove que tu fassas vomir le malaute denant que la vianda sia degerida en l’estomac, quar fort leu la causa annexsa le golayro sira foro-getada per vomit; o que deglusia le malaute una pessa de nap o de razit de laytuga o un boci de pa sec; o prengua una pessa de sponga marina sequa leon, e lia aquela fortment am fiel, e aprop le malaute transglussia aquela, quar cum perve al loc en le qual so spinas e es extrahuda, lahoras so foro-getatz.	 If it does not appear in the liver but is suspected to be in the stomach, then force vomiting until you vomit up its cause from a dry sponge or a piece of bread soaked in seawater, and hold tightly the bad humor against your chest, such that when both the spine and the bad humor are extracted, their pain will subside.
E mays pren una anguila e be am fiel liada, e sia dedintz mesa e soptament sia extrayta; o pren un porr e soptament le metas e soptament l’en tratz.	 Take a snake and bind it tightly, or take some water and squeeze out the bad humor from between your fingers and toes.
Mays si no so foro-getatz am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas, lahoras husa de un instrument de plom segon aquesta forma:	 If they do not subside with those means that we mentioned earlier, then apply another method to them of the following form
E sia pus gros que ray un petit, e en la extramitat de lu sia conquavitat la qual tu entrometas en la sua guola am facilitat.	 The first sentence means: When the body cavity is small enough to enter it easily, then place a cushion between the patient's thighs and put another on their legs as well as one on their chest holding their hands in such a way that they are comfortable during this procedure.
E el aga le sieu cap elevat en sus, e guarda te que·l tocament del sieu os de la gola, per so que endevengua a lu cos e am aquela que enpellesca le os o la spina, o que aquel le metge am la sua ma.	 The second sentence means: With the patient's head elevated and with their nose held open to prevent their airway from being blocked or strangled by it, so that the doctor can examine both the mouth and the spine without any hindrance.
Mays empero que·l malaute aquel entrometa es miels, per la sua sciencia del loc de la causa annexa e enpellisca en jos, e tira la sua ma am le instrument en sus, tot aquo segon la quantitat la qual es a lu preparada entro que sia foro-getada.	 The third sentence means: However, if the patient enters into convulsions during this procedure, due to their knowledge of the location and cause that was added in the lower part and is now being removed from below, and pull out your hand on the instrument with it as long as you are prepared for any emergency situation.
Capitol .xxxix.	 The number 39 at the end represents the sentence number, which signifies a continuation of the medical treatise in Latin numerals.
De extraccio de sancguisugua annexsa al golayro.	 It means: From the removal of the sackage that was attached to the groin area.
Quan es medicada sanguisugua am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la curacio am medicinas e no comfereys, considera lahoras en le guolayro del malaute al solelh, pus que tu aias compremuda la lengua de lu am instrument le qual a tu havem recomtat.	 When treating the patient with purgative medicine as mentioned in the division of medical care and does not agree on any part of it, consider using an enema for the patient's anus to relieve them, provided you have recommended its use previously.
Donc si tu vezes la sancguisugua, extratz aquela am onci petit o am gesti subtils decentment.	 If one is going to remove sackage, then do so gently or discreetly by applying a soft touch if necessary.
E si no es a tu possible estrayre am aquel, lahoras pren una canula concava e entromet aquela en lo guolayro del malaute, e aprop pausa en la concavitat de la canula un ferr ignit, e fay aquo tantas vetz (entro que la sancguisugua sia morta e se osta del guolayro) e abstengua se le malaute tot lo jorn de aygua.	 When you suspect someone of being unable to open their thighs, the doctor will insert a small curved needle into that area and enter it into the hollow part of the patient's leg, and after inserting the needle they will burn off any pus with fire as long as the veins are not obstructed or if the abscess is dead.
E aprop prengua una veyria plena de aygua frega, e obra la boca de lu en aquela, e lava la boca am aquela; e no trasglucia de aquela alcuna causa e maugua l’aygua una hora aprop autra am la sua ma, quar la sancguisugua tantost cum sent l’aygua catz.	 To purify the water for use, they would pour it into a vessel and place their mouth in that, and wash the mouth with it; without crossing over from that part of the mouth any cause or danger to the water entering another hour immediately.
Mays si no es foro-getada am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras subfumigua le malaute am cimetz o am assafetida per le instrument le qual havem recomtat en la sufumiguacio de uvula.	 If the person has been advised not to do so by a doctor using that instrument for phlegmatic purging or abscess incision, then they would wash the patient with cold water instead of hot in order to prevent any harm from occurring due to their instructions regarding that specific medical procedure.
Fay aquo, so en quar cayra.	 In that case, do as follows:
E es un’autra manieyra de operacio en sufumiguacio de aquela, es que tu prenguas una ola en la qual sian carbos ignitz e la ola sia cuberta am una cobertora en le mieg de la qual sia un trauc, e sia compausat en aquel trauc la extremitat del instrument; e aprop dega desus la subfumigacio; e pause le malaute la sua boca en la extremitat de la canula, e claugua la sua boca per que la subfumiguacio no sia foro-getada entro que sapias que la subfumigacio es pervenguda a la sancguisugua, quar la sancguisugua tantost cayra.	 Another option for the procedure is to take an oil with carbon and cover it with a gauze bandage placed in the corner of the instrument; then apply the purgative to that area only, avoiding any other part of the body; after applying it, place your hand over their mouth so that the purge does not come out through the mouth if you suspect that the purge is dangerous for some reason.
E si no catz, lahoras tu itera la subfumiguacio motas vetz, e abstengua le malaute de beure, e mange causas saladas e alhs, e no begua aygua, e ayssi necessari es que am aquest regiment sia fora-getada.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body and when pain occurs in the feet, it's customary to call gout among doctors.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument am le qual es trayta sancguisugua del guolayro quan es vista; e es semblant a forceps ayssi cum vezes, sino quar es en lu alcuna curvitat:	 This is the shape of the instrument that is used to extract flesh from any region when it is seen in this manner, and it resembles tweezers as well, except where there are any curves.
le qual sia mesa al guolayro, e la extremitat de lu es semblant a bec de ciconia, que es guanta, en la qual es aspretat de lima, per so quar, quan comprem alcuna causa, aquela no leyssa.	 Which is the same shape for both men and women; its end resembles that of a bird's beak, which it uses to catch prey when catching any cause, in such cases it fails.
Capitol .xl.	 The capital of France
En le qual es la suma del sermo en apercio de apostemas e en seccio de lor.	 In which the sum of the letters at both ends of the word is equal to the number of its internal letters.
Les apostemas so motas specias, de motas manieyras, segon que ve rememoracio de lor, de quascuna en aquest libre.	 The marks are very special, because each one recalls something in this way
E so diversas en perforacio e seccio de lor per doas manieyras, de las quals la una es per la specia de apostemas en si meteys; e per aquo que comprem de las humiditatz.	 And they differ very much in the way of their incision and sectioning, from which one is to make special marks with them inside, and for this reason we call upon them for moisture.
E la segonda manieyra es prop les locs en les quals accideys del cos, quar le apostema accident en le cap es autra de la apostema accident en le cul; e le apostema en le loc carnos accident es autra del apostema accident en junctura; e a quascun de lor es son juguament per operacio.	 The second mark is to the places where accidents occur in the body, such as an arrow accident on the head being different from that on the buttocks; and the arrow on the chest being different from that on the joint. And each of them serves its own purpose for operation.
E mays de apostemas so alcunas las quals cove que no sian perforadas sino aprop maturacio de la sania en aquels o compliment de lor.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
So autras apostemas les quals cove que sian traucatz quan son cruzes, e no son maturatz segon lor compliment, ayssi cum apostemas que son propdas a las juncturas, quar apostema quan ve prop junctura, lo esser de lu es prolonguat entro que·s poyreys aquo que es en le circuit de lu, e fort leu son corromputz les liamentz o les nervis de aquela junctura, per que es fayta causa de contraccio de aquel membre; o es apostema prop de membre principal, e si tu tardas la perforacio de lu entro sia madurat nosira al membre principal; o es prop le cul, donc perfora aque no-madurat; e no cove que·l perforas cru, de no-complida degestio, sino aquel que es prop del cul, per so que no poyresca le preon de lu e sia elonguat a las partidas dedintz del cul, e sia fayta fistula, o que sia fayt en le terme de lu que no sia sanat.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body and are not immediately relieved upon touching them, or when there is an opening in the joint, then it should be cauterized with a pointed cautery to prevent the intestine from coming out through the hole.
Mays cove que tu sapias la hora de la perforacio de la apostema, e aysso es quan es maturat.	 The timing of puncturing an abscess is when it has matured enough that its contents may be leaking, and that is when the abscess has opened up or perforated.
E sapias que es madurat quan es la cedacio de la dolor e la cessacio de la febre, e aprop la diminucio de la rogor e de la pulsacio, e la acuitat del cap del apostema, e les autres senhals.	 You know that the pain and fever have subsided, and there is a decrease in swelling and pulse rate as well as sharpness of the abscess head and other symptoms.
E quar cove que sapias la perforacio cazer en le loc pus dejos del apostema e de pus venient de curacio de la eminencia.	 When puncturing an abscess, you must do it carefully in a location that is far from where any further infections may arise.
E perforacio tostemps sia per le lonc de la carn o del cors, si las apostemas son en las partidas de las mas o dels pes, e en loc dels lacertz, de las cordas dels nervis, de las arcerias; e, al derier, en totz locs enguals en les quals no es reflecio; quar en aquels que so reflectitz, usa de perforacio segon aquel membre.	 Puncturing should be done on the skin of the arm or chest if abscesses are located in the upper extremities and below the waist, between nerves, arteries, and tendons. However, if they are reflective of locations that may not have reflections, puncture them where you would like to place a reflection, using puncturing as necessary for that member.
Mays quan le apostema es en loc carnos, lahoras miels es que leysses la perforacio de lu entro que sia confermada la digestio de lu segon compliment, ayssi quo havem dit; quar si tu perforas aquel denant aquo, es prolonguat le cors del poyre de lu e de mota sordicia, e fort leu las labias de lu so enduradas e la profunditat de lu.	 When the abscess is opened up in a certain location, then the pain ceases to be when digestion of it has been confirmed as mentioned before; however, if you open that same place now, it will prolong the pain and damage the bowels and make them loose, causing great harm.
Mays alcus apostemas so perforatz segon la latitut de la carn o del cos deves la necessitat, o segon aquo del qual lo membre indigeys.	 Only open abscesses in a specific location or if it is the member that causes pain
E cove que administres petita perforacio , e·n les apostemas grans gran perforacio e ampla o motas seccios segon la diversitat de la grandesa dels apostemas.	 You may make small, medium-sized, large or multiple incisions based on the diversity of their size.
E autras so dels apostemas en les quals cove que la codena sia conquavada e sia encidida, quan es fayta ayssi quo pan e fayta es en terme que ja stigua, ayssi cum aquel que accideys en trops de dubelec e de bubos.	 The abscess is opened at any point that the pain has been suppressed and disappeared when it was previously mentioned in this way; however, if more than one or both abscesses occur simultaneously, then you must perform multiple incisions to avoid complications such as death.
E de aquels so que so insciditz am seccio havent tres angles; e de aquels es en le qual es inscidit ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirtra, ayssi cum las apostemas dels angonars.	 Those abscesses should be opened at three different points to avoid complications such as a fistula of the anus or abscesses in the corners.
E de lor so en les quals es administrada seccio redonda e seccio lunar, e semblantz ad aquels.	 Open them in round and crescent incisions, similar to those.
Mays aquel al qual no es cap ayssi cum son apostemas leons superficials, cove que tu perforas aquel am perforacio superficial, o plana tant solament.	 Only open that abscess if it is not superficial; otherwise, just perform a superficial incision or make one only.
E cove quant le apostema es gros e ya ha colligit mota sania, que perfores aquel e no te coytes que extraguas tot le poyre en aquela hora; habantz extratz de aquel una partida, e aprop opila le apostema entro al autre dia, e aprop extratz una partida major, e aprop fa aquo motas veguadas segon graduacio entro que sia foro-getat.	 Only open that abscess if it is large and has already spread to the surrounding area; otherwise, just make one incision only.
E majorment si·l malaute es de freol vertut, o femna prens, o enfant petit, o viel en decrepitut, quar l’esperit animal motas vetz es resolvut am la egressio de la sania, e fort leu mor le malaute, e tu operte les.	 When the patient is very sick or in decline or young and small, or in a state of decrepitude, that the spirit moves to leave its healthiness, and light weight leaves the patient, you must operate them [the patient].
Don guarda aquest capitol am gran cautela, e aprop la tua perforacio en la qual perforas aquestz apostemas, cove que abstergescas las plagues e consideras donc si la plagua del apostema es pauca, o es una seccio plana, lahoras tu aministra las qualguas de li o de coto antic; e si le apostema es gran, e las fissuras de la perforacio son motas, lahoras cove que tu pauses meca en quascun trauc entro que pervenguan ensemps.	 When you make an incision and come to the part where these points are placed, consider whether or not there is a little space between them, and if it's flat, then add some padding on either side of the incision; but if the aperture is large and the wounds from the incision are big, leave room for sutures.
E si en le apostema es abscindit una partida de la codena o has concavada aquela en le circuit, lahoras cove que tu la complescas de coto viel o de fil fayt de drap de li, ayssi cum quan has traytz pans o razizos, ses humiditat; e strenh aquel entro al tertz dia; e aprop proceseys aquel e cura le am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	 If the aperture is closed by a pad or concaved in its circuit, then cover it with padding on both sides of the incision, as well as when you put stitches and when you remove them; and fix that opening so that all fluids from within can escape out, and tighten that opening up to heal.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc en la hora de la operacio tua, lahoras tu aministra aygua frega e vi agre en les quals mules un drap de li, e pausa aquel sobre le loc del fluxs del sanc motas veguadas.	 If a vein or artery bleeds during the operation you administer cold water and vinegar to the dressing of it, pause that over the location where bleeding stops veins are closed.
Mays si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras cove que tu aministres regiment e curacio e polveras las quals he recomtadas en motz locs de aquest nostre libre e de divisio.	 If the bleeding of the vein or artery persists, then consider administering regiments and care and powders given in various places from this book to stop it.
Mays si es en temps de hivern, e·l loc de la apostema es loc de motz nervis, lahoras cove que tu enfundas pulvils en vi e oli caut, e pauses aquels sobre les locs.	 When winter comes, the region of the stomach is a region of nerves, and gout pain occurs when you inhale dust particles and fumes and hold them there.
E si es en estiu, e les locs son carnoses, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils enbeguts am aygua e oli o am vi e oli, e tot aquo sia freg entro que sia le ters dia, ayssi cum havem dit, e lahoras cove que tu deslies le apostema e abstergescas aquel e aministres en la curacio de lu aquo que a lu conveneys entro que sia sanat.	 If it is summer and the body parts are firm, then gout pain occurs when you hold in your breath for long periods of time while inhaling dust particles from damp air or water, as described above, also refrain from holding onto the abdomen tightly to prevent any harm to the intestine.
E aysso es aquo que es necessari de la cognicio de la curacio de apostemas universalment, mays segon la via de distinccio ja he dit de tot apostema en qual manieyra es via de la cura de lu per capitols singularment.	 Therefore, it is necessary to have the knowledge of treatment for all sores universally, but secondly, according to the way of distinguishing each sore individually
Capitol .xli.	 xli
De seccio de apostemas les quals veno en la codena del cap.	 The sores that come in contact with the head area.
En la codena del cap petitz apostemas, e so de specias de nodes les quals conteno tunicas que so a lor factz ; e las specias de lor so motas.	 On the forehead sores, there are special types of sores that contain tunics which are very harmful; and the sores themselves can be dangerous as well.
E de lor son pingas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditat semblant a lima.	 They are cold sores, similar to those containing moisture like pus.
E de aquelas so las quals conteno humiditat semblant a pols, et asemblantz a lor; e de aquelas so que son lapideas, durs.	 They can also be blisters that are difficult and painful.
E en la seccio de totz, e en la extraccio de aquels no es temor, cum deves la exteccio de aquels no fa contrariat arceria.	 Everywhere else on the body except for the head area, in the other parts of those who are not to be feared if they do not cause any trouble.
E la operacio en seccio de aquels es que tu esproes aquels am instrument la forma del qual ve aprop aysso, le qual es apelat entromes, entro que sapias que contengua.	 This surgery is divided into stages where you are to use an instrument of the kind which we have provided for this purpose.
Quar si aquo que conte es humiditat, lahoras scindeys aquel am seccio segon la longitut per seccio superficial segon aquesta forma:	 If there is a humidity in that section, then proceed to divide it into two sections based on the horizontal length and then make a further division into two parts according to this method.
E comensa en la seccio de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G. Donc cum la humiditat es evacuada, lahoras tu excoria aquela pel que conte aquela humiditat, e no leysses de aquela alcuna causa de tot, quar tropas veguadas retorna, si roman de aquela alcuna causa.	 First start at the line B and proceed to the line G. Once the humidity has been removed, if you find any more moisture in that area then remove it, without leaving anything behind, as long as there is no further cause of trouble, unless otherwise specified.
E aprop submergeys coto en enguent egipciach, si es present, e sino, en aygua e sal; e umpleys am aquel la plagua e layssa aquel entro ad autra dia, quar am aquo corrodeys tot so que es romas de aquela pellicula.	 If you find ice, then proceed to submerge in vinegar and salt water instead, and wipe off the mixture with a cloth.
E aprop itera sobre aquel coto am enguent egipciach segondament e tersament si indigeyses de lu, entro que·t comfides que no y haia romas alcuna causa de aquela pellicula; lahoras cura la plagua am enguent entro que sia sanada.	 Then repeat the process over and over again until you are confident that there is no more damage to this layer of skin, then apply the ointment on top in order for it to be healed.
E si apostema conte nodi gras, lahoras tu inscideys aquel segon aquesta forma:	 If you find nothing further, proceed as follows:
am seccio havent forma de crotz, e geta oncis entre doas labias de la seccio e scorsa aquel de tota partida, e esforsa la tua vertut en extraccio de la tunica la qual conte aquel.	 From the section you've divided and take out all of it from one side to another, pull off your tunic in order to remove what is contained within.
Mays si a tu arceria fa contrarieta, lahoras fay aquo que yeu t’e recontat primieyrament.	 When the pain of the joints arises from cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet
E semblantment fay en le apostema lapificat de seccio e de curacio segon que a tu havem dit; e seccio sobre apostema lapificat es pus leugiera, quar es de pauc sanc e de pauca humiditat.	 This is somewhat similar to Latin as it uses the word "secció" which means section in Catalan and "pauca" that translates to a small amount.
E alcunas vetz so alcus de aquestz apostemas les quals so en le cap en alcus homes am los quals de tot no es humiditat; la qual causa es quar yeu inscindigui sobre un apostema en le cap de una femna vielha e atrobegui le apostema ayssi cum peyra sorda, aspra, blanqua, la qual no podia esser trinquada, e si a alcu fos am aquela percussit, plaguera aquel.	 There are some versions of this method that have been used in the past by people who were trying to prevent moisture from getting into their heads, and it was believed that if you applied these bandages over an incision made on the scalp of a woman with white hair (who could not be shaved), then it would prevent any pain or harm.
Mays en les autres apostemas accidentz en le cap otra aquest no es aquest capitol, ayssi cum les apostemas que veno als caps dels enfantz e deves las razitz de las aurelhas, mays la seccio de aquestz totz sia seccio superficial.	 In other versions of this method, the bandages were placed over the head, just as with the bandages used on children's heads and ears, the section of these was a superficial section.
E pausa la perforacio de aquels de la partida pus bassa de lor per so que sia alleujat le cos de la sania a las partidas pus bassas.	 After making an incision that is low enough to reach all parts of the body, it was believed that applying such bandages would relieve the pain in the affected part and prevent any more harm from occurring.
E aprop cura aquelas am aquo que conveneys ad aquel de curacio.	 After performing this procedure, apply a dressing on top to take care of the wound.
Capitol .xlii.	 Chapter 21
De seccio de scrophulas las quals accideyso en le col.	 The section from the bowels that can be applied to the colon.
Motas veguadas endeveno aquestas apostemas en le colh e en las aysselhas e en les angonars; e alcunas veguadas accideyso en las autras partidas del cos.	 When pain occurs in the anus, apply a poultice there and on the buttocks and thighs; also those that are located at the bottom of the body.
E so aquelas que accideysso en le colh, e so motas que so engendradas entre lor, e tota scrofula de aquelas es dintz la sua tunica propria, e ayssi cum en les nodis e apostema del cap, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	 Those that are located in the buttocks and thighs also those between them; all sores from clothing to be treated with a poultice of their own, as is done on the head, neck, and joints
E las specias de aquestas scrophulas son motas, quar de aquelas so alcunas lapideas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditatz, e de aquelas so malignas las quals no obeseysso a curacio.	 The special sores are those that contain moisture, which of these should be moistened, and the ones that are malignant, which cannot be cured.
Donc en aquela la qual tu vezes de bona disposicio en le Tocament, de la qual la color de aquo que es manifest es propda a la color de la codena, e es mauguda a tota partida, e no es annexsa am le nervi del colh, ni am las venas, ni am la arceria, e no es preonda, cove que tu inscidiscas aquela am siccio superficial de la partida desus a la partida dejos del cos de la linha de .G. entro la linha de .B., e scorja aquela de tota partida, e exten dos labias de la codena am onci, o am motz oncis si has necessitat de aquels, ayssi cum havem dit en las apostemas del cap, e extratz aquela petit a petit.	 In this instance the application of warm water or wet dressings is recommended to treat superficial wounds in these sores that spread over the body from line G to B and then return them all by themselves without any external help.
E es mays cautela que no sia inscidida la vena o nervi.	 It is important to be careful not to damage the veins or nerves as well.
E sia le spatum no mot agut, que no ajuste a tu la tua ma am inscizio, o que enquiete le malaute, e que inscidas aquo que no es necessari inscidir; quar si inscideysses vena o arceria e prohibeys tu de la tua operacio, lahoras pausa en la plagua vetriol trissat o autras polveras las quals ostan fluxs de sanc, e estrenh la plagua, e layssa aquel entro que·s repausa la acuitat de la apostema e sia mollificada la plagua e comense esser poyrida.	 Also note that if you do accidentally cut into the veins or arteries and stop your operation; then apply a poultice of strong vinegar, crushed stones from those that flow with blood, and cover it to decrease the pain and make it smooth over time.
Quan le sanc es abscindit.	 When the fever has passed
Donc retorna a la tua operacio entro que l’aias complida.	 After completing your surgery, then return to your operation room
E aprop inquireys am le tieu dit indic si es romas alcuna causa de las autras petitas scrophulas, donc inscideys aquelas e munda aquelas.	 Then inquire whether there are any signs of the small ulcers, and describe those that you see.
E si es en la razit de la scrophula gran vena, cove lahoras que no inscidas aquela scrophula de la sua razitz.	 If it is in a large vein, then let the doctors know about this large ulcer on your body.
Abantz cove que lies aquela am fiel doblat fort e que leysses aquela entro que caia per si ses nocument.	 Then tell them that you have opened it very wide and expect it to come out if you breathe in or sneeze.
E aprop omple la plagua de coto vielh le qual tu has ja submirgit en enguent egipciac, e aprop cura aquel.	 After swallowing the potion which you have already swallowed, take a look at it and care for it.
E si inscides aquela scrophula tota, lahoras cove que tu ajustes las doas labias de la plagua e cuzas2 tantost pus que no y ha romasa deguna superfluitat.	 If you find a large ulcer in the pouch itself (the anus), let them know and remove any excess tissue that is not necessary.
Mays si tu vezes que haia romasa superfluitat per la grandeza de la scrofula, cove que tu entendas a inscidir la razit de aquela, e astrayra aquela e aministra sutura e aquo que es dit.	 If you notice that the ulcer has become excessive due to its size, tell them to check on it and repair or remove the excess tissue as needed.
E aquela de las scrophulas que conteno humiditatz, perfora aquela am perforacio superficial aqui la on appar a tu le loc de maturacio de lu, e pausa perforacio de aquo que siec le pus bas del cos, ayssi cum havem dit.	 If the ulcers you mentioned contain moisture, perform the surface perforation here in the place where maturation is done, and stop the perforation of this which can penetrate into your body as well.
E aprop aministra perforacio, calguas am enguent e semblantz ad aquels, per so que corroda aquo que es romas de la corropcio.	 After performing the perforation, cover it and prevent it from spreading by covering over it.
E aprop quan tu vezes la plagua ja esser mundada, lahoras tu cura aquela am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanada.	 When you once make a small incision, doctors heal that wound by removing the generative flesh inside of it until it is healed.
Capitol .xliii.	 The thirty-third book of the Capitularies.
De seccio del pilhot del apostema accident dintz le guolayro.	 The secretary of the Pilgrim, from whom we received these letters, died.
Diyssero les antics aquesta seccio en le epilhot, e no vist alcu hom en nostra terra que aquela aia fayta.	 We were able to find a copy of those letters in another book, but no one was found among us who had received them.
E aquesta es la inscriptura del sermo de aquels.	 This is the inscription on the seal of these messengers.
Mays en les homes haventz esquinencia, cove que sia esquivada la extraccio del epilhot, cum per aquo no sia fayt juvament per so quar totas las venas e las majors del malaute so aqui.	 When homes don't have any money to afford the translation of the book, but for this reason not being able to read it from the book itself, as a result all veins and larger arteries may be damaged here
Mays en aquels que han apostemas cautz en la boca o guolayro o dos aurelhas, quan la malautia no es en la cana, cove husar de la seccio de epilhot a fugir la perdicio la qual es fayta per perfocacio.	 When the messengers had sealed their lips or tongues, and if there was a delay in sealing them due to haste, they would lose that part of the document which has been destroyed through execution.
Donc cove quan volem aquo, que inscidam le epilhot dejos tres cercles dels cercles del epilhot, o quatre am petita seccio per la latitut en aquel que es entre dos cercles per quantitat, que la seccio sia en ciphac, no en la cartillage, e aquest loc es convenent a seccio, quar es privat de carn e les vayselhs de sanc de lu son luhen.	 Therefore, when we want this, we seal the edges of the document into three or four smaller sections at an angle on that line which is between two circles in terms of quantity, so that the section is in a cipher and not in print, and it is convenient to make a section where the private parts of the signer are hidden.
E si le metge es pauruc, cove lahoras que extenda la codena del golayro am onci, e aprop fenda la codena entro que pervengua a la canal, mays evite les vaysels de sanc si vetz de aquelas alcuna causa.	 "If the physician is fearful of spreading the gout through touch, he must avoid touching it with his hand when it appears in the channel, and must prevent any harm that might come from such contact.
E aprop inscida li ciplach segon que havem recomtat; e es significat sobre la seccio de la canal per le flacma le qual es de aquela eyssit am aquo que es de lu disromput e per la abscizio de la votz.	 "Then apply the second compress as recommended, and it means over the surface of the channel for a blister that has appeared in this way which is of the same nature as the one mentioned above by removal of the wound.
E layssa la plagua uberta per alcun temps.	 "Remove the plaster after some time.
Donc cum la hora es remauguda en la qual perforacio es temuda, agregua doas labias de la codena de la plagua, e cus aquela sola ses la cartillage.	 "Then when it has been removed at a time when the perforation is feared, add two layers of gauze over the patch, and cover that with a bandage.
E aprop administra medicinas que fan naysser la carn entro que sia sanat.	 "Then apply medications that soften the flesh within which may heal.
E diyssec Albucasis que la summa del sermo le qual havem recomtat, exposicio no es sino que veias que alcus de aquetz apostemas ja han opilat lo guolayro del malaute, e le malaute es vengut entro a mort, e le ale de lu es entresecat, e alcus van a inscidir le epiglos per so que respire le malaute sobre le loc de la plagua per alcuna respiracio, e sia salvat de mort.	 "Then apply the sum of the serum that we recommended, exposure is nothing more than if someone has already applied it to the ulcer on the patient's back, and the ulcer becomes infected into death, and the skin of it will become inflamed, and they are going to insert an endotracheal tube so that he may breathe through the wound for any breathing, and be saved from death.
E per aquo comandero layssar la plagua uberta entro que sia consumida la malicia de la malautia; e es la malicia de lu per tres dias; e donc lahoras comandero cosi la plagua, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	 "For this reason, you must apply the plaster firmly until it is completely consumed by the ulcer's malice; and it will be the malice of him for three days; and then you must command so to put on the bandage, and cure it until it becomes healed.
E aquo que yeu he vist per mi meteys, es que una sirventa pres un cotel e mesec le en le sieu golayro e inscidic am aquel una partida de la cana del pulmo, e yeu fu apelat a la curacio de lu, e atrobegui la mugen ayssi cum es mugit del moridos, e descubrigui la plagua e atrobegui le sanc le qual era yssit de la plagua petit.	 "And now that you have entered through my mouth, let a servant place it on the left side of his throat and remove any obstruction from there.
Donc yeu fo confessat que aquela no havia inscidit vena ni guidegi, e le vent yssia de la plagua, e curegui aquela entro que foc sanada.	 "You said that the vein had not obstructed the opening and that it was unobstructed, so you cured it.
E no accidic a la sirventa si no rauquiera en la votz, e aprop alcus dias retornec ad miloracio de las suas dispozicios.	 "And don't command the servant if they do not want to stay on your instructions and return to their own devices.
E ara dic yeu que en la seccio del epilhot no ha temor.	 "You say that in the section of the heart there is no fear.
Capitol .xliv.	 "The end.
De seccio sobre apostema le qual accideys en le golayro defora, e es apelat hernia del golayro.	 "In the section about hernia of the throat, it is called 'hernia of the throat'.
Aquest apostema nompnat hernia del golayro es apostema gran segon la color del cors, e es mot en las femnas.	 "This type of hernia is usually considered a large one after looking at the color of the body and it appears on both legs.
E es segon dos manieyras, quar o es natural o accidental.	 "It can be caused by either natural causes or accidents.
E en le natural no es engen de curar.	 "In the case of a natural one it is not curable.
E l’accidental es segon dos manieyras del qual la un es semblant a nodes grasses, e l’autra manieyra es semblant apostema le qual es fayt per nodacio de arteria, e en aquel es temor.	 "In the case of an accidental one it is usually caused by something similar to a thrombus, and another type occurs from constriction of the arteries resulting in fear.
E no cove que·s fassa presumpcio a lu cum ferr sino en aquel que es petit.	 When there is joint pain caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, it is customary to call it gout among doctors.
E tu proha aquel e investigua aquel am le dit, e si atrobas lu semblant a nodi gras, e no es suspendut am alcuna de las venas, lahoras tu inscideys aquel ayssi cum les nodes, e extratz aquel am aquo que conte lu de la pel e bursiclam; e sino, lahoras es perscrutat tot le sieu esser, e aprop cura le loc am aquo que cove de curacio entro que sia sanat.	 You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs and placed a cushion under them, another on their legs, and another on their chest holding their hands.
Capitol .xlv.	 The last sentence of this text is incomplete or missing some words. Can you complete it?
De seccio de las specias de nodes.	 You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs and placed a cushion under them, another on their legs, and another on their chest holding their hands.
Dels nodes so motas specias e yeu ja he dit totas las specias de lor en la divisio.	 You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs and placed a cushion under them, another on their legs, and another on their chest holding their hands.
E cove que yeu recomte assi la diferencia entre node e exitura cum fassa dubitacio.	 You should note the difference between nodes and excrescences when there is doubt about it.
Donc yeu dic que am exitura es caliditat e febre e dolors vehementz entro que es sedada la ebullicio de la superfluitat; e es complida putrefaccio que lahora cessa la febre, la dolor e la calor.	 Excrescences are called 'heat' or 'feverish growths', caused by the overheating of fluids in the body and are usually associated with a rise in temperature and intense pain that subsides when the excess heat is expelled through sweating.
Mays am node no es caliditat ni febre ni dolor, e conte aquel ciphac leon le qual es al u sac propri.	 Nodes do not have a fever or any pain; they simply appear suddenly and are quite harmless.
E es segon la color del cors, e le comensament de lu es cum un ceze e es fayt ayssi cum vace, sia major o minor, e son segon dos specias, quar o so grassas e conteno humiditat, e las colors de la humiditat son motas, segon que yeu diyssi en la divisio.	 The second characteristic is the color of the skin; it begins with a rash that spreads gradually, either larger or smaller, and may be two types: one covered in moisture and having green or brown colors, while the other is dry but with moisture-colored stains on it.
Donc cove, quan pervenas a la curacio de node, que exprohes aquel e inquiras aquel al comensament am sturment le qual es apelat intromes, segon que vindra la sua forma en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	 When you arrive at the stage of intercourse when you ask about what to do first and second that comes as a request for assistance from the beginning of it in which it is customary to call the introduction
E es manieyra de inquisicio de apostemas e de totz nodes, e es que tu prenguas aquest sturment e entromet aquel en le loc pus humit le qual atrobas en le apostema, e tu revolveras les tieus ditz am aquel petit a petit entro que sapias que·l sturment ja ha penetrat la codena.	 You are going to ask the question one by one and insert it into the vagina while making sure that you understand each step as you go along until you realize that the penis has already entered the opening.
E aprop ultima la tua ma segon la mesura de la grandeza del apostema, e aprop extratz le entromes e considera aquo que es yssit en le vestigi de lu.	 Finally, place your hand over it and consider that this is in the memory of him.
E si es fora-getada la humiditat corrent, de qualque color sia, lahoras tu le inscideys am seccio superficial segon que he dit en les autres apostemas.	 If you find it to be dry and colored, then the pains that follow may be superficial as mentioned in other cases.
E si del vestigi de l’intromes no hieys humiditat, lahoras sapias que es gras.	 If there is no moisture from the vagina, you will realize it is slippery.
E secca sobre lu am seccio havent forma de crotz segon aquesta forma:	 Place a cushion under them and use your hand over this area to prevent the intestine from coming out.
ayssi cum t’e ensenhat, e suspen aquel am oncis, e excorja la codena de tota part am facilitat, e guarda la pel o sac, si podes, sobre aquel e extraguas aquela sania am le node.	 As you approach it, gently remove and spread the opening wide as possible, if possible, place a cushion over it to prevent any leakage from that area.
Mays si es romput en la operacio, no es possible extrayre aquela sana, e motas veguadas endeve aquo, e lahoras tu la extratz a pessas entro que de lu no romangua denguna causa.	 If the opening is torn in the operation and it cannot be restored again, you should close it tightly after that to prevent any leakage from occurring at all.
Quar si de lu roman denguna causa, pauc o trop, le node retorne segon le mays.	 When the cause of pain is small or moderate, then it will return to its place (i.e., cease).
E si tu vezes que de lu roman alcuna part petita, lahoras comple la plagua de alcunas polveras corrosivas agudas e strenh la plagua, e pausa sobre aquela que sede apostema caut, e cura aquel del autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	 If the cause of pain is small and localized, the doctors will apply a poultice with corrosive sharp powders and strain it tightly, then place a bandage over it to protect it from further injury, and treat that part with another cure as needed (i.e., if more treatment is required).
E si es node gran, lahoras tu cus las doas labias de lu e cura aquel am aquo que encarna.	 If the cause of pain is great, then the doctors will cut open both thighs and treat that part as described above.
Mays si vena pulsatil es a lu contraria, o no-pulsatil, lahoras tu coyta e huemple le loc de zegi trissat que es vetriol e leyssa aquel streyt per dos dias o per tres entro que·s poyresca la plagua e que repause la ebullicio del sanc; e aprop retorna a inscindir aquo que es romas del node.	 If the pulse is against (temporarily lost), then the doctors will cut it and treat that area with vinegar, leaving it exposed for two days or three to prevent infection, and cover it after that time with a bandage so as not to let out any poison gases; and afterwards, return to incising where it was.
Capitol .xlvi.	 Chapter 64
De las formas del sturmentz necessaris en seccio e perforacio.	 Of the necessary forms in sectioning and piercing.
De aquels so las formas dels intromesas, e so de tres specias, que de aquels es alcu gran, e de lor es migier, e de lor es petit.	 These are the forms of the intercourse (sexual organs), and three kinds, that from these come large, medium, small.
La forma de intromes gran es aquesta:	 The form of large intercourse is this one:
La forma de intromes migier es aquesta:	 The form of medium intercourse is this one:
La forma de intromes petit es aquesta:	 The form of small intercourse is this one.
Sian faytz de ferr, de alfulud, de extremitatz cayradas decentment, per so que festino le intrament en les apostemas.	 When joints become painful due to cold humors that enter each part of the body, causing pain in the feet, it is commonly called gout by doctors.
E aquestas so las formas dels experientz, e son nompnatz albered, e un de aquels es apelat berid.	 These are some common symptoms and conditions, and one of them is named "gout.
E so de tres especias, quar de lor es gran, migier e pauc.	 There are three main ones: gouty arthritis, which is the most severe; gouty rheumatism, milder than the first type; and gout, which is less severe of them all.
La forma de experient gran, forma de lu:	 The most severe form
La forma de experient migier, forma de lu:	 Milderform
La forma de experient pauc, forma de lu:	 Least severe form
Conveneysso que sian per aquels apostemas e exituras e fistulas e bubos per so que entre aquelas so dels osses e de autras causas.	 It means that the symptoms and causes should be considered, taking into account both internal and external factors such as bones, tendons, joints, and abscesses.
E so faytz redontz, grosses, leons, ayssi cum grans agulhas am las quals son cosidas las selhas, e son faytas de eram citri, o de eram o de ferr, o de argent, E las milhors so quan so faytas de eram citri.	 Then remove the stitches, cut off the protruding portions and abscesses with sharp knives, and apply ice to reduce swelling.
E son faytz les experient de plum negre, les quals se acordan que per aquels sian ubertas las fistulas en la conquavitat de las quals so reflexios, que sian reflectidas am la sua levitat am aquelas refleccios.	 The symptoms of gout are characterized by the appearance of fistulas in the cavities that may be reflected upon examination of the affected areas.
E so de tres specias, quar alcus de lor so loncs, e dels autres migiers, e dels autres breus, segon la quantitat del ample de la fistula e de la strictura de lu.	 There are three main types: severe gout, milder forms of the disease, and less severe ones based on the size of the fistula opening and its constriction.
Forma del experient gran de plom:	 This text seems to be a medical instruction for performing an operation on a patient, possibly describing how to perform an incision or a procedure related to intestines.
Forma del experient migier de plom:	 This sentence does not seem to have any translation as it is grammatically incorrect in the given language and seems like a mistake in the original text.
Forma del experient petit de plom:	 The final sentence of this text seems to be describing how to perform an incision on the patient's chest, possibly related to intestines or hernias as well.
Las formas dels oncis so de motas specias, quar de aquels so alcus simples, als quals es una curvitat solament, e so de tres specias: grans, paucs e migiers.	 The types of incisions are diverse and various, from those that are simply curved to those which are large, small, or medium-sized.
E de lor so uncis orps, e so de tres specias.	 The openings for incisions are also varied and different depending on the type you choose: open or closed.
E de aquels so uncis haventz doas curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	 Some incisions have curved shapes while others may be flat.
E de lor so haventz tres curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	 The type of incision also determines the number of openings or slots that will be present on it, depending on its shape and purpose.
E totz aquetz so necessaris en lor loc.	 All incisions should have their own place in this context.
Forma de unci simple gran, forma de lu:	 This text seems to be a description of how to perform a simple large incision or possibly related procedures on the patient's body parts such as intestines and hernias.
Forma de unci simple migier:	 The sentence does not seem to have any translation as it is grammatically incorrect in the given language and seems like a mistake in the original text.
Forma de unci simple pauc, forma de lu:	 This final sentence of this text seems to be describing how to perform a small incision on the patient's body parts possibly related to intestines or hernias as well.
Forma de unci orp gran:	 The term 'incision' in Latin is 'incisa'.
Forma de unci orp migier, forma de lu:	 This sentence does not seem to have any translation as it is grammatically incorrect in the given language and seems like a mistake in the original text.
Forma de unci orp pauc, forma de lu:	 On the surface of his feet
Forma de unci gran havent dos curvaturas:	 The curvature of a great height
Forma de unci migier havent dos curvatas:	 A lesser curvature
Forma de unci pauc havent dos curvaturas:	 A small curvature
Forma de unci gran havent tres curvaturas:	 Three great heights
Forma de unci migier havent tres curvaturas:	 A lesser curvature of three
Forma de unci pauc havent tres curvaturas:	 A small curvature of three
E aquestas so las formas dels scalpels am les quals son seccatz e scorjatz les nodes e le apostemas, e so de tres specias, quar de aquels es gran, migier, e pauc.	 And these are the forms of scalpels that remove scars and cut off nodes and nails, and have three varieties, four of them large, medium, small.
Forma de scapel gran:	 A great scalpel
Forma del scapel migier:	 A medium scalpel
Forma de scapel pauc:	 A small scalpel
Las extramitatz de aquels am les quals es fayta seccio so agudas e las autres extramitatz so no-agudas, e no so pausadas en tal manieyra, sino per que sia fayt juvament en la excorjacio dels nodes la temor de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e per aquels sia sanat le malaute e atrobe tranquilitat un petit per la adustio la qual atroba deves la excoriacio del apostema.	 The external veins of these scalpels are sharp and the others are not-sharp, and they do not wear off evenly in that way, but because they are made for young people to remove nodes with fear of a vein or nerve injury, and therefore maintain healthiness and tranquility for a small while until the excoriation of the nail.
E aquestas son las formas de almagidas, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc, ayssi cum veyras.	 And these are the forms of scalpels, with three varieties, large, medium, small, just like yours.
La forma de magda gran:	 The form of a big scalpel.
Forma de magda migier:	 A medium scalpel form.
Forma de magda pauc:	 The form of many (people):
Sian faytas de eram e so semblantz de ray am le qual e fayt alcofol.	 Many forms, all alike in quality
E es en la extramitat lada punctada am spatum occultada e en aquela corr a las partidas dedintz e defora, quan tu vols, ayssi cum veses.	 It is necessary to make the opening hidden and in that way you may do whatever you please
Las formas de spatimis, les quals so amaguatz entre los ditz deves la perforacio dels apostemas e no les percebo les malautes, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc.	 The forms of speech, which are among the letters that make the opening of quotes and do not allow mistakes, and there are three types: big, medium, small.
E aquestas so las formas de aquels:	 These are the forms of these ones:
Las formas de ventozas am las quals es abscindit le flux del sanc, e so de tres specias; gran, migiera e pauca; las formas de lu:	 The forms of wind are those that prevent the flow of air from leaving, and there are three types: big, medium, small.
Sian faytas de eram citri, redondas am alcuna longitut , e sian subtils.	 Forms made of citrus, rounded at any length, and subtle.
E cove que sian aquestas specias de ventosas deves tu grans, migieras e paucas, per so que per aquelas abscindas flux de sanc am velocitat en necessitat, e lahoras quan a tu primieyrament no es medicina.	 You must use the big ones for preventing the flow of air at high speed when it is necessary, and doctors will call them first aid.
Enpero no uses de aquelas ad abscidir sanc en tot loc del cors, e non uses sino en locs carnoses, ayssi cum en les lacertis de las cambas e de las coyssas, e en les lacertz dels brasses, e de las mamillas e del ventre e dels engonars, e semblantz a lor dels lacertz carnoses humitz.	 Do not use them in all parts of the body, but only in those which are most sensitive, such as the legs and thighs, chest, belly, breasts, and groin, except for those covered with hair.
E alcunas veguadas son faytz de aquels strumentz autres petitz semblantz scorsas de fisacs segon aquesta forma; per les quals lo sanc es abscindit quan es fayt per fleubotomia, o deves inscizio de vena o de arceria.	 Some tubes are used in these instruments as guides for guiding the arteries after this form is done; for which the veins or artery must be incised.
E alcunas veguadas son faytas redondas segon aquesta forma:	 The first symptoms are round in this form
Capitol .xlvii.	 Capitulation
De la cura de las mamillas dels homes las quals so asembladas de femnas.	 Cure for breast tumors that resemble those of women
Alcunas veguadas so infladas las mamillas de alcus homes deves le compliment del dormir cum comensan esser pellutz, e aprop so infladas las mamillas, e so asembladas las mamillas de las femnas, e romano apostemosas, lejas.	 Round breasts swell the tumors of some men who suffer from insomnia and are also swollen like those in women's breasts, and we must take care to prevent them from coming out
E ad aquel que avoreys aquo, cove que inscidisca aquelas am seccio lunar segon aquesta forma, de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G., e aprop excorja la groceza tota, e aprop uempla la plagua de medicament encarnatiu, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am cosidura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	 For those who have come to this part of the text, who will discover that the lunar line B goes into the line G, and take care that all is smooth, and apply a pointed cautery in a timely manner, and adjust both sides of the incision, and cure it if it is healthy.
Mays si la mamilla declina a las partidas dejos e es mollificada per la sua magnitut ayssi cum endeve a las femnas, lahoras sia fendut en dos latz sieus pus sobiras, am dos seccios semblantz a figura lunar, de las quals quascuna sia contenguda en l’autra deves la fi de quascuna, entro que sia que la linha major contengua la menor segon aquesta forma de la linha de .B. e la linha de .G. E aprop excorja la codena la qual es entre dos labias de la plagua, e osta la pingueza, e aministra aquo que havem dit de la sutura e de las polveras aquo que es necessari en la curacio entro que sia sanat.	 If the breast swells to the point where it prevents itself from closing and resembles a lunar shape as mentioned earlier with each side containing one of them, into which line goes B and G? And take care that all is smooth, and apply a pointed cautery in a timely manner, and adjust both sides of the incision, and cure it if it is healthy.
E si tu non conpleysses la inscizio de aquo que cove inscidir per la inquietut del malaute, e per flux de sanc, lahoras cove que huemplas la plagua de coto submergit en enguent corrosiu e layssa aquel entro que aquo corroda que es romas de la grayssa, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	 If you do not comply with the incision of this passage for the sake of quieting the restless patient and for the flow of urine, then place a plug in its cavity to prevent it from coming out, and cure it if it roars like grasshoppers, and adjust that one so that it is healthy.
Capitol .xlviii.	 When joints are afflicted by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body,
De perforacio de apostemas que veno dejos le titillic.	 The pain in the feet.
Aquetz apostemas que veno dejos le titillic so de las specias de scrophulas, durs, las quals conte una pel que es sac.	 That is when it occurs in the toes or fingers, and the cause cannot be determined from the pain itself.
E de aquelas so alcunas que conteno humiditatz; e aquelas que conteno humiditatz cove que sian inscididas am seccio lunar segon aquesta figura: de la linha de .G. a la linha de .B. E cum es tot evacuat aquo que es en le apostema de la sania, lahoras tu le comple de coto viel e leysa le entro al autra dia.	 If it contains moisture; and if it contains dry matter that is desiccated as a result of the lunar phase: from line .G to line .B. And when this has been done, then apply poultice in the hollows tomorrow
E aprop le coto sia ostat e sia curat am enguent convenient ad aquo, entro que sia sanat.	 Then do what is necessary for health, according to your judgment.
E si le apostema de las specias dels nodes es, e de las scrophulas, lahoras tu scindeys sobre aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la seccio sobre las scrophulas engualment.	 If the abscess of the nodes is, and of the bones as well, then you should cleanse that area just like you did with the bones before.
May si la plagua es extenduda en aysso que yesca poyredura, lahoras administra en lu cauteri segon que en aquo havem denant dit.	 If the abscess is widespread, then apply the cautery there where you have applied it before.
Capitol .xlix.	 When pain occurs in the joints and other places that cannot be determined from the cause itself, it is customary for doctors to call this gout.
De seccio de apostemas que accideysso per arceria o per vena.	 The pain can occur through arteries or veins.
Quan arceria es rompuda, e la codena es consolidada la qual es sobre aquela, lahoras motas veguadas accideys apostema E les senhals per les quals es conoguda que imflamacio e apostema sian per la arteria o per vena: quar quan apostema es per arceria es lonc agreguat en le preon del cors; e que quan inpelleysses le apostema am les tieus ditz, sentes en lu quays sia stridor.	 When the aneurysm is ruptured and the clot is consolidated on it, then gout attacks occur, and the fingers for which inflammation and gout occur are either through an artery or a vein: if the attack occurs through an artery, it will be very severe in the foot; when you press on the attack with your fingertips, you will feel that it is strangling.
E aquel que es per vena es redon al manifest del cors.	 The veins that are coming out on the surface of the body.
E seccio sobre aquest apostema es error, e majorment en aquel que es dejos las aysselhas, e en les angonars, e en le col, e en motz locs del cors; e es mot gran, donc cove que la sua curacio am ferr sia esquivada, e aquel que es en las extramitatz, o al cap, cove que sia evitat.	 If the appendix is the cause of this pain, and especially if it comes out through the anus, in the rectum, or from a location outside the body; then the pain will be severe enough that your treatment must be avoided, and should not occur at the head.
Mays sobre aquel que es de lor per imflacio de l’orrifici de la arceria, scindeys en la codena seccio en le lonc; e aprop huebre la seccio am uncis e aprop la arceria, e deliura de las tunicas entro que sia descuberta.	 If it is a result of inflammation of the epididymis or from the cord that leads to it, then make cuts in the scrotum and also into the tunica albuginea, tearing away any uncovered parts.
E aprop met sobre aquel agulha e fay aquela penetrar entro al autre latz, e estrenh la arceria am fiel doble en dos locs, — la qual causa yeu a tu eyssenhegui en extraccio de doas arcerias les quals so en les templars.	 Then place the needle and let it penetrate into another artery, filling both arteries in two locations - which causes you to exhale from both temples.
E aprop punh le loc le qual es entre dos liamentz am spatum entro que yesca le sanc tot que es en lu, e sia dissolvut le apostema.	 Then place the object between two seams on the surface where it should go in completely and then dissolve the appendix.
E aprop administra curacio en la qual es engendrat poyre entro que caian les liamentz; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz convenientz ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	 Then administer treatment according to what is generated, that which came from two seams; and take care of him at the moment when it becomes sick.
E si es apostema per seccio de vena, lahoras cove que tu tenguas am la tua ma aquo que es a tu possible del apostema am la codena, e aprop intromet la agulha dejos le loc le qual tu has tengut dejos la tua ma, e fay aquela penetrar; e sia en aquela fil doble entro que tu extraguas aquel del autre latz, e aprop ligua le apostema am bo liament segon que yeu he dit a tu en le liament de uva4 de doas partz am doas extremitatz del fil.	 If it is the appendix by way of cutting into a vein, your hand should be at its location that you may have taken from it, and then let the needle enter; then in this double way extract it out to another artery, and bind the appendix with both ends on two parts of the same veins, one on each side of the fourth part of both extremities.
Mays si temes que extraguam le fil, lahoras entromet le fiel am aquela agula dejos tot le apostema deves la inscizio de la agulha primieyra, e strenh les tieus fiels en quatre locs.	 When you fear that the needle may be withdrawn from the vein, the pain occurs at this moment and in four places
Aprop secca le apostema en le mieg loc de lu entro que quan es yssit aquo que es en lu, lahoras tu inscideys la superfluitat de la codena, e layssa aquo que de lu es liat.	 Then tighten the needle into its place where it was inserted so that when it is there, the pain will cease and be released from the limb.
E aprop pausa sobre lu pulvil le qual has submergit en vi e oli, e aprop administra la curacio la qual es fayta am calguas e enguentz entro que sia sanat.	 Then apply a powder that you have previously wetted with water and oil, and administer the treatment that is customary to be given when one is sick.
Capitol l del apostema le qual accideys per torcio de nervis.	 The first part of the needle which pierces through the nerves.
Ayssi cum accideys apostema en arceria e en vena, e semblantment accideys apostema en les nervis quan accideys en lor percussio o accideys per trebal superfluable, e per semblantz.	 And when the needle penetrates into the artery and vein as well as to nerves where it hits on impact or through a freely movable part of the body, in the same way.
E es fayt le mays de lu en les locs dels adjutoris o del talo, o en tot loc en le qual so maugudas las juncturas.	 It is customary to apply it on the parts of the assistant or the table, or in any place where the joints are inflamed.
E es apostema greu, e es asemblat a la color del autre cors, e es en las majors de lu disposicios ses de lor e quan es streyt am vehementia, sent en lu le malaute semblant stupor.	 The needle is painful and it turns the color of another part of the body, especially when spread with great force, causing pain to the patient in this way he becomes unconscious.
E no es apostema agreguat en le preon del cors, e per so es dejos la codena, e el es maugut a tota partida e no va a las partidas denant ni detras.	 It is not customary to apply the needle at the bottom of the arm or behind it, and for this reason it is necessary that one should remove the pain, and because of its severity will not occur in front or behind any part of the body.
Donc aquo de aquels que es en las juncturas no cove que sia envasit am ferr, quar fort leu endevenguera contracio.	 The joints may swell up if cold humors infiltrate there due to gout.
Mays aquel que es en le cap o en le front fen la codena am spatum.	 The tongue may become swollen in the neck or forehead, due to gout.
Mays si es apostema pauc, lahoras te aquel am les forfecs e abscindeys aquel de razitz.	 If it is a small abscess that appears on the face and disappears after a while.
E si es gran, lahoras tu le suspen am unci, e excorja aquel, e aprop osta aquel; e ajusta la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	 If it is large, then you will have to drain the abscess, and clean it thoroughly, after which you should close the wound with sutures, and cure it as necessary.
Capitol .li.	 The end of the text.
De seccio de apostema le qual accideys de cheil que accideys al ventre.	 When a small abscess appears in the belly button,
Endeveno ad alcus homes motas veguadas en les ventres de aquels e en las autras partidas del cors de aquels theils les quals son apelatz funguals per similitut de aquels am funges, dels quals la razitz es subtil e·l cap de aquel es gros; e ja las labias de aquels so conversas, e es de aquels que es petit, e es de aquels que es mot magnificat.	 The abscesses appear in the abdominal cavity and in the thoracic cavity of these persons, which are called functional because they are similar to those of the lungs, except that their head is larger; and the labias (stools) from them are soft, while others are large or very big.
E yeu ja e vist un, e en le ventre de lu eran dos theils les quals eran mays a funges semblantz, e no era diferencia entre aquels blancs, de menuda razitz.	 You had seen one and in his belly there were two of them that were similar to each other, except for their size; there was no difference between those two white ones due to the smallness.
E ja las labias de aquels eran enversadas e se fendian, e humiditat corria de aquel tot temps.	 The stools from them parted and flowed continuously as water does.
Donc yeu inscidegui aquels e atrobegui en la un en pes quays xviii unc. e l’autre quays vi unc.	 You advised him, then you asked the first of his friends for advice in regard to this illness, and the other also came forward to help with it.
E la operacio en la inscizio de lor es que consideres lahoras si·l malaute es humit, e la color de atheil es blanca, humit, de subtil razitz; lahoras tu le inscideys am spatum lat, e sian en la presencia tua cauteris en le foc, quar motas veguadas deves la seccio de lu es expellit mot sanc; e si te ventz le sanc, cauteriza aquel.	 When the patient's buttocks are damp and white from being moist and subtle with cold humors, then you should make incisions in the buttocks skin. You must do this while keeping watch on their chest, where any discharge might appear; if a discharge occurs, burn it.
E si vezes le malaute pauruc e temeros, guarda te de inscizio am ferr; mays lahoras pren fiel de plom recent fayt, e strenh am aquel atheil, la manieyra del qual es aquela que havem dita; e leyssa aquel per dos dias.	 If the patient is scared or trembling, make incisions on both buttocks cheeks and apply cold water to the affected area, while also applying a cloth soaked in that very cold water over it for two days.
E aprop ajusta en la strictura del fil de plom; donc, no cesses strenher le plom granre devetz en theil, entro que sia abscindit e cayha per se ses trebalh.	 Then, with the stitches now tied tightly and the patient lying down flat on their back, you must cut off all excess cloth from them, making sure to remove any remaining pieces that might break away as they heal over time.
Mays si theil es de grossa razitz, lahoras en la inscizio de lu es alcuna causa de temor e de paor, e majorment en aquel que es en le ventre.	 If their buttocks are large and there is no cause for fear or trembling except in their belly area, then you should make incisions on both of those areas.
Mays possibla es que tu inscindas la maytat de lu , e aprop cauteriza aquel per que no retorne.	 It's possible to remove the patient from that location and burn it so that it doesn't come back,
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanada la plagua.	 And then you should carefully cut away all excess of cloth into small pieces, making sure not to remove any part that might break away as they heal over time.
E guarda te que tu no presumas inscidir theil le qual es de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, de leg reguardament, quar aquel es absi cancros.	 And make sure you don't cut through any of those parts that are bright red and inflamed with cold humors as they can be dangerous.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio de cranc aprop aysso.	 When you remove a stone from someone's bladder
Capitol .lii.	 The capital of France, Paris, is known for its fashion boutiques as well as its famous landmarks like the Eiffel Tower and Louvre Museum.
De curacio de eminencia del umbilic.	 To remove a blockage from your intestine.
Eminencia del umbilic es fayta per motas causas; o per fissuras del ciphac le qual es sobre le ventre, e yeys de lu la tela o budel segon que endeve en las autras rupturas; o per sanc le qual flueys de vena o de arceria segon que es denant dit, o per ventositat coarctada en lu.	 When a blockage occurs in the bowels or bladder due to causes such as tears in the diaphragm (diaphragmatic hernia), second-degree tears of the bowel following large veins or arteries rupture, or when there is a constricted vein causing obstruction
Mays si es per fissura del ciphac e per yssiment de la tela, lahoras la color del apostema es semblant a la color del cors; e es leon ses dolor, e aprop appar de divers situament.	 When the pain is caused by tears in the diaphragm and the tissue swelling looks like it does on the body surface, doctors will examine you to determine what's causing the pain and suggest appropriate treatment
E si es per egressio del budel, lahoras le situament de aquel am lu de aquo que havem recontat, de mays vehement diversitat, e cum tu premes aquel am les tieus ditz es occultat, e aprop retorna; e fort leu es am lu so, e es magnificat mot deves le introt de banh e vehement trebalh.	 If it's about the intestine coming out, then you should examine that situation carefully and determine what caused it, whether from repeated vomiting or forceful bowel movements, and prevent recurrence; while it is within your power to do so, and it is of great importance to return as soon as possible, because it can be a dangerous symptom
Mays si per humiditat, lahoras es leon e no es occultat quan premes am la tua ma, ni es constrengut, ni es cregut.	 If the swelling is caused by moisture and you are not constricted or obstructed when you press your hand against it, then there may be an issue that needs medical attention.
E si es per sanc, lahoras am aquestz senhals apareys le apostema a negror declinant.	 If the swelling is caused by some sort of constriction (such as a strangulated hernia), the color of the swelling may become darker over time.
Mays si es per carn nada, lahoras es apostema greu, gros e dur, e es ficat segon una quantitat.	 If there's no meat, then gout will strike you hard, severe and long lasting
Mays si es per ventositat, lahoras le tocament de lu es leon.	 If it is due to excess heat, the attack of gout on him begins.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras lahoras si la eminencia de l’umbilic es per sanc de arceria, o de vena, o per ventositat; lahoras cove que sias prohibit de la curacio de lu, quar en aquela es temor e paor ayssi cum t’e ensenhat en le capitol en le qual he dit les apostemas per arceria e per vena.	 The operation on him is to consider if the reason for gout is a defect in the veins or arteries of the umbilical region, or due to excess heat; if you are forbidden from caring for it, then fear and dread will come upon you as I have stated in the passages regarding care for the veins.
E si la eminencia del umbilic es per le budel o per la tela, lahoras cove que comandes al malaute que tengua le ale sieu, e sia stant extendut; e aprop senha am tenta en le circuit de tot le umbilic, e aprop comanda a lu que stia envers entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e aprop circunda am spatum lat en le circuit del umbilic sobre le loc le qual has senhat am la tenta; e aprop exten la maytat del apostema a las partidas desus am unci gran; e aprop lia en le circuit am fiel fort o am ceda e la manieyra del liar decent.	 If the reason for gout is in the bowels or in the membrane, the sufferer should tell the patient to have it hold steady and extended; and lead him by gently moving his hand towards between your thighs, making a circuit around the abdomen as I said before regarding the veins of the body. And remove all the padding from between the fingers until they are tight and strong; and keep them in close contact or slightly apart depending on how much you want to use them.
E aprop huebre le mieg del apostema extendut sobre le liament e intromet le dit tieu en aquel indic e quereys le budel; e si tu l’as atrobat ni guardat per le liament, lahoras tu extratz alxorati e impelleys le budel a las partidas dedintz del ventre.	 And lead the finger of the pad extended towards him and press it gently in that place as I mentioned before regarding the bowels; if you have not placed it tightly on his abdomen, then tighten up its position to push the bowels out.
E si has atrobada la tela, lahoras pren aquel am unci; e inscideys las superfluitatz de lu.	 When you have opened up the cloth, then apply a medicine to it. And take away all of its excess fluid
Mays si es contraria a tu arceria o vena, lahoras circunda aquel mot, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio; e pren dos agulhas e met en aquelas dos fiels fortz e entromet dos agulhas en le circuit le qual has feyt entorn le apostema en manieyra de crotz, las quals fassas penetrar; e aprop strenh le apostema en quatre partidas sobre las agulhas.	 If the artery or vein is opposed to your incision, then surround that opening with a suture and close up your incision; take two needles and insert them into those two arteries in such a way as to enter the circuit around the aperture of the cross, which you will find by cutting it open (in English "cutting it open" refers to making an incision); and apply tension to the aperture with four sutures.
E si tu vols, osta las agulhas e leyssa le loc entro que poyresca la carn extenduda e caia per si; o inscideys aquel quan es subtiliat e se poyreys, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	 If you want to apply a needle and let the flesh stretch open until it is smooth or straight as possible, do so when it is subtle enough that it seems necessary; or, if there are no other injuries nearby, gently care for this by applying your hand here where wounds enter from all sides of his body.
E si la eminencia del ombilic es de carn nada en lu o per humiditat, lahoras cove que tu conquaves le apostema ayssi cum havem dit e estraguas le sanc o la humiditat, la qual atrobas en lu, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove e que consolide le loc.	 If the prominence of the bellybutton is made from fat or by moisture, then apply your incision as you would normally do and stretch it tightly to heal the wound, which you will find in his body, and gently care for that area where wounds enter from all sides of him
Capitol .liii.	 The third chapter of a book on medicine is about...
De curacio de cranc.	 Treatment of burns.
Ja havem dit, en la divisio, de specia de cranc e en qual manieyra es via a la curacio de lu am medicinas, e que es squivador en lu la curacio am ferr per so que no sia ulcerat; e havem dit cranc engendrat en la mayra e cautela de la curacio de lu.	 We said in the division that specific burns and how to treat them are important for medical care, as well as warning about what can happen if treatment is not done properly (the translation of "squivador" here means protector).
E diyssero les antics que alcunas veguadas cranc es en loc on es possibla la eradicacio de lu, ayssi cum de cran le qual es en las mamillas o en la coyssa e a lor semblantz dels membres allocat a estrayre tot aquel, e majorment quan es comensant petit.	 "The servant should apply cold compresses to the parts where it is possible to eliminate them, and then put a cushion on their chest and legs to prevent the skin from tearing.
Mays quan es antiquat e es gra, no cove que te propries a lu, quar yeu non pogui sanar de aquel alcu ni no he vist autre, ni que sia pervengut ad aquo.	 "Do not rub it too much if it is rough because you risk tearing the skin; otherwise, when done gently and with caution, there will be no harm to the patient or his surroundings.
E la operacio en lu es quan es allocat ayssi cum havem dit, es que tu precedescas e laysses le malaute e purgues de colera negra alcunas veguadas, e aprop sagna aquel, si es atrobada replecio manifesta.	 "The operation on the patient is when they are placed like this; first you put them in cold compresses and purge black bile from the affected areas, then apply a cushion to prevent any damage or tears.
E aprop prepara le malaute am preparacio en le qual sia locat am operacio, e aprop prohiceys en le trauc uncis les quals cove ad aquel; e aprop concava de tota part am la codena sego bona perexcrutacio entro que no romangua alcuna causa de las razitz de lu.	 "Preparations are made for the operation, where it is located to perform it, and a cushion is placed on each side of him; and carefully consider all aspects related to its correct execution in order not to cause any damage.
E layssa correr le sanc, e no abscidas aquel leugierament, e exprem les locs, e abstergeys le sanc gros tot am la tua ma o am instrument am le qual es a tu possible dels instruments.	 "Remove the bandage gently and do not remove it immediately; examine the place carefully and wipe off any residue from your hands or the tool you are using to prevent injury.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat de sanc gros inscizio de vena o de arceria, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que·l flux del sanc sia cessat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	 "If a large amount of blood is lost through injury or hemorrhage, the sores are cautorized when the flow of blood stops and then care for that with another cure in order to heal.
Capitol .liv.	 The first sentence of this text means "Open the space.
De curacio de ydropici.	 Cautiously
Nos ja havem recomtat, en la divisio, de las specias de ydropici de l’aygua, e les senhals de quascuna especia, de la curacio de lu am medicinas.	 We recommend that in the division of dropsy (edema), for each variety of dropsy and its symptoms, in order to treat it properly by doctors.
E aquela la qual es curada am ferr no es sino la specia de althitas sola, e no es aproximat am ferr a la specia de timpanistres ni a la especia de yposarcha, quar aquo es mortal.	 The one that is cured by doing so only means the variety of dropsy itself, and it's not suitable to treat the varieties of ascites or edema, as this can be fatal.
E quan tu ja has medicat aquesta especia de ydropici timpanistre am medicinas e no comfereys la tua medicacio, lahoras considera, quar si al malaute ja es conseguida debelitat, o es am aquel autra malautia otra ydropici, ayssi cum si es en lu tos o cos de ventre e semblant ad aquels, lahoras guarda te que no le mediques am ferr, quar temor es sobre aquo.	 When you have already cured this variety of dropsy with medications and it does not cause any harm to your treatment, the doctors consider that if another kind of dropsy has occurred or is about to occur, then do so gently to prevent it from happening, as fear is upon us.
Mays si tu vezes le malaute de vertut exuberant, e am lu no es autra malautia sino ydropici tant solament, e no enfant ni vielh, lahoras la manieyra de la operacio de lu es que tu eleves le malaute entre las tuas mas, e le ministre aprop lu exprema le ventre de lu am la sua ma, enpellen la aygua a la partida dejos del pentenilh, e aprop pren spatum spinos segon aquesta forma:	 If the patient's urine becomes excessively turbid and it is not another kind of dropsy but only edema, and neither fever nor illness, then the doctors recommend that you lift the patient between your thighs, place a cushion beneath them, minister to her with water from the fountain, prevent the urine from coming out through the penis, and support the abdomen as follows:
sia de dos partz agudas lonc, de aguda extremitat ayssi cum spatum; mays empero sia en lu alcuna brevitat petit a petit, per so que en la operacio am aquel no passes entro al budel, e que ledas aquel.	 Place both arms gently, in the same place as you would if it were to go out of the body, and may they be kept quiet little by little, that in this operation there is nothing that goes through the intestines, and do not let them go anywhere else.
E aprop considera si la generacio de ydropici es de part dels budels, quar lahoras cove que tu am la seccio te alonhes del ombelic per la quantitat de tres ditz a las partidas dejos, en le dreyt de lu sobre le pentenilh.	 The first sentence translates to: "The opening of the abdomen is done with the help of servants who open the space between the patient's thighs and place cushions under them.
Mays si la generacio de hydropici es per malautia del fietge, lahoras la tua seccio sia sinistra del ombilic per tres ditz.	 The second sentence translates to: "If the cause of hydrocephalus is from a hernia in the abdomen, then place the cushion on the left side of the belly for three times.
E si la generacio de lu es per la melsa, lahoras la tua seccio sia en le las dreyt.	 The third sentence translates to: "If the cause is from a lesser ailment, then place it on the right side.
E no cove que la tua seccio sia sobre le costat sobre le qual vol jaser le malaute per que no corron las superfluitatz ad aquel loc freul.	 The final sentence translates to: "Do not place the cushion over the side that will cause any unnecessary trouble, as it may cause more harm than good.
E aprop perfora am le instrument tota la codena, e aprop entromet en aquela seccio, e eleva la tua ma am le spatum entre la codena e·l siphac, e tu excorja aquel; e si’ la quantitat de una ungla o enviro.	 The final sentence translates to: "Then apply the instrument all over the surface of it, and insert into that cushion, then place your hand between the needle and the shaft, and push it in there; if it is only one inch or so.
E aprop perforo le ciphac entro que pervengua le spatum al loc vuoyt, e es loc de l’aygua.	 The final sentence translates to: "Then put the needle through where you want the flesh to go, and that place is for water.
E aprop extratz aquel e entromet un instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	 The final sentence translates to: "Then take out that instrument and insert another one of this form:
e es semblant a canula de argent subtil; es fayt de argent o de eram o de lato leon, al qual en la partida pus bassa de lu es un petit trauc, e en les costatz de lu so tres traucs: dos de una partida e un del autra partida; e fayta es la extremitat de lu insciza segon la manieyra de pluma, ayssi cum vezes:	 The final sentence translates to: "It is similar to a silver needle that is made of gold or silver or bronze, with the tip bent down at an angle of about one inch from the shaft; and it has three openings on its sides. Two of them are in line with each other as if they were parallel lines, while the third opening faces the side where the feather point is placed.
E en la extramitat de lu pus sobirana es armilla, quar quan le instrument perve al aygua, lahoras aquela tantost deysen sobre le instrument, donc evacua de l’aygua en la ora miega quantitat, quar si tu evacuas de aquela mes que no cove en la hora, fort leu mor le malaute per resolucio del sieu spirit animal, o accideys a lu cincopi que es appropinquada la mort.	 In the extremities of the patient's body, when an instrument penetrates through water, pain occurs on the instrument; do you remove it from the water or not? If so, then you are removing water that can lead to death in one hour, because if you do not remove it, your patient will die within five hours.
Mays evacua de aquela segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu e segon que significan a tu las disposicios del malaute de la vertut del pols de lu e de la bontat de lu.	 You should remove it, considering the quantity of water and meaning that you are removing the patient's belongings from their pulse point and quality of life.
E aprop extrats le instrument, e rete l’aygua la qual causa es quar tantost es retenguda per la codena la qual rete le trauc que es sobre le ciphac del qual e recomtat a tu que perfores aquel segon aquela manieyra.	 Remove the instrument and remove the water that caused it, as removing the obstruction will cause the pain to go away and is recommended by your physician for you to perform this action immediately.
E aprop itera le instrument al autra dia si vezes le malaute tollerant aquo, e extratz de la aygua petita quantitat, e fay aquo per alcus jorns sobre temor, e guarda te de error entro que no romangua de l’aygua sino pauc.	 If your patient tolerates this instrument well and removes a small quantity of water from it, do so for several days with caution, but be careful not to remove any water unless you are absolutely certain that removing the obstruction will cause pain.
Mays si tu temes sobre le malaute, e leyssas de l’aygua gran quantitat, lahoras cura aquel am sepultura en arena cauda, e mota suzor en banh, e al solelh espere per lonc temps; e cura aquel am medicinas dessicativas entro que sia sanat.	 If you fear that the patient is dying from water intoxication and the pain has already become unbearable, treat it as if it were an abscess, remove pus from the back and breasts, expose it to the sun for a long time; also cure it with diuretics so that he can regain his health.
E cauteriza sobre le stomac, e la melsa e·l fitge aprop la extraccio de l’aygua, segon que yeu he recontat en aquo que es precedit.	 Cautery on stomach, and remove the bandage after extraction of water, as stated previously
Capitol .lv.	 Are you looking for a domain name or website?
De la curacio dels enfants les quals so natz les locs de la urina no-perforatz.	 The bladder's openings are closed by the children
Alcunas veguadas alcun dels enfantz es eyssi del ventre de la sua mayre e·l cap de la sua mixtio no es perforat (o es trauc streyt o no es en son loc).	 Some of the children are not swallowing any of their mother's milk.
Donc cove coytar am perforacio de lu tantost que es nascut am spatum mot subtil segon aquesta forma:	 Therefore, cauterize to prevent further bleeding from newborn babies in a gentle way like this
E aprop pausa en le trauc un clavil subtil de plom e ligua aquel, e te per tres jorns o per .iiii.tre.	 Then apply a subtle cotton bandage and tie it, and leave it for three or four days
E quant vol urinar sia remaugut e hurine; e aprop retorne aquel.	 When urine is passed and the urethra has been opened, return that
E si tu no pauses le plom, ja es possible que la urina la qual va sobre le loc, no leysa aquest claure.	 If you do not apply the bandage, it is possible that urine may leak through the opening and cause damage to the area.
Mays aquel del qual le trauc es streyt sia medicat am clavil de Plom, ayssi cum havem dit, per trops dias entro que sia amplificat.	 This bandage should be used for more than three or four days if it is applied to the urethra.
Mays aquels en les quals es le trauc no en son loc, so leditz, la qual causa es quar de aquels, aquel que es nat e·l trau es deves la fi del cap de la vergua per que no pot urinar a las partidas dedintz, entro que eleva la vergua am la sua ma a las partidas desus; e no es a lu generacio, per so quar le sperma no pot pervenir a la mayre segon rectitut, e es malautia mot laga.	 If this happens to the urethra and it causes inflammation of the vagina opening into which urine cannot pass through due to swelling, then elevate the vagina towards the buttocks as much as possible without causing damage, in order for sperm not to escape out of the vagina when ejaculating, and is considered a medical condition called vesicourethral fistula.
E la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que·l malaute sia envessat sobre le sieu dos, e aprop exten le cap de la vergua de lu am la tua ma sinistra am vehement extraccio, e inscideys le cap del cap de la vergua del loc del perpucii am spatum agut, ayssi cum es inscizio de pluma, o que tu ne razas alcuna partida, per so que·l mieg de lu vengua semblant al cap de la vergua e que le trauc caia en le mieg loc segon que cove.	 The first sentence is: "The man of the operation on him has placed his right hand above his head, while the left arm extends out to capture it and slide down over the top of the neck towards the chest, like a plume.
E guarda te que en la tua operacio de flux de sanc, quar motas vetz accideys aquo; e pausa te a lu am aquo que abscindeys le sanc, e cura la plagua entro que si’ sanada.	 "And remember that in the administration of purgatives when you administer it to him, if he begins to vomit after you have given it to him, and care for him until vomiting stops and cleanse his stomach.
Capitol .lvi.	 I am not able to determine what this text is referring to without more context. It appears to be a grammatical error or an incomplete phrase in Latin.
De albater le qual accideys en le prepucii en le cap de la vergua e de corropcio e negror e adherencia del prepucii del cap de la vergua.	 "To alleviate the pain between the eyebrows and behind the ear, by rubbing cold water on it.
Motas veguadas accideys aquest albater en la vergua e es eminencia de carn laga.	 The phrase "motas veguadas" is a misspelling of "motas veguadas," which means "softened herbs." It seems like the passage you provided might be a translation error or an incomplete thought in Spanish, as well as it being grammatically incorrect.
E de aquela una es maligna e autra es no-maligna.	 The two phrases seem to contradict each other and could mean either both are good (benign) or one is malignant and the other isn't.
No-maligna, cove que suspendas am unci subtil e abscindas aquela entro que aquela mondes tota; e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto submirgit en enguent egipciac; e aprop aquel, cura le am enguent diafinicon entro que sia sanat.	 "And the benign one that you have suspended in a subtle way and closes it tightly to keep it shut. And prepare for when he tries to open his mouth by placing something over it so that it cannot be opened easily; then care for him until he is healed.
E si albater es maligna, de lega color, lahoras cove que tu aministres cauteri aprop la inscizio de lu e la razio de lu.	 When malignant ulcers are formed from a yellow-colored substance, doctors order to apply pointed cautery on the ulcer and its cause.
Mays si albater es en le prepuci del cap de la vergua no-circumcis, e la una partida de albater es dedintz le prepucii e l’autra partida es defora, lahoras cove que tu ostes albater le qual es dedintz al comensament entro que es consolidat; e lahora tu cura aquel deforo, quar quan tu curas aquel ensemps le prepuci, no es asegurat que no sia trinquat.	 If the ulcer is in the preputial area of a uncircumcised penis and one part is being treated and the other is left untreated, doctors require that you apply salve to treat the one under treatment, and to cure any defect when you have cured its cause; as long as you have cured both conditions simultaneously there's no guarantee they will not be re-opened.
E ja eysamen accideys en les genetius e en le prepuci negror e corruccio, adonc cove que tu conquavas tot aquo que ja es denigrat e que ja se vol corrompre o que ja es corrumput; e aprop lineys sobre aquel aprop aquo am mel, le qual es contusit am farina de scorsa de milgrana e de errs trissatz e crivellatz.	 And if both are affected in the genitals and preputial area, namely those that have been blackened with soot or dust, then it is necessary to apply a certain remedy on them as well; being a mixture of bran from wheat flour and vinegar and salt.
E aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sana.	 And you cure the other condition simultaneously so that both are healthy.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, lahoras aministra cauteri lunar segon aquesta forma:	 If there is a discharge from a sore, doctors prescribe the following treatment:
quar cauteri juvatiu es a dos disposicios ensemps, so es a flux de sanc e a la plagua quan es corrumpuda.	 Cautery of youth should be applied to two wounds simultaneously; one is for the discharge and another for when it becomes infected.
E si le cap de la vergua es corrodut e es destruit tot en la hora, lahoras cove que tu intrometas en lo meat del prepucii una canula de plom per so que le malaute urina per aquela.	 If the head of the penis is ruptured and completely destroyed in that instant, doctors require you to insert a catheter into the urethra through the preputial area so that the ulcer may urinate from there.
En la adherencia del prepucii am le cap de la vergua (et aquesta adherencia no accideys sino en aquel del qual le prepucii es sa, e sobre lu no es exhigida circumcizio; e quan accideys adherencia per plagua o per apostema) cove que excorjas am spatum obtus entro que sia dissolvut le liament e sia deliurat le cap de la vergua de tota partida.	 The patient is about to undergo circumcision, and the adhesion in that region must be removed completely before attempting any other procedure; it's crucial to dissolve the lint and deliver the head of the penis to its full extent.
E si es dificil desirnir aquelas exquisidament, lahoras cove que tu excorjes am spatum alcuna causa del cap de la vergua e del prepucii, e aysso es quar le prepucii, quan es subtil, fort leu es perforat per la sua subtilitat leugierament.	 If it's difficult to remove them completely, the doctor will attempt to excise any cause of pain in both the penis head and the foreskin, as well as those that are sensitive when they are perforated by their own fragility.
E aprop separa entre·l prepucii e·l cap de la vergua am dra7 de li subtil, le qual ja es mulhat en l’aygua frega per que no adherescan autra veguada.	 Then separate the foreskin and the head of the penis by drawing a line there, so that it may not adhere to any other surface.
E aprop sia curat am vi stiptic entro que sia consolidat.	 Then make sure it is well-consolidated.
Capitol .lvii.	 Chapter VII of the Capitularies
De mundificacio dels enfants e de la curacio de aquo que accideys ad aquels de circumcisio.	 Of circumcision and the treatment of those who are affected by it
Circumcisio no es solucio de continuitat ayssi cum las autras plaguas: mays empero cum sia de la nostra operacio e de nostra voluntat, e lus de aquela sia propriament en les enfants, es necessari que asignem en aquela milhor operacio e via pus leugiera perdusent a salut.	 Circumcision is not the solution to our continuity issues as other plagues may come; however, given that it's from our operation and our will, and because we have always done so in children, it is necessary to perform this important procedure through which painlessness can be obtained for salvation.
Donc dic que les antics no diyssero circumcisio en alcu dels lors libres, quar no n’usan en las suas leys, e no es sino quar havem aquisit per speriment, la qual causa es que yeu he atrobat la major partida dels artifexs e dels barbies usar circumcisir e mundificacio am novacula e am torores; e usan de liament am fiel e de inscizio am la ungla.	 But if they didn't have circumcision in the days of free men, who did not use it in their laws, and therefore we acquired a great advantage from its use for the first time, which is that it causes the greatest part of the evils and diseases to be diminished by circumcision and cleansing with water; and this is done with complete faith and confidence.
E yeu ja he prohadas totas aquestas manieras e no atrobegui milhor mondificacio am forfexs, am liament am fiel que en mondificacio cum la ungla, quar motas vetz efugeys la codena pus desus, quar la codena del prepucii a dos tunicas, e roman la tonica pus dejos, e fort leu es forsat ad autra inscizio e dolor sicura.	 When the pain arises from cold humors that infiltrate every part of the body, and when pains are felt in the feet; it is customary to call gout by doctors.
E am mundificacio le qual es fayta per alphecati, e es digital, del qual usan les sabatiers, no es segurada la inscizio de la extremitat del membre viril, quar fort leu intra en le trau de lu.	 The manner in which the gout is applied when it is to be done on the genitals, and if it is digital, using the sabatiers; for fear of causing injury to the member's extremity, lest it enters into the thigh.
Mays en la operacio am ungla, fort leu obazeys ferr e corromp la tua operacio.	 When performing the operation on her arm, be very careful and prevent contamination by sterilizing your tools thoroughly.
E la codena del enfant es breu per natura, e motas veguadas nays en tal manieyra que no ha necessitat de mondificacio, e yeu he vist aquel.	 The urethra of the child is short in nature, and there are remedies that do not require treatment; you have already seen that one.
Mays de la mondificacio que·s fa am forfexs e liamentz am fiel, la bontat, experiment descrobic a mi, quar las forfexs so de proporcional inscizio, per aquo quar la acuitat que es desus es ayssi cum la acuitat que es dejos; e donc cum tu premes la tua ma so proporcionadas dos acuitatz, e inscideysso segon una comperacio en un temps; e es fayta compressio del fiel am figura contenent la codena de la vergua de tota partida, am le qual no catz error de tot.	 When performing the treatment using probes and needles, be careful to measure their size proportionately so that there is no excess or lack of it; and when you place your hand on top so provide two measurements at once, and if necessary for a comparison in time; also do the compression with the help of a firm object containing the entire canal without any error.
E la manieyra de la operacio primeyra es que tu fassas estar le enfant majorment si es de aquels que entendo un petit, que no fassas sino que tu lies le fiel en la sua vergua tant solament, e que leysses aquel entro al autra dia.	 The first thing you do for the operation is to make sure the child stays still if it is a small one; otherwise, only place your hand on top of her vagina just like that without doing anything else, and tomorrow let them go back alone.
E aprop fay aquel alegrar en tota aquela manieyra que es a tu possibla de aquo que recep la sua intelligencia.	 And put it there so that it can receive your intelligence.
E aprop fa aquel estar entre las tuas mas estatuir preparadament, e no sia ges cezent; e occulta las forfexs en la tua ma o dejos le tieu pe, que l’enfant no veia aquelas ni degun autre dels instruments.	 And put it there so that it is hidden between your breasts and cannot be seen or felt by others.
E aprop entremet la tua ma a la vergua de lu e suffla en la codena, e tira aquela entro que sia eyssit le cap de la vergua, e aprop mondifica aquel de aquo que es agregat en ela de sordicia.	 And put it in between your thigh and the vulva, blowing through the vagina channel, pulling it into place so that it has reached the top of the vulva, and then wrapping around to its position below the ears.
E aprop lia le loc signat am fiel dobla, e aprop ligua pus bas de aquel un petit le segon liament, e aprop te am le dit pous e endic tieu le loc del liament dejos am bona retencio, e inscideys entre dos liaments.	 And then attach it with a strong double knot at the bottom of that piece, and secure it by tying a second smaller piece to it's top, so that you keep both knots between two pieces.
E aprop eleva la codena sus leugierament e estratz le cap de la vergua; e aprop leyssa le sanc corre petit e petit, quar es milhor ; e pausa polvera desus e sobre la polvera pausa drap en le qual es spandut mugol de huou coyt en ayguaros concosit am oli rozat recent bo; e layssa aquel sobre aquel entro al autra dia; e cura aquel am curacio entro que sia sanat.	 And then lift up the vagina opening and extend it to the top of the vulva, and repeat this process with a smaller one inside as well, until they are both equally tight, pause for a moment, place them in such a way that their heads meet at the bottom, and secure them together.
La forma de las forfexs a mondificacio, aquesta es la forma:	 The method of wrapping the foreskin is as follows:
Sian las unas extramitatz no-talhantz e las autras sian talhant, que non sia yssit le ram del clau, e sia la longitut de las doas acuitatz ayssi cum la longitut de dos manubres engualment.	 You must not let one end touch the base of your glans (penis head), and leave enough space for it to move around freely; at the same time, both ends should be equal in length as two full-grown fingers.
Mays la error en mundificacio es quar fort leu efugeys la codena intrinseca tota, o partida de lu deves la inscizio.	 The first sentence seems to be a medical instruction regarding the treatment of hernia patients, specifically about how to position them for examination or surgery. Here's my best guess at the translation: "Lay the patient flat on their back so that the internal organs do not protrude.
Donc cove que tu extendas aquela de la tua hora am la tua ungla denant la apostemacio del loc e que inscidas aquela segon equalitat.	 It seems like this sentence is a continuation of the previous instruction, further specifying how to position the patient during hernia surgery or examination. Here's my translation: "After you have laid them flat on their back as instructed before, then secure that second support.
E si no la podes tenir am la tua ungla, lahoras extratz aquela am unci e inscideys aquela.	 This sentence seems to be a continuation of the previous instructions regarding positioning during hernia surgery or examination. Here's my translation: "And if you cannot hold their head in place with one hand, then support it by placing something under that side as well.
Mays si son passatz tres dias, e roman aquo que es imflat dejos la vergua apostemat, lahoras tu leyssa aquo entro que sia cedat le apostema caut, e excorja aquel am fecilitat, e inscidex aquel segon que a tu es preparat.	 This sentence seems to be the final instruction regarding positioning during hernia surgery or examination. Here's my translation: "If you have already stretched them flat as instructed and feel their abdomen is ready for incision, then tie down that corner with cord and prepare the second side.
E guarda te del cap de la vergua, quar no nosera a lu aquo.	 This sentence seems to be an additional instruction regarding positioning during hernia surgery or examination. Here's my translation: "And hold their head steady so that it won't move around.
E donc cura aquel am aquo que la plagua consolida de las polveras las quals havem recomtadas en le tractat de las polveras.	 This sentence seems to be a continuation of the previous instructions regarding positioning during hernia surgery or examination, possibly referring to using powder-based adhesive. Here's my translation: "And apply this substance that is recommended in the treatment of powders as described before.
E si es inscidit de la codena sobre mesura, e obezeys a las partidas desus, aquo no notz a lu.	 This sentence seems to be another continuation of the previous instructions regarding positioning during hernia surgery or examination. Here's my translation: "And if you have applied enough adhesive as instructed before, then don't touch it.
E mays cura aquel am aquo que havem dit entro que sia sanat.	 And here it begins, which I will now translate for you.
Capitol .lviii.	 Chapter 88
De curacio de urina retenguda en la vesiqua.	 Treatment of retained urine in the bladder
Retencio de urina en la vesica es fayta per oppulacio fayta per peyra o per sanc congilat, o per poyre o per carnada, e semblantz ad aquels de aquo que havem dit de las manieyras de curacio en la divisio.	 The treatment of retained urine in the bladder is to be done by means of a suppository or by using an enema, or through poultice or by the application of heated oil, as advised by those who are skilled in the art of healing.
E si no es dissolvuda la urina, e veses retencio de lu esser per peyra le qual ja es en le col de la vesica, lahoras cove que le malaute sia encorbat sobre les sieus denolhs.	 If the urine is not dissolved, and the bladder continues to retain it, then the patient should be urged to go to the doctor who put in the catheter into their urethra, as mentioned earlier.
E aprop conponeys les pes de aquel sobre le sieu dos e extendas le sieu ventre de la partida pus desus del sieu dos, e le malaute estrengua le sieu ale tant quant es a lu possible.	 The patient lies on their side and stretches out their stomach from the start towards their feet, allowing the bladder to be stretched as much as is possible.
Donc lahoras le col de la vesica es costreyt ha espulsio de la peyra a las partidas detras, per que la urina es absolta.	 Then the urethra is gently pulled out from behind, towards the front part of the bladder so that urine may be expelled completely.
E si no es dissolvuda am aquo que havem dit he vehement es fayta la causa sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que aministres extraccio de lu am instrument le qual es apelat siringua, del qual aquesta es la forma: Sia de argent e sia subtil leon conquau, ayssi cum canula de pena de ausel am subtilitat de ray lonc en similitut d’un palm e mig, al qual sia cana subtil en le cap de lu.	 If not dissolved as previously mentioned, then the physician should strongly urge the patient to take an instrument called a syringe made of silver and mild lead with which he is skilled in subtlety and sharpness: either one that has the appearance of money or another that resembles a finger's tip at the end of it.
E la manieyra del eyssiment de la urina per aquel es que prenguas le fiel doblat e lies en la extramitat de lu lana o coto per bona liadura; e entrometas las extramitatz del fiel en la partida dejos de la ciringua, e inscideys am las forfexs si superflueys alcuna causa de la lana, mays intromet la en la canula am vehemencia E aprop enongeys la ciringua am boder e am album de huou.	 When the bladder is about to empty and you want it urgently, press on its side gently with a finger to stop it from emptying prematurely; otherwise insert into it a small tube for better control
E fay cezer le malaute sobre la selha, e embroca la vesiqua de lu e la vergua am olis umitz, e oli de oliva e ayguaros.	 Place the patient on their back and place both hands under his arms; lift them upwards to straighten the spine
E aprop entromet la ciringua am facilitat entro que pervengua a la razit de la vergua; e aprop dobla la vergua desus a la partida del embelic; e aprop empelleys la ciringua dintz aquela; e aprop empelleys aquela entro que pervengua a la vesica, e aquela centa le malaute esser pervenguda a la causa vuoda, e no es fayt asso segon aquest orde, sino le meat en le qual va a tortuositat.	 To straighten the spine and prevent the bladder from coming out, you should lift both arms upwards; then place your hand inside the vagina to gently push it up against its opening; do not let go of this hand until you feel the bladder is held in properly.
E aprop exten le fiel am la lana petit a petit, quar la urina siec la lana.	 Gradually extend the finger towards the urethra little by little, so that urine may gently flow out.
Aprop extratz aquela e fay per curacio urina, e usa ciringua, no cesses fer aquo e usa ciringua entro que sia evacuada la vesica e le malaute atrobe alleviacio.	 Once you have inserted the tube gently press it against the bladder to start the flow of urine; if the bladder is full do not force it and use a catheter for better control.
Capitol .lix.	 Goodbye
De qualitat de clisterizacio de la vezica am clampcedra e am semblantz instrumentz les quals sian acordants ad aquo.	 The quality of catheterization should be checked and the instruments used must be suitable for this purpose.
Quan accideys en la vesica ulceracio o apostema, o sanc congilat en aquela, o es coartat poyredura, e vols en aquela destillar ayguas e medicinas, lahoras sia fayt am instrument le qual es apelat clampcedra, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	 When a vesical ulcer or fistula occurs at the anus or in that region, or if a hernia is created there and you wish to distill waters and medicines from it, doctors will use a device called a clampcera.
sino que en la extramitat de lu es sorda, so es clausa.	 When in an external area of the body, silence occurs.
Et en aquela so tres traucs: dos de la una partida , ayssi quo vezes.	 And in that way three troubles arise: two from each side, namely.
En le comensament es loc concau, en le qual es aquo que es enpellit, e sia segon quantitat que oppile aquel, ses addicio, entro que quan alcuna causa es ab aquel tirada de las humiditatz, sia atirada, e quan es expellida, am aquo sia atirada, e quan es expellit lonc, segon que fa clampcedra am la qual es phicat naphta en las batalhas de mar.	 At the beginning is a place that becomes empty, and there comes another quantity which opposes it; its addition, when no cause arises from it flowing out of the moisture, then it flows away too, and when expelled by itself, another flow against it also, and when it expels itself first, second come after the clampcera where phication occurs in the battles at sea.
Donc cum tu vols prohicir humiditatz en la vesica, entromet la extremitat de clapcedra en la humiditat, e atira am aquel aquo que es empellit a las partidas desus, quar la humiditat es atirada en la conquavitat de clapcedra.	 Therefore when you want to distill water in the vesica, introduce the extremity of clampcera into it, and let the moisture flow against that which was expelled in battles, so that the moisture flows away from the cavity of clampcera.
E aprop entromet la extramitat de clapcedra en la vergua segon que havem recomtat en la ciringua; e aprop empelleys la humiditat am aquo que empelleys, quar aquela humiditat perve a la vesica tantost, e le malaute cent aquela.	 And introduce the extremity of clampcera into the urine as recommended in the bladder; and let the moisture flow against that which flows out, so that this moisture permeates the vesica too much, and the patient near to it.
Forma del cristeri subtil am le qual la vesica es cristerizada, e es aquela la forma:	 The subtle form of stretcher used in which the bladder is stretched out.
E sia fayta de argent o de lato, de la qual le cap pus aut sia semblant a petita pluma, e dejos lu cana dedintz liament.	 And if it's made of gold or silver, with which its head is shaped like a small pen, and there are holes through which the urine can pass out.
E aprop pren vesica de moto, e pausa en aquela la humiditat que vols cristirizar en la vesica, e aprop lia aquela entre dos am fort liguatura am fiel doble, e escalfa aquela humiditat sobre le foc.	 Then stretch the bladder with motion, and place there humidity to be used in the bladder, and fasten it between two very firm parts that are closely tied together, and hold back the humidity over a fire.
E aprop entromet la extremitat del cristeri en la vergua.	 And insert one of its extremities into the vagina.
E aprop estrenh la tua ma sobre la vesica am la humiditat am strectura descent entro que·l malaute centa que aquela humiditat ja es pervenguda a la vesica.	 Then place your hand over the bladder and hold back the humidity that is being stretched in, so that it does not leak into the vagina.
Mays si a tu no es present vesica, lahoras tu pren una pessa de parguames e fay de aquel cercle; e perfora aquel de tota la sua retonditat; e aprop entromet fiel fort en aquels traucs, ayssi quo so revolgut; e aprop agregua le cercle ayssi quo es agreguat alsofatur, pus que tu pausas en aquel aquo que tu vols de las humiditatz, e olis e ayguas.	 If the bladder is not present, you will need to take a small bag and make a hole in it; put the entire piece inside your rectum; tie it securely into those folds as shown above, so that it swells up; place the hole where you want to drain off the humidity, and then apply it.
E aprop tu lia aquel en le instrument e fay am aquel ayssi cum has fayt am la vesica, e exprescio am la tua ma entro que la humiditat pervengua a la vesica.	 Then place it into the instrument as you would with the bladder, and express yourself when the humidity leaks out of the bladder.
Capitol .lx.	 The end
De extraccio de peyra.	 Translation is complete.
Nos ja havem dit en la divisio las specias de peyra e curacio de lu am medicinas, e la diferencia entre peyra engendrada en los ronhos e peyra engendrada en la vesica, e les senhals de aquela.	 "In the division of veins and arteries of medicine, there is a difference between heat-induced pain and cold-induced pain, as well as the difference in their causes.
E havem dit la peyra en la qual catz operacio am ma, e seccio.	 "We have said about gout which can occur at any time, and its section.
E la peyra engendrada en la vesica propriament es aquela que es ficada en la vesica.	 "The cause of the gout that occurs in the bladder is known as this one.
E yeu so narrant aquel am exposicio manifesta e abreviacio.	 "You should make it clear and concise.
Donc dic que peyra engendrada en la vesica majorment ve als enfantz; e dels senhals de lu es que la urina que es eyssida de la vesica es semblant a aygua en la sua subtilitat, e apar en aquela arena; e le malaute fregua la sua vergua, e motas veguadas pen, e aprop es dressada; e am aquo yeys foro le cul en motz de aquels.	 "The gout that occurs in the bladder is often seen in children, and its symptoms are similar to urine that has been retained in the bladder appearing as water in its subtlety, and it appears in this way.
E es laugiera la sanacio dels enfants de aquela entro que han conseguitz xiiii ans; e es dificil curacio en les viels.	 "The treatment of children with that condition who have been suffering for more than 14 years is difficult.
Mays en les joves es migiera per aquo quar es entre aquels.	 "In youth, it tends to be between these two.
E de aquel del qual la peyra es major e la curacio es pus leugiera; E si es pauca, es contraria ad aquela.	 "Between one where the gout is severe and its treatment is easy, if there is little, it opposes this.
Donc cum pervenem a la curacio de aquela, cove al comensament de aquela que mondifiquem le malaute am cristeri le qual extragua tota la fenda la qual es en les sieus budels; quar aquela fenda alcunas veguadas prohibeys la envencio de la peyra deves la inquisicio de lu.	 "When we come to the treatment of that, first let us make known what member of the body is affected by it and its cause.
E aprop sia pres le malaute am les sieus pes e sia contosit e maugut enjos per so que la peyra descenda al preon de la vesica, o que saute de loc aut alcunas veguadas.	 The first sentence translates to "And then place a cushion under their thighs and another servant on their legs, and another on their chest.
E aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas preparat, e las mas de lu sian dejos las coysas de lu, per so que la vesica tota sia fayta declinant a las partidas dejos.	 "And then place the cushion between your most prepared parts and another one on their chest.
E aprop perquier aquela e tota aquela deforo.	 The last sentence translates to "Then make everything that is done.
Donc si sentes la peyra en l’espazi, lahoras tu te coyta tantost am seccio sobre lu.	 When the bladder is in the space, it will cause you to have to use a servant as much as possible over him/her.
E si no catz de tot dejos le tieu tocament, lahoras cove que tu untes am oli le tieu dit indic de la ma sinistra, si malaute es enfant, o le dit miga si es jove complit, e entrometas aquel en le sieu cul.	 If you do not have enough time to begin with, doctors recommend that the servant comes from the left side of the patient's body if they are a man, or from the right side if they are a woman, and put him/her into their anus after being introduced gently.
E perquier de la peyra entro que stia dejos le tieu dit.	 The text translates to "The bladder must enter as mentioned earlier.
E converteys aquela petit a petit entro al col de la vesica.	 Then gently introduce the servant into the vesica's anus one by one.
E aprop prem sobre aquel am lo tieu dit, e expelleys aquel a las partidas defora ves le loc del qual vos la seccio.	 And then slowly press onto that as mentioned earlier and remove it from the area where you have caused discomfort to make way for her/him.
E comanda al ministra que prema la vesica am la sua ma; e comanda a un autra ministra que am la sua ma dextra extenda les genetius a las partidas desus, e am la sua autra ma remaugua la codena la qual es dejos les genetius, en partida del loc en le qual se fa la seccio.	 The minister should press on the bladder with their left hand; and another minister should extend their right arm and bend the knee to remove the blanket from its location making way for it in a part of the body that is made ready before proceeding further
E aprop entromet espatum be inscident del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	 The first sentence translates as follows: Upon opening this space between their thighs...
e scindeys en lu aquo que es entre·l cul e·ls genetius, no en le mieg loc, abantz al latz de la coyssa sinistra; e sia la seccio sobre aquela peyra e·l tieu dit sia en le cul, e sia fayta seccio transversa, per que la seccio defora sia ampla e dedintz streyta segon la quantitat que egrecio de la peyra sia a lu possibla, e no major, quar fort leu comprem le tieu dit le qual es en le cul la peyra deves la seccio, e es foro-getada ses defacultat.	 The first sentence means: Upon opening this space between the buttocks and genitals, do not go to another place except for the left buttock; there put a cushion on that side as well, so that it is large enough to stretch from behind when necessary, without exceeding its capacity, which can be adjusted depending on how much extension of the buttocks you need, but no more than this.
E sapias que de la peyra es alcuna a la qual so angle e margers, per que le eyssiment de lu es fayt deficil per aquo.	 The sentence means: You should know that the size of each buttocks is different at each angle and margin, which makes it difficult to adjust them in this way.
E de aquela aquo es leon semblant a glan, e es redonda, e es fayt de lu leugier eyssiment.	 The sentence means: It is similar to the round ones, they are easy to adjust and stretch.
Donc si es aquela al qual so angles e marger, ajusta en la fissura.	 If it's like that one with different angles and margins, adjust them in the opening/passageway.
E si no es ayssi foro-getada, lahoras cove que tu engenes sobre aquel, o que strenguas sobre aquel am gesti decentment, la extremitat del qual sia ayssi cum lima am le qual strenguas sobre la peyra, e no evasesca de lu; o que entrometas dejos lu instrument subtil de curvada extremitat.	 If not, the doctors advise you to gently stretch over that one or slightly bend it, making sure that the part of which is stretched onto their buttocks does not exceed them; or use a subtle device for curved extremities.
Mays si tu no podes sobre aquel, lahoras tu amplifica le trauc un petit, e si tu veus flux de sanc, abscindeys en strenh aquel am vitriol trissat.	 If you can't stretch it that way, the doctors advise increasing the gap slightly, and if it is not possible to do so without tearing or straining, take off the strained part gently.
Mays si la peyra es mays de una, lahoras al comensament tu impelleys la ma a la boca de la vesica, e aprop inscideys sobre lu; e aprop impelleys un petit aprop aquo; e semblantment fay si son motas mays de doas.	 "When you first see a patient with severe pain in the region of their testicles, immediately apply pressure to their scrotum and place your hand over it.
E si es peyra mot gran, lahoras ignorancia es que tu inscidas aquel am gran seccio, quar accideys al malaute una de doas causas: o que mora o que endevengua a lu destillacio de urina continuabla, per aquo quar le loc no es de tot consolidat.	 "If the pain is very severe, doctors should investigate to see if there are two causes - either that urination continues uncontrollably (a symptom of bladder outlet obstruction) or another cause such as a kidney infection.
Mays aministra expulcio de lu entro que sia fora-getada, o engenia en la fractura de lu am las forfexs entro que extragua aquela en pessas.	 "If the bladder is completely empty or if it has been removed (through surgery), doctors should examine whether there are any fractures of the urethra to prevent urine from leaking out.
Donc cum tu auras cumplit la tua opperacio, lahoras omple la plagua de enses de aloe e de sanc de drago, e strenh aquel.	 "Once you have completed your examination, doctors should remove the bandages and dressings as soon as possible, and dispose of them properly.
E pausa sobre aquel drap enfus en oli e vi, o en oli rozat e aygua frega, per so que apostema caut sia cedat.	 "Wait until all the fluids have completely drained off, or if they are cloudy and may contain pus, to prevent the dressing from becoming contaminated.
E aprop resupina le malaute sobre le sieu col, e no deslias le liament entro al tertz dia.	 "Apply warm compresses over their chest area and do not apply anything else on the third day.
E cum aquel auras desliat, embroca le loc am aygua e mot oli, e aprop cura aquel am enguent diafinicon e am enguent diabazilicon entro que sia sanat.	 "Once you have completed your care and treatment for that specific issue, apply warm compresses to the affected area, moisturize it gently with water but no oil, and then cover it with a bandage.
Mays si en la plagua accideys apostema caut, adhust e corrosiu, e de aquel semblantz ayssi cum si le sanc es en la vesica congelat, e per lu es la hurina prohibida (e aquo es conogut per la egressio del sanc am urina), a donc entromet lo tieu dit en la plagua e extratz aquel sanc, quar si roman provoca la vesica a corropcio de la vesica e de lu putrefaccio.	 "If pain occurs in the bladder is frozen and cannot be alleviated through external means (which could lead to urinary incontinence), doctors should insert a catheter into that region, remove it if necessary.
E aprop lava la plagua am vi agre, aygua e sal, e am opposicio a tota specia, am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	 With water, salt, vinegar, and against all things, I apply this mixture to help with the cure of any disease.
E cove en las horas de tota la curacio que tu lies amdos las coyssas e ajustes las medicinas las quals so pausadas sobre le loc.	 You should massage both thighs and adjust the medications that have been put on each part
E si la peyra es petita e es en le meat de la vergua, e es ficat en lu, e eyssement de urina es prohibit, lahoras cura aquel am aquo que yeu recomti denant que pervenguas a seccio, quar tropas veguadas per aquesta curacio yest acusat de seccio; e ja yeu e esproat aquo, e es que tu prenguas un perforador de ferr alfelut, del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	 If the urine is small and it comes out of the meat, then apply a cautery to treat this ailment as prescribed by doctors.
de triangulada extramitat, agut, ficat en fust.	 In extreme cases, do not hesitate to call upon an expert.
E aprop pren fiel, e lia am aquel la vergua dejos la peyra per so que no retorne a la vesica.	 And firmly press it against the urethra to prevent it from returning to the bladder.
E aprop entromet le ferr en la vergua, perforant am fecilitat entro que·l perforador vengua ad aquela peyra.	 Insert the cautery in the urethra, puncturing through a small hole so that the needle goes into the urethra to treat it.
E revolveys le perforador am la tua ma en aquela peyra petit a petit, e tu perforsa la perforacio de lu entro que fassas aquel del autra part penetrar; quar la urina tantost es absolta.	 Slowly rotate the needle in that urethra hole gently, and force the opening to heal so completely that no urine leaks out from there anymore.
E aprop prem la tua ma sobre aquo que es romas de la peyra de la partida deforo de la vergua, quar aquela es trinquada, e es foro-getada am la urina, e le malaute es sanat.	 Press your hand firmly onto that part of the urethra where the infection was removed from the urine, which is now healed, and it prevents leakage and heals the disease.
Mays si aquesta curacio no es a tu aparelhada per alcuna causa la qual prohibeys de aquela, lahoras lia un fiel dejos la peyra, e autra fiel desus la peyra.	 When this procedure is not to be applied due to any cause that prohibits it, then the doctor will take care of finding another way
E aprop encideys sobre la peyra en aquela vergua entre doas liaduras.	 Then place it over the space between two legs.
E aprop extratz aquela.	 Remove that one.
E aprop deslia le liament e mondifica le sanc congilat, le qual es fayt en la plagua.	 Separate and clarify any clogged congestion in the throat, which is known to be present at this time
E no es necessari liament de fiel dejos la peyra, sino per que no retorne a la vesica, e l’autre liament desus sino, quar quan es desliat le fiel aprop la egrecio de la peyra, la codena retorna a son loc e cobra la plagua.	 It is not necessary to apply the cautery directly over it, but rather so that it does not return to its original location and the other servant should be put in place when the first servant touches the area of the foot, as this will prevent it from returning to its original position and force it into another part of the body.
E per aquo es a tu necessari quan lias le fiel desus, que tu eleves la codena a las partidas desus, o que retorne deves le tieu compliment, e cobra la plagua ayssi co havem dit.	 It is necessary at this point when you place the second servant to remove and put it in another part of the body, or else you will need both servants and force them into a position where they must work together to prevent the pain from returning.
Capitol .lxi.	 The end
De extraccio de peyra de las femnas.	 Extraction of intestines from the thighs
Peyra en las femnas pauc es engendrada.	 Gout is not commonly caused in women
Mays si ve peyra ad alcuna de aquelas, lahoras dificil es la curacio de lu, e es prohibida per tropas manieyras.	 If you do this procedure on that, the doctor will take care to find another way, and it is forbidden by medical practice for someone else to attempt to perform it without permission.
La una de lor es quar la femna fort leu es verges.	 One of their duties is to ensure the woman is not too lean.
E la segonda es quar tu no trobas femna be scient que descroba si meteyssa al metge quan es casta, o es de las femnas haventz maritz.	 When a patient arrives at the doctor's office, they are already in pain.
La tersa es quar tu no hatrobas femna be sabent aquesta art, majorment la operacio am ma.	 The third sentence translates to "unless you find this procedure uncomfortable, we will proceed with surgery.
E la quarta es que·l loc de la seccio sobre peyra en las femnas es longinc del loc de la peyra, per que indigeys de seccio preonda, e en aquela es temor.	 The fourth sentence translates to "The incision in the thighs is longer than that of the foot because it involves more tissue and carries a greater risk.
Mays si necessitat provoca a tu ad aquo, lahoras cove que tu prenguas una femna metga be scient, e pauc es atrobada.	 The fifth sentence translates to "If you need the procedure performed urgently, it is customary for doctors to perform it promptly.
Mays si tu es privat de aquela, lahoras cerca metga quast e subtil, o presenta una femna matrona be esenhada en le feyt de las femnas, o femna que en aquesta art ennueys partida del art.	 The sixth sentence translates to "If you prefer a different procedure or present an alternative method that avoids the described approach, we can consider it.
Donc fay aquela present, e comanda a lu que fassa tot aquo que tu li mandaras, de la enquisicio sobre la peyra al comensament; la qual causa es que reguarde si la femna es verges, lahoras cove que meta lo sieu dit en le cul de lu e quiera la peyra.	 Finally, the seventh sentence translates to "But once you decide on a procedure, we will proceed as requested by you and do not hesitate; our priority is to perform it in your desired location.
Donc si atroba aquela, coarte aquela dejos le sieu dit, e lahoras comanda a lu que inscida sobre aquela.	 In other words, if you choose this option, we will follow your instructions and proceed with the chosen course of action.
Mays si no es verge, lahoras comanda a la matrona que entrometa lo sieu dit en le conh de la malauta e enquiera sobre la peyra, pus que pausa la sua ma sinistra sobre la vesica, e comprem aquela am bona comprecio.	 If you are not comfortable with this, we ask the nurse to enter and inquire about the procedure as mentioned before pausing her hand over the bladder, then proceed with it in a good manner.
Donc si atroba aquela, lahoras cove que gradantment maugua aquela de l’orrifici de la vesica a las partidas dejos am somman de la sua vertut entro que pervengua am aquel a la razit de la coyssa.	 When the patient is about to defecate, they should put pressure on their anus to prevent any accidents from happening during that time.
E aprop inscida sobre aquela apposicio de la maytat del conh deves la razit de la coyssa de qualque part sia a lu parada e cent la peyra en aquela partida, e·l dit de lu no sia remaugut de la peyra coartan dejos lu.	 The attendant should gently press on the external opening of the anus to prevent any accidents from happening in that area during bowel movements.
E la seccio sia pauca al comensament; e aprop entrometa lo ray sobre aquela seccio, e si sent la peyra, lahoras ajuste en seccio segon la quantitat la qual sap que la peyra sira getada de aquela.	 The initial section should be short and the attendant puts pressure on that section first, checking for any pain or urgency in doing so. If they feel discomfort from pressing there, then they adjust the section according to how long it takes them to detect the sensation of defecation starting
E sapias que las specias de peyra son motas: quar de aquelas es pauca e gran, e leon e aspra, e longua e redonda, e havent ramps.	 The sensations of pain are different. Some may be minor and major, some may be sharp or dull, some may be long or round, and there could also be hemorrhoids.
Donc tu sapias quantas specias so de lu per aquo que tu signifiques sobre aquo que vols.	 Then you know how many sensations there are for this kind of examination on the area you want to examine.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, ajusta en le loc vetriol trissat e te aquela per una hora entro que sia abscindit le sanc, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	 If you see blood flow, apply pressure to the area for one hour until it is relieved and then return to your examination when the sensation of defecation has been achieved.
E fay que prepares am tu dels instrumentz les quals e ditz en la extraccio de peyra en les homes, per so que sias ajudat per aquels en la tua operacio.	 Prepare the instruments that are used in examining hemorrhoids in patients and ensure you will be able to use them during your examination.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, e sabes que la expulcio del sanc es de la arceria que es insciza, lahoras tu pausa polvera sobre le loc e estrenh aquel am pulvils e strictura descent, e no iteras aquo; e layssa la peyra e no extraguas aquela, quar fort leu morira la malauta.	 When you see a flow of bile and realize that its expulsion is from the liver, which is being blocked, the doctors will stop the treatment and wait for further examination to determine whether it was successful or not.
E aprop cura la plagua.	 The doctor applies a poultice.
Donc cum es cedada la acuitat del sanc aprop alcus jorns, e·l loc se poyreys, lahoras tu retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	 Once the intensity of the bile flow subsides and the location is identified, the doctor resumes treatment while waiting for the blockage to be removed.
Capitol lxii.	 This sentence does not seem to have a clear meaning in English. It may be an error or part of another text that was cut off mid-sentence.
De seccio sobre ernia acoza.	 To cut through the abdomen, you should use a sharp knife and proceed with caution.
Hernia ayguoza no es sino agregacio de humiditat en le ciphac blanc lo qual es dejos la codena dels genetius contenent le huou, e es nompnat ciphac.	 A hernia is simply the accumulation of moisture within a blank cavity that contains the hollow organ or structure in question and is named after it.
E alcunas veguadas es en le propri pannicol le qual a lu preparec natura en la partida del huou, entro que sia cuyat que ja es autre huou; e es la codena del genetiu entre le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, e no es aquo sino tart.	 When some veins are in the natural position at the start of the hollow organ that it prepares nature within, until another hollow organ is found; and this one was mentioned as the cavity between the white one we've talked about and isn't it rather that?
E la generacio de aquest hernia es per debelitat la qual accideys als genetius, per que ad aquels es efundunda aquesta materia, e alcunas vetz accideys per percuscio fayta sobre les genetius.	 The generation of this hernia is due to a weakness that occurs in veins between the intestines and sometimes causes bleeding through the veins.
E aquesta humiditat es havent motas colors, quar la color de lu o es declinant a citrina o a sanguinent, o rog, o es negra feculenta, o es ayguosa blanqua, e es aquo que es mays.	 When the moisture is present and its color is changing from yellow to a more reddish hue or a violent red, it means that there are blood vessels nearby, or it could be blackish in appearance or whitish in appearance; this is what doctors call an erythema.
E les senhals per les quals es saubut on es aquesta agreguacio de aygua so aquestz: quar si es en le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, lahoras le apostema es redon declinant un pauc a longitut ayssi cum figura de huou, e appar le genetiu, quar la humiditat conte aquel de tota part.	 When the abscess has a white head as we mentioned before, then the pain is increasing in length and appearance, indicating that the moisture surrounds it on all sides.
E si la humiditat es en le propri pannicol, lahoras le apostema es redon am partida del huou e per aysso hom estima que es autre huou.	 If the moisture is in the palm of the hand, then doctors estimate that there may be another abscess nearby.
E si la humiditat es entre la codena dels genetius e·l ciphac blanc, lahoras catz dejos le centiment.	 If the moisture is between the glans and the white head, then doctors consider this to be a sign of another abscess nearby.
E cum tu vols la cognicio de la color de la humiditat, lahoras tu esproa la color de la humiditat en le apostema am entromes cayrat del qual la forma es precedida; e segon aquo que es eyssit en le vestigi del entromes, jutga de aquo que es dedintz lu.	 To know the nature of the moisture color, doctors check for the appearance preceding it and also consider the presence or absence of a streak on its edge; based on this they determine what is meant by that moisture.
Donc quan nos vinem a la curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que comandem al malaute que sia fleubotomat si aquo es a tu possibla, e vezes le cos de lu ple.	 When we come to the care of the patient to perform an operation, doctors command that if there is a chance it could be gout they will make sure their body feels good afterward.
E aprop sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos sobre alcuna causa un pauc auta, e pausa dejos lu motz draps.	 Then spread the ointment over both sides and let it drip off slowly.
E aprop setz tu sobre la part sinistra de lu, e comanda al ministra que segua a la dextra de lu, le qual extenda la sua vergua a hun de dos latz a la codena dels genetius e a la partida del mirac del ventre.	 "Place yourself on the left side of the patient and instruct the minister to move to his right.
E aprop pren spatum lat e scindeys la codena dels genetius del mieg loc per la longitut entro prop le pentenilh.	 "Extend your arm, bend it at a 90-degree angle so that the heel of your hand is just inside his belly button.
E sia fayta la seccio segon rectetut engualment distant de la linha que deveseys la pel dels genetius, entro que pervengua al ciphac blanc comprehendent.	 "Take a section slightly to the side of the line where you would usually shave his groin, but instead aim for the blank space between.
E excorja aquel, e observa, e guarda te per aysso que tu no inscidas aquel; e la tua excoriacio am la qual aquel excorjas per partida jassia que sia suspenduda am le huou mays e subtilment escruta am la excoriacio segon la quantitat a tu possibla.	 "After that, observe and remember so that you do not cut it yourself; also have your excoriation prepared in advance to allow for the amount of excision according to your possibilities.
E aprop perfora le ciphac ple de aygua am perforacio ampla, e extratz tota l’aygua.	 "Make a large incision through the center of the abscess and remove all the liquid.
E aprop separa entre doas labias de la seccio am uncis, e exten le ciphac a las partidas desus; e no toques la codena les genetius comprehendent, e inscideys le ciphac en aquela manieyra que es a tu possible.	 "Separate the two lobes of the incision and extend it to its full length; do not cut his groin, just make an incision in that direction if you can.
E inscideys aquel am la sua totalitat o en pessas, e majorment le sieu latz subtil, quar si tu no perscrutas exquisidament la inscizio de lu, no es fayta segurtat que la aygua no retorne.	 "Cut it all the way through or as much as possible; mostly leave a small slit, because if you don't make an exact cut on him, be sure to not let the abscess come back.
Mays si le huou procezeys de aquela defora de la sua codena en la ora de la tua operacio, lahoras quan tu auras complida la seccio del ciphac, retorna dedintz aquel, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la codena dels genetius am sutura, e aprop cura aquel ayssi cum las autras plagua, entro que sia sanat.	 When the operation is over and you have completed the dissection of the diaphragm, return to that point, place both hands on the abdomen incision sutures, and gently press them so as not to cause any pain or injury
E si atrobas le huou corromput per autra malautia, lahoras cove que tu lies les vayssels les quals so sore le suspensori, e extrat le huou, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit.	 If the cause of the pain is another ailment, then call upon the physician who specializes in that particular ailment and seek his advice
Mays si l’aygua es agreguada en doas partidas esemps, lahoras sapias que doas son las ernias; donc inscideys aquela partida segon que has feyt en l’autra engualment; e si es a tu vist que sia una opera, lahoras tu la fay.	 If the two symptoms are different parts of the same issue, then you should determine which part is causing your pain and seek advice accordingly. However, if it is suspected that there may be an underlying operation causing this, then inform a physician about the suspicion.
E aprop tu abstergiys le sanc, e entramet en las seccios lana submersa en oli o en oli rozat; e pausa deforo autra lana la qual tu as submersa en vi e oli, e expandeys aquela sobre dos genetius e·l mirac del ventre; e pausa desobre draps doblatz e pulvils, e lia aquels desobre am liament le qual es segon aquesta forma:	 Then gently press down on the belly button and feel around inside for any lumps or bumps that you may have missed before.
e aprop sian preses dos draps e sian humplitz de lana carmenada segon aquesta semblansa; e sian faytas las extremitatz am les quals es premut de coto o de lana humida, e sian agreguatz am strectura en le braguier de las braguas, e la una de las extremitatz prengua del cul entro al dos, e la segonda prengua a la partida del pantenilh, e dos extramitatz sobre dos coyssas dejos e dos extramitatz autras sobre dos angonars, e tota extrictura sia ajustada en le braguier de las braguas.	 Gently press the two sides of the abdomen with damp hands in order to feel inside for any lumps or bumps that you may have missed before, and then gently press each side of your thighs just above where it is pressed by clothing or wet cloth, and feel around both flanks at the back of the arms. The extremities should be felt from below the buttocks down to between them and on either side in order to ensure they are accurately located.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta hernia es medicada artificialment am cauteri en loc de seccio am ferr; e es que tu prenguas cauteri cutellar subtil e que inscidas am aquel la codena dels ginitius, e es ignit segon que havem recomtat entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc contenent la aygua, e lahoras tu pren cauteri segon aquesta forma:	 "The artificial hernia is treated by cutting it open in the location where it was formed; and you should perform a subtle cautery to cut through the septum between the ventricles. If recommended into discovering the white phlegm containing water, then you will take the cautery after this manner:
e es asemblat a letra greca.	 "It is assembled in Greek.
E aprop perfora am aquel ciphac, e es ignit entro que tota la humiditat sia fora-gitada.	 "And after performing on the septum between the ventricles, you will ensure that all the moisture has been removed.
E aprop exten le ciphac am uncis, e excorja am uncis, e excorja am cauteri subtil ignit; e inscideys aquel segon que es a tu possible entro que eradiques tot lu; e guarda te del huou que·l foc no·l toque.	 "After extending the incision and removing it, and the subtle cautery is performed; and ensure that you do so until all of them are eliminated. And remember to turn off the heat when touching.
E sapias que aquesta operacio es pus salva e pus longinqua de flux de sanc, e milhor que operacio am seccio.	 "You know that this operation is very short and long in terms of blood flow, and prefer shorter operations.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat apostema caut en la hora de seccio o en hora de cauteri, o flux de sanc, lahoras cove que tu cures qual contrarietat fa a tu per aquo, am curacio la qual conveneys a lu segon que es dit.	 "If you want to perform the operation at any time during cutting or cautery, artery blood flow is to be taken into account, and it should be corrected as mentioned.
Mays si le malaute es pauruc, e no spera la segonda operacio per la sua horribilitat, lahoras administra perforacio segon que yeu recomti aquo; e es quan es certificat deves tu, per aquo que havem dit de las significacios, que aquela hernia es ayguosa.	 "If the patient is in shock or does not want to undergo a second operation because of its severity, then administer another incision as advised.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute sobre alcuna cezelha elevada, aprop perfora le apostema en la partida pus bassa de lu am spatum lat, e pausa la perforacio segon la longitut del cos.	 When a patient's joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body and the pain occurs in the feet
E sia la apercio ampla entro que corro tota l‘aygua.	 Then, make an incision wide enough to expose all the water
E aprop pausa sobre le loc coto e lia aquel e layssa aquel, per so que corro le romanent de l’aygua.	 And place a finger on each side of the opening made earlier and remove it gently, in order to allow for the passage of water.
E aprop cura aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	 And then cure what is torn
Mays si contrarietat es a la egrecio de l’aygua en aquela hora tu perforas aquela: e aquo no es fayt sino per aquo quar le pannicol blanc en le orrifici de la plagua fa contrarietat e prohibeys le eyssiment de l’aygua, lahoras cove que tu metas en la plagua pena o instrument am la qual es extrayta l’aygua dels ydropitz, la forma del qual es precedida; o ajusta en la opprecio de la plagua un petit.	 If it is contrary to the incision of water at that time you make an opening there: and in this way prevent the outflow from the drops, so that the white piece of cloth on top of the wound will not be harmed or ripped by the water flowing through; or adjust a small amount at the edge of the wound.
E sapias que l’aygua retorna, e es agueguada aprop vi meses o enaviro aquels; e cum es agreguada, lahoras sia perforat segon aquela meteyssa manieyra, quar le malaute ayssi passara les sieus dias.	 It is known that the water returns and is gradually absorbed or evaporated over time; and as it is added, the doctor will make another incision so that the patient's days may be prolonged.
Capitol .lxiii.	 Chapter 33
De seccio sobre hernia carnosa e la curacio de lu.	 About the excision of a herniorrhaphy and its cure.
Sapias que en la seccio sobre aquesta hernia es temor perdusent a pernicia en las majors disposicios; per que a mi es vista la dimissio de lu e esser salvat per aquela milhor.	 It is known that in the section about this hernia there is fear of harm being caused to major organs, so I see dismissal and recovery through such surgery as necessary.
E yeu so rememorant la operacio en aquela e las specias dels apostemas.	 The operation should be remembered in that place and the specifics of the incision.
Donc, dic que l‘apostemas natz en les cos dels quals les genetius so conponutz e es fayt aquo per motas causas: o per superfluitat aguda agra, la qual es efundida als genetius, o per percuscio.	 Then, I would say that the gout is caused by one of two things - either due to acute acidity found in the veins or due to a lesion.
E es la color de la apostema segon la color del cos, e no es atrobat en lu dolor, e es apostema greu.	 The color of the incision is similar to the color of the skin, and it does not cause pain, but rather causes severe pain.
E fort leu es apostema lapificada, del qual la color es fosca, e no es centiment a lu.	 A deep incision was made, whose color was dark, and which did not spread to the edges.
E alcunas veguadas es fayt per nodacio de las arcerias, e per imflacio de aquelas ayssi quo ja es perceubut la rememoracio de lu, o per imflacio de venas.	 Some veins were broken up through the incision of the arteries and by swelling of those nearby which already had been remembered to be swollen or due to swelling of veins.
Mays aquo que es per imflacio de arcerias es conogut per la dispercio de la apostema quan compremas aquela am les tieus ditz; e no cove que aquel toques.	 It is understood that the pain caused by the swelling of veins can be relieved when you apply pressure to the incision, but not for this one.
Mays aquel que es fayt per imflacio de vena no es dispergut de lu alcuna causa deves la compressio am les ditz.	 It is understood that pain caused by swelling of veins should be relieved when applying pressure to the incision, but not for any other cause and do nothing else.
E ja es possible que sobre aquesta specia sia fayta seccio e sobre les autres carns; e es que tu inscida la codena dels genetius, e aprop esten le huou a las partidas desus, e extratz aquel del ciphac blanc, e deliura le suspensori dels vaysels, e ligua les, e inscideys le suspensori pus que tu deliuras aquel de tota partida de las partidas del huou.	 It is possible that for this special case and the others as well - it is recommended to make an incision of the veins, place your hand on them, extract a white vein from their chest, remove the suspenders of the veins, tie the knots tightly, and insert the needle in all of them.
Donc si l’huou ja es am aquelas carnadas consolida, lahoras cove que tu extraguas le huou e inscidas aquel.	 When you have already opened up the space between the patient's thighs, place a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another one on their chest holding their hands, now if the humors consolidate there
E si es adherencia entro alcuna causa del ciphac, o entre aquo que es entre les bayssels, lahoras cove que tu deliures tota aquela adherencia e inscidas aquela per inscizio redonda.	 And if adherence occurs due to any cause of the chestnuts or between the thighs, then call for a remedy and insert that into an incision round
Mays si es nativitat de carn en le loc de la adherencia la qual es detras, lahoras cove que tu inscidas tot aquo que es de lu, e extraguas le huou ayssi cum havem dit.	 And if the cause of adherence is found in a location behind where it occurs, then call for an insertion into that place as well
Donc cum es complida la tua operacio, lahoras omple la plagua de lana imfuza en oli rozat e vi; e aprop cura aquela am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	 Once your surgery is completed, then apply the cream of lanolin ointment to it and wait for relief; then seek further medical attention if necessary
Capitol .lxiv.	 chapter 14
De la curacio de hernia que es de vitz.	 From the care of a hernia that is caused by force
Vit es apostema envolut per alcuna envolucio semblant a broto am mollificacio dels testiculs, e es fayt dificil movement exercitiu e deambulacio sobre le malaute.	 The space between the testicles becomes narrowed due to an enclosure similar to that of a glove, making it difficult for movement and walking around the patient.
E en la curacio de aquesta malautia es per temor per aquo del qual es precedida rememoracio.	 In the care of this ailment is caused by fear of what preceded memory.
Empero cove que diguam opperacio en aquela segon que fero les primiers.	 However, in order to perform that operation as soon as possible for those who are first responders.
E dic que cove que fassas sezer le malaute sobre una cezelha elevada; e aprop enpelleys le suspensori dels testiculs a las partidas dejos; e aprop te la codena dels genetius am les tieus ditz am les baysels que so probdas a la vergua; e tengua aquels autre ministre que tu, e extenda aquels am extencio vehement.	 And say that you should place the patient on an elevated tray; and press down on their testicles at the points where they are sensitive to prevent them from coming out; and then tie off the veins in both legs with a strong thread so as to prevent bleeding; and have another attendant stand by who can remove these as soon as possible, and extend them vigorously.
E aprop inscideys am spatum lat agut per seccio traversa en le dreyt dels vaysels entro que sian les vayssels descubertz.	 When you have opened a space between them, place a cushion under their thighs, another on their legs and another on their chest, holding their hands
E aprop excorja de tota partida ayssi quo a tu havem dit en extraccio de arceria las quals so en las templas.	 And in the temples
E aprop fica en aquelas un’agulha en la qual sia fiel doble, e lia aquel en le primier del locs en les quals accideys vit, e lia aquel autra veguada en le derier de lor.	 And put a bandage that is very tight but still double, and lay another on the first ones in which the blood flowed out, and one more on their right side.
E aprop inscideys aquels en le mieg loc per seccio dreyta segon la longuesa del cos, e extratz aquo que es agreguat de las humiditatz fetulentas e corruptas.	 And fill this with the most impure and contaminated fluids
E aprop cura la plagua am curacio de las autras plaguas en las quals vols sania esser engendrada per so que caian les vaysels les quals noyreysso un de dos genetius, quar no es mal per aquo.	 And apply the plaster with the healing ointment from the other plaguas to ensure that only one of the two generations is covered, as it's not harmful for this
Mays si accideys vit a totz les bayssels, lahoras cove que·ls testicols sian extragutz o que les testicols per aquo se cequo am les vayssels, per que sia privat de tot nutriment per la inscizio dels vayssels, e que sian estaborits, o que cequo per so que no sia juvament am aquels.	 If all the veins become affected and the testicles are paralyzed because of it, that they may be cut off or have their testicles removed due to this, in order for them not to be nourished any more, and to die, or that a treatment is done so that they do not live anymore.
Capitol .lxv.	 Epilogue
De la cura de hernia entestinal.	 From the cure of inguinal hernia.
Le adveniment de aquesta hernia es per seccio que endeve en le ciphac extendut sobre le ventre de part dels angunars del mirac del ventre, per que deysendo les budels de aquela ruptura ad alcu dels budels.	 The occurrence of this hernia is due to the extension of a loop over the belly button from one side of the navel to the other, by which it will cause the intestine to come out through the rupture.
E aquesta ruptura es o del ciphac o de excencio de lu, e accideysso aquestas doas specias per motas causas: o percussio, o per sautz, o per clamor, o per elevacio de alcuna causa greu, o per semblantz.	 "The rupture is of the diaphragm or from excess; it causes these two kinds of pain by different causes: either a blow to the stomach, or through force, or from loud noise, or from an excessive weight gain.
E·l senhal de aquo, quan es per extencio del ciphac, es que accideys pauc a pauc en lonc temps, e no accideys soptament, e es apostema engual entro ves le preon per so quar le ciphac comprem le budel.	 "In this case when it is due to the diaphragm's excess, then it causes little by little over time, and does not cause sudden pain; instead, it sends a messenger into two veins near the heart in order for the intestine to be removed.
E le senhal de lu es quan es per seccio del ciphac, quar al comensament fa accidir dolor vehement sobtament; e es apostema divers aparent dejos la codena propdana aparent, e aquo es per eyssiment del budel, e·l cos de lu a las partidas deforo del ciphac.	 "The other case is when it's due to the diaphragm's weakness; and at first there is sudden pain that comes; after this occurs intermittently with different strength, and it is for exhaustion of the intestine, which affects the parts of its cavity.
E alcunas veguadas es fora-getat am le budel la tela, e es apelada aquesta hernia entestinal zirbal.	 "Some vessels are forbidden to touch the intestines directly; and it is called a hernia by itself.
E alcunas veguadas es fayta am ventositat, e alcunas veguadas corr en le budel fenda, e aqui es retenguda, e es am aquo gran pernitia3 del malaute, e alcunas veguadas fa endevenir dolor malvada e majorment quan es premut.	 "Some vessels are forbidden to enter the abdomen directly; and some vessels are tied around it, in this way creating a great net of protection for the patient; and some vessels cause bad pain and mostly when they are pressed.
E en la curacio de las especias de aquesta malautia am ferr es temor, per que cove que sia esquivat le cazament en aquela.	 "In the care of these special things in order to avoid a sudden attack is necessary because otherwise it might happen suddenly.
E la manieyra de la operacio de aquela es que comandes al malaute que redugua le budel am la sua ma a las partidas dedintz de la sua conquavitat si obezeys al sieu retornament, e aprop sia envessat sobre le sieu col entre las tuas mas, e eleva las cambas de lu.	 When the operation is over and you're ready to close up, command the patient to put their hand on his chest between your thighs, and lift their legs.
E aprop sten la codena la qual siec la codena dels testicols a las partidas desus, e inscideys la codena dels testicols tota per le lonc; e aprop fiqua en doas labias de la seccio uncis segon que indigeysses a hubrir la seccio am aquels.	 And then apply a strip of adhesive bandage over the incision, covering all sides to seal it tightly after you stretch it out like this.
E si’ la seccio segon la quantitat que a tu sia possible que de aquela le huou sia foro-getat.	 After making the incision as much as is possibly necessary for that purpose.
E aprop excorja aquela ciphaqueth les quals so dejos la codena dels testicols, entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc dur de quascuna partida.	 Then apply a white sterile dressing over the incision after removing any dressings from the thighs, making sure it is completely covered.
Lahoras tu entromet le tieu dit en aquo que siec le testicol, en aquo que es entre ciphac blanc, le qual es dejos la codena del huou, e entre le ciphac segon, e absolve am aquel’adherencia que es en la partida detras del huou.	 You then place the stitches inside as you would for an incision, with a sterile dressing over it, ensuring that both dressings are in place and holding them securely behind the wound.
E aprop mau am la ma la codena dels testicols a las partidas deforo, e am aysso exten le ciphac blanc en sus am la ma sinestra, e eleva le huou am le ciphac a la partida de la seccio; e comanda al ministre que extenda le huou ensus e tu dissolveys la adherencia que es detras am solucio complida.	 Then remove the left hand dressing from between your thighs and apply it to the right side of the chest, extending the white dressing over the wound and lifting the wound above the sterile dressing at the end of the incision; then command the minister to extend his arm out further and release the adhesive that is behind him after completing the solution completely.
E cerqua am les tieus ditz que lay no sia alcuna causa del budel envelopat en le ciphac blanc dur.	 When the intestine is wrapped around a white hard phallus
Mays si tu atrobas de lu alcuna causa, lahoras tu enpelleys aquel al ventre dejos.	 If there is no cause for it, then remove that from his stomach area
E aprop tu pren una agulha en la qual sia fiel gros fayt de x fiels, e entromet aquel deves le derier del ciphac, le qual es jos la codena dels testicols, la qual siec seccio; e aprop inscideys las extremitatz las quals emineysso del fiel entro que sian quatre fiels, e aprop compausa alcus de lor sobre alcuna figura en manieyra de crotz; e lia am aquel le ciphac del qual havem dit que es dejos la codena dels testicols am fort liament de dos partz.	 Then take a needle with one-inch long and accurate threads, and pass it through the middle of his genitals (penis), so that its end touches the floor; then sew up those ends from which the needle emerged on all four sides of that figure in order to form a pouch, and fasten them over any shape you wish. And if there is already one such pouch made with cords as strong as two hands' strength
E aprop envolveys las extremitatz dels fiels e lia aquelas am liament vehement entro que alcu dels vayssels que noyrrisso aquels no puscan trametre alcuna causa per so que de aqui no accida apostema caut.	 Then wrap the ends of his genitals tightly, and place them over a piece of cord firmly, in order to prevent those cords from being passed through any cause that would lead to their not opening up completely.
E pausa autra veguada liament segon foro le primier liament, lonh de lu mens tres ditz; e aprop aquestz dos liaments layssa del ciphac le qual es dejos la codena dels testicols la quantitat de la grandeza del dit, e inscideys tot le romanent segon redondeza, e osta de lu le huou.	 Then place another cord in the second hole long enough to go three inches; and fasten those two cords together with a knot at their end, so that they form a bag over his genitals (penis), and cut off any excess cord after it is tied.
E aprop inscideys en la partida dejos de la codena dels testicols per seccio de la qual corra sanc e sania ayssi cum havem recomtat en aquo que havem dit.	 Then sew up the opening of his testicles according to what we recommended in this, and what we said before.
E aprop aministra lana submersa en oli, e pausa en la plagua; e aministra le liament le qual havem recomtat (e alcunas veguadas le ciphac blanc es cauterizat, le qual havem dit aprop la inscizio de lu temen de flux de sanc, quar motas veguadas accideys aquels) e leyssa le liament entro que per si caia.	 When the bowels are filled with water and you place a cushion under them, you arrange the linen recommended by us (and some of these linens have been cauterized, so that any leaking ones can be stopped). And if there is leakage:
Mays si le cazement de lu es tardat, lahoras de aygua cauda sia embrocat, e pausa sobre aquel entro que caia segon que havem dit.	 If the bowel obstruction occurs late, you pour scalding water over it and place a cushion beneath to prevent its escaping.
E aprop cura la plagua am l’autra curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanat.	 You arrange another servant to attend to the others who are ill; and if there is illness among them, you provide care for that too.
Capitol .lxvi.	 Chapter sixty-six.
De hernia ventosa.	 Ventricular hernia.
En aquesta hernia no e vist alcu que sia estat ardit sus la curacio de lu am ferr.	 In this type of hernia, there is not always a need to make the same care as before.
E les primiers diyssero que es fayta ayssi cum havem recomtat en la hernia que es am vi; la qual es que tu lies les vayssels aprop la seccio sobre aquela am fecilitat de lu; e aprop secca en le mieg loc en enviro le apostema am aquo que obro aquel, entro que caian les vayssels.	 The first thing to do in this type of hernia is to apply what we recommended for the other one: you put a cushion under their chest and arrange them so that they are not able to come out; then, if any of them try to escape from there, have someone cover it with another cushion.
E cura la plagua segon que havem dit entro que sia sanada.	 You provide care for the illness among them as well.
Capitol .lxvii.	 Chapter sixty-seven.
De la disropcio que es fayta en les anguonars.	 About the dropsy which occurs in the lungs.
Alcunas veguadas endeve ruptura en les angonars ayssi cum havem dit, e emineys le loc.	 Some of these servants will die by rupture in the lung; and that is unfortunate.
E no deyssen als genetius alcuna causa dels budels al genetius; e si deyssen, aquo es pauc; e retorna s’en en totas horas.	 When there are no causes for hernia in the groin, it is rare that this occurs and returns after a certain period of time.
Mays si es prolonguat le temps am aquo, es ajustada fissura en le ciphac entro que deysenda le budel en le ciphac; e accideys aquo per la extencio del ciphac le qual es en le angonars ayssi cum havem dit, la qual causa es quar le ciphac es estendut, e aprop es mollificat e·l loc es apostemat e emineys.	 If the time for this is prolonged, an incision in the diaphragm will be made so that the hernia may pass through the diaphragm; and it occurs by opening of the diaphragm as mentioned above, which causes it to extend, and place a poultice on the location
E la cura de lu es am cauteri ayssi quo es precedida la narracio de lu.	 The cure for this is like that mentioned in the previous passage.
E alcunas veguadas es curada am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: e es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos entre las tuas mas, e aprop secca le loc de la ruptura dels apostemas emineys am seccio per la latitut segon la quantitat de tres ditz.	 Some vegetables are cured by cutting off the head like that: and it is customary to place the patient's hands between your thighs, and then press down on the rupture area with a firm grip for the duration of three minutes.
E aprop strenh le ciphac blanc que es jos la codena entro que sia descubert.	 And then firmly press on the diaphragm while keeping it white so that any air may not enter through the opening.
E aprop pren le ray e pausa aquel sobre le loc eminent del ciphac, e prem aquel al preon del ventre.	 Then take hold of the diaphragm and place your hand over the prominent part of the diaphragm, and press it against the abdomen.
E aprop cus le dos locs eminentz sobre la extremitat del ray del ciphac, e ajusta am la sutura un de aquels am l’autre.	 Then put both hands on the extreme parts of the diaphragm, adjusting one over the other.
E aprop extratz la extremitat del ray, e no inscidas del ciphac de tot, ni no extenda le huou, ni autra causa ayssi cum yeu te fi saber en la curacio de hernia entestinal.	 Do not extend the diaphragm beyond its limits or open it up any further, nor cause any other damage as mentioned in the passage on how to cure an inguinal hernia.
E aprop cura aquela am la curacio de las plaguas, e cum inscideyses les fiels, mundifica aquela e restaura la plagua entro que sia consolidada; quar le ciphac es contrayt e no es ajustada la eminencia de ruptura.	 When treating those sores and wounds, make sure to cleanse the field with water, and restore the wound back into its proper place if it is consolidated; for the physician must not disturb or correct the excellence of rupture.
E cauteri es milhor en aquest loc, quar es pus propda a salut.	 Cautery should be applied here to ensure healing.
Capitol .lxviii.	 Fifty-eight
De mollificacio de la codena dels testiculs.	 The mollification of the testicles
Motas veguadas la codena dels testiculs en alcus homes es mollificada per aysso quar las carns que so entre aquela son mollificadas, e es fedat le reguardament de lu.	 The moles on the testicles should be removed in every household where they are found to prevent them from causing pain and damage to organs.
Adonc necessari es ad aquel que es preguat en la curacio de lu que fassa jazer le malaute segon le sieu dos, e enscida tota la codena la qual es mollificada sobre la codena natural; e aprop que ajuste doas labias am la sutura.	 If it is necessary to treat the patient with cautery at this time of healing, make a cut on their second nipple and remove all moles that are mollified from over the natural area of the nipple; and then place two stitches above the incision.
E si vols, cus en le comensament la superfluitat de la codena mollificada am tres cozeduras o quatre e am ferma sutura.	 If you wish, use three or four sutures to hold down the mollified mole after it has been removed from over the natural area of the nipple.
E aprop inscideys entre las suturas; e aprop cura per curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat e caian les fiels.	 Then place sutures between them and apply cautery to treat any other sores that may occur in the field.
Capitol .lxix.	 Fifty-nine
De castracio.	 Castration
Sapias que castratio en nostre ley es excomengada, mays per causa es legut a mi que·m remembre de lu en aquest libre; e no es necessaria la rememoracio de lu sino per doas manieyras, de las quals es la una per so que aquo sia en la sciensa del metge quan es enterroguat de aquela, que sapia la curacio de lu al qual accideys; e l’autra manieyra es que nos motas vetz havem necessitat de castracio de autras bestias per les juvamentz nostres per aquelas, ayssi cum de motos, e de bocs, e de porcs, e de semblantz a las bestias.	 Castration is known in our law to be excusable if there was no intent on the part of man to remember it at this time; and it is not necessary to remember it unless for two reasons: one so that when he is asked by the physician about his care, knowing its treatment will come into question; another so that we may prevent castrating young animals for their own sake or for our food.
E donc dic que castracio es fayta en dos manieyras: o per atrissio, o per fissura a seccio.	 Castration means to be done in two ways: by traction or through a section cut
Mays en aquela que es fayta per atrissio, la via de la opera es que nos fassam cezer la bestia en aygua cauda entro que·ls genetius de lu sian mollificatz e sian linhitz e que pendan.	 If done by traction, the path of this operation is that we will make the beast stand erect inside him so that his genitals become soft and tender and he will endure it.
E aprop pren aquels am la tua ma entro que sian resols e no apparescan dejos le tocament.	 Then put your hand over this area, do not allow them to retract or move away from the place
Mays en castracio fayta per fissura e seccio, cove que tu tenguas la bestia e premas la codena dels testicols de lu am la ma senestra.	 If done through a section cut, and you hold the beast with your right hand on his chest and left hand on his testicles, it will endure it.
E aprop lia le suspensori, e inscideys sobre quascun huou am una seccio entro que dos huous proceseysso.	 Then tighten them around a section of the body to ensure that they are secure and in place.
E aprop inscideys aquels pus que auras quascu excorjat.	 Then put some water on it.
E no leysses sobre aquels del ciphac alcuna causa, sino le ciphac subtil le qual es sobre les vazes.	 Do not spread them over the body, but apply a compress that is light and gentle, which should be placed on the affected area.
E aquesta manieyra de castracio es milhor la qual es fayta per atrissio, quar atrissio fort leu layssa alcuna causa dels testicols per que la bestia desira coyt.	 The method of castration that is more beneficial is when done by traction because it does not cause any harm to the testicles so that the beast desires to endure it.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	 Then take care of the wound until it has healed
Capitol .lxx.	 Farewell.
De la cura de hermafrodozia.	 Farewell, from Hermafrodos
Hermafrodozia en les homes es segon dos manieyras: la una es quar o appar en aquo que siec l’espazi en la codena de testiculs, en aquel que es entre dos testiculs figura quar cunh de femna en la qual so pels.	 In the second half of the body there is a second thing: The one that opens space between testicles, in which case it goes from one to another and its function is to separate them
E alcunas veguadas de aquel corr urina le qual es en la codena dels testiculs.	 Some veins of the latter urine, which are located at the entrance/exit of the testicles.
Mays en las femnas es una specia: e es que·l conh de la femna sobre le pentenilh es ayssi cum dos testiculs de home un pauc de tot yminiheys a la partida deforo ayssi cum le perpucii de home e dos testicols.	 The one in the females is special: it connects both testicles of a man to prevent injury or damage, and it also prevents them from coming out with the help of two pointed instruments.
E la curacio es de tres specias: de dos dels homes e de una specia de las femnas.	 The cure is done in three ways: for one man and two women
E es que cove que tu inscidas aquelas carns ajustadas entro que efuga la emprecio de aquela, e aprop que cures aquelas am curacio de las autras plaguas.	 It means that you should make those wounds closed so that the escape of what is in them does not happen, and it also advises on how to cure any other wounds that may arise from these wounds.
E en la segonda specia dels homes de la qual yeys urina la qual es en la codena dels testiculs, no es curacio ni opperacio en lu.	 In the second way for men where urine comes out through the entrance of testicles there is neither cure nor prevention in that case.
Capitol .xxi.	 Chapter 21
De lentinge e de carn eminent per causas de las femnas.	 Of length and flesh prominent by causes of women
Lentige fort leu es ajustada sobre causas naturals entro que es etressat e es fayt leg le reguardament; e alcunas veguadas es magnificada en alcunas femnas en tant entro que es spandit ayssi cum en les homes e perve entro al coito.	 Length is cut short by natural causes so that it may be stretched and made firm, and veins are enlarged in some women as well as in some men during sexual intercourse.
Adonc cove que tu tenguas la superfluitat de lentinge am la tua ma o am unci e inscidas.	 When you have removed excessive fat from around your legs or underarms and incisions are made
E no ultimes en inscizio, majorment en le preon de la razit, per so que no endevengua flux de sanc.	 After making the incision but before closing it, make a slit in the skin to allow any drainage from beneath
E aprop cura aquela am curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanada.	 Then apply a poultice of warm cloths to treat the affected area.
Mays carn nascuda es carn que nays en le horrifici de la mayre entro que umple aquel, e fort leu es eyssit a las partidas deforo segon semblansa de coa (e per aquo alscus primiers appelero aquo “malautia caudada”); donc cove que nos inscidam ayssi cum inscidem lentinge, e curem aquela entro que sia sanada.	 Newborn skin is skin that needs to be treated with care because it's more susceptible to infections than adult skin (hence the term "newborn rash" - and as for curing this latter, we say "cradle cap"); so when we apply medicine or dressings like this one to treat this area.
Capitol .lxxii.	 Chapter 22
De curacio de alratica.	 For the cure of erysipelas (a bacterial skin infection).
Alratica es que le conh de la femna no sia perforat, o sia le trauc petit.	 E si el malautia cauada en la fema, o en l’homun, faquei inscidam aquo “malautia cauada”; e per quu es fet maiuscul li senzillume a lasfemnas de femna quae son paques.
E es o natural o accidental.	 The rash can be caused by both natural and accidental means.
Accidental es per malautia la qual ha precedit, e aquela es fayta o per carn nada ajustada o per ciphac subtil o espes.	 Accidental refers to injuries or cuts that are not properly dressed or attended to, or through which there is a small gap between the skin and the clothing or equipment used.
E es fayt o en le preon de la mayre, o en les costatz de lu, o en le pus sobira de lu, o en le pus bas de lu, e prohibeys de cuoyt e de enprenguacio e de enfantament, e fort leu prohibeys las mestruas.	 It can be caused in the hands, feet, face, chest or abdomen, and it prohibits touching, handling, examination, diagnosis, and treatment, causing great harm to the patient.
E la cognicio de aquela es fayta per reguardament de la metrona, si la oppilacio es apparent, propdana; mays si no es apparent, lahoras tu cerqua aquela am les tieus ditz o am le ray.	 When the reason for illness is unclear, consult a doctor to determine what may be causing it
Mays si oppilacio es per ciphac subtil, e es propda a las doas labias, lahoras tu coyta e disromp aquela.	 If an illness can be attributed to a subtle cause, and if the patient is likely to respond well to two drugs, consult the doctor about it.
E es que pauses sobre las doas labias pulvils, e aprop pausa les tieus ditz indicz de amdoas las mas encemps.	 When the illness is caused by a delicate cause and responds well to a double dose of medicines, consult your doctor about it.
E la femna sia sobre le sieu dos, las sieuas coyssas extendudas, e aprop exten las doas labias am forsa entro que aquel ciphac subtil sia romput e la oppilacio sia uberta.	 When the cause of illness is unclear and both legs are swollen, consult your doctor as well to find out if that subtle cause has been missed and whether pain has intensified.
E aprop pren lana e enbeu le4 en oli e pausa aquela sobre·l loc, e jagua am home le dia per so que·l loc inscis no sia consolidat.	 Then proceed with the treatment indicated by your doctor, ensuring that the area is well moisturised to prevent it from becoming hardened or callous
Mays si le ciphac es gros e espes, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel am spatum lat o am fuelha de mirta.	 If the cause is severe and extensive, consult your doctor about what measures you should take to treat it.
Mays si la oppilacio es per carnada, lahoras suspen aquela am unci, e inscideys aquela.	 When the illness may be attributed to trauma or injury, have them treated at once and follow your doctor's advice.
E sian am tu las medicinas que fan cessar flux de sanc ses mordicacio, ayssi cum ahacatia, e sanc de drago, e enses, ajustat am album de huou.	 If the medicines that stop inflammation and pain are prescribed, as well as painkillers and anti-inflammatory drugs, adjust your medication regimen accordingly.
E aprop aministra una canulha de plom ampla per so que la plagua no sia consolidada leugierament.	 Then apply a broad sponge to prevent the lesion from becoming hardened or callous
E tengua aquela per alcus jorns e aministra calgua de li sec.	 The initial sentence translates to: Here you have that which provides relief on days, and it supplies a cool liquid
E aprop sia curada am l’autra curacio de consolidacio entro que sia sanada.	 And there is another cure for consolidation inside of those who are cured.
E alcunas vetz accideys en la mayre nativitat de autres carns, e lahoras cove que inscidas segon aquesta manieyra.	 There can be accidents in the greater number of animals, and it is customary for these to strike at a second time.
Mays si aysso es per apostema crancos, a l’apostema crancos le qual es en la mayre no sia fayta contrarietat am ferr en deguna manieyra.	 If this occurs through the apoplexy stroke, then it is customary for that to strike at a second time in any way
Capitol .lxxiii.	 This is Chapter 33 of the Capitularies.
De la cura de emorroydas e de tayl e de botor roja que accideysso en le conh de las femnas.	 Of the cure for hemorrhoids and varicose veins that occur in the female groin.
Emorroydas so apprecio dels orificis de motas venas entro que de aquelas corro mot sanc continuadament; e cum so antiquadas emorroydas e son fayts theyls.	 Hemorrhoids are appreciated by the openings of veins inside which, due to those in continuous inflammation and contraction, and therefore ancient hemorrhoids and their causes occur.
E ja yeu he dit en la divisio las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e diyre ayssi aquelas que recebo curacio e aquelas que no recebo curacio.	 And you have mentioned the division of those items and the necks of those, and direct this that receive cure and this that do not receive cure.
Donc dic que emorroydas e theyls quan so en le preon de la mayre e no apparo al sentiment, lahoras en aquelas no sia fayta curacio am ferr.	 It means hemorrhoids when they are located at the greater part and do not show to the touch, then the cure is not given in those cases.
Mays aquelas las quals so en le orrifici de la mayre sobre las quals catz sentiment, so aquelas que so curadas.	 And those that are inside of the larger opening on which they can be touched, those are cured.
E cove que tu metas la femna en mayso frega e aprop exten atheyl am les forfexs, o am drap aspre, e inscideys aquelas am las razitz.	 The first sentence translates to "Do not touch her lower back or shoulders.
E aprop pulveriza sobre aquelas deves le fluxs del sanc de una de las polveras insciscivas ses mordicacio, ayssi cum acassia e semblant ad aquels.	 The sentence means: "Place the powder of a certain kind of medicine on the sores from which the scabs have fallen off.
E aprop enpellesca les sieus pes per una hora, e aprop pausa aquela en aygua freja.	 The translation is: "Place both feet in water for one hour, and place that hand under cold water.
E si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras fay aquela sezer en decoccio de sumat e de scorsas de milgranas e de gualas e de semblantz.	 The translation is: "If the sores persist, apply a concoction of vinegar and garlic to the sores.
E aprop pren farina de ordi e comfiys aquela am miel e vi agre e fay emplastre am aquo sobre le dos de lu.	 The sentence means: "Place flour paste mixed with honey, vinegar, and water on both legs.
E si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, fay adherir am dos ventozas, e a las mamilhas ses escarificatio.	 If the sores have been cured, well done. Otherwise, apply the poultice to the breasts and arms.
E aprop pren lana e submergeys aquela am suc de coliandre o am suc de arnagloza o am suc de guarravier am vi pentit e fay adherir al loc; e aprop cura le loc am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	 The sentence means: "Place the poultice of either colander or vinegar, or a mixture of garlic and wine, and place it on that area. Then apply a poultice to the wound in order for it to be healed.
Mays athyl rog le qual es de aspre reguardament, cove que tu inscidas aquo que a tu appar de aquel segon que he dit en theyl engualment.	 The translation is: "If you wish to know the reason of what I mentioned earlier, ask yourself if that was the same meaning.
E cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	 Then apply a poultice for it to be healed.
Capitol .lxxiv.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
De perforacio de eyssedura accident en la mayre.	 The incision for removing excrescences from the abdomen
Motas specias de apostemas accideysso en la mayre, ayssi cum cranc e apostema lapident e ulceracios e adhubelat e erpetromens e fistulas emorroyas e raguarrias e thyl e autres apostemas.	 The various types of incisions made in the abdomen are for excrescences (tumors), ulcers, abscesses, fistulas, and others.
E yeu ja he dit aquestas malautias e las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e las curacios de lor en la divisio.	 You have already mentioned the ailments of those who are about to undergo surgery and their respective incisions in the division.
E cove que yeu digua en aquest tractat de apostema caut le qual ve en la mayre quan es dels apostemas que collegeysso sania, e si vols saber en qual manieyra se fa la opperacio de lu am ferr.	 In this treatise on incision for excrescences in the abdomen you will find out when to perform it and how to do it when you want to know about performing an operation of that type.
Adonc cove que tu consideres si la dolor de la apostema en le sieu comensament es aguda am percussio e flecma e febre, e vezes aquel enrogezir e si catz sobre aquel le sentiment, lahoras no·t coytes am perforacio de lu, e cura aquel am aquo que ajuda sobre la maturacio entro que cesse la acuitat dels accidentz.	 If you consider that the pain of the excrescence at its onset is acute and includes pain in the limbs and fever, then it would be advisable not to make an incision, but rather seek treatment as described above to bring down the intensity of the pains.
E lahoras cove que tu fassas cezer la femna sobre una cezelha que aia doas cezelhas; e recline sobre le sieu dos e ajusta les sieus pes a la partida pus dejos del ventre, e las sieus coyssas sian expandudas, e pausa les sieus brasses dejos les sieus denols, e lia quascus am liament ad aquo convenient.	 Have her lie flat on one side with two pillows under her head to support the neck and adjust the abdominal area by bringing it up towards the chest, expanding the chest and placing a cushion beneath the chin, and then place your hand over this area gently
E aprop la matrona segua del latz dreyt e aministre le instrument am le qual es ubert le orrifici de la mayre, la forma del qual vindra en aquelas causas que·s faran aprop.	 The physician is about to perform a procedure on the female patient's lower abdomen using an instrument designed for this purpose and with which the opening of the greater artery will be performed in those causes that are to come next.
E cove quan vols ministrar aquest instrument que tu fiques am lo ray le preon de la mayre de la femna, e aquo que del instrument es intrat en la mayre no sia mays que·l preon de la mayre e leda le malaute.	 When you're preparing to use this instrument on the female patient, ensure that it is inserted into her lower abdomen with as little force required for inserting a larger catheter and not more than necessary.
Mays si l’estrument es major que·l preon de la mayre, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils sobre la textura del preon de la mayre per sso que sia prohibit l’intrament de tot instrument en le preon de la mayre.	 If the instrument is larger than the larger catheter, be sure to apply gentle pressure on the surface of that catheter to prevent any other instruments from entering it into the greater cavity.
E cove que tu pauses le vertitge que corr en le strument del latz pus desus e que le ministre tengua le strument e revolva le vertitge entro que sia ubert le orrifici de la mayre.	 Before using the instrument on her abdomen, ensure that you've checked for any defects and that it is securely inserted into place so that it can be safely pulled out to open up space for performing the greater procedure.
E cum appar la excitura, e es tocada am la ma e es leon e molh, lahoras cove que tu secces aquela deves le cap de lu am spatum lat.	 After checking her and ensuring that both are visible and in a good condition, ensure you proceed to the next step by removing any protective cover over it at your fingertips.
E cum la sania es evacuada, lahoras cove que tu pauses en la plagua una meca submersa en oli rozat o oli vert en le qual sia alcuna stiptisitat; e pausa la calca7 en la seccio en le preon de la mayre.	 After the sacrum has been evacuated, ensure that you place a sponge soaked in soapy water or vinegar into which there are no restrictions on its use; and after placing it over her lower abdomen, remove any adhesive residue from it before inserting it into the greater cavity.
E pause deforo la mayre e sobre le pentenilh lana munda submersa en aygua en la qual sian bulidas malvas.	 When a patient's stomach has become bloated from overeating, place it in water to alleviate swelling of the belly.
E aprop sia curada aprop dos dias am enguent le qual conveneys ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	 The patient should be kept quiet for two days and if they are better after that then go ahead with treatment
E alcunas veguadas es lavada la mayre e la plagua enayssi que es cristerisat am aygua e mel, e aprop am aygua en la qual es bulhida razit de liri o de aristologia longua, e aprop retorna al enguent.	 The veins should be washed with warm water and the larger one in particular is to be submerged in water that contains herbs or ingredients of herbal medicine, and then rinse it back into its place.
E si la plagua es dedintz en la mayre ameguada, lahoras cove que tu sias prohibit de la curacio de lu am ferr, habantz cura aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio.	 If the swelling is in the larger arm, then it's customary to forbid the procedure from being performed on that limb and perform it instead on another part of the body that was mentioned earlier in the passage.
Capitol .lxxv.	 Chapter LXXV
A ensenhar las matronas en qual manieyre les enbrios bius sian medicatz quan yeysso segon figura no-natural.	 To treat any illness whose cause is unknown
Necessaria causa es que la matrona conogua en le comensament la figura del enfantament natural per senhals de lu, e es que quan tu vezas la femna expremar a las partidas dejos e desira odorar le ayre, e sobre aquo es enleujada per aquo que sobre ela es del part, e festina le eyssiment del enbrio, lahoras sapias que aquest part es segon figura natural, e es l’eyssiment de lu sobre le sieu cap, e la segondina am aquel o suspensa o pendent del ombelic.	 The illness should be treated with the initial appearance of a natural figure to determine its origin, and if it's suspected that there is another part involved, then one must check for swelling in that area as well, and if both parts show swelling or pain simultaneously, then further action may need to be taken on the abdomen itself, by checking out swelling over the head, while suspending or supporting the other.
Donc cum tu vezes aquels senhals, lahoras cove que·l ventre de lu sia compremut per so que l’embrio deysenda leugerament quar quan deyssen sobre le sieu cap, deysen a lu la segondina, e es mondada de aquelas superfluitatz am bona mondificacio.	 "When you come across such pains, it is customary for the belly of him to be compressed so that his embryo may gently descend when he wishes over its head, and then place on the second one, and spread these unnecessary things from a good effect.
Mays aquel que es otra aquest part es no-natural e no-lausable, quar quan le enbrio es eyssit sobre sos pes e·l cos de lu es eyssit devant le cap de lu e·ls pes de lu, e la ma de lu una, o al pe de lu i, o es eyssit le cap de lu e la ma de lu, o al ventre de lu, e fort leu es convertit sobre le sieu col, e semblant de las figuras de lu no-lausablas.	 "Whoever that part is unnatural and unwearable, when the embryo is expelled from his body and its body parts are ejected towards his head, and one of his hands or feet, if it reaches to his head, then his stomach is emptied towards its head, and such things as figures are not wearable.
Don necessaria causa es a la matrona que sia savia e subtil en totas aquelas causas, e que·s guarde de error e de decepcio.	 "It is necessary for the maid to be wise and subtle in all of these causes, and she must avoid errors and disappointments.
E yeu so mostrant tota figura de aquelas, e qual engen es en aquelas per so que sia significat per aquo e sia stat sobre aquo.	 "And you should show the entire figure as it is in those places where its meaning is to be stated and placed on this.
Quan le feyt es eyssit sobre le sieu cap per egrecio natural, e aquel es vehement sobre la femna e es fayt a lu part dificil, e vezes la vertut de lu ja debelitada, lahoras fay aquela sezer , o que las femnas tenguan lu, e evapora le conh de lu am fenugrec coyt e am olis humitz.	 "When the vein is expelled from its head naturally, and it is very strong in the woman and makes her part difficult to bear, times may weaken her heart, so doctors advise against making such a seer or that women have it, and evaporate some of its humor through a cold compress.
E aprop entrometa la metrona entre les sieus ditz espatum petit e fenda am aquel la segondina, o secce aquela am la sua ungla entro que corro aquo que es en ela de humiditat.	 "Then place the bandage between their thighs and let it fasten on the second one, or spread them in such a way that they are moist.
E preme le ventre de la femna entro que deyssenda le fet.	 The midwife should press on a woman's belly until she delivers the child.
Mays si no deyssen, lahoras cove que la femna sia cristirizada de mucellage de ptilli e mucellage de fenugrec am cizami.	 If not done earlier, put some ointment on the vulva and perineal areas as well as the area around the anus and the opening of the vagina to help soothe her pain
E aprop comanda a lu, aprop le cristeri, que sia compremuda e fay aquela stornudar am condisi; e te la boca de lu e·l nas de lu per huna hora, quar le fet sira foro-getat tantost.	 Prepare the patient and administer the remedy as soon as possible; put a cloth around their mouth and nose for one hour to prevent them from crying excessively.
E si las doas mas del fet so foro-getadas al comensament, lahoras cove que tu redusiscas aquelas am fecilitat petit a petit.	 If the pains of childbirth are too strong at first, ease their pain gradually.
Mays si no obezeys al intrament, lahoras pausa la femna sobre una cezelha e leva les pes de lu sus, e aprop concuceys la cezelha sobre la terra; e la femna sia tenguda que no caia deves la concussio.	 If not immediately, place the woman on a cushion and support her legs with pillows, making sure she doesn't roll off them.
E si las mas no son dedintz tornadas e morr le fet, lahoras inscideys aquelas e extratz le romament del fet o lia le cors a la ma de lu am drap e extratz aquel am equalitat, quar aquel sira foro-getat.	 If not delivered or the mother dies after childbirth, the midwife should cut open the abdomen and remove the fetus from her chest to her hand as quickly as possible, so that she may deliver it.
De eyssiment del embrio sobre les sieus pes.	 After removing the embryo, place the child on their back.
Quan le fet yeys sobre les sieus pes, lahoras cove que tu impelliscas aquels en sus, e aprop convertas le fet petit, e aprop que engualhes aquel, e aprop que prenguas un pe de lu e extendas aquels petit a petit.	 After placing the child on their back, gently lift and hold them, supporting them in this position until you bring another person to help you carry it.
Mays cum son eyssit entro a las coyssas, lahoras tu comanda a lu que se exprema, e fay aquela extornudar am condizi, quar sira foro-getat si Deus lo vol.	 When his legs are spread open, you will see that the pain is caused by cold humors that have infiltrated into each part of the body; and when there's pain in the feet, it is customary to call this gout.
E si no es foro-getat am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras tu retorna le fet petit a petit entro que pauses aquel segon figura natural, quar aquel sira lahoras foro-getat am leugier eyssiment.	 If the first treatment is not enough to alleviate it, you should proceed with a more gradual reintroduction of the second figure that has been recommended by doctors one at a time as it occurs naturally until its relief is achieved.
E si es prohibit am tot aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras pren de musellage de altea e de goma dissolvuda, e percuteys tot en le mortier per bona percussio, e aprop linieys am aquo le conh de la femna, el pus bas del ventre de lu.	 If it is forbidden to perform the recommended treatment altogether, you should massage both thighs and dissolve any fat with a compress, then strike gently on the lower abdomen of them.
E aprop fay aquela cezer en aygua tebeza, entro que consegua les ypocondias.	 You must apply heat to warm up your body before starting treatment.
E cum vezes que las partidas dejos de lu so lenificadas, lahoras fay a lu subfumiguacio de mirta e sub-pausa aquela a lu.	 When the parts of him have become inflamed, you should apply something cold and then place it in a cool place to reduce inflammation.
E quan te la sub-fumiguacio per una hora, lahoras tu la fay sezer sobre una cezelha, e aprop fay aquela stornudar e extrenh la boca de lu, e levas de aquela, e prem la partida pus bassa del ventre de lu am leugiera compressio, quar le fet sira tantost foro-getat.	 After 1 hour of cool application you should then apply heat to a gauze pad and press it against the lowest part of his belly, as this will cause pain relief until further notice.
Eyssiment del fet sobre les sieus denols e las suas mas.	 Treat both thighs and arms separately.
Quan le fet eyssira segon aquesta forma, lahoras tu engenies en entrometen las suas mas petit a petit; e aprop la femna stia evessada sobre le sieu col, e les pes de lu pengo en jos, e aquelas sia jasent sobre le lieyt, e complegua las suas mas.	 When the treatment is over and he feels better, you should gently press on both breasts separately; lift his legs up and put them together in front of him, then carefully place them down again.
E aprop prem sobre le ventre de lu petit a petit, e aprop extratz aquo que es dejos les pes de lu de las aurelhas entro que sia preparada en la partida pus dejos.	 And gently spread it out on the belly of him little by little, and stretch it out that way so that his legs are inside when he's ready to enter into her vagina.
E si le fet no es fora-getat, lahoras pren les pes de lu e mau aquels am movement vehement, e aprop prem aquo que es sobre les ypocondres petit a petit entro que le fet puege a las partidas desus.	 And if the anus is not ready yet, they will take his legs and move them violently around so that he can penetrate into her vagina when it's time for intercourse.
E aprop entrometa las suas mas e engualhe le fet petit a petit, e comanda a la femna que se exprema entro que le fet sia foro-getat.	 And gently put his hands in and around him slowly, ordering her to make herself ready when he is ready to enter into her vagina.
Eyssiment del fet latutidinalment pendent una de las suas mas.	 Gently hold the little finger of each hand separately from a while.
Sia engeniat en reduccio de la ma de lu, mays si no podes aquela reduzir, lahoras eleva la femna e fe aquela anar.	 Reduce it as much as possible without causing any harm, and they will raise her arms to do so.
E si anar no pot, lahoras fay la jazer sobre le lieyt, e concuteys las coyssas de lu am concussio vehement, e aprop aministra liamentz les quals yeu e recomtatz de mucillages.	 And if that doesn't work, they will use a pointed cautery on the thigh and cause it to be violently inflamed, and after applying the recommended ointments, tell me how he reacted.
E si es vengut le enfantament, lahoras fay aquela sezer sobre cezelha, e aprop studia sobre la reduccio de la ma, e enguala le fet segon figura natural, e fay stornudar la femna e comanda a lu que comprema a si entro que sia foro-getat.	 And if the attempt fails, they will apply it to her forehead and focus on reducing his hand, guide him into a natural erection, and tell them to press inside when he is ready.
Eyssiment del fet sobre·l col expandudas las suas mas e la fassia de lu es al dos de la sua mayre.	 Gently hold the penis against her vagina, with his hand on top of hers at a distance slightly greater than that of their larger hand.
Cove que la matrona tengua la ma del fet e aprop revolva aquel petit a petit, e eque aquel am facilitat.	 When the midwife has taken hold of the infant's hand and begins to gently pull it out slowly, then that is quite easy.
E cum es e quant so es engualhat, e lahoras pausa sobre le conh de lu aquo que havem recomtat de oli e de mucellages.	 And as the pain increases and becomes unbearable, he recommends applying oil and moisture to alleviate it.
E aprop comandas a lu que·s maugua petit a petit, e quan auras feyt aquo, lahoras fay aquela cezer sobre una cezelha e comanda li que sia inclinada sobre le latz dreyt, e aprop comanda a lu que sia compremuda; e fay aquela stornudar am condizi.	 And when the midwife has gently pulled out the infant and is ready to cut it free from its umbilical cord, she commands him to place her on his chest with her head towards the right side, and directs him to squeeze tightly as he cuts.
Exitus foetus praeparati super latus.	 He orders that after cutting the umbilical cord, the infant should be placed on its back immediately.
Quan deyssen a horrifici de la mayre segon aquesta manieyra, considera, e lahoras tu inscideys la segondina am la tua ungla entro que sia evacuada de la humiditat.	 When the midwife discovers this second sign of labor contractions, she advises you to clean your vagina as soon as possible in order for it to be dried out.
E si le fet es suspendut sobre la cara e·l col de lu, lahoras tu inscideys aquela del embelic, per so que no sia retengut e mora.	 If the infant is lying on its stomach and its head on the floor, she advises you to remove that part of the blanket in order to prevent it from being wet and dirty.
E aprop empelleys le fet a las partidas dedintz entro que pauses aquel segon que cove, e manda a la femna que comprema a si alcunas veguadas, e el sira fora-getat am eyssiment leugier, si Dieus o vol.	 And he commands the midwife to take the infant's hand and place it in her right arm, and directs her to tell him whether any waters have broken or not.
Exitus geminorum aut foetuum multorum.	 He orders that after cutting the umbilical cord, if twins are born, they should be cut free as well, but if more than one baby is born at once, he commands them to be delivered from each other gently and carefully.
Sapias que gemels motas veguadas so natz, e alcunas vetz naysso tres o quatre , mays aquo es estranh e tart s’endeve; mays v so causas foro natura, e no vivo.	 The first sentence of the text is "Quan dolor de juncturas son faytas per humors fregas...
E conte aquelas, ja sia que sian montiplicatz, una segondina, e son seperatz per ciphac, distingen aquels enter le liguament en l’ombilic de cascun de aquels E alcunas veguadas so foro-getatz ayssi cum es un fet per eyssiment natural leugier, e so eysitz alcunas veguadas per eyssiment no-lausabla ayssi cum havem recomtat.	 The second sentence of the text is "E conte aquellas...
E si son dificils alcus de lor deves le enfantament e perveno ad aquo que havem dit de las figuras no-naturals, lahoras tu cura aquels ayssi cum havem recontat.	 The third sentence of the text is "una segondina...
E si’ la matrona subtil e fassa aquo que fa am facilitat e subtilitat, e am tarditat, e sia ingeniat segon tota figura segon que es a lu preparat de l’engen amenant a salut.	 The third sentence of the text is "una segondina...
Rememoratio eius quod formatur in matrice ex embrionibus et Abortiuntur.	 That's correct! The translation for "una segundina" should be "a second one.
Alcunas veguadas son formatz en la mayre un, e dos, e tres, e quatre, e v, e vi, e vii, e mays x, e ja es deves mi verificat que una femna abortem ne getet vi, e una autra x totz formatz, la qual causa fo fayta per mensuracio dels glorios savis.	 The translation for the entire sentence is: "Some of these swellings are formed in one, two, three, four and five parts; some in six, seven or more parts. It is necessary to verify that a woman has not aborted prematurely, but another may be caused by an excess measurement of the swollen veins.
E tot aysso cove que sia en la sciencia de la matrona quar fort leu ad aquela parve semblant de aquo, e donc opause se ad aquo am so que cove.	 The translation for "si es necessitat..." is: And if it is necessary...
Capitol .lxxvi.	 "The sixty-sixth chapter.
De extraccio del fet quan es mort.	 "From the extraction of the body when it dies.
Quan tu curas le fet mort am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la medicacio e no es defora eyssit, e tu yest forsat usar de opperacio am ma, lahoras cove que consideras si la femna es de sana vertut e no es am alcu dels accidentz per les quals sobre ela es temuda perdicio.	 When you cure the dead body as mentioned in the division of medicine and it is not forbidden by any means, then use the opportunity to check whether or not a woman has good health without being affected by accidents for which she may be prone to die
Lahoras cove que la femna sia envessada sobre le lieyt sobre le sieu dos, e sia le cap de lu enclinat enjos e las coyssas de lu sian elevadas.	 Then lift the head of the woman onto a board or something similar and raise her legs
E·l ministre tengua aquela de doas partz o sia liada en le lieyt per so que·l cos de lu no se extenda deves la extraccio del fet.	 The minister should have that piece of cloth laid on the body to prevent it from extending outside during extraction of the body.
E aprop tu humecta la boca de la mayre de lu am olis humitz e am mucellage de altea e de fenugrec e de semensa de li.	 Then wet your fingers with water and apply them to her face, neck, forehead, cheeks, and nose.
E aprop unte la matrona la sua ma am aquels olis e mucellages, e aprop entrometa la sua ma am fecilitat en la mayre, e aprop cerque am la ma loc en le qual fique les uncis en le fet.	 Then wet your hand and apply it to her forehead, put in the vagina with a gentle motion, and place it at an angle between her legs where you will leave the fingers inside her body
E locs convenient en aquo: adonc tu considera si le fet es preparat que deysenda sobre le sieu cap, e lahoras tu fique les uncis en les huels de lu, o en le col, o en la boca, o en le palat, o dejos la barba, o en la furcula de lu, o en les locs propdas de las costas, o dejos les ypocondres.	 This is where you should consider: whether the body is ready to send its head down, or leave it inside her vagina, or in her mouth, palate, or beard, or furcula of her body, or in places that have been opened up by wind, or put them between the buttocks.
Mays si le deysendiment es sobre les pes de lu, lahoras en le pentenilh, o en le mieg de las costas.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
E cove que tengua le unci am la ma dreyta, e pausa la curvitat de lu en aquel loc le qual es entre les ditz de la ma senestra, e entrometa la ma am facilitat e fique le unci en alcu de aquels locs les quals havem ditz, entro que pervengua a la causa boyda.	 And if it is necessary to place the first cushion on the left side and pause the curvature of his back at that location between the two areas mentioned earlier, enter the right hand easily and put the first cushion in those places where we have specified before, so as not to prevent movement from causing further harm.
E aprop pause e fique en la apposicio de lu un autre unci, o le tertz si es necessitat, per so que sia atraccio engual, e no sia extencio segon la sua rectetut tant solament.	 And if it is necessary to place another cushion on the right side and leave a third if needed, in order that the traction may be applied equally and not too much, just enough.
Ans sia maugut a tota partida, per so que l’eyssiment de lu sia alleujat ayssi cum es fayt en dent deves la eradicacio de lu.	 And then let it rest for a while in order that the inflammation of his body may be relieved as soon as possible from this treatment.
E cove en lu aquo que es entre lor que la extencio sia mollificada; e si alcuna partida de lu es retenguda, lahoras cove que la matrona unte alcus sieus ditz am oli e entrometa aquels espertament e revolva am aquels aquo que es retengut.	 And so that the excessive traction may be softened; and if any of his parts remains restrained, then let a servant enter there to massage those points and roll them as you said earlier.
Donc si la partida del fet es fora-getada, lahoras les uncis sian permudatz entra loc le qual sia pus aut; e fay aysso entro que tot le fet sia fora-getat.	 Then if the treatment is over, let all the cushions be removed to that location where it was placed first; and so then he may completely recover from this ailment.
Mays si la ma es eyssida denant l’autra, e no es possible reduzir aquela per la coartacio de lu, lahoras cove que drap sia envolopat sobre aquela; e aprop extratz aquela entro que tota sia fora-getada, e inscideys aquela o en la junctura de la ma o en le coyde.	 And if the hand that gave it is away from him and reducing it by any means is impossible, let them bind his arm tightly in order to return him back quickly; and so then he may completely recover, and put into a junction of the arm or between the thigh.
E ayssi cove que fassas en l’autra ma e en les dos pes.	 And there you are, do it on one leg at a time
Mays si le cap del fet es gran, o accideys a lu coartacio en le eyssiment, o es en le cap de lu aygua ajustada, lahoras cove que entrometa entre les ditz espatum spinos e fenda le cap e extragua la aygua, o que discroba aquel am un instrument le qual es nompnat “alundat”, la forma del qual vindra am las formas dels autres instruments en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	 And if the head is large, or if it happens to slip off in water, or if it's caught on a hook with an adjusted beak, doctors say that pain occurs between the fingers of the right and left legs, or when they have an instrument called "alundat" which has its shape like others.
E semblantment fassa si·l fet es de gran cap per natura: e lahoras cove que inscida aquel am algematu, o que prengua aquel am alunda ayssi cum havem dit; e aprop extra les osses am les forceps.	 And similarly when the head is large by nature, doctors say that pain occurs when it slips off in anything, or when they pull out with "alundat" as usual, and place them into the mouth to be swallowed, like this; and gently take the bones with the forceps.
E si le cap es eyssit e es coartat deves la furcula, lahoras sia fendut entro que la humiditat la qual es en le pietz sia efunduda.	 If the head is lost and caught on a bone, doctors say that pain occurs when humidity in the breast area is increased.
Mays si no es complicat, ni obezeys a eyssiment, lahoras tu inscideys le cap tantost segon que a tu sira possible.	 If it's not complicated or excessive, doctors say that you should try to catch the head as soon as possible.
E si le dejos del ventre es apostemat o es en lu ydropici, lahoras cove que tu perfores aquel entro que corro la humiditat que es en lu.	 If it comes from under the abdomen or falls in the water drop-off area, doctors say that you should try to catch it as quickly as possible between the legs of both right and left sides.
Mays si le fet es sobre les sieus pes, lahoras la atraccio de lu es leugiera e la direccio de lu a la boca de la mayre es leugiera.	 If the head is on your feet, doctors say that you should grab it gently and direct it towards the mouth of the larger size.
Mays si es coartat deves le ventre e·l pietz, lahoras cove que tu extraguas aquel am drap le qual auras envolopat sobre la tua ma, e que fendes le ventre e·l pietz entro que corra aquo que es en aquels.	 When the pain of the belly and chest is present, they will tell you to squeeze that part with your hand placed above it so as to hold in it until the passage comes out by itself.
Mays si les autres membres so ostatz e torna le cap, lahoras la metrona entrometa la ma senestra; mays si la boca de la mayre es huberta, lahoras intrometa la ma en le preon de layre, e cerque am aquela le cap, e atira aquel am les ditz entro a la boca de la mayre, e aprop entrometa en lu un unci, o dos uncis, e atire lu am aquels.	 When the pain of other members is present and it comes back to head, they will tell you to place your hand above it so as to hold in until the passage goes out through the mouth or nose.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada per apostema caut le qual accideys a l’u, lahoras cove que no sia trebelhat sobre lu; abantz cove lahoras aministrar efusio de causas humidas grassas.	 If the mouth of the patient is closed by a gag that hinders breathing, they will tell you to stop using it and administer fluids for dry coughs.
E aministre emplastres; e segua le pacient en ayguas que mollifican e humectan.	 Administer plasters; and continue to treat the patient by moisturizing and hydrating them.
E si le fet es sobre le sieu costat, lahoras si possible es, sia agulat: e sia aministrat aquo que havem dit en le fet viu.	 If it is on the side of the body, they will do their best to do so; and if necessary, administer what was advised in the previous response.
E si aquo no es possible, lahoras sia inscidit en pessas, e sia extrayt.	 If that is not possible, they will be told to remain still, and withdraw.
E cove que non layssas alcuna causa dedintz de la segondina.	 When nothing else works, they will stop all attempts of the second kind.
E cum tu auras complida tota la tua opperacio, lahoras aministra aquo que havem dit de la curacio en les apostemas cautz les quals accideysso de la mayre.	 When you have finished your work, they will tell you to administer what was advised in the previous response for treatment of the pain caused by the major veins or arteries.
E si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras deyssendas en ayguas stipticas e aministra l’autra curacio.	 When blood flow stops due to injury, the pain sets in sharp and severe, another treatment is administered
E yeu ja e vist una femna en le ventre de la qual era fet mort, e aprop sobre aquel foc autra veguada emprenhada, e aprop foc mort es le fet autre.	 You've already opened the area between her thighs where she was found dead, and place a cushion over that spot as well, another servant on their legs, another on their chest, holding their hands.
Accidit al u aprop lonc temps apostema en le sieu embelic; e inflat es entro que foc ubert, e comensec a getar brac.	 The first servant came in through the mouth of her abdomen and inflated into place with water, causing it to enter her breast as well
E yeu fu appelhat a la cura de lu, e medicat a lu per lonc temps, e la plagua no es consolidada.	 The treatment was called for her long time ago but the abscess has not been cured.
Adonc yeu pausegui sobre lu de alscunas causas emplastra de forta atraccio, e eyssic de lu un os, e aprop passero alcus jorns, e eyssic un autre os; e yeu fu trop meravilhat, cum en le ventre no sia os.	 You have already placed a cushion over her chest and another on each arm, but you also need to place one more servant in the belly, because it seems that there is no opening there.
E adonc yeu cogitegui que eran dels osses del fet mort.	 After that, have you thought about the bones of the deceased?
Donc yeu enguisigui la plagua, e extrayssi de lu motz osses , la femna existent en las sieuas milhos disposicios, e ja visquec en tal manieyra per lonc temps, correc de lu un petit de brac.	 Then you should remove the abscess and extract all of its bones from her thighs, for a woman who exists in their disposal; afterwards place them gently over time to correct one little arm.
E yeu no afermegui asso esser stranh, sino quar en aquo es sciensa e ajutori ad aquo que le metge artifec am la ma per curacio aministra.	 You do not have to be afraid of being strange; rather if this is known and helps the doctor in administering treatment.
De las formas dels instrumentz que so necessaris a extrayre le fet.	 Of the instruments that are necessary for extracting the body.
Forma de vertitge am la qual es uberta la mayre:	 "The manner of use for which it is used by doctors
Aquesta es la forma de strenhedor en le qual so engualhatz les libres, al qual engualhament sian dos virtitges en doas extremitatz de dos futz.	 "This is the manner of using for which two virtues are necessary on each extremity
May empero aquesta virtitge cove que sia pus subtil de strictori, e sia fayt o de eba o de fust de boys.	 "Moreover this virtue must be very subtle in its execution, and it is either done with a fine needle or a file.
E sia la latitut de quascun fust quays dos ditz e le marge de quascu amdos quays un dit, e la longitut de quascu es un palm e mig; e en le mieg loc de dos fustz so dos ajustaments de aquel meteys fustz les quals ja son fermatz, dels quals la longitut es la maytat de un palm e un pauc mes, e la latitut de quascu es quay dos ditz, o un pauc mes.	 "The length of each stroke is the width of a hand and an inch more or less; and its breadth should be as wide as two fingers.
E aquestz dos additamentz sian entromeses en la boca de la mayre per que sia uberta am aquels quan tu revolves las doas prescriptas virtigges.	 "These two additions are insertions into the mouth of the patient to ensure that it is used when you rotate both prescribed virtues.
Forma autra semblant de aquela pus subtil e pus leugiera:	 Another manner similar, but very subtle and easy to use.
Sia fayta de fustz de eba o de boys segon la semblansa de forceps.	 "Another way is with a file or needle, as for the previous method.
Mays empero en la extremitat de lu so dos additament ayssi cum vezes, e la longitut de aquels additament es quays un palm, e la latitut de quascu es dos ditz.	 "Moreover in the extremity of it there are two additional insertions; and their length is like that of a palm, and their breadth as wide as two fingers.
E cum tu vols am aquels ubrir la mayre, lahoras tu fay cezer la femna sobre le lieyt les pes pendentz, ubert aquo que es entre las coyssas de lu.	 "When you want to apply the larger, place it between the thighs and raise it, or do as if you are between the buttocks.
E aprop obre la tua ma am le instrument ayssi cum fas am forfexs engualment segon la quantitat que vols de la aprecio de la boca de la mayre entro que la metrona fassa so que vols.	 Lay on your left side, open your mouth, and let the doctor insert the instrument as far as he wants
La forma de vertitge la qual diysero les antics:	 The correct translation is: "Lay on your left side.
Forma de impellent am le qual es empellit le fet:	 "The manner in which it was done previously.
Forma de amisidat2 am le qual es conterit le cap gran	 "The way to hold the head firmly.
E es asemblat a forceps al qual so dentz en la extremitat, ayssi cum vezes, e alcunas veguadas es fayt lonc ayssi cum forceps segon aquesta forma, ayssi cum vezes, al qual so dentz ayssi cum dentz de ressegua am le qual es inscidit e conterit.	 The forceps are inserted into the extremity and held in this manner, sometimes, after a while they become necessary to use them again, at which point they are used as before with fingers of support or to hold it in place
Forma de amesidat pauc:	 "A few minutes.
Forma de unci havent una spina:	 The correct translation is: "If you have a hernia.
Forma de unci havent doas spinas:	 If you are holding a vertebra.
Forma de forceps a la qual so dentz de cerra am le qual le cap del fet sia conterit:	 The forceps are used to hold the head of the body in place.
Forma de spatum havent dos extremitatz am le qual le cap es abscindit:	 "The way to hold both sides of the extremity when removing the head.
Forma de dos espatums latz:	 The correct translation is: "Two points towards.
Totz aquels instrumentz so excersitatz, e quan mes so multiplicadas las specias de aquel e so preparadas deves le artifexs, quant es pus leugier a la sua opperacio e pus aut deves les homes per la sua quantitat.	 The instruments are used as mentioned, and when the number of species increases and their preparation is complete, then it should be done in order to perform its work properly or they will not perform as well.
E no obres de aquels instrumentz ja sia qua sia deves tu aparalhat, quar la necessitat de aquels no es excusabla.	 The use of these instruments is already sufficient, unless there are additional requirements that cannot be excused.
De extraccio de la segondina.	 Of the second incision
Quan la segondina es retenguda deves le enfantament, lahoras cove que tu comandes a la malautae que retengua le sieu ale, e aprop fay aquela stornudar am condizi, e strenh la tua ma sobre la boca de lu e sobre las nars de lu, e si per aysso es defora eyssit, bo es.	 When the second incision is closed you must command the surgeon to hold onto it and then remove this bandage from above his nose and mouth and if necessary also below as well.
E sino, lahoras tu pren una ola e perfora en la cuberta un trauc e pausa en aquela erbas ubrent la boca de la mayre, ayssi cum calament e ruda e anet e camamilla e scicados arabic e cassia lignea e santaurea.	 If not, the doctor will apply a compress and prevent hot air from touching his cheeks by covering them with cold water as calmly as possible and gently and continuously as required and cumin seeds
Totas aquestas erbas o alcunas de lor sian submersas en aygua en la ola, e pausa aquela sobre le foc.	 All these herbs or some of them will be submerged in hot water within the compress, and placed over his forehead.
E aprop pausa una canula de canaviera en la boca de la mayre, e tengua aquela entro que la evapor vengua a la concavitat de la mayre.	 And then place a cannula of veins in her mouth so that any fluid collected there would evaporate into the cavity of her face.
E aprop fay aquela stornudar ayssi cum havem dit, e la segondina sira fora-getada am velocitat.	 And then remove that bandage as quickly as possible and place a second one on top.
Mays si roman aprop aquesta curacio e no es eyssida, lahoras tu comanda a la matrona que submerge la sua ma sinistra en oli sizami o en micellage de altea, e aprop entrometa aquela en le conh e queresca am aquela la segondina, e cum aquela auras trobada, lahoras pren la e exten aquela pauc a pauc Mays si es annexsa en le preon de la mayre, lahoras entrometa la sua ma segon que havem recomtat, e quan aura trobat la segondina, extragua aquela petit a petit segon rectetut per so que la mayre no caja deves la atraccio vehement.	 If you wish to perform this operation and it is not necessary, the doctor will command the nurse to immerse her left hand in oil or micellar water as recommended by the hospital, place it on top of the second bandage and when they find the second one, remove that one little by little until her chest stops.
Abantz cove que sia permudada als costatz dreyt e sinestre am facilitat.	 When a man's testicles are swollen from illness or injury, they must be gently loosened by a servant holding his hand on their chest.
E aprop sia ajustat en la quantitat de atraccio, quar ela obedira e evasira de adhirencia.	 The servant adjusting the traction should gradually increase it until the patient is comfortable and resists further tightening of the grip.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada, nos ja havem recomtat la curacio am sturnutacio e am medicacio de la ola am erbas.	 If the mouth of a female patient is swollen, we recommend seeking treatment from an oral surgeon and a medical doctor for care.
Mays si no es fora-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recomtadas, lahoras guarda te que no fetigues sobre aquela en iteracio de abstracio, mays empero cove que aquo que es eyssit de lu a la boca de la mayre lies a la coyssa de la femna, e aprop cristeriza aquela am enguent e tetrafarmacon; quar aquel fara poyrir aquela aprop alcus dias e sira dissolvuda e sira fora-getada.	 If the swelling is not caused by any of the causes mentioned before, then it's recommended to seek medical advice in order to figure out what specifically could be causing this issue with a female patient and apply appropriate compressives or other treatments; so that it may be resolved and prevented from occurring again.
Mays quan se poyreys, es de lu elevada mala audor al cap, e al estomac, e aquo ledeys la malauta; e adonc cove que sian aministradas sub-fumiguacios e convenientz ad aquo.	 If it is necessary to elevate the head and stomach of the patient as well as apply cold packs on that area; then seek advice from a doctor for appropriate treatment.
Mays alcus dels Antics ja so esproatz sub-fumigacio de nazitort e de figuas seccas.	 The ancient remedy is to apply cold compresses to the nose and cheeks as well.
Forma de instrument am le qual la femna es sub-fumiguada deves la retentio de mestruas e de la segondina:	 To be applied by an instrument, through which a female patient is being cooled down should include menstruation and the second one as well.
Sia fayta de veyre o de eram.	 The purpose of that advice or treatment might be either to do so now
E sia pausada la extremitat subtil en le conh e la extremitat ampla sobre le foc, e la sub-fumiguacio sia pausada sobre las brazas del foc.	 When the sensitive extremity of his hand is placed on the face and the broad extremity over the fire, and when the sub-fingertip is placed on the fingers of the face
E tengua aquela entro que sia consumida aquela sub-fumiguacio e itera·n autra.	 It was customary for that to be consumed along with a sub-fingertip
De curacio del cul del enfant no-perforat.	 The anal cavity of the child was not perforated.
Motz enfantz naysso e les culs de lu no so perforatz, les quals ya ciphac subtil e opilat.	 The fingers of the child were not perforated, and it was customarily done gently and carefully.
Adonc cove a la matrona que perfore am le sieu dit aquel ciphac; e sino, perfora aquel am spatum agut, e guarda se que no toque le lacert.	 If you pierce the vein in that manner, and if not, perforate it gently, and guard yourself so that you do not touch the skin.
E aprop pause sobre aquel lana enfusa en vi e oli; e aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia senat.	 Then place your hand over the inflamed part of his veins, and apply a compress on top to prevent it from swelling further.
Mays si temes que sia opilat, lahoras pausa en le trauc una canula per motz dias, e osta la quan le enfant voldra degerir.	 If you fear that he may suffer, stop applying the tourniquet at once and prepare for his care.
E ja accideys oppilacio del cul per consolidacio de plagua o de apostema; adonc cove que aquela consolidacio sia inscidida, e aprop sia curada am aquo que avem dit de la curacio e del plom.	 And if consolidation of the anus with glue or with stitches occurs, then immediately apply the treatment that is prescribed for anal care and wounds.
De curacio de las fistulas que endeveno dejos.	 The treatment for fistulae which emerged from his anus.
Las fistulas que endeveno en la partida dejos pus bassa so nodacio e grossetut las quals endeveno prop del cul defora o en l’espazi de la una partida.	 Fistulas that emerged on the outside of the anus or in the space between the two openings.
E es una fistula o motas.	 It's a fistula or abscess
E cum aquela nodacio es antiquada e corr de la humiditat aygosa blanca o poyridura subtil, e alcunas veguadas so de aquestas fistulas alcunas penetrantz.	 With the passage of time and exposure to white powder or subtle humidity, some of these fistulas may become infected
E aquelas penetrantz so conogudas per aquo que es eyssit de aquelas per la egressio e per ventosetat; e alcunas vetz use le malaute de egressio, e fort leu es eyssit de aquelas verm.	 These infections may lead to the exit of fluids and swelling in some cases, while others become infected with severe inflammation, making it difficult for them to leave the body.
E so de aquelas fistulas alcunas veguadas en l’espazi penetrantz entro a la vesica, e entro al meat de la vergua; e so de aquelas penetrantz entro la junctura de la coyssa e entro al notz de la coeta.	 These fistulas may also infiltrate into the bladder and urethra of the genitals, as well as between the joints and the testicles
E aquo en que es conoguda fistula penetrant entro al cul e no-penetrant, es que tu metas le tieu dit endic en le cul, e entrometas tenta subtil de eram o de ferr en la fistula quan no y es turtuositat.	 In cases where a fistula penetrates the anus but not the other way around, you should put a tube in the anal cavity and try to gently remove it when it becomes blocked.
Mays si en aquela es turtuositat, lahoras entromet en aquela tenta subtil de plom o de pels de caval entro que tu sentas la tenta o le pel en le tieu dit.	 If there is a blockage, you should try to gently remove the plug or apply pressure on the finger or hand inside it to feel for blockages or obstructions.
E si no sentas aquela de tot ni no procezeys del trauc alcuna causa de egestio ni verm ni ventositat, ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras sapias que es no-penetrant, e lahoras coyta te a la curacio.	 If there is not blockage or fluid leakage, you should contact the doctor for further care.
E quan la fistula es penetrant entro a la vesica o entro al meat de la vergua, lahoras la significacio de lu es eyssiment de urina de aquela e prohibicio de lu ad aysso que·l loc am medicina sia consolidat.	 When the fistula penetrates into the bladder or urethra of the genitals, doctors will often treat it as a urinary tract infection to prevent further complications and treatment of that location in medicine being solid.
Mays si es penetrant entro la junctura de la coyssa o entro al os e envencio de dolor en le circuit, lahoras senhal de lu es que la tenta perve entro aqui si en lu no es turtuositat entro al os, e envencio de dolor en le circuit de la partida; e que de lu yeys poyredura tostemps; e que no val en aquela medicacio, ni es consolidada am enguent.	 When joint pain occurs through the urethra or anus and spreads throughout the body, doctors urge immediate treatment as it can be very dangerous, because there is a risk of internal injury from its passage; so that when it does not go away on its own, in this case emergency medical attention must be sought.
E en totas aquelas fistulas penetrant no es curacio de tot, e la curacio de aquelas es trebalh e vanetat dels folyls metges sobre·l qual so fermatz.	 It is not curable in all such cases, and the cure of these is a challenge for the surgeons who are experts on this matter.
Mays en aquela que no es penetrant e no antiqua, sanacio am ferr es sperada segon que yeu a tu recomtare, e aquo que ja yeu e proat.	 If it's not curable and is recurrent, medical treatment is expected to be sought with the recommendation of your doctor.
E es que le malaute jagua entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos e eleva las cambas de lu entro sus, las coyssas sian enclinadas al ventre de lu, e aprop entromet tenta de plom, o de eram si es en la fistula turtuositat, entro que sapias le loc on perve la tenta.	 The patient lies between your thighs with their legs raised to expose the fistula, which is then gently tried to be probed for pus or matter, unless it is a turpulent fistula that can only be approached from outside through an incision made where you were able to reach.
E si aquela sent le malaute entorn le cuol, lahora cove que tu entrometas le tieu dit endic en le cuol.	 If the patient is lying on their back and the fistula is located in or around the buttocks, then your approach must be made through an incision into that area of the body.
E si sentas en le tieu dit la tenta ja per si meteyssa descuberta penetrar, otra aquo que sentas entre le tieu dit e aquela siphac o carn, lahoras sapias certanament que aquela es penetrant; e adonc no trebalhes en aquela, quar no es en aquela sanacio, ayssi cum havem dit.	 If you suspect that the fistula is discovered to be penetrating or is located between the buttocks and anus, doctors will certainly determine that it is penetrating; so if this occurs but treatment isn't available in this area, then go elsewhere for medical help because there are other areas where assistance can still be provided.
Mays empero diyssero alcus que es sana en alcus homes tart.	 "In case of pain in the joints, apply cold compresses as mentioned.
E de la medicacio per la qual es sperat juvament en lu es que tu ignes cauteri subtil segon le ample de la fistula, ayssi cum es precedit, e intrometas aquel ignit en la fistula entro que pervengua entorn le cuol; e aprop itera aquel doas o tres vetz entro que sapias que ja son adhustas totas aquelas carns ajustadas fistuladas que so semblantz a cana de pluma de ausel.	 "For medical treatment in case of pain, apply subtle cautery as previously mentioned and also introduce that cauterization inside the fistula if it penetrates around the anus; and apply each of the two or three electrodes into where you know they are already attached to those adjusted fistulae which resemble a quill from an owl.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder entro que en yescan totas aquelas carns que so adhustas, e aprop cura aquela am medicinas la carn engendrantz e consolidantz, e si es sanada, bo es; e sino, lahoras no es sana en degun temps per autra curacio.	 "Then apply the cold compresses wrapped around the body into where you have already attached them and also cure that which are adhering to it by medical treatment and consolidate it if it is healthy otherwise do not be considered healthy in this matter for another treatment.
E si la tenta intra, e no penetra entro·l tieu dit le qual es en le cul, e entre aquel e la tenta que es velament spes de carn o de ciphac, e vezes la fistula en aquo que siec la superficia de la codena, lahoras secca la codena del comensament de la fistula, e tu ve seccan am la tenta, e sia en la fistula entro que la seccio pervengua al loc en le qual perve la extremitat de la tenta, e per la tenta es liberat e catz.	 "If it penetrates and does not penetrate into the area mentioned as being at the anus, try inserting a needle to pierce it through which may be flesh or diaphragm, and sometimes fistula in this way where if there is surface of the cord it will dry the cord from the beginning of the fistula, then seal it, and when the attempt is completed it will release from the catheter.
E aprop mundifiqua aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so asembladas a canula de pena de ausel e no romangua de aquelas alcuna causa.	 "Then make all those adjusted fistulae resemble to cannula of a owl and do not come from any other cause.
Mays si flux de sanc vezes que vengua entre tu e la tua opperacio quan ensideysses aquelas carns, lahoras le milh que sia e del pus leugier instrument es cauterizar am foc o am medicina acuta, quar cauteri am foc ajusta bonas doas habitutz: so es adhustio de aquelas carns ajustadas, e abscizio del sanc exseccacio de las humiditatz.	 "When a flux occurs between you and your partner's body when examining those parts, the doctor should apply heat or cold instruments to cauterize them with fire or acute medicine, depending on which one adjusts well for that part, and dryness from excessive moisture.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder o en caus trissat entro que·l loc geta brac, e aprop lahoras cura la plagua am enguentz carn dura engendran e consolidan.	 "Then apply a cold compress wrapped around the body part or area in question to harden and consolidate it.
E so medicinas en las quals so stipticitat e exseccio; quan lahoras es restaurada ja es sanada e no temes iteracio.	 "The medicines used for those conditions include astringents, as dryness is restored when the sores are healed and do not need further treatment.
Mays si la fistula ja perve entro al preon del cul e es elonguada de lu superficia del cos, lahoras entromet le tieu dit en le cul e inquireys am aquel.	 "If a fistula has formed inside the anus and is elongated to its surface of the body, then apply it to the buttocks and ask for assistance.
E donc si centes la tenta e entre tu e ela es velament de ciphac o de carn, e es propda a la penetracio, lahora no es operacio en lu sino segon via di fiducia e de speransa.	 "Then if you are between the two and there is an attempt to penetrate or flesh, do not operate on it directly but instead seek medical assistance through trust and hope.
La qual causa es aministrar en lu una de tres manieyras: o que cauterize aquela ayssi cum havem dit; o que secces aquela entro que consieguas la conquavitat de lu per que sia a tu possible entrometre las qualcas e la curacio propdana; e no procesiscas mot am seccio per so que no inscidas le lacert contenent le cuol, e que accidisque sobre le malaute eyssiment de la egistio ses voluntat; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit quar fort leu sira sanat; o que elongues aquel velament e mondes aquel pus que seccas aquel entro prop le cul, ayssi cum havem dit, o am tenta o am autre instrument de aguda extremitat, e aprop mondifique aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so en la seccio entro la on podes am percrustacio; e aprop esforsa te a far la restauracio de tota la plagua am seccio, e si le orrifici pus desus no es consolidat, e romangua la fistula uberta en la partida del cul, e sira pus leugier per le malaute.	 "The cause to be given in it is one of three ways: cauterize that area as you have mentioned; or remove the abscess cavity around which you can enter and proceed with care for possible entrance, and do not process on such a way so that there are no cuts inside, and place your hand over his buttocks and seek assistance from the abdomen. And if it is necessary to cut off that part of the intestine completely, then sew up the fistula at its exit; or elongate that part of the intestine as mentioned before, or with another instrument for acute extremity, apply a compress on fistulas located in the section where you can perform a perversion examination, and seek assistance. And if it is necessary to cut off all the abscess from there, then sew up the fistula at its exit; otherwise, let the abscess be removed as mentioned before.
E alscunas veguadas la fistula es finida segon aquesta manieyra: es quan tu entrometas la tenta en la fistula, e es en le latz del cul entorn la superficia del cos am la codena e en le marge del cul, lahoras pren tenta de perforada extremitat, que es ayssi cum agulha de preparantz les coers segon aquesta forma:	 The first sentence translates to: "The initial incision is complete according to this method; when you introduce the needle into the fistula, it's around the surface of the body and at the edge of the anus.
e entromet en aquela fiel envolopat de v fiels o entorn aquels; e aprop entromet tenta am fiel en la fistula entro que consiegua la conquavitat de lu.	 "The needle is inserted with great care, avoiding any folds or edges along the way, and in order to reach the cavity of the patient.
Mays si es penetrant en le marge del cul prop dedintz, lahoras tu extratz le fiel de aquel trauc ayssi que tu intrometas le tieu dit en le cul; e extraguas la extremitat del fiel e ajustes las duas extremitatz essemps, e estrenh cascuna, e leyssa aquo per un dia o per dos, e quan mays inscideys le fiel en la carn, estrenh be aquel entro que aquelas carns sian inscididas las quals so entre doas extremitatz del fiel e que cajan.	 "If you are inserting into the anal margin carefully and precisely, make sure to remove any folds that may interfere with the passage of the needle into the anus; also remove one end of the thread and adjust it tightly against the other end so that when you push the needle through skin, these two ends will close together.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia consolidada e sanada.	 "Carefully place a bandage over it once it is healed.
Mays si le orrifici de la fistula no es penetrant, lahoras fay aquel penetrar, en qualque manieyre sia a tu preparat, sino que sia mot en le preon, quar no es a tu que fassas aquo per que no inscidas le lacert; e aprop fay am aquela entro que sia sanada.	 "If the orifice of the fistula is not penetrable, do not attempt to insert anything into it unless you are prepared for this and have made sure that nothing will fall inside.
La forma de spatum spinos am lo qual es fenduda la fistula: la curvitat del qual es mot aguda e l’autra partida es no-aguda, per so que no inscidas aquo que no es necessari, ayssi cum vezes.	 "The shape of the passage through which the fistula is closed varies depending on whether it has an acute or non-acute curve; if you are not careful when inserting anything into this passage without being necessary, there may be a risk.
De sutura de emorroydas en las quals corra sanc en la inscizio de aquelas.	 The first sentence translates to "The sutures of the abdomen run along this incision.
Emorroydas so segon dos manieyras, quar o so entre le cul semblantz aysi que es de carbos, o quays aquelas sian cum a gras de rasim.	 The second sentence translates to "The second part of the abdomen runs between the buttocks and extends downwards towards the groin area.
E de aquelas so petitas e grans, e que le sanc corr de aquelas tostemps e es una, e so motas, e so fora·l cul, e en las extremitatz de lu.	 The third sentence translates to "And these are small and large sutures, from which the wound extends upwards towards the chest, and the sides, and below the buttocks, and in the extremities.
Mays empero aquelas que so foro le cul so segon las mes de pauca humiditat, de las quals corr aygua citrina o un petit de sanc am cos continuabla, e so segon la color del cos.	 The fourth sentence translates to "And those that are on the buttocks may be very dry and lacking in moisture, from which a sour taste or small wound may emerge, as well as being of a different color.
E la curacio de aquela que es dedintz le cuol es que comandes al malaute que se assela e que se exprema entro que le cuol yesca e las emoroydas apparescan a tu.	 The fifth sentence translates to "The care of such wounds is that the patient should lie still and remain calm, so as to prevent any additional tears or swelling from occurring.
Adonc tu te coyte e suspen am uncis o que tenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, e aprop incideys aquelas deves las suas razitz.	 The sixth sentence translates to "And when you have washed and dried them, place a bandage on the affected area.
Mays si les uncis no so tengutz en aquelas per la humiditat de lor e mollificacio de aquelas, lahoras pren aquelas am drap aspre o am coto o am flassada de lana, e extratz aquelas am les tieus ditz, e aprop inscideys aquelas e polveriza sobre lor alcunas polveras caudas aprop la inscizio, per que sian ad aquelas en loc de cauteri; o cauteriza aquelas segon que es precedit en le capitol de cauterizar.	 The seventh sentence translates to "If the dressings do not absorb enough moisture or soften them too much, use a bandage that is rough or coated with lanolin (wool), and apply it over the affected area as tightly as possible on the incision, so they will not fall off; otherwise, cauterize them according to the instructions for cauterizing.
E aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	 And then apply a cure for those other ailments that may arise
E si le cul no obezeys a egressio, lahoras cristerisa le malaute am cristeri en le qual sia mordicacio petita, e sia lavat am aquel aquo que es en le cuol e que obezesca a egressio leugierament quan le malaute s’esprem.	 If the anus becomes swollen and there is an exit but it's not large enough to be noticeable, apply a mild cure that prevents leakage when the patient tries to push out their bowels.
Mays si las emorroydas so defora le cul, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiera, e es que tu prenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, o que prenguas aquelas am unci, e inscidas aquelas, e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit entro que sian sanadas.	 If hemorrhoids occur in the anus, it is customary to treat their cause and apply a mild cure for them, or you can also apply those that we mentioned earlier when discussing treatment for those ailments.
E aquel que avoreys inscizio, cove que aministres sutura de lor segon aquesta manieyra: pren fiel envolopat e entromet aquel en agulha e aprop extratz las emorroydas a las partidas dessus, e fay aquel penetrar am la agulha en la razit del autra part, e envolveys las doas extramitatz del fiel en la partida pus dejos de la agulha, e so latitudinalment; e estrenh la emorroyda am strectura fort, e aprop noza le fiel e extratz la agulha.	 If you cut open the anus and sew up the second one like this: put a fine suture in it tightly and insert it into the other part of the body, and surround both ends of the needle with a thread, and stretch the hemorrhoids over them; then remove the needle from inside the skin gently.
E fay aquo a totas, e layssa de aquelas una e no la cozes, per so que la superfluitat del sanc corra de aquela.	 And do this to all of them and leave one out in order that the excess blood flow from that area.
E aprop pausa sobre le cul drap enfus en oli rozat o en cerot; e pausa aquel sobre·l cuol e comanda al malaute que·s repause.	 And apply a poultice of warm, greasy or sour substances over the anus to stop it from itching and command the patient not to scratch it.
E aprop layssa aquela entro que caja; e quan es casuda, cura aquelas am enguentz o am autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	 And when that comes loose apply a cure for those other ailments or put them in order so they are healed.
De curacio de fistulas.	 Curare of fistulas
Motas veguadas accideys per exseccacio de fenda o per costriccio de natura.	 The veins become swollen due to either dryness or constriction in nature.
E cum so antiquadas e no val en aquela medicina, lahoras cove que tu razas aquelas am la puncta de spatum o am la tua ungla entro que sian faytas humidas e sia hostada de aquelas la escorsa pus desus, la qual prohibeys aquelas de consolidacio; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian consolidadas.	 When such veins are not treated in time with the current medicine available at that moment, doctors warn you to apply a pointed cautery to make them bleed and remove the blockage inside so as to prevent any further consolidation of those veins; and on the contrary, if they have already consolidated, it is customary for doctors to treat them by applying pressure.
Lahoras tu osta aquelas am razio pus vehement que la primieyra entro que mot sancno e sian excoriadas; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	 When you apply the medicine, it is customary for doctors to first make those veins bleed and then treat them if they are already healed.
De curacio de almesamir, so es clau.	 The cure of hemorrhoids is crucial.
Sapias que alamermar, so es clau, e no es si no notz redon segon la color del cors semblant a cap de claviel, e es fayt en tot le cors e majorment en las partidas dejos les pes e als ditz, e endeve per aquels dolor deves le anament.	 Do you understand that hemorrhoids are crucial to cure and not just for the redness on your groin like a pimple? It is important to treat them throughout the body but mainly in the areas of the buttocks and toes, and it is necessary to prevent any pain by doing so.
E adonc cove que sia inscidit aquo que es en le circuit del clau, e sia tengut am les forfexs o am unci, e sia eradicat de la sua razit; e aprop cura aquel.	 If you feel that this is in your way and it affects the circulation of blood or nerves, or if they come out, and cause an injury to yourself; then treat for them.
E si vols, cauteriza le segont que es precedit en le sieu capitol.	 If you wish so, burn that which was mentioned in the previous sentence.
Mays de veruca es eminencia petita aspre fistulada redonda sobre la superficia del cos, e motas veguadas veno en las mas dels enfantz.	 A blister is a small red spot on the surface of your body and swollen veins appear in the hands most often during childhood.
E curacio de lu es que estendas e inscidas aquela, o que estrenhas aquela am fiel o am pel entro que caja.	 The treatment procedure begins when you stretch out her legs and insert a cushion between them to support her body while lying down on the couch
E si vols, cauteriza aquo, segon que havem dit, am foc o am medicina acuta.	 If you want to proceed with the cautery, after having mentioned that we are dealing with acute pain.
E ja so eradicadas enversas e no-enversas am le instrument le qual yeu diyre.	 Remove it from both sides and do not put it back in the same place.
Mays formica es eminencia petita feutrada o fistulada grossa sobre la superficia del cos anant mot en le preon, e quan le freg atroba aquela es centit en lu semblant de mordificacio de formigua, e es fayta entorn le cos.	 The flea bite appears as a small red bump or blister on the body's surface in advance of the more severe pain it causes, and spreads out towards it like a fire spreading.
E curacio de lu es que prenguas una canula de pena de auca o de pena de voltor, e sia fort, e pausa aquela sobre la formigua entro que la contengua le cercle de la canula de las partidas de lu; e aprop revolveys la tua ma am la canula entro que inscidas aquo que es en le circuit de la formigua, e pauses aquela en le preon de la carn, e que eradiques la formigua de la sua razit.	 The procedure involves the use of a syringe filled with either an anesthetic or a numbing agent, and securing it in place over where it will cause numbness, ensuring that nothing touches the affected area while performing the treatment.
E si vols, fay aquo am canula de eram o de ferr segon aquesta forma:	 If you want to proceed with the syringe method instead of the previous one
Sia la partida desus de la canulha trahent a subtilitat, sorda (so es no-perforada), envolopada per so que sobre le dit la aprencio de lu sia ablaviada e la revolucio de aquela.	 The needle should be thin and numb (it is not perforated) to ensure that it covers the affected area completely, preventing any injury during its removal.
E si vols cauteriza la formiga segon que es denant dit en la cauterizacio de atheyl en le capitol de cauteri.	 If you want to proceed with cautery instead of what was previously mentioned in the cautery chapter, do so from the top down towards the toes.
De forma dels instrumentz que so aministratz a dar cristeri.	 In order to administer these remedies
Alcunas veguadas es fayt cristeri de argent o de lato o de eram fondut o malleat; e alcunas veguadas es fayt de aquels instrumentz petit e gran segon aquels als quals so aministratz, quar aquel que es aministrat en la curacio dels petitz enfants sia petit; e de aquel dels quals los culs son freuls o doloyrozes, les cristeris de aquels sian petitz.	 Some remedies are made of gold or lead or iron filings; and some remedies are made from small and large instruments depending on the ones that are used to administer them. For example, if they were given by a doctor treating children it would be small; while for those who have gout, then the remedies are smaller
La forma de cristeri gran e pauc:	 Large and small
Le cap de la canula de lu desus en le qual es liada la borsa sia ampla segon aquesta manieyra; e sia a lu distinacio la on la borsa es liada ayssi cum vezes.	 The top of the needle is wide depending on this manner; and at another place where it is narrow like that.
E la extremitat de lu pus dejus, la qual es entromesa en le cul, sia sorda (so es no-uberta) mot leon, atrasent a subtilita; e en la un del latz de lu sian dos traucs, e en l’autre costat un trauc, e sia la amplesa del trauc segon la groseza dels rays e pus gros un petit.	 The part of it that goes in the anus is not sharp like this; instead, there is a subtlety to it; and on one side of it has two holes, and on the other side has one hole; its edges are thin depending on the size of its rays, and it becomes thicker at smaller ones.
E sia la borsa en la qual sian pausadas las medicinas de vesica de bestia o de pel de ovelha, e la razit de lu sia un palm.	 And the one that holds medicines for bladder stones or kidney stones is round.
E sia perforada per motz traucs ayssi cum es revolvuda; e si l’espazi le qual es entre les traucs la grossetut del dit.	 It has holes through which it can be rolled up, and the space between them is the width of this hole.
E aprop entromet en aquels traucs fiel fort de fiel cru le qual sia de detz fiels, o enviro aquels; e ajusta am aquel la borsa; e quan es pausada en lu la borsa, sia streyt en le cap del cristeri entre dos distingentz am fort costriccio, e aprop cristeriza am aquel quascun trauc: Mays la qualitat de cristerizar am aquel es que tu omples la borsa de la medicina, que sia escalfada segon la quantitat de la tolleransa del malaute; e guarda te que no sia trop cauda ni trop freja.	 When you put it in those holes, tightly so that they are as firm as if from the same field or opposite to them; and adjust it on that hole; and when it is placed into the hole, then stretch its end between two very narrow places, tight like a needle, and place one cristery onto each hole. The quality of cristery being that you should put the medicine in the bag as hot as possible depending on how much tolerance your patient has; and make sure not to be too hard nor too soft.
E aprop le malaute sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos, e eleva las suas cambas en sus e pausa dejos lu un cuer sobre le qual ja so les homes o un lansol; e aprop unta la extramitat del cauteri am oli o am album de huou o am mucellage de fenugrec o de semblantz; e aprop entromet aquel en le cul am facilitat, e aprop le ministre prengua la borsa e exprema aquel am doas mas e essemps am vehemencia entro que sia evacuat en le budelh tot aquo que es en le cristeri; e aprop extra le cristeri e le malaute leva las suas cambas a la paret.	 The first sentence of the text translates to: "Place a cushion underneath their thighs, raise up their legs and put one hand on it.
E si la medicina forsa aquel a eyssiment, tengua le tant quant poyra; e si dorm am aquel per tota una nueyt, es mays derier en juvament.	 If the medicine forces this to happen, hold onto them as tightly as possible; and if they come with all their might, it's more dangerous in youth.
Mays si tu cristerizas aquel en las malautias de solucio de ventre e l’eyssiment de lu le coyta, lahoras tu itera le cauteri entro que sia sanat.	 If you apply the cautery to the belly and pain occurs, then you must act quickly to get relief.
E si en le cul so emorroydas o apostemas ledens, lahoras sia le cristeri mot subtil e leon, dels cristeris am les quals les enfantz so criterisatz.	 If something happens in the anus or buttocks, then apply the cautery gently and slowly, between the two fingers of the hand used for applying it to children.
De curacio de las plaguas.	 With respect to care (of) patients
Yeu ja e dit en la divisio de la curacio de las plaguas aquo que convenia al libre, e yeu dic assi la curacio de aquelas am ma e am medicinas segon le conpliment.	 You have already said in the division of care for patients that is customarily done as a matter of course, and you say similarly about care for doctors after being praised.
Donc dic que las plaguas son diversificadas segon aquo en que son faytas las plaguas e segon le loc sobre le qual cazo las plaquas.	 Therefore, I am saying that the causes of diseases are divided according to whether they are internal or external factors and based on where the plaques settle.
E las causas per que motas vetz son faytas las plaguas so ayssi cum getament de peyra, o inscisio d’espaza o de cotel, o percussio am lansa, o am fustz, o am sageta, o semblantz ad aquels de motas causas.	 When the causes for which things mentioned above are considered to be the cause of pain
Mays las plaguas que so en les locz del cos so ayssi cum plagua la qual catz sobre le cap, o·l col, o·l pietz, o·l ventre, o·l fitge, e semblantz ad aquels dels membres.	 The pains that occur in the parts of the body mentioned above are caused by certain causes or reasons
E yeu so recomtant la curacio de alcunas plaguas per que pauses aquela ratiocinacio e regla sobre las autras plaguas.	 It is recommended to cure some of the pains through this reasoning and regulation regarding other pains.
E yeu comensare de las plaguas del cap simplas, quar la rememoracio de las compostas vindra al comensament del tertz capitol.	 The pains in the head are simple to remember as they come first in the third capital.
Donc dic que quan accideys en le cap plagua simpla e no es fractura, lahoras considera: si es per getament de peyra o de semblant, e ja ha trinquada la codena tant solament e es gran plagla e temes sobre aquel malaute havinement de apostema caut, lahoras tu te coyta e fleubotoma la cephalica tantost, e no tardas aquo; e extrats ad aquel del sanc segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu si no mes alcuna causa prohibent de fleubotomia, majorment si·l sanc que es eyssit de la plagua es pauc.	 When a simple head pain occurs without any fracture, the doctor considers: if it is due to trauma or injury of some kind, and only one painful area and concerns about that patient having stitches on his chest, the doctor treats him with sedation, compresses the forehead as much as possible, does not delay this; otherwise extracts from that second for the duration of the pain if no other cause preventing sedation major than if it was due to the pain itself is minimal.
E sia la flaubotomia del contrari de la partida plaguada; e guardase le malaute de replecio e de vi e de viandas grossas.	 And stay away from the opposite side of the head, and keep far away from the patient's neck, face and heavy blood vessels.
Mays si de la minuicio prohibeys alcuna causa, lahoras sia aminorat de la vianda e no apropinque a carn ni a vi.	 When there is no cause to make incisions
E pausa sobre la plagua, si a lu accideys apostema caut, coto enfus en oli rozat solet o en vi en le qual es stipticat.	 And place the pillow on it if it happens that a sharp object comes too close, to prevent injury or blood from coming out in the same manner as described earlier.
Mays si est segur de apostema caut, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua, si es recent am le sieu sanc e le ayre no ha mudat aquela la polvera la qual yeu recomtare aprop petit.	 If you are sure that the sharp object has come too close, place a pillow on it, making sure to replace any torn cloth with another as soon as possible.
E si le ayre ja ha mudada aquela, lahoras pausa sobre alscus enguentz entro que sia sanada.	 If the pillow is already torn or damaged, place a new one in its stead after checking that it has been repaired.
Mays si la plagua es gran o es per inscizio d’espaza e de semblantz, e no so ajustadas las labias de lu per puvils, lahoras ajusta aquelas am sutura segon que yeu recomtare de la sutura de lor.	 If the pillow is too small or not properly adjusted for support, adjust it to suit after checking that you should repair its stitches instead.
Mays si la plagua ja es discuberta del os e pen, e no es retencio de lu sino un petit suspensori, lahoras inscideys aquela e aprop cura la plagua am medicinas e restaura la carn aprop en loc de codena, e comanda al malaute que sia pescut de viandas en las quals es groceza: caps e formen coyt e semblantz a lor, entro que sia compost.	 If the pillow has already been removed from use and torn in such a way that it cannot be used again for support, cut off the pillow immediately with a scalpel, disinfect it and restore the flesh properly at its location, commanding the patient to keep their legs crossed as instructed while they are healing.
E si atrobas en la codena putrefaccio e no adhereys al os, lahoras tu inscideys tot aquo poyrit e geta aquo, e aprop cura aquo.	 If pus from the wound begins to ferment and does not adhere to the bone, cut it off completely at that point; you should get rid of it, and repair it.
Mays si en aquestas plaguas es arteria o vena de la qual fluxs de sanc pot evenir, e no es abscindida per medicinas, lahoras tu inquier sobre la arteria, e si atrobas aquela no-inscidida, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am spatum, o lia aquela; e si necessitat te provoca que aquo que havem dit no comfereys, lahoras tu cauteriza entro que·l sanc sia abscidit.	 When there is an artery or vein whose blood flow may cause pain and not blocked by medicine, then inquire about the artery, if you detect it, investigate that one; and if necessity arises in which I have said that this happens to occur, cauterize into where the blood has come out.
E si aquestas plaguas son simplas e petitas, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiere; enayssi que tu polverizas sobre aquelas aquesta polvera, quar consolidada aquela denant que l’ayre mude aquelas.	 If the pain is simple and mild, then the cause of it may be light; otherwise you should sift through that powder to determine what caused this bruising.
E la manieyra de la polvera es aquesta: recipe oli de enses partida una, de sanc de drago partida doas, de caus no-extincta partidas tres; sia tot mot trissat e crivellat, e de lu sia la plagua omplida, e sia constrengida per bona constriccio entro que be sobre aquela aderesca, e sia coagulada am le sanc.	 The remedy for the powder is as follows: take one part of vinegar, three parts of dragon's blood, and add no external substance; it should be thoroughly scalded and creamed until smooth, and then poured over the bruise, whereafter it will coagulate against the itchiness, and heal any swelling or injury.
E aprop strengeys aquela desus am pulvils e leyssa aquela, e no la deslias mentre esta ayssi que no es apostemada, quar no es eredicada de lu la medicina entro que sia sanada.	 After applying that powder and leaving it as is for a while, if the medicine does not seem to be effective, do nothing else but leave it on until it has been applied completely without being washed off, at which point the medicine should have become effective.
E alcuna vetz fa aquo sola cautz, quan no es a tu en present enses e sanc de drago.	 None of these alone suffices when you do not also have vinegar and dragon's blood.
E ja fa aquesta meteyssa operacio en las grans plaguas quan conveneys que sia pausada sobre aquelas e sian streytas, e so plaguas recentz am le lor sanc, las quals le ayre no ha alteradas.	 The operation of this remedy is performed on large bruises when it is covered and stretched, as the bruise itself may have changed.
E si le ayre las ha alteradas, e majorment quan es en temps d’estiu, lahoras no es entencio a la posicio de aquesta polvera, mays adonc cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit, enayssi que tu pauses sobre aquelas alcus enguents degistius, o que pauses sobre aquelas pols de la farina del ordi am aygua e mel entro que getan poyredura; e aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	 When the patient's anus has been altered and especially when it is summer, then the pain is felt in that area as mentioned before, you should rest your hand on those rough places, or on those fingers of the order to prevent further injury; also apply a second treatment to those other affected areas.
Mays si accideys am la plagua fractura en os, e es petita, lahoras tu extratz aquo am gesti.	 If you encounter a fracture in your leg and it is small, then the doctors will treat it with this method.
E yeu diyre la cura de las fracturas del cap en aquo que es envenidor.	 The treatment for broken bones when they are infected
De las plaguas del col.	 Of the hemorrhoids
Mays si la plagua accideys en le col, lahoras no es en lu differencia en medicacio, e entre la plagua del cap quan es simpla.	 If a hemorrhoid occurs in the anus, then doctors will not differentiate from medical treatment when it is simple.
Mays si ja le nervi del col es inscis o arteria, lahoras si es nervi, no es en lu engen sino que sia evitada curacio de lu am aquo que fa vehement stipticitat, ayssi cum ziniar e zegi que es vetriol e semblantz a lor quar nozo als nervis e contrazo aquel.	 If the nerve of the anus is crushed or an artery, then it is not in vein but must be avoided for treatment with hot applications such as those used to treat burns and blisters on the nerves against which are acidic and similar to them.
E no pauses sobre la plagua alcuna causa de tot freja, quar la sustancia dels nervis es freja e la continuacio de lu es am le cervel, le qual es le pus aut de totz les membres.	 Do not rest on any cause of the hemorrhoid pain as the nerve substance is hurt and its continuation is in jeopardy to all members.
E si’ aquo am que es curat de medicinas leugieras, ayssi cum es caus lavada am aygua dousa, alcuna veguada enfusa en oli rozat o no-rozat, e thucia quan es lavada am aygua dousa e las autras peyras minarantz segon aquesta manieyra, e enguentz humitz.	 If you are going to use drugs for the treatment of hemorrhoids as well as washing with hot water in a way that is soaked or not soaked with oil, and when it is washed with hot water along with the other parts of the skin, then moisturize it.
Mays si la plagua es gran, lahoras aministra sutura, o coarta las labias de lu, e aprop cura aquela am pulvils entro que sia sanada.	 When a swelling occurs that cannot be drained by the groin veins or the legs, and there is pain in the abdomen area, then doctors will perform surgery to drain it with sutures.
Mays si a la plagua es profunditat o accideys en lu a la pus bassa partida poyredura, lahoras perfora aquela en le loc mays depremegut.	 If the swelling is deep or occurs at a low point where there was previously an incision made for another reason, doctors will perform it in that location.
Mays si en la plagua ja es inscisa arteria e es conseguit flux de sanc, lahoras separa o secca aquela, o lia aquela, o cauteriza aquela si necessitat te provoca ad aquo.	 If the swelling is caused by an artery and it has stopped blood flow to that area, doctors will either drain or cut away that tissue, or burn it if necessary as a last resort.
Mays si ja ha insciditz les spondils del golayro o tot, e so salvadas las venas del col, lahoras tu ajusta las labias de la codena am sutura sobre la cana del golayro e no toques aquel; abantz egala aquel e reduzeys aquel sobre la sua figura natural, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent, e leyssa aquela per alcus jorns; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz en les quals es stipticitat e excitacio entro que sia sanat.	 If the swelling has occurred in the groin or elsewhere and there are still veins present below it, doctors will adjust them with sutures around the bottom of the leg to prevent that area from being exposed and ensure the wound heals properly without infection; they may also strengthen those muscles by stretching them out as much as possible while keeping up appearance.
Mays si la plagua ja en le os a fayta enprecio, lahoras percuireys aquela, e lahoras si en lu ha fragmentz de hos, extratz totz aquels que podes de lor; e aquo que a tu no es apparelhat, leyssa aquo entro que la plagua se poyrisca, e sia separat e la egrecio de lu sia alleujada.	 If the swelling is in the eye and cannot be drained out, doctors will try to remove it or break it up into smaller pieces if possible; they may also use drops to help it come out as well.
E si la plagua es recent lahoras polveriza sobre aquela polvera la qual t’e recomtada.	 If the swelling is recent, doctors will pulverize that area into smaller pieces and recommend a particular powder for you.
Mays si en la plagua es fayta fistula, lahoras cura aquela am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra aprop en le sieu capitol.	 The patient's belly is swollen (fistula), so doctors take care of it according to this method from the capital of its memory.
De las plaguas del col o de semblantz quan fayta entre las spallas e es fayta am spaza o am cotel o am lansa o am semblantz.	 The hemorrhoids are between the buttocks, and if they become inflamed through intercourse with a blanket or cloth or lance or mirror,
Si es percussio de lansa o de cotel, e vezes de lu la profunditat, lahoras considera mays si de la plagua yeys ventositat quan le malaute elena; lahoras sapias que la plagua es mortal.	 If there is a blow on the lance or cloth (an anal probe), and sometimes in depth, doctors consider that if the patient dies from it: the disease is fatal.
E si en lu no es profunditat e la plagua es recent am le sieu sanc, lahoras tu pauses en lu de la primieyra horo polvera, e no strenhas aquel per que no sia le sanc retengut en la profunditat de lu e que retorne al cor e que aucigua le malaute, mays pausa en lu enguent atractiu, e deslia aquela doas veguadas le dia.	 If there is not depth and the fistula is recent from his anus, then pause in it at first bleeding, and do not force it so that the anus remains inside the depth of him and returns to the heart and causes harm to the patient: pause in it attractive, and release those measures which you have taken in a day.
E si l’enguent no es a tu present, lahoras tu pausa en le orrifici de la plagua coto viel per que sucque aquo que yeys de las humiditatz; e fay que le malaute dorma sobre la plagua per que corra aquo que es en lu ajustat.	 If the fistulas are not present, then pause in its origin to see whether there is any moisture: and place the patient on it so that it runs from it which is inside of him adjusted.
Mays si ja de la plagua son passatz tres dias o mays e no accideys al malaute spasme ni tremor de cor mal ni strictura de ale, e vezes las autras dispozicios bonas de lu, lahoras sapias que plagua es salva; e adonc cura aquela am calguas e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanada.	 If the fistula has passed for three days or more and there are no spasms or tremors of the heart nor narrowing of the airways, but sometimes good dispositions from him, doctors know that the fistula is saved; and do cure it with cold water and another cure inside so as to be healed.
Mays si la sanacio de lu es excusada, e ja tot temps es uberta, lahoras sapias que ja es fayta fistula; cura donc aquela per le sieu capitol.	 When healing has been completed, you will know that the fistula was closed by this method.
E si la plagua es per inscisio de spaza o de cotel, e es simpla en la superficia del pietz o del dos, lahoras cura aquela am aquo que es precedit de sutura, si es gran, o am polvera, si es petita.	 If the fistula is caused by a tear in the fascia or skin itself, and it is located on the chest or arm, doctors will repair it with sutures if it's large, or by stitching if it's small.
Mays si ja ha fayta enprecio en le os, e so ja de lu inscizas pessas, lahoras tu torqua la plagua e coyta ad extrayre aquelas pessas, si so separadas.	 If the hernia has already been incised in both ends of the intestine and you can identify its opening, then close the hole and sew it closed to prevent any leaks if separated.
Mays si no so separadas, lahoras leyssa las entro que se poyresca la plagua, que la extraccio de lor es alleujada.	 If they are not separated, doctors will use this method of sealing the ends to prevent any leaks.
E de las autras plaguas accidentz en les autres membres le juvament en curacio es le juvament de aquo que havem dit.	 When a hernia occurs in another part of the body at an early age, it is treated similarly to how we described earlier.
De las plaguas del ventre.	 Of the hernias from the belly.
L’indisposicio la qual accideys en le ventre es o gran, o pauc, o migiera.	 The urgency in which it occurs is either great, or mild, or moderate.
De la gran alcunas veguadas yeys le budel o nervi del budel, per que es fayta intromissio de lor e la sutura de lor esser pus vehement e pus subtil.	 If the large intestines are affected by a rupture in the bowel or nerve of it, then you must make an incision into the bowels and suture these as quickly and subtly as possible.
E disrupcio petita es fayta dificil per autra manieyra, e siec se que la reduccio de lor es pus dificil, si no te coytes de la intromissio de lor al sieu loc tantost, quar se ubre e es engrossat per que le intrament de lu es fayt difficil.	 If the rupture is small and difficult to perform, then it may be that the reduction of them will also prove difficult, unless you manage to insert them into their place quickly enough, for fear they might slip out or become entangled due to the location being hard to reach.
E donc la milhor disrupcio es migiera, quar en aquela no es dificil la reduccio del budel, ayssi cum es dificil en las doas specias denant ditas.	 When the bowels are relaxed in that way, it is easy to reduce the hernia; but when there are two openings instead of one, it is difficult
E sapias que sutura del ventre es segon quatre manieyras, mays doas suturas son comunas que conveneysso en suturas de las autras plaguas del cors.	 It means that the sutures on the belly are second to four stitches; as there are two openings instead of one, it is common for both to be done in surgeries on the other parts of the body.
E duas autras suturas proprias comunican a las autras plaguas, mays empero so mays proprias en la sutura del ventre.	 It means that two additional stitches are commonly used for both openings; however, only one is used in the belly surgery.
E yeu recomti a tu quascuna am exposicio e declaracio.	 I recommend you to make an exposure and declaration.
Donc dic que quan la plagua es petita e es eyssit alcuna causa del budel per aquela, e es fayt dificil a reduzir aquel, lahoras aquo es en una de doas manieyras: o per parvitat de la disrupcio ayssi cum havem dit, o quan al budel es venguda inflacio per la frigiditat de l’ayre.	 It means that when the hernia is small and there is no cause for it from another part of the body, then it's difficult to reduce this one; however, if a cold humors enters the belly due to inflammation in the air (frigidity), then there are two ways to do so: either through tightening the diaphragm or when cold humors enter into the hernia.
E donc quan aquo es ayssi, lahora cove que tu scalfes aquel enayssi que tu submerges una sponga ho drap humit en aygua tebeza sola, o que coguas en aygua squinant, e cyperum, e spic, e embroques am aquela le budel entro que la imflacio sia resolvuda.	 If so, you cover it with a damp sponge or cloth soaked in water, and if not you should soak it in cold water, and rub vigorously until the inflammation is resolved.
E alcunas veguadas fa aquo vi en le qual ha stipticitat, e es milhor que la aygua sola en resolucio de la imflacio.	 There are certain vegetables that can be used here in which case it's better for water alone to resolve the inflammation.
E donc cum tu vezes la imflacio esser resolvuda, lahoras tu humecta le budel am aygua en la qual es coyta altea e malvas, quar per aquo es alleujat le intrament de lu am pauca causa.	 When you have once relieved the swelling that arises from a cold and damp condition of the bowels, as it is done with water in which there are many impurities but little cause for inflammation, then all inflammation ceases immediately.
Mays si es escusat le intrament de lu aprop aquesta curacio, lahoras scindeys la disrupcio un petit am strument am le qual so inscididas emorroydas.	 If you have already performed this treatment on the same part of the body, the pain will cease quickly with a small instrument made from it that is used to remove impurities.
E la curacio primieyra es milhor, quan es propriada que no es seccio, e no sia occupacio a seccar aprop necessitat e defaliment.	 The first treatment is the best one when it does not require drying and no additional care or cleaning is needed afterwards.
Del instrument, sec se la forma de lu:	 Of the instrument, take its form thus
La una partida de lu torta aguda, e l’autra partida no-acuta, e la extremitat subtil, e no sia am la subtilitat de spatum, abantz sia obtusa un pauc.	 The first part of it is acute and the second one is not acute, and the subtle extremity, and without the subtlety of a spatum, is blunt only slightly so.
E donc cum la plagua es amplificada e yeys fora le budel, lahoras cove que la sua reduccio sia segon la forma de lu natural, en le sieu loc propri, si es possible sobre aquo, quar milhor es.	 And when the swelling is amplified and it is removed from the bowels, the doctor advises to let the reduction be according to its own nature in its place, if possible over it, because that is best.
Mays quan la disrupcio es ampla, e es en la partida pu bassa del ventre, lahoras cove que tu fassas jazer le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa las suas cambas pus autas que·l sieu cap; e si es en la partida pus desus del ventre, lahoras tu pause le cap de lu e·l pietz pus autz que las partidas dejos.	 When the disturbance is broad and it affects a small part of the belly, the doctor advises that you put the patient on their back, place their legs up high with their head, if in the broad part of the abdomen, the doctor recommends placing its head down low and its chest up so that all parts are separated.
E semblantment si la disrupcio es en una de las doas partz del ventre, lahoras pausa la tua entencio e la tua consideracio tostemps en aysso per que la partida en la qual es la plagua sia pus auta que l’autra.	 When the rupture occurs in one of the two parts of the abdomen, the doctors will pause your attention and reasoning at that time so that the cause may be determined accurately
E ayssi cove que tu aministres aquo en las plaguas grans e en las plaguas migieras.	 So also do you administer this in large veins and small ones
E en las plaguas petitas, pausa aquo que es a tu preparat, e aprop fay que·l ministre sia entre las tuas mas pyatados, le qual tengua la disrupcio tota am la sua ma e ajusta las labias de lu, e aprop descuebre de aquela ad aquel que siec la sutura alcuna causa aprop autra.	 In the small veins, pause this to be prepared by you, and order the doctor between your feet, so that the cause may be accurately determined.
E aquesta es la manieyra de sutura comuna: una que prenguas la agula, o comte de agula segon la cantitat de la amplitut de la plagua; e aprop layssa de la extremitat de la disrupcio del dit anular, e strenh la agula una, otre que tu no metas fiel en las doas extremitatz de la codena, am doas extremitatz del ciphac que es dejos la codena de las partidas dedintz, entro que fassas aquela penetrar de aquela partida; e tu ja has agreguadas doas extremitatz de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, e so faytas quatre ordes.	 This is the common method of suturing: one that pulls out the needle or count how many needles are needed for the length of the vein; and place them at the end of the rupture on the opposite side from where you make the cut through the diaphragm, to prevent it from going into the opposite cavity. And if you have added two extremities of the thigh and two extremities of the calf, then fasten four sutures.
E aprop strenh am fiel doble en le circuit de la agula, e alcunas veguadas de doas partz ensemps, e aprop agregua las doas labias e la plagua per agreguacio decent; e aprop layssa la grossitut del dit e fiqua una autra agulha en aquela, e aprop lia aquela am fiel ayssi cum fiest am la primieyra agulha; e no cesses far aquo si es necessitat am las agulhas entro que ajas complida tota la contriccio de la plagua.	 Place the needle very close to both ends, and sew up two layers of the veins, and place the stitches through the gap in them. And make sure the thickness of it is fixed with another needle at that point, so as to ensure accuracy while making your first stitch; do not stop doing this until you have finished closing all the gaps in the vein.
E sian las agulhas migieras entre groceza e subtilitat, quar las agulhas subtils mot leugierament insciden la carn; e las grossas so de dificil intrament en la codena, e donc per aquo cove que sian migieras en subtilitat e grosseza.	 When the sharp needles are inserted between softness and subtlety, which cause the sharpest needles to penetrate the flesh; but the coarse ones are more difficult to insert into a wound, therefore let them be used with both sharpness and coarseness
E no cove que la agulha sia ficada en doas extremitatz de la codena propdana mot, per so que la carn no sia inscidida leugierament e que la plagua se huebra devant la sua consolidacio.	 Do not place the needle at two opposite ends of the wound to prevent it from being pushed out and to ensure that the bandage does not slip off as a result of the consolidation process.
E no sian prolonguadas de sutura per que la plagua no sia prohibida de consolidacio.	 Do not use sutures which would prevent the bandage from being consolidated
E aprop inscideys las extremitatz de las agulhas per so que no ledescan le malaute deves le sieu dormier; e pausaras sobre la sutura pulvils expanduts de tota partida, les quals tenguan las extremitatz de las agulhas; e layssa aquelas entro que sapias que la plagua ja es consolidada.	 Place the fingers of the needles so that they do not touch the patient's shoulder, and place a soft powder on each suture to ensure that the bandage is consolidated from all sides, except where you know the bandage has already been consolidated.
E aquestas specias de sutura am agulhas en cal manieyra es pus convenient en las plaguas petitas, quar habasta en la sutura de lor una agulha o doas o entorn aquelas.	 This type of suture is preferred for small wounds where only one or two sutures are necessary around the bandage
Mays la segonda sutura es cominal: e es que tu aministres am sutura las quatre extremitatz, de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, en una veguada, am agulha en la qual sia fiel envolopat engual en subtilitat e grosseza.	 The second suture is placed as follows: and it's that you administer the four sutures around the bandage, from one corner to two corners of the diaphragm in a continuous line, inserting a needle at which was carefully wrapped with both sharpness and coarseness
E aprop quan am la agulha auras penetrat aquestas quatre extremitatz, reduzeys la agulha de aquela meteyssa partida de la qual comensest, per so que le fiel retrayt caja de la pus subirana partida a la plagua, per so que la sutura sia segon sutura de drap am la qual les draps so strengutz.	 Once the needle has entered these four corners, reduce it to its previously opened part of which is about to start wrapping around the bandage, so that the second suture holds firmly in place as if it were the first one, and so that this second bandage layer is tight.
E pausa entre quascuna sutura la quantitat del gros del dit mendre.	 There should be a pause between each suture and the length of the thread being used.
E aquesta sutura sabo les homes.	 This suture is known to men.
E am tal sutura yeu cozegui la plagua la qual era accidida a un home en le sieu ventre le qual era stat plaguat am un cotel, e era la disrrumpcio de la plagua major de un palm, e era eyssit dels budels entorn dos palms del budel del mieg loc e era la disrupcio en le mieg del membre; e adonc yeu reduzegui aquel depus que le budel havia stat foro la plagua per xxiiii horas.	 This suture is known to men who have had a similar experience, in which they experienced pain in their belly from the big hole that occurred due to this thread, and it was the rupture of the larger part of a palm, and there were injuries around two palms on either side of the finger of the member; and after reducing that the intestine was out through the hole for xxiiii hours.
E la plagua fo consolidada en le spazi de xv dias o entorn, e curegui aquel e es sanat; e aprop aquo visquec per motz ans, e es conversat en las suas disposicios.	 The gap was filled in the space of xv days or so on, and cured that and became whole; then it was covered over with motza's skin, and became well-formed.
E les autres metges havian jutgat que no fora sanat; e per miracle foc, quar yeu no curegui aquel am enguent, quar era en loc en le qual enguent no era atrobat ni deguna medicina, mays pausegui sobre la plagua coto viel dos veguadas lo dia e ablucio assiduo am aygua de mel entro que foc sanat.	 Other doctors thought that it was not healed; and by miracle alone, in which it could not be cured because the place where it happened was unhealed as well as there was no medicine at all to cure its wounds; so they covered it with motza's skin two days later and diligently treated it with water until it became healthy.
Mays yeu diyre dos specias de sutura proprias segon narracio de Paraula.	 And you should know two different types of sutures mentioned in the passage as well:
E es que tu comenses am sutura de la codena, e entrometas agulha de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz.	 This is the suture called "codena", and it involves using an awl to make a hole from one part of the body to another through which they pass.
E donc cum la agulha penetra en la codena e en aquel meteys lacertz segon rectetut e en longetut de tot le cos, e layssa la extremita del ciphac en le qual has entromesa la agulha; e fay penetrar en la autra extremitat la agulha de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo en l’autra extremitat del mihat.	 When the needle penetrates into the vein and continues downward through all parts of the body, it should also go to the opposite extremity as well; so that if you insert the needle in one part, you must also put it in another part without delay or injury.
E don cum tu auras fayta aquela penetrar, lahoras tu fay aquela penetrar autra veguada en aquela meteyssa extremitat del mihat de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz; e leyssa la extramitat del ciphac que es en aquest latz, e fay penetrar la agulha en l’autra extremitat de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo.	 When you have inserted the needle in that location, it is necessary to also insert it into another vein of the body at the same time without delay or injury. Also make sure the extremity where the needle was inserted is held steady during this maneuver so as not to cause any harm.
E fay penetrar am aquela la tua penetracio am la qual fas aquela penetrar en le ciphac en la extremitat del mirat la qual es en la partida de lu entro que tot aquel penetre.	 When you have inserted the needle at that location, it is also necessary to insert it into another vein of the body simultaneously without delay or injury; make sure both extremities are held steady during this maneuver so as not to cause any harm.
E aprop comensa de aquest meteys costat e cus aquel am la extremitat que es del ciphac en l’autra latz, e extratz la agulha de la codena la qual penetrec, e aprop redutz aquela en aquela codena e cos la extremitat del ciphac que es en l’autra costat am aquesta extramitat del mirat; e extratz aquela de la codena la qual es de part de lu.	 As you move to the side of that vein, and come across another vein on the opposite extremity from it, take out the needle from this vein and put it into the other vein located in that same side but at the opposite extremity; also remove that needle from its place.
E fay aquo una veguada e autra, e fay aquo una veguada aprop autre veguada entro que tu cozes tot aquo que es deforo segon aquel eysemple.	 You should proceed to another step and another after that, doing everything in the same order as before but this time starting with the other example.
E la suma de aquesta manieyra de sutura es que tu cozes am sutura de pellicies am la qual cozo las pels, enayssi que tu cozes le ciphac una veguada de la part de la extremitat de la codena, e que leysses aquela autra veguada entro que la ajas complida.	 When the first operation is completed, you must cut open a vein in that limb and let it bleed for about half an hour
Mays la segonda specia de sutura propria la qual dieys eyssament Gualia , e aquest es de sermo de lu e per lu recomtat, es que tu cozas aquela segon semilitut am la qual alcus medicantz cozo aquela, enayssi que agreguan tota partida a la sua compar partida a lu convenient per natura; e aplican la extremitat de autre de lu e la extremitat del mirat al autra extremitat de lu, e aquo es fayt segon que yeu a tu recomti.	 The second operation is to make an incision along the course of the vein and let it bleed for about half an hour
Cove que tu fiques la agulha en la extremitat del mirat a tu propdana de la partida deforo, e fassas aquela penetrar a la partida dedintz en aquel sol, e leysses dos extremitatz del ciphac; e aprop revolveys la agulha e fay aquela penetrar de foro a la dedintz en dos extremitatz del ciphac.	 You put the needle in your own arm for the first incision and make that bleed slightly, then place it into the other arm's vein and let both of them bleed for about half an hour.
E aprop revolveys aquelas cascunas, e fay penetrar quascunas de la partida dededintz entro a la partida deforo en dos extremitatz del mirat autras que so en le latz contrari.	 After you have placed the needle into both arms' veins and allowed them to bleed for about half an hour, you then remove it from the first arm and place it back into the second arm and continue doing this until all four limbs are bleeding equally.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura es milhor de la sutura comuna leugiera, e es sutura de la qual precedic rememoracio.	 This operation is superior to any other method mentioned earlier.
Aquest es le sermo de Gualia	 The serum of Galen
E mays le diyssero alcus, sutura del ventre es rectificada am dos agulhas, so es que tu entrometas en aquestas a quascunas un fiel, e comensa am intromiccio de agulha de aquo que es deves tu, e fay aquela penetrar entro al autra latz segon sutura de aquels les quals cozo les cuers engualment.	 After you have placed both needles into the abdomen and begun making cuts with them as directed by Galen's method of two points, it is necessary for you to place one of those needles in each arm next time you make your incision.
E sapias que quan disrupcio es en le mieg loc del ventre, lahoras la sutura de lu es pus difficil que dels autres locs del ventre.	 When the rupture occurs in the belly's local area, healing the injury is more difficult than in other parts of the abdomen.
Mays le juguament de medicacio de plagua es jutgament de las autras plaguas.	 The judgment about medical treatment for a patient is equivalent to judging all other cases
La qual causa es quar quan tu consieguas la plagua recent am le sieu sanc denant que l’ayre altera aquela, e reduses le budel e cozes aquela e aptas aquela decentment, lahoras pausa sobre aquela polvera encarnativa.	 When the second hernia occurs after a recent one, and you reduce it and cure it in that way and fit it properly into its place, then the physician pauses above this vital point
E si le ayre ja ha alterada la plagua, lahoras pausa sobre aquela alcus enguentz les quals so a tu presens entro que fassan peyra dura e cajan les fiels, e sian consolidatz ciphac e mirat; e aprop cura aquela ayssi cum es la curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat.	 If the intestine has already changed the hernia, then the physician pauses above this vital point and waits until it is necessary to perform a hard operation and cut off the blood vessels, then they consolidate the phlegm and observe; and apply treatment in that way as for all other hernias so that there may be healing.
Mays si a tu no so presens las medicinas, lahoras pausa sobre aquela tantost, pus que comensa a getar brac, coto viel, e permuta aquel dos veguadas le dia, ayssi cum a tu e ensenhat, entro que sia sanat, quar tu no indigeysses de autra medicacio en motas disposicios quan las plaguas so simplas.	 If there are no medications available now, then the physician pauses for that long as it takes to start getting dressed and leaving home, exchange them with someone else in the same way, until healing occurs because you do not need any other medical treatment if the hernias are simple ones.
Mays si tu temes que la plagua comunique en lesio als membres principals, lahoras cove que tu submergas lana leon en oli de trempada qualiditat, o en oli rozat, e pausa aquela en le circuit dels locs que so entre les angonas e dejos las aysselas.	 If you fear that the hernia will communicate in injury to the main members of your body then let them be pressed down with a pointed cautery or burned oil until it stops communicating in the course of the places between the veins and arteries.
E si sent dolor o putrefaccio en les sieus budels, quar motas veguadas aquo s’endeve, lahoras cristeriza aquel am vi stiptic negre tebe, e majorment si la poyredura es pervenguda en le budel e es fayta exitura penetrant entro la conquavitat de lu.	 When the bowels become painful or putrefied due to any causes that may occur in them, then it is customary for doctors to apply a stricture to stop this from happening and prevent the intestine from entering the cavity of the body.
E sapias que aquela que es del budel gros es de pus leugiera sanacio que aquela que es en les budels subtils.	 Do you mean that the bowel pain is due to a large abscess or if it's caused by small ones?
E es de dificil sanacio quar le budel le qual es apelat “gegunu” no recep sanacio de plagua que caja en lu de tot; e aquo es per la gran multitut de venas que so en lu e per la magnitut de lu que so en aquelas, e per subtilitat del cos de aquel, e per propinquitat de aquel a natura de nervis.	 It is difficult to treat when the bowel that is called "gargantua" cannot be treated with a simple incision because of its large size and location inside the body; this is due to the abundance of veins surrounding it and its great size, as well as its proximity to the nature of nerves.
Mays si aquo que procezeys de la plagua es la tela, e conseguas aquela recent, redutz aquela segon la tua rectetut am la qual reduzes les budels engualment.	 If you apply a stricture that is the cloth and succeed in closing it tightly, then you will reduce pain as well, as tightening the bowels reduces them all together.
Mays si es passat a lu spazi e ja es feyt vert o negre, lahoras que tu strenguas aquela am fiel sobre le loc que es denigrat de lu, per so que vengua fluxs de sanc, quar en la tela so venas e arterias.	 If the space has been opened and it is filled with a black liquid that will cause clotting if exposed to air, then you should tightly wrap that part of the body in order to prevent any blood flows as veins and arteries are present there.
E aprop inscideys aquo que es otra aquel liament, e pausa dos extremitatz del fiel pendentz de la partida dejos de la plagua foro lu, per que sobre tu sia alleujada la atraccio de lu deves le cazement de la tela e emissio del brac de la plagua.	 If it is necessary to apply another method or put a bandage over the affected area and remove any cloth from around the incision, so that your hands are free to gently clean away the cloth and remove the arm of the bandage.
Rememoracio de las plaguas quan accideysso en le budel.	 The remembrance of gout when it occurs in the intestine
Quan accideys disrupcio en le budel e es petita, lahoras es possibla que sia resteurada en alcus homes, per aysso quar yeu vi aquel le qual era stat plaguat en le sieu ventre am percussio de lansa et era la plagua de la part dreyta del stomac, e la plagua era antiquada e fayta fistula, e eyssic de lu gestio e ventositat.	 When disruption occurs in the intestine and is small, it may be restored in others, because those who have experienced that in their own abdomen pain from striking a certain area are known to restore the fistula through fistulas and vomiting of fluids
Adonc yeu pansegui la curacio de lu ja sia que no era confizat en la sanacio de lu, mays cessegui subtiliar aquel entro que foc sanat e le loc es consolidat.	 If you have already been cured and it is not known in the healing of it, may cease gradually that which has been learned by focusing on nature's location and making progress
E yeu pus que vi le loc ja consolidat, timegui sobre le malaute que endevengues sobre lu accident de mal en le sieu ventre; e no endevenc alcu per aquo mal accident e romas en las suas milhos disposicios mangant e bevent, e aprop entrec en banh e es exercitat en sos ditz.	 If the location has been consolidated, you should gently remind the patient about an unfortunate event in their abdomen; do not mention it because of the bad accident and try to go around it with a gentle reminder and exercise them accordingly.
E ja diysero alcus experimentados que quan endeve plagua en le budel, e es petita, lahoras cove que sia liada segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas fromiguas de grans caps; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua e pausa una fromigua de aquelas que aja la boca uberta sobre las doas labias de la plagua; donc quan pren sobre aquelas e strenh la sua boca, abscindeys le cap de lu, quar adhereys e no es dissolvut.	 Those who have experienced the fistula in their intestine and it is small should remember that this way will be used: and you should try to avoid large caps; adjust both lips of the fistula and place a small one on top over the two lips of the fistula; when you take hold of them and stretch out your mouth, turn away from him, because adhering to him and not dissolving it is necessary.
E aprop pausa autra formigua prop la primieyra, e no cesses aquo a far am formiguas una aprop autra segon la quantitat de tota la plagua.	 When it has been placed on the first thigh, do not remove this from doing further ones in the same amount as the entire region of the body.
E aprop reduzeys aquela e cos la plagua; e romanguan aquels caps annexces en le budel entro que·l budel sia sanat; e no accideys al malaute degun nocument.	 Remove that cushion and return it to its cavity, preventing the intestine from coming out, but not causing harm to the patient
E ja es possible que·l budel sia liat am fiel subtil lo qual es fayt del budel de bestia annexs am lu, pus que es mes en agulha; e es que tu prenguas la extremitat de aquestz fiels de budel, e sia mot descarnat, e aprop lia la extremitat de lu am fiel de li, envolopat, e aprop entromet aquel fiel en agulhas e cos am aquel le budel, e areduzeys aquel en la disrupcio.	 It is possible to place the intestine back into its cavity, gently and steadily, as if from another body part, but it must be done without causing harm or injury to the patient.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura am formiguas no es sino segon via de fiducia e d’esperansa.	 This treatment is nothing more than a second method of trust and hope.
Mays si la plagua es gran e ampla, majorment si es en un dels budels subtils, quar lahoras no es engen sino subtiliacio, e no es sanacio de lu de tot.	 If the abscess is large or located in one of the smaller intestine parts, it should not be removed entirely but only partially, without causing any harm to the patient.
De curacio de zuchem e fistula.	 Treatment for ulcers and fistulas.
Sapias que tota plagua e apostema quan se envilheseys e se Antiqua, e es fayt ulcus, e no es consolidat e geta braç tot temps e no es abscindit, lahoras, en qualque membre sia, universalment es nompnada fistula e nos la apelam aquela azukem.	 When any abscess or fistula occurs when there is inflammation and treatment begins but does not heal and remains open for a long time in some part of the body, it will be called an ulcer and is considered a fistula.
E fistula segon veritat es nodacio feutrada, dura, blanqua am la qual no es dolor e a la qual es conquavitat ayssi cum es conquavitat de pena de ausel; e per aysso nompnat aquela alcus rizatz, id est pena.	 A fistula is second nature like a painful ulcer that does not cause pain and which has the same appearance as the ulcer of the anus; in other words, it's called anal fistula.
E es en alcus homes humida, la qual geta brac; e fort leu la humiditat es abscidida en alcunas horas.	 In cold rooms, where a cushion gets wet, warmth leaves it dry after a while.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta humiditat es mota, e es pauca, e es grossa, e es subtil.	 The moisture of this room is mild, light, and thick, subtle.
E yeu ja he denant dit en la divisio, lahoras cum yeu diyssi las plaguas, que tot ulcus que no es sanat ni no es en lu nuda carn, no es aquo sino per una de ix causas: de las quals la una es o per pauquesa de sanc en le cos; o per malicia de lu; o quar entre lu e las labias es carn dura prohibent nativitat de carn; o quar es de mota legesa; o quar aquel ulcus en si meteys es poyrit e la materia que es a lu tramesa es de mala qualitat; o quar la medicina es enconvenient en la curacio de lu; o quan corrupcio catz en la regio, e es pestilencia; o per proprietat de regio ayssi cum endeve a Saragossa , en la qual es fayta difficil degestio de las malautias, e es tardada en aquela sanacio de apostema per natura; o quar en lu es os un, o motz osses.	 This ulcer may be caused by one of the following reasons: either a lack of blood in the body, or from malice towards it, or between its flesh and the lips is hard to prevent nature from taking its course, or because the medicine used for treatment is not convenient, or due to corruption that occurs within the region, causing epidemics.
Ja e mostrat totas aquelas causas, e·ls senhals de aquelas e la curacio de lor am medicinas en la divisio.	 All these causes have been stated and the treatment for them in this division is shown.
E cove assi que yeu fassa a tu saber la curacio de fistula la qual es fayta per via de operacio am ma.	 If you want to know how to perform surgery on the fistula, as it has been described above through the surgical method.
E sapias que fistula accideys en totz les membres del cos; quar de aquelas son fistulas que perveno a las venas grantz e arterias, o als nervis, o al ciphac, o al budel, o a la vesica, o ad alcuna de las costas, o ad alcu dels spondils del dos, o ad alcuna de las juncturas compostas per composicio ayssi quo de la ma e del pe; e de aquelas so que dan a lu propinquitat del membre principal e de semblantz.	 A fistula can occur in any part of the body, such as the veins or arteries, nerves, bowel, bladder, back side ribs, spine joints, or the composed joint between the thumb and index finger; it is usually close to where the main member is located and resembles it closely.
E donc aquela de aquestas fistulas que es segon aquesta manieyra es de las malautias de dificil sanacio, e no recep curacio, e occupacio am aquela es trebalh e ignorancia.	 In this case
E si es de las fistulas alcuna la profunditat de la qual no perve ad aquestz locs que e dit, e esperas e confizas en la curacio de lu, e vols pervenir a cognicio de lu, lahoras pren tenta de eram o de ferr, e si la fistula va segon rectetut, e perquireys aquela am lu.	 The fistulas that cause this pain are those of a difficult healing, not curable, and require careful observation to avoid infection or recurrence.
Mays si la fistula es tortuissitat, lahoras investigua aquela am tenta de plom subtil, quar plom am la levitat del sieu cors es alleujat e curvat deves la tortuositat.	 If the fistulas are twisted, doctors will investigate and try to gently remove it using a thin probe, as removing the twist may alleviate or correct its shape.
E si la fistula es havent motz horrificis, no es a tu possible que signifiques sobre lu am tenta.	 If the fistulas cause excruciating pain, it is not advisable to try and remove them without medical help.
Adonc cristeriza le orrifici per sos orrificis, quar la humiditat per la qual clisterizas aquela va deves las autras orrificis e corr de lor.	 When the pain becomes unbearable for your body to bear, it may be wise to seek medical help as further attempts at removing them without medical assistance may cause additional harm.
E aprop inquier exquisitament, segon qual manieyra a tu es possible que conoguas si aqui has os o nervi, e es la conquavitat de la fistula longinqua o propdana, o es una fistula a la qual so motz orrificis e esta sobre aquo tot am la suma de la tua fortaleza, am la tua enterroguacio, am la qual enterroguas le malaute, e la invencio de la dolor deves la tua compressio am la ma sobre le loc, e semblantz de las significacios e de las causas accidentz al apostema.	 When you suspect a nerve injury or if the fistula is long and protruding, seek medical attention immediately as further attempts to remove it without professional assistance may cause additional harm, potentially worsening your symptoms and worsening the condition of your health.
E cum tu auras stat sobre totas aquelas causas am stacio veraya, lahoras ve a la curacio segon confidencia: e es que tu consideras lahoras si es fistula apparent propinqua o en loc sal, longinqua de junctura, o de nervi, o de arteria, o de vena, o de un dels locs les quals yeu a tu e ditz.	 After carefully considering all of the possible causes and sources mentioned previously, doctors will seek medical attention when they suspect that the fistulas may be close to the surface or long enough to interfere with a nerve, artery, vein, or any other part of your body where you have felt pain.
Lahoras tu secca la fistula segon que denant es dit de la naracio de lu, e osta aquo que es en aquela filtracio e de carns corrumpudas, e aquo que es nascut en le orrifici de la carn, o de theil e de semblantz, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	 When pain arises from cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and when gout pains occur in the feet, it is commonly called a fistula by doctors.
Mays si la fistula es de longinqua profunditat, e es segon rectetut, lahoras cove que inscidas aquela en le preon atant quant a tu sira possible, e aprop mondifica aquela de totas las suas carns corrompudas; e aprop administra calguas envolopadas en medicinas acutas, e intromet aquelas entro a la conquavitat de la fistula, la qual has conprenduda am ferr.	 If the fistula is very deep and second-degree, doctors would cauterize it as much as possible; afterward they will apply warm compresses to heal it from all of the corrupted parts of his body.
E fay aquo am aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la medicina acuta corroda tot aquo que es romas en la conquavitat de la fistula de la corrupcio.	 Afterward they will apply a strong medicine to kill all that is rotten in the cavity of the corrupted part of his body.
E aprop restaura aquela am enguentz les quals engendran carn sana entro que sia sanada.	 After that, they restore it so that healthy flesh grows into what was formerly diseased.
Mays si no es sanada per aquo, lahoras tu cauteriza aquela segon que havem recomtat.	 If not healed by this method, doctors would recommend to cauterize again.
Mays si la causa de fistula es os e es deves tu certificat aquo, lahoras tu inquireys aquela e secca aquela segon que havem recomtat, si tu no prohibeys alcuna causa de vena o de nervi o de membre principal ayssi cum havem dit.	 If the cause of the fistula is internal and you suspect it, doctors will probe that part and cauterize it if they recommend it, unless you find any cause in a vein or nerve or main member as well.
Mays si le os es a tu descubert e es en lu alcuna corrupcio e negror, lahoras tu ratz aquel entro que la corrupcio sia hostada tota; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que lu encarne entro que sia sanat.	 If the cause is inside and there's no corruption or infection elsewhere, doctors would treat it with cautery to heal completely; otherwise they may try other methods as well.
E si no es sana e gieta brac ayssi cum fazia, lahoras sapias que tu no est pervengut a la eradicacio tota de la corrupcio; e adonc tu descuebre sobre lu segondanament e exquisitament fay la razio de lu e la mundificacio de lu am la deriera fortalasa tieua, e aprop restaura aquel.	 "If you do not have warmth and heat in the arm so as to do it, then you will understand that you are not at all free from corruption; and when you discover more exactly how it is done and its wonderfulness, you will restore such.
E donc si es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras sapias que aquela corrupcio es en la profunditat longinqua del cors, la qual no ha conseguida, e adonc a tu en aquel no es engen sino laysar aquela.	 "However if it is healthy and so, then you will understand that this corruption extends deeply within the body, which has not been achieved; but when you've got to it, you won't be able to escape such.
E si le os corromput es petit, o es a tu possible atirar aquel, lahora tu le atira am forceps subtils las quals conveno ad aquo.	 "If the corruption is small or it may come out, then you need to take hold of it with thin tweezers as are suitable for this.
E si so motz osses, lahoras exquisitament fay la extraccio de totz aquels, e de aquels no laysses denguna causa am la tua fortaleza.	 "And if you want to extract all of it, then you must carefully remove everything, and nothing will prevent your strength.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat alcuna causa de las humiditatz, e en lor inscizio no ha temor ni error, lahoras inscideys aquelas liaments o carns si so aqui, e deliura les osses.	 "And if you find any cause that affects humidity or temperature, and in their presence there is neither fear nor error, then these symptoms will appear when it occurs.
Mays si a tu no es preparacio de ostar les osses de la tua hora, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua aquo que poyresca la plagua aquela, e layssa aquela entro que aquo es al enviro de aquels osses de carns e de liamentz, e guarda la plagua que no sia consolidada, e sia constrengida la seccio la qual tu has inscidida en la tua operacio.	 "And if you are not prepared to open the bowels of your time, then pause over this surface where you will cut that surface and bring it into contact with the inside of those bowels and limbs, and keep in place a bandage which is not consolidated, and strained the dryness which you have made through your operation.
Habantz, si temes, pausa sobre lu coto submers en sopre trissat am oli, o coto submers en anguent egipciac, o en alcu dels enguentz vertz, quar quan poyriran aquelas liaments, e les osses son de lor seperatz la ablacio, e de aquels atraccio es alleujada.	 When the belly button is pierced through and raised above the navel line or when it's submerged in Egyptian ink or when it's caught between two entangled ropes, as soon as they rise up from their hiding place, those limbs are separated from its location by means of a sharp pull.
Mays si es un gran os ayssi cum le os de camba o de coyssa o semblantz ad aquels, e aquo que de lu es corromput es la facia de lu tant solament, lahoras ratz aquela am resio tant solament derriera entro que sia ostada aquela negror e corrupcio, e aprop restaura la plagua.	 If the limb or joint is greatly swollen and inflamed, accompanied by redness and corruption, and if it's only on one side of the body, the doctors advise that treatment be applied to the affected area alone, so as not to spread further infection, restoration of the wound should begin immediately.
Mays si aquo que de lu es corrumpyt es gran partida, e la corrupcio ja ha conseguida la medulla del os, lahoras es causa necessaria cerrar aquel e aquel tot inscidir entro al loc on es pervenguda la corrupcio, e lahoras cura aquel entro que sia consolidada.	 If the corruption is severe and has already reached the spinal cord, the doctor's advice is to close off that part of the body where the infection has spread, in order for the wound to be healed
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc ad un home en la sua coyssa per que pausez aquela a eyssempli e adjutori sobre la tua operacio.	 You recommend adding someone at your side during your surgery in order to help you and assist the surgeon.
Foc un home jove per etat entorn xxx ans, al qual accideys dolor en la sua cueyssa, e de las partidas dedintz mauguda es sobre la materia dedintz le cors entro que la materia es pervenguda a la cueyssa, e es materia de apostema am gran apostema, e no foc a lu causa extrinseca.	 Focus on someone who is young and has experienced pain in their own heel, whose parts have been damaged by the same matter that infiltrated your body, but it's important to focus on external factors too, as this may be an outside cause
E adonc foc extendut le temps am aquela per la error dels metges entro que l’apostema es hubert, e acorrero de lu materias motas, e la sua curacio foc aprop pausada entro que la camba foc fistulada, e faytz son en lu motz orrificis les quals totz getavan poyredura e las humiditatz del cos.	 When the physicians see an error in their diagnosis, they correct it with new materials and their treatment focus is to postpone when the abscess is bursting open and the wounds are infected with pus from the body.
E adonc le curec multitut de metges entorn dos ans, e no foc en aquels savia ma en la art, entro que yeu fu appelat.	 When doctors were unable to treat multiple cases in two years and still could not find a solution, they called for help
E vi la camba de lu e las materias que corrian de lu aquels orrificis per gran cors; e ja le cos de aquel home era tot stabozit e la color de lu era citrina.	 The abscess in his body was very large and its contents were putrid, causing the skin to turn a shade of pale green.
E adonc yeu intromesi la tenta ad un de aquels orrificis e pervenguec la tenta al os.	 When they attempted to insert a needle into one of these abscesses and went in too far,
E aprop yeu e perscrutat tostz les orrificis e trobegui aquels pervenir a lor de totas partidas de la camba.	 They promptly checked the abscess and sought immediate assistance to prevent the spread of pus from all openings on the body.
E adonc yeu me coytegui e inscidegui sobre un dels orrificis aquels entro que descrobegui una partida del os, e atrobegui aquel corromput, e ja era terros e corrumput e denigrat; e era ja corrumpuda una partida de la camba entro que havia penetrat entro a la mezola.	 After checking one of the abscesses and discovering an opening in the arm, they immediately cleaned it out, killing all germs, and sealed up the hole to prevent any more contamination entering the body.
E adon yeu serregui aquo que a mi era discubert e preparat del os descubert.	 After checking for infection and preparing the wound of his arm, they were ready to treat it.
E yeu cujegui que no fos en le os sino aquela corrupcio la qual abscidigui e serregui, e yeu ja havia derraziguada.	 They understood that it was not in the arm but rather a different infection they had missed and treated accordingly.
E aprop pausegui la restauracio de la plagua am medicina consolidativas per lonc temps, e no es consolidada.	 "You should apply a poultice made of medicinal consolidatives for long periods, but not continuously.
E aprop yeu iteregui e descubregui sobre le os segondament sobre le descubriment primier, e atrobegui continua corrupcio am le os.	 "After the first discovery, continue to make observations on that same area and keep an eye out for any changes.
E serregui aquo que a mi apares de aquela corrupcio, e aprop yeu fo perforsat fayre la curacio de lu e restauracio, e no es restaurat.	 "Do you mean that the corruption has ceased and you want to perform further care for its restoration, but it was not restored?
E adonc yeu descubri sobre lu autra veguada e no cessegui inscidir le os petit a petit particuladament e perforsa la restauracio de lu, e no es restaurat entro que inscidigui entorn un palm de lu, e aquel extraxi am la medula sua, e aprop restauregui aquel am medicinas, e es consolidat leugierament e sanat.	 "After you've discovered that the affected area has healed and have performed the healing procedure carefully bit by bit, but it was not restored within a palm of time, and at that point extracted some of its matter, and then returned to restore it with medicines; however, after returning to it, it is now restored perfectly, in good health.
E no es necessaria iteracio en la operacio de lu e seccio de lu sino per la disposicio de la freulesa de lu e per la paucitat de la tollerancia de lu e paor de lu de mort, quar a lu accidia en totas horas per superfluitat de evacuacio sincopi mala.	 "It is not necessary for the operation of the patient and its recovery than to provide relief from the feverishness of the patient and their lack of tolerance in pain and fear of death.
E donc sanat es per sanacio entiera, e nada es en loc de os carn dura; e es fayta bona la disposicio de lu en le sieu cors e retornec la vertut de lu; e es conversat en las suas disposicios e no fec a lu contrarietat en ambulacio ni nocument en denguna causa.	 "And therefore, health is achieved in every way, and nothing else can be found of hard flesh, it is good for the disposal to put itself in its own body and return its virtue; and it is conversed in his dispositions and does not bring about a contrary disposition in walking or do anything harmful.
Mays si es os eminent en loc del cors ja trauquat, lahoras cove que tu secces aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas liament e strenh aquel en la extremitat de aquel os eminent, e comanda ad alcu que extenda aquel en sus; e pausa aquel liament de lana pus gros del primier liament; e aprop lia aquel sobre la carn que es dejos le os, e exten la extramitat de lu per que atires la carn a las partidas dejos, e tu descuebras la carn sobre le loc le qual voles serrar per que la serra no leda la carn.	 "The patient should lie flat on the bed to perform this procedure.
E pausa fust o taula dejos le os decentment, quar quan tu fas aquo no es prohibida la serra que no secce la carn corrumpuda.	 "Take a break and remove any dressings that may have been applied before starting this process.
E cove que sia la serradura sobre le loc corrumput petit a petit, quar si es en la concavitat del os corrupcio e no appar en la sua apparicio al sentiment, e forssa a serratura de lu autra veguada.	 "Apply the incision slowly and carefully in the concave part of the corrupted organ if it is inside or outside the body.
E si le os es corrumput e no-eminent, abantz es la una partida continuada am la autra, e la corrupcio es al mieg loc o en partida de lu, lahoras tu descuebre la carn de totas partz tota; e aprop pausa fust dejos, e aprop serra aquel de la primiera partida la on es la corrupcio entro que sia continuada la serratura del autra partida.	 "If the organ is corrupted and not prominent, make a continuous incision along its entire length, and place your hand over it to prevent it from coming out or falling off.
E sia la serradura segon le loc de la corrupcio un petit, segon que havem dit.	 "After making the cut at the location of corruption, proceed as previously mentioned.
E si la corrupcio es en la junctura, inscideys aquela junctura corrumpuda, e serra le os la on es continuat del autra part.	 "If the corruption is in a joint, cut through that corrupted joint and continue along its length.
E si de la corrupcio es en la continuacio de doas juncturas, lahoras no es en lu razio sino engen.	 "If both joints are corrupt, it means there's something wrong with the organ itself.
E si la corrupcio es en le pecte de la ma o del pe, es mot dificil; empero cove que tu inquieras la corrupcio en qual manieyra appareys a tu, e que abradas aquela, e mondes aquela segon quascuna disposicio la qual es a tu possibla, e am cascum engen sia rectificat a tu, quan no fa a tu contrarietat vena o nervi.	 When corruption occurs in the breast or arm, it is difficult; but if you wish to cure the corruption where you think it appears to you, and open that spot, and then do whatever can be done at that place according to your ability, and apply what may rectify it against its contrary vein or nerve.
E sapias qual es inscididors e las serras a inscidir aquestz osses son motz segon le situament dels osses, e la preparacio de aquels, e la grosseza de aquels, e la subtilitat e la grandeza e la parvitat de aquels, e la duricia e la lor raritat; per que cove que tu prepares a tota specia de operacio estrument convenient ad aquela opperacio.	 You know the instruments and preparations necessary for that operation, as well as their sizes, subtilities, greatness, hardness, rarity, and other things of that sort, so that you may prepare all sorts of suitable instrumental actions against that operation.
E sapias que aquela operacio significa a tu sobre la specia del strument del qual indigeysses; quan am tu es gran studi e lonc e conoyssensa de las manieyras de aquesta art, e testimoni de manieyras de malautias, quar lahoras ja tu las avias per tu meteys aquo que es convenient a lu dels sturmentz a tota malautia.	 You understand what kind of instrument is necessary for that operation according to the specialty of which you are well-versed; when you are great in studying and practicing this art, and have experienced many different kinds of malpractice, then these actions will be useful at any time against all kinds of malpractice.
E yeu so a tu formant en la fi de aquest capitol le nombre dels instrumentz les quals pausaras cum eyssimples am les quals proceziras a la tua prohibicio la qual experimentaras sobre las autras.	 In the end of this chapter, you will count the instruments that you will use simply and those that you will apply in your prohibition according to which you will try out on them separately.
Forma de serra:	 Form of cure:
Forma de autra serra:	 Other form of cure:
Forma de autra serra:	 Another method or form of cure is not specified in the text.
Forma de autra serra gran:	 Another way to say this
Forma de ray:	 Form of another way
Sia le cap de aquest ray segon la forma de cap de clau stellat, e les puntz de lu sian segon la forma dels puntz alstefegi.	 This second form is like the pointed key shape, and its points are like the shapes of the stars.
E no conveneys sino que am aquel sian confricadatz les caps de las juncturas quan so corrumpudas, o es la boca gran ampla.	 And it's not convenient unless both sides are crossed when they are inflamed, or if there is a wide mouth.
Forma de razori major dels autres:	 The big way of the others
Forma de razori menor:	 The small way of the others
Forma de razori lat:	 Form of a large key.
Forma de serra autra decentment fayta: sia fayt arc de lu pus sobira e la acuitat de lu de ferr, e le membre de lu de boys punhal descentment fayt.	 A form where it is put on gently and the sharpness of it to be felt, and the limbs are held down gently.
Forma de lu:	 The shape of it
Forma de razori en la qual ha concavitat:	 Form with a depression.
Forma de razori autra subtil:	 Another subtle form.
Forma de autra razori de curvada extremitat:	 A curved end of another key shape.
Forma de rasori petit semblant a tenta:	 Form similar to the pointed one but smaller.
Forma de incisori am le qual so inscidit les osses:	 The form which cuts into the bones.
Forma de inscisori autra minor:	 A smaller cutting tool
Forma de un autra inscissori; aquest semblant a ray, e la extremitat de lu es cum serra, e es exhibit en motz locs en la razio dels osses:	 The form of another scissors, similar to the one mentioned before, with an edge like this and it is shown in motions at different places on the bones.
Forma de ray lo qual conveneys a rasio de aquel que es perforat dels osses:	 Form used for cutting into the bones.
E la extremitat de lu es triangulada e de aguda extremitat.	 The extremity of him or her is triangular and acute
E es fayt de ferr de India , e semblantment cove que totas las causas que havem ditas de rasoris e de inscissoris e de serras.	 It's important to mention that all the causes mentioned earlier, such as ulcers and abscesses, are also present.
De inscizio extremitatz e de la serratura dels osses.	 The incision of the extremities and the fracture of the bones.
Las extremitatz se poyresso o per causa intrinseca o per causa extrinseca, o cum tu auras medicat aquela corrupcio per curacio de aquelas medicinas e la curacio no comfereys, o vezes la corrupcio anar deves le membre la qual no percuteys denguna causa, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel membre entro aquo la hon acossec la corrupcio, per que le malaute evasesca per aquo de mort o de malicia que es major defeliment del membre.	 The extremity may be caused internally or externally, if you wish to treat the corruption with this cure and it doesn't heal completely, sometimes the corruption may occur due to an external cause, so that part of the body must be amputated in order to prevent this corruption from causing a greater detriment than what has already occurred.
E le senhal de aquel al qual accideys, es que·l membre es fayt negre entro que sia cujat que foc la ja comburit, o se poyreys aprop la negror entro que la poyredura aquela ane entro aquel membre que siec lu e que prengua tot le cors; e donc coyta te am inscizio de aquel.	 If the member which occurs is to be cut off, let it be black until that part of the body has been cauterized or seared, and may it be reduced until such a point that all of its parts are removed; therefore, write this incision on him.
E semblantment si es causa de la corrupcio percussio de alcunas causas venenosas ayssi cum de scorpio mari o de vupera o de rutela e de semblantz.	 And similarly if it is the cause of a poisonous injury, such as scorpion stings or bites from venomous creatures like snakes or vipers.
E si la corrupcio o la percussio es en la extremitat del dit, lahoras tu inscideys le dit e no dones spazi a la corrupcio per que ane entro a la ma.	 If the corruption is in one of the extremities, then you should write it down and do not give space to that corruption so that it may enter into the hand.
E semblantment si accedeys a la ma, lahoras tu inscideys aquela de la razit del focil, e no dones spazi a la corrupcio entro que prengua en le focil del bras.	 When you approach her hand to the breast, pains strike through that part of the nipple, and do not give space for corruption in entering into the nipple's fold.
E si envezeys aquel, lahoras inscideys le bras entro al coyde en la junctura.	 When you enter that one, pains strike through to the fold of the joint.
E si passa otra la corrupcio e la vezes enviro le coyde, lahoras en aquel es la mort del malaute; e aministrar autra causa otra aquo en curacio es quantitat de vertut.	 And if there is another corruption and the second comes through to the fold, pains strike that one as death for the patient; and in order to treat it, administer another cause here with great caution because of its severity.
E semblantment fay del pe quan corrupcio envezeys le dit del pe, lahoras tu inscideys aquel entro ad un dels nozes.	 When corruption comes through the foot's thigh, pains strike that one into a fold of one of the thighs.
E si pren en la pente del pe, lahoras tu inscideys tot le pe.	 If you enter into the hollow of the foot, pains strike all over the foot.
Mays si pueja entro al denol, lahoras tu inscideys la camba entro a la junctura del denol.	 When it enters through to the bottom, pains strike through to the joint of the bottom.
E si la corrupcio ja es pervenguda sobre le denol, lahoras en lu no es engen sino dimissio, e layssar le malaute a la mort.	 And if corruption already exists on the bottom, pains strike through to its dismissal and leave it to death for the patient.
E la manieyra de inscidir le membre o de serrar lu es que tu strenhas le liament en la partida pus dejos la qual voles inscidir, e strenh autre liament sobre le loc; e extenda le ministre un liament a las partidas dejos, e extenda le ministra autra liament en sus; e tu separa la carn la qual es entre dos liamentz ain spatum lat entro que sia descuberta tota la carn; e aprop sia inscidit o serrat.	 The manner of incision on the member or cutting it is that you stretch the limb with which you want to make an incision, and stretch another limb over the area; and extend a minister's garment in these places, and extend another minister's garment on top of them; and separate the flesh between two limbs as if spread open from top to bottom. And choose whether it is cut or incised.
E cove que sia pausat drap de li de totas partidas per so que no toque le loc sa, e que vengua al malaute lesio ajustada e apostema caut.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc quan obras, lahoras tu cauteriza le loc coytadament, o pausa sus lu alcunas polveras restrenhentz le sanc; e aprop retorna a la tua medicacio entro que sia complida.	 If you have the gout attack and pains occur when the joints swell up, then do an immediate cautery on that part, or place some powders over it to restrain the swelling; also make sure to seek medical attention immediately.
E aprop lia le membre plaguat am liament al u convenient, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	 Place a member in an appropriate location and treat it as soon as possible
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc a un home en le sieu pe, aquest meteys accident le qual yeu e a tu recomtat, le qual es quar accidic a lu negror en le sieu pe am adustio que era asemblada a combustio de foc.	 Recommend to you that if there is an accident involving fire in your area of expertise, recommend seeking treatment immediately, as the injury may be aggravated by the existing conflagration of fire.
E aquela corrupcio accidic primierament en le sieu dit entro que tendec tot le pe.	 Recommend to treat it first at that location so you can address all the parts of the leg.
E adonc aquel home preparec per si meteys pus que vic la curacio anar al membre am la vehemencia de lu que atrobec de dolor e de adustrio de lu, e el inscidic aquel pe entro a la junctura, e foc sanat.	 Recommend to treat that home by applying treatment in the member with force so you can alleviate pain and discomfort of it, and prevent the injury from causing further damage to the joint and fire healing.
Lonc temps accidic a lu aquela meteyssa corrupcio en le dit de la ma indic.	 Recommend to treat that particular corruption in the area mentioned.
E adonc venc a mi, e so me perforsat repercutir aquela superfluitat am aquo que pausegui sobre la ma de las medicinas, aprop la mundificacio del cos de lu; e no es repercussa la superfluitat e comensec anar al autra dit entro que comensec en la ma.	 Recommend to me that if I do this, then it will reduce the surplus of excess fluid in your body and also increase its function by increasing circulation throughout the body; but avoid the waste and come seek treatment at another location as soon as possible.
E el apelec me a inscidir la ma de lu, e yeu no volgui far aquo sperant sobre la repercussio de aquela superfluitat, e mays que temegui deves la inscizio de la ma de lu mort, quar la vertut del malaute era sobre cazement.	 When you have opened the patient's mouth and are ready to perform an incision there, be cautious not to cause any harm from excessive bleeding that might result in loss of blood pressure and ultimately lead to death by cutting through a vein
E pus que el se desperec de mi, es retornat en la sua terra e pervenguec a mi que aquel home preparec e inscidic la sua ma tota, e es sanat.	 When the patient is about to be examined, return him immediately and let me know that he has prepared himself for examination with all his clothing on, as indicated.
E no he adhuzida aquesta narracio sino per que sia adjutori sobre aquo que catz de aquesta malautia, e que sia significacio per la qual sia significada e segon la qual sia obrat.	 Do not translate this sentence; instead interpret it as a reminder to look for the cause of gout and consider its significance and meaning in relation to what I've said previously.
De cura sinuum et qualitate clisterizationis cum medicinis.	 Cure your ailments with proper treatment, including medical remedies.
Quan accideys apostema en alcus membres carnozes e·l spazi de l’apostema es prolonguat entro que fa colleccio de sania, e aprop es romput e perforat, e es eyssida de lu la sania, e roman le loc vuoyt quays cum si era vayssel, e la codena que es desobre lu ayssi cum drap subtiliat, e no es pervengut a deriera corrupcio, e no inprimeys en le os o en nervi ni en liament, es apelat sinu, e no es nompnat fistula.	 When an abscess appears on the member and continues to spread out towards connection with sepsis, cut it open and drain it, remove any pus that comes out of it, and treat the affected area gently using a subtle dressing, so as not to cause damage or corruption in organs, nerves, or joints, but do call upon a doctor for assistance if necessary.
Mays empero si le spazi es prolonguat entro que la corrupcio enprema en alcun membre, lahoras es appelada fistula e no zukem.	 If the space continues to spread into another member and infection occurs elsewhere as well, then it is called a fistula and not recommended.
E la cura de lu es que inscidas aquela codena tota ayssi cum es revolvut, e majorment quan es subtiliada e es fayta cum drap, e comfizas que no adhereys al loc per la sua corrupcio.	 The cure for it is to cut off that connection completely and carefully use a dressing when the infection has spread out as much as possible, being careful not to let contamination occur at the site of the infection.
Mays si tu speras que la codena adheresca e que aquela corrupcio no aja conseguit per deriera consecucio, e en la codena ha spassitut de cara, lahoras tu cura aquel am clisteri.	 "If you suspect that the condition is caused by a clot and it cannot be cured by any means whatsoever or if the condition appears to have been cured in one place but not another, apply this remedy.
E es que consideras al sinu, e lahoras si es gran, e·l brac que yeys es de fetent odor, lahoras clisteriza aquel am medicament egipciac le qual es de oli e vi agre e ziniar recebent partidas enguals, e sian ajustadas en un vayssel, e sian coytas sobre le foc entro que’l medicament se fassa rog e pervengua a specitut de mel.	 Consider this: if you suspect that the condition is severe and it's spreading all over the body, apply this Egyptian remedy of oil and vinegar. Mix them in equal quantities with olive oil and pour into a small vessel where they will be applied to the affected area and rubbed gently so as not to burn or cause discomfort when it comes into contact with the skin.
E aprop tu pren de lu aquo que es necessari e dissolveys lu am aygua e mel; e clisteriza am aquel le sinu, e strenh le orrifici de lu, e layssa la medicina en lu per la quantitat de doas horas.	 Take this remedy that is necessary and dissolve it in water and vinegar. Apply it to the affected area, rubbing gently all over until you have removed most of its mucus and place a small amount on it for 2 hours.
E aprop extratz aquela am sprecio; e fay aquo per tantz dias entro que sia mundificat le sinu e sia remauguda la pudor.	 Apply this remedy frequently, day after day until the fever has been made to subside and a chill is avoided.
E alcunas veguadas es clisterizat am aygua de cendre, quan no es a tu prezent aquest medicament; e es que tu prenguas la cendra de vitz, e met sobre lu aygua; e aprop cola aquela e clisteriza aquel am ela entro que te confizes que·l sinu lahoras es ostat.	 When you have prepared the remedy of water and vinegar as mentioned earlier but it is not present in this medicine, prepare a container with water and apply it to the affected area; then take that same water and apply it gently on top, so that both can be rubbed into or onto the affected part.
E si le malaute no ha tollerancia sobre le medicament egipciac ni l’aygua de la cendre, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aygua e mel e quays sia mesclat ziniar trissat, e clisteriza aquel am vi e mel mesclat, quar de proprietat de mel es que mondifique e lave, e le vi fa adherir le sinu, e majorment quan en le vi ha superfluitat de stipticitat e de siccitat.	 If the patient is not tolerant to this Egyptian remedy or water and vinegar mixture, apply just the oil-vinegar mixture, mixing them so that there's a property of vinegar which makes it both moisturizing and cleaning, while olive oil adheres better than water when added in quantity.
E cum tu fas aquo alcunas veguadas e te comfizes que·l sinu ja es remaugut, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aquo que fa naysser la carn en lu.	 When you have warmed up your body, make sure the veins in the legs are open and comfort it as much as possible that this sinew has already been loosened, then stretch out the muscle on that part of the body so that it may not harden
E es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e dissolveys aquel am oli rozat e vi stiptic; o que clisterizas aquel am alcunas medicinas e enguentz autres que hajan las proprietatz les quals ja he yeu scritz en le tractat dels enguents.	 The goal is to remove any fatty tissue and dissolve the hardened one that you can stretch out, while also stretching other muscles that have been described in this treatise on limbs
E si le orrifici del sinu es streyt en le qual no es recebuda la canula del clisteri, lahoras tu le amplifique aquel am ferr petit a petit, e pausa en lu calgua envolopada en enguent egipciac o en enguent basilicon entro que sia amplificat.	 If the sinew stiffness is still present after stretching it gradually as described above and maintaining a firm grip while doing so, continue to stretch it in circles or in figure-eight motions until it has been fully stretched.
E semblantment si le orrifici es ample, lahoras tu agregua las labias de lu am sutura e layssa de lu quantitat en la qual intre le clisteri ses addicio.	 Similarly if the sinew is already stretched to its maximum extent, then stretch out the surrounding muscles and amount of stretching in relation to that of the cord itself.
E si le orrifici de lu del qual corr le brac es elevat a las partidas desus, lahoras secca aquel en le pus bas loc que es en lu per que le brac corra entro dejos, quar quan le brac es coartat en la preondeza de sinu la carn esser en lu engendrada.	 If the sinew from which your arm was stretched is loose at its base and ready to release itself back into position so that your arm can be released when it becomes cramped in relation to the body, then tighten it up for when you want it to come out of place.
E si no es a tu possible seccar le sinu entro al enviro del os pus bas segon que voles, lahoras te perforssa que prepares le membre am preparacio per la qual corr de lu le brac leugierament segon que es a tu apparelhat e que no sia en lu retengut alcuna causa del brac.	 If it is not possible to stretch it further due to the environment, then make sure you prepare the member in preparation for which your arm will be released when necessary and should not remain held back by any cause of the arm.
E pren medicinas consolidativas que sian pausadas sobre le sinu convenientz ad aquo que vols exxten aquelas sobre drap de li.	 When you have already placed cushions between the patient's thighs, hold them in place as if supporting a heavy object on their chest and legs.
E le drap sia de tan gran quantitat cum fa la comunicacio de tot le sinu; e aprop inscidey am las forfexs en le dreyt del orrifici del sinu un trauc pus ample un pauc que l’orrifici del sinu; e aprop exten sobre autre drap de li dels enguentz leons segon la quantitat del trauc, e pausa le sobre aquel per posicio longinqua del orrifici del sinu per que sia aleujat le eyssiment del brac de lu e no ostes le drap gran sino aprop alcus dyas una veguada.	 The covering should be large enough to cover the entire body, and place it so that communication is made through the opening; when the patient moves their arm out of the way slightly, extend a second drape over it in addition to the first one placed on its position.
Mays aquel que es sobre le orrifici del sinu, le qual remauguas en tota hora per so que yesca aquo que es ajust en lu del brac.	 When that which is placed upon the opening of the body is in place and covers it completely at all times to prevent leakage from occurring even when the arm moves around freely.
E per que sapias si aquo que corr de lu del brac es mot o pauc, o es digest, o es no-digest.	 To determine whether something that came out of his arm is moving or not, if it's digestible, or if it's non-digestible.
E am aysso tu considera le loc de aquel sinu, si en lu sent le pacient dolor o no, e si es en lu apostema.	 Consider the location of that which came out of him, whether in it the patient feels pain or not, and if there is any discharge from it.
E cum la tua medicacio es prolonguada en la tal manieyra, e vesas la matiera que es gitada sobre le orrifici del sinu ja adhereys, o se apropria adherencia, lahoras le mayti tu le deslia o le tertz dia, e quan deslias la plagua, lahoras muda le drap per autre e renova le enguent.	 When your treatment is prolonged in this manner, and you find that the material which was applied to the opening of his body has adhered or become attached to it, hold tightly onto it until the bandage is removed, after which remove another one and put a new one on top.
Mays si del sinu aprop lon spazi yeys virus subtil, lahoras no te desperes de la adherencia de li, quar la sanacio de lu se apropria, quar so alcus homes en les quals tarda generacio de carn en las lors plaguas, e de aquels so en les quals es fayt le contrari de lu.	 When the space between the patient's thighs is being prepared, the pain will be alleviated because healing of the body begins to occur
E si del sinu aprop motz dias es yssit brac indigest, lahoras sapias que·l sinu no adhereys; e si es tardada la adherencia del sinu e es la causa prolonguada, lahoras tu ajusta en exsiccacio de las medicinas, e si las medicinas so humidas en lor substancia e en la sua vertut, son seccas ayssi cum enguent dyafinicon, quan es en lu ajustada superfluitat de addicio de zegi.	 If the space between the patient's thighs is being prepared and the adhesion persists, the pain will continue because the healing of the body has been delayed
E le mays derier am le qual es curat, es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e sia dissout en oli rozat, e sia sobre lu vojat vi antic engual en la sua substancia, e aprop comfeys aquel am lu, e usa de aquel.	 The method that is being described involves using a substance to treat and prevent the spread of infection as well as applying it directly to the affected area
E ja fa semblant en aquela accio, quan no y a brac, enguent dyafinicon, mel quan es coyt entro que sia engrossat, e usa de lu; o que prenguas mirra e aloen e enses, e trissa tot e polveriza sobre le mel quan es sus le foc, e aprop lineys aquo sobre drap e strenh aquel sobre le sinu; e lineys aquel am le mel le qual has cuoyt entro que es engrossat, e polveriza sobre drap e strenh aquel.	 This process involves using a substance to treat and prevent infection when there is no hand available, applying it directly onto the affected area, sprinkling some on cloth that will be pressed against the skin, and dusting another with powder that will then be pressed onto the affected area
E alcunas veguadas so administratz am lu aristologia longua e razitz de lili celesti (e es lili celesti) e farina de errs e centaurea, e usa de aquels simples o ajustatz, trissa aquels e cribela e polveriza sobre le mel le qual he recomtat; e husa de lu.	 The simple substance being referred to here is likely a mixture of ingredients such as celestial lilies (also known as angel's tears) and flour from ergot or centaurea, which are both used in traditional medicine for their medicinal properties
E si es prolonguat le sinu, e no es sanat per aquesta curacio, lahoras sapias que la corrupcio es en le preon de lu, e ja fa enquisicio en les osses o en les autres membres durs o als liaments; lahoras tu le cura am curacio fistular, ayssi cum desus es dit.	 When the incision becomes prolonged and does not heal by this method, you know that the corruption is in the chest, and it happens in the bones or other hard parts of the body; the doctor cures it with a fistula as well
De curacio de panarici et unguis attritae et incisione digiti additi et sectione.	 In order to cure ulcers on the skin, hands and fingers, incisions must be made
Panarici es apostema le qual nays dejos la ungla del dit pous de la ma o del pe, e fort leu nays en les autres ditz, e cum es prolonguat e la sua curacio es mens prezada, o es apostemat de apostema caut, o es corrumput, e gieta brac entro que corrodeys la razitz de la ungla, e fort leu corromp aquela tota, e fort leu perve la sua corrupcio al os entro que es a lu odor fetent, e es fayta la extremitat del dit lada, e la color de lu es fayta fusca.	 In order to cure ulcers on the hand or foot, an incision must be made through which finger, and if prolonged with its curing is not recommended, or it becomes infected, or it has become corrupted, you are told to bring that limb into contact with the affected part of the body so that the ulcer can be treated; and if both hands are affected, the extremity will be amputated.
E donc quan tu auras aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas am ferr tota la superfluitat que es romasa de la ungla e aprop cauteriza la plagla aprop aquo, quar cauteri mot es juvatiu en aysso.	 When you have done that which I mentioned earlier regarding the division and it does not heal your ailment, then know that you must remove all the excess from the ulcer and burn off the infected part on top of that, and if it is necessary to cauterize as well, do so as quickly as possible.
Mays si le os es sa e la ungla es sana, e las addicios de la ungla vuoydas ja compremen las carns a las partidas dedintz, e comensan lu punger e ledeysso aquela, lahoras cove que tu pauses ray subtil dejos le angle de la ungla que pungeys la carn, e impelleys aquela sus e inscideys aquela carn am facilitat, e pausa sobre aquo que roman de la carn de las medicinas comburentz corrosivas entro que sia tot remaugut; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	 If the arm and leg are both healthy, and you have already cured the wounds on them as mentioned earlier, then focus your attention to that angle of the ulcer where it penetrates into the flesh, force it down there with ease, and place your hand over it so that it is easily cured; but if corrosive medicines cannot be used because they are totally healed.
Mays si la corrupcio ja enprem en le os, lahoras cove que tu inscidas le os aquel e le extraguas, car nul temps no es sanat que sia en lu le os corrumput.	 When a corruption enters into the mouth, it is customary to wash that part of the body and extract any impurities from it because there are no healing moments in the time corrupts the mouth.
E si vezes la corrozio e la corupcio anar en le dit, lahoras tu inscideys aquel en un dels nozes segons que es premesa la sua rememoracio, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	 If a boil or corruption enters the neck, then wash that part of the body and take care to cleanse it as soon as possible because there are healing moments in cleaning it.
Mays si a la ungla endeve percussio o atricio, e endeve en aquela dolor vehement, lahoras cove que tu al comensament fleubotomes le malaute, e aprop secca la ungla am spatum agut am seccio transversa desus en jus, e guarda te que la seccio no pervengua entro a la carn que es dejos la ungla, quar tu faras accidir al malaute dolor vehement, e sira causa a nativitat de la carn ajustada superflua en le loc; e aprop cura aquel loc am aquo que ceda dolor.	 If a hernia or swelling enters the neck and causes intense pain, then wash the patient first with hot water and apply cold compresses to it transversely, and keep in mind that if the compression does not prevent the protrusion of the swelling into the skin, you will make incisions on both sides at an angle so that no part of the swelling is lost because there are healing moments in making incisions.
Mays dit ajustat, le qual es nat en las mas de alcus homes, fort leu es carnos tot, e fort leu so en lu osses, o fort leu es en lu ungla.	 When you do an adjustment that is good for all cases but one, and it is light in weight or smallness of the body parts affected, mild and light on the bones or flesh, gentle and soft on the hernia.
E alcus de lu son natz en la razit de la junctura, o es la nativitat de lu en alcus nozes dels ditz.	 The joints of it are located in the recess of the junction, or its nature is such that it infiltrates into all parts without distinction.
Mays aquel que es nat en alcus nozes del dit no se mau, e aquest que es nat en las juncturas fort leu es maugut.	 The one which is natural to the veins of the feet is not severe, and the one that is natural for joints is mild.
E de aquels que son natz carnoses, la seccio es leugiera, e es que tu inscidas aquel deves la sua razitz am spatum lat.	 When someone's joints are sore from cold humors that have infiltrated each part of the body, and pain occurs in their feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
Mays de aquel que es nat en la razitz de la junctura, la curacio es dificil; e donc guarda te de la abscizio de lu.	 If the cause of joint pain is not related to cold humors infiltrating each part of the body, then treatment will be difficult and one should seek advice from a doctor.
Mays en aquel que es nat en dit deves les nozes, cove que tu inscidas al comensament la carn de lu am inscizio redonda entro al os, e aprop serra am una de aquelas serras convenientz ad aquo, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	 If the cause of joint pain is not related to cold humors infiltrating each part of the body and one has no sores on their feet or hands, then it's advisable to start making incisions around the affected area at the base of the foot, preferably using a sharp instrument for this purpose, and after that apply ointment to the incision.
Mays consolidacio la qual accideys als ditz entre lor motas veguadas o per nativitat del home que nays enayssi, o per consolidacio de plagua o per combustio de foc, o per semblantz, adonc cove que secces aquela consolidacio entro que les ditz retorno a la sua forma natural.	 If the cause of joint pain is due to swelling or birth defects, or due to burns, fire, or frostbite, then it's advisable to consolidate these injuries in such a way that they return to their original state as closely as possible.
E aprop pausa entre lor draps de li enfuzes en oli rozat per que no sian consolidatz leugierament, e separa entre aquels, o pausa entre aquels una lamina de plom subtil entro que sia consolidat segon que cove.	 After placing them on a hot oil to prevent any further consolidation, separate the affected areas or place a thin layer of soft material between them so that they can be consolidated after the oil has cooled off.
E semblantment si accideys consolidacio en alcus ditz am la palma, lahoras tu secca aquela consolidacio segon que es preparada e conveneys a la figura del membre.	 If consolidation is needed on the palm of one's hand, then after it has been prepared and suits the member's shape, then do so.
De inscizio de vices, so son varicas.	 The incision for veins are cuts.
Vices so son varicas, e so venas envolutas grossas plenas de superfluitatz melencolicas las quals veno en motz dels membres del cors, e le major adveniment de lor en las cambas, e majorment en las cambas dels itinerantz e dels laborantz e dels portantz.	 When veins are full of melancholy humors
Adonc cove que tu administres purguacio del cors de colera negra alcunas veguadas am expulcio fort, e aprop sangna le pacient de la vena basilica.	 If you administer purging with black bile, make the patient drink some vinegar to expel it forcefully from the body.
Mays la curacio de lor am ferr es segon dos manieyras: la una es que sia inscizas e sia atirat aquel sanc negre, e l’autra manieyra es que sia elevada la vena e sia extrayta tota.	 The cure for this ailment may be in two ways: one is to open and drain the artery that's blocked by black bile, and the other way is to elevate the vein and extract all of it.
La seccio de lu es segon aquesta manieyra: embroca al comensament la camba am aygua cauda mot entro que le sanc gros sia resolvut, que es feculent de la camba, e aprop strenh la camba del malaute a la partida pus sobirana de la coyssa entro a la partida dejos del denol am una benda, e aprop secca la vena en un loc, o en dos, o en tres am seccio ampla, e aprop eleva le sanc negra am la tieua ma de la partida dejos de la camba entro en sus, e desus en jus, entro que del sanc sia yssida la quantitat que voles e que vezes habastar, e la qual tollera la vertut del malaute.	 The second way is to drain the vein that has been blocked by black bile first until it's fully resolved and becomes full of impurities, then tighten the vein at the patient's waist with a string or cord so that all of it comes out into his hands, and from there remove it in one piece, or in two pieces, or in three pieces as needed, making sure to lift up the blocked vein until its amount is what you want and how many times you desire, and this will help the patient recover.
E aprop lia aquela, e comanda a lu que abstengua de las viandas colera negra engendrantz.	 And on that day, command him to abstain from black bile foods generating them
E itera la curacio per fleubotomia quan las venas so umplidas e aquo notz al malaute.	 It is customary for phlebotomy when the veins are full and this happens to the patient.
Mays la elevacio de lor es segon aquesta manieyra: tu que razas la camba del malaute, si en lu so motz pels, e aprop met le en banh e embroca la camba de lu am aygua cauda entro que s’enrogesesca e las venas sian exuberadas; o que sia exercitat per exercici fort, si banh no es a tu present, entro que·l membre sia scalfat.	 "After the patient has been positioned on their side with their injured leg elevated above the level of their heart and chest, they should massage the veins in that leg to prevent blood from pooling there.
E aprop secsa la codena en le dreyt de la vena per seccio en le lonc o en le derier de lu deves le denol, o en le pus bas de lu deves lo talo.	 "The practitioner should apply gentle pressure to the thigh of the affected leg, either at or just below the knee or the foot.
E aprop uobre la codena am uncis e excorja la vena de tota part entro que appara al sentiment, e es deves la appericio de lu que vezes aquela roga declinant a negror.	 "The practitioner should apply gentle pressure to the entire vein down to where it becomes more superficial and may be felt as the skin.
E donc cum evazeys e de la codena tu vezes aquela blanca quays sia corda.	 "After applying gentle pressure, watch for any changes in color that might indicate circulation is compromised.
E aprop tu met dejos aquela le ray entro que sia elevada e sia gitada de la codena, e sospen aquela am onci orp leon.	 "Make sure the limb remains elevated and positioned properly at all times to prevent further complications.
E aprop secsa autra seccio aprop aquela seccio per tres ditz, e aprop excorja la codena de la partida desus de la vena entro que apparia.	 "The practitioner should massage the affected limb in a circular motion for three or more times, and then apply gentle pressure to the vein at its base.
E aprop eleva aquela e inscideys aquela en deriera seccio deves le talo, e aprop extratz aquela e eleva aquela entro que sia yssida per la seccio segonda, e aprop extratz aquela de la seccio que es sobre aquela.	 "The practitioner should elevate the limb and insert a finger into the crease of the affected leg, then apply gentle pressure to that area before moving on to the next one.
E fay aquo entro que extraguas aquela de la seccio que es pus sobirana o pus auta de totas las seccios, entro que tota es yssida; e lahoras inscideys aquela.	 "Apply gentle pressure evenly across all the creases until every one is done.
E si no obezeys a tu ad extrayre e elevar, lahoras intromet una agulha am fiel fort doble e ligua aquela e extratz la, o intromet dejos lu le ray e revolveys la tua ma a tota part entro qu’en sia getada.	 "When joints are affected by cold humors infiltrating the body and causing pain in the feet, it is commonly referred to as gout.
E guarda te que no sia inscidida; quar si es trencada, es fayt a tu dificil elevar aquela mot e es vengut sobre le malaute per aquela nocument.	 "Please note that this should not be incised unless it is ruptured, as it will make elevating the joint difficult and cause discomfort on the patient in that area.
E cum aquela tota auras fora-gitada, lahoras pausa sobre le loc de la plagua lana submerssa en vi e oli rozat e oli no-rozat, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	 "After all the sores have been treated, place a poultice soaked in vinegar and warm water over that area to prevent further infection.
E si la vit es contrayta havent tortuositat a la qual sia envolucio a las partidas, e no es segon rectitut segon que havem dit, lahoras cove que tu fendas sobre aquela a tota partida de tortuositat de lu e als locs de envolucio de lu, e aprop suspen aquela am uncis entro que eleves aquela tota.	 "If the intestines are twisted and obstructed in such a way that it is encircled by folds of the body's surface, do not cut through to all parts of the twisting obstruction but instead place something around its circumference to prevent further obstruction.
E guarda te deves la tua seccio que no inscidas la vena e que no plagues aquela, quar dificil sira a tu elevar aquela; e serva la tua prudencia en aquela.	 "Please note that you should not incise the vein and harm it unnecessarily, as it would be difficult to elevate it. Use your discretion in this matter.
Forma del inscident am le qual es seccada vit:	 "Make an incision where the vein is severed:
Forma de unci orp:	 "Make a small, circular incision.
No es a lu accuitat ayssi cum als uncis ni es de aguda extremitat per so que no plague la vena; e es de grossa flexibilitat leon, quar si era subtil, inscidira la vena per la sua subtilitat; habantz es en lu superflua grosseza ayssi cum havem dit.	 "Do not incise the artery but rather make a small incision at an angle so that you do not harm the vein; it should be flexible enough to avoid cutting into the vein, as making a small incision without flexibility will cut into the vein.
De extraccio venae cruris.	 The left femoral vein
Aquesta vena es engendrada en las cambas en terras caudas ayssi cum al- Ategi en terra de Arabics e en las terras de India caudas e aridas de pauca teneritat e en las quals no nays erba ni aybre.	 The left femoral vein is generated in the calves of Europe, Asia and Africa, as well as in the Indian subcontinent, which has little vegetation or trees.
E fort leu es engendrada en autres locs del cors otra las cambas.	 Yes, it can also be found on other parts of the body like the legs
E la gestacio de lu es de putrefaccio que ve dejos la codena ayssi cum venen dedintz le cors serpentz e vermps e scarides e verms engendrantz entre la codena e la carn.	 The gesture to it is one of ulceration, where the blood vessels and worms enter between the skin and the flesh.
E senhal de la suscepcio de l’adveniment de lu es de aquesta vena que accideys en la camba enflammacio vehement; e aprop le loc es vesicat; e aprop comensa la vena yssir del loc de aquela vesicacio quays sembla razit de planta.	 The sign of its occurrence is the appearance of a very inflamed leg, and when touched it becomes vesicular; and immediately afterwards the vein seems to be bursting from that vesicle as if it were a plant.
E adonc cum appar de lu la extremitat, lahoras cove que tu envolvas sobre aquela una pessa de plom del qual sia le pes de una drac. entro a ii drac., e noza aquela e layssa le plom suspendut de la camba.	 Once you notice it on the extremity of someone's leg, tell them to apply a poultice made from the crushed body of a dragonfly over that area; and if necessary cover it with a cloth to prevent flies getting in.
E tantas veguadas cum yeys de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, envolveys aquo em plom e noza aquel.	 Whenever you notice any cause of its occurrence anywhere, apply this poultice and cover it with a cloth.
E si mot es prolonguat, lahoras tu inscideys una partida de lu e envolopa le romanent; e no inscidas aquela de razit entro que sia fora yssida, quar si inscideys aquela es contrayta e intra en la carn e fa accidir apostema e poyredura en le loc e ulceracio mala.	 If prolonged it is advisable to incise a part of it and wrap it in linen; if not, remove that part immediately so as to prevent it from spreading inside the flesh and causing further pain and ulcers.
Per que cove que sia tractada suaument e sia extrayta petit a petit, entro que sia fora-gitada del derier de lu e no remangua de lu alcuna causa en le cors.	 The first sentence means "From which part of the body is it being treated and from where is it gradually withdrawn, so that it does not cause any pain in the chest.
E de aquesta vena es yssit en alcus homes que es en la sua longitut de v palms e de detz e ja es pervengut a mi que yssic un de xx palms.	 The second sentence means "And from this vein it runs into all the houses that are on its length, and I have already mentioned one of those.
E si es inscidida en la hora de la sua medicacio, lahoras intromet lo ray en le trauc de lu e perfora aquela am lonc trauc am le cors, entro que sia evacuat tot aquo que es en la materia, e administra putrefaccio del loc per alcus dias am medicinas; e aprop cura aquela per la curacio de apostemas.	 If it is inflamed in the time of its treatment, then drain off the fluid from the vessel and perforate that portion towards the chest, until it is completely evacuated from this matter, and administer putrefaction for a few days with medicines; and apply healing ointments for the cure of ulcers.
E aquesta vena alcunas veguadas ha motz ramps, e majorment quan apar a la junctura del pe o en le pe, e veno a lu motz orrificis, e es yssit de quascu orrifici ram.	 The vein of some people is sometimes blocked, and mainly when it comes to the junction of the foot or in the leg, then it becomes obstructed, and it is said that there are certain obstructing matters.
E donc cura aquela ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio e am aquo que es desus dit.	 Therefore treat this as previously mentioned in the division and in this way which you have already heard.
De sectione super vermes generatos sub cute et dicitur aegritudo bovina.	 The term "boar's sweat" is used to describe a particular type of heat rash, often caused by exertion or anxiety.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en alcuna terra deves nos malautia bovina per so quar motas veguadas endeve als bious e es verm pauc un le qual es nat entre la codena e la carn, e va en tot le cos pujan e devalan, e es mostrat al sentiment deves le sieu anament de membre en membre entro que disromp la codena e yeys fora.	 This malady is called "boar's sweat" in every land where the bovine ailment occurs through some veins that go throughout the body and spread to all parts of it, showing its appearance as a swelling between the skin and the flesh, and it is displayed on one member at a time until it bursts open.
E la generacio de lu es per putrefaccio de alcunas humors ayssi cum accideysso verms e serpentz e lombrics e ascaridas en le ventre.	 When the production of some humors leads to putrefaction, worms, serpents and lice in the belly are symptoms
E es temut per la malicia de lu, quar quan el va en le cors e es elevat al cap, e es pervengut al huel, lahoras fort leu uebre en lu e intra e destruzeys le huel, e aquo endeve motas veguadas.	 Fear of the patient because when he enters his body and is raised to the head, and then falls on it, the sores are burned off him fiercely into him and destroy the sores, therefore ending all wounds.
E donc quan tu voles curar aquel e extraire lu, lahoras no se fa si no deves la sieua ambulacio e apparacio de lu al sentiment, e adonc cove que tu strenhas aquo que es sobre lu e aquo que es dejos lu am liament e constriccio fort, e aprop secca sobre lu e extratz aquel.	 Therefore when you want to cure him and extract him out, the doctors do not apply it unless their presence is felt and seen by you, and then only that which is over him, what he has imposed upon him and tightened up tight, and place them on him and extract him out.
E si es preondat en la carn e no le atrobes, lahoras tu pausa cauteri am foc sobre le loc entro que mora, e la major causa que es temuda es corrupcio de lu am la qual corrump le loc ayssi cum havem dit.	 If it is pressed into the flesh and you do not burn it off right away, then place a pointed cautery on that part where it has taken hold, and one of the major causes to fear corruption from him is putrefaction which also corrupts the location like I've mentioned.
May si tu vezes aquel esser pervengut al cap prop del huel, lahoras strenh sobre le sobrecil am fort strictura, e aprop secsa sobre lu, e extratz aquel; e cove que·l malaute use de mondificacio del sieu cors am medicinas evacuantz humors putridas malas, e guarda se de viandas generantz putrefaccio.	 If he is taken to the head with pain from his stomach, then the doctors tighten strongly upon it and place them on him, and extract him; and with the bad patient's use of medication from their own body to eliminate bad humors which generate putrefaction, and guard themselves from producing putrefaction.
De sectione super aegritudinem nafir.	 From section above fear
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en nostra terra nafir, e es dolor la qual ve en alcus membres, e aprop es permudada de membre en membre.	 This ailment is called "phlegm" in our land, and the pain it causes occurs throughout the members of its body; so it is spread from member to member
E yeu ja e vista aquela segon que yeu te recomtare.	 You have already seen that second thing which you should recommend
Yeu fu apelat a una femna malauta ad una vila, e descubric le sieu bras e vi una imflacio petita en la vena funis del bras, e pus que fu romas per una hora, vi aquela imflacio anar ayssi cum va verm pujan ad aquest, mays pus leugierament que esser por, ayssi cum si fos argent viu quan corr de loc en loc.	 You were taken to a female patient with this ailment, and you found her breast inflamed and a small swelling in the vein of it; after an hour, that swelling would spread like wildfire through the body, causing great pain wherever it went.
E adonc anet s’en la dolor de aquel loc e fiquet se en le muscle, e aprop aqui stec per una hora.	 And once the pain in this area subsides and passes into the muscles, after one hour it is recommended to take a break from that treatment.
E aprop correc en l’autre cors entro que pervenc al autre bras.	 Then proceed to the other breast as well, moving towards the other arm.
E aprop recomtec a mi que revolvia se per tot le cors sieu segon que yeu vi; e fo trop meravelat de la permutacio de lu e de la velocitat de membre en membre.	 And then recommend to me that you move throughout her body, the second time as well, and be careful with the exchange of it and the speed at which member to member occurs.
E yeu ja havia vist denant aquo en les mieus huels segon aquela manieyra, empero yeu he vistz motz les quals atroban dolor esser permutada de membra a membre.	 You have already seen that second time in the worst way possible for this ailment, but you also saw how much it pains to exchange members.
Mays no vi aquo am les huels ayssi cum en la femna.	 But I did not see that as well with her as I had seen it previously
E yeu no cogiti esser aquo sino que es per aquo quar la femna era de viela, on so de secs cors e de venas descubertas, e en aquesta apparec al sentiment aquela ventositat permutada.	 You did not consider this ailment unless she was already in a weakened state, where the two breasts and veins were exposed, and it showed that the exchange of pain is painful to experience.
E es necessari que no apparesca segon aquesta retro-curacio en aquels que son delicioses e am cors humitz de venas ameguadas.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
E cum tu voles la curacio de lu, e le pacient sent aquela dolor, lahoras no es a tu aparent al huel ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras tu strenh sobre aquel e dejos lu leugierament e secse sobre aquel entro que sia yssida aquela ventositat coartada, e cauterize le loc.	 If you want to apply the treatment of gout, and the patient feels that pain, do not allow it to be applied in the manner mentioned earlier; instead, wait for the passage between the joint and place a moist cloth over that part gently so as not to cause further harm or discomfort, then cauterize the area.
Mays si tu no la vezes am los tieus huels, alhoras tu cura aquel am excussio del cors e am aquo que expelleys ventositatz, e carmina aquelas am pillulas fetidas e am pillulas de serapi e semblantz.	 If you do not want to use the methods mentioned earlier, instead cure that part of the body and apply it as a poultice for gout, using bitter pills or serpent pills and similar ones.
De extraccio de sagetas.	 From extraction of pus.
Sagetas son diversificadas segon las specias, e segon les locs dels cors en les quals cazo, quar la lor diversitat es que de aquellas so que han grans puntas, e petitas, e concavas, e sordas, so es solidas; e de lor so que han tres angles, e de aquelas a las quals so que han lenguas; e de aquelas a las quals so astelas.	 Sages are diverse according to their location and the part of the body in which they occur: those that have large points and small ones, long ones and short ones, thin ones and fat ones - solid ones or not, depending on whether they have three angles or only one.
E aquela que es segon les membres e las pessas en las quals cazo es segon dos manieyras: quar les membres o so membres principals concaus, ayssi cum le cervel, le cor, e·l fitge, e le pulmo, e les ronhos, e les budels, e la vezica, e a lor semblantz; e donc quan catz en alcu de aquestz membres e aparo a tu senhals de mort, la qual causa yeu recomtare aprop, lahoras cove que tu evites extraccio de aquela sageta en aquels quar la mort siec aquel en le qual en las majors disposicios, e quan a tu no appareysso aquestz mals senhals, e la sageta no es amaguada en la profunditat del membre, lahoras tu extratz aquela e cura la plagua.	 That which is second to the arms and legs in which they occur: those that are part of the main arteries or veins, such as the carotid artery, coronary artery, pulmonary artery, aorta, lungs, bladder and urethra; and when you cut through these members and reach your neck's surface of death, causing an obstruction there, causing you to recover by removing it from its cavity in the member.
E dels senhals del servel es quan catz en lu sageta, e trespassa le os, e es yssit del cyphac le qual es sobre le cervel, quar accideys per lu soda vehement, e scotomia, e vertige, e rogor en les huels, e imflamacio e rogor de la lengua, e spasme e permixtio de entendament e vomi de colera, e fort leu es abscindida la paraula e es destruida la votz, e es yssit del loc de la plagua humiditat blanca semblant a pols, e yeys de lu semblant ad aquositat de la carn.	 When the patient lies down, it causes pain in the chest, and there is a lump on the chest that prevents breathing from occurring; intense vertigo occurs, causing the body to tremble violently with heat and chills throughout the hands, as well as inflammation of the tongue, spasms of the understanding, and vomiting from anger.
E donc si appareyso a tu aquestz senhals, lahoras tu abste de la curacio e de la extraccio de la sageta, si non es fora.	 And if this happens to you, then stop taking care of the opening and extraction from the abscess, unless otherwise advised by your doctor.
Mays les senhals de la sageta quan catz en le cor, so que ela es prop de la mamila senestra, e sent am aquela quays sia ficada en causa dura, e no es causa vueda; e fort leu le movement de la sageta es semblant a movement del pols, e corr de la plagua sanc negra, e siec aquel fregiditat de las extremitatz, e suzor freja, e sincopi; e donc sapias que la mort descen ses tot dopte.	 And when the abscess is in the chest and makes it hard to breathe, causing violent shaking of the body similar to a stroke, black bleeding from wounds, and if coldness strikes the extremities, and freezing, and silence?
E les senhals quan la sageta ha plaglat le pulmo so eyssiment de sanc spumos de la plagua, e les vayssels que so prop del col so apostematz, e es mudada la color del malaute, e expira sperit gran aut, e demanda atraccio de ayre freg.	 And when the abscess gets into the lung it causes frothy pus from the veins that are near to the chest, and makes the face pale, great pain occurs, and the body seeks relief through breathing.
E si catz la sageta en le velament le qual es en le pietz, e la dolor lahoras es prop de las costas petitas, e es fayt le ale gran am vehement dolor e am sospir, e no so maugutz totz les membres dels muscles.	 And when the abscess is in the membrane that's over the chest and pain occurs on the small ribs, it causes great intense pain and heavy breathing, but does not hurt all the members of the muscle.
E si catz la sageta en le stomac, lahoras fort leu yeys de la plagua vianda alcuna indigesta.	 When stomachache comes from cold humors that infiltrate into the stomach, then pain occurs in the belly, it is customarily called indigestion by doctors
E si catz la sageta en le ventre, e es ficada en lu, yeys alcuna fenda de la plagua, o la tela, o budel le qual es disromput, e no es speransa en la curacio de lu extraccio de la sageta.	 And if the stomachache is located within the belly and there is no hole in the lining, or intestine, then it cannot be passed out of the stomach through this opening, but it will cause pain.
E si la sageta catz en la vesica, e es yssida defora urina, e procesesca de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, e fort leu es dolor sobre le malaute, lahoras sapias que es mortal.	 And if the stomachache is located within the bladder and there is no outlet for urine, then it can cause severe pain to the patient, doctors usually call this condition as urinary retention.
Mays les autres membres ayssi cum es la cara, le col, e·l golayro, e las spallas e le adjutori, e les spondils del dos, e la furcula, e la coysa, e la camba e a lor semblantz dels membres, son salvatz segon las majors disposicios quan la sageta no atroba vena ni arteria e no es sageta venenosa.	 The other members are as follows: the face, the neck, the groin, the thighs and buttocks, the spine of both sides, the hyoid bone, the sacrum, the pelvis and its surrounding bones, they are all used second to larger organs when the stomach does not connect with a vein or artery and it is not infected.
E yeu recomtare aquo a tu que he vist del esser de aquestas sagetas, per que signifiques per aquo sobre la curacio tieua.	 You should remember this for future use when considering the stomach's condition to indicate its severity through these signs.
La qual causa es, quar en un home cazec sageta en le lacrimal del huel de lu en la razitz del nas, e yeu extrayssi aquela a lu del autra partida, dejos le grays de l’aurelha de lu, e es sanat, e no accidic en le huel de lu nocument.	 The cause is when someone has stomach pain in the eyes due to inflammation of the nasal mucosa and it extends into other areas like the throat or face, causing discomfort without acidity.
E extrayssi autra sageta a un Juzeu la qual cazec en lu en lo grays del sieu huel, dejos la palpebra pus dejos, e la sageta ja era occultada e no so conseguit de aquela sino una petita extremitat am la qual adhereys al sieu fust, e era gran sageta de las sagetas agudas dels Turcs , am ferr leon en la qual no havia aurelhas.	 "The patient's eyes are closed and the eyelid is lowered, making it difficult to see in his or her own light.
E senat es le Juzieu , e no accidic en le sieu huel mal accident.	 "However, if there was an accident with the eye itself.
E extrayssi una autra sageta a un home Crestia la qual era cazuta en le golayro, e era sageta arabica, e es aquela a la qual so aurelhas; e adonc yeu inscidegui sobre aquela entre doas guidegi, e ja era submersa en le golayro de lu; e adonc yeu so subtiliat am aquela, e aprop extraxi aquela, e es sanat le Crestia .	 "The patient's eyelids were lowered and covered over the eye itself, making it difficult to see.
E extraxi autra sageta a un home la qual era cazuta en le sieu ventre, e cogitegui que moris per aquela; e donc, pus que foro passatz xxx dias e no es mudat sobre lu alcuna causa de las suas disposicios, inscidegui sobre la sageta e engenagui sobre aquela, e es sanat, e no accidic a lu accident mal.	 "The patient's eyelid was lowered and covered over their abdomen, causing them to lose consciousness within 3 days with no known cause for the loss of appetite.
E vi mays un home en le qual cazec una sageta en le dos de lu, e consolidada es la plagua sobre lu, e pus que foc aprop set ans, yssic la sageta en la razitz de la coyssa.	 "The patient's eyelid was lowered and covered over their chest with gauze, making it difficult to see in the affected area.
E vi una femna a la qual cazec sageta en le sieu ventre, e la plagua es consolidada dedintz lu, e no es mudada en las suas disposicios en re, e la femna no atrobec nocument en alcunas de las suas opperacios naturals.	 "The female patient's eyelid was lowered and covered over their abdomen with gauze, making it difficult to see in the affected area.
E vi un autre home al qual cazec sageta en la sua cara e consolidada es la plagua e romas la sageta, no atrobant aqui mota dolor, e motz semblantz ad aquestz.	 "Another man who comes to the face and places a bandage over the nose and mouth prevents any pain here.
E extrayssi la sageta del home dels princeps del rey que era cazuda en le mieg loc del nas sieu e ja havia declinat a la partida dreyta un petit, e occultada era tota la sageta.	 "The bandage of the man from the Prince of the King was placed in his nose and mouth and had already declined to turn right even slightly.
E yeu fu appelat a la curacio de lu aprop le cazement de la sageta entro a tres dias.	 "He was called for treatment after three days.
E adonc yeu atrobegui la plagua de la sageta mot streyta; e adonc yeu inquirigui aquela am tenta subtil, e no sentigui aquela; mays el la sentia puncio dejos la aurelha dreyta, e adonc speregui que aquela punccio era per la extremitat de la sageta.	 "After applying the bandage and trying with subtlety to remove it, nothing worked; may the pain from that spot be cured by the right side.
E amplastregui le loc am emplaustre en le qual es vertut atrectiva e digestiva, confizant de mi que·l loc se apostemes per que appares a mi le loc de la sageta, per que secces sobre aquela.	 "He examined the location where it was most convenient and digestive, realizing that this place would cause more problems if it were located near to his stomach.
E no accidic en le loc accident significant que la sageta hagues conseguit aquel loc; e yeu continuegui am le emplaustre sobre lu per motz dias e no accidic accident; e consolidada es la plagua entretant, e romas le malaute de la extreccio de lu per spazi de motz dias entro que un jorn sentic la sageta dintz le sieu nas e recontec aquo a mi.	 "He did not accuse the significant place where the foot got that place; and continued to make it more convenient over time, keeping the bandage in place as well.
E adonc yeu pausegui sobre la plagua medicina acuta corrosiva per motz dias entro que foc ubert, e am la tenta yeu assagegui aquel, e atrobegui la extremitat de la sageta subtil, la qual adhereys al fust.	 "After a while he stopped applying the acute corrosive medicine and tried to remove it, trying with subtlety to remove it from his foot, which adhered.
E aprop yeu ajustegui en la apersio de la plagua per aquela medicina acuta entro que apparec a mi visiblament la extremitat de la sageta, e passec a mi temps am aquo per le spazi de temps entro quatre meses.	 The first sentence translates to: "I will now administer the acute medicine through this opening and immediately visible extremity of the leg; I want you to wait for four months.
E aprop pus que la plagua foc amplificada, e foc a mi possible entrometre las forfexs en lu, e remaure aquela, e no obezic ad eyssiment, lahoras yeu no cessegui subtiliar e ingeniar sobre aquela am manieyras de engen, entro que comensegui un dia sobre aquela am manieyras de engens pendre lu am forceps descentment faytas, segon que vindra la forma de aquelas en la fi del capitol, entro que extraxi aquela; e aprop restauregui aquela plagua.	 The second sentence translates to: "I will enlarge the opening and introduce a tube between the thigh and the body of the patient, so that they may breathe through it without impediment, I want you not to cease your subtle and ingenious efforts on this matter until we begin another day on which these things are done in order to restore that hole.
E alcus metges jutgavan que la cartillage del nas no es restaurada, e yeu restauregui aquela e la plagua es consolidada, e sanat es le malaute per sanetat entiera, e no noguec en lu en deguna causa.	 The third sentence translates to: "Doctors will judge that the nose cartilage is not restored and you should restore it along with the hole as consolidated, so that the patient may breathe healthily in any case.
E yeu recomti a tu la qualitat de extraccio de alcunas sagetas per que pauses aquo regla e significacio sobre aquo que no he dit, quar las partidas de aquesta art e las difinicios de aquela no so conprehendudas am narracio ni no comprehen aquelas le libre.	 The fourth sentence translates to: "I recommend that you consider the extraction of some bones in order for this rule and its meaning to be clear, as these parts are not comprehensible from reading or without comprehension.
E le artifexs savi compara am pauc sobre mot; e am aquo que es present sobre aquo que es absent; e atroba operacio novela e instrument novel deves le descendement de las causas extranhas del art quan accideysso.	 The fifth sentence translates to: "The artificer must consider the absence of movement and its presence, so that you may act according to whether it is present or absent; and you must use a novel operation and new instrument when external causes occur.
E donc yeu dic que sagetas no son fora-gitadas dels membres en les quals son ficadas sino segon dos manieyras: o per atraccio del loc en le qual intrec; o per le contrari de la autra partida.	 "When joint pain is caused by cold humors, it infiltrates each part of the body and causes pain in the feet.
E aquela que es gitada per le loc don es intrada, o es sageta procedent en loc carnos, e es atirada e fora-gitada.	 "The first option refers to when the pain is caused by a location that infiltrates or when it occurs in a certain area.
E si no obezeys a eyssiment de la hora en la qual catz, lahoras cove que tu la laysses per alcus dias entro que poyresca la carn que es al enviro de lu, e sia alleujada l‘atraccio de lu e la sua egressio.	 "If the pain is not caused by a location that infiltrates or when it does not occur in a certain area, then it means there are other factors at play and the pain may be related to inflammation of nearby areas.
E semblantment si es ficada en os e no obezeys a tu a eyssiment, lahoras layssa aquela per alcus dias e itera aquela am atraccio e mocio en quascun dia, e ja es fora-gitada.	 "If the pain occurs in the foot and there are no specific locations involved, then the doctor may examine nearby areas for inflammation or irritation.
E si no obezeys a tu eyssiment aprop alcus dias, lahoras cove que tu perforas en le circuit de la sageta en aquel os de tota partida am taravel subtil entro que·l loc sia amplificat de la sageta, e aprop extratz aquela.	 "If the pain persists for several days without a clear location or is localized in an area where swelling of that part may be related to the cause of pain, then the doctor will further examine it.
E si la sageta es ficada en le os del cap e ja ha procezit en un dels ventres del cervel, e apparo en le malaute alcus de aquels accidentz les quals yeu e ditz, lahoras abste de la extraccio de la sageta e layssa aquela entro que·l sieu esser sia equat aprop alcus dias; quar si la sageta perve al ciphac, lahoras la mort no es a lu prolonguada.	 "If the pain occurs in one of the ventricles and has progressed to an incident that is known or mentioned by others, then the doctor will refrain from extracting it until further examination determines whether there should be more time for recovery.
E si la sageta no es ficada sino en le cors del os tant solament e no passa entro al ciphac, e roman le malaute per alcus dias, e no accideys a lu denguna causa de aquels accidentz, lahoras tu engenia en la atraccio de la sageta e en la atraccio de lu.	 When the patient's urine is held for too long and does not pass through the urethra alone but passes into the bladder as well, then doctors call it a urinary retention.
Mays si es mot ficada e no obezeys a tu a extraccio, lahoras tu aministra taravels en le circuit de la sageta ayssi cum havem recomtat, e aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	 If the patient's urine is forced out but does not empty the bladder completely and remains in the urethra, doctors prescribe a treatment course to complete emptying of the bladder.
Mays si la sageta ja es amaguada en le loc del cors, e es amaguada del sentiment, lahoras tu inquireys aquela am tenta, e si tu sentas aquela, lahoras atira aquela am alcus sturmentz les quals so convenientz a la atraccio de lu.	 If the bladder is stuck in that part of the body or feeling, then doctors will ask you to try and release it, if you feel it, they will urge you to remove it from where it was placed.
E si no podes sobre lu per la constriccio de la plagua e per la longitut del preon, e aqui no es os ni nervi ni vena, lahoras tu fen sobre la plagua entro que sia amplificada e que sia possible extrayre la sageta.	 If the obstruction is in both the urethra and the length of the penis as well but without any nerves or veins, doctors will suggest increasing its size to make it easier to extract the bladder.
E si so a lu aurelhas am las quals sia tenguda, lahoras tu deliura la carn en la qual es ficada de tota partida am tot le engen que poyras far; e ingenia sobre aquo, si no podes sobre la evasio de la carn en la fractura de las aurelhas e en torssio de aquelas entro que obezesca.	 If the bladder is stuck in such a way that it cannot be pulled out even after stretching its skin from all sides to the extent possible, doctors will suggest trying to make an incision through the areola and into the torso of those who are obese or have difficulty doing so due to their condition.
E quan tu administras la extraccio de la sageta en quascun loc on sia, lahoras tu usa am torcio de la tua ma am forceps a totas partidas entro que fassa aquela obezir; e subtilia am deriera subtilitat que la sageta no sia trencada e que sia fayta a tu dificil atraccio de lu e de aquela extraccio.	 When extracting the bladder from any location, doctors will use the forceps to hold all sides of it and make sure not to break it and also make sure that its extraction is difficult as possible because they want to prevent another one from happening quickly
E si no podes sobre aquela de la tua hora, lahoras tu layssa per alcus dias entro que se poyrescan las partidas que so en le circuit de lu, e aprop itera aquela quar lahoras es alleujada.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body and pain occurs in the feet, customarily called gout among doctors.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat flux de sanc, lahoras tu administra aquo que havem dit de curacio en le sieu capitol.	 If it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery.
E guarda la tua vertut de inscizio de vena o de nervi, o de corda, e aministra engen en tota manieyra a tu possibla de la evasio de la sageta; e fay aquo am facilitat e tranquillitat e tarditat e fermetat ayssi cum yeu e a tu recomtat.	 Ensure that the vein or nerve is completely closed, and administer it carefully in any way necessary to prevent leakage of the wound; do this with ease, tranquility, patience, and firmness as recommended by your doctor.
E donc que fassas contrayre la sageta per so que·l malaute sia segon la figura segon la qual foc deves le cazement de la sageta en lu, quar es mays juvatiu.	 Do you want to know the translation of this sentence?
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible, lahoras tu aministra aquo que es a tu possible per las figuras.	 If it is not necessary, then administer what follows as recommended by your doctor.
Mays las sagetas que son fora-gitadas per le contrari del autra partida, o que ja de lu procezeys alcuna partida a las partidas de fora, o fa gilbositat la extramitat de la sageta per sentiment de la partida pus desus de la codena propdana e vezes aquela eminent; adonc tu secsa sobre aquela; e sia la seccio segon la quantitat en la qual prenguan las forceps; e aprop atira aquela, quar ela es fayta leugiera a eyssiment.	 Ensure that the incisions on each side of the other opening are healed and do not allow any of them to open or cause injury again, for fear of doing damage to the patient's abdomen.
Mays si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu tortz lama segon contrarietat entro que la sageta enprema en le os, e amplifique a si meteys, e aprop extratz aquela.	 If it is necessary to retract the incision, then make sure that it closes properly against its own edges and stretch it tight.
E sino, layssa aquela per alcus dias, e aprop itera aquela entro qu’en yesca.	 Then place that within 7 days, and arrange it so that it enters
E si le fust de la sageta es en aquela, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am lu.	 If the fistula of the sack is like this, then you will treat it accordingly.
Mays si le fust es cazut e voles aministrar inpulsio, lahoras tu intromet e aquela, si es sorda, sturment concau per so que intre la concavitat de lu en la coa de la sageta e aprop impelleys aquela am lu.	 If the fistula is blocked and you want to administer pulsio, place it inside that, if silent, use a pointed instrument to enter through the cavity of the sack and apply accordingly.
Mays si la sageta es concava, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am sturment fort intrant en aquela, quar la sageta es alleujada per aquela.	 If the sack is concave, then you will treat it by inserting it firmly into that, as long as there is no leakage from that.
E si la sageta es entoxiguada, lahoras cove que tu concaves tota la carn en la qual es le vere, si es a tu possible aquo, e aprop cura aquela am aquo que si conveneys.	 If the sack is inflamed, you will fill all the flesh around it with whatever is to your best ability, and treat that part accordingly.
E si la sageta catz en le pietz, o en le ventre, o en la vesica, o en le costat, e es propinqua per so que tu tocas aquela am la tenta, e es a tu possible secsar sobre aquela, lahoras secsa sobre aquela e guarda te de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e extratz aquela, e aprop cos la plagua si indigeys, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	 If the sack is on the chest or belly or in the bladder or in the side and it's close enough that you can touch that part with your hand, then treat that part as if it were another treatment zone, and secure it to prevent leakage from veins or nerves, remove it, and cover it with a cloth until it is healed.
Forma de forceps am las quals so atiradas las sagetas:	 Method of using the forceps on the sack:
Sian las extremitatz de lor cum a bec de ausel que son faytas cum serra quan prendon sobre la sageta per so que no la layssen.	 The hands should be placed under their chin to prevent them from falling, when picking up the sack as if it were an egg.
E de aquelas son faytas motas specias, grans, paucas e migieras, segon la quantitat de la grandeza de la sageta e de la sieua pauqueza, e de la amplitud de la plagua, e de la constriccio de lu.	 The humors are cold and varying in size from large to small according to the size of the vessel or cavity they enter into
Forma de impellent concau de aquesta extremitat conquava ayssi cum pena de ausel per so que sia alleujat le intrament de la sageta en lu, e impulcio de aquela sorda:	 The purpose is to gently stretch this extremity in such a way that the pain from it leaves immediately and drives away the coldness.
Forma de impellent de sorda extremitat:	 To gently stretch the affected limb.
ayssi cum ray per so que sia alleujat le intrament de lu en la sageta concava e es impellida am aquel.	 The purpose is to relieve the pain in that part of the body and drive away its coldness with gentle stretching.
De fleubotomia de las venas.	 Vein stripping procedure.
Las venas de fleubotomia de las quals corr costuma de fleubotomar so xxx, de las quals so en le cap xvi, so es doas venas pulsatils las quals so aprop las aurelhas, dic alhasisain; doas herbas que so en les dos templars apparentz; e doas venas que so en dos lacrimals de dos huels que son appeladas aspicientz; e la vena preparada en le mieg loc del front, e la vena que es en la extremitat del nas; e doas guidegi que so al col; e doas venas que so en la labia desus; e doas venas que so en la labia dejos; e — aquestas so las venas que so appeladas algelic —; e so doas venas que so dejos la lengua.	 The veins of the procedure are those that customarily accompany phlebotomy in this area, as in the sixth and seventh cervical vertebra, which are close to the temples and ears; and those prepared for use on the forehead and nose extremity; and two guides at the chin; and two near the labia.
Mays las venas que so fleubotomadas en les brasses so v; quar de aquelas es una cephalica, e es deves le latz silvestre; e le poble appela “la vena del cap”, e sorda, e es vena migiera, e es composta de un ram de la basilica, e de autre ram de la cephalica; e nomna aquela le poble “vena de tot le cors”, e basilica es vena la qual es pausada en le latz domestic, e es nomnada “citillar”, e nompnan aquela les vulguars “vena del ventre”; e funis del bras, e es pausada sobre le focil, e es aquela en la qual es fleubotomat, e es aquela que appar sobre le poutz per apparicio manifesta; e salvatella, e es la vena que es entre lo dit auricular e·l pus petit dit, e so en lu dos ramps.	 The veins used in this procedure are those that commonly accompany phlebotomy at the ears and neck, as well as the cephalic vein which is near the base of the skull; it may be prepared for use on the forehead or nose, depending on preference; two guides placed at the chin, one close to the labia below, another above.
E en le pe e la camba so tres venas; la una de aquelas es que es dejos la curvatura del denolh del latz silvestre; e la segonda es sophena, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz domestic; e la vena sciatica, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz silvestre; e en la camba son autras venas semblantz ad aquelas.	 "The left thigh has three veins: one of which is that of the wild rabbit's curvature; and another for the domestic rabbit, while the sciatic vein is that from the wild rabbit.
Le juvament de las venas que so aprop las aurelhas es a cataris antics e emigranea e sahafati e ulceracios del cap malas antiquas.	 The veins of youth are those with pointed ears, and they migrate east and west, and are full of ancient ulcers
E la qualitat de sagnar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: es que sia ras le cap del malaute, e sia freguat le cap del malaute en le occipiti en le loc de amdoas las venas am drap ample am bona fricacio; aprop strenha le malaute le sieu col am una benda entro que apparan las doas e les locs de lor so aprop las aurelhas en dos locs depremegutz del cap; e quereys aquela am le tieu dit, e si tu sentes le pols de aquelas am le dit tieu, aqui senha am tenta.	 The quality of the veins that they recommend is to say: it should be straight up from the top of the patient's head and down to the occiput in the area where both veins are connected; stretch the patient tightly with a band around their neck so that the two points on the head are brought together; seek this out, if you feel the touch of those mentioned above at your fingertips, then try it here.
Aprop tu pren la lancea cutellar, e es aquela que es inscident, e aprop tu intromet aquel dejos la vena en la codena entro que·l fleubotomi vengua al os.	 Stretch the pectoral artery, and that which is mentioned, and also stretch it when you introduce the vein into the forearm so as to bring out the elbow.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am la vena e la codena a las partidas desus e inscideys la vena am inscizio inscident.	 Stretch your hand around the vein and the arm, and divide them at their ends and incisions.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio la quantitat de dos ditz ajustatz o entorn de aquo; e fay yssir del sanc atant quant voles.	 The length of the incision should be determined by the amount of two fingers from this end, and you can adjust it as needed.
E aprop strenh am pulvils e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	 When the abscess has been opened, let it be cured there
E ja e precedit en le comensament del libre la inscizio de aquelas e de lor la cauterizacio.	 And after that begin with the incision of those and their cauterization.
Mays de las doas venas arterias que so als templars le juvament de la fleubotomia es a emigranea antiqua e sode malvada e obtalmia assidua e cors de superfluitatz acutas effusas als huels.	 When the veins and arteries of those are opened, then open the vessels for phlebotomy to evacuate the ancient and bad blood from all excess fat in order to heal the ulcers on the body sores that are painful
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: constrengua le malaute le sieu col mot entro que apparan las doas venas al sentiment per appericio manifesta e sia demonstrat le pols de lor dejos le tieu dit; e lahoras tu senha am tenta.	 The quality of phlebotomy for those veins is to recommend it to you: constrict the patient's neck so that they cannot see the veins out, but instead show them how their fingers are pressed and then explain that the ulcers will heal.
E aprop tu eleva la codena desobre la vena a las partidas desus am le tieu dit indic, e intromet le fleubotomi inscident dejos, e eleva la vena en sus; e inscidey aquela ayssi cum has fayt en las doas venas autras; e fay correr del sanc segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	 After you have lifted the cord from over the vein as instructed, insert the phlebotomy instrument into it and lift the vein up; then apply pressure at that point to stop bleeding when necessary and repeat this with each of their veins or arteries.
E aprop deslia la coartacio del malaute, e pausa le tieu dit sobre la vena per una hora, e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto e pulvils e strenh aquela desus am fort constriccio, e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	 After making an incision in the patient's abdomen and placing a cushion under them, pause for one hour to allow the abscess to be cured there.
E ja es precedida la rememoracio de lor, e de aquelas la inscizio, e la atraccio en le comensament del libre.	 After you have taken note of their location and made an incision as instructed, begin with the beginning of treatment.
E donc le juvament de fleubotomia de la vena del front es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a las malautias antiquas de la cara e a emigranea e rogor e ulceracios fetidas.	 The first sentence of the text translates to: "The bleeding from the nose is treated with the treatment for ancient cephalic wounds, or pyorrhea and ulcers.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es segon que yeu recomti a tu; so es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col am una benda entro que apparesca la vena; e aprop pren le insturment le qual es nompnat fossori del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	 The quality of the treatment is second, you should apply it as soon as possible. It is recommended that a patient who has such a condition should place their hand inside the vein and use the instrument which is called a tourniquet to constrict the vein:
Pausa la puncta eminent la qual es al cap del fossori sobre aquela vena e percuteys sobre lu am penche o am autre causa en la manieyra de lu, e layssa lo sanc correr segon la quantitat la qual voles; e aprop deslia la perforacio del malaute e strenh aquela entro que sia sanada.	 After you have placed it on top of the tourniquet and secured it tightly enough to cause constriction in that vein, allow some blood to flow through the patient's hand for a while - until the amount desired is reached; then make an incision into the vein and apply pressure over it so as to staunch its bleeding.
E alcunas veguadas es uberta am fleubotomi lat, empero no cove que·l fleubotomi sia de acuta extremitat ayssi cum les autres fleubotomis, abantz sia de lada extremitat, e fleubotoma aquela segon le tranvers, quar le os es propda e fort leu trencaria en lu le fleubotomi quan es subtil.	 Some of the wounds may be treated with a tourniquet alone, but only if it is applied to an extremity without any other wound nearby and tourniquets should not be placed on the same extremity as another tourniquet - unless they are both very close together; when tourniquets are used too quickly or forcefully, they can damage the veins.
Mays le juvament de las duas venas que so als lacrimals de dos huels per scabia del huels per rogor e sebol en les huels, e a las malautias de la cara.	 The two veins that are mentioned as the tear ducts of the eyes and those from around them should be treated with pyorrhea and ulcers:
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia es que·l malaute strenha le col sieu am una benda, e aprop fleubotoma aquelas, e tu sias stant sobre le cap de lu.	 "The quality of phlebotomy is that the patient's strength decreases as a result, and it causes them to lose consciousness.
E sia fayta la fleubotomia segon le transvers a longitut un pauc am fleubotomi pauc, quar en le loc no es carn; e si le fleubotomi es subtil, fort leu la extremitat de lu es trencada.	 "After phlebotomy in the transverse direction by a small amount of phlebotomies, where there is no wound, if it is done subtly and lightly on one's extremity, it may be broken.
E aprop fay correr del sanc atant quant es a tu necessari, e pausa sobre aquelas coto, e strenh aquelas per una nueyt, e aprop deslia aquelas.	 "As long as you need them to do so and place their hands there, stretch them gently for some time, then let go of them.
Mays le fleubotomi de la vena del nas es conferent a febre acuta e a soda vehement, e a las malautias de la cara e emigranea e rogor que accideys en la cara, e majorment quan es antiqua.	 "The phlebotomy of the nasal vein causes an acute fever and severe pain, especially in those with facial injuries.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col e aprop te le sieu nas am la tua ma sinistra, e pren le fleubotomi subtil lonc e fica aquela en le mieg loc del cap del nas segon rectitut, quar la vena no appar al sentiment aqui, e quar le sanc comensa a fluir tantost.	 "The quality of phlebotomy on the nasal vein is that the patient's strength decreases in their chest and hand to the left side as they press it towards the right nostril. Do this gently until you reach a certain area around the base of the nose where the vein doesn't appear, causing the blood flow to increase.
Cove que tu ultimes la tua ma am le fleubotomi petit a petit e fassas correr del sanc segon la tua necessitat; e aprop lia aquela per una nuoyt, quar aquela es restaurada leugierament.	 "After making the phlebotomy gradually and causing it to move slowly as needed, place it gently back in place, where it is restored naturally.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de las doas guidegui a constriccio de ale e a comensament de lepra e a motas malautias e inpetige e malas ulceracios corrosivas ayssi cum herpotromeno.	 "The early phlebotomy of the veins contributes to the constriction of the arteries, and it causes the onset of leprosy and other diseases that cause ulcers and corrosive sores.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que el malaute strenha dejos quascuna en le sieu col am liament; e estia le artifexs sobre le cap del malaute, e le malaute sia sezent sobre una sezela.	 The quality of the phlebotomy in those is that the patient strains to push away any object from its way out through its outlet; and there are placed on top of the patient's head, and a sponge at its back by which it may be washed.
E aprop fleubotoma la vena al lonc am fleubotomi ample petit a petit; e aprop extratz de sanc segon temprada quantitat o segon aquo que vezes de necessitat que es ad aquo; e aprop fay semblant del autra vena.	 The phlebotomy is made gradually, and as much as necessary for times of necessity that it may be done; but with the same vein.
E aprop deslia le liament e strenh las doas venas am strictura migiera per so que·l malaute no sia prefocat, e laysa entro al mati quar la plagua es sanada.	 The object is placed into the vein and pressed to close it tightly so that the patient cannot be prevented from breathing through its outlet; then once the blister has been drained by washing away with water.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de las venas algerich, comfereys a petitas apostemas e pustulas de la boca e corrupcio de las gengivas e malas ulceracios e fissuras, e a malas ulceracios que so en le nas e en le circuit de lu.	 The youthfulness of the phlebotomy to the veins is accompanied by pustules in the mouth and gums corruption, bad ulcers and fissures, and bad ulcers that are on the nose and throat.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que fases cezer le malaute denant tu, e strenh le col de lu am una benda, e aprop revolveys las labias de lu e reguarda a doas venas de las quals la una es de la dextra de la labia e la segonda de la senestra; e la demonstracio de quascuna es per la negror de quascuna de amdos, e aquo mays es quar en le circuit de aquelas so venas menudas negras; e adonc inscideys cascuna per inscizio inscident.	 The quality of the phlebotomy in those is that it causes thirst and strains at its outlet a stick, and there are placed on top of each vein, one from the right side of the labia and another from the left; and the demonstration of them both is by the blackness of their ends, so that it may be observed how much thinner these two veins are in the circuit.
Mays si dubitacio es dejos tu, e no sabes qual es de aquelas, lahoras tu enten a inscisio de la major de aquelas, e de la pus manifesta de aquelas.	 When doubts arise about those things mentioned above, pain arises in the feet
E fay le semblant de las doas venas que so en las labias desus.	 The veins that are located below our thighs
Mays costuma corr mays a inscidir las doas venas que so en la labia dejos.	 They usually find the veins in the area between the labia majora
Mays de doas venas que so dejos la lengua le juvament es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a prefocacios que so en le guolayro, a la malautia de la uvula, e a malautias de la boca.	 Some of the veins they usually find in the area between the labia majora are located at the base of the tongue, below the soft palate, and inside the mouth.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es que segue le malaute entre las tuas mas denant le solel, e eleva la lengua de lu, e reguarda dejos la lengua, de la un latz de lu vena e del autre latz vena, e la color de quascuna es declinant a negror.	 The quality of phlebotomy in those veins is that it follows the artery between your big toes and lifts the tongue up, guards the vein from below with one finger and the other above, and the color of each changes to black.
E adonc fleubotoma quascuna; e guarda te que no ultimes la tua ma en fleubotoman aquelas, quar dejos aquelas so arterias.	 After phlebotomy in each one: and guard that after phlebotomizing those arteries
E las tuas venas que so fleubotomadas en le coyde so en las quals corr costuma en totz les homes, e la fleubotomia de lor es fayta segon dos manieyras, o pongen am le fleubotomi mirtilat o olivar a subtilitat declinant; o secsar am fleubotomi cutellar, e apelha si alnessil, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	 The veins that have been phlebotomized in this way are usually found in all people, and the phlebotomy of them is done with two needles or one needle in the thigh.
E aquest alnessil es que conveneys a seccio e de aquels so specias latz e subtils segon la amplitut de las venas e segon la strictura de aquelas.	 This is why they prefer to phlebotomize them with thin needles and choose the small ones depending on their size and tightness.
Forma de fleubotomi mirti:	 "Puncture of the veins
sia le latz de lu ayssi cum vezes, e conveneys a obrir las venas concavas plenas procedentz apparentz grossas, e ad aquelas que conteno sanc gros torbat.	 The last sentence translates to: "open full and dilated veins are prominent and those that contain small obstructions.
E aquesta es la forma de fleubotomi olivar:	 This is the way of olive phlebotomy
E aquest fleubotomi es de menor latitut e de pus subtil extremitat, e conveneys a fleubotomia de venas subtils que conteno sanc subtil citri.	 The olive phlebotomy has less latitude and finer extremity, and is suitable for the subtler veins that contain subtle obstructions.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena basilica la qual es una de tres venas: quar extratz le sanc de las malautias que so dejos le guolayro e·l col, e de aquo que siec le pietz e·l ventre.	 The youth of the phlebotomy of the basilar vein is one of three veins - the external jugular veins that hold the malady and the esophagus/stomach, and from this which pierces the belly.
E conveneys al fleubotomador, quan fleubotomia aquela, que guarde be aquela e sia sobre-temor en aquela, quar dejos lu ha arteria, e si erra e ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi, inscidira aquela arteria e accidira fluxs de sanc, per so que cove que no fleubotomes aquela am fleubotomi pungent, abantz sia sectant cum alnessil.	 For the phlebotomist when performing this phlebotomy to hold tightly and keep calm in anticipation of that, as if there is an artery, and adjust at the puncturing of the phlebotomy incision will damage that artery and cause blood flow to stop so that it should not be performed except by a skilled phlebotomist.
E si no appar la basilica per apparicio manifesta, lahoras cove que tu laysses aquela e que tu mudes a la autre, o que cerques alcun ram sieu; o que fleubotomes en loc de lu finis del bras, quar aquela es manifesta; e secsa aquela am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit.	 If the basilar vein does not appear for a moment of manifestation, then you must take it and change to another one or search elsewhere; or perform phlebotomy on the end of your arm, where that is manifested; and seek the olive phlebotomy in such manner as we have said.
Mays si tu voles la fleubotomia de lu meteyssa, lahoras cove denant la strictura del bras que toques le loc entro que conogues le loc dels pols, e aprop senha sobre lu am tencha; e aprop lia le bras e secsa la vena am seccio concava am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit; e guarda te que caja la percussio per alcu spazi del loc de la arteria.	 When you want to perform phlebotomy on the patient, place a cushion under their legs and another one on each of their arms so that they are holding them tight; then apply pressure over the artery as shown below; and keep applying until blood comes out from the wrist.
E quan tu vezes, cum strenhes le liament, imflacio en le loc que has senhat am tencha, lahoras aquela inflacio es inflacio de la arteria, e donc squiva aquela.	 After tightening them as shown below and keeping the pressure on that spot for a while, the swelling will decrease in the artery area, so it's advisable to do this.
E si vezes le sanc fluir en la fleubotomia ayssi cum aurina de enfant, e·l sanc es subtil rog, lahoras sapias que es del sanc de la arteria; e lahoras tu coyta e pausa le tieu dit sobre aquel per lonc spazi; e aprop osta le tieu dit, e si lo sanc es abscindit, quar motas veguadas es abscindit, lahoras tu strenh le bras e layssa aquel.	 If the blood flow doesn't come out during phlebotomy as shown below and it is a sign of trouble with the artery, understand that this is an indication of problems in the artery; stop pressing on that spot for some time; if the problem persists then apply more pressure to the arm where you applied the first one.
E guardes le malaute de la moccio de lu, e sia sobre-temor de lu e no maugua aquel per alcus dias entro que sia sanat.	 Keep the patient calm and avoid making them anxious as it could cause complications if they become agitated or distressed for too long a period of time.
Mays si le sanc no es abscindit, e vezes que deves tu no es present medicina ad aquo, lahoras tu inscideys la arteria, si appar a tu; quar la extremitat de lu es contrayta, e es abscindit le sanc; o que prenguas scorsa de fistic, e fen aquela, e pren la una maytat e strenh aquela sobre le loc de la vena am strictura descent am liament e am pulvils entro al autra dia.	 If the blood flow is not returning or you suspect a problem with your technique for performing phlebotomy, then please check that there are no complications and if necessary take the patient to the next day as they will need further treatment from another doctor.
E lahoras si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, lahoras cura aquel am aquo del qual es precedit a la rememoracio del loc de las polveras abscindentz flux de sanc.	 When pain arises from the joints
E la abscizio del sanc de lu es dificil en motas disposicios per le loc petit de la plagua e la possibilitat del liament del bras.	 The incision of the joint is difficult in small spaces, and the possibility for the arm to be affected.
Mays de la vena fusca la fleubotomia es juvament que extratz lo sanc de la partida subirana del cap e a la partida dejos del cors; per aquo quar es composta de ram de la basilica e de ram de cephalica, ayssi cum havem dit.	 The swelling of the veins is commonly called phlebotomy and occurs in both areas: the neck and the chest.
E cove al fleubotomant aquela que sia sobre-temor en la fleubotomia de lu, quar dejos aquela es un nervi; e adonc si ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi e atroba le nervi, accidira a lu stupor, e es difficil la sanacio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot, E aquest nervi motas veguadas apar al sentiment; e si es ocultat ad alcus homes e es subtil e no es monstrat, lahoras cove que tu pauses le fleubotomi am le qual tu fleubotomas am seccio de alnessil, e evita le nervi am la tua fortalesa.	 The phlebotomist should perform the procedure carefully to avoid injury and prevent shock from occurring.
E si la vena es entre dos nervis, lahoras tu fen la vena en la longitut.	 If a vein is between two nerves, you'll have to cut through it.
Le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena cephalica es que atratz le sanc del cap e comfereys a las malautias dels huels.	 The current of phlebotomy on the vein in the neck is that they can cause numbness or tingling in the arms.
E cove en aquest propriament, si vols que la fleubotomes pungen am fleubotomi olivar o am fleubotomi mirti; quar es la pus salva de totas las venas, quar no es dejos lu arteria ni nervi.	 In this case, if you want the phlebotomist to perform a superficial phlebotomy or a deep phlebotomy, they must avoid all veins and arteries
Mays empero conveneys a tu deves la fleubotomia que guardes que am le fleubotomi no punguas le cap del lacert tant solament, e cerques le loc pus leugier, e no notz a lu, si no es atrobat am la percussio primieyra que sia sobre aquela am fleubotomia alcunas veguadas.	 When the patient is ready to undergo floubrophagia (throat surgery), you must ensure that they hold their breath and keep their head still only while the first incision is being made, looking for a location to lie down gently so as not to move during the procedure, unless otherwise indicated by the surgeon.
Mays empero fort leu es apostemat en alcus homes, quan no es fleubotomat en la primieyra percussio, mays no notz en re aquel apostema.	 If it is necessary to apply a tourniquet in cases of severe bleeding during throat surgery (floubrophagia), the tourniquet should be applied carefully near home and released gradually after the first incision has been made.
Mays la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquela e les accidentz de lu so motz, en les quals te cove cogitar en lor rectificacio.	 The quality of floubrophagia in that case may be considered dangerous and require a more careful approach, considering the potential complications it can bring.
Le primier de lu es del qual cove que sapias que fleubotomia no es aministrada sino en conservacio de sanetat e per speransa de lu e cautela de aveniment de malautias, e que sia fayta fleubotomia en la una de las venas que so en le coyde, so es: cephalica, fusca e basilica; e que sia fayta fleubotomia al comensament de primaveyra, sobre dejun en primaviera e autunppne, e en invern aprop la comestio, quan apparo significacios de replecio.	 The first incision that you should be aware of is in the vein closest to your face, known as the cephalic vein, subclavian vein or basilic vein; and at the very beginning of floubrophagia surgery, over a spoon full of anesthetic.
E sia fayta fleubotomia e le tertz dia o al primier pus que del jorn siran passadas tres horas.	 The third day after the first incision is usually passed three hours.
Mays fleubotomia que es aministrada, mays quan provoca convenencia e necessitat ad aquo, o de nuoyt o de dia, en tota hora e en tot temps.	 Floubrophagia may be administered at any time and in all situations where it is deemed necessary or convenient.
E cove que efant no sia fleubotomat entro que aja xiiii ans, e femna que sia prenhs no sia fleubotomada sino del quart mes entro al sete, e les viels no sian fleubotomatz les quals ja han passatz lx ans.	 When it is necessary to stretch the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery
E cum alcu vol esser fleubotomat per qualque manieyra sia, cove que mondifique les sieus budels denant la fleubotomia am clisteri leon, si en aquels ha mota fenda retenguda, per so que las venas no atiro las superfluitatz en la fleubotomia dels budels, que son puridas, e que no noguan als membres principals.	 When stretching the foot is necessary to stretch it using a pointed cautery.
E no sian fleubotomatz les pascientz naucea sacertiva e crapula, ni evasent de malautia ni de ebretat entro que aquo sia remaugut aquo de lor, ni malaute de ydropici, e mays que fleubotomia sia temuda aprop colica passio e aprop vomit, e aprop cos de ventre, e aprop multiplicacio de coyt e de trebal e de exercici de dejunis o de vigilias e de tota causa que dissolveys la vertut, o sia corpore28 o animal.	 When stretching the foot is necessary to stretch it using a pointed cautery and not be affected by any other ailment or injury that may occur during this procedure, nor be caused by hernia or droppici (ancient words for hernia), and that the gout should not come out when vomiting occurs or the stomach is upset.
E aprop considera en subtiliacio de humos denant aquo si le sanc es gros, am viandas e beures, e am medicinas si aquo es a lu possible ad aquo.	 When stretching the foot is necessary to consider the subtlety of humors when the stomach is full or drinks are taken and medications if it's possible to do so.
E aprop intre en banh si alcuna causa no prohibeys, o sia excersitat per alcun exercici per so que·l sanc sia subtiliat.	 When stretching the foot is necessary there should be no prohibition or exercise that would interfere with its subtlety.
E pausa la fleubotomia de lu en le pietz del dia, so es enviro la hora de tercia, ayssi cum havem dit.	 The procedure of stretching the foot can be done in the morning on a clear day after the third hour as previously mentioned.
E perforsa te que·l pietz de aquel sia guardat en aquel dia de totz mals accidentz animals, ayssi cum es angustia, ira, temor, e de totz accidentz corporals, ayssi cum es trebal e pena superflua e coyt e semblantz a lor.	 Ensure that the foot is kept free from all bodily accidents, pain and any other injuries, both physical and mental, to prevent swelling of the veins and so on.
E a la sua sezelha fassa esser presentz las causas en le us de la qual corr costuma dels homes am aromaticitat e odorament e am bals e semblantz ad aquels segon la cantitat de possibilitat.	 When you have opened up the patient's legs, you should place cushions underneath them and another on their chest to hold their hands in a comfortable position.
E segua le fleubotomador sobre un coyssi que sia pus aut que·l coyssi de aquel que deu esser fleubotomat.	 The phlebotomist is placing the tourniquet over one arm, on top of another that was previously used for phlebotomy.
E aprop extragua le sieu bras, e fregue aquel am la sua ma le fleubotomador doas o tres veguadas; e aprop strenha le liament am correia e involva aquel doas veguadas.	 After placing the tourniquet over one arm and removing a third bandage from it, tighten up your wrist to start the procedure.
E sia la strictura temprada, quar la strictura quant no es engual, o la strictura es am superfluitat, lahoras prohibeys de fluxs del sanc; o es am mollificacio, e lahoras prohibeys le cors del sanc eyssament.	 The temporary constriction should be applied until it is equal in strength to the normal constriction of the vessel being treated, or when it is no longer necessary. Temporary constrictions may also be used as a therapeutic measure if they are applied without causing pain and do not obstruct blood flow.
E aprop la strictura, cove que aquel que deu esser fleubotomat fregue las suas mas ensemps entre lor entro que las venas sian imfladas, e sian declaradas al sentiment.	 Tighten the tourniquet to the point where it causes swelling in the veins and is felt by the patient.
E aprop le fleubotomador unte le sieu fleubotomi am un pauc de oli antic propriament; e aprop pausa le sieu di indic de la ma senestra sobre aquela vena, dejos le loc del qual vol la fleubotomia, per que la vena fuja un pauc, e la percussio sia sessada quar de las venas es la qual atrobas ayssi cum corda fugent deves la fleubotomia, e de aquelas es que es plena de ventositat e quan pauses le fleubotomi sobre aquela es contrayta deves le fleubotomi, e es desceubut le fleubotomador; e le fleubotomi no uobre la vena, e si uobre, aquela es streyta.	 The phlebotomist applies a small amount of anti-coagulant to the tourniquet first before tightening it and placing their hand over the vein being treated in order to prevent blood from flowing out during the procedure when the vein is accessed with an incision.
E donc, per aquo cove que·l fleubotomador sia fermat e sia sollicit en totas aquestas causas.	 And therefore, because of this cautery, may be firm and solicit all these causes
E aprop depause le fleubotomi, mays si la vena es huberta en una veguada, lahoras bo es; e sino, tu itera aquo autra vaguada dejos aquel loc un pauc, o sobre lu am festinacio, si le loc no es apostemat.	 Then return the cautery and if a vein is burst in a large area, they will be; otherwise you should try another cautery or over it apply the same cautery but with less force, unless the location is open
Et si le loc es apostemat, o le malaute se spauresca, lahoras tu le layssa per un dia o per dos, e no strenha le liament, quar fort leu atirara apostema caut, ni no intre en banh.	 If the location is open or the patient becomes worse, they should apply it for one or two days and not stretch too much because hard pressure may cause an ulcer to reopen
E aprop itera la fleubotomia si la ama.	 Then apply another cautery if needed.
E si la apercio es petita e corr sanc subtilment, e temes que non yesca sanc la cantitat que voles, lahoras tu itera le fleubotomi en aquel trauc segon rectitut e ajusta en la appercio un pauc, e fay aquo am festinacio denant que·l loc sia apostemat, quar le loc es apostemat en motz homes deves pauca apercio.	 If the aperture is small and gently pressed you fear it may not give enough pressure, apply another cautery on that occasion, in addition to adjust it at the opening a little, and if the location is open make sure to leave some space between, so that when the location is open do not press too hard.
Mays si vezes aquel ja apostemat, lahoras no iteres sobre lu, quar no escusa a tu alcuna causa; e pausa sobre aquel alcuna partida de la fenda de oli, quar alleuja le cors del sanc.	 If the vein is already open then you should not repeat on top of this cause; and pause over that opening of the hole so as to prevent any additional causes; it will damage the heart's circulation.
E es milhor en aquest loc que oli e que les autres olis.	 It is better in this location compared to others.
E semblantment aministra fenda de oli en tota fleubotomia am la qual fleubotomes las venas deves la prohibicio de cors de sanc, e fan aquo tyriaca alfadoc e sagzenea quan es pausat de la una de aquelas sobre le loc, quar le sanc es subtiliat e es revolvut quan es gros.	 The cautery should be used with caution to prevent damage from breaking the veins and causes aneurysms when applied at that location where it is small and becomes unstable when large.
E si en le loc de la fleubotomia es engendrat gran apostema, quar motas veguadas accideys, e majorment ad aquel que no es stat sangnat sino aquela veguada, o en la apercio de la vena pauca, e lahoras tu coyta, e pausa sobre le loc sponja infuza en aygua e sal, un pauc scalfada, e strenh aquela per una hora, quar es dissolvut.	 "If in the area of phlebotomy a great hematoma occurs, which veins are torn apart and primarily affect those that do not bleed but only have tears or when the poor vein is found, then stop it cauterize, pause over the bleeding location, wet with water and salt, a small bandage, and hold for one hour until it dissolves.
E cove que fassa aquo aprop le yssiment del sanc de aquela vena am compliment de lu o de autra vena.	 "And do what you must to make the incision of that vein completely clean or another vein.
E si roman en le loc per alcus dias alcuna negror o viriditat, no notz aquo; e si voles, pausa sobre aquel alcuna causa de aloen e de mirra dissolvut, o alcuna causa de suc de mentastre o de calament o semblant de lu.	 "If there is no blood or green color in the area where you made an incision, do not worry; and if you want to remove any cause of bleeding, pause over it until it dissolves, or some other cause that might make one bleed more, or calm down.
E motas veguadas accideysso apostemas e eminencias deves fleubotomia de la basilica.	 "The torn veins from phlebotomy should be repaired at the basilica.
E donc pausa la tua ma sobre aquela, e si lahoras tu atrobas mollicia deves la tua compressio sobre aquela, lahoras aquela eminencia es malvada e mala; e adonc guarda te que pauses sobre aquela alcuna causa de aquo que havem dit, quar fort leu fluira de la arteria sanc.	 "Then pause your hand over that area, and if you notice a worsening compression should resume it, the pain is bad and bad; and please remember to pause over any cause of this which I mentioned before, because the blood flow from the affected artery will be very poor.
E fay emplaustre am aquo en que es stipticitat, per que le loc sia endurat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	 "And please make sure to strengthen it in such a way that the location is rigid, and apply appropriate care so that both wounds are treated.
E cove que extraguas del sanc a tot hom segon la quantitat de la sua vertut e segon la color vencent sobrc le sanc segon que appar.	 And you shall cut off all the flesh after the amount of his virtue, according to the color it has, leaving some left over so that none can miss seeing it
Quar si le sanc es negre, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia rog; e semblantment si tu le vezes gros, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia subtiliat; e semblantment si es agut, entro que sia ostada la acuitat de lu.	 If the flesh is black, you shall remove it entirely; and similarly if it is large, you shall remove it entirely; and similarly if it is sharp or bitter, to remove it completely so that its sharpness does not remain.
E cove ad aquel que es ple e fort e ha necessitat de extraccio de sanc en una veguada, que sia amplificada la fleubotomia de la vena e le fleubotomi sia lat.	 And when a vein is thick and strong and needs to be opened in a curved area, then expand the phlebotomy of the vein and the phlebotomy should go wider.
E en aquel que es freul, sia fayt le contrari de aquel, e cove que extragua aquel en tropas veguadas, e que le trauc sia streyt.	 And when it is foul or rotten, do the opposite of that; and when you wish to cut off such in various areas, then make it smooth
E le milhor que es administrat en fleubotomia de vena es que sia la seccio transversa, no punctura.	 The best phlebotomy for veins is a transverse incision, not a puncture.
E aquesta manieyra de fleubotomia es salva de flux de sanc e de inscizio de nervi, e es pus lausabla e pus salva que fleubotomia segon latitut e longitut.	 This way of phlebotomy saves the flow of flesh and injury to nerves, and is placed in such a manner that phlebotomy can be done at different latitudes and lengths.
E a la qual es acostumat sobrevenir sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e cove que tu cures aquel denant la fleubotomia am un petit de pa infus en vi de milgranas o de oximel simple scalfat; e extratz a l u del sanc en tres veguadas o quatre.	 And when accustomed to occur without stopping phlebotomy, and you cure it during phlebotomy with one stroke of the flesh and one drop of blood from a thousand granate or oximeter simple scalphat; and cut off the flesh in three areas or four.
E si es enfregiditat de compleccio, lahoras prengua denant la fleubotomia pa infus en eyssarop de mirra o en eyssarop de mel aromatizat am specias ayssi cum am pebre, canela, gingiebre e semblantz, o en eyssarop aromatizat e mot odorant.	 When the body is too cold for comfort, doctors order a lukewarm infusion of myrrh or sweet-scented meerschaum to be applied externally.
E si accideys sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e es causa de lu issiment de mot sanc, lahoras cove que prengua en beure aygua de carn e eyssarop mot odorant subtil; e use de aromaticitat am algualea, e sia linit le sieu pietz am aquela.	 If a sudden chill occurs and is the cause of the pain mentioned above, doctors order to drink warm water with a soothing infusion and apply an aromatic substance externally.
E usa de las autras causas que havem ditas en la divisio en le capitol de sincopi per evacuacio.	 Use all the other reasons given in the chapter on sudden chill, excluding their cause of evacuation.
E qui vol eventar le sieu bras e dissolver le sieu sanc segonda veguada, cove a lu del qual la fleubotomia es per mota evacuacio, e la vertut de lu es freol, que evacue le sanc petit a petit, so es segon la quantitat de la vertut en les dias continuables.	 Who wants to try the substance and dissolve their pain in the second part of the day, knowing that it is for the purpose of evacuation, but only as a way to alleviate symptoms, gradually reducing its intensity over time, which is secondary to the quantity consumed each day
Mays qui vol eventar le sieu bras, e gitar lo sieu sanc segonda vetz, e le sieu cors es fort, lahoras fassa aquo aprop vii horas o ix de la primieyra fleubotomia.	 If someone wants to try the substance and dissolve their pain in the second part of the day, and their chest is strong, doctors suggest doing so immediately after the first application.
Mays qui vol atirar le sanc del cors sieu al contrari de la partida a la qual declina, cove que sia eventat en le segon dia o le tertz.	 If someone wants to try and alleviate chest pain contrary to what they did on their previous day or third day, doctors suggest doing so the second day or third day.
Mays aquel cors en le qual es mot sanc ja scalfat e es acuit e fa accidir febre, cove que sia gitat de lu sanc en una veguada e sia de lu gitada gran cantitat e sia amplificada la apercio entro que accidesca sincopi, pus que tu auras conservadas totas las condicios de fleubotomia; e que pauses la tua ma sobre le pols de lu deves le cors del sanc, per que no endevengua mort en loc de sincopi, quar motas veguadas endeve aquo quan le fleubotomador es ignorant e negligent.	 If the chest pain is already weakened and intense and accompanied by fever, then you should apply it to a single day with a large quantity and amplify its effect so that symptoms of gout appear in the next few days. And always keep your hand over the area to prevent death due to sudden chill, unless the poultice maker is knowledgeable or negligent.
E no cove quan tu voles desliar le bras e evacua le sanc segonda veguada, cum ja sia claus le orrifici de la vena e sia fayt difficil issiment del sanc, que tu premas subre aquel am vehemencia e encurvat sia extendut leugierament, quar aquo es trop mal.	 When you want to heal the second branch and vein separately, already close off the first major veins and it is difficult task because it requires great effort and may cause swelling of the arm.
Habantz le layssa entro que sia fleubotomat segondament; o remau aquo am la acuitat del fleubotomi que es coagulat del sanc en le orrifici de la vena; o pausa sobre aquel de tyriaca alfarach, o de sagzenea, e comprem aquel am compressio leugiera entro que·l sanc sia fora yssit.	 After you have opened the second branch and vein separately, then seal off the first major veins in order to prevent the bleeding from entering them; or place a cushion over that part of the arm to absorb it if it does happen.
E si la vena es apostemada, lahoras layssa aquela e no la toques entro que·l apostema sia sedat.	 If the vein is sealed off, then seal off that one and do not touch it in order to prevent it from sealing up any further.
E si necessitat te provoca a evacuar le sanc segondament, e no es excusacio, lahoras tu sagna aquel sobre aquel loc o en l’autre bras en autra vena.	 If you need to evacuate the second vein and it is not an excuse, then seal off that one over another location or in another vein.
E la vena apelada “funis del bras” es fleubotomada en loc de la fusca o de la basilica, quan no so atrobadas o so amaguadas, quar es composta de aquelas.	 The sealed off vein is located in the arm or the basilica when they are not closed off properly, which is made up of those.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intrometa la sua ma en aygua cauda entro que·l focil se enrogezesca e que la vena apparia manifestament.	 The quality of the phlebotomy is that the patient introduces their hand into the injured part and causes bleeding, which makes it clear to see
E aprop sia strengut sobre aquel am liament am strictura migana; e aprop fleubotoma segon le tranvers petit, no latitudinalment ni segon la longitut.	 Then secure it with a band around that limb and do not make the phlebotomy second to another vein transversely or longitudinally, but rather vertically.
E sia la apercio ampla e sia la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas aquela sobre la junctura de la ma un petit.	 The first sentence translates to: When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and when pain occurs in the feet.
E si es prohibit le fluxs del sanc, lahoras tu itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e layssa le sanc correr en la aygua entro que consieguas la tua necessitat.	 The sentence translates to: If you block the flow of blood, then apply pressure with your hand on the site where pain occurs in water and hold it until the doctor's need is met.
Mays si tu eras en les dias d’estiu, lahoras tu yest excusat de la iteracio de la ma en l’aygua cauda, e le mes es pausat le cors del sanc en aygua cauda en temps de yvern.	 The sentence translates to: If you are in the hot days of summer, then excuse yourself from applying pressure on the foot with water, and wait for a break as long as possible until dawn breaks.
E la fleubotomia de aquesta vena es pus salva que de totas las autras venas, quar dejos lu no ha vena pulsatil, ni nervi.	 The sentence translates to: The phlebotomy of this vein is performed safely when all the other veins are present, as long as there is no pulsating vein or nerve.
E la fleubotomia de la savatella de la ma dreyta es conferent a las malautias del fetge.	 The sentence translates to: Phlebotomy of the left arm's vein should be performed in conjunction with the patient's leg veins.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que tu strenguas la ma am liament o am la tua ma, pus que tu l’as mesa en ayga cauda, entro que la vena sia imflada e sia be demostrada al vezement; e aprop fleubotoma aquela transversan; e si inscidas aquela de tot no nozera aquo en re.	 The sentence translates to: The quality of the phlebotomy is that you should hold your hand firmly or press it against the patient's hand, unless water is poured over the vein and its inflation confirmed at once; then you perform a transverse phlebotomy; if the latter was not successful in this case.
E conserve que no ultimes la tua ma am la fleubotomi, quar dejos lu so les nervis dels ditz denudatz de carn.	 The sentence translates to: Always keep your hand off the patient's body during phlebotomy, as any further pressure on these nerves may cause damage to the skin.
E aprop itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e laysse correr le sanc en aquela, quar si tu no iteras aquela en l’aygua cauda, le sanc sira coagulat en lo orrifici de la vena, e es prohibit de flux.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, do points on the surface of the foot to make a pointed cautery
E cum es extrayt le sanc segon la quantitat de necessitat, lahoras tu pausa sobre la vena oli e sal, per que no sia consolidada coytadament; e semblantment cove que tu fassas en tot ram streyt.	 After determining the extent of necessity, you should then place a cushion under their thighs and another on their legs to prevent the intestine from coming out.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de aquela de la ma senestra, es que es conferent a las malautias de la melsa.	 It's important for the first assistant to be trained in phlebotomy and also attend to any injuries or wounds that may occur during the procedure.
E fay semblantment en la fleubotomia de lu ayssi cum has fayt en l’autra.	 Do so similarly when performing phlebotomy as you have done with the other patient.
E le juvament de la vena sephena de la fleubotomia es a las malautias que so en la partida dejos del cos, ayssi cum so malautias de la mayre, e a retencio de mestruas, et a las malautias dels ronhos e ulceracios de coyssas e de cambas antiquas, e a lor semblantz de las malautias.	 The assistant should also be trained in venipuncture and attend to any injuries or wounds that may occur during the procedure as well.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute entrometa lo sieu pe en aygua cauda e fassa sobre aquel fricacio entro que be apparen las venas; e lia sobre la junctura del pe am correia; e le loc de la vena le talo apparent deves le dit pous, e de aquela so ramificatz en la facia del pe motz ramps.	 The quality of the phlebotomy is that it makes the patient feel pain in their feet and causes them to press down on the puncture site; it also presses against the junction between the foot and leg, causing swelling and damage in the vein's location.
E donc fleubotoma le pus ample ram o dejos la camba deves le talo deves la agreguacio de lu, quar es milhor e pus sal.	 The phlebotomy should be performed as gently as possible to prevent further complications or damage to the vein, as this is crucial and extremely important.
E si fleubotomas aquela en la facia del pe, lahoras tu te guarda dels nervis que so dejos aquela sobre la facia del pe, e pausa la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas per le travers, quays cum si tu la volias inscidir.	 "When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout.
E sia le fleubotomi vosil.	 You have already opened up the space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
Mays si es prohibit le issiment del sanc; lahoras tu itera le pe de lu en l’aygua cauda e layssa correr le sanc en aquela entro que sia evacuat.	 If the obstruction is great, you will apply a poultice made of wine vinegar to the area and let the obstruction flow out as long as the obstruction continues inside that way.
E si le fleubotomador erra en la primieyra veguada, lahoras itera am le fleubotomi en sus un pauc, quar le loc es sal; e no temes de lu malician, mays que te guardes dels nervis ayssi cum havem dit.	 If the phlebotomist errs in making a small incision on their first attempt, you will repeat it and put them down gently as I've just mentioned.
E semblantment fay de la sophena del autre pe engualment.	 And similarly apply poultice to the other foot as well.
E de la vena sciatica, le loc ayssi cum havem dit es deves le talo dejos la cavilha de la partida silvestra.	 From the sciatica vein, put it in the hollow of the wild thigh.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de lu es a dolo de anca quan es per sanc caut.	 The youth of phlebotomy is to make incisions as slowly and carefully as possible when causing a bleed.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intre en banh, e festine e strenha la cueyssa de lu del latz de la ancha entro desus le talo desus quatre ditz an una benda longua subtil, quar no appar sino per aquo.	 The quality of phlebotomy is that the patient enters into a trance, and it becomes increasingly difficult to open their veins as you get closer to the four points on one's hand which are very thin, making it difficult for anyone else but the professional phlebotomist to do so.
E donc quan appar, lahoras tu fleubotoma aquela segon cascun engen que es a tu possible e segon le tranvers, e es milhor; o inscidas aquela per inscizio o secces aquela per seccio, quar le loc de lu es sal.	 "When you arrive, the doctor will examine your abdomen thoroughly and then proceed to the back.
E ela es en motz homes mot ameguada; e si atrobas aquela, e no appar al sentiment de tot, lahoras fleubotoma alcun ram de lu, e es aquel que appar en le dos del pe enves le dit auricular e le anular.	 "The doctor will then examine both ears thoroughly and proceed to the nose.
E guarda te dels nervis, e fay correr del sanc la quantitat que voles.	 "Keep your nerves calm while we make a small incision in order to remove it.
E aprop deslia la strictura e pausa sobre le loc de la fleubotomia coto e strenh le loc, quar leugierament es sanat.	 "Then proceed with the tracheotomy procedure and hold pressure on the area to prevent bleeding.
De ventozacio e de las qualitatz de uzar de aquelas.	 "Please use gloves when handling these items.
Ventozas so de corns, o de eram, o de veyre.	 "These are the various types of tools used in such procedures.
E ventozacio es fayta segon doas manieyras: la una de lor es am scarificacio e extracio de sanc, e l’autra es ventozacio ses scarificacio.	 "The first one is for making incisions and removing sutures, the other is used to make small cuts.
E aquesta ventozacio que es ses scarificacio es segon doas manieyras, quar o es am foc o ses foc.	 "This second type of tool that makes small cuts can be used either for making focus or foci.
E a las ventozas que so administradas am scarificacio e extraccio de sanc son xiiii locs del cors, dels quals la un en lo qual so pausadas ventozas es alnocrati, e es la deriera partida del cap; e le mieg loc d’el de doas partz del col ensemp; e ventozas del mento dejos la mandibula pus dejos de la boca; e ventozas de doas spatulas; e ventozas de alohoster, e es sobre la fi de la coeta; e ventozas de dos focils, e so de dos brasses; e ventozas de doas cavilhas; e ventozas de doas cuoyssas.	 "The tools that are used for incision and suture removal have locations in various parts of the body: one is on the forehead, another on the chest; also between the eyes and nose, mouth and cheeks; below the chin; at the base of the skull; behind each ear; between two fingers; above both ears, each with its own brass; above both nostrils; and behind the sternum.
E ventozacio no extratz le sanc sino de las venas menudas sparssas en la carn, e per aquo no catz la vertut per aquelas, ayssi cum es cazement per fleubotomia; ni no cove que ventozacio sia fayta am foc o ses foc en alcuna malautia fayta per replecio entro que le cors tot sia evacuat.	 The first sentence translates to: "Do not extend the incision beyond the smallest veins in the flesh, and for this reason do not allow blood clots to form.
Mays si necessitat provoca a ventozacio per malautia o per continua, aministrem aquela en tota hora al comensament del mes e en la fi de lu, e en le mieg loc de lu e en qualque temps sia.	 If it is necessary to make an incision for illness or as a continuous treatment, we will perform the operation at the beginning of each month and at its end until such times come that no longer need this.
La qual causa es quar dels homes es en les quals es sanc multiplicat entro que indigeys de extraccio de lu per ventozacio e atroba en le sieu cap graveza e soda; e de aquels es que atroba replecio e rogor en la sua cara e en le sieu cap, e en le sieu col; e de aquels es que atroba pruziment en la sua cara e en le sieu front e tenebrositat e hebetut en les sieus huels; e de aquels que gieta le loc de la sua ventozacio; e de aquels es que le lor ris es multiplicat; e de aquels es que atroba gustament de sanc en la sua boca, o que la lengua es apostemada e escup sanc; e de aquels es que lor dormir es multiplicat, e de aquels que vetz sanc en lo dormir rogor e antics e plaguas e autras causas a lor semblantz.	 The reason for this is that the incision multiplies inside and causes severe pain in the head, causing redness to spread from it all over, leading to extreme headache, intense throbbing pain, itching, and various other symptoms of illness affecting their face, chest, and hands; and finally that they become sleepy during sleep.
E donc quan vezes en alcuna causa de aquelas, e propriament si es en le tertz o miga del mes, lahoras comandam ventozacio esser fayta pus que so passadas del dia dos o tres horas.	 Then when there are no other reasons to do this, and especially if it is on the third or middle of a month, doctors order that the incision be made promptly within three or four hours after it has been done.
E juvament de ventozacio de la nuca es que quan aquela confereys a gravitat en le cap e ad aquo que es efondit als huels; mays cove que aquo sia aprop evacuacio de tot le cors.	 The reason for an incision in the neck is to reduce the swelling of the head and allow the rest of the body to breathe more easily, so that this operation should be performed as soon as possible to remove all fluid from the chest.
E aquesta ventoza es en le loc de fleubotomia de la cephalica.	 In this location of cephalic phlebotomy
E no es legut que use de lu aquel que es de frega complecio, o en le qual es catarr, quar dona ad aquel gran nocument.	 It is not recommended to use that which causes complication, or in the area where it can cause a great discharge.
E per aquo no cove que uso de aquela les vielhs, e en les caps dels quals so malautias frejas.	 It's also not advisable to use those things that cause harm to the lips and the corners of the mouth.
Mays ad aquel que sobre aquela es continuant sobre lu es fayta oblivio; e per aquo cove que tu comandes al ventozador que depause la sua ma un petit am la ventosa a las partidas dejos, temen de la generacio de oblivio.	 You should also order the phlebotomist to pause your hand slightly in front of the vein's opening, in order to prevent the formation of an abscess.
Mays ventozacio de alkehel es en loc de fleubotomia de la vena fusca e de la basilica: e per aquo confereys a asma, e a la constriccio de ale e a la scissura del sturment de ale, e a tos, e a replecio.	 The phlebotomy should be done in the area of the femoral vein and the basilica: and by doing this, you can prevent swelling, constriction of veins, fissures on the skin, tearing, and bruising.
E cove que sia enpellida la ventoza alkehel un petit, quar si es pausada dejos, engendra debilitat en le cors e en le stomac.	 You should keep the phlebotomy slightly open to prevent dizziness, which may occur if it is paused for a long time, and can lead to weakness in the body and stomach.
E la ventozacio de alhagdahan confereys a las dolors accident en le cap e a obtalmia, e emigranea, e prefocacio, e a dolors en las razitz de las dentz; e es en loc de fleubotomia de la basiliqua.	 The phlebotomy can lead to head pain and eye problems, blindness in one eye, redness of the face, pain on the teeth, and pain on the corners of the mouth: it is done in the area of the basilica.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que no prema la sua ma am scarificacio per que no inscida la arteria e accida fluxs de sanc.	 You should order the phlebotomist to not apply pressure on their hand, so that they don't obstruct blood flow and cause issues with it.
E ventozacio dejos le mento comfereys a alcola en la boca, e a corrupcio de la gingiva, e a semblantz a lor de las malautias que so en la boca, e stan en loc de fleubotomia de aliheric que so en las doas labias.	 The doctor inserts the tongue into the patient's mouth and probes for inflammation of the gums, examines their throat for any sores or lesions that may be present in the mouth, and checks the location of the tonsils which are located at the back of the throat
Mays la ventozacio que es fayta sobre las doas spatulas confereys a caphatan, le qual es fayt per replecio de caliditat.	 The doctor performs this test to check for inflammation between the two tonsils and the palate, which is done by inserting the tongue
E la ventosacio de las doas partidas dedintz dels focils confereys juvament de la fleubotomia de tres venas, so es de la basilica, fusca e cephalica, quar aquela atratz le sanc de totas aquelas venas pus manudas que so en la carn, e aquelas venas menudas de las autras venas pus grossas entro que pervengua la atraccio a las tres venas.	 The doctor checks the three veins in order: basilica, fusca and cephalica. He will check for any swelling or blockage in these veins that may prevent blood from flowing to other areas of the body.
E comanda al ventozador que trop no procezesca en scarificacio, quar le loc es denudat de carn, e dejos lu so nervis e arterias.	 The tongue depressor should not cause any cuts or punctures in the patient's flesh and should be removed after every use.
E es una ventoza am la qual es ventozat sobre alshosses e confereys a las emorroydas del cul e a las ulceracios pus dejos.	 The test checks for any inflammation in the anus, hemorrhoids, and anal ulcers.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que sia gran ventoza, e que sia de eram, quar le loc indigeys de fort seccio; e fort leu so traucadas ventozas subtils e sia scarificat am scarificacio.	 The tongue depressor should be gentle and not cause any cuts or punctures as the location is sensitive.
Mays ventozas de las cambas minueysso per minuicio manifesta, quar atiran le sanc de tot le cors, e comfereysso a dolors antiquas dels ronhos e de la mayre, e de la vesica; e provocan las mestruas, e comfereysso a bothor e ademil; e stan en loc de fleubotomia de doas sophenas, e alahorcoben, e de doas cavilhas.	 The test checks for any inflammation of the calves and toes, old or new sores in the mouth and throat, vesica (bladder), breasts, and other sensitive areas.
Enpero mot debelitan tot le cors e fan accidir sincopi en motz homes.	 "The entire body has been cut open without hesitation in one motion.
E de las ventozas alahorcoben le juvament es propda al juvament a las ventozas de doas cambas.	 "Cut off the old veins and attach new ones to both legs.
E la qualitat de la posicio de las ventozas es que pauses la ventoza al comensament vueda e sucguas per succio temprada, e no prolongues la posicio de las ventozas, mays pausa aquelas leugierament, e reman aquelas coytadament, e que las humors venguan al loc per adveniment engual.	 "The position of the veins is that you should remove them from the beginning and clip them immediately with a swift motion to prevent any delay or obstruction in their removal, so as to leave no doubt about it, making sure they are well removed, and allowing the fluids to flow freely through the location.
E no cesses iterar aquo e continuar entro que veja le loc ja enrojezir e inflar e que appara la rogor del sanc.	 "Do not repeat this step if you see that it has already caused a bruise or swelling, and proceed to the next step as soon as possible.
E lahoras tu scarifiqua e itera la succio pauc a pauc, e aprop considera en la dispozicio dels cors.	 "The physician should gently remove the bandage and repeat the suction slowly and gradually, paying close attention to the body's position.
Quar aquel home que es de tendra carn de rars pors, cove que tu le scarifiques una veguada e no pus, per que le loc no sia ulcerat.	 "When treating someone with hardened flesh that is not used to pain, you should gently remove the bandage and do it slowly without pus, so as to avoid making the location ulcerated.
E comanda al ventozador que amplifique la scarificacio e pronde un pauc, e atempre la succio am facilitat.	 "Order the phlebotomist to accelerate the suction and proceed one step at a time, always maintaining ease in movement.
E si en le sanc es grossitut, lahoras cove que scarifiques doas veguadas, quar en la primieyra veguada es uberta la via de subtiliacio al sanc e a la aquositat de lu.	 "If the wound is deep, you should remove two bandages at once, so that the first one closes tightly to the injury and gently applies pressure on it.
Mays en la segunda a la perscrutacio aquisida de la extraccio del sanc gros.	 In the second part of the medical procedure, you should make an incision to open up the main artery.
E si le sanc es mot feculent, lahoras sia fayta scarificacio la tersa veguada per que consiegua le derier.	 If the vein is clogged, doctors will perform a small incision on its surface in order to release it and make it better.
E derierament, quan volem extrayre le sanc pauc a pauc o un petit, abasta a nos una scarificacio.	 Furthermore, when you want to extract the artery gradually or by parts, cut off part of its surface.
E si volem extraccio de mot sanc, scarificam am mota scarificacio; e si nos conoyssem que·l sanc es gros, lahoras cove que scarifiquem per scarificacio preonda.	 If you want to extract a large artery, cut off more of its surface; and if we suppose that the artery is big, doctors will make incisions progressively larger.
E le terme de scarificacio en la qual es la profunditat de la codena tant solament.	 The term for incision refers to the depth of the cavity as well.
E si aquel del qual la codena es grossa, dura, fusca, e les sieus pors so streytz, cove que les locs de las ventosas sian untatz lenitius, apertius resolutius; si es en temps d’estiu, ayssi cum es oli de aloen o oli de violat, o oli de amellas dossas, o oli de cemensa de coja; e si es en temps ivern, lahoras oli narci, o oli de liri, o oli de camamilla, o de sanc, e ad aquels semblantz.	 If the vein is thick and hard to extract, you should apply pressure over it with your fingers, or try to pierce it with a needle; if it's in summer, use a sharp stone or a blunt one for piercing; and if it's winter, doctors will use snow or ice to pierce it.
E si la superfluitat es grossa, freja, lahoras le oli sia amaranti, o oli de balsamita, o oli de aloen, o oli aneti, e a lor semblantz.	 If the surplus is thick and slippery, doctors will use strong alcohol or vinegar to extract it; if there's frost, they can apply ice or snow; otherwise, you should try to pierce it with a needle.
Mays si le ventozador es de amples pors de tendra carn, lahoras cove que sia prohibit de oli, e cove que ad aquest les locs de ventozas de lor aprop la ventozacio sian lavatz am ayguaros o am aygua freja de solatrum, o am aygua de coja, o am aygua de bordolaguas, e semblantz ad aquelas.	 If the artery is very narrow and tough, doctors will prohibit the use of alcohol or ice; instead, they should apply warm water on it to make it more flexible so that the incision can be made gently, or cold water for veins, or hot water mixed with vinegar, according to their choice.
E aquel del qual le sanc es de mota humiditat, lava las suas ventozas am vi agre, o am aygua de mirt e sumac e semblant ad aquels.	 When a person has a cold from moisture, let them breathe in fresh air or moist air with salt and vinegar.
E de aquel del qual las superfluitatz son grossas, lava las suas ventozas am vi antic, o am aygua de sansuc, que es majorana, o de decoccio de anet, o de camamilla, e a lor semblantz.	 For someone with thick humors or phlegm in their lungs, let them breathe in dry air to improve their condition.
E cove que la ventozacio sia guardada denant de banh; habantz cove que sia aministrada aprop issiment del banh per una hora o per doas, e cove que dorma aprop la ventozacio.	 Keep the breathing tube in place until it is removed by a doctor or nurse for one hour to two hours, and cover the patient's mouth with gauze if they cannot speak properly.
Quid est quo oportet ut regatur ventosandus aus phlebotomatus ante ventosationem.	 What should be done before ventilation is started?
Cove que consideras al comensament: lahoras si le ventozador o aquel que·s deu fleubotomar es coleric e ventz sobre lu sanc agut e imflamacio, lahoras cove que prengua causas infrigidantz, ayssi cum milgranas acetosas, e endivia an vi agre e laytuguas, e secanabin, e julep, e a lor semblantz.	 Before starting ventilation, consider whether the ventilator or the person who will perform phlebitis and inflammation should be used to prevent causes of cold injury, such as ice water, hot towels, etc.
E pausa a lor viandas ayssi cum poletz, e carns de auzels serbiges, e viandas conditas am agras, e a lu semblantz.	 Cover the patient's airway with paper or cloth and secure it in place.
E de aquel del qual la compleccio es freja, cove que prengua en beure eyssarop almiva, o eyssarop de alsecanabin de semensas, e sumac, e vi mot odorant migier entre viel et noel; e que a lu sia comendat que use de paucitat de beure e de mangar, e pausa las viandas de lu poletz e canabir e pissers e petitz auzels e colombat.	 For someone with hypothermia, have them drink warm liquids such as apple cider vinegar and honey to bring their temperature up, and place the patient in a cold room or area and cover them with blankets to prevent further loss of heat.
E cove que en lo dia de ventozacio e de fleubotomia le beure sia major que la vianda.	 On the day of amputation and phlebotomy, drinking should be more than usual
E cove que sia donat en beure en alcunas horas ad alcus homes tyriaca alpharac, o medicamentz de musc, so es muscada, o alcelita denant la ventozacio o denant fleubotomia o aprop, per so que·ls membres principals sian confortatz e que·l sanc sia subtiliat; e no cove que prenguan aquela scalfatz.	 On the day of amputation and phlebotomy, or when administering a medication that causes muscle pain, swelling, or allergic reactions related to the operation or phlebotomy, ensure that the main members are comfortable and the wound is treated as gently as possible; do not apply excessive pressure on the area.
Mays las ventozas que so ses scarificacio sian ventozas que so pausadas sus le fetge, e sobre la melsa e podagra, e sobre le umbelic, en les locs dels jonolhs, e la pixida del ancha, quar aquestz membres no suffertan scarificacio sobre si.	 On the days after surgery when wounds are closed and sutures remain open or if pain persists despite taking painkillers, be sure to check for swelling of the affected joints, ankles, and feet; take care of any blistering that may appear on the margins of the wound; avoid applying excessive pressure on these parts.
E no es querit per aquelas sino atraccio de sanc de membre, ayssi cum pausam ventosa sobre mamilha en malautia de flux de sanc del sanc de las nars; e usam de aquela per que sia dissolvuda ventositat freja inviscade del membre, ayssi cum pausam sobre le ventre e l’umbelic; quar aquela rarifique le membre e scalfa lu e ramau la dolor quar resolveys ventositat.	 Do not apply pressure to the affected member or if there is any bleeding from a wound or ulcer in the nose, gently massage the belly and umbilicus to dissolve the pain caused by gout; do avoid applying excessive pressure on these areas so as not to make them worse and cause further discomfort.
E ja es pausada sobre les ronhos quan accideys en lor opilacio o poyra, quar per vertut de atraccio fort leu huobre opilacio e erradica le poyra de son loc.	 When pain occurs in the lungs or chest after eating fatty foods or spicy food, gently massage and remove phlegm from its location.
E semblantment fa quan es pausada sobre le fetge e la melsa deves ventositat en aquels enclausa.	 Similarly, when pain occurs in the wound and chest area after surgery, treat it as gently as possible.
E aquestas ventozas so administradas vuedas amb succio tant solament; e alcunas veguadas so administradas am foc.	 When these blisters are treated with pus only, some of them are cured by fire
E alcunas veguadas so administradas plenas de aygua tebeza en las malautias de la melsa.	 Some of the blisters are cured with full water injections in the small veins of the legs.
E aquo es per que la ventoza sia umplida e sia pus gran, so es aygua cauda sola o aygua en la qual sian cuytas herbas ad aquo convenientz.	 This is why it happens that when a wound becomes full and infected with pus alone, water may be used separately or in combination with other remedies to alleviate the pain.
Forma de ventoza aministrada am foc: sia la amplitud del orrifici de dos ditz, segon que nos la havem formada; e la quantitat del preon sia la maytat de un palm; e sia en lo latz de lu, en le loc que es en le circuit, la maytat de lu, le trauc sia petit segon la quantitat que intre en lu una agulha.	 The method of treating blisters with fire: first, measure the circumference of the blister as accurately as possible; second, determine the amount of preon that is needed to fill it completely; and third, in order to ensure even application over a larger area, spread out the preon thinly on an object nearby.
Sia fayta de eram rog o citri, de grosses marges, leon, enguals e terses per so que no leda le membre deves la sua posicio sobre lu.	 When using a cautery for pain, ensure that it does not lead to the member losing its position on the body.
E sia al mieg de lu vergua transversa de eram o de ferr, on es pausada candela am lo foc.	 If you are making transverse incisions with a cautery or fire, pause the flame when cutting.
E ja sia aquesta ventoza gran major de aquela la qual havem recomtat; e la pauca mendre de aquela segon las malautias e la etat de aquel que usa de aquela.	 If this wound is larger than what we recommended, and the pain moderate in comparison to other wounds, use it as prescribed.
E las ventosas dels efantz e extenuatz so autres que las ventozas dels joves e de grosses corssas.	 The blisters of experts and novices are different; they may come from different causes.
E la qualitat de pausar aquesta ventoza am foc sobre le membre es que extenda la meca am foc de lenha decentment denant una pauca candela de cera, e pausa aquela sobre le mieg de la vergua transversa en le mieg loc de la ventoza, per que le foc sia accendut enviro la partida dejos per que no sia comburit le cors del malaute.	 The quality of stopping a cautery over the body part is to extend it with less heat until only one small candle from wax is lit and then pause it on the wound area, to prevent burning the patient's skin
E aprop sia pausada sobre le membre del malaute, e le dit sia sobre le trauc que havem dit, entro que quan tenem las ventozas e non indigem que osten le dit e que yesca la vapor sobre aquel trauc, lahoras la ventoza sira tantost dissolvuda.	 When the wind is calm and there is no indication that it will become strong again in the near future, disperse the gout with gentle winds.
E prop igneys la meca segon la sua manieyra, e itera aquela si indigeyssas de aquela.	 Put gently on top of your hand, and repeat this until you feel that way.
Mays en ventosa que es aministrada en la malautia de plauressi, am aygua, en la qual no ha vergua transversa ni trauc, e no es aministrada sino que sia umplida de aygua, e es pausada sobre le membre tant solament.	 When the wind is blowing gently and without any indication that it will become strong again in the near future, disperse the gout with gentle winds only on top of your hand.
E aquesta es la forma de lu: E aquesta ventoza quant plus es gran, tant es milhor, per que puya recebre gran quantitat de aygua.	 This is how it goes: And as wind gets stronger, the more powerful it becomes, because you have to receive a greater quantity of water.
Capitol .xcvii.	 Chapter 72.
Sanguissuguas no so administradas en motz membres sino en les membres en les quals non es possible posicio de ventosas, per la parvitat de aquels, ayssi cum le pot e gingiva e semblantz a lor; o en membre denudat de carn, ayssi cum le dit e·l nas e lors semblantz.	 The gout is not administered to the limbs themselves but in those parts where wind could be applied without causing harm due to their fragility, such as the nose and ears, or in a member of flesh that is sensitive like the finger; so too with the saying it and its location similar to them.
E la qualitat de usar de aquelas que si has trobadas sanguisugas que so en las ayguas dossas de poyredura mundas.	 The quality of using those who have found gout in waters that are particularly good for preventing coldness is used.
E aprop sian layssadas le dia e la nueyt en aygua dossa entro que sian famolentas, e que no romangua alcuna causa en le ventre de aquelas; e aprop sia evacuat le cors en le comensament am fleubotomia e am ventozas; e aprop fregua le membre del malaute entro que s’enrojezesca; e aprop sian pausadas sobre lu.	 Then, in water that is particularly good for preventing coldness and does not cause any harm inside the abdomen, apply it to the chest at first with a cautery, and apply it to the parts of the body one by one, until you reach them all; then place a cushion on top.
E cum son umplidas e caso.	 When the urine has entered
E si es possible succio del loc am ventoza, es mays derier en juvament.	 If it is possible to open up this area of the body, they may be cured in youth.
E sino, lahoras lava le loc am vi agre e aprop am mota aygua; e sia freguat e expremut.	 If not, then wash off the affected area and apply cold water.
E si es prolonguat le cors del sanc aprop le cazement de las sanguissuguas, e es aquo resudan, lahoras tu enfon un drap de li en aygua freja, e pausa aquel de sobre entro que sia abdida la resudacio.	 If the swelling of the veins in this area is prolonged and painful then apply a compress soaked with cold water to it, and remove that one from over as soon as its effect has worn off
E si le sanc es multiplicat, lahoras polveriza sobre lu vitriol trissat, o guallas e semblantz a lor de las causas stipticas, entro que·l sanc sia abscidit; o sian pausadas sobre le loc las maytatz de favas excocicadas, e sian layssadas entro que las favas aderescan al loc, e es le sanc abscidit.	 If the swelling becomes excessive then apply a compress soaked with acidulated vinegar or seek out its underlying causes, until it is cured; otherwise remove all the poultices that have been applied and check if the ailment has gone away.
E cove, si es necessaria, iteracio de sanguissuguas, quan es possible mudar aquelas.	 And if necessary, an incision should be made to drain the blood when it is possible change those.
E si las sanguissuguas son prohibidas de suspenssio, lahoras sia freguat le loc am sanc recent o fique una agulha en les locs entro que yesca sanc; e aprop sian pausadas, quar aquelas quan sento alcun sanc tantost adarysso.	 If the veins are prohibited from flowing then wash off the affected area or place a needle in the affected areas until it hurts any longer.
E quan voles que cajan, polveriza sobre aquelas un pauc de aloen trissat, o sal, o cendre, e cazo tantost.	 When you want to drain off them then sprinkle some of the burnt salt or alum onto it and apply pressure
Ayssi comensa lo prolec de la tersa partida: de restauracio.	 The beginning of the solution is restoration.
Aquest capitol es motas veguadas necessari en la art de medicina; e es restauracio de fractura e de dislocacio accident en les osses.	 This capital refers to the necessary healing arts in medicine, its restoration of fractures and dislocations accidents in bones
O, filh, sapiatz que jactan se de aquest capitol les fols metges e les vulguars e aquels que degun temps no reguardero les libres dels Antics ni legiro de aquels una letra.	 Oh, son, I tell you that the physicians and pharmacists mentioned in this chapter are those who disregarded the freedoms of ancient times or were bound by laws from then
E per aquesta causa es fayt que aquesta manieyra dels scients in terra nostra es privat; e yeu no ho e obliat en aquo degun temps be de tot; e no he adhibit aquo que apres, sino per longitut de lectio dels libres dels Antics e studi sobre le entendement de aquels, entro que extrayssi la sciencia de aquels.	 Therefore, it is customary that the pursuit of science in our land be private; and you are not obliged to do so during these times unless you want to become a scholar of ancient times or study about their understanding, which leads one into the art of those sciences
E aprop adirigui a experiment e studi en la longitut de la mieua vida.	 I will devote myself to experiments and studies in the length of my life.
E yeu ja he de aquo descrit en aquest capitol tot aquo que conte la mieua sciencia e sobre le qual es passat lo mieu experiment; pus que agui abreujat aquo a vos autres e deliuregui aquo de occupacio de elonguacio; e abreujegui aquo en la fi de abreujacio; et e monstrat aquo en la fi de declaracio; e formegui en aquo motas formas dels sturmentz que so administratz en aquel, cum es fayt per addicio de declaracio, ayssi cum he fayt en dos capitols precedentz.	 I will describe in this chapter everything about my science and what experiments have been made; how much the best experiment was conducted; explain that I am doing it for you and delivering it to occupy time; and show it at the end of delivery; and present it at the end of declaration, just as I presented the forms of administration used in those chapters which were added by this addition.
Capitol primier.	 First capital
Summae et collectiones ex esse fracturae ossium, ex eis quarum praemissio necessaria est, antequam incipiamus rememorationem membrorum fraftorum et diversorum si uniuscuiusque.	 I will first describe and collect the fractures of bones from those which have been released to us as necessary before we begin the account of members or different ones.
Cove donc que diguam en le prohemi de aquest capitol las summas del sermo; e les capitols al entendament dels quals en le comensament es forsat le artifexs e a stacio sobre la veritat de aquels; so es vos e aquels que so promptz que sapian o aprenguan aquesta art nobla autres de vos.	 When you have finished reading the first sentence, translate it as follows: "Henceforth from this chapter onwards, we shall describe and explain the different arts and their uses; for each one of these is necessary to be learned by those who wish to know or learn about this noble art.
E donc dic que quan accideys a alcu fractura o dislocacio o torcio o cazement, lahoras cove que tu te coytes al comensament am fleubotomia o aleyar aquel, o quascu ensemps, si no prohibeys alcuna causa, ayssi cum debelitat de vertut, o es aquel al qual accideys effant, o viel en decrepitat, o es temps de vehement calor, o de vehement freg.	 "When a fracture or dislocation or sprain occurs in any part of the body, whether due to blunt trauma or sharp injury, without any other cause, then that is an emergency and you should seek medical help immediately.
E aprop sia content en vianda sieua de erbas frejas e de carns de auzels e de crabotz; e prohibem carns grossas e umplir si de viandas e de tota vianda que umple las venas de sanc, entro que siras segurat de apostema caut, e si no temes efusio de materia al membre.	 "Then take care of the joints' fractures and sprains; avoid excessive intake of salt and sugars, as well as filling the veins with them, so that you keep your blood pure, and avoid the effusion of material into a member.
E lahoras retorne le malaute al sieu regiment primier am le qual corr costuma de lu.	 "Then return the patient to their usual diet first.
E donc cum le os trencat comensa esser restaurat, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia pascut de viandas nutritivas de nutriment mot e gros e greu en les quals sia viscositat, ayssi cum so viandas faytas de froment cueyt am aygua, e ris, e caps, e pes, e ventres de vacas, e huous, e peys fresc, e vi gros e semblants ad aquels, e am aquest regiment es fayta coagulacio de fractura pus leugierament e miels.	 "When the bone is broken, it should first be restored to a diet of nutritious foods that are not too hard or heavy, such as fresh vegetables, fruits, eggs, cheese and dairy products; soft drinks, water, soups, breads, fish, and lean meats, so that you can coagulate the fracture for healing.
E sapias que les osses trinquatz quan so en les homes que so en la primiera vilura e en los decrepitz, no es possible que sian continuatz e sian consolidatz segon lur natura per la exsiccacio dels membres de lor.	 When bones are broken when one is in the first wave and in the second wave of the disease, it's not possible for them to continue and consolidate themselves due to the dehydration of their members
E son consolidatz e continuatz segon lor natura tot temps per la exsiccacio de aquels membres, e so continuatz e consolidatz aquels que so de lor en la fi de la lenitat, ayssi cum les osses dels petitz effantz.	 They continue and consolidate themselves over time due to the dehydration of those members, just as bones from pets eventually do.
Mays empero natura ajusta e amnecteys sobre le os trencat de tota partida alcuna causa semblant a glut en le qual es grossitut que adhereys e strenh aquel entro que so ensemps conglutinatz e liatz ensemps, entro que venen la fi de fortitut e de fermesa, ayssi cum foc al comensament, entro que denguna causa no prohibeys aquel de las suas obres.	 In nature's adjustment and adhesion of the broken bone to a certain extent, it becomes rigid and strained when it is within itself in conjunction with other bones that tighten them together, until they reach the end of strength and firmness; so as from the beginning, unless there is a cause that prohibits its work.
E per aquesta causa es necessari que pauses las viandas del malaute, viandas en las quals so gravitat e viscozitat e grosseza, ayssi cum havem dit.	 For this reason, it's necessary to insert the veins of the patient in which there is gravity and viscosity and thickness; just as we said before.
Mota diversitat de fractura segon diversitat del membre.	 Diversity of fracture according to diversity of member
E sapias que las specias de fractura son diversas segon la diversitat dels membres, quar fractura del os de la camba es diversa de la fractura del os del cap; e la fractura del os del pietz es divers de la fractura del os del dos; e semblantment totz les autres membres son diverses entre lor.	 It is known that the types of fractures vary according to the diversity of the members, for example, a fracture of the lower limb is different from a fracture of the head bone; and the fracture of the breastbone differs from that of two bones; and similarly all other members are diverse among them.
E yeu venc am rememoracio de tota specia de fractura, expausada en le sieu capitol distincta del autre.	 You remember each type of fracture separately in its own specific chapter different from the others.
Mota diversitat de fractura en si meteyssa.	 "There are many fractures in his body.
E son diversificadas las specias de fractura del os en lor meteyssas; quar es fayta fractura arcuada otra aquo que accidan en lu stellas; e alcunas veguadas es fayta fractura segon la longitut del os: e so las fracturas de lu satagia e astelhas e addicios procedentz e no-procedentz, ayssi cum es fayt en la pena quan es preparada a escriure, e es fractura am plagua e disrupcio en le cap, e es fractura fissura petita.	 "There are various types of fractures in his limbs and torso; some acute others like the ones that occur on the extremities; there are also fractures which come from bending or sudden movements, causing pain and disrupting the skull, and small fissures.
E a tota specia es engen o turment propri en restauracio de lu segon que vindra rememoracio de lu distincta en les sieus locs.	 "For each type, there is an appropriate remedy for restoration in its own way depending on the recollection of it from his memory.
Mota senhal de fractura del os.	 The sentence does not contain a complete statement or question that could be translated into English as a standalone sentence.
E per aquo es conoguda fractura del os: es tortuositat de lu, e de aquel eminencia e appericio de lu al sentiment, e so de lu quan compremes aquel am la tua ma.	 "Here is the knowledge of a fracture in his body; its tortuosity and that feeling he has while remembering it, as well as when you remember it with your hand.
E donc quan no es en le loc tortuositat apparent ni so no es feyt deves le tieu tocament quan toques le os am agitacio e le malaute no atroba gran dolor, lahoras no es aqui fractura.	 "And when there is no visible tortuosity and it seems to have healed enough that touching his body doesn't cause a lot of pain, then the fracture has been resolved.
Habantz es possible que sia tortuositat o petita fissura, adon no cove que tu mauguas aquel am la tua ma e am compressio de tot; habantz pausa sobre lu de las medicinas de las quals ve rememoracio aprop aquel moment le qual conveneys al loc; e aprop sia streyt per strictura subtil.	 "It is possible that it's a small fissure, meaning you cannot squeeze it with your hand and compress the whole thing as well; pause over it from the medicines whose recollection helps at this moment in order to be strictly applied.
E sapias que·l loc quan es arcuat e no es scindit en dos o otra aquo que no accidan en lu satagie, cum es remauguda tota partida de la sua compar, lahoras cove que comenses de la tua hora a rectificacio de lu habantz que a lu accida apostema caut.	 When the location is arched and not divided into two or more, then it's customary for the gout to begin with pain in its attack
E si a lu accida apostema caut, lahoras layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que cesse le apostema; e aprop engualha aquel segon quascuna manieyra que podes de levitat e de engen.	 If the gout begins with pain in its attack and lasts for several days, then apply a second poultice every time you change hands to relieve and ease it
E sapias que restauracio de lu e agulacio de lu es pus leugiera que del os en le qual accideysso sathagie.	 The relief of the gout and incision are very important for this illness.
E aprop strenh aquel segon que vindra la rememoracio de lu.	 After applying a second poultice, remember to apply another one in due days
Mays si en le os so satagias, lahoras es necessaria extencio de aquest membre trencat de doas partz, si es la ma o le pe; o am la tua ma si le membre es petit; o am doas cordas o am una corda e la ma.	 If the pain in that limb lasts for more than two days and it is either your hand or foot, then you should cut off this part of his body, whether it's the left or right hand if the member is small; otherwise apply both hands or one hand and a cord on top.
E sia la tua posicio am la qual pauses le membre loc engual segon la sua figura natural, mentre que las partidas so extandudas del membre trenquat, lahoras te perforsa que fassas retornar aquelas addicios am engen e segon quascuna manieyra que poyras en lor locs.	 Position yourself as though you were in the natural position of that member while applying to the areas between the joints of the bent limb; otherwise, apply both poultices and then every time you change hands.
E guarda te segon la tua forssa que no accida sobre le malaute per la tua operacio delor ni lesio; e perforsa te segon le tieu poder que tu appliques la un os am l’autre son companho segon lors milhors formas.	 Ensure that you do not touch the patient's body with your hands or cause any injury during the poultice application, and place one poultice on each hand separately after every two sessions.
E cove que en aquela hora aprofitablament tu toques am la tua ma aquel, e si vezes aqui alcuna causa diversa, rectifiqua aquel e enguala aquel per la quantitat de la tua vertut.	 When you are in a good position to touch his hand at that time, and if there is no other cause different, correct it and straighten it by the amount of your virtue
E exquiva vehement extenssio e compressio, ayssi cum fan mots fols metges que motas veguadas fan accidir apostema caut per la sua operacio, o fan accidir contraccio en le membre ayssi cum havem vist aquo per la operacio de lor motas veguadas.	 Exceedingly vigorous stretching and compression are used by surgeons to prevent the retraction of retracted flaps during surgery, or to control the contraction of a member in such a way that it conforms with what is seen in the operation of retractors.
E aprop annecteys, aprop equacio e decent operacio e strictura de aquel membre, e repaus e tranquilitat; amoneste le malaute sobre aquo e fay le squivar que no maugua aquel en la hora de las suas vigilias e del sieu dormir, e ves la sua revolucio e agitacio, e deves la sua egestio, e deves totz les sieus movementz am tota la sua vertut; e aguarda se que la posicio del membre sia posicio am la qual sia asegurada la dolor, la qual causa es quar quan sent en la disposicio de la posicio del membre delor o lesio; lahoras cove que permutes aquel ad autra disposicio de aquela am la qual non senta dolor; e guarda am aquo que la posicio de lu aquela sia dreyta e engual, per so que al membre non accida tortuositat quan es restaurat.	 The patient's limb is to be stretched and compressed very gently in order to prevent the retraction of retracted flaps during rest periods or sleep, as well as movements that cause agitation; and wait until a position for this limb is found which causes no pain. Then it should replace this position with another one without causing any pain. And also ensure that the position for the limb is correct and straight so that the limb does not move awkwardly when it is restored
E la qualitat de la strictura del membre tranquat es aquela que yeu recomti; per que sapias que·ls membres trencatz so diversificatz en lor parvitat e en lor grandeza e en la forma de aquels.	 The quality of the stretch on a limb is that which you recommend, as different members may be stretched differently in their size and shape depending on what they are
E de aquels que son petits ayssi cum le bras e·l dit e·l focil e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras cove que la envolucio sia de drap mol subtil.	 For those that are small such as the arm and eye and alike to these ones, it is customary for the wrap to be made of very fine cloth.
Mays aquels que so grosses ayssi cum la cuoyssa o la camba, cove que en aquels sia envolucio lada e dura, quar la liadura lada connecteys le membre gran e strenh aquel de tota part am strictura engual, enayssi que en lu no intre macula.	 When the large vessels and veins are congested with cold, such that they form a hard lump at their connection to the limbs, which causes pain in all parts of the body, making it difficult for anyone to move
E aprop comensa, aprop la tua evacuacio de equacio, pausar liament convenient ad aquo, sobre le loc de aquela fractura am tres envolucios o quatre segon que·l membre mereys; e strenh la tua ma un petit am le liament.	 Now, gently stretch the affected limb as much as possible, without causing further damage to that area or any other part of the body; and hold your hand over it a little bit
E aprop ve am aquel a la partida pus sobirana del loc de la fractura, e strenh mens que no foc la tua strictura am la qual has strengut le loc de la fractura.	 Now stretch that part of the limb gently away from where the fracture is located; and try not to force it into a position such as you had previously stretched out the area around the fracture.
E aprop elongua te am envolucio del loc de la fractura un pauc, e mollifiqua la strictura petit a petit, entro que prenguas del loc sa una gran partida.	 Now stretch that part of the limb gently away from where the fracture is located; and soften it slowly into position gradually, trying to move only from the area around the fracture toward its full range of motion.
E aprop pren una autra benda e envolveys aquela autra veguada sobre le loc trenquat am envolucio, e aprop ve am las envolucios a la partida pus dejos de la fractura; e sia la tua operacio en la strictura de la envolucio e en mollificacio de aquela segon que havem dit en la envolucio primieyra desus.	 Now take another object and wrap it around the affected area just above where the fracture is located, and gently extend that object towards the opposite end of the fracture; then you should release the first object from its place on top of the limb, and gradually increase the stretch in the other direction as well.
E aprop pausa entre las volucios de stopa leon o drap am le qual sia engualada la tortuositat de la fractura, si en lu es tortuositat; e sino, no pauses en lu alcuna causa.	 Now pause between the folds of the cloth or drape over it as you would cover its complexity if there is one; and otherwise do not pause in doing so.
E aprop pausa sobre lu autra benda, e aprop enguala sobre aquestas envolucios stelhas decentment faytas tantost, si en le loc no es imflacio o apostema caut, e lahoras pausa sobre lu aquo que sede le apostema aquel e que oste la imflacio; e layssa aquela per alcus jorns; e lahoras tu strenh sobre lu las stelhas.	 "Place a cushion under them and then spread out the stiles gently, if there is no swelling or redness in the area, so that pain doesn't arise from it. Then place an additional cushion over this space to prevent any further swelling; and hold their hand.
E sian las stelhas de la maytat de canna lada raza, e be formada saviament; o sian de fust de pi; o de ramps de palma ; e sia le ample de quascuna stelha segon aquesta forma e aquesta figura:	 "The stiles should be formed as follows - either long and narrow or wide and short. Depending on the size of each stiles.
Empero cove que la astelha que es pausada sobre aquela fractura sia pus grossa e pus lada un petit que las autras astelhas, e la longitut de la stela segon qu’es legut al membre en magnitut e parvitat; e aprop strenh sobre las astelhas am autra benda segon la tua primieyra strictura; e aprop lia desus am fiel decentment segon que havem dit de strictura, e es que sia la tua strictura segon le loc de la fractura mes, e quant mes es alonguat de la fractura, es mendre la strictura.	 "However, be aware that the stiles placed over a fracture should be thick and narrow to prevent any further injury.
E cove que les fils sian migiers en grossesa e subtilitat, e sian de li mol; e si les fils so grosses, ayssi cum yeu he vist per la operacio de alcus fols pausantz les lors fils de cordas de li tort, e es error gran, quan catz la strictura fora equalitat.	 "And be aware that the stiles should not be too thin or delicate, and they must feel firm to prevent any injury.
E eyssament fils subtils no so convenientz, quar tu no consaguiras per strictura am aquels aquo que voles, e no cove que entre astela e astela haja mens de un dit.	 "Very thin stiles are not convenient because you may not be able to maintain the pressure needed for treatment and there must always be some space between them.
E si le malaute es ledit per las extremitatz de las stelas aprop la strictura en les locs sas, lahoras pausa dejos aquelas de stopa leon o lana carmenada entro que aquo no li fassa lesio.	 "If the patient has a problem with the joints of the stiles being placed too close to each other or in sensitive areas, then let them be separated so that there is not any damage.
Alcunas veguadas fractura es am plagua, e accideys disrupcio en la codena, e yeu vindre am rememoracio en aquela en le capitol segon singularitat.	 Some broken veins are painful to touch, and an injury occurs in the finger, and you remember that in this singularity
E sapias que ges tot membre trencat no es streyt am stelhas al primier dia; la qual causa es quar le membre, quan es gran, no cove que pauses sobre lu stelhas sino aprop v dias o vii o mays, segon la tua seguratat de adveniment de apostema caut.	 It means that if a member is broken, do not immediately put pressure on the first day; rather, wait until it's swollen or inflamed to apply pressure with caution according to your safety measures in case of any bruising or injury.
E aquesta es la manieyra dels emplaustres am les quals les Antics restauravan, les quals so pausatz sobre fractura e dislocacio e torcio.	 This is the custom among the ancients who set a cushion on fractures and dislocations of limbs.
Manieyra de emplaustra comu abruejat de restaurament de fractura, convenient a motas compleccios e majorment a las femnas e als efantz, quar es de aquo sobre le qual no ventz calor ni freg: e es que prenguas de polvera de moli, e es la medula de la farina que pen deves le movement de la mola en las paretz del moli.	 The custom of setting cushions on the surface for fracture restoration is primarily done on limbs and elbows, where no heat or friction should be applied; it's important to prevent swelling, especially in women and children as it relates to preventing bone marrow movement from being damaged during recovery.
E comfeys aquel ayssi cum es, sino que cribelles aquel am album de huou, e pausa la comfeccio de lu no-spessa ni subtil; e aprop usa de aquela.	 And once that is so, do not cover up the wound or attempt to dress it hastily without any care for cleanliness and subtlety; rather use the appropriate treatment.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre restaurant fractura e dislocacio e torcio: recipe de assafetida, de lapdanum, de acacia, de enula, e migrach, que es razit de milgraner salvage, de totz ana drac. x; de mirra e aloen ana drac. v; alochil ana drac. xx; totz sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian mesclatz am aygua alichil o am album de huou si la compleccio del malaute es scalfada; e aprop usa de aquest emplaustre, quar es de bona composicio e restaura les osses trencatz leugierament, e confereys a motz homes.	 Another custom in fracture and dislocation treatment: to apply bitter substances like lapis lazuli, acacia, and dragon's blood; mix them with water or the wound if it has become infected; and use this plaster as a dressing, which is of good composition and restores broken bones gently, providing care for people.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre le qual comfereys a fractura e torcio: recipe migrach e met de altea blanca ana drac. x; de mirra e de aloen ana drac v; de acacia drac. vi; de bol armenic drac. .xx.	 In the beginning of a procedure to set bones properly and to fix fractures, apply ointment on the wound with white plaster, doctor's handiwork, and after that cover it all up with a bandage.
Totz sian trissatz en mortier am mota contricio, e sian cribellatz, e sian comfitz am aygua o am album de huou e sia administrat.	 Three drops of a mixture containing alcohol and water are to be taken in wine or vinegar, depending on the illness you have.
Manieyra de emplaustre a juncturas e osses separatz de lors locs, e seda dolor accident en aquels e a fissuras e fractaduras: sia presa lana sutza e sia submersa en vi agre e oli cuyt e sia pausat sobre le loc.	 To separate the joints and bones from the rest of the body, apply ointment to the affected areas and place them in vinegar or oil with gauze covering over it.
Mays en aquest emplastre no es vertut de restauracio, de apostema caut e expelleys dolors propriament.	 Do not attempt surgery without proper training; do not use cautery to release pain from the body.
Autra manieyra de emplastre que restaura os trancat: pren fuelas de figuier sort e fuelas de papaver salvatge; contereys tot e fay emplastre de lor.	 Another ointment that repairs fractures, made of fig leaves and wild poppy seeds; covers the wound entirely.
Manieyra de emplastre abreujat aministrat deves la restauracio de fractura de os e quan tu voles resolucio del romanent de apostema: recipe razitz de altea, de camamilla e flors de violes, de farina de ers, de totz ana partida i; sian totz trissatz e sian cofitz am vi, si·l membre no es scalfat.	 Another ointment for swelling to treat fractures and when you want resolution from the pain: apply a mixture of chamomile flowers, violets flower petals, flour from rye bread, and the ointment as described before; it should be applied with three drops at each part that is not swollen.
Mays si es scalfat, lahoras comfeys aquel am aygua de coliandre humit o am aygua e usa de lu.	 If you are swollen use vinegar or alcohol depending on the illness to alleviate swelling.
Autra manieyra de emplastra pus fort en resolucio que aquest primier, quan accideys apostema dur deves la restauracio del membre: recipe de razitz de altea e de semensa de li, e de balaustia, e mellilot, majorana, flors de viol, de camamilla, de totz ana partida i engual; totz sian trissatz e sian cofitz am aygua de sauze o am aygua dousa o am vi, tot aquo segon la qualitat del membre e le repaus de la color de lu.	 When the first incision is made to restore this member: apply ice and warm compresses alternately; also apply mustard plasters and blisters of mullein, greater-lot and lesser-lot flowers of violet, camomile, all together, even from the smallest patch to the largest one; all these patches are used until frostbite occurs or numbness sets in.
Mays Ypocras no diyssec en le sieu libre que sia pausat sobre le membre trenquat deves la restauracio de lu sino cerot fayt de cera e de oli e no autre causa; e recomtec que sia migier entre grossitut e subtilitat.	 When the free space is covered over the affected member, do not apply any other ointment or remedy until you are certain to have restored it properly and that there was nothing else that caused this. And recommend making a distinction between size and subtlety.
Mays a Gualia es vist que sian pausatz sobre le membre trencat deves la restauracio de lu e las causas en las quals es exsiccacio am petit de caliditat so ayssi cum mirra, enses e semblantz a lor de aquelas causas que havem recomtadas.	 It is noted that the frostbite patches should be applied over the torn member in order to restore it and identify the causes such as excessive cold or moisture causing it, as recommended previously.
Manieyra de emplastre que comfereys a lesio e dolor: recipe migat, de cezes, de pels de home inscizes o pena de auzel, e de altea, e sal, partidas enguals; sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian cofitz, e sia fayt emplastre.	 When considering the injury and pain: apply mustard plasters or ice packs or ointment containing alum, as well as salt pads - all together; these patches are applied until frostbite occurs or numbness sets in.
Mays la quantitat segon la qual cove que romangua la liadura e aprop sia disliada, es que consideres si no es accidit dolor ni pruziment ni le os es trencat no es maugut de son loc, lahoras tu no deslies de motz jorns.	 When determining how much to apply in order for the inflammation to stop and the swelling to subside: consider if it is not accompanied by pain or bruising of the skin indicating a more serious injury, you do not need further treatment at this point.
E si accideys al loc dolor vehement o prusiment o imflacio, lahoras tu te coyte o deslie aquel en la hora, e osta le emplastre de lu.	 When a severe pain or inflammation occurs at that place, the doctor will apply ointment to it right away, and cover it with a dressing
E pren drap de li e spongia marina leon humida, e submergeys aquela en aygua tebeza, e am aquela lava le loc entro que cesse aquel pruziment e la dolor sia sedada; e aprop layssa repausar le membre per una hora; e aprop pausa sobre lu lana sutza submersa en vi agre e oli o oli rozat, e lia sobre lu per una nuoyt entro que sias segur de apostema caut, e que repause la imflacio del membre, e sia remauguda la dolor de lu.	 To cool the inflamed area with seawater and sponge it thoroughly, submerge it in lukewarm water to relieve the pain and swelling; let it rest for an hour, and cover it again with a dry cloth soaked in vinegar or olive oil to stop the inflammation and get rid of the pain.
E aprop itera aquela strictura subtil e emplastre petit e no·l strenhas per la tua constriccio primieyra, e subtilia am aquel entro que sia sanat.	 Apply a small bandage tightly but not too tight to relieve your first constriction, and gently apply it over where the pain is.
E si vezes que le apostema e la rogor e la dolor e la imflacio e tots les accidentz ja so remaugutz de tot, e indigeysses de emplastre e de strictura, lahoras tu itera aquel ayssi cum has fayt al comensant engualment.	 If the pain and swelling have already gone away from all of them, you should apply and bandage as before.
E si no accideys al membre alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no deslies aquel sino aprop tres dias o quatre o v o vii; e alcunas veguadas tot aquo es layssat per xx dias segon que a tu appar per la desliadura del membre, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que la fractura adhereys, e se acosta a la coagulacio de la carn sobre aquel.	 If no cause is found for the pain in that member and it doesn't improve within three to four weeks or longer depending on how long you wait before seeking medical advice, then apply this ointment as described above until the fracture adheres and coagulation of the flesh occurs over it.
E lahoras ajusta en la strictura mays que en la tua strictura primieyra tota, e ayusta en la engrossacio de la vianda del malaute, segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu.	 Adjust your bandage tightly as with the first one and lubricate the lining of the patient's abdomen before doing so, remembering to do this
Mays si tu vezes le loc de la fractura ja desiccar e extenuar mays que no cove, lahoras sapias que·l nutriment es prohibit pervenir ad aquel; e donc embroca aquel am aygua tebeza deves tota veguada que delias aquel; e sia aquo en totz tres dias; e alleuja la strictura un petit, e per aquesta operacio corr al membre le nutriment, e es sanat leugierament.	 When a fracture occurs in the location already wetted and extended, you should know that nutrition is prohibited to prevent it from further happening; therefore, bind up this with thread so that water cannot come into contact with it; and do this for three days; and loosen the tightness after a short period of time by which operation restore its nourishment, as well as the health will be improved.
Mays aquo que fan les fols restauradors de la fractura del membre autra veguada quan no es restaurat al comensament, segon que cove, e es restaurat segon tortuositat, es error segon la operacio de lor, e temor gran, e si fos dreyturier aquo agrandit les Antics en lors libres e agueran am aquo obrat.	 When restorers of the fractured member do not restore it properly from the beginning, or if they make second surgery for tightness, this is an error and great fear, because if it was correct, it would have healed in a short time without any trouble.
E yeu no he vist ad alcu de lor aquo far, per que es pus razonable que aquo no fassa.	 You should not look at them as an excuse for doing so, because this is something that does not happen.
Capitol segon: De fractura quan accideys en le cap.	 When a fracture occurs in the head.
Las specias de fracturas son motas, e las figuras de lor son diversas, e las causas son distinctas, quar de fracturas alcuna es fayta per percussio de spaza, e la percussio osta tot le os entro al ciphac, le qual es dejos le os, ayssi cum fay ayssa en le fust, e per aquo aquesta specia es nompnada ascial; o la spaza inscideys alcuna partida del os, e inscideys la carn de lu e no passa la inscizio entro al derier de lu; e aquesta specia de fractura es nompnada levatio absoluta.	 The types of fractures are different and have diverse causes, except for some that occur due to trauma on the bone, which causes injury within the skull, as such it is called skull fracture or brain concussion.
E la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca, e de fractura que es contricio o atricio; e causa de lu es percussio am poyra o cazement sobre peyra, e a lor semblantz.	 The extent of these two types of fractures may be great or small, and those that are twisted or twisted; the cause is usually an impact to the head or face, causing injury.
E aquesta fractura o es penetrant que ja apropinqua al pannicol le qual es dejos le os; o es en la facia del os, e la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca.	 When a fracture occurs near the groin area where it is difficult to approach due to its size or thickness, or when it happens on the bone itself, and the wound dressing for these fractures is large
E de fractura es que es ameguada en le os, en la subtilitat del cabel petita, e per aquo es nompnada aquesta specia fractura capillar.	 When a fracture occurs on a small bone, it is called a capillary fracture
E es fractura que es fayta o per cazement o per percussio de peyra e a lu semblantz, que fa intrar alcuna lamina del os a las partidas dedintz, e es fayta en le loc concavitat ayssi cum accideys als payroles de eram quan accideys a lor percussio e es partida de lor intrada a las partidas dedintz.	 When a fracture is caused by a blow or impact to the bone and it goes into the marrow, causing its exit through the pores of the bones, as occurs when someone is hit and their entry through the wounds
E majorment es fayt aquo en les cors de osses humitz, ayssi cum so caps de efantz.	 It often happens in the hollow bones like the elbow and shoulder blades.
E so a totas aquestas specias fracturas satagias, so son pessas ayssi cum stelhas separadas.	 All these special fractures cause pain so severe that they separate from one another.
E yeu vindre am reremoracio de tot aquo en son loc.	 You will find relief in this place.
E conoyssem totas aquestas specias de fractura per deteccio sobre aquelas e per inquisicio de lor am tentas e ostament de carn corrumpuda que es sobre lor.	 All these special fractures should be examined for causes and signs of infection as well as any damaged tissue that may cover them.
E specia capillar es conoguda per aysso que es descubert sobre le os, e es abstergit, e linit sobre lu am tentha, quar la fractura appar negra.	 A capillary fracture is identified by examining the bone and looking for signs of infection as well as any damaged tissue that may cover it.
Mays en la curacio de fractura considera al comensament les accidentz del malaute, e lahoras si tu vezes per los accidentz que signifique per significacio manifesta sobre paor, ayssi cum es vomit de colera, e extencio, e perdement de entendament, e abscizio de votz, e sincopi, e febre acuta, e eyssiment dels huels e rogor de aquels, e semblantz a lor dels accidentz en las majors disposicios, ses dopte no es sanat.	 In the treatment of fractures, consider from the outset the injuries that caused them and the pain associated with them, as well as other symptoms such as vomiting and exhaustion, loss of consciousness, dizziness, and rapid fever, which indicate a serious injury.
E si vezes accidentz no-correntz tu speras salut, lahoras tu comensa la curacio de lu.	 When joints are affected by cold humors causing pain in the feet, it is customary for doctors to call it gout.
La qual causa es quar si es vengut a tu le plaguat en le comensament cum es plaguat e aquo es en les dias de ivern, lahoras cove que tu studias en le ostament del os denant le dia xiiii segon tota disposicio.	 The cause of this pain may be from a cold humor that infiltrates the joints as well as in the early days when it first occurs and is followed by pain in the feet later on, doctors are advised to apply a pointed cautery point.
E si es en les dias d’estiu, lahoras cove que te coytes ostar le os denant le vii dia, habantz que aquo que es dejos le os sia corromput del pannicol, e que accidescan les accidentz que havem recomtatz.	 If it's in the summer days, doctors are advised to try to cure the pain by removing the cold humor that is causing them and may also need to check for any other accidents or injuries
E si la fractura ja es pervenguda al pannicol cubrent le cervel, e es am partidas menudas e atricio, lahoras cove que inscidas la partida conminuta e atrita, segon que yeu recomtare a tu.	 If the fracture is also present in the nasal cavity and has symptoms such as pain when swallowing or breathing through the nose, doctors are advised to examine their condition thoroughly and seek further advice from medical professionals.
E es que tu razas le cap del malaute plaguat, e descuebres sobre le os segon costuma e manieyra a tu possible segon la figura de la plagua, e que sia leugier sobre le malaute.	 You should gently stroke the patient's head and uncover their nose, checking for any injuries or swelling around it, and examine them thoroughly to check if they have one.
E si accideys a tu deves la deteccio del os, fluxs de sanc o apostema caut, lahora tu te oppausa a lu am aquo que cove, e es que huemplas le loc de draps infuzes en vi e oli rozat, e fassa repausar la plagua entro que sia sedat le apostema, e sies segur de fluxs del sanc; e aprop comensa en la circuicio del os e en la ablatio de lu.	 If you detect any injuries or swelling in the nose, apply a cold compress to it and wait until it is saturated with oil and vinegar, then gently remove the bandage from around it, making sure no burns occur; and make sure to keep the gauze moist between applications by frequently wiping it off.
E aquo sia segon una de dos manieyras de operacio.	 The second procedure
E la una manieyra es que tu inscidas le os am inscisori de streyt tal, e aquesta es la forma de lu: E aprop administra un autre inscissori aquest, un pauc pus lat que aquel; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	 The first procedure is to apply a poultice made of sweet oil and fresh herbs to the affected area. This is how it works: Apply another incisionary instrument, one that is slightly finer than the previous one; this is done as follows
E aprop administra mays le inscissori pus lat que·l segon.	 The second procedure involves applying a poultice made of sweet oil and fresh herbs to the affected area. This is how it works: Apply another incisionary instrument, one that is slightly finer than the previous one; this is done as follows:
E cove que sia deves tu nombre de inscissoris diverses, dels quals alcus so pus latz que alcus autres; e alcus de lor so pus breus que·ls autres e sian en le derier de acuitat de las suas extremitatz, e sian de ferr indi o felod.	 You will need a variety of incisionary instruments, some that are very fine and others that are quite coarse; choose the one with which you feel most comfortable making an incision, whichever is last in sharpness on your fingers, to do it or let someone else do it for you.
E usa de lor am facilitat en percussio sobre le inscissori per so que no concutesca le cap e leda aquel.	 Use them gently when applying the incisionary instrument so that it does not make contact with your face or hands.
E si le os es fort, dur, lahoras cove que perfores en le circuit de lu denant que tu administres los inscissoris am les taravels, les quals so nomnatz taravels no-profundantz.	 If the poultice is very stiff or hard, make sure that when administering the incisionary instrument you do it through a cloth like this: The cloths which are named deep are not meant to be used for making an incision.
E no so nomnatz ayssi sino quar aquels no pausan le terme de l’os del test ad aquo que es aprop lu, per so quar al taravel es redonda extremitat o marge sobre aquel que es dejos le cap de lu agut semblant a marge o a cercle petit, le qual prohibeys esser submergit e passar la spissitut del os.	 Do not use such cloths unless you are sure that they will fit properly to what you want it for, so that when the cloth is on its place and fits as if there were a small circle or edge around where your head ends against something like an edge or a small circle, this prevents the cloth from being submerged and passing over the opening of the incision.
E es convenient que tu prenguas de aquestz taravels gran nombre dels quals quascu convenesca a la spicitut de quascun os, entro que sia a tu present en tottz testz del cervel la extremitat del qual sia aguda, la quantitat en longitut e brevitat sia segon la quantitat de spicitut de aquest test.	 When the pain is severe and in an extremity that is acutely defined (i.e., the amount of sharpness in the test corresponds to its length), then do this at your present location with tests from the extremities where they are acute as well.
E aquesta es la forma de tres specias de teravels: La qualitat de perforar en le circuit del os trencat es que pauses le teravel sobre le os e revolvas aquel am les tieus ditz entro que sapias que l’os ja es penetrat; e aprop permuda le terevel ad autre loc, e pausa aquo que es entre tot trauc la quantitat de la grosseza del ray o enviro aquo.	 This is the procedure for three types of tests: The quality to perforate through the broken limb should be that you place the probe on the limb and pull it as tight as possible, knowing that the limb has already been penetrated; then remove the test tube and move it elsewhere so that there is no contact between any part of the body and the test.
E aprop inscideys am inscissoris aquo que es entre quascun trauc del os, e fay aquel pus subtil que podes sobre aquo en fi de levitat, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que erradiques le os, o am la tua ma, o am alcuna autra causa per alcus sturmentz les quals auras apparelhatz ad aquo, ayssi cum tanalhas e forceps subtils.	 Then remove the test tube and apply a very fine point to it as described earlier, knowing that you should avoid contact with any part of the body or anything else nearby during this procedure.
E cove que tu guardes am tota cautela que l’inscissori no toque alcuna causa del ciphac.	 You must be very careful not to touch any part of the body during this process.
E donc cum auras circuit le os perforan, e sira separat del ciphac si es continuat am lu, e auras aquel extrayt, cove que razas e enguales aquel en la asperitat de lu de aquo que es en le os am autra sturment semblant a inscissori, mays empero cove que sia pus teon e pus subtil que les autres inscissoris.	 When you have finished the test procedure and it is separated from the body cavity if it continues, then take that out as well; make sure to wipe both off in a way similar to how you wiped them before, but be careful not to touch anything else nearby during this process.
E si roman alcuna partida dels osses petitz e satagias, lahoras pren aquela am facilitat am aquo que es deves tu dels sturmentz; e aprop aquo cura la plagua am lichinis e enguentz les quals havem ditz.	 When the bones are brittle and fragile, doctors prescribe this remedy to alleviate discomforts; by rubbing it on the flesh of the affected area, it helps soothe itching caused by cold sores.
E l’autra manieyra de operacio es leugiera, longinqua de paor, la qual diyssec Gualia e la lauzec per gran lausor; e aquest es le sermo de lu: necessari es a tu en le comensament que comenses descobrir la partida del os del loc en le qual es la fractura pus vehement e pus manifesta, entro que quan auras descubert aquela partida e auras pausat dejos lu la extremitat de aquest inscissori lent e alegre del qual aquesta es la forma:	 The other method of operation is gentle and soothing. It is done quickly; when you discover the fracture's site, it must be immobilized to prevent further injury to this sensitive part of his body, which is very important because...
E es que la partida lenticular es leon e no inscideys alcuna causa, e la partida aguda es de lu en dos latz avantz en longitut, ayssi cum vezes; que la partida lenticular sia ajustada al ciphac am la facia de lu inscident aguda en le os.	 The fracture that is painful and sharp usually occurs in two parts before it becomes a single part, which means...
E aprop percuteys sobre le inscissori de una partida am un petit malhet entro que inscidas tot le os am facilitat ayssi cum es revolvut, e tu sias segur del pannicol que no accida en lu accident que temas en denguna manieyra, e si le medicant14 era le pus fol de totz les homes e le mays ignorant de lor; certament, e si era dorment.	 You should gently apply pressure over the area of a small wound to try and stop it from bleeding too much. If you're unsure if this method will work or cause more harm than good, then it might be better to avoid using any remedy as these men are not medical professionals; furthermore, they may have had no sleep for days on end, so do your best to make sure there is no accidental injury done by attempting such a method.
Lahoras si romania alcuna causa annexa al os del pannicol en alcus locs de os, inscidira aquel de lu am la extremitat del inscissori aquel lenticular, e deliuraria aquel de lu am facilitat, quar es deliurat de lu ses nocument e ses paor.	 There should be no additional cause or effect on the bones of the patient anywhere else in the body when using this method to treat a fracture that is painful and sharp; it may help alleviate pain as well.
E si fractura del os no penetra entro al pannicol, e aquo que es abscidit o es ostat del os es la facia de lu, e roman en lu asperitat e satagias subtils, lahoras cove que razas aquela asperitat e erradiques aquelas satagias am razoris subtils per les quals tu has preparat le nombre, de diversas quantitatz per que sia a tu possible administrar de aquels en tot loc les pus convenientz de lor e le pus dreyt de aquels segon aquo en que te perduzeys la tua operacio aquel os trencat e la figura de lu.	 "If the fracture does not penetrate into the pouch, and thus is removed or has fallen out of place, it will be applied to its area with a gentle touch and gently move those delicate areas that you have prepared for in various quantities so that they are accessible at any convenient location on them.
E cove que administres en la tua razio am la qual razes le os al comensament le pus lat de aquels razoris, e aprop usa aprop lu del pus subtil de lu, e no cesses far aquo segon continuitat entro que pervenguas ad aministrar le pus teon e·l pus subtil de totz aquels.	 "When administering to the area where you place the bone that has just been removed or fallen out of place, use gently and apply gently on the very delicate part of it, do not stop doing this continuously until all the other treatments have been administered.
Mays en quascuna de las autras fracturas petitas capillars e fractura subtil, cove que administres cura segon aquo que perduseys ad rectificacio de lu.	 "In every case of small capillary fractures and subtle fractures, you should administer treatment after this correction has been done.
E es causa que no es ameguada sobre totz les quals han studi en aquela art.	 "The cause is that it is not known about all the studies in that field.
E stec sobre aquo que nos scriut havem mostrat en grans fracturas.	 "I am asking for information on how they showed large fractures.
E si le pannicol es retangut quan tu erradiques le os, lahoras cove que prenguas drap de li segon la quantitat de la plagua, e submergeys aquel en oli rozat, e pausa aquel sobre le orrifici de la plagua; e aprop pren autre drap doblat o triplicat e submergeys lu en vi e oli rozat e pausa aquel sobre drap prim e fay aquo al pus leugierament que podes sobre aquel, que no graves le ciphac; e aprop administra sobre aquel liament lat, e no strenhas aquel sino per quantitat que tengua la plagua tant solament.	 "If the pouch is pulled when removing the bone, you should take another piece and submerge it in hot oil, then place it over the fresh one and do this until all of them are used up without any serious harm; then apply the same treatment to that part only.
E layssa aquel am aquesta cura per un dia o per dos entro que sias segur de apostema caut; e aprop deslia aquel e aprop aministra medicinas am las quals es superflua siccitat, ayssi cum razitz de lin e farina de errs, e polvera de enses e de aristologia, e de semblantz ad aquels.	 "Healing this ailment for one or two days is enough to ensure that it doesn't recur; afterwards he must abstain from strong seasonings and foods like eggs, cheese, nuts, and shellfish, as well as meat and fish.
E es que tu fassas de aquestas medicinas polvera que sia pulverizada sobre la plagua, ayssi cum son secas; e universalment, administra en aquel tota medicina de proprietat de la qual es que abstergesca e no mordique.	 "After using these medicines sprinkle them over the cloth so they are dry; and generally, administer to him every medicine that is property of which he must abstain from taking.
E guarda te segon la tua vertut que la plagua en la tua curacio sia neta; e no sia en lu surdicia de enguent ni autra; ni no layssas agreguar virulencia en lu; quar quan es ajustada sobre le pannicol del cervel, corromp aquel e poyreys aquel, e accideys sobre le malaute aprop aquo malicia maligna.	 "Keep the cloth in your care as clean as you can; do not let it be soiled or dirty; do not add any more virulence to it; when put over the abscess of the brain, pour it on and wash it off, then wipe with a bad-smelling ointment near the abscess so that it cannot harm the patient.
E accideys en le ciphac del cap, cum de lu es mondificat le os e majorment quan es menspresada la cura de lu, e es negror en la superficia de lu; e donc considera lahoras si accideys al malaute les accidentz que havem ditz, sapias que es parnicios ses tot dopte.	 "Pour it on the forehead of his head and when most of its medicine has been applied, and is now black in color; consider that if he experiences any accidents as mentioned above, you should know that this must be taken into account.
E si no accideys negror sino de la medicina que es pausada desus, e es en vertut de aquela medicina que fassa aquela negror, lahoras cove que tu prenguas de mel una partida e de oli rozat partidas iii, e am aquels linieys un drap, e aprop pausa aquel sobre le ciphac; e aprop cura aquel am las specias de curacio que conveneys entro que sia sanat.	 "If the medicine is not black but has been taken off then apply that black medicine as mentioned above; consider that if you add a bit of vinegar and oil separately, and on these lines an ointment, place it over his forehead; afterwards cure him with special medicines for recovery.
Capitol .iii.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
De restauracio del nas quan es trincat.	 After the nose has been slit.
Sapias que no es trencat del nas sino doas partidas ensemps pus sobiranas, o una de aquelas alcunas veguadas, per so quar en lu has dos osses, quar la partida dejos es cartillaginosa, e no es trencada e no accideys a lu sino atricio e tortuositat e sinuitat.	 If you slit the nose instead of the two nostrils mentioned above (which are not specified), or if one of those passages is blocked, then it will result in one nostril being blocked and the other becoming inflamed, causing pain and difficulty breathing.
Mays si es trencada la una de las doas partidas de lu, lahoras cove que tu intrometas le dit petit en le sieu nas, e que engualhas aquela fractura dedintz am le tieu dit indic, e am le dit pous defora, entro que retorne le nas segon la sua figura natural.	 If one of the two passages is slit (which passage was not specified), then put a finger in it to check for any blockages, and after you have found that fracture, gently push back into its proper place to restore the nose to its normal shape.
E sia fayt aquo per tu am facilitat, e guarda te que no caja per aquela tua operacio sobre le malaute delor.	 And remember to do it in a way that is as easy and comfortable for you as possible, so don't worry about the operation itself.
E si la fractura es en la pus sobirana partida del nas, e le dit no perve ad aquela, lahoras cove que sia equat am la extremitat del ray en le qual sia petita grossitut.	 If the fracture is in the superior nostril passage and it is not blocked on that side, then gently place your finger near the end of that small opening to check for any blockages.
E si la fractura es en doas partidas, lahoras tu fay le semblant de aquo.	 If there are two fractures, you proceed as before.
E coyta te am restauracio de lu en le primier dia de la fractura, si es possible; e sino, lahoras aprop le vii o·l x deves le repaus del apostema caut.	 If it is possible to restore the nose within one day of the fracture occurring, do so; otherwise, have your surgeon perform a nasal valve procedure or use an alternative method to close up the affected area (such as glue).
E aprop entromet en la extremitat del nas una meca de drap de li, si la fractura es en una partida, o metz doas calguas, si la fractura es en doas partidas, e sia en la calgua grossitut de tanta quantitat que umpla le trauc del nas.	 When a bone is broken in one piece or two pieces, then place the cloth on its nose as if to hold it closed until healing occurs.
E diysso alcus dels antics restauradors que las calguas sian enfundudas en boder, e sian permudadas en tot dia, mays no es vist a mi; habantz cove que la meca sia enfunduda en album de huou comfit am polvera de moli; e aprop layssa la qualgua entro que l’os sia fermat e sia endurazida la cartillage.	 That is the custom of those ancient restorers to bind up the wounds in a bandage, and spread it out on each day until you do not see any more. And then place that wound inside so as to be firm yet flexible.
E alcunas veguadas sia entromes en le nas, en loc de calgua, pena de auca pus que es envolopada de drap de li leon; e sia que ja te la fractura del nas pus vehement e que le malaute no sia prohibit de inspiracio.	 Some wounds are inserted into the nose area, in the location of the bandage, unless you are wrapped with cloth from it itself. And that already had a nasal fracture, and vomiting occurs frequently, which prevents breathing.
E aquesta causa no es a tu necessaria; e si voles, fay aquo, e si voles, fay calguas.	 That is not necessary to you or me or anyone else. If you want it, do this, if you want the bandage, [do] that
E si accideys autra veguada apostema caut, emplastra le nas am cerot o am coto enfus en vi agre e oli rozat, o am diaquilon.	 If another wound occurs at a later time and is already dressed up but is open or the edges are inflamed, place it in the nostril facing towards the back of your throat and cover it with gauze soaked in vinegar or lemon juice, or if you have both on hand.
Mays si no accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que emplaustres aquel defora am farina de sizami e am polvera de enses cofitz am album de huou; e aprop pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e no lies le nas am alcuna causa.	 If another dressing is not available, then wrap it in a bandage of gauze and place that over the previous one on top to prevent any issue from occurring with the nose.
Mays si so trencats les osses del nas am fractura petita o so conminuitz, lahoras cove que scindas sobre aquels, e extraguas aquels am insturmentz que conveno ad aquels; e aprop cos la scissura, e cura aquela am aquo que encarna e consolida, e am emplastres ad aquo convenientz.	 When the jaws of the nose are torn or broken into small pieces, then take scissors to cut them apart and extract those from among the instruments that should be used for this; afterwards apply a compress on it to bind it up and consolidate it, and place something over it for convenience.
E si accideys plagua dedintz le nas, lahoras cove que cures aquela am calguas e administra canulas de plom entro que sia de tot sanat.	 If the nasal plug is broken or dislodged, then apply warm compresses and administer plum-colored tubes to ensure they are of good quality.
Capitol .iiii.	 I cannot understand this sentence. It appears to be a mix of random characters with no meaning.
De restauracio de la mandibula quan es trincada.	 When the jaw is broken, restoration can take place
Quan la mandibula dejos es rompuda e la fractura de lu no es am plagua, reguarda lahoras si la fractura es deforas tant solament, e no es trencada en dos e es curvada a las partidas dedintz, lahoras la sua cognicio es leugiera.	 If the jaw is broken but not in two pieces and curved at its ends, then the doctor should examine it carefully.
E cove donc, si la fractura es en la part dreyta, que tu intrometas le tieu indic senestre en la boca del malaute; e semblantment si la fractura es an la mandibula senestra, lahoras intromet le dit indic de la ma dreyta; e impelleys am aquel la gilbositat de la fractura dedintz am facilitat a las partidas defora, am la tua autra ma de la partida defora del os; am aquel decentment equa aquelam.	 If the fracture is in the right jaw, then insert a tube into the mouth of the patient and similarly if it's in the left jaw, then put your hand on the left side to facilitate breathing through both sides.
E si la fractura de la mandibula ja es separada en doas, lahoras cove que administres extensio de doas partz segon rectitut entro que sia possibla la equacio de lu.	 If the jaw is broken into two pieces, then you should administer extension tubes on both sides to facilitate breathing.
E si accideys conmocio de dentz a disrupcio, lahoras strenh aquelas de las quals speras que romandran am fil de aur o de argent o de ceda; e aprop pausa sobre la mandibula trencada cerot, e aprop pausa sobre lu drap duplicat, e pausa sobre le drap gran stelha decentment fayta, o una pessa de sola engual a la longitut de la mandibula; e aprop lia aquela desus segon que a tu es apparelhada la liadura de lu e que conveneys la applicacio, entro que no es destruida.	 When the dentition is disrupted, the pain from those that have broken their teeth or gold or silver will be restrained by a pause over the broken jaw bone, and over the double cloth, and over the great blanket gently placed, or a single piece of linen stretched at the length of the mandible; and if they were to apply this second measure when you are dressed in it, that is applied.
E comanda al malaute que use de repaus e tranquilitat, e pausa la vianda de lu sorbicios leons.	 The patient should be instructed to use pauses and tranquility, and to stop taking the liquid diet pills.
E si extimas que ja es alterada la figura en alcuna manieyra, lahoras tu te coyta e deslia aquel al tertz dia; e aprop rectifica aquo que ja es alterat de lu e emplaustra aquel am polvera de moli, am album de huou, o am farina de cisami, pus que tu auras ostat le cerot de lu, e pausa sobre le emplastra lana leon.	 If the shape is altered in any way, you should apply it and place it on the third day; and correct that which has been changed by the same as powder of millet, or flour of wheat, until you have made a hole for the eye, and put a cloth over its place.
E adonc cum sta annex e ajustat aquel emplastre sobre lu, e la disposicio del os no es alterada, layssa aquel, que no le deslies entro que sia sanat e strenh la fractura; quar motas veguadas aquesta fractura es streyta en tres sempmanas.	 When you have attached and adjusted the bandage over it, and if its position is not altered, remove that one, because tearing it may cause pain, especially in three days.
E si autra veguada accida apostema caut, lahoras administra aquo que havem dit motas veguadas en la sedacio de lu entro que sia sanat, e sia remaugut aquel apostema.	 If another vein is ruptured as well, the doctors will instruct to administer this measure that has been mentioned before so that it may be treated and healed in its course, and to apply a new bandage.
E si la fractura es am plagua, lahoras considera si es pessa del os separada o satagias, lahoras tu te subtilia que ostes aquelas satagias am aquo que conveneys ad aquo en la remocio de aquelas dels sturmentz.	 When a fracture occurs that may be painful, the doctors consider whether it should be separated or sutured, and they tell you to gently apply something over those sutures to prevent infection in the area where these sutures are located
E si le orrifici de la plagua es streyt, lahoras tu le amplifique am le fleubotomi segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	 If a hemorrhage occurs from the fracture, the doctors advise you to increase pressure on the bleeding area according to your needs
E aprop quan tu auras ostat aquelas satagias, e de aquelas no sira remaugut re, lahoras tu cos le orrifici de la plagua si es ampla; e sino, pausa sobre aquela un dels emplaustres que conveneysso ad aquo e encarnan aquela, entro que sia sanada.	 When you have finished those sutures and some of them are still open, the doctors advise to check if the bleeding from the fracture is severe enough; otherwise, place a bandage over that area until it's healed
Capitol .v.	 I am not sure what "Capitol" refers to in this context, but perhaps there might be an error in transcription or punctuation? Could you please provide more information about the phrase so I can better assist you?
De restauracio de la furcula quan es trinquada.	 When a rib is fractured
Motas veguadas es trencada la furcula de la partida denant deves le muscle, e aquela fractura es fayta en una de tres manieyras.	 When a rib is fractured, the doctors will examine whether any muscles were torn and treat that fracture one of three ways:
Quar o es trencada, o seperada, o es seperada en doas partz otra que no accidan satagias; e es leugier a la restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que accideysso en lu satagias, e es dificil a restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que la fractura es am plagua.	 Either the fracture is separated from each other or it was already separated into two parts that don't align with one another, and in this case they will simply treat the pain; or if both sides of the rib are fractured, it can be difficult to restore the normal alignment and may require surgery.
E la operacio en aquela, quan la fractura es ses plagua, es que tu fassas esser present dos ministres, per so que la un tengua le adjutori e siegua la furcula trencada, e l’autre extenda le col ves aquela partida.	 In that case, when a fracture is severe enough to require surgery, two surgeons will be called upon one of whom shall hold the fractured rib and another to extend from the opposite side to align with it.
E aprop enguala la fractura am les tieus ditz entro que sia fayta la forma de lu segon que cove, e no sia en lu eminencia pauca ni concavitat.	 When a bone breaks in such a manner that it is necessary to make the second cut after inspection of its form and not into its poor or concave area.
E si indigeysses mes de extencio, lahoras cove que pauses dejos le titillic del malaute spera de drap o de lana, e sia la grandesa de lu segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat; e exten e eleva la furcula e coarta la spera am la tua ma entro que enguales la frectura segon que cove.	 If the necessity arises to amputate, I suggest that you cover it with cloth or wool, as well as keeping in mind its size compared to your needs; also extirpate and lift the flap of skin over the bone so that the incision follows closely behind once again.
E si no podes atirar la extremitat de la furcula a las partidas defora, per so quar es pervenguda al preon, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e pauses sobre le muscle de lu un coyssi migier en grandeza.	 If you cannot amputate the arm of the flap below the elbow due to risk of infection, have the patient lie flat on their back and place a cushion under their thigh for support in size.
E le ministre prema le muscle de lu a las partidas dejos entro que l’os de la furcula sia elevat que es en le preon en sus, e lahoras tu rectifique la fractura e enguala aquela am les tieus ditz.	 The physician gently raises the arm of the patient to above their shoulder and examines the fracture closely; afterwards they align it with the incisions made earlier between them.
Mays si sentes satagias de la furcula e so maugudas, lahoras cove que fendes sobre aquela e extraguas aquelas satagias am facilitat.	 If you suspect gout and your symptoms are severe, I suggest placing a cushion between the patient's thighs to support them in ease.
E si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu ingenia inscisio de lu am un dels inscissoris les quals has apparelhatz ad aquo, pus que havias pausat dejos la furcula le sturment que serve le ciphac; e es sturment de fust o de ferr del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	 If the patient is resistant to the incision you have made earlier in this manner, pause and examine it as closely as possible. Afterwards, decide whether to remove or repair it according to its nature.
E es semblant a culier del qual aquesta es la concavitat; e sia la sua latitut segon aquo que has necessitat de lu, segon la grandeza del os o la pauqueza de lu.	 This text seems to be describing how medical procedures are performed on patients with ailments such as hernia or intestinal issues. The first sentence suggests that the procedure involves a cushion being placed under the patient's thighs and another servant holding their hands, perhaps indicating assistance in performing an operation?
Mays la longitut de lu sia segon que es a tu possible a la operacio; que haja doas extremitatz ayssi cum vezes, e la una extremitat sia ample e l’autre streyta.	 It suggests that the length of the body is important for the operation to be performed correctly. The text implies that there will be two assistants assisting with both arms and legs. One assistant should have a wide handspan while the other has a narrow one.
E si la disrupcio de la plagua la qual has inscidida quan has extraytas la satagia del os es ampla, e yest segur de apostema caut, lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura.	 If the disruption of the flap that was created when you removed the saddle is large and it's safe to stitch up both flaps of the skin together.
E si la disrupcio es pauca, o temes apostema caut, lahoras tu uemple la plagua am draps e pulvils segon la quantitat de la scissura de la plagua.	 If the disruption is small or you're worried about stitching up both flaps together, then cover and bandage the flap with gauze according to the size of the cut in it.
E si accideys apostema caut, lahoras infon drap en vi agre e oli rozat e vi, e pausa sobre aquel.	 If stitches are necessary but you're worried about bleeding and risk of infection, then place a dressing on top with something absorbent like cotton wool and cover it up.
Mays la strictura del os quan es ses plagua e ses seccio, es que pauses emplastre fayt de farina de moli am album de huou, e pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e aprop pausa la spera dejos le titillic de lu, si indigeyssas de aquela, e aprop pren humemate, so es torca la qual teno les Sarrazis , que sia mot longua, e sia latitut de lu de un palm o entorn aquel; e aprop pausa pulvils duplicatz sobre la stopa e l’emplastre; e aprop pren una stela de taula subtil de la qual la latitut d’ela sia de tres ditz e en longitut semblantment; e aprop envolopa aquela en drap, e aprop envolopa aquel drap am la stela en lo loc sobre le loc de la fractura; e aprop pausa humemati ayssi cum es revout, e revol aquela sobre le col de lu e dejos le titillic de lu sa e dejos le titillic de lu malaute, e reduzeys aquela sobre tota partida, e quan vezes que la strictura de la fractura am strictura descent, e es aquo que no es occultat sobre tu.	 If you're stitching a flap and a cut separately, then first apply flour paste to the flap and cover it with a bandage on top of that. Place another bandage over the bandage in order to hold everything together if needed.
E tot, que no sia mauguda la stelha desobre le os trencat; e per so cove que tu vejas le malaute quascun dia, que quan le liament es mollificat o vezas la stela ja esser remauguda, lahoras tu rectifica aquo e strenh la liadura.	 "When a broken bone is encountered, be cautious not to apply a tourniquet over it; instead if you see the patient's body swelling or hear sounds of fluid in their lungs, then apply pressure on that part.
E aprop pausa le dormir del malaute sobre le col de lu, e pausa dejos le titillic de lu deves le dormir de lu en la nueyt un petit coyssi; per so que am aquel sia elevat le adjutori de lu del latz de aquel, e donc es elevada la la fractura de la furcula a elevacio del muscle; o sia le bras de lu liat al col de aquel.	 "Place the pillow below the patient's waist and put a titillation pad beneath them so that they sleep flat on their back in a small cushion, to ensure that both of his arms are at their sides.
E no deslies le liament si no accideys en le loc prusiment o apostema, entro a xii dias.	 "Do not apply pressure if the limb is bleeding or torn off; wait for up to 12 days.
E aprop renovelha le emplastre si has vista la facia de lu ad aquo, e ajusta en la strictura e restaura aquel e layssa entro que sia restaurat e sia coagulat la fractura de la furcula.	 "Replace the splint if you see evidence of bone injury at that place and adjust it to fit properly. Repair any damage and ensure that both the break and the blood clot have been restored.
E es strenguda e comfortada segon le mes en xxviii dias, e alcunas veguadas en alcus homes es fayt en mens de temps de aquel.	 "Strengthen and comfort them on days 28-35; some wounds may take longer to heal than others.
Capitol .vi.	 "The end of the medical treatise.
De restauracio de fractura de la spalla.	 "Rehabilitation for a broken shoulder blade.
Spatula tart es trencada en le loc lat de lu e no so trencatz de lu sino les marges.	 "If the broken bone is in the lateral part of their body, do not break it but rather its edges.
E donc quan es trencat le loc de lu — e es trencat en le mieg loc de lu — e no es conogut sino per tocament, lahoras segon que es la figura de la fractura sforsa te la preparacio de lu e reduzir aquela segon la figura natural en tota manieyra de engen la qual es a tu possible.	 "Then when the bone is broken in the proximal part of their body - or if it is broken at the lower leg -, do not try to move them, but rather wait and let doctors prepare them and reduce that area back down to its natural size as much as possible.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc polvera de moli am album de huou e stopa leon; e aprop pausa pulvil de drap duplicat; e aprop pausa sobre lu stela lada de taula subtil segon la quantitat de la spatula tota o mays un pauc.	 "Place a cushion under the patient's thighs, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
Mays si dejos la stela es concavitat en alcu dels locs de la spatula, lahoras tu enguala aquela concavitat am stopa leon, e aprop pueja la stela segon equalitat.	 "If the cushion is concave in the areas of the spatula, then you must fill that space with a cushion to prevent the cushion from coming out.
E aprop strenh desus am humemati longua ab constriccio decent e am fermesa de la stela entro que no sia remauguda del sieu loc.	 "After placing the cushion, you must stretch your arm gently across it to keep it in place and prevent it from coming out of its location.
E considera le liament en quascun dia; e totas veguadas que sia mollificat, lia autra veguada e stren le e equa la stela si es remauguda del sieu loc.	 "Consider each day and ensure that the cushion is softened, loosen another and gently stretch it to keep it in place if it has come out of its location.
E jagua le malaute sobre le sieu latz sa.	 "Place the patient on their back.
E la spatula es restaurada en xx dias o en .xxv.	 "The cushion is restored within 10 days or less than that.
E donc quan es complit aquest nombre, lahoras tu dissolveys le liament, e que tu scias ensegurat quar aquela es dels osses dels quals la cominicio no es temuda ni lor dissolucio.	 "When you have completed this number of days, then the cushion is removed and it can be assured that it is from bones where the beginning was not expected to dissolve.
E si procezeys del loc del os pessa e pongeys dejos la codena, lahoras tu scindeys sobre lu, e osta le, e fay segon que havem dit en la fractura de la furcula de sadacio de apostema caut si accideys aqui.	 "If the cushion is placed on a bone and it falls out, then you should check that area to see if there was any damage or breaking of the rib cage from forceful coughing.
Capitol .vii.	 "The end of Part VII.
De restauracio de la fractura del pietz.	 Restoration of the hernia
Le pietz alcunas veguadas es romput en le mieg loc de lu e aquo tart endeve; mays las extremitatz de lu mot endeve que so ciccadas e comminuidas.	 The intestines are withdrawn into a small hollow, and there it is fixed tightly; may the extremities of him move as little as possible and communicate only with the aid of finger holes
E dels accidentz de lu quan es trencat le mieg de lu es que declina a las partidas dedintz e accideys a lu gran dolor, e dificultat en lo hale, e tos, e fort leu e vomeys sanc; e es declarada en lu cavitat en le os trencat e no es occulta al sentiment.	 When the hollow of his body is torn apart and he feels great pain, difficulty in breathing, weakness, fatigue, coldness, and thirst, it is declared within him, not hidden from feeling
E la restauracio de lu es que sia resupinat le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa entre las spallas de lu un coyssi; e aprop prem als muscles de lu, e ajusta las costas de lu am las mas de dos costatz, e subtilia te en la operacio de lu e en la equacio segon tota manieyra que es ad aquo possibla e que conveneys ad aquo, entro que retorne la figura del os segon que cove.	 The restoration of him is to place a cushion on either side, pause between the flaps and then press on his muscles, adjusting the chest and back ribs as much as two fingers width, and gently in the operation and adjustment after every attempt that it can be done and suitable for this, until returning the figure of the torso as long as possible.
E aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e estopa e pausa desobre astela de taula subtil de sauze o de caligi e de a lor semblantz en levitat, pus que tu envolopas aquela en drap; e aprop subtilia te en lian aquela sobre le os trencat que no sia maugut; e vay am liadura segon retonditat al dors alcunas veguadas, e strenh aquel am strictura decent; e aprop considera la liadura en tota hora, e quan es mollificada strenh aquela.	 Then pause over the chest and stomach, pause between these two tablecloths lightness or heaviness, put a cover on top of it, gentle in wrapping that around the torn place so as not to be hurt; then gently wrap it around the torso torn, considering its tightness and when it is relaxed tighten it.
E si necessitat provoca a desliament de aquela deves corrossio o pruziment, o dolor, o apostema que accideysso en le loc, lahoras tu coyta e deslia aquela e erradica le emplastre e rectifique aquo que accideys per aquo am manieyra de curacio de lu; e aprop reduzeys le emplastre, si vezes ad aquo la facia; e ajusta a lu strictura entro que sia sanat.	 If the need arises to cause this pain or effusion, or any other that happens in that place, the doctor will remove and clean it, fix it as needed through care for him; then reduce the cloth if necessary, adjust the tightness until it is healthy.
Capitol .viii.	 "When pain occurs in the joints due to cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body.
De restauracio de las costas quan son trincadas.	 Restoration of the legs when they are torn apart.
Sapias que fractura de las costas no catz sino en locs grosses que siegon le dos; e de las extremitatz de lor de la partida denant no accideys ad aquelas contricio sino per aquo quar so cartillaginosas.	 Only the large veins or arteries in their extremities are torn, and not at those places on their sides; rather they are cut through where they are connected to the body's main veins or arteries.
E cognicio de lu no es amaguada al sentiment deves la inquisicio de lu am les ditz.	 If it is necessary, make an incision into them without pain, for questioning its nature.
E la restauracio sia ayssi que enguales la fractura am les ditz segon la manieyra possibla, entro que sia engulhat segon que cove, e aprop emplastre e strenh le os trencat am stela, si indigeys de aquel.	 The restoration should be made with the same incision as that of the tear, if possible, between which and what is torn, placing it on a stretcher to support the cut member until further examination may determine its necessity.
E si la fractura de las costas es declinant a las partidas dedintz, lahoras accideys al malaute dolor vehement e punctura, ayssi cum punctura que accideys ad aquel que ha pleureci, e per aquo quar le os ponh le velament; e accideys a lu difficultat de hanelit, e tos, e vomit de mot sanc; e aquesta es de dificil curacio.	 If the tear of the legs is deteriorating, then pain and cutting occur frequently, as it often happens to those who have pleural effusion, by wrapping them in cloth so that they may not fall out, and doing difficult procedures such as intubation, thoracentesis, vomiting, and this is a very difficult procedure.
E ja les Antixs so engeniatz en aquela am motz engientz.	 Then the arteries are opened up in order to perform the operation.
E de lor so que diso: cove que pauses viandas del malaute que engendro imflacio e ventositat, per que le ventre sia imflat e sia extendut, e la fractura sia impellida a las partidas defora.	 They say this to prevent the accumulation of inflammation and excess gas in the abdomen, so that it may be flattened and extended, and the tear is pushed out.
Mays nos avoreyssem aquo per so que no sia causa leugiera a generar apostema caut, si no accideys; e si ja accideys, lahoras ja ajuda ad aquo.	 "When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia pausada desus ventoza e aprop que sucque am fortitut; e es semblant a ratiocinacio, mays empero es temut que la ventoza atire las superfluitatz al loc per la debilitat.	 "And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery.
E diyssero alcus de lor: cove que·l loc sia cubert am lana que ja es submersa en oli caut, e sian pausatz pulvils entre las costas entro que sia umplida, que sia la liadura engual quan envolopas aquela segon retonditat; e aprop sia curat le malaute am curacio de pleuresi de vianda e de medicina.	 "Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out.
E si causa vehement constrenh le malaute la qual no sufferta, e le os punh le velament am punctura ledent, temem sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que fendam sobre le loc, descubram de la costa trencada, e aprop pausem desobre aquela instrument que conserve le ciphac, la rememoracio del qual es precedida, e que inscidam le os am facilitat, e extraguam aquel.	 "You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
E aprop que ajustem las doas labias de la plagua, si es gran, am cozidura, e curem aquela am emplastres entro que sia sanada.	 "And place the two large leaves of the bandage if it is a large one, and arrange that over any cuts or sores.
E si accideys dedintz apostema, lahoras tu coyta e enfon pulvils en oli rozat e pausa sobre le loc, e que sia curat le malaute am aquo que cove a la apostema dedintz.	 "If pain occurs due to the passage of a stone, then place powder in hot oil and cover it with a bandage.
E sia ressupinat sobre le latz sobre le qual dorm, entro que sia sanat.	 "And raise your head on a pillow that is warm.
Capitol .ix.	 When joints are afflicted by cold humors that infiltrate into each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout among doctors.
De restauracio de fractura del spondil del dos e del col.	 Restoration of fractures from the spine at two and the collar.
Alcunas veguadas endeve fractura als osses del col, e tart endeve a lor atricio, e semblantment als spondils del dos.	 Any broken bones in the neck must be restored by an orthopedic surgeon; similarly for the spine of two.
E cum aquo accideys ad alcu e voles saber si sara sanat o no, lahoras considera, quar si vezes las sieuas mas ja mollificadas e stupefaytas e mortas e no pot maure aquelas ni extendre ni strenher aquelas e quan constrenges aquelas am les tieus ditz o punges aquelas am agulha e no sent en aquelas dolor, lahoras sapias que no es sanat, e en las mes de disposicios es mortal.	 When it happens to you and you wonder whether it is a disease or not, the doctors consider that if times have passed and many other severe consequences occur without being able to stop them by straining them with an awl, they know that it's not healthy; in such cases there are no treatments available.
E si mau aquelas e sent en aquelas constriccio am les ditz e punctura, lahoras sapias que la nucha de l’os es salva e que le malaute guereys am curacio.	 If they feel pain in the joints and have swelling, doctors know that this is gout; the patient will seek help from a doctor.
E si ve als spondils del col le semblant ad aquo e voles saber si sira sanat o no, lahoras considera als pes de lu.	 If it happens to both the spine and you wonder if it's healthy or not, doctors consider your feet as well.
Lahoras si tu vezes que so ja mollificatz, accideys ad aquels aquo que es accidit en las mas, e aprop quan jatz sobre le sieu dos, yeys ventozitat e egestio ses la sua volontat, e alcunas veguadas es resupinat sobre le sieu dos e vol urinar e no pot, lahoras sapias que es mortal, e adonc no trebales en la curacio de lu.	 If you have many times that your feet are swollen and pain occurs at the same time as well, and when you lie on your back, you vomit and cannot urinate; doctors know it is fatal, do not attempt treatment for this condition.
Mays si no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, la causa es milhor e pus leugiera.	 When there are no other causes of such a pain, it must be gout.
E la curacio de lu es que te perforses a la sedacio del apostema caut que pauses sobre le spondil atrissat oli rozat sol, o am mugols de huous asatz; pausa sobre aquela aquel alcunas veguadas le dia entro que sia sedat le apostema caut.	 The cure is to apply the poultice of the pointed cautery over a heated and soothed spone on which the gouty swelling lies, or on the joints where it hurts; pausing for some time until the pointed cautery is applied gently with soothing words.
E lahoras pausa un dels emplastres confortantz e exsitans, e strenh sobre aquel am liament; e comanda al malaute que use de repaus e de tranquillitat e que no dorme sobre la partida am la qual atroba dolor entro que sia sanat.	 After the poultice has been applied and cooled down, press gently on it while soothing words are spoken to the patient; instruct them to take breaks and quiet time, and not sleep until the pain is alleviated.
E si accideys deves la atricio del os satagias o alcuna causa que ja es seperada de lu, lahoras cove que secces sobre la codena e que ostes aquel os; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua, am sutura si es gran; e aprop cura aquela am alcu encarnatiu dels enguentz, entro que sia sanat.	 If the cause of the pain is from the spleen or if there are no other causes to be separated from it, have them lie quiet on their back and adjust their legs; and if they are sitting, then straighten up as well.
Mays si es trencat le derier del os alhoses, e es la fi de la coeta, lahoras cove que tu entrometas le dit pous de la ma senestra en le cul, e que enguales le os trencat am l’autra ma segon que es possible per equacio segonda; e aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e astelha, si indigeysses de aquels, e aprop strenh aquel.	 If the cause of the pain is cut from the spleen and it's the end of a fit, have them hold their hand in front of their buttocks, and join their legs crossed over each other if possible; and place the poultice gently on that spot, if necessary, and press firmly.
E si sentes satagias trencadas en lu, lahoras tu fen sobre aquela, e osta aquel, e cura la plagua am la curacio que es precedida entro que sia sanada.	 If you feel the spleen is torn as well, have them lie on that spot, and onto their back, and apply the poultice to it before it's healed.
Capitol .x.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet
De restauracio de la ancha.	 Restore the intestine or hernia to its cavity
Les osses de las anchas tart so trencats, e si trencan, lahoras la fractura de lor no es sino communicio en las extremitatz de aquelas e son inscidas en la longitut e declinan a las partidas dedintz; e accideys al malaute dolor en le loc e punctura, e la camba es stupefacta quan es fractura.	 Bones of the thighs are broken when they break, and if they break, the pain of the patient occurs in that area and injury, and the veins are paralyzed due to the fracture.
E la restauracio de lu es que tu extendas la tua ma sobre aquel entro que sia sobre la fractura qual es la figura de lu.	 The restoration is done by extending your hand over where it lies on the surface of the fracture, which represents its position.
E si fractura es en la extremitat de lu tant solament, lahoras tu enguala aquela segon que a tu es apparelhat per equacio engual entro que sia asemblat a la sua figura natural.	 If it is only in one extremity of him alone, the doctor will tie up that part with ropes to make sure it stays in place while aligning its natural position.
Mays si la fractura es en le lonc o que ja declina a las partidas dejos, lahoras tu fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu ventre entro que sia preparada a tu la restauracio de aquela fractura.	 If the fracture is in the abdomen and refuses to return through its incision, the doctor will tie up the patient's abdomen over that part of his body while preparing for the restoration of that fracture.
E donc quan auras engualada aquela, pausa sobre lu emplastre, e aprop pausa sobre aquel astela de fust o de codena, e strenh per strictura sobre la qual no temas punctacio de fractura ni remocio de la stelha.	 When you have tied up that part, place a cushion on top of it and also on the other end of its support or cord, to prevent any injury from the fracture or loosening of the rope.
E enguala la concavitat am aquo que uempla aquela entro que aquela prengua la strictura segon equalitat, e comanda al malaute que dorma sobre le sieu dos o desobre le sieu costat sa.	 Tie up that part in such a way as to prevent it from breaking while aligning its position equally well on both sides or covering one side of the patient's body.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu cessa de extencio de lu e de la sua restauracio entro que sia sedat le apostema caut, e pausa sobre lu aquo que sede aquel segon que es precedit; e aprop retorna a la restauracio de lu, e strenh aquel ayssi cum cove.	 "When the abscess has been cut open, then stop applying pressure to it and its restoration should be done in such a way that when the second step is complete, one immediately returns to the restoration of it.
E si accideysso en le os satagias o son comminuidas, lahoras tu las tratz.	 "If it happens on the sagittae or the temporomandibular joints, then the sores are treated.
Capitol .xi.	 What is this Latin phrase and what does it mean?
De restauracio de la fractura del adjutori.	 Restoration of the fracture of the collarbone.
Adjutori es aquo que es entre le coyde entro al cap de la spalla.	 The adjutory is that which lies between the neck and the top of the shoulder blade.
E si es trencat, lahoras la restauracio de lu es en una de doas manieyras, de las quals es la una que tu prenguas fust pla de migiera groceza segon aquesta forma:	 If it is broken, then the restoration of it will be in one of two manners. Which of these ways are you willing to follow for more beauty?
E sian liatz en doas extremitatz dos liamentz, e aprop sia suspendut del loc elevat.	 And there is a second manner by which the suspension is on both ends and placed above them.
E segua le malaute sobre una sezela; e aprop gieta fora le sieu bras trencat sobre le fust entro que pervengua al titillic de lu en le mieg loc del qual sia annexa la curvitat del fust.	 After the patient is placed on a bench, and one place places his broken arm over it in such a way that when he presses at the top of it in the middle part which is attached to its curve will come out.
E aprop suspen sobre aquel alcuna causa greu, o·l minestre extenda aquel a las partidas dejos; e aprop le metge eque la fractura am las sieuas mas ensemps, entro que la fractura retorne segon que cove.	 Then the physician and one of his assistants suspend it so that there is no great cause to extend it out to their range of motion; and thereafter the physician will examine all its parts, until the fracture returns after which
E l’autra manieyra es que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sieua cervitz e suspen la ma del col de lu am liament; e aprop comanda a dos ministres que la un de lor tengua aquo que es desobre la fractura am las suas mas; e l’autre tengua le pus dejos de lu; e quascu de lor extenda a la sua partida.	 When the patient's buttocks are open, the second servant supports their head and suspends it from beneath with his hand on the colostomy bag, while another commands one of them to stretch out its right arm over this way, so that it can see what is about to happen; and the other commands him to extend his left leg.
E si voles que la extencio sia pus fort, lahoras tu strenh sobre la fractura am liament e sobre aquela am autre liament, e quascu dels dos ministres extendan a doas suas partidas.	 If you want the extension to be strong, then support it from beneath with both hands and stretch out over both of its limbs simultaneously, and have both servants extend their two arms out in front of them.
E donc si la fractura es propinquada a la extremitat del muscle, lahoras cove que sia pausat la mitat del liament sobre le citillic e l’autre dejos la fractura deves le coyde.	 If the fracture is close to an extremity of the limb, then place one half of it on the outside and the other shall be kept inside,
E semblantment si la fractura es propdana al coyde, lahoras cove que sia pausat le liament sobre aquel loc e sobre aquel coyde.	 Similarly if the fracture is close to a joint, then place one half of it on that location and the other over another joint.
Enguala aquela am facilitat e ses trebal, e aprop quant sira engualada segon que cove e es applicada per bona applicacio, lahoras strenh aquela si no accideys apostema caut.	 When it is applied easily and smoothly, and if it is placed correctly according to the good application method, then support it firmly unless an error occurs or there are difficulties in applying it.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras layssa la strictura entro al vii dia, e pausa sobre lu lana sutza enbeguda en vi agre e oli rozat entro que repause le apostema, e lahoras tu stren aquela.	 If an error occurs during the application or there are difficulties in placing it correctly, then place a cushion under its surface on the first day and let it sit still as best you can until tomorrow, and support it firmly.
E la manieyra de strenher aquela es que pauses emplastre sobre la fractura, e aprop pausa envolopament de drap nau sobre le emplastre; e aprop ajuste le bras sobre aquel adjutori, e pause la sua ma uberta sobre le sieu muscle.	 "The servant is to place a cushion on top of the fracture, and then put down a blanket over it; and then adjust your arms under that support, and place both hands above his chest.
E pausa le drap e strenh sobre le adjutori le bras per so que·l bras sia en loc de stelhas, si no prohibeys de aquo alcuna causa del os trencat.	 "And then remove the blanket and strengthen over him; put his arms in place as if they were broken, unless there is a good reason not to.
E lahoras usa de stelhas.	 "The doctor uses stitches.
E es que pauses sobre la fractura aquela stela que sia pus lada e pus fort de las autras stelas; e pausa entre quascuna stela la latitut del dit, e sia la longitut de las stelas segon la trencadura am addicio de tres ditz de tota partida.	 "And place a bandage tightly on the fracture, and then place another one at an angle to support it; put them close together in length but leave enough space between them for three fingers of both hands.
E aprop strenh sobre las stelas am la strictura la qual he dita al comensament del capitol.	 "And tighten the bandage on top as much as possible, and then start applying stitches from the beginning of this chapter.
E es que la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura sia pus streyt.	 "Your stitches over the area of the fracture should be very tight.
E quant pus es alonguada la fractura sia la strictura menor.	 "The bandage should be looser than it is on the fractured area.
E donc si vezes le situament de las stelas e la strictura ayssi cum havem dit en la hora en la qual restauras le membre al sieu assituament, lahoras tu fay.	 "And then, when you are restoring a member to its place in the situation, do so with great caution.
E si temes apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la strictura e las stelas entro al dia vii ayssi cum havem dit.	 "If you are afraid of causing further damage, then let the bandage and stitches remain in place as they were previously.
E aprop considera le liament en totas partidas per tres dias per so que no accida en le loc pruziment o imflacio; o es prohibida la vianda pervenir al membre per disposicio de superfluitat de strictura; e donc rectifiqua tot aquo segon que havem dit.	 "Consider the matter for three days to prevent bruising or swelling, unless it is forbidden by doctors due to a lack of tightness on the bandage; and then correct all this as you previously said.
Mays si tu yest sobre confizanssa que no accida alcuna causa de aquo, lahoras no deslias la liguadura sino aprop tres dias o mays.	 When there is no cause for gout, doctors do not apply any treatment, but wait three days or more.
E sia la sua dormicio del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e las sieuas mas sian sobre le stomac.	 The patient's bed should be placed between the thighs of the woman, and the pillows on her stomach as well.
E pausa sobre le adjutori cocena plena de lana engualment, e considera en tota hora de la nueyt o del dia que no sia deliada ni dissolta la figura del membre trencat, o que sia le liament mollificat, donc rectifica aquo tot am la tua vertut.	 While the broken member is being healed or mended with stitches, and consider every hour of the day whether it has been properly mended or not; if not, correct it as soon as possible.
E pausa la vianda del malaute segon le orde le qual havem denant mes, enayssi que la vianda sia subtil en le comensament entro que es comensat strenher; e lahoras cove que egrossas la vianda de lu.	 After the order of healing has been given by a doctor as mentioned above, ensure that the bandage is gentle on contact from the moment it was first applied until now; and doctors should also make sure to cover with additional bandages if necessary.
Quar de constuma del adjutori e de la camba de lu es que sian strengutz en xl dias; e lahoras cove que sian desliatz e sia administrat banh e sia medicat am enguentz los quals rectifican aquel.	 After the bandage and cloth have been applied, they should be tightly bound for 7 days or more; doctors are to remove them and apply new ones if necessary, so that any defects can be corrected.
E si la fractura es layha atrita, lahoras tu no deslies de aquela le liament e las stelhas entro a l dias o entro a dos meses.	 If the fracture is healed by itself, doctors do not remove stitches or apply bandages until after 1 to 2 months have passed.
Capitol .xii.	 The end of the medical treatise.
De restauracio de fractura del bras.	 Treatment for fractures in arms.
Bras es compost de dos osses les quals so appelatz dos focils; dels quals la un es petit, e es aquel que siec le dit pous, e l’autre es gran e es aquel le qual es pausat dejos le petit dit, de la partida pus dejus.	 The arm is made up of two bones called the humerus and radius. Of these, one is small, and that's the one whose name comes first in Latin, while the other is large and it is the one kept from moving the smaller one through restraint.
E fort leu es trencat le focil major solament, o le petit, e fort leu son trincatz ensemps.	 The large intestine breaks open by itself alone or the small one, while the small one is torn in pieces.
E quan es trencat le focil petit desus, lahoras la restauracio de lu es leugiera, e la sanacio de lu es pus leugiera.	 When the small intestine has been torn apart, then healing of it should be quick and its restoration is easy.
E quan es trencat le focil de lu dejos la fractura de lu es mala, e la sanacio de lu es dificil.	 If the large intestine has been torn apart, then a fracture in it can be harmful, and healing of it will be difficult.
E pus mala de aquela es quan son trencatz dos osses essemps.	 When two bones are torn together is when the situation is very bad.
Donc si l’os le qual es trencat es le focil petit desus, lahoras es convenient al metge, deves la restauracio de lu, que pauze petita extencio am facilitat entro que aquel sia engualhat.	 When the bone that has been torn apart is the small intestine, then it's advisable for a doctor to assist in restoring it and its restoration should be done as quickly as possible because of the potential damage caused by tearing two bones together.
Mays si le focil gran es aquo que es trincat, lahoras cove que pause extencio pus vehement.	 If the large intestine has been torn apart, then it is advisable to take very strong action quickly.
E si les dos focils so ensemps trincatz, lahoras cove que tu pauses la extritura mot pus fort.	 When both intestines are torn apart, then you should take very strong measures immediately.
E cove que pauses la figura de la ma deves la restauracio de lu e la extencio de lu estenduda sobre un coyssi, e sia le pols de la ma a las partidas desus, pus aut que totz les autres ditz, e le dit auricular sia pus bas dels autres ditz, e le malaute sia cezent sobre una cezela cayrada.	 And it should be remembered that the hand in question should be placed on a cushion to support its restoration and the tearing of it must be done firmly over one pad or several others, leaving the ears untouched as much as possible, while avoiding touching other parts if necessary, and the injury from above must be treated with utmost care.
E sia un coyssi denant lu en la altetut o endreyt de lu, per so que·l malaute no encorra trebalh.	 And when placing it on a high table or elevated surface to prevent it from falling.
E aprop le ministre extenda le bras de la partida pus dejos am la sieua ma o am liament, e autre ministre extenda desus semblantment.	 The first servant extends his arm towards the patient's body, and then moves it aside to make room for another servant who will place their hand on him or her shoulder as well
E aprop le metge engualhe le os entro que redugua aquel segon la milhor figura que pot.	 The surgeon takes a second instrument that can be used in addition to the first one, to cut deeper and make a more precise incision if necessary
E si en la factura del os so satagias, lahoras te perforsa raduzir tota pessa en le sieu loc am la tua vertut.	 If there is a wound on the arm of the patient, they must carefully remove all the flesh from that area and lay it down flat in order to heal properly
E si appar en lu satagia separada que punh la codena e no es a tu speransa en la restauracio de lu, lahoras tu fen sobre lu e osta aquela segon la manieyra la qual havem dita desus.	 If there is separate pain in the arm that prevents your recovery from it, then you should apply this second dressing over him and leave the one which we have already mentioned on his hand.
Mays si la fractura es am plagua, yeu ja he fayt ad aquo capitol singular, e donc pren la curacio de aquel.	 If a bone is broken and you need to apply this specific dressing here, then you should first take care of it.
E si accideys apostema caut al comensament de la tua restauracio, lahoras tu lineys un drap am cerot fayt de oli rozat e cera blanca, e sia migier entre specitut e subtilitat, e strenh drap sobre aquel am strictura subtil entro que le apostema sia cedat; e lahoras remau le cerot e pausa emplastre preparat de polvera de moli am clayre de huou, e aprop pausa stelhas; e sia la stela la qual es pauzada sobre aquela fractura pus lada e pus fort.	 If you begin your recovery procedure and the wound is not ready for this dressing yet, then use a cream-based dressing that is white and has a middle of purity and subtlety between two extremes. The dressing should be applied to it in such a way as to prevent the dressing from being torn off with any force; and after applying it, you must remove the old dressing and place a prepared plaster over it, made of flour mixed with clay which will dry slowly; and that plaster is to be placed over the fracture itself, lightly yet firmly.
E sapias que·l nombre de las stelas del bras so vi en las majors disposicios, o sia la fractura en un focil o en dos focils ensemps.	 The first sentence translates to "You know that in the major fractures there are two bones broken and three in a double fracture.
E aprop pausa la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura pus fort e pus vehement, e quan mays sira la extrictura a las partidas desus de la fractura o a las partidas pus bassas de lu, pausa la strictura un pauc pus molh segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu en le comensament del capitol.	 This sentence means "Then pause the tightening of the location for the fracture that is strong and intense, and when it's time to loosen up the tightness from the fracture or the tightness in very weak areas, then pause the tightening one moment less than what precedes a remembrance of it at the beginning of this chapter.
E les draps que so envolopatz sobre la fractura sian draps mols humitz, e no sian durs ni aspres, e·l fiel am le qual es strenhut sia de li propriament migier entre subtil e gros, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	 The bandages that wrap the fracture should be soft and moist, not hard or tight, and faithful to one who is known for being gentle between subtle and gross, as recommended.
E considera le membre e·l liament aprop alcus dias.	 Consider the member and the ligament alignment appropriate for healing days.
E si accideys alcuna causa de la qual rectificacio es necessaria, ayssi cum prusiment le qual accideys al membre, e lahoras cove que tu enbroques le membre am aygua cauda entro que cesse aquel pruziment.	 If any cause of correction is necessary, as you might have broken the member and pain occurs in it, apply water gently to bring it together until that pain stops.
E leysses le membre no costreyt entro que repause, e aprop torna la strictura.	 Do not continue tightening the member beyond when paused, and then resume tightening it.
E si la extrictura ja es mollificada e l’os ja es remaugut e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras rectifiqua tot aquo am la tua vertut.	 If the tightening has already been softened up to the extent that the bone is loose and flexible enough as mentioned above, then you have rectified everything according to your understanding.
E considera mays si le nutriment es prohibit pervenir al membre per superfluitat de strictura, quar lahoras cove que mollifiques aquel un petit e laysses aquel per alcus dias entro que corra ad aquel le nutriment, e aprop strenh aquel.	 Consider the nutrition if it is forbidden to tighten the member for excess of tightness because you soften that slightly and let it relax a little over time until it reaches its full strength again and continue tightening it.
Mays si al malaute no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no cove que sia desliat entro aprop xx dias o enviro de aquels.	 When a patient has no cause for the ailment that we mentioned earlier, doctors will not prescribe any treatment within this timeframe or environment.
E aprop sia suspenduda la ma del malaute per la sua vertut de movement agitatius, e fay aquel dormir sobre le sieu dos.	 Then place a cushion under their buttocks to support them when they move, and let them sleep on their back for comfort.
E sapias que aquesta fractura es restaurada en xxx dias o en xxxii dias, o fort leu es restaurada en xxviii dias, e tot aquo es segon la disposicio de las compleccios e las disposicios de la vertut.	 You know that the fracture is restored within 30 days or between 28 and 35 days, depending on how quickly it is restored according to the complexity of procedures and the state of health of the patient.
Capitol .xiii.	 Capitulation.
De restauracio de fractura de la pinche de la ma e dels ditz.	 Restoration of fractures in the arm or leg.
Sapias que a la pinche de la ma e als nuzes dels ditz tart endeve fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio motas veguadas.	 You know that if a fracture occurs in the arm or legs of the patient and they cannot be moved as per our guidelines, then you should immobilize their affected limbs to prevent further damage.
E quan accideys a la ma fractura o atrissio, lahoras cove que·l malaute segua cayrat e denant lu lies cezent segon equalitat, e aprop pausa la ma de lu sobre aquela extenduda.	 When there is an arm fracture or dislocation, the doctors tell the patient to keep moving their unaffected limb and rest their affected limb by placing a cushion over it.
E aprop le ministre extenda les osses trencatz e·l metge engualhe aquels entro que sian congongitz am bona congoncio.	 Then extend the bones that are broken, while another doctor holds them in place so they can align properly with each other.
E lahoras cove que pause emplastre e estopa, si no accideys apostema caut; e aprop pausa stela desus segon la quantitat del loc, e tu ja has envolopada aquela en drap de li.	 Then the doctors tell you to place a cushion and stop any bleeding if there is any. And then they will determine how much pressure or time it takes for them to stop.
Mays si la trincadura es en las partidas dedintz deves le ventre de la palma, e lahoras fay semblant de spera de drap, e comanda al malaute que strenha aquela am la sua palma trincada; aprop sia strenguda am drap lonc.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors infiltrating the body and occurs in the feet, then it is customarily called gout by doctors.
E sia la stelha de cuer am drap en le qual sia levitat, per so que le cuer sia aplicat a la palma; e strenh aquela segon que cove.	 And if there are any blisters on the body in which they become inflamed, do so with a pointed cautery to make it apply firmly to the palm of the hand, and then hold it tightly.
Mays si la fractura es a las partidas defora, lahoras cove que pauses desus stela e autre estela de la partida dejos en la palma, per so que la ma sia uberta e dreyta; e aprop pausa la strictura, ayssi cum es revolvuda la ma a la rateta entre les ditz am liamentz.	 And if there is any fracture on the surface of that part of the body, then place another cushion over it and put your hand firmly in its palm to make sure it stays well-attached and straight between the digits; hold tightly so as not to let go from fear or pain.
E si accideys fractura a alcu dels nozes dels ditz, lahoras si es le dit pous, sia engualat segon que cove e aprop sia strenhut am la palma e si·t voles, pausa a lu astela petita dreyta per so que sia elevada la fractura e no sia mauguda.	 If it happens that there is a fracture on the toes of those digits, then place another cushion over it as well, and put your hand firmly in its palm to make sure it stays attached securely, and if you want to, press down gently with a small cushion so that the fracture stays elevated but not strained.
Mays si la fractura es en les autres ditz, ayssi cum en aquel del mieg loc, o en le indic, o en le auricular, o en le anular, lahoras sia engualhat e liat am le dit sa le qual siec aquel; o sian totz liatz segon continuacio, e es milhor; o pausa sobre aquel stela petita, ayssi cum havem dit en le pous.	 If it happens that there is a fracture in another digit besides those mentioned earlier, then place another cushion over it as well and hold tightly to the finger or thumb next to it so that they stay attached together; or if you continue to press gently with a small cushion above that one.
E considera, en la tua restauracio, e aprop aquela, la disposicio de apostema caut e oppose — am la tieua operacio — am aquo que cove quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, segon que es iterada la narracio de lu.	 In your treatment, and with that as well, make sure you apply a cold cautery, and against the flow of blood - this is to ensure the operation's success when any cause of these arises, after which it has been recorded in writing.
Capitol .xiv.	 Chapter fourteen
De restauracio de fractura del os de la coyssa.	 Treatment for a fracture in the thigh bone
Le os de la cueyssa motas veguadas es trencat e es declarat al sentiment segon que es convertit a la partida denant e a la pus sobirana.	 The thighbone is broken and declared as such after it has become apparent that it occurred during an attack of gout and severe pain.
E la restauracio de lu se fa enayssi que·l liament es strenhut sobre la fractura e autre liament dejos la fractura, e le malaute sia prostrat sobre le sieu ventre e sobre la cara.	 The treatment for it is that a bandage should be placed over the fracture and another on top of it, with the patient lying prone on their belly and face.
E aprop le ministre extenda tot le liament a la sua partida segon la qualitat, quan la fractura es en le mieg loc del os.	 The minister extends the bandage to its length after quality has been established when the fracture is in one piece of bone.
Mays si es propdana a la razitz de la cueyssa, lahoras sia le liament propda al denolh a la partida del pentenilh, per so que la extencio caja en sus, e le autre liament dejos la fractura.	 It may be necessary to place the bandage over both legs in order to hold down the patient's head during recovery, to prevent it from falling out of bed.
E semblantment si la trencadura es propdana al denolh, lahoras sia fayt le liament propda al denol, e sia la extencio a las partidas dejos.	 Similarly if the fracture is located on the head, it should be placed over both legs as well to prevent the patient from falling out of bed.
E aprop le metge enguale le os am amduas las sieuas mas entro que reduzesca aquel segon la semblansa natural e l’os es conjungit per bona conjunccio; lahoras cove que pauses emplastre e strictura, si no accideys al membre apostema.	 The physician should make sure that the bones are tightly held together after they have been joined by a good union, or else there is a risk of separation between them; in case any part of it comes loose.
Mays si accideys en lu apostema, lahoras tu layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que l’apostema caut sia cedat, e aprop retorna a la tua curacio.	 When someone faints in front of you as an attack occurs on the tongue, pain arises from it and is customary for doctors to call it tongue cramp
La strictura de lu sia ayssi fayta: cove que envolopes sobre la fractura una benda dura, e dobla aquela dos o tres veguadas, e remaugua de lu superfluitat; e aprop envolopa la camba entro que pervengua al talo e a la razitz de la cueyssa.	 This stricture is so tight: wrap it around the fracture with a hard object and hold it for three or four breaths, then release its excess moisture; and wrap it around the cheekbone to prevent its path from reaching that of the jaw or nose
E intromet lonc fiel entre la cueyssa e la camba prop del denol a las partidas dejos, e venguan las extremitatz del fiel de la partida pus sobirana de las doas partz, e aprop revolveys sobre la camba e la cueyssa aquo que superflueys de la benda.	 Place the needle between the cheek and the jaw, towards the side of the face where it is most swollen; then move its extremities to either side gently, so that they are not too close together; and place it over the cheek and the nose such that excess from one side does not spread onto the other.
E aprop pausa sobre la cueyssa en le loc de aquela fractura astelhas, e pausa de aquelas una stela sobre le os de la camba.	 Then place a cushion over the cheek where the fracture is located, and another on each side of the jaw
E aprop uempli las vacuitatz entre la camba e la cuoyssa am draps mols, per so que sia coagulada la extrictura.	 Place the cushions gently between the cheekbone and the nose to prevent excessive swelling in that area
E aprop comensa am strictura fort del mieg sobre le loc de la fractura am tres envolucios o quatre, e quant mays tu te alonhas am liament del loc de la fractura, la tua strictura sia menor e pus leugiera e pus molha.	 Place the tight bandage on the location of the fracture with three or four wraps tightly in place; as you move away from that area, loosen it and make it less tight and more pliable.
E aprop exten a doas extremitatz del fiel a las partidas dejos entro que pervengua a la cavilha del pe, e strenh amdoas las extremitatz de las stelhas del autra part per so que·l liament no sia remaugut del sieu loc.	 Place both of the servant's extremities at the side where they are going to prevent them from coming down over your foot, and stretch out the other ends of the strings on that side as well to make sure it is not pulled away from its own location.
E aprop leyssa la strectura sobre aquel, don esta ayssi que no accideys al membre corrosio ni apostema caut ni emflacio e semblantz ad aquels; e si accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, adonc cueta te am desliament de lu, e rectifica aquo que accideys tot aprop, segon que havem dit motas veguadas.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout among doctors.
Mays si en le os es pessa del os la qual pongua, lahoras cove que tu engualhes aquel segon que a tu es possibla; e sino, fen sobre lu e remau aquel, e cura am aquo del qual es precedida la rememoracio entro que sia sanat.	 If you can't open the abscess of the eye, then do so with your own hand and remove it immediately thereafter, and cure what came before by remembering that it is health.
E alcunas veguadas es strenhuda aquesta fractura de la coyssa otra aquo que sian ajustadas a lu stelhas, ayssi cum havem dit en le adjutori e·n le bras.	 And the joints become stiff due to this fracture of the cartilage that is adjusted to its sheaths in such a way as described by the attendant and in the arms.
Mays empero en la restauracio de lu en tal manieyra fayta no accideys al malaute claudicacio; e si es restaurada sola, otra aquo que li sia applicada l’autra camba, lahoras es necessari que claudique aquel del qual es tostemps.	 However in the healing of this manner it does not occur in the patient's claudication, and if it is healed alone then apply another cushion on them, the physician must make sure that he cramps from whom it happened earlier.
E sapias que la coyssa es strenhuda en xl dias o un pauc mes o un pauc mens, e tot aquo es segon la diversitat de las compleccios e de las autras dispozicios.	 You know that the joint becomes stiff in one or two months or a few days depending on the variety of complications and other circumstances.
Capitol .xv.	 The last sentence translates to: "This concludes part 15.
De restauracio de la fractura de la rodela del denolh.	 Restoration of the fracture of the kneecap.
Sapias que fractura de la rodela del denol tart endeve, mays accideys a lu motas veguadas atrissio.	 You know that the fracture of the kneecap is very serious and may cause problems with movement.
Mays si accideys a lu fractura, lahoras no es sino fissura o trauc en las suas partidas, e aquo es am plagua o ses plagua, e sobre aquo tot es estat am le sentiment.	 When a fracture occurs in the patient's body part, they are merely tears or bruising on their parts, and thus it is called a sprain or strain, over which everything rests to its extent.
E la restauracio de lu es enayssi que sia engualat aquo que es romput de las partidas de lu am les ditz entro que sia agreguat e conjongit segon que es possible per equacio e facilitat e fabricacio.	 The recovery of it involves ensuring that everything is restored in order to remove any damage, which may involve doing additional work and combining efforts so that it can be done easily and conveniently.
E aprop pausa emplastre e pausa sobre aquel stela redonda, si indigeysses de aquela; e strenh desus am strictura ad aquo convenient.	 Then place the round stone there if necessary, and stretch out your arm to that extent as it is convenient for you.
E aprop considera totas las disposicios las quals havem recomtadas en las autras fracturas, ayssi cum es apostema caut e semblant ad aquels enaissi que se oppause a tot accident am aquo que a lu es convenient entro que sia sanat.	 Then consider all the arrangements that are recommended in other fractures as well, so that you prevent any accidents related to it while treating it to its extent and preventing complications arising from it.
Capitol .xvi.	 The sixteenth chapter of the capital book
De restauracio de la fractura de la camba.	 The recovery of a leg fracture.
Sapias que en la camba so dos osses dels quals la un es gros, e es le nompnat per nom de la camba; e l’autra es subtil, e es nompnat focil.	 The bone that is larger it is called the tibia, and the other one is smaller and called the fibula.
E accideys a quascus de las specias de fractura aquo que accideys als dos osses del bras, e per aquo es fayta restauracio de lu ayssi cum restauracio del bras engualment, e la operacio de lu es una.	 When fractures occur in the bones of both arms, then the recovery and treatment are done similarly for them as well, making it one operation.
E si so trincatz dos osses ensemps, la camba es convertida a totas partidas.	 If two bones break simultaneously, the leg is broken into all parts.
E si es trinquat le os pus subtil, la camba es convertida a las partidas Denant.	 When the nose becomes obstructed due to cold air infiltration, the congestion is called rhinitis.
E si es trincat le os pus gros, atrobas aquel dejos, e es de aquelas causas que no so a tu ameguadas.	 If the obstruction of the nose is caused by thick mucus and discharge from those causes that are not on your list, then it can be called sinusitis.
E aprop aministra extencio e equacio e liguacio de las astelas segon aquel engualment.	 Then apply ointment, gauze, and bandages to the affected area as needed.
Mays empero cove, si la fractura de la camba es laja havent motas satagias, que la extencio sia mendre e pus leugiera, e alleuja am la tua vertut.	 If the fracture of the bone is caused by a gunshot wound that has already been treated and the external injuries are severe, it is advisable to seek medical attention immediately.
E en la camba es alcuna causa de operacio sobre le bras, e es quan tu engualas las stelhas e que comples tota la tieua operacio, lahoras tu prendras pessas de fustz de pi le qual es pausat dejos las cauzas las quals so pausades en solies, e so faytas eyssament de brancas de palma; aligeys de aquelas a las quals es petita groceza, e no sia ges de las manudas, e sia la longuesa de aquelas segon la longuesa de la camba, e del denol entro al pus dejos.	 If there is no cause for surgery on the arm and you have completed all necessary procedures, then the pain may be due to white spots or bruises of the palm; alternatively, if it is a small bruise along the forearm, compare its length with that of the arm itself and determine the reason for the injury.
E aprop envolopa sobre quascuna drap en doas envolucios segon la longitut de lu, e pausa la una sobre la partida de la camba de la una part e l’autra del autra part, e sian del denol entro al pus bas loc del pe.	 Then apply a bandage to each affected area in proportion to its length, placing one over the base of the arm on one side and the other over the opposite side; then place it at the bottom of the leg as directed by your physician.
E aprop lias las doas stelhas en tres locs de doas extremitatz e al mieg loc, quar am aquesta strectura la camba es prohibida de clinar a la partida dextra e sinistra, e sta per bona stacio.	 Then apply the two bandages to both extremities and in between them, as this stretch may be harmful if applied directly on the right and left sides of the arm or leg; it is best not to do so for safety reasons.
E ja es aministrat un brasset de fust segon la longuesa de la camba; e sia pausada en lu la camba per so que conserve aquel de movement.	 The nurse administered a brace for supporting the length of her leg, keeping it in place to prevent any movement from that area.
E majorment cove que tu fassas aquo en fractura, e quan am aquela es plagua propriament.	 Additionally, do not do this if there is an injury present and when you see that condition immediately.
E aprop considera en quascun jorn la camba e studia am aquel per derier studi, e tu le guardes de apostema e de imflacio o de autres causas semblantz; e cum accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, lahoras opausa te a lu am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	 When you see the condition on any day and study it for a while to observe if there are any other causes like swelling or inflammation; but if those causes occur then stop doing this and call your doctor immediately.
Capitol .xvii.	 Chapter seventeen of
De la fractura del talo e dels osses del pe e dels ditz.	 Of the fractures in the leg, bones, and digits.
Al talo no accideys fractura de tot; mays als osses del pe accideys fractura alcunas veguadas; e als ditz del pe pauc accideys fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio en las mes de disposicio.	 The leg bones do not always fracture together as one piece; often the foot bones do fracture some of their pieces; and rarely the finger bones fracture, except for an injury to the hand.
E si als osses del pe endeve fractura e vezes aquels osses esser elevatz sobre si entre lor, lahoras le malaute pause le sieu pe sobre la terra preparat ayssi cum anant.	 If both leg bones break and lift them up between themselves as one piece, the patient will place his hand over his foot on the ground in preparation for this procedure.
E aprop pausa la un pe sobre aquo que es elevat de aquels osses, e aprop calca aquels, e prem, e engualha aquels entro que torno en los locs.	 Then place one hand over that part which is lifted by those bones, and hold them tightly, press, and squeeze them into the locations.
E aprop pausa emplastre e stopa desus, e pausa dejos le ventre del pe una petita taula a la qual sian dos caps plas.	 Then place your hand on top of it and stop its movement, and place your foot over it with two heads placed upon the small table that is only a head's width long.
E aprop strenh aquela am le pe am strectura descent, pus que tu has envolopada aquela am draps e am autres causes de las quals indigeys.	 And place a pillow under her belly to support it while you gently stretch that part of the body downward and wrap your arms around her as well
E cum a lu passan tres dias o quatre, lahoras tu deslia le liament, quar tu atrobaras les osses engualatz, o sian trincatz o sian dislocatz, e la operacio en aquels es ayssi co coneysses.	 After three or four days of treatment, the joints become loose and the bones begin to crackle and pop; therefore it is time for surgery.
Mays si alcus ditz son trincatz, lahoras restaura aquels, e enguala aquels ayssi cum yeu e recomtat a tu en la restauracio dels ditz de la ma.	 If the joint pain persists after these remedies have been tried and are unsuccessful; then you should recommend to your patient that they undergo surgery for restoration of their joints.
E aprop pausa al dit trincat stela segon la longitut del dit, e sia pus lada de lu un pauc; e aprop dejos le pe aquesta taula la qual e a tu recomtada, e strenh aquela am strictura decent.	 Place the affected joint on a flat surface and gently stretch it downward while holding onto it with one hand for about 10 seconds to loosen up the joint.
Mays si aquo que es trincat dels osses so dos o tres o mays, lahoras tu pausa sobre quascun dit astela de la sua quantitat envolopada en drap leon, e strenh la taula en le pus bas del pe, e sia stant sobre la un dels caps de la taula foro le ventre del pe per que la tengua am bona retencio.	 If the joints have become loose and are causing pain after three or four days of treatment; then place a cushion under each elbow to support them while gently stretching down on each arm and placing your hand over it, so that they may lie comfortably on their chest or belly as desired.
E es convenient a tu que no oblides que no consideres totas las causas las quals que e ditas a tu en las autras fracturas dels accidentz que havem dit; e opausa te a tot accident am aquo que cove.	 Remember to also include all the causes for fractures or accidents that may have occurred as well, and avoid any further injuries from happening in this process.
Capitol .xviii.	 The eighteenth chapter of the medical treatise is on curing fevers.
De fractura del conh de la femna e del os del pentenilh e de la vergua del home.	 The first part of this text translates to "Of the fracture of the woman's arm, her elbow, and also that of the man.
Quan le conh de la femna es trincat, lahoras fay aquela ceser en cezela cayrada, e aprop enclina aquela a la partida del dos un petit, e sia tenguda detras.	 When the woman's arm is broken, they cut off the shoulder joint to prevent dislocation, and place it behind her back.
E aprop la matrona umpla le conh de coto, e sia fayt en le conh de lu ayssi cum spera; e aprop la femna sia concutida, e eleva le dos de lu petit a petit, quar tot aquo es fora-getat entro que sia denant la partida del conh ayssi cum spera e l’os trincat retorna.	 They cut off the arm of her husband and lay it on top of hers as well; if the woman's elbow is broken they elevate each limb in turn, so that this will be healed by the time she makes a new one or when her shoulder joint becomes fractured
E aprop pausa pulvils sobre le dos de lu, e quan vol urinar remaugua le coto am facilitat e aprop urine, e reduzeys e retorna aquel segon la manieyra segon la qual mezist aquel al comensament, e aprop retorne al sieu pulvil primier.	 Then they place powders on both of them and when he wants to urinate it is made easier, and afterwards remove the second and return it to its first place, so that they are placed back where they originally were.
E fassa ayssi per vii dias o enviro aquels, quar aquel es restaurat.	 Do this for seven days or until it is restored.
E si voles, pren una vezica de ovela e strenh sobre le trauc de lu una canula de canavera; e entromet tota la vesica en le conh de lu, e aprop ensuffla en la canula am vertut entro que la vesica sia imflada dedintz le conh, quar la fractura retorna.	 If you wish to do this for one bladder, stretch the urethra with a catheter of lead and introduce it into your husband's penis; fill it up until the bladder is inflated by filling in urine through that way while keeping an eye on the penis so that the fracture returns.
E aprop sia umplida de coto e estia per alcus dias segon que havem recomtat, entro que sia sanat.	 Then fill her vagina and leave it as is for a few days until she recovers, until she is healthy again.
E quan le os del pentenil de home o de femna es trincat, lahoras aministra en la restauracio e agulacio de lu aquo que havem recomtat en l’os del anca.	 When the nose of a man or woman is crushed, doctors provide treatment and surgery to this place as we recommend in the nasal passage
E aquo que es dreyt no es occultat en aquestas fracturas proprinquas e que pauc endeveno, majorment ad aquel al qual es alcun studi e us e enten aquest meu libre mot; quar aquela fractura significa a tu en las majors disposicios via dreyturiera en la restauracio e en la strictura de lu, e donc enten be.	 That is why it doesn't occur in those nearby fractures and usually happens to that one which has undergone study or use of this particular free word; for when a fracture occurs, then you should seek treatment and repair accordingly, knowing
Mays en la vergua del home quan es trincada, pren guarguamela de auca, e met la vergua en aquela; e aprop pausa sobre lu envolucio de drap, e sia envolopada, e aprop sia layssada per tres dias o enviro aquels, e sia sanada.	 For the forehead when it is crushed, tie up the corners and fill in the gap with something like a cloth; afterwards place a bandage over this, one on top of that, and put them both down for three days or until healed
Capitol .xix.	 Chapter 29
De restauracio de fractura dels osses quan es am plagua.	 Of bone fractures when the person is laid flat
Convenient es ad aquel al qual accideys fractura am plagua, e majorment si le os es gran ayssi cum es le os de la cuoyssa o de l’adjutori, o semblant ad aquel, que tu te cuoytes e fleubotomes aquel tantost si las condicios de fleubotomia a tu o testifican ayssi cum desus havem dit.	 If you encounter a bone fracture when lying flat, or if the nose is broken in this way and large enough to resemble that of an adjutant, then you must cover it with something soft as much as possible so that any conditions of phlebotomy testify in such a manner as we have said.
E si la plagua eflueys sanc, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la retencio de lu enayssi que tu polverizes sobre lu zegi trissat, si a tu autra causa no es present.	 If the person is lying flat and bleeding, doctors cover it with something soft so as to avoid touching or contacting it if another reason exists
E aprop comensa restaurar la fractura en aquel meteys dia, e no prolongues aquo, si no accideys apostema.	 Restore fracture in that same way today, do not delay it, unless you expect to see improvement
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la restauracio de lu entro al ix dia, entro que sia cedat le apostema, e no apropinques a lu en le tertz dia e·l iiii de tot, quar tu faras accidir mals accidentz.	 If you expect improvement, then restore it on the 9th day, provided that the swelling has subsided by the 3rd day, and do not delay further than this, or else you will be doing more harm than good
Mays si le os trencat es eminent sobre la codena descubert, lahoras cove que te perforses reduzir aquel e engualar aquel am las tuas mas am facilitat e am pauca extencio.	 If the tooth is broken and visible to the eye, then you should try to remove it as quickly as possible, using gentle care and little force
Mays si extencio no es a tu preparada e la equacio de lu am las tieuas mas, lahoras tu reduzeys aquel am las tuas mas am aquest sturment; e es sturment le qual es fayt de ferr, la longitut del qual es de vii ditz o de viii e la latitut del qual es segon la quantitat de la plagua; e per aquo es necessari al metge que prengua de aquels tres o quatre segon la quantitat que indigeys ad aquo en la curacio en tota specia de fractura.	 If not, you should try to reduce it as much as possible using your fingers and the thumb; and this is important for a doctor to know because of its length (seven or eight digits long) and breadth (second quantity), so that they can determine how much force was used in treating all kinds of fractures.
E sia redon, e sia en lu pauca groceza per so que no sia doblat deves la comprecio sobre aquel en la hora de la operacio.	 And make sure there is not excessive bleeding while performing the operation on it
E sia de aguda extremitat al qual sia marge en las sieuas extremitatz; e sia le desus de lu a grossetut tendent, e de la maytat de lu entro a las partidas.	 The extremity to which there is margin in its extremities; and the part of it that is too thick and extended should be taken off, and should be brought into the parts
E aquesta es la forma de lu:	 This is how it works:
E es nompnat en grec “labre volentz atelarem”, so es paleta pauca.	 The correct translation of this sentence in Greek is "open the left arm".
Per que cove que sia pausada la extremitat de lu acuda elevada sobre la extremitat del os eminent.	 This means that you should raise one extremity, such as a hand or an arm, above the head while keeping the other at rest below it.
E inpelleys aquel en una veguada entro que retorne le os, e sia engualat am alcuna equacio.	 This means that you should pull him into a gentle curve and return his hand gently.
E donc esforsa te engualar las extremitatz de la fractura entre lor, e si la extremitat de lu trencada es subtil, e no pren aquela le sturment per bona axcepcio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas la extremitat de aquel os entro que l’insturment haja poder de aquo.	 This means that if you cannot use both extremities for some reason, you should try to move one extremity into a position where the tool can be used as long as it has the power to do so.
Mays si no podes reduzir le os de tot am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras enscideys aquel am aquo que coveneys a lu dels inscizoris les quals havem ditz; o serra aquel am una de las serras en qualque manieyra sia a tu possible.	 This means that if you cannot reduce the arm to where it has been recommended, then place the arm in another position which is within your capability.
E aprop ratz aquel que roman en le os de asperitat e de scorsas menudas.	 This means place the arm across his chest and shoulder areas.
E cum le os es reduzit, e aprop la reduccio le malaute atroba dolor vehement ledent, lahoras sapias que le os no es retornat al sieu loc natural; e adonc fay aquo quar tu confereyses al malaute gran juvament.	 This means that once the arm is reduced, and if it has been properly positioned across chest and shoulder areas, you can tell when the pain has subsided, as the patient will relax their grip on your hand.
Cum es complida la tua restauracio la qual fas al os, e lahoras submergeys drap en vi stiptic negre, e propriament si es en estiu, e no pauses sobre la plagua cerot ni autre causa en la qual sia oli, per so que no fassa en lu accidir poyredura e corropcio.	 Once the restoration of arm is complete and you have secured it properly in a neutral black drape or other material that allows for unrestricted movement without causing discomfort or friction, ensure there are no straps on the chest or back that may cause injury during removal.
E aprop aministra stelas en la hora del tieu compliment de la restauracio de l’os, e layssa la plagua descuberta enayssi que inscidas le trauc am forfexs e uses de envolucios segon la quantitat de la plagua.	 The servant should prepare the steps during the time of the patient's dressing change and remove any exposed gauze that may cause discomfort or irritation, and then apply a bandage in proportion to the amount of gauze used.
E guarda te am tota cautela que no strenhas la plagua am la fractura, quar motas veguadas an fayt aquo les fols metges, e fero accidir sobre les sieus malautes mort o malautia corrodent o zuthement, so es sania.	 Be very careful not to strain the gauze at the fracture site, as excessive use may cause further harm or damage, so it is advisable.
E si la tieua strictura leugiera, molli, diversa de la strictura de las autras fracturas.	 If your patient's condition worsens instead of improving, you should be aware that the symptoms vary greatly from those seen in other fractures.
E si la plagua es gran o es plagua mala, e temes sobre aquel alcus accidentz mals les quals havem recomtatz, e atrobas dolor en le loc, lahoras no cove que pauses sobre aquel astelas, mays fay ad aquel envolucio de draps durs en loc de stelas e strenh lu am aquelas.	 If the gauze is large or of poor quality and you are afraid that it may cause harm in case of an accident during dressing changes or if it causes pain to the area where it has been applied, then do not leave it there but rather remove the hard bandage over it immediately.
E cum aprop un dia o dos vezes ja la plagua comensar, que en lu sia engendrat brac, lahoras tu osta desus le drap le qual havias pausat sobre aquel am vi, e aprop aministra calguas, enguentz am les quals de nostra constuma es que mediquem las plaguas, ayssi cum enguentz tetrafarmacon e semblantz ad aquel.	 If after one or two dressing changes the gauze starts to turn white and begin to grow on it, then remove the covering bandage that you have placed over it and immediately apply cold compresses as we customarily do for treating bruises.
E conveneys a tu que deslias le liament e considera la plagua en quascun dia mati e vespre entro que sia consolidada e fermada, e cove que·l membre sia preparat en tal manieyra que la poyredura corra de lu a las partidas dejos am facilitat.	 You should loosen the bandage and consider changing it every day and night until it is consolidated and firm enough, so that the member will be prepared to prevent any further problems from occurring easily.
si a la plagua passan motz dias, e no es consolidada ni es abscindit de lu le brac, lahoras sapias que aqui so satagias de las petitas per que cove enquieras la plagua am tenta.	 When the bladder is filled and not fixed or opened up from the arm, then you know that it is trying to escape
E de aquelas satagias aquelas que so separadas remau e extratz, aquelas que de lor no so separadas e pongen le membre e fan accidir dolor, perforsa te a inscidir aquelas segon que a tu aquo es possibla.	 And of those who are separated from the outside and from each other, which when they do not separate them and pain occurs in the limbs, please inquire about whether it is possible
E si accideys a la plagua zuchem o eluchen, so es stiomenios, o autra specia de corrupcio e de putrefaccio, lahoras cove que pauses a quada un de aquels am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio del qual es precedida narracio en le sieu capitol.	 And if the bladder is in or outside of the body and it becomes infected with mold, yeast or putrefaction, then you know that there are three types of corruption that follow, which when they occur in a limb cause pain
E de aquo en le qual cove que stia lo mieu sermo e tu fassas present la tua pessa: quan os gros es trincat, emineys sobre le membre ayssi cum le os de la coyssa e del ajutori e semblantz ad aquels dels membres grans, e que no presumas atraccio de lu, ni la extraccio de lu quar motas veguadas accideys per aquo la mort; habantz layssa aquel entro que poyresca, quar fort leu cayra per si aprop xx dias o xxx; e lahoras cura la plagua si a tu es vist, e si no layssa aquela.	 And from that in which you have to make your greatest effort and do the following: when large bones are fractured, raise both legs of the body with the assistance of someone else's help and remain there until the bones heal; if it is not done, neither remove nor extend them because they could cause death; hold back such a thing in that way so that it does not come out; cure the bladder when you see it, but do not leave that one unless it is very sick.
Capitol .xx.	 [No translation provided]
De la curacio de nodacio que accideys en le vestigi de alcuna fractura.	 From the care of the fracture that occurs in the remains of any broken bones
Motas veguadas accideys aquesta nodacio en le vestigi de sanacio de fractura, e majorment que es prop de las juncturas, e es orrasada per lu la figura del membre; e fort leu prohibeys le membre de la sua operacio natural.	 "The motions become irregular due to the fracture of a joint, and especially if it is one of the joints that bend, and the body part will swell.
Adonc considera si la nodacio es recent e aministra en aquela medicinas que han stipticat ayssi co es aloen, e enses, e mira, e sercacollo, e acrassia, e semblantz ad aquels; enayssi que prenguas de aquela alcunas o totas, e comfesiys aquelas am vi stiptic, o am album de huou, o am vi agre, e pausa aquela sobre la nodacio en estopa, e constringeys aquelas sobre lu per bona constriccio.	 "Consider if the fracture is recent and administers those medicines that have been used similarly to this one, as well as others, see, cure, cure, cure and attend to them; otherwise, do not use these medicines or any of them, but rather take a rest for now.
E leyssa extrictura que no deslies aquela per motz dias; e aprop deslia aquela e itera autra, entro que sia remauguda la nodacio; o strenh sobre aquela lamina de plom descentment, quar plom ha proprietat de remaure tot aquo que es imflat en les membres.	 "Do not delay that treatment for too long days; instead apply it and repeat another one until the pain goes away; or stretch over that sheet of damp cloth to soak in this which is flat on its surface, as cotton has the property of getting moist when spread.
Mays si nodacio ja es en peyra convertida e streyta es e nessessitat provoca a ostar aquela coytadament, e lahoras scindeys aquela per la partida pus sobirana de lu, e inscideys la superfluitat e eminent, o ratz aquela am alcus rezoris entro que sia remauguda; e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	 "If the fracture is already treated and stretched as necessary to alleviate it immediately, then stretch that same part separately from any other, and reduce excess fat and swellings, or use this ointment regularly until it heals.
Capitol .xxi.	 ".XXI.
De restauracio de fractura quan es restaurada e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul no segon la sieua natura.	 "Restoration of a fracture when it is restored and properly aligned the delicate member will function normally again after its own nature.
Quan fractura de os es restaurada, e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul, lahoras aquo no es fayt sino per motas causas: de las quals la una es multitut de solucio del liament e de la liguacio de lu fayta no segon que cove; o per superfluitat de strictura dels liamentz entro que·l nutriment sia prohibit correr al membre; o per multitut de embrocaccio superflua; o per movement superfluent no en la sua hora; o per pauquesa de sanc en le cors del malaute e per debelitat de lu.	 When a fracture is healed, and the member is gentle and free from pain, the doctor does not consider it necessary to use any remedy: either for multiple solutions of ligature or ligature, or for excessive tightening of ligaments that restrict nutrient flow; or for excess of sponginess remedies; or for movements done in an unsuitable time.
E curacio de aquo es dar a mengar al malaute e far le cor de lu tendre entro que·l sanc sia multiplicat en lu; e aministra banh; e entromet gaug e leticia sobre lu.	 The care to be given is to feed the patient and make their heart tender so that the swelling may decrease, and to administer a poultice gently over them.
E aprop pausa pegua sobre le membre, per so que la pegua atire a lu mot nutriment, o continua embrocacio de lu am aygua tebeza, entro que·l nutriment corr e retorne a la sua figura natural.	 The hand should be placed gently over the member to prevent it from receiving nutrition or continue the application of remedies until the nutrition returns to its natural form.
Capitol .xxii.	 Conclusion.
De curacio dels osses trincatz quan so restauratz tortuozament e prohibeys la operacio de lor de aquo que cove.	 The care of the bones should be taken when they are completely restored and forbidden any operation on them, to prevent complications from occurring.
Quan accideys al membre ja restaurat aprop la sanacio de lu de tortuositat e eminencia al os trincat e nodacio, e es per aquo fededa de forma del membre, mays empero le membre no es prohibit de la sieua operacio natural, lahora no cove que tu recipias la paraula de aquel que exsistima aquel membre sia de novel trincat.	 When the member has already been restored to its full health and strength through tortuousness, but it is still injured or deformed in any way, it is for this reason fed with a gentle care of the member, so that the member may not be prohibited from its natural surgery, unless you have found someone who claims that such a member was new when fractured.
Mays ja so statz motz fols metges e restauradors les quals han fayt aquo en nostra tera; e aquesta operacio es mot vituperable perduzent a gran temor le senhal de la qual es mortal.	 When doctors and restorers have done this to us in our time, then this operation is of the most despised kind with great fear for its fatal outcome.
Mays si claudicacio e nodacio son recentz, lahoras cove que sian enbrocatz am aygua tebeza en la qual so coytas erbas mollificantz, ayssi cum son fuelas de altea e razitz de lu, e mellilot, e semblantz ad aquels; e sia fayt a lu emplastre am emplastre mollificatio ayssi cum dyallaquilon ben fayt; o que sia preza mucillage de razit de altea e sia contucida am gray de gualina o am oli de cirami, e sia emplastrat am aquel; o que sian prezes figuas grassas e sian trissadas am fems de colom, e semblantz ad aquels de las medicinas que son nompnadas amermans consolidacio.	 If recent claudication and stiffness occur (are experienced), the doctors say that this is a result of the arteries being hardened by fatty deposits or other substances; and they further say that it has been found in many cases to be alleviated through massage, which may soften and remove these deposits or substances from the vessels.
E alcunas vetz es dissolvuda am assidua fricacio leugiera que sia am las mas humidas, e sia administrat movement del membre a tota partida en totas horas.	 Some of them are dissolved by hot steam that is most humid; and they are administered with movements on the whole body over all hours.
Mays si tortuositat ja es anada denant e es fayta fort e convertida es en peyra e provocada es necessitat a curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que sia le pus desus cecsat e la continuacio del os sia dissolvut, e sia inscidit aquo que superflueys de nodacio de aquel meteys am le os am inscissoris subtils, e sia aministrada facilitat en aquel am sollicitut e studi.	 If tortuousness is present and it is severe enough to require treatment, the doctors say that this should be carefully attended to with a view to making it easier; for example by using very soft ointments and dressings, and by administering them in such a way as not to cause any irritation of the fine skin around the affected area.
Capitol .xxiii.	 Chapter 33.
De sermo en dislocacio.	 On dislocation.
Dislocacio es eyssiment de alcuna de las juncturas del sieu loc, per que es prohibida de movement, e es orrezada la figura del membre, e fa venir sobre le malaute dolors e lesios grans.	 When a joint becomes dislocated from its place, it is forbidden to move and the member looks like it has been injured with large sores.
Donc quan accideys ad alcu dislocacio, lahoras cove tantost perforsar que sia reduzit, e no tarde aquela reduzir, quar si es tardada, le loc es apostemat e fort leu am aquo es fayta dificil la reduccio de dislocaccio.	 Therefore, when a dislocation occurs, doctors will try to reduce it as soon as possible and not wait too long because if it is delayed, the joint becomes stiff with difficulty reducing the dislocation.
E per aysso no cove que sia maugut ni stendut en la hora de la apostemacio, quar motas veguadas fa venir spasme e dolors ledentz.	 And if that happens at the time of reduction, then cramps and pains will come along with it.
Mays quan aquo accideys, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la flaubotomia del malaute, e aprop sia layssat entro que repause le apostema; e aprop le membre sia embrocat am aygua cauda e oli, e aprop sia reduzit am facilitat.	 When this happens, doctors will suggest applying pressure to the thigh, and if necessary apply a tourniquet before the reduction; and also warm the limb with hot water or oil, and then reduce it easily.
E tot membre sia curat am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra en son loc.	 And when that member is cared for in this way, memory will come back to its place.
E yeu ja e ordenatz les capitols de dislocacio segon que es precedit en fractura; de la partida del cos pus sobirana entro a la partida pus dejos.	 You already mentioned the joints second after mentioning fracture; from the beginning of the body towards the end, it will be placed.
Capitol .xxiiii.	 The 44th joint
De curacio de dislocacio de la mandibula dejos.	 Treatment for dislocation of the jaw is done here.
So dislocadas las doas mandibulas si no tart; e la dislocacio de amdos es fayta segon una de dos manieyras: que o son remaugudas de lurs locs per pauca remocio, e so mollificadas un petit; o so dislocadas per entiera dislocacio e complida, entro que sian mollificadas a la partida de la junctura entro que corro saliva del malaute e que no puesca tenir aquela ni puesca claure la sua boca, e la lengua de lu sia envolopada en sa paraula.	 When the two lower jaws become dislocated and cannot be reduced by gentle stretching but must be reduced by forceful dislocation followed by immediate closing of the mouth to prevent saliva from flowing out or causing difficulty in speaking, then it is customary to close the mouth with a cloth.
Mays quan la dislocacio de lu es pauca, lahoras en las majors disposicios retorna per si an pauca causa.	 When a dislocation occurs that is slight, then the pain returns to the major joints if only slightly caused
Mays si la dislocacio es entiera e complida, lahoras cove que sia administrada reduccio de lu leugierament, e no sia tardada de tot.	 If a dislocation occurs entirely and completely, then the pain is to be administered reduction of the joint immediately, and not delayed at all
E es que·l ministre tengua le cap del malaute, e entrometa lo metge le dit pous de la una sieua ma en la razit de la dislocacio de la mandibula dedintz la boca de lu, si la dislocacio es de la una part; o que entrometa les sieus dos pouzes ensemps, si la dislocacio es de doas partz, e les autres ditz de las mas de lu sian defora am les quals enguale; e comanda al malaute que cesse las suas mandibulas e absolva aquelas anar de quascuna partida; e le metge engualhe la mandibula e enpellisca la mandibula entro que retorne al sieu loc.	 The minister is to be placed at the head of the patient, and the surgeon enters through his mouth in order to examine the dislocation from below if it occurs on one side; or that the two pulleys enter separately, when the dislocation is on both sides, and others as before mentioned are put around the bottom of him so that they may engage; command the patient to cease all movement of his jaws and open them wide.
E si dificil es la reducio de lu, e majorment si amdos las mandibulas so essemps dislocadas, lahoras aministra evoporacio am aygua cauda e oli, entro que sia fayta leugiera la reduccio de amdos e no tardes la reduccio de amdos de tot, ayssi quo havem dit.	 If it is difficult to reduce him, and if both jaws are severely dislocated, the doctors will administer anesthesia through an incision in his back, so that they may perform both reductions without delay, as mentioned above.
E donc cum retornam e so engualadas, e es clausa la boca del malaute e no es mollificada, lahoras pausa sobre aquelas polvils de drap am cerot, e sia fayt de cera e oli rozat; e aprop sia liat am facilitat am liamens mols.	 And when they are both engaged and the mouth of the patient is closed and not opened, then the doctors will place a pad on its back so that it may be moved easily and gently.
E sia le dormir del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e·l cap de lu sia stant entre dos aurelhes, per so que no maugue aquel a la partida dreyta ni a la sinistra; e no li fassas per forsa masteguar alcuna causa; habans la sieua vianda sia forbicio leon, entro que quan las dolors sian remaugudas e las mandibulas so nozadas, lahoras maugue aquo que vol.	 When the patient is lying on his back and the head of him is between two arms, in order that he may not fall to the right nor to the left; and do not let anything touch it for fear lest any harm come from it; have the patient's eyelids bound so as they cannot open them.
E aquo sia aministrat am facilita, e no trebalhe sobre la apercio de la boca deves la comestio e beure e ocitatio, entro que la mandibula sia nozada e sanada.	 This is how it should be administered and done gently to open the mouth, to feed him with food and drink or give a sip of water, so that the jaw is closed tight and relaxed.
E si es dificil la reduccio de duas mandibulas quan so dislocadas en alcuna hora e no so convertidas als lors locs, lahoras motas veguadas accideysso febres e soda assidua, e fort leu es alerguat le ventre del malaute, e fort leu e vomeys colera pura.	 If it is difficult to reduce two jaws that are dislocated at any time and do not convert into the right place during sleep, then gout attacks occur feverishly, and cold sweat comes out of him in abundance; he suffers from severe pain in his belly, and great thirst with pure cold water.
E quan tu vezes aquo, lahoras sapias que es perdicio; e motas veguadas mor aquel al qual accideys aquo en x dias.	 When you apply this treatment, the doctors know it is happening; and when the gout attacks occur in three days.
Capitol .xxv.	 Chapter XXV
De reduccio de la dislocacio de la furcula e de la extremitat del muscle.	 Of reducing dislocations of the shoulder blade and the extremity of the arm.
Furcula no es dislocada del latz dedintz per la sua continuacio am le pietz; e alcunas veguadas es dislocada a la partida defora, e aquo es declarat al sentiment.	 The furculae do not become dislocated through their continuous movement to the chest; and some are dislocated in front of others, as it is declared by the feeling.
E la restauracio de lu es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos e extenda les sieus brasses.	 The restoration of it involves putting the patient on their back and extending their arms
E aprop coarta le loc am la tua palma am fort coartacio, quar ela retornara.	 Do so with a very firm grasp, as this will ensure that it returns
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre e pulvils e strenh aquela.	 Place your hand on the chest and press down firmly to hold it in place
Mays la extremitat de aquel que siec le coyde e·s continuat am aquel, no es dislocada en alcun dia; lahoras cove que sia reduzida e engualhada segon que havem dit e segon que es a tu aparelhat.	 If the affected limb is still attached and does not come loose in any day, then the pain will subside after saying this and also when you take your arm off.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre, e pulvils, e extrictura, e comanda al malaute adherir a trenquilitat e a repaus entro que sia sanat.	 Place your hand on the chest, press down firmly to hold it in place, and command the hernia to adhere to tranquility and rest until it is healed.
E am aquesta meteyssa curacio es reduzida la extremita del muscle quan es separada del sieu loc.	 The remedy for this condition involves reducing the affected limb when it's separated from its location.
Capitol .xxvi.	 This is the end of the text
De la reduccio de la dislocacio del muscle.	 From the reduction of dislocation.
Sapias que·l muscle no es dislocat sino segon tres manieras, de las quals es la una que sia dislocat a la partida del titillic a la partida dejos.	 The muscle will not be dislocated unless it is dislocated at both ends.
E la segonda es que sia dislocat a la partida desus del muscle, e aquo es fayt tart; e no es dislocat a las partidas detras per la spalla; e no es dislocat a las partidas denant per les nervis.	 The second involves being dislocated at the point of separation from the muscle, and this is done by cutting through it; and not being dislocated at both ends behind the back or between the nerves.
E majorment es dislocat e defora eyssit a las partidas dejos deves le titillic, e majorment en aquels dels quals las carns son paucas, leugierament es dislocat; mays en aquels en les quals so motas carns, es eyssit fora am dificultat.	 In addition to that is dislocated at the point of separation from the titillating, and moreover in those where the nerves are sparse, it will be dislocated; also when they are in those with many bones, it will come out with difficulty.
E fort leu accideys ad alcus homes percussio o cazement, e le muscle de lu es apostemat de apostema caut, e es cujat per aquo que ja sia dislocat.	 The first sentence is "When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body.
Adonc cove que tu sproes aquo entro que estias sobre-sertetut de lu, e lahoras procesiscas en la curacio de lu.	 After you have placed a cushion under them and applied warmth to their limbs, the doctors will proceed with their treatment.
E es conoguda la dislocacio de lu quan es a las partidas dejos deves le titillic; per so que distingescas entre le muscle dislocat e·l muscle sa, quar tu atrobas entre aquels diversitat manifesta; e atrobas en le cap del muscle concavitat e dejos le titillic deves le tocament del cap del muscle ayssi quo un huou, e al malaute no pot redusir la sua ma a la sieua aurelha, ni maure aquela per totz movementz.	 You will distinguish between the dislocated muscle and the normal one by feeling for its concavity at the top; do not apply any force that might dislodge it or cause further damage to both muscles simultaneously.
Si es dislocat deves le pietz o ensus, e tu lahoras atrobas manifest tocament, e no es amaguat.	 If dislocated, you must treat the affected muscle gently and avoid excessive rubbing; if necessary, apply a second cushion or pad underneath it as well.
E de aquesta dislocacio es fayta leugiera reduccio quan es fresca e le malaute es enfant.	 A gentle reduction should be made when the dislocation is fresh and the patient is still young.
E la reduccio de lu es que·l ministre eleva la ma de lu a las partidas desus; e aprop pause les tieus pouses dejos le titillic de lu, e eleva la junctura am fortaleza en sus al sieu loc, e·l ministre eleva la ma de lu, e extenda aquela en sus; e aprop pausa aquela dejos quar ela retorna leugierament.	 The reduction of it is performed by placing the hand on its location and applying force to pull it back into place. You should also hold down both ends with your other hands to prevent any further movement, then release when you feel it returning gently.
Mays si per aquo que havem dit no retorna, e so del comensament que accidic la dislocacio, motz dias, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia banhat en aygua cauda e sia aministrada enbrocacio que mollifique e liniesca ayssi cum si so coytz razitz de altea, e fenugrec, e melillot en aygua, e sia administrada.	 If it does not return or in case you are about to make the dislocation but for some reason cannot proceed with it immediately, the doctor will administer a strong and soothing solution of water, honey, ginger, and lemon juice while you wait, and then continue after that.
E aprop le malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu dos e sia pausat dejos le titillic de lu espera de lana que sia engual entre levitat e strictura, e aprop le metge pause le sieu talo sobre la spera, e eleva le cap del muscle am vertut, e atire la ma del malaute per que no sia mauguda a las partidas dejos, e autre ministre tengua le cap del malaute, que no sia maugut a las partidas dejos, quar aquela tantost retorna al sieu loc.	 When the patient's thighs are raised and held in place by cushions on either side, then the physician places his hand on the top of their chest and lifts up to stretch it, and holds down the arm so that the shoulder doesn't move during this maneuver, and finally he ministers to the head of the patient, making sure they don't hurt themselves.
E si voles, reduzeys aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu fassas esser prezent un home le qual sia pus lonc que·l malaute, e estia de la part de aquel latz, e entrometa le sieu muscle dejos le titillic del malaute e eleve le titillic de lu a las partidas desus entro que·l malaute sia suspendut en ayre, e autre ministre tire la ma del malaute de las partidas dejos del sieu ventre.	 If you want to perform this maneuver, make sure that the patient is facing towards the person who will hold their arm and extend it in an arc so as to lift up on the chest of the patient while they are suspended by the other side, then another minister should take hold of the hand of the patient from beneath their waist.
Mays si le malaute es leugier, lahoras cove que am lu que autre causa sia suspenduda, per so que grave aquel, quar la dislocacio retorna tantost.	 If the patient is lying down, then place the cushions below them to support their body while they are suspended in this manner, and make sure that they do not move or turn over during this maneuver, as it can lead to injury if done improperly.
E es reduzit eysament segon autra manieyra: e es que sia ficat en terra un fust lonc le cap del qual sia redon de figura, ayssi cum pilo de mortier, que no sia gros ni subtil, e aprop sia pausat dejos le malaute; pus que so pausatz sobre·l cap del fust draps leons, e·l malaute sia stant segon la longitut del fust, e aprop sia extenduda la ma de lu a las partidas dejos del autra part; e sia extendut le cos de lu del autre part am fortaleza, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	 Another maneuver to perform is to place the patient lying down on their back while holding their arms and legs spread out so that they are suspended from above, then have a person support them in front by placing cushions underneath their head and extending their body towards one side, making sure it doesn't roll over during this movement.
E si es dificil reduccio de lu per totas las causas que havem ditas, lahoras usa de aquesta cura: e es que tu prenguas un fust la quantitat del qual sia en le lonc de dos brasses, e latitut de aquel sia de quatre ditz, e la grossetut de lu sia aleujat en le preon del tittilic segon aquesta forma:	 When the causes of difficulty cannot be reduced by all those mentioned earlier, it is customary to use this remedy. The dosage is one fist-sized portion, measured from the tip of your thumb to the end of your middle finger.
E aprop sobre le cap redon sian liatz drap leons per so que·l fust no ledesca le malaute.	 And place it over the head so that the fist does not cover the patient's face.
E aprop sia pausat dejos le titillic del malaute, e sia extenduda la ma o le bras sobre·l fust entro a las partidas dejos, e sia liat le fust sobre le adjutori e le bras e la extremitat de la ma.	 Place the fist over the patient's chest and place your hand or arm on top of it to stabilize it in place, covering both the fist itself as well as its adjacent areas such as the wrist and forearm.
Aprop sia pausat le bras sobre un scalo de scala segon la latitut, e la ma sia extenduda a las partidas dejos, e l’autre cos sia suspendut de l’autre part, quar la junctura intra tantost.	 Place the arms on a flat surface at right angles to each other and place your hand over one arm while extending the other, so that it is held in place with both hands above and below.
E cum le intrament de lu es complit segon quascuna maniera que es a tu possibla, e lahoras cove que tu pauses dejos le titillic spera de lana de engual quantitat; e aprop pauza emplastre perparat de polvera de moli am enses e album de huou sobre tot le muscle, ayssi quo es revolvut desus, e aprop strenh dejos le titillic am strictura decent; e le liament sia revolvut sobre le emplastre, e la ma de lu sia annectida al col de lu, e sia leyssat, e no sia mauguda la ma de lu per vii dias.	 When the complete treatment is performed in any way that seems possible to you, and it is recommended by doctors, then place a poultice of ground meal on every muscle affected, so as to soften them up. And if you want to harden the fist while keeping its surface clean, do not let the hand holding the poultice be squeezed for more than seven days.
E cove que sia pausada la vianda del malaute pauca, entro que·l membre sia confortat, quar es pus leugier a la sanacio de lu.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, it causes pain in the feet and is customarily referred to as gout among doctors.
E aprop la vianda sia donada major aprop vii o v e sia exercitat un movement; e donc si es fermat e no es mollificat, lahoras ja es sanat.	 And if it needs to be treated with a pointed cautery on the surface of the foot, then do so and make sure you press firmly but not too hard, as the pain will lessen.
Mays si la junctura es dislocada motas veguadas per humiditat que accideys a lu o per autra causa, lahoras cove que en aquela sia administrat cauteri am tres traucs, segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri.	 And if the joint is dislocated due to moisture or for another cause, then apply cautery on it as well, and after that, in the chapter of cauteries
E si tot aysso es fayt e aprop vii dias es desliat le liament e la junctura no es fermada, e le emplastre e la strictura son reduzitz sobre lu alcunas veguadas, e no es fermada e catz e no pot elevar aquel bras a las partidas desus, lahoras sapias que·ls nervis de lu, les quals so al cap del muscle, ja so inscizes o extendutz o mollificatz, e sapia que la junctura nul temps no sira ficada en loc sieu.	 And if both the ligament and joint are not fixed tightly or cannot be lifted up to their original positions, then the muscles will stretch or stretch out, causing pain in those nerves that are at the top of the muscle, which may compress them or extend them, making it impossible for the joint to return to its place.
De la dislocacio de aquela qu’es fayta deves le pietz e la mamilha o las partidas detras, la reduccio es fayta am impulcio e extencio am las mas, entro que retorne.	 From the dislocation of that which you have caused pain to the buttocks and the thighs or behind them, the reduction will be made forcefully and extend until it returns.
E sia administrada en aquela l’autra strictura, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	 And if another treatment is administered in that other structure, cure this by making sure it is healed.
E si accideys aprop la sanacio gravitat en le membre e tarditat en le movement de lu, lahoras le malaute uze de banh motas veguadas entro que aquela gravitat sia alleujada e que retorne a la natura de lu primiera.	 And if you find that applying the remedy is causing harm to the member or slowing down its movement, then apply it until the gravity is alleviated and returns to its natural state.
Capitol .xxvii.	 When joints are affected by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, resulting in pain especially in the feet, physicians call this gout.
De curacio de dislocacio del coyde.	 Reduction or removal of hernia
Sapias que la junctura del coyde es dislocada am difficultat e semblantment retorna am difficultat; e aquela es dislocada a totas partidas, e majorment a la partida denant a la partida detras, e la dislocacio de lu no es amaguada a tu quar es cazent dejos le vezement o dejos le tocament segon qualque figura sia dislocat, e quan ajustes le coyde disloguat am le sa, aquo es a tu declarat manifestament, quar la junctura es concavada e no pot doblar le bras, ni tocar am aquel le sieu muscle.	 When the joint is dislocated it is difficult and painful, and when it is dislocated at all parts of the body, especially behind or in front, and dislocation occurs without being able to fix it with any figure, then once the joint is fixed the pain stops, this indicates that the joint is concave and cannot bend its arms nor touch on the opposing muscle.
E cove que·t coytes, e reduzescas la dislocacio tantost denant que vengua a lu apostema caut, quar si ve a lu apostema caut, dificil es la reduccio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot; e majorment quan es a las partidas detras, quar pus mala es de totas las autras specias de dislocacio, e de major dolor, e motas veguadas deyssen am aquela la mort.	 After dislocation of the joint it is difficult to reduce or fix it back in place and if you try to fix it with a cautery (hot iron), then doing so will be painful and the reduction may not heal properly; moreover, when dislocations occur behind each other, which often leads to multiple fractures and pain.
E la restauracio de lu, quan es aquela que es possibla reduzir, es que la ma de lu sia extenduda am doas mas, e le bras de lu sia expandut, e las mas del metge sian sobre le coyde e dejos lu, e el empellisca la junctura am les pouzes de las suas mas ensemps, o am la razit de la sua palma entro que torne en son loc.	 When the restoration of the joint is possible then place a cushion under their knees and spread out their legs as far apart as they can; extend both arms so that the hands are placed on top of the knee or palm touching it.
Mays si la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras retorna ayssi que dobla la ma am la sua ma, entro que percuta le coyde am la razit de la sua palma.	 If the dislocation is behind, then place your hand over its cavity.
E si la dislocacio no obezeys a la reduccio, lahoras aministra vehement extencio e mot fort.	 When the dislocation does not subside from reduction alone, the doctors provide strong pain relief medication.
E es que dos ministres extendan le bras, e tenguan aquel eyssament dos ministres per so que no sia remaugut deves la extencio.	 The two ministers extend their arms and have an attendant positioned behind them to ensure they do not accidentally miss the pain relief medication.
E aprop sia revolvut le bras deves tota part, pus que es envolopat drap doblat lonc sobre la ma de lu, o liament.	 The arms must be fully extended from all parts so that a bandage is wrapped around their hand, or at least.
E quant le metge toca la junctura am la sua ma, unte aquela am alcun oli per so que aquo sia aquelas causas las quals ajudan en lubricitat de la junctura am facilitat; e aprop empellesca la junctura am empulcio vehement entro que retorne.	 When the doctor touches the joint with their hand, ensure that there is no oil on it so this can be one of the causes for lubrication to facilitate joint movement; and afterwards tightly wrap around the joint while applying pressure to get rid of it as quickly as possible.
E aprop la reduccio de lu cove que sia pausat sobre aquela empastre en le qual sia stipticitat e excequacio am album de huou, e sia extrenhut am strictura descent, e·l bras sia suspendut del col, e sia layssat per alcus dias.	 Ensure that the reduction is placed on top of a cushion which has stiffness and traction at all times, as well as being tightly stretched; the arm should be held behind its side for several days.
E aprop sia desliat; e donc si la junctura es formada en le sieu loc, lahoras tu deslia le liament de lu e layssa aquela.	 Ensure that lubrication is used and that the joint should be lubricated as much as possible in its location; then after a while wrap it tightly to prevent any slipping.
E si vezas la junctura no be strenher, lahoras tu itera le emplastre e·l liament, e layssa aquela per alcus dias entro que sia extrenhuda; e aprop deslia aquela.	 If the joint becomes stronger as time goes by, then you should continue to lubricate and wrap tightly for several days until it becomes very tight again; and repeat that process.
Mays si accideys a lu gravitat aprop la reduccio de la junctura, e la disposicio de lu es en movement, lahoras aministra humectacio en banh e fricacio subtil, e comprecio, entro que sia aleujat; o pausa sobre la junctura aleliati, so es coyssa de moto grassa; e aprop sia liada, e layssa aquela sobre le os le dia e la nueyt.	 If the joint gravity worsens while trying to reduce it and movement becomes impossible, then provide a humid environment with subtle friction and pressure, until it is released; or put a bandage on top of it so that it can be pressed down gently over time.
E aprop osta aquela, e met aquel en banh; e quan suza, lahoras tu fregua la junctura am fricacio temprada, e aprop itera sobre aquela aleliati, so es ronhonal de moto, una veguada, e la segonda, e la .iii.a.,	 When the pain begins to infiltrate a joint, apply warmth immediately and firmly hold it down with your hand
am intrament de banh, entro que sia linit.	 To prevent further damage
E si voles, pausa sobre aquela fenda de vaca humida e scalfada am boder e stren sobre aquel; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas, quar aquela es humida e reduzeys a la sua disposicio.	 If you wish, place something damp and cool on it to prevent further damage.
Capitol .xxviii.	 The end of the passage.
De curacio de dislocacio de malassen, so es de la junctura que es entre·l bras e la ma.	 To avoid dislocation of the joint, keep it between your arm and hand.
Malassen de la ma alcunas vetz es deslocada, e la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es leugiera, e·l contrari es de las autras juncturas, mays empero cove que sia velocitat en la reduccio de lu en la hora en la qual es deslocada, denant que le loc sia apostemat o que accida en lu apostema caut.	 To avoid dislocation of the foot, keep it between your arm and hand to prevent dislocation from occurring. If dislocation occurs, place a cushion on top or under the dislocated part as needed, depending on whether the dislocation is anterior (front) or posterior (back).
E la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es que tu pauses la junctura de la ma del malaute sobre una taula e le ministre extenda la ma de aquel, e le metge pause la sua ma o o la sua palma sobre la iminencia de la junctura, e empellisca aquela entro que retorne al sieu loc.	 To reduce dislocation of the foot, place a cushion between your arm and hand on a table and extend your fingers towards the joint. The physician will also hold down their palm or hand over the area to prevent the joint from coming out, pushing it back into its original position.
Mays empero cove que sia considerat si la palma ja es ostada al ventre de la ma, lahoras le malaute pause le dos de la sua ma sobre una taula deves la extencio e la reduccio; e si la dislocacio es precedent deves le dos de la ma, lahoras sia la posicio de la ma de aquel intrinicequement sobre la taula, per so que la ma del metge caja sobre aquela iminencia de la junctura.	 If the palm is already over the belly of your hand, the physician will place two fingers on a table and reduce dislocation from there. If the dislocation occurs beforehand, position one finger of their hand inside between the joint and the table so that they can press down on the area when it needs to be reduced.
E donc si retorna tantost, bon es; e sino, lahoras strenh aquela am empastre cedant le apostema e layssa aquel; e no iteres aquo, quar sino, no soferta ni no podes sobre la reduccio de lu pus que passan a lu dias.	 "If you are done with the translation of this sentence and need to provide more sentences or want to stop translating all together, please respond in a similar fashion as before.
Mays empero la junctura roman segon la sua tortuositat; e no notz al malaute alcuna causa, sino que la ma es mollificada e no pot strenher alcuna causa; lahoras sapias que les nervis son trincatz o trissatz, e lahoras no es engen en lu sino que sia strenhuda am cauteri prop le cazament de lu e fort leu aquo confereys alcuna causa.	 "And if the joint is complex and there's no cause for pain other than fatigue of the joints or muscles, doctors know that it will be difficult to find a cure; the reason being that nerves are involved as well.
Donc cum malassem es retornada, lahoras pausa sobre lu empastre le qual havem recomtat, e sia layssat e strenhut per v dias; e aprop sia desliat e sia layssat e la ma de lu sia excercitada.	 "Once the abscess is returned and doctors recommend to keep it in place for several days, then exercise both arms and legs intensely.
Mays si le movement de lu es ostat e accideys en lu alcuna gravitat, lahoras leniys aquela am aygua cauda e am fricacio alcunas veguadas, entro que sia alleujat.	 "If the body movement is reduced and occurs at an altitude of several kilometers, doctors recommend allowing cold water to come in contact with the affected area as it helps soothe and reduce swelling.
Capitol .xxix.	 "Capitulum xxxix
De la curacio de dislocacio dels ditz.	 "Treatment for dislocated joints.
Alcunas veguadas so dislocatz les ditz a tota partida.	 "Some vegetables help alleviate joint pain when eaten at any time.
E quan es dislocat alcun dit de aquels al dos de la palma o al ventre de lu, lahoras sten le dit e impelleys la dislocacio de lu am les tieus pouses, entro que retorne.	 "If a finger is dislocated between the second and third fingers or in the belly of the hand/foot, doctors try to straighten it by pressing on nearby joints.
E aprop sostenta le cap del dit, e suspen aquel deves la part a la qual es dislocat, e layssa aquel per dos dias.	 The physician holds down the head of the patient's hand so that it cannot be moved from its place, and lets this arm hang for two days.
E aprop suspen aquel e exten aquel entro que dreyt sia engualhat en aquel sieu dia.	 The physician suspends both hands in such a way that they do not move on the day of treatment.
E quan sira noyt, lia aquel segon aquela narracio, e no cesses desliar aquel en le dia e exercitar am movement, e lia aquel en la noyt; e fay aquo per alcus dias entro que sia streyt.	 After this treatment is complete and the doctor allows the hand to be loosened on that day, they do not loosen it until the next day or exercise movements in the meantime, allowing for up to two days of rest before returning to motion again.
E fay semblant am aquo, si es dislocat al ventre de la ma, e lia aquel ad aquela partida e fay am aquo la tieua primiera operacio, entro que sia sanat.	 If the patient has dislocated their stomach and hand, they undergo their first operation on that day with the intention of healing.
E semblantment fay am aquo quan es dislocat a las autres partidas.	 The same applies when dislocation occurs elsewhere in the body.
Capitol .xxx.	 That's all, thank you for your assistance!
De la curacio de dislocacio dels spondils del dos.	 From the treatment of dislocations from both sides.
Quan accideys ad alcun dels spondils del dos o del col dislocacio complida, e so remaugutz motz spondils de lors locs, lahoras en aquela no es curacio, quar la mort se coyta al malaute.	 If either of the two sides or the neck dislocation occurs completely and does not heal properly, it is a fatal condition for the patient.
E senhal de aquo es que la egestio del malaute es fora-eyssida ses voluntat, e no pot retenir aquela; e motas veguadas so mollificatz alcus membres de lu o doas cambas de lu o dos brasses de lu, o un de aquels; o es remaugut un spondil de son loc, quar motas veguadas es remaugut e motas veguadas es fayta la remocio de aquels a quatre partidas.	 That is to say that the patient's vomiting is against their will and they cannot hold it back; in fact, if one of them loses control over their abdomen or thighs or buttocks, or if any part of these is dislocated, then all of those parts are lost for four days as well.
Donc aquela ja es remauguda a las partidas detras e es nompnada gelbozitat.	 This text describes medical procedures used in medieval times for hernia reduction surgery or when treating gout attacks on one's feet, where a cushion is placed between the patient's thighs to prevent them from coming out and to hold their hands so that they do not move during the procedure.
Mays la curacio de lu es que lahoras consideras si la gelbozitat accidey de puerissia, quar lahoras en aquela no es curacio ni de aquela no es sanacio de tot.	 The surgeon's task is to consider whether the hernia can be reduced or not and that if it cannot be reduced or treated then neither is it a cure nor is it any treatment for this.
Mays en aquela que ve per cazement o per percussio o per semblant ad aquels, ja diyssero les Antics las manieras de curacio am sermo prolixs, del qual lo mays retorna am profieyt; mays yeu ja e abreujat de aquel del qual lo pauc escusa del trop de lu, per la mieua propinquitat a la entencio mieua exposicio, am la qual he aquo expausat et format ex instrument divers de aquel am le qual mostrero aquo e espausero aquel.	 The task is to perform the operation either by impact or percussion or some other way with those methods of treatment which are most complex and lengthy, from which return the result; may you have already described how little there was of this kind in that place where it was least useful for them, near enough so as to understand its use through acquaintance with what is written here.
E dic que en gelbosita que accideys de la partida denant en le pietz, no es engen ni sanacio de aquela; e semblantment en aquela que es fayta a dos latz.	 It says that in hernia there may not be any cure or treatment of this kind; and similarly for those who have been treated with two cushions.
E de aquelas no es curada sino aquela que accideys en le dos propriament am aquo que yeu recomti.	 It is not cured but the one that occurs at the very end in which you are recommending.
E es que·l malaute sia extendut sobre la sua cara sobre pug engual prop de paret, e sia extendut dejos lu esturment molh per so que no sia lidit le pietz de lu.	 The patient's face is spread over the bed and covered with a wet cloth to prevent their chest from being exposed.
E aprop un fust dreyt sia pausat, ficat en la terra en la extremitat del pug entorn le cap de lu, e autra fust en aviro les pes de lu en l’autra extremitat del pueg.	 A cushion is placed there and held down firmly to prevent the feet from moving around their head as well as on the other side of their body.
E·l ministre tengua le fust, e no sia fermat en fossa; e autre ministre tengua l’autre segon aquela forma.	 The minister has his face in this position, not fixed on a flat surface; another minister has the other way around.
E aprop envolopa sobre le cap del malaute e dejos les titillic liamen leon ferm; e exten la extremitat del liamel al fust le qual es deves le cap de lu, e lia aquel en lu; e aprop strenh l’autre liament sobre las ancas de lu les denols de lu, e deves las cambas de lu; e aprop ajusta totz les liamentz e lia aquels en l’autre fust le qual es deves les pes de lu.	 Place a cloth over the patient's head and fix its corners to their sides securely; extend one of them towards his feet as if it were his head, and hold that in place; arrange all the limbs so that they are on both sides of him, and bind them tightly against each other.
E aprop le ministre cascu extenda le liament a la partida del fust, e no sian remaugutz les dos fustz e les liamentz dels sieus locs en les quals son ficatz, mays empero no so fermatz ayssi cum havem dit.	 The minister should extend the limb towards the first side of the chest and not tighten both sides or limbs in their respective locations as we've mentioned before; rather, they should be loosened slightly to allow for some movement.
E le metge pause las suas palmas sobre le spondil am fortaleza entro que retorne, o que pause sobre aquela una taula, e aprop que ajuste sobre la taula les sieus pes entro que retorne.	 The physician places his palms on the patient's spine with firmness so that they return or place them on a table and adjust them on the table to ensure their return.
Mays si no retorna per aquesta forma, lahoras pren una taula de la qual la latitut o la longitut sia en aviro de tres brassas, e cava en la paret de la qual havem dit que es prop le malaute un loc en le qual intre la extremitat de la taula.	 If this form does not work, the doctors will place a table of which the latitude or longitude is set to three paces from where we've mentioned as being in front of the patient one location on it between that extremity and the edge of the table.
E aprop pausa la maytat de la taula sobre le spondilh, e·l metge pause les sieus pes sobre l’autre extremitat, e estrenha be entro que le spondil sia coartat e que retorne al sieu loc.	 The physician places the mattress on the spine and then places his hands/feet onto the other extremity, ensuring that the spine is supported properly so it returns to its original location.
E si tu voles, obre am torn le qual es revolvut am la ma; e es que tu fiques en terra deves le cap del malaute en le derier del pug dos fustz, la longitut dels quals sia d’un bras, e deves le cap de lu en le derier del pug eyssament dos fustz; e sia la longitut que es entre quascun fust un palm, e ja es fayt en quascun fust trauc en le qual corr torn, e quascun sia mot fermat en terra per so que no sia maugut.	 When you want to open the gap between a patient's thighs and place a cushion beneath them, another servant on their legs, and yet another on their chest, holding their hands; this comes first
E sia mes un fust redon en le qual es le torn, e sia revolvut en les dos traucs dels dos fustz.	 And also have one servant at the head of each leg, as well as another serving on each side, holding their hands; this comes next
E en la extremitat de lu es un trauc en le qual es format le fust, la longueza del qual es un palm am aquo que es revolvut; e en les dos autres fustz es semblant de aquel.	 At the extremity of him is a servant in whose hand it is formed and held the fist, its length being one palm above mentioned; also at the other two fists they are similar to that one
E aprop strenh les liamentz que has streyt en le pietz del malaute en le trau le qual es deves le cap de lu, e les liamentz que has streyts en las coyssas de lu en le torn le qual es deves les pes de lu.	 And apply bandages that you have placed on the chest of the patient and over its wound, as well as those that you have placed between his thighs in order to cover his legs;
E aprop deves quascun torn e stia un ministre que torssa le torn am la sua ma, e le metge engualhe le spondil segon que havem dit.	 And it is necessary for each servant to hold the hand of their patient, and also that another doctor should be present who can assist with the arm as mentioned.
E aquesta es la forma del torn:	 This is the form of the treatment:
E aprop pus que le spondil es retornat, e le loc es engualhat, lahoras cove que pauses empastre exciccatiu am album de huou, e aprop estopa; e aprop pause sobre le empastre astela de taula de la qual la latitut sia de tres ditz o enviro aquels, e la longitut de lu sia quantitat que prengua le loc de la gelbositat, e sobre la partida del spondil sa.	 When the servant is returned and placed in position, then cover it with a sharp excising tool from the book of cuts mentioned; stop immediately thereafter; place over the excising tool plate on which there are three sections or divisions into them, and the length of it will be equal to the distance between its parts.
E aprop sia liat am liament le qual havem dit, e uze le malaute de nutriment subtil entro que sia sanat.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and foot pain occurs, it's customary to call gout among doctors.
E si roman alcuna iminencia en le loc en la fi de la sanacio, lahoras cove que sian aministradas medicinas que moilifico e liniscan am aministracio de la taula per lonc temps, la qual havem recomtada; e ja es aministrada en aquel loc lamina de plom.	 If there is no imminent danger in the location of healing, then pains should be administered medicaments that are soothing and can relieve pain in an area over time, which has been recommended; and it has already been administered to this place from above.
E alcunas veguadas accideys imminencia en le derier dels spondils del dos, e es cujat per aquela dislocacio; e es aquel os le qual ja imineys per que no cove que sia fayta prosompcio a lu am aquesta medicina, quar fort leu fara a tu accidir mort.	 Some of the risks are imminent in the heel of the two legs, and it is caused by that dislocation; and he who knows this will not want to be without this medicine, for fear of death at his injury.
Capitol .xxxi.	 Chapter xxxi
De curacio de anca dislocada.	 Of the treatment for a dislocated joint.
Sapias que la junctura del ancha e la junctura del muscle no endeve sino dislocacio tant solament, e no accideys ad aquelas aquo que accideys a las autras juncturas de petita remocio e concavitat.	 The joint of the ankle and the joint of the muscle do not need to be dislocated only once, but may occur at any or all other joints with small movements and indentations.
E la junctura de la ancha es dislocada segon quatre manieyras, quar es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, o a las partidas defora, o a las partidas denant, o a las partidas detras.	 The joint of the ankle is dislocated after four times, which occurs when it is dislocated on the inside or outside side or in front or back side, depending on where you're standing at that moment.
E majorment es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, e pauc a las partidas denant o a las partidas detras.	 Mostly it is dislocated to the inside or some times to the outside and sometimes in front and sometimes back depending on where you're standing at that moment.
E senhal de la dislocacio de lu a las partidas de dintz es quar, quan tu ajustas la camba del malaute sana am la malaute, es pus longua e·l denolh es pus heminent que de la sana, e·l malaute no pot doblar le sieu pe deves le lenguonar, e es le loc que siec le lengonar apostemat de apostema caut, per so que·l cap de la coyssa ja es pervengut aqui.	 When the dislocation of this is adjusted to the correct position with the healthy leg, it will be long lasting and the pain will subside as if by magic, preventing it from straightening itself out and causing harm, while the part that was dislocated lies here
E·l senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio es a las partidas defora, es que les accidentz de lu so contraris ad aquest accident.	 The sentence before this one translates to "When an injury occurs, injuries of the same type are contrary to that injury.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas denant es quar expan la camba sieua segon compliment, mays empero no dobla aquela ses dolor que es en le denol, e si se perforsa ad anar e no pot sobre aquo a las partidas denant; e la urina de lu es retenguda e l’engonar de lu es apostemat, e deves la ambulacio de lu sobre le talo.	 The sentence before this one translates to "Then extend the lower leg's other part in conjunction with it, but do not allow the joint pain that is there to spread.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas detras es que no expande le denol, ni no puesca doblar aquel denant que doble le engonar, e la camba de lu es pus breva que l’autra, e l’engonar es mollificat, e·l cap de la coyssa es deves aquel loc.	 The sentence before this one translates to "Then do not let the pain spread out and prevent it from spreading over to the other part of the leg.
Mays reduccio de las specias de aquesta dislocacio es que tu consideras, lahoras, si la dislocacio es vetusta et antiqua, que ja es anticada am le havent aquela aprop tu aministras reduccio de lu e roman segon la sua disposicio, lahoras no es en aquela curacio de tot; e adonc no cove que en aquela sia fayta prosompcio.	 The sentence before this one translates to "If you consider the dislocation to be old and not cured, then immediately administer treatment for it in conjunction with its position, otherwise there will not be any help at all.
Mays en aquel del qual la dislocacio es recent, e es una de las quatre specias de dislocacio, lahoras te coyta ad aquo que volvas la junctura e extendas aquela a las partidas dedintz e a las partidas defora, e mau aquela a la dextra e sinistra, quar fort leu retorna e no indigeys de autra cura.	 In the case where the dislocation is recent and one of the four types, it is customary to address this by attempting to restore the joint and extending it in both directions forward and back, and also bending it to the right and left, with great care being taken not to injure any other part of the body.
Mays, si no retorna en aquesta manieyra, lahoras cove que tu prepares ministre fort e extendas la camba de lu de la partida pus dejos, o am las suas mas, o am liament lo qual es liat sobre la camba desus le denol; e autre ministre extenda la ma de aquel desus enayssi que meta las suas mas dejos les titillics de lu; e aprop strenha am liament leon sobre la razit de la coyssa, e tengua autre ministre ters le extremitat del liament.	 If not, it is customary to first extend the limb from its most recent position and then press with great force on the joint furthest away towards your body; or stretch the limb out fully and then apply pressure at all possible points of articulation on the hand that holds it, holding tightly so as to prevent any additional motion.
E sia extencio de lu o de la partida dedintz a l’angonar a la partida de la furcula, o de la partida detras a la partida del dos.	 Extend either from the joint furthest towards your body or behind it; extend across from one side of the rib to the other side and then stretch out behind you, stretching as far back as possible.
E sia la extencio de totz aquels en una veguada entro que·l malaute sia elevat am le sieu cos de terra e que romangua pendent.	 And when the patient is raised up from lying on their belly, with both hands free and supported by cushions beneath them, they extend in all directions as much as possible, rising as high as they can.
E aquesta specia de extencio es specia cominal a totas quatre.	 This extension exercise is the same for all four types of dislocation.
E donc si la dislocacio retorna am aquo que havem dit, sira bo; e sino, lahoras es necessari a tota specia aquo que dire de la propria curacio.	 If the dislocation returns to what has been said so far, that is good; if not, it will be necessary for another kind of treatment specific to this case.
En la reduccio de lu propria, quan es dislocada, e la dislocacio es a las partidas dedintz, cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu latz sa; e aprop pausa les liamentz sobre la razit de la coyssa en aquel loc le qual entre le cap de la coyssa e·l loc que es dejos le langonar; e aprop exten le liament en sus de la part del angonar a la pus auta partida de la furcula.	 In the reduction of the patient, when dislocated, and dislocation occurs at the level of the elbow joint, then place the body of the patient on their back; and apply a pad below the shoulder area in that location between the head of the shoulder and the place where it is located to prevent the limb from escaping.
E aprop autre ministre fort prengua les brasses de lu, e amerme le loc gros de la coyssa malaute e extenda a las partidas deforo per extencio vehement, quar aquela retorna en le sieu loc.	 Then apply pressure on the large area of the patient's shoulder with force, and try to extend it forcefully outward, so that it returns to its original position.
E aquesta specia es de pus leugiera curacio am la qual aquest membre es reduzit que las autres specias.	 This method is specifically designed for reducing the swelling of this member compared to other methods.
Mays si es excusat sobre tu e no obezeys al entrament am aquesta specia de curacio de tot, lahoras cove que sian liatz les dos pes del malaute ensemps am liament fort, leugier, sobre amdos les talos e amdos les denols.	 If you are excused for entering the discussion on this specific treatment of swelling in general, then hold tightly to both hands and firmly, support their toes as well as their heels.
E sia la longitut de quascun de son par la quantitat de quatre ditz, e sia la camba malaute extenduda mays que l’autre per quantitat de dos ditz.	 The length of each should be proportional to the quantity of four inches, and the patient's leg extended more than the other by a quantity of two inches.
E aprop le malaute sia suspendut sobre le cap del fust, e que sia en la mayso; e sia la longitut de lu de la terra la quantitat de dos brasses.	 Then place the patient's head on top, and make it as high as possible; then extend their length of the leg to two inches.
E aprop comanda a un jove fort que minuesca le cap de la coyssa, e sia suspendut am le malaute autre jove, e l’autre jove minuent la coysa am fortaleza empellesca, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	 Then apply pressure to a young person who is holding the patient's head gently in place while supporting them with another youth firmly, so that the joint returns to its original position quickly.
Mays en la reducio propria, quan es dislocacio a la partida defora, cove que·l malaute jaga sobre pug segon que havem recomtat en le havent gelbozitat; e sia strenhut le liament sobre la camba malauta propriament e sobre le pietz de lu.	 When the dislocation occurs outside of the pelvis area, and you recommend to hold it down with a ligature over the patient's abdomen
E aprop dos fustz sian pausatz, la un als pes de lu, e l’autre al cap; e aprop sian pausatz fustz ajustatz al mieg del pueg ficat sobre·l qual draps humitz sian envolopatz, per so que·l malaute no sia dampnajat per que·l fust sia entre las coyssas de lu, per que deves la extencio a las partidas dejos no sia atirat.	 And place your fingers in such a way that the patient's buttocks are spread apart as much as possible and do not let the ligature between their thighs be exposed so it may prevent the intestine from coming out.
E aprop quascun ministre extenda a la sua part, e·l metge am la sua ma enguala la reduccio segon l’art.	 And apply pressure to that area as directed by your physician.
Donc, si obezeys a revercio, sira bo grandament; e sino, pausa sobre aquela diligentment e ayssi quo havem dit en gelbozitat per aquela engualment.	 Then if you suspect another condition may be present, please do so very carefully and exactly as instructed for that purpose in ligature application.
Mays cove que·l malaute jagua sobre les sieus latz sa quetament.	 Place the ligature over the patient's anus to prevent it from coming out of their body.
E quan la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras cove que la camba sia extenduda leugierament, e es segon aquesta meteyssa narracio sobre pueg; e le metge pause la palma de la sua ma dreyta sobre·l langonar malaute, e aprop coarte aquel am l’autra ma, e am aquela coartacio pausa aquel extendut a las partidas dejos a la partida del denol.	 When the dislocation occurs outside of the pelvis area and you recommend extending the bowel to prevent it from coming out; then apply pressure over the patient's anus with one hand while covering that part of their body with another, and press tightly onto those areas during the next contraction.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas detras, lahoras no cove que·l malaute sia extendut a las partidas dejos, e es elevat sobre la terra; habantz cove que sia pausat sobre causa dura, ayssi cum cove le eyssament si l’ancha de lu es dislocada a las partidas defora, segon aquo que havem dit del jasement de lu sobre dos anchas; e es sobre la sua cara e les liamentz sian extendutz, segon que havem dit, no ha guayre.	 If the dislocation occurs behind them and you recommend to prevent its extension by holding it down on a hard surface while covering your face with another hand as instructed in case of any other dislocation occurring outside of that area; then apply pressure over their chest or keep extending those ligatures, depending on what is recommended.
E cove que sia aministrada compressio am taula sobre le loc al qual yeys la junctura.	 When a compression bandage was applied over the area where there's a joint
Donc cum la reducio es complida segon que cove — e·l senhal de la reduccio de lu no es amaguat a tu, e es que tu extendas del malaute doas cambas, e quan tu vezes aquelas enguals e le malaute extrenh la sieua camba e expandeys aquela ses excusacio, lahoras sapias que·l membre segon que cove es retornat — e lahoras tu ajusta doas coyssas e pausa empastre e extrenh am benda ayssi que la ancha no sia mauguda en alcuna de las partidas; e adheresca le malaute a repaus per tres dias o per quatre.	 When the second step is complete, after applying the compression bandage over the area where there's joint pain and extending both legs as well as pushing down on the lower abdomen to release any trapped gases, then you adjust your knees, place one cushion above each knee, and push it flat while keeping your other hand on top of it. Then hold that position for three or four days.
E aprop deslia le liament e l’empastre, e compara la una camba am l’autra.	 After the compression bandage is applied and fixed in place, compare one leg to the other one.
Lahoras, si vezas aquelas enguals en vustament, lahoras sapias que la dislocacio ja es fermada, e adonc layssa le malaute anar.	 After extending both legs, you should know that the dislocation is fixed in place and then leave the patient alone.
E si vezas alcuna causa de mollificacio, lahoras tu retorna e emplastra aquel, e extrenh aquel segon la tua primiera strectura, e layssa aquel en tres dias.	 If there's no reason for rest (in other words, if the patient is not improving), you return and reapply that compression bandage, extending it after your first stretch, leaving it in place for three days.
E aprop deslia aquel, e fay aquel tardar en ambulacio sobre quascu per alcus dias, entro que sia confortat.	 After applying that, wait until the patient is ambulatory on some days before allowing them to resume normal activities, as long as they are comfortable.
Capitol .xxxii.	 Chapter 22
De curacio de dislocacio del denolh.	 Treatment of dislocation of the thigh bone.
Le denolh es dislocat segon tres manieyras, quar es dislocat a las partidas defora, e a las partidas dedintz, e a las partidas dejos mays a las partidas detras; e a las partidas denant no es dislocat.	 The thigh bone is dislocated when it comes out from below the knee joints and above them but not in front of or behind those.
E le senhal de dislocacio de lu es que comandes al malaute que aplique la sua camba am la coyssa; lahoras sapias que·l denol es dislocat.	 The patient's leg is to be placed on a cushion, as the physician orders: they know that dislocation will occur.
E la restauracio de totas las manieyras de lu es que fassas cezer le malaute dreyt, enayssi que ja extenda la sieua camba, si pot sobre aquo; adherir le tieu dos a la cara de lu, e pausa le pe de lu entre les tieus pes; e aprop fay adherir le denol de lu am las tuas palmas, e rete aquelas entre les tieus ditz sobre le denolh de lu am fortaleza, e autre ministre extenda le sieu pe entro que·l denol retorne a son loc.	 The restoration of all the muscles of the patient is to be done by placing the cushion on their leg, and then extending it with the help of someone else: for if they can't do this themselves, have another person hold one end while you extend the other into place between their feet; and ensure that there are no gaps in between the fingers holding onto the muscle as tightly as possible, so that when the dislocation is restored to its normal position it will not come out again.
E senhal de reddicio de lu es que la sua camba adharesca am la coyssa am levitat no-laboroza.	 The relief of the patient's leg involves placing their cushion on the ground and then lifting the foot, without using any strength or effort: for this is to be done gently as possible so that the dislocation will not come out again due to too much force being applied.
E aprop emplastra aquel e fay adhirir la camba am la coyssa, e aprop lia aquelas emsemps am una benda per tres dias o per quatre, e aprop deslia aquelas.	 Place the cushion on their leg and then fix it in place: for this is to be done firmly yet gently so that the dislocation does not come out again due to too much force being applied.
E no uze le malaute de ambulacio per alcus dias, entro que sia sanat e cofortat.	 The patient should not walk around with their leg for several days until they are healed and comfortable.
Mays si la reduccio de lu a tu es excusada, lahoras aministra fort extencio am liamentz dels quals en la curacio de la hancha precedit narracio.	 If the reduction of them is excused, provide the relevant details from the previous paragraph regarding their condition.
Capitol .xxxiii.	 Chapter xxxiii
De la curacio de la dislocacio del talo.	 The dislocation of the heel
Le talo alcunas veguadas es remaugut per petita remocio, e alcunas veguadas es dislocat segon compliment, e la dislocacio de lu es fayta o a las partidas dedintz o a las partidas deforo.	 The foot can be dislocated in two ways: it may fall or twist.
E le senhal de la dislocacio de lu es que vezes le talo imflat procedent a la partida a la qual es dislocat.	 The sign of the dislocation is that sometimes, when the foot falls to its side at which it was dislocated.
Mays la curacio de la remocio de lu es de leugiera reddicio, e es que sia extendut am facilitat am las mas e sia engualhat entro que retorne.	 The treatment for dislocation of the foot is to straighten and return it gently but firmly back into its normal position.
Mays en la curacio de lu quan es dislocat segon compliment, cove que fasses cezer le malaute dreyt, e tengua aquel un ministre fort e valent de la partida detras del dos de aquel en le mieg loc de lu.	 When a foot twists or becomes dislocated in the second way, you should turn it inward with great force and strength behind two of your fingers into its correct position.
E aprop te tu am la tieua ma dreyta le pe de la pus sobirana part, e am la tua ma sinistra de la part pus dejos del pe en le loc de la cavilha.	 And place your left hand on the top of the foot and your right hand on its bottom side near where it was injured.
E aprop atira le pe a tu am la tua ma dreyta, e aprop am la sinistra per dos veguadas, e aprop exten am la sinistra; e empelleys le pietz del pe am la dreyta deves la camba ses trebalh.	 And place your right hand on the top of it and your left hand on two sides, extend the left one, and bend both knees for support as you push against the foot to its correct position.
E fay aquo doas veguadas segon que havem comtat.	 After doing this procedure several times.
E aprop empelleys le pietz del pe a la camba la tersa veguada, e tu es a la cavilha.	 And place your foot in the correct position with force and support from one of your knees as you push against it.
Donc si retorna en una veguada o en dos segon aquesta manieyra, e si vezes le pe engualhat, es bo; e sino, lahoras sobre lu itera la operacio, quar aquel retorna.	 Then if the foot returns in one or two tries with this approach, that is good; but if it does not return correctly, continue to try again and perhaps have a doctor perform the operation as needed.
Mays si a tu es prohibida la reduccio de lu am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu dos sobre terra, e estrenh un paysel mot en terra fermat, e que caja entre las coyssas de lu, e tu ja has envolopat sobre lu drap per so que no ledesca le malaute.	 "When it is forbidden to reduce the size of the patient as recommended by doctors, then place a cushion on its back and spread out an extra one between its thighs, and you have already covered its chest with another cloth so that it cannot move.
E aprop le ministre de lu tengua las suas coyssas, e aprop autre ministre extenda le pe am las suas mas o am liament que lie sobre le col del pe; e aprop extenda aquel quascun ministre contre extencio del sieu par, e le payssel sia extant entre las coyssas del malaute retinent aquel, per so que·l cos de lu no sia atirat a las partidas dejos deves la sua extencio.	 "Place the minister on its thighs and place another minister above it to extend over the chest or back of it, and place one between the legs of the patient as well. Keep the cloth between the thighs of the patient so that his body cannot escape.
E aprop le metge enguala la dislocacio am las sieuas mas, e autre ministre tengua la coyssa sana a las partidas dejos, quar la dislocacio retorna am la facilitat.	 "The doctor extends the healthy leg to support it and places another minister on top of the patient's chest or back to support them as well. The cloth between the thighs of the patient prevents his body from escaping.
E donc cum retorna la dislocacio e es declarada a tu la sanetat de la reduccio de lu, lahoras pausa emplastre e extrenh aquela am liamentz fortment, e ligua le pe am liament a la camba.	 "Once the dislocation is returned and it is declared that the reduction of him is now complete, place another minister at one end of his garment, covering the chest as well.
E cove que temes o te guardes dels nervis les quals so detras sobre le talo, per que le liament sobre aquel no sia vehement e leda aquel fortment.	 "Keep your thoughts and emotions in check while they are behind you on this path to prevent the cloth from being torn apart by them.
E aprop layssa aquel per dos dias o per tres; e si le liament es mollificat, extrenh aquel.	 "Place him for two or three days and if his illness is alleviated then remove it.
E aprop deslia aquel en le ters dia o en le quart, e prohibeys le malaute de anament per xl dias.	 When you have opened the space between their thighs, placed a cushion underneath them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands
Mays si es forsat de anar denant aquel spazi, no es fayta segurtat que la dislocacio no sia sobre lu dissolvuda e corrumpuda, e aprop aquo que no recipia curacio.	 If you are done with that space, make sure the dislocation is not over it dissolved and corrupted, and proceed accordingly.
E si accideys a lu apostema caut, lahoras cove que tu aministre en la cedacio de lu aquo en lo qual precedic la nostra narracio, en autre loc de curacio e de embrocacio, entro que sia remauguda.	 If the cautery falls on that place where our story proceeds and in another location for care and anointing, ensure it is pure.
Capitol .xxxiiii.	 Forty-four
De curacio de dislocacio dels ditz dels pes.	 From the dislocation of the feet
Cove que aquel qu’es dislocat sia engualhat am pauca extencio ses trebal; e aquo que no es dificil, abantz es leugier.	 If they are dislocated and have little or no feeling in their toes, do not worry.
Mays si la dislocacio es en alcus nozes del dos del pe, lahoras cove que fassas cezer le malaute le sieu pe sobre loc engual de la terra o sobre taula, e sia estant ayssi cum si anava.	 If the dislocation is on one of their feet, doctors advise to place a cushion beneath them either on the ground or on the table, and behave as if nothing had happened.
E aprop tu sta de pes, e pausa le tieu pe sobre aquo que imineys de las juncturas, e aprop calca aquel am le tieu pe am vertut entro que retorne, e que vejas aquel ja engualhat e no aparesca en le loc eminencia.	 And when you put them on their feet, place a cushion beneath it where the joints are to be seen, and gently strike that same foot gently in front of the other one until it returns or disappears from the prominent location.
E aprop pausa dejos le ventre del pe de lu una taula que prengua tot le pe, a la qual sian dos caps, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent e ferma per tres dias; e aprop deslia aquel e fay aquel repausar de ambulacio per motz dias, entro que sia estrenhut e de reddicio sia assegurat.	 And place the belly of their foot on a table where it will take up all of the foot with two heads, and gently strike that same part until it is sore and firm for three days; then place it and wait until it becomes quiet and secure.
Capitol .xxxv.	 "Upon arrival.
De las specias de dislocacio que sian faytas am plagua o am fractura o am quascuna ensemps.	 Upon arrival, you will see if the dislocation is caused by cold humors or a fracture of any kind.
Quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, e tu te perforssas en la curacio de aquela e en la restauracio de lu, motas veguadas succezeys la mort.	 If there is no cause found for the pain or if your care does not alleviate it and restore function, you will have succeeded in causing death.
E per aquo no cove que sobre la curacio de lu presuma, sino aquel que es savi en l’art, de lonc uzatge, misericordios e pietados, tardiu, no-ardit ni presomptuos; e que use en le comensament de medicinas que cedan apostemas cautz tant solament, e leyssa le malaute al divinal jutgament, sino ad aquel al qual speras salut de perdicio, am de la malautia alleviacio, e en la qual appareys alcuna speransa.	 Do not consider that you are to be blamed for the care of this person or if it fails in its purpose and does no good, but rather that he is praised who is skilled in healing, with long practice, compassion, devotion, late, without haste, nor presumption; and uses medicines which give little hope, except to release from sin's bonds.
E adonc esforsa te tantost far de lu la reduccio en le comensament de la causa, denant que endevengua apostema caut.	 And when you have done all that can be done in the beginning of its cause and are still left with a desperate appeal for help.
E adonc si le membre retorna segon que volem, lahoras aministra regiment le qual ceda apostema caut e cura la plagua am aquo que conveneys a lu dels enguentz desiccatius.	 And when the member returns after having given it all that can be done, and there is still pain in the area where we want to dry out the desiccated flesh.
E si dislocacio es am fractura e accideys en le os satagias separadas, lahoras tu perforsa le stement de lor, e fay en aquo so que havem dit en las malautias simplas de aquo que es precedit en les locz de aquels.	 If the dislocation is caused by fracture and occurs in the area between the bones separated, you should examine this as well to see if what I mentioned earlier has occurred in that location.
E guarda e esquiva segon la tua vertut aquel del intrament en las vias de temor segon que a tu es precedida la mia predicacio; quar aquo es milhor a tu deves le tieu Creator, e mays permanent a la tua gloria, e mays saludos al tieu cos verays aquels en le tieu temps.	 And guard and conceal the second of your virtues that from within the ways of fear is preceded by my prophecy; for this is better to you than any other thing I have spoken.
Ayssi fineysso las paraulas de Albucasim perfieytament de las quals Dieus ne sia benezeyt.	 And may all the words of Abraham prove perfect, and that God will bless him
Amen.	 Amen
