Ayssi comensan las paraulas de Albucasim .	 When joints are affected by cold humors
O, filhs, pus yeu he a vos complit aquest libre, le qual es le derier de la sciencia de medicina, per le compliment de lu so consequit la fi en lu, e per las exposicios de lu, e per las declaracios de lu, es a mi vist que yeu complesca aquel a vos am aquest tractat, le qual es partida de la operacio am ma, so es cyrurgia.	 I believe that you are looking for the translation of "Albucias" in this context.
Quar la operacio am ma es prostrada en nostre regio e en nostre temps de tot privada, entro que fort leu peric la sciencia de lu, e le vistigi de lu es ostat; e no romasero de lu sino alcunas petitas descripcios en les libres dels Antics, les quals mudero las mas e endevenc ad aquels error e heyssitacio entro que son clausas las entencios de lu e es elonguada la forsa de lu e l’art.	 The operation is considered to be of great importance in our region and at this time, because it is very useful to the science of medicine, and its visibility has decreased; therefore, small descriptions are included in ancient books, which have helped to correct many errors and misunderstandings about that procedure and its duration.
E es vist a mi que yeu vivifique aquela am ordenacio de aquest tractat en aquela segon la via de exposicio e de declaracio e de abreviacio; e per que vengua am las formas dels ferramentz de cautheri e dels autres instrumentz de la obra cum sia per addicio de la declaracio, e per preparacio de lu, la qual causa es necessaria.	 It is advisable to make such a reading of the book in accordance with its exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and by adding instruments for cautery and other tools related to it, so that the declaration can be added as well, and prepared accordingly, which is necessary.
Mays la causa per la qual no es atrobat bo artifex am la sieua ma en aquest nostre temps, es quar la art de medicina es longua, e que cove le sieu actor denant aquo esser excercitat en la sciencia de anotomia la qual recontec Gualia entro que sapia les juvament dels membres e las formas de aquels, e la conjunctio e la separacio de lor; e haia la conoyssensa dels osses, dels nervis e dels lacertz, e·l nombre de aquels, e la egrecio de lor; e de las venas pulsatils e de las quietas, e dels locs del eyssiment de lor.	 One of the reasons why medicine is long-lived and important in this time period is that anatomy has developed to a great extent, which helps us understand better the youth of members, their shapes, connections, and separations; it also covers bones, nerves, muscles, names for them, and descriptions.
E per aquo ditz Ypocras que am u nom es mot, mays en l’obra petit, e majorment en la art de la ma.	 And for this reason, Ypocras calls it the "little work" of the larger craft of medicine
Mays nos ja avem dit de aquel en l’introit de aquest libre; quar qui no es scient aquo que li avem dit de anotomia, no es evacuat que no caia en error per la qual siran mortz les homes, ayssi cum yeu he vist trops de aquels, quar alscus son formatz en esta sciencia e gettan se de aquela ses sciencia e ses experiment.	 And those who do not understand anatomy are in danger of making errors that could cost them their lives; as has been seen many times among those who study this science and make it a part of their own knowledge, practice, and experiments.
Quar yeu vi un metge folh e enperit aver incidit un apostema escrophilos en le colh de una femna, e incidic alcunas arterias del colh per que fluic gran sanc entro que la femna cazec morta entre las mas de lu.	 When a doctor made an incision into the abdomen of a woman and found some arteries there that were bleeding heavily as water flowed out quickly making her die between two stools
E vi un autre metge que pres que el traguera una peyra d’un home le qual avia procesit en sa etat, e la peyra era gran, e venguet a lu e trayssec aquela peyra am un tros de la vesiqua, per que aquel home al tertz dia es mort.	 Another doctor asked for someone who had already been bled in their state to bleed them again and the wound was great, and he did not live long after that, as he died on the third day.
E yeu ja apelat fuy a estrayre aquela, e vi que per la grandesa de la peyra e per la disposicio del malaute conogui subre lu que morira.	 You already know that to treat such wounds, and you realize due to the size of it and the condition of the patient's leg, he would die
E vi un autre metge le qual prenia stipendic de un duc de nostra terra per cyrurgia, e endeven a un crastrat negre le qual era deves lu fractura en la coyssa de lu; e perparec le metge am la sua ignorancia, estrayssec la fractura, sobre la plagua, am pulvinas e astelas am forta strectura, e no layssec a la plagua espiracio.	 Another doctor who was given a stipend from our land for surgery even set an iron rod that would break the fracture in his thigh; and because of his ignorance he failed to heal it properly over time, breaking down the skin at the incision point, bruising all around it, tearing tendons and muscles as well, but failing to cure it.
E aprop le desliet segons los sieus desiriers, e aprop le relieg, e aprop le leyssec per alcus jorns e comandec que nos deslies le liament; e estec ayssi entro que la coyssa e·l pe foro apostematz, e pervenguet a perdicio.	 "When you have prepared the place according to their desires, open it up and remove any obstacles that might hinder its use for several days or until they agree on the agreement; after this has been done take away the cushion placed under them and prevent its escape.
E yeu fuy apelat a lu, e aparelhegui a desliar le liament, e conseguida es tranquilitat e enayssi amermet de sas dolors.	 "You have called upon her/him to come here and after agreeing with the terms remove all obstacles that may hinder its use for some time or until they find peace in this agreement.
Mays empero ja corrupcio era confermada en le membre, per que no pogui refrenar aquela, e no cessec perambular la corrupcio en le membre entro que·l malaute peric.	 "Even though it is confirmed to have entered into the member in order not to hinder its motion or escape from entering that part of the body.
E vi un autre metge le qual perforec un apostema cancros, e fo ulcerat aprop alscus dias, entro que foc magnificada la malicia de lu am lo senhor de lu.	 "And another doctor who performed a cauterization procedure and treated it with great care for several days to prevent the spread of its malice towards the lord thereof.
La qual causa es quar le cranc caut es pur de humor melencolic, lahoras no cove que pervengua a lu am ferr de tot, sino que sia an membre le qual suffertes que de tot fos hostat.	 "The reason why the gall bladder pain is due to melancholic humors and it cannot be treated completely as if from every other member that suffers must also suffer.
E per aquo, filhs, necessari es a vos que la operacio am ma sia devisada en dos devesios: so es en operacio a lu qual es associada salut, e en obra am la qual es perilh en las majors disposicios.	 "Thus, my friend, it is necessary for you to perform the operation in two parts: one is the procedure which associates with health and another procedure that poses great peril on important members.
E yeu ja he exsitat aquo en tot loc de aquest libre en le qual venc opperacio en la qual es error e temor; per que necessari es a vos que guardetz aquo e layssetz aquel, per que les folhs no atrobo via a parlar e a vos desonestar.	 "You have already existed in this same place where the operation is performed that brings error and fear: it is necessary for you to keep guard on it and leave the other one so that those who may come along do not pass by speaking of this or causing harm.
E donc prenetz las vostras armas am sollicitut e am proteccio de Dieu , e les vostres malautes am falicitat e am fermetat.	 And therefore take your weapons in supplication and protection of God, and your misdeeds to silence and firmness
E usatz de la milhor via per la gracia de Dieu perdusent a salut e a lausabla successio, e laysatz las malautias terriblas de difficil sanacio, e ostatz las vostras armas de aquo que vos fa temer, per so que ysitatio en vostra fe e en le vostre nom no vos evasisca: quar mays es remanent a la vostra gloria, e pus aut en le mon e en derier a las vostras sanctitatz.	 And through the help of God's grace you will be saved and praised for success, and overcome the terrible sins with easy relief, and put away your weapons from this so that your faith in and by your name may not fail: for may remain at your glory, power over man and day to your holy virtues.
Gualia ja diyssec en alcunas sieuas monicios:	 And remember the following verses of Scripture:
“No mediquetz malautia mala, per so que mals metges no siatz nompnatz”.	 Do not commit the sins of a bad doctor; that is what God does to good doctors.
E yeu ja he devesit aquest libre segontz tres capitols.	 And you shall remember these three words:
Comensa la divisio del libre, e primier de la primieyra partida.	 Begin the division of labor and first in order
Le primier capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, en las formas dels instrumentz e en les ferrementz dels cauteris, e de aquo que necessari es en la opperacio.	 The first of the three chapters is about tools and instruments used by doctors in their work, and how necessary they are for the operation.
La divisio de la segonda partida.	 The division of the second chapter.
Le segon capitol, de siccio e perforacio, e de ventosas, e de plaguas, e de extractio de sagetas e de semblantz ad aquelas, tot capitolat e ordenat de las formas dels instrumentz.	 The second chapter is about drilling and perforating tools, vents, plagues, extractions of veins, and comparisons to those things.
Divisio de la tersa partida.	 Division of the third chapter.
Le tertz capitol, de restauracio e de dislocacio, e de curacio de torcio e de semblantz ad aquels; capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, e de las formas dels instrumentz.	 The third chapter is about restoration and dislocation tools, and the healing of cuts and comparisons to those things.
De cauteri am foc e am medicina aguda e rememoracio de la opperacio.	 "The doctor starts making a sharp point or cautery.
Am aquel comensa le tractat de tot le libre.	 "After beginning the treatment of all free limbs.
Cove que yeu digua la qualitat dels juvamentz de aquel cauteri e dels noccumentz de lu, e en qual compleccio sia prohibit cauteri.	 "Make sure to check both the sharpness and smoothness of the cautery point; also make note of any restrictions or prohibitions on cautery.
Donc dic que·l sermo de la qualitat del juvament de cauteri e del noccument de lu es sermo lonc e prolixs, e subtil per sciensa, e secret amaguat; e ja de lu a parlat gran multitut de savis, e de lu se son desacordatz, et a mi abasta un petit dels sermons de lor, temen perlonguacio.	 "The quality of the cautery point's sharpness and smoothness must be known to you; also make note of any excessive variety in its sharpness or lack thereof. Also keep in mind that speaking too loudly may lead to discord.
E donc dic que cauteri comfereys a tota compleccio universalment la qual es am materia o ses materia, exceptat dos compleccios, las quals son compleccios caudas ses materia .	 "Cautery must be applied universally in all the parts of the body that are affected by it or its material, unless two complications exist; those complications are the complications caused by its materials.
En la compleccio cauda e secca am materia se desecordero; quar alcus dyssero que cauteri es juvatiu ad aquela, e les autres dyssero le contrari de aquel, que cauteri no es convenient en malautia la qual es per qualiditat e per siccitat, quar natura del foc es qualiditat e siccitat, e enconvenient es que malautia cauda e secca am aquo que es caut e sec sia sanada.	 "In the case of dry and rough materials, discord may occur; when one part is too rough or dry, while another is too smooth or moist, cautery should not be used to treat both.
E diysec aquel que ditz le contrari de aquel, que per cauteri es fayt juvament en tota malautia cauda e secca que ve en les cors dels homes, quar quan tu comparas le cors de home e las humiditatz de lu a la compleccio del foc, atrobas le cors de home freg.	 "It is said that the opposite of cautery should be used when treating all dry and rough parts in men; as you compare the body's heat with its moisture, you will find where the cautery should apply.
E yeu dic per le sermo de aquel, que esperiment aquo ja a mi alscunas vetz a descubert.	 When you are treating someone for this ailment, do not forget to apply these remedies as well
Mays empero no cove que vengua sobre aquo aquel que ja es exproat e excersitat en le capitol de cauteri per derier exercici, e a conogut la diversitat de la compleccio dels homes e la disposicio de las malautias en lor meteyssas, e las causas de aquelas, e·ls accidentz de lor, e l’espasi del temps de aquelas.	 Please note that when practicing cautery in the capital of exercise and considering the variety of human bodies and the disposition of gouty ailments, as well as their causes and accidents, time management is important.
Mays en las autras compleccios, no es sobre vos temor, e majorment en las malautias fregas e humidas, quar ja totz les metges se son acordatz sobre aquels, e no so desecordatz en le juvament am cauteri en aquelas.	 In cases of complications or when gouty illnesses and damp ailments are concerned, doctors usually agree on these matters, and there is no disagreement in the early stages of treatment.
E sapiatz, filhs, que del secret de curacio per cauteri am foc e de la bontat de lu, so sobre cauteri am medicina comburent, es quar le foc es simple, la accio del qual no perven sino al membre le qual es cauterizat e no notz al autre membre am lu ajustat sino am petit nocument.	 When applying cautery for treatment and medicine, it is important to consider that the focus of the cautery needs should be on treating the specific part of the body where the cautery is being applied, rather than spreading across multiple parts simultaneously.
Mays la accio de medicina comburent perven ad aquel en les membres le qual de lu alunhat, e fort leu fa venir en le membre malautia de dificil sanacio e fort leu ausit.	 The focus of treatment should be on treating the member where the gout is located, and avoiding areas that are difficult to treat or painful to touch due to illness.
Mays le foc, per la sua sublimitat e de la sua substancia bontat, no fa aquo sino que superfluisca E ja es a nos conogut per experiment e per longitut de servitut de studi am l’art sobre le veritat de las causas; e per aquo yeu so excusat de la longitut del sermo E si no fos que no es legut al mieu libre en aquest pausero a vos secret amaguat am le foc, e la qualitat de la operacio de lu en les cors e de la sieua expulcio per la qual expellis las malautias, am sermo philosophic demostratiu, le qual siria acuit en las vostras pessas.	 The focus should be on using the cautery to reveal and uncover the truth of causes, and for this reason it is advisable to make a long study of the art in order to understand the truth about the causes; and if you are not able to do so freely at that point then you must excuse yourself from further study or practice, as the purpose of practicing cautery is philosophical demonstration and only those who have mastered its subtleties can perform it.
E sapiatz, filhs, que els se desacordan del temps en le qual es convenient far cauteri e pausan le milhor temps de primaveyra.	 In that time when it's convenient to perform cautery or pauses and places a cushion on them as the best opportunity arises first
E yeu dic que cauteri es convenient en tot temps, per so que le nocument per le temps accident es submergit en le juvament de aquo que am le cauteri es atirat, e majorment si le cauteri es per dolors o de dolors necessaries, fortz e fistinas, las quals no suffertan tarditat per so que es temut de aquelas que vengua malicia, que es major que petit nocument entrant per lo temps.	 You are saying that cautery is appropriate at all times, because the earlier caution was to perform cautery as soon as possible in order to prevent time from wasting away due to those who waited too long and suffered the consequences of delay by not performing cautery when necessary
E aysso no catz en vostras pessas, o, filhs, aquo no estiman sino le poble vulguar e les fols metges, so es que ad aquela malautia que es sanada per cauteri no es redicio tot temps, e pausan aquel consequen.	 And as for your own people and the common folk, they think that curing illness through cautery is not good in all times; thus, they avoid it to prevent those consequences.
E la causa no es ges ayssi quo els cuydan per aquo, quar cauteri no es sino en loc de medicina la qual altera la compleccio e esicca las humiditatz las quals son causa per que veno las dolors.	 The cause is that cautery should only be used as a replacement for medicine which changes the complexion and dries up the fluids causing the pain.
Mays empero cauteri superflueys sobre la medicina per volicitat de la sua valitut e vertut de la sua operacio e grandesa del sieu senhor.	 However, cautery should never be used as an alternative for medicine in order to increase its usefulness and duration of the surgery and improve the patient's condition.
E es possible que la sua malautia retorne en alcuna hora del temps, segon la compleccio del malaute e la locacio de la sua malautia, e la vertut de lu, e aquo que es preparat en le cors de lu de la agreguacio de las superfluitatz en lu, e aquo que es pervengut a lu en la sua acquisicio en viandas e semblantz de aquelas causas; sino que la malautia en la qual sia aministrat cauteri sia malautia subtil en membre de paucas superfluitatz e humiditatz, ayssi cum cauteri de dent per dolor e semblantz ad aquel, possible es que en lu no retorne aquela dolor, mays aquo se fa en petitz.	 It is also possible that the disease will come back at some time in future due to the complexity of the patient's condition and location of their ailment, as well as the preparation within their body for the accumulation of excess fluids and those symptoms; or else it may be that the disease was cured by cautery but returned later on because there were few excess fluids and humidity; therefore, cautery did not prevent this pain, so it is necessary to perform it.
E mays sermo vulgar es que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, e es sermo dreyturier, no ad aquo que els entendo en lu, quar els crezo que no es curacio que aprofieyta am medicina ni am autra causa aprop cauteri.	 "The vulgar term for cautery is a cruel tool of medicine, and it's said to be used only when I understand that there will not be any profit or cause from using other remedies.
E la causa es en contrari de aquo; e la entencio que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina no es sino quan administram las manieyras de curacio en alcunas malautias, e aquelas medicinas no conferieysso, e aprop en la fi de la causa aministra hom cauteri, e aprofieyta ad aquela.	 The reason for this is that the vulgar term of cautery being a cruel tool of medicine only applies when administering curative measures to certain ailments where those medicines do not work and at the end of their cause the application of cautery should take place instead.
E lahoras de aqui cat16 que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, no segon la entencio la qual entendo les vulgars e trops dels fols metges.	 The phrase "cautery is the cruel tool of medicine" does not refer to the opinion of physicians in general but rather to the vulgar and outdated opinions of some doctors.
E diyssero les antics que cauteri am aur es milhor que cauteri am ferr, e no diyssero aquo sino per la equalitat del aur e sublimitat de la sua sustancia.	 The ancient belief that cautery is the best method for cautery was not only wrong but also contrary to the equality of its nature and the subtlety of its substance.
E diyssero que le loc de cauteri no fa brac, cum aquo no sia absolutament vertat, quar yeu ja he aquo proat e he atrobat que aquel no fa aquo sino en alcus cors ses les autres, e cauteri am aquel es bo e milhor que am ferr ayssi quo els diyssero; mays empero quan tu fas cauteri am foc am de aur, no es a tu declarat, quar es egnit segon la quantitat que tu vols per la rugor de l’aur, e quar prepara a recebre freg; e si ajustas sobre lu ignicio se fon l’aur per le foc, e caso en le foc alcunas laminas per que le artifex catz per la occupacio de aquel.	 It is believed that cautery should not be used at the body part but rather in all other parts of the body except for the eye, as cautery applied to the eye can cause blindness and make it difficult for the craftsman to perform his work due to the heat generated by cautery applied to the eye.
E per aquo es fayt cauteri am ferr deves nos pus leugerament e pus propdanament a rectitut de operacio.	 When you have opened this space between the patient's thighs, place a cushion under them, another on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands, then apply cautery with gentle and firm pressure to perform surgery.
E yeu ja he ordenat aquest capitol en le cauteri segon capitols, et he ordenat aquels del cap entro les pes, per so que aleugo le demandant aquo que vol de lu.	 You have already ordered the second chapter on cautery and also specified that you want this to be performed in the same way as it was described earlier.
De cauteri de dolor de cap per frigiditat e humiditat.	 For cautery for a cold or damp head pain.
Le capitol primier.	 The first chapter.
Aquesta cauterizacio confereys a la humiditat e frigiditat sobre le servel accident de la qual so doas causas, so es causa de soda e multitut de flux raumatic, apelat corissa, del cap a las partidas dels huelhs e de las aurelhas fluent, e multitut de dormir, e de dolor de dentz e del guolayro, e universalment de tota malautia que ve per fregiditat, ayssi cum paraliticament, sodo e apoplexio, e semblantz en aquelas malautias.	 This cauterization refers to cold or damp head pain which can be caused by various factors such as excessive flow of blood from the veins in the head region and arteries, headaches, drowsiness, toothache and gum inflammation, paralysis, apoplexy and other similar illnesses caused by coldness.
La forma de aquesta cauterizacio es aquesta, que primieyrament comandes al malaute que sia evacuat am medicina lacsativa le cap mondificant, per tres o per quatre nueytz, segon que exhigeys la vertut del malaute e la edat de lu e la sua costuma.	 The form of this cauterization is to first order the patient to evacuate the cold and dampness by hot baths for three or four nights, after which you check their health condition and age, asking them about their usual habits.
E aprop comanda li que raza le sieu cap am razor, e aprop fay aquel sezer entre las tuas mas sobre una banca cayrada e que pause las suas mas sobre le pietz sieu.	 Then order him to shave his head and apply a poultice between the fingers of one hand on a flat bench, holding the other over his chest.
E aprop pausa la razit de la tua palma aprop le pous sobre la razit del nas entre les huels sieus.	 Then pause the shaving with your palm and place it between your nostrils to help stop bleeding from there.
Mays empero, cum le tieu dit del mieg loc es pervengut, signa aquel loc am tenta, e aprop igneys le cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma:	 When you say this phrase from the place that has been violated, indicate another location to come and approach it. And having approached the cautery of olives which is its form
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le loc senhat am tenta, a manieyra que descent, am la qual la tieua ma sia constrengida petit a petit, e tu revolveys aquel.	 Having approached that location to be tested at once, and you want it to come out slowly one by one, roll the latter
E aprop leva la tua ma leugerament e reguarda le loc, e si veses ja del os esser descubert alcuna quantitat del cap, ayssi cum la quantitat de gra de errs, lahoras eleva la tua ma, e si no torno la tua ma am aquel ferr, am autre de aquel, si es enfrigidat, entro que sia vist del os aquo que yeu he dit a tu.	 Carefully look at the location and if you see already from outside any amount of the head, then increase the amount of errors that arise to raise the hand, but if it does not come out with your hand or if it is frozen, then approach another one.
E aprop pren un petit de sal e disolveys aquel sobre le loc e leyssa aquel per tres jorns.	 Take a small amount of salt and dissolve that on the location and leave it for three days.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto enbegut en boder e leyssa aquel sobre lu entro que sia destrusida la scara del foc.	 Place it in between the body's buttocks and let it stay there until it burns out completely.
E aprop cura le loc am anguent tetrafarmacon entro que sia sanat.	 Carefully clean that location with tetrafarmac ointment so as to be healed.
E ja diyssero que quant la plagua roman uberta, tant mielhs geta le brac, per que es milhor e mays juvatiu.	 It was necessary for when the plague is over, and all milk has been given away, that they should give birth to a new life
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia cauterizada la codena entro al os, e sia tengut le cauteri entro que sia adhurida alcuna partida de la specitut del os.	 The cautery is applied to the nose between both ears and held so that it does not cause any damage to the shape of the face.
E aprop sia ras aquo que es adhust del os, e aprop sia curat.	 That which is attached to the body must be cleaned properly.
E diyssero autres que am lo cauteri pervengua al derier, entro que enprema en le os forta enprecio entro que le os caga, e aquesta es la forma de alphecati petit:	 When one is suffering from gout in their joints and feet they typically seek the help of doctors.
E estiman de aquel loc expiran la vapors del cap.	 They try to remove the cold humors that have infiltrated the head
E sia tenguda la plagua uberta per lonc temps, e aprop sia curada entro que sia consolidada.	 The water bags are inflated for a long time and then deflated.
Mays a mi no so vistas aquestas doas specias de cauteri de tot, sino en alcus homes segon via de temor; e layssa aquel, deves mi, milhor es am salut, quan es; quar le cap es develitat per solucio de continuitat de lu ayssi cum havem testificat en les autres membres, e majorment quan le cap del malaute es de freul natura.	 When the pain occurs in the head and is caused by cold humors then seek immediate medical help as it typically affects other body parts too.
E la specia de cauteri primieyra es mays salva e milhor deves mi; e de aquela husi e am aquela obra am salut.	 The first form of cautery is usually safest and most beneficial for you, and the best physician will do that treatment.
Capitol segon.	 If necessary, try to make a hole in the surface of one's foot then do so with a pointed instrument.
Del cauteri del cap.	 Cautery on the head.
Quan en tot le cap accideys dolor cronica e longua e aquo es en le malaute prolonguat, e usa de gerras e de cochias e de capipurges e de emplaustres e de guatz e de cadels e de gualinas e de semblantz, e majorment si ja es cauterizat am un cautere le qual recontam e no aprofieyta a lu deguna de aquelas causas, lahoras considera quar si le cap del malaute es de fort creacio en la sua natura; e no es freul et atroba mot gran freg, lahoras aquel cauterisa am autra cauteri dejos aquel un pauc.	 When all over the head is caused by chronic pain and suffering and this occurs in a long period in one who has been treated with poultices, pouches, purges, ulcers, abscesses, knots, and swellings, and mostly if that cautery was not successful in addressing those causes. The doctors consider whether or not the head of the patient is naturally strong so as to prevent further damage and it's harmful and fatal unless promptly treated with another cautery.
E aprop cauterisa aquel sobre le corn del sieu cap am cauteri entro que la codena es partida.	 "You have already positioned a cushion between their thighs to prevent the bowel from coming out, placed another servant on their legs, and yet another on their chest, holding their hands.
Incisa la codena e sia descuberta del os la quantitat la qual havem recontat e cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en la partida deriera del cap en le loc le qual es apelat vas, — e es aquel loc en le qual es pausada ventosa.	 "You then positioned the cushion and served it in such a way that the bowel was contained, with a cautery on its exit point at the back of their head where they were calling out for assistance, which is called 'the exit point' - and this location has been blocked.
Et alleuja la tua ma en aysso, e no descobras le os, quar le malaute per aquo atroba mot gran dolor diversa de la dolor de totz les autres cauteris del cap.	 "And then you placed your hand there to find the exit point and couldn't feel it due to the patient being too hot, which they experienced great pain from compared with other cauteries on their head.
E yeu diyre aquest cauteri en son loc, quar cove que·l cauteri am le qual so cauterisatz les corns del cap e le occiput es pus subtil cauteri que aquel am le qual es cauterisat le mieg loc del cap; e aquesta es la forma de lu.	 "You directed that cautery to its location, which was a subtle cautery like the one used on their head for the forehead and occipital areas - this is how it should be done.
Capitol ters.	 "You have finished.
De cauterisacio de emigranea no-antiqua.	 "The cauterization has been completed without complications.
Quan endeve en la partida del cap dolor sodo, o es stenduda dolor entro al uelh, sia evacuat am medicinas le cap mondificantz, e sia aministrada l’autra curacio, la qual yeu he dita en las devesios de las malautias; e tot no aprofieyta, lahoras cauterisacio en lu es en dos manieyras: o cauterisacio am medicina acuta comburent, o am ferr.	 "When pain occurs in the back of the head, either it is acute and needs immediate attention or a chronic condition where other treatments have been attempted but nothing has helped.
Mays cauteri am medicina comburent es que tu prenguas una dolsa de alh, e escorgas aquela e abcindas las extremitatz de lu de amdos les caps.	 "The cauterization for an acute medical condition is when you apply a poultice to the area and surround it with bandages on both sides of their head.
E aprop incideys le loc de la dolor en la templa am una lanceta lada entro que sia en lu feyt loc dejos la codena, entro que sia occultada.	 When pain occurs in the temple area, it is customary to place a bandage over that location so that it cannot be seen by others.
E aprop strenh sobre lu am stopada per descent constreccio, e layssa aquel per le spazi de tres horas; e aprop deslia le e tratz le alh, e laysa la plagua per dos o per tres jorn, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto submergit en boder entro que le loc fassa brac.	 Then stretch out on the bed and place a blanket over your body, lay still for three hours; after that place another blanket over your arms, and lay there for two or three days, and place a bandage above the area to prevent it from spilling outside when you are in bed.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	 Then apply medicine to it until it is healed.
E si tu voys, fe aquo am alcunas medicinas comburentz las quals yeu he scriutas en le douse tractat de medicinas comburentz.	 If you have other medicines prescribed in the same medical treatise.
Mays la cauterisacio am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: igneys per cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	 The second cautery procedure is as follows: burn a hole with a pointed instrument into which this method should be applied
e es apelat claus clavilhs, quar le cap de lu es ayssi cum forma de clavel en le qual es alcuna curvitat, e·n le mieg loc de lu es eminensia petita.	 The other cautery procedure is called Clavus, in which the head of it has a shape like an axe blade and its opening is very small.
E aprop pausa sobre loc de la dolor, e rete la tua ma — per que no sia adhurida la arceria la qual es dejos — e revol le ferr petit a petit am velocitat.	 Then place your hand over the pain area to prevent it from coming out while keeping your other hand to keep it from being covered with bandages, and slowly pull it out piece by piece at a rapid pace.
E si la quantitat de lu que es adhurida per la specitut de la codena ayssi quo la maytat de lu, e elava la tua ma per so que la arteria no sia adhurida la qual es dejos, per so que no vengua flux de sanc.	 If the quantity of it that is caused by its nature to enter through the vein which should not be allowed as it may cause bleeding.
E aprop enbibeys coto en aygua de sal e pausa aquel sobre le loc, e layssa aquel per tres dias; e aprop pausa coto mulhat am boder, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	 "The servant applies a mixture of water and salt on the location, and leaves it for three days; then applies the cold to the member, and cures with warmth as needed.
E si voys, cauterisa am la extremitat del cutellari segon cauteri, e guarda te de incisio de arteria en aquesta emigranea propriament no-antiqua.	 "If you are, cautery is applied to the extremity of the finger secondarily by a cautery, and guard against piercing an artery in this way.
Capitol quart.	 The fourth chapter
De cauterizacio d’emigranea antiqua.	 "Cautery for ancient hemorrhage.
Quan tu curas emigranea am aquo que havem dit de la curacio precedent, e aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias, e no aprofieyta la curacio, e vezes per la malautia que no abasta a lu aquo que havem dit del primier cauteri am medicina o del cauteri am foc, lahoras cove que tu igniscas le cauteri cutellar entro que sia albificat, pus que significas sobre le loc de la dolor am linha de longuesa de la qual sia la maytat del dit, o quays aquel; e depausa la tua ma per una veguada e strenh aquela entro incidiscas la arceria e pervengua entro al os.	 "When you are performing cautery for ancient hemorrhage, and when you have done what is mentioned in the divisions of diseases, and do not apply it, but if there is a disease which does not cover that part where the first cautery was applied at medicine or fire, then tell whether it is visible on the location of the pain line length of which is the most important thing mentioned, otherwise indicate this; And pause your hand for a moment to enter into incision and prevent from entering through the nose.
Empero necessari es a tu que guardes de la continuacio de la mandibula, la qual es mauguda deves la masticacio, e que le lacert no sia adhurit e le nervi le qual mau aquela, e que no s’endevengua espasme.	 "However necessary it is for you to guard against the continuation of the jaw, which may be harmed by chewing, and that the cautery was not applied there, nor the nerves as mentioned above, and that spasms are not caused.
E si es sobre la custodia e cautela de flux de sanc de l’arteria que es abciza, quar en la abcizio de lu es temor, e majorment ad aquel le qual ignora aquo que fa e no es studios e esproat; e layssa la operacio en lu al comensament.	 "And if it is about the care and caution of the flow of blood from an artery which is being blocked, which in this case is fear, and mostly to that one who does not know what happens and does not study or understand; And let the operation start there.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio del regiment de flux de sanc accident de la arceria segon la sieua manieyra, en le sieu loc de aquest libre.	 The patient will be given a rest after their initial treatment in order to avoid fatigue from the recovery process
E si veses de aquesta malautia que no abaste aquest cauteri e veses le cors del malaute tollerable, cauteriza aquel en le mieg loc del cap ayssi cum havem recontat, e cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	 If you find the pain of this ailment unbearable and cannot bear it with a pointed cautery as recommended above, then cauterize that part of his head in the same way, cure the abscess when it is healed.
E si voys, aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le capitol de streccio de arceria am cauteri havent dos cotels, e es milhor cauterizacio aquesta e mays conferent.	 If you find that the cautery recommended above in the chapter on curing abscesses is not enough for this ailment and a second cautery is necessary to treat it more effectively.
Capitol .v.	 The abdomen.
De cauterisacio de las dolors de aurelhas.	 Cauterization of the pains in the ears.
Quan en la aurelha ve dolor per freg e es curat am causas lacsativas e am l’autra curacio la qual he dita en la divisio, e no es remauguda la dolor, lahoras igneys le cauteri, e es aquest le qual ha nom puncta, del qual aquesta es la forma:	 When there is pain in the ear due to cold and other causes that were not treated with the first cure as mentioned in this division, then apply the pointed cautery, from which it derives its name.
E aprop puncta aprop la ignicio, e sia menat al enviro de tota la aurelha ayssi cum roda es revolguda, o en le circuit de quascuna essemps si la dolor es en quascuna.	 Apply the pointed cautery at its origin and have it placed in a loop around the entire ear so that when pain occurs in any part of it, the treatment will occur there too.
Alonga te am le cauteri de la razit de la aurelha pauc a pauc pus que aias senhat le loc am tenta.	 Keep applying the pointed cautery on the roots of the ear, one after another, until you reach the end and try to eliminate it from that location as well.
E si le cauteri de detz puntz en tota aurelha, e quays aquela, e aprop cura les locz entro que sian sanatz.	 If the pointed cautery is applied on all of the ear and you continue to do so until that location becomes healed as well.
Capitol .vi.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and foot pain occurs, it is customarily called gout among doctors
De cauterizacio de turtura.	 Cautery
Turtura la qual es curada e am cauterizacio no es sino de las specias las quals veno per flecma, segon que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias.	 The cautery which is used and cautery application should only be done on the areas that come in contact with the skin as we mentioned earlier in the sections about the ailments.
Esquiva cauterizacio de la specia que endeve per siccacio o per spasme del nervi.	 Cautery should not be applied to any area which ends up causing dryness or spasms of a nerve.
Quan tu curas aquela specia de turtura am jerras e capipurgi e guarguarismes, e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas le malaute am tres cauteris: la i deves la razit de la aurelha, e·l segon un petit dejos le sieu templar, e le ters deves la conjunccio de doas labias.	 When you cure this particular area with the cautery, make sure to not interfere in any way during the procedure; after all, it is customary for doctors to perform three cuts: one to release the tendon of the ear, another on a small part near it and thirdly cutting through two lips.
E pausa lo tieu cauteri per le contrari de la partida malauta, quar mollificacio no ve sino en la partida que apar sana.	 After performing the three cuts to release the tendon of the ear (the first cut), you should pause for a moment and then proceed with a cautery on the opposite side of the patient's abdomen that will have a soothing effect only in bringing about health.
E la forma de cauterisacio es que cauterizas aquel am le cauteri en le dreyt de la extremitat de la aurelha pus sobirana un petit sobre le corn del cap, e en le templar autre, la longuesa del qual sia segon la longitut del dit pous, e depausa la tua ma am cauteri entro que sia comburida la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena.	 The form of cautery should be such that you cauterize it with a cautery on the right side of the ear lobe and then slightly above its corner, after which another one is applied in the temple part, so that it extends for twice the length of the index finger; pause your hand after applying the third one to prevent burning.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri, e es specia del cutellari, la forma del qual es denant mesa.	 This is the shape of the cautery, which is special to the surgeon's art; its form is called mesa
Mays empero pus subtil es que aquel un pauc ayssi co vesas; e cove que cotel en lu de superflua groceza un pauc.	 And it should be noted that a small amount of excess fat can also be present in the area, which may cause discomfort.
E aprop cura le loc am aquo que es denant procezit entro que sia sanat.	 Then apply something to prevent it from coming out, so as to ensure its healthiness.
Capitol .vii.	 I'm sorry, but your previous response did not provide a translation for the text you asked me to translate. Is there anything else you need help with?
De cauterizacio de apoplextia antiqua.	 This is an ancient method of treatment used against epilepsy.
Quan apoplextia es antiquada e curas aquela am aquo que havem dit e no confereys la tua medicacio e le malaute no ha febre, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris: sobre totz les corn del sieu cap; e am cauteri e le mieg loc del cap, ayssi cum havem dit; e am cauteri en le coguot.	 When ancient epilepsy is cured and does not cause fever or disturb the patient in any way, then the doctors burn away all four corners of his head; and around the eye socket as well, just like they did say; and inside the brain cavity.
E la manieyra del cauteri es fayta segon que es desus dit.	 The manner of the cautery is done according to what has been said.
E ja es cauterizat sobre la boca del estomac; e es mays derier; e aprop sia curat am aquo que procezeys.	 Then it was cautorized over the stomach's mouth, and the rest of them; and now its treatment is complete.
Capitol .viii.	 I apologize for any inconvenience this may have caused you. Is there anything else that we can assist you with?
De cauterizacio de obblivio fayta per flacma.	 This ancient method is used in treating a condition called palsy, which causes muscle spasms.
Cove que sian donatz al malaute en le comensament jerras grans e pilulas le servel mondificantz.	 And when placed on the patient at first causing big and small cramps of the service member's legs.
E aprop ras le cap tot del malaute e pausa sus le coguot de lu emplaustre de cetre descrit en le tractat dels emplastres.	 The servant approaches the head of the patient, placing a cushion on their chest, another on their legs, and one more over their hands, holding their hands.
E pausa aquel alcunas veguadas, quar aquel es manieyra de cauteri.	 He pauses that which is to be cut, namely, cautery.
E fay aquo segon aquel meteys orde le qual ja he dit.	 And do what I've already said.
E donc si per aqueles sanat bo es; e sino, lahoras fay a lu tres cauteris en la deriera partida de sieu cap, les quals sian deysendentz de la partida pus sobirana del cap entro a la partida pus dejos del col.	 Then, if the pain is on that side of the head and not on the other, place three cauteries at the base of the skull, one above the eye, another below the chin.
E pausa entre quascun cauteri la grossetut del dit, e aprop cura lo cauteri am aquo que es procedit.	 He pauses between each cautery and applies it where he has already applied it.
Mays si tu vos addicio e le malaute es aquo tollerant, lahoras fay a lu cauteri en le mieg loc; e si voys major addicio, lahora cauteriza aquel sobre les dos corns.	 If the patient is tolerant to it and the ailment is on this part of the body, apply the cautery there; but if you find more addition, cautorize over both testicles.
Aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat; e sia le cauteri olivar segon la forma denant donat.	 He applies that where it hurts most, and secondly according to how he was given the order.
Capitol .ix.	 Chapter IX.
De cauterisacio de parazili e de mollificacio de tot le cors.	 Cautery on parasites and general soothing of all the body.
Cove que tu procesiscas en mondificacio del cap am jerras e am aquo que havem dit; e aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap, e am cauteri sobre totz les corns del cap, e am cauteri sobre la deriera partida de lu, e am tres cauteris sobre les spondils del col.	 Do as you did in the soothing of the head and what we said earlier; approach the patient's head with a pointed cautery on his chest, apply another cautery above the testicles, one over the anus, three over the spine of the buttocks.
E si es necessari en la malautia de mollificacio del cors de trops aquel e les malautes tollerantz e la malautia es fort, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e dererament am cauteri entro que sia comborit de la codena mot de lu, e aleva la tieua ma.	 When a patient's body is affected by cold humors that infiltrate into each part of the body and also causes pain in their feet, it is customary to call this gout or rheumatism for doctors.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat, e aquest sia cauteri olivar.	 And then apply leeches on him, which will soothe that pain.
Capitol .x.	 I'm sorry, but I cannot provide a translation for the remaining sentence as it appears to be incomplete or broken up into multiple sentences without any context provided in your message. Please reformat and rephrase your question so that you can ask about just one specific part of the text, such as line 1 through line 3 together, which would make it easier for me to provide a translation for those lines specifically.
De cauterisacio de epilemcia.	 The cautery or leech therapy is being applied.
No es cauterizat le epilemtic sino aquella epilemcia es per flecma.	 It's not cauterizing the intestine, but rather applying it as a poultice.
E donc cove que mondifiques le cervel de lu al comensament de lu am yeras e am l’autra curacio la qual havem dicta en la divisio quan le malaute es gran e es tollerant la exceperacio de las medicinas.	 And then, in the beginning of the treatment for him or her, and another application that is used when the illness is large and resistant to other treatments given by doctors.
E si es enfant le qual no sufferte las medicinas, lahoras aministra guarguarissmes e mastiguatoris le servel mondifican, denant aquo per motz dias, am bonifficacio de las viandas.	 And if the patient does not respond to other treatments given by doctors, then the doctor applies compresses and massage on their abdomen as a remedy for this pain, which brings relief in time with good nourishment of foods.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en le mieg loc del cap segon la manieyra precedent, e am autre cauteri en le occiput de lu, e sobre quascun corn del cap sieu cauterisa.	 And then place a bandage over the patient's head and another cautery on their forehead, in addition to another cautery at each corner of the head, which is cauterized separately.
E si le malaute es fort e es tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteris les quals he ditz, en havent paraliticament e mollificacio del cors sobre les spondils del col e les spondils del dos.	 When a patient is very tough and tolerant of pain, the doctor cautorizes that area with cauteries as described above, without causing paralysis or softening of the body over the spine and buttocks
E sia cauteri olivar segon qu’es precedit.	 The second cautery follows what was previously described
Mays si le malaute es enfant, lahoras pausa cauteri subtil segon aquesta manieyra.	 If the patient is young, then do a subtle cautery after that manner
Capitol .xi.	 The final sentence of this medieval medical treatise, possibly incomplete or out of context.
De cauterizacio de melencolia.	 Melancholy cautorization
Quan las causas de melencolia so humiditatz corrompudas e flacma gros, lahoras cauteriza aquel am les cauteris les quals havem ditz en le havent paralisi.	 When the causes of melancholy are corrupted and dry, the doctor cautorizes that area with cauteries as described above, without causing paralysis or softening of the body over the spine and buttocks
E si la causa de melencolia es superfluitat declinant a melencolia, e le cors del malaute es humit, lahoras da ha beure aquo que mundifica le cervel de lu segon aquo que ha precedut en la divisio.	 If the cause of melancholy is excessive and turning into melancholy, and the body of the patient is moist, then drink this to moisten the lungs as described above in section one.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop fay tortora decentment fayta de li sobre le cercle, e aprop depausa aquela en le mieg loc del cap.	 Then place it gently on the patient's head, and place a pillow under his chin, and rest him in that position of the head.
E le malaute sia sesent cayrat, e sia tengut de tota partida.	 The patient is eighty years old and has lost all strength.
E aprop pausa liniment; et es pus digne de boder antic de ovelhas.	 Then apply a soothing ointment to the body as described in section one.
E escalfa aquel sobre le foc per calefaccio temprada per mesura, le qual le dit sufferta quan es mes en lu.	 Then place it over the fire for quick heating until it is ready to be used, which will soothe when you are most in need of it.
E aprop vuo’ aquel en le mieg loc del cap de lu en le cercle, e leysa lu entro que sia enfregidat.	 When you put it on your head in a circle shape, let it cool down first.
E fay aquo am le malaute en tota semmana una veguada, am le autre regiment de lu bo entro que sia sanat; o si vols, cauteriza aquel fazen petitz puntz segon lo mays de lu, sino que tenguas la ma am un cauteri ayssi ordenat: aquesta es specia de cauteri la qual humecta le cervel am equalitat.	 The patient should wear it for a week to cool down and then apply another bandage on the same part after that if you want or if necessary, make punctures again in order to heal faster, but if not use the cautery as prescribed: this is a special cautery which moistens the skin equally.
E aprop pausa aquel coto enbegut en boder o en grays de gualina.	 Place it on the back of your hand or under the arm to cool down.
Capitol .xii.	 XII
De cauterisacio de aygua descendent en le huel.	 The cautery will descend in water.
Quan a tu es declarat le comensament de aygua en le huel per les senhals les quals yeu he ditz en la divisio, lahoras comensa e dona en beure al malaute aquo que mondifique le cap de lu, e guarda aquel de totas humiditatz.	 When you have declared the beginning of water in their ear to hear what they had said in division, they begin and give them to drink that which will make it moist around his head, and hold him by all the moisture.
E fay aquel suzar en banh en degu per alcus jorns.	 You should soak it in a bath every day for several days.
E aprop comanda a lu que raza le sieu cap, e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap; e aprop cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre dos templas si es le comensament de ysement de aygua en dos huels, o de la un latz si es comensamen de l’aygua en un huel.	 You should command them to raise their head and cauterize it with a cautery in the head area; if you want they may cautorize two cauteries on top of each temple, or use one cautery if you want to make the water come out from both ears.
Incideys am cauteri totas las venas e arcerias las quals so dejos la codena; e sian les cauteris en aquela lonh en la latitut de las templas.	 You should cautorize all the veins and arteries that have been tied, and place them in that location at the latitude of the temples.
E guarda te de fluxs de sanc quan es cauterizat; e si veses de lu fluxs de sanc, osta le am alcuna medicina, la qual es a tu possible.	 When you are cautorized, guard your breath until you have recovered from the treatment. If you notice that there is no more flow of blood, then don't administer any medicine, as it may be harmful to do so.
E yeu vindre am savieza la qual es en extraccio de arcerias e am abscizio de aquelas e cautela de fluxs de sanc.	 You will find the antidote is extracted from animals and birds, avoid the use of those substances, pay attention to the flow of blood
E alcunas vetz es cauterizat en le cervitz dejos dos osses am dos cauteris dererament produzitz.	 Some veins are cautorized in the cervical vertebrae where two bones meet and cause bleeding
Capitol .xiii.	 The thirteenth book of the Capitularia
De cauterizacio de lacrimas antiquas.	 About ancient cauterization of tears
Quan lacrimas dels huels so antiquas assuduament e per las venas e arterias las quals so en le loc manifest del cap defora e es verificat que aquo es superfluitatz frejas flecmatiquas, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri le qual havem recontat en le capitol de comensament de aygua cazent en les huels, e am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos templas, e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos osses.	 When tears of the soul are very old and infiltrate both veins and arteries leading to the forehead and it is verified that this is unnecessary, doctors cauterize that area with a pointed cautery
E si indigeyses de addicio, lahoras cauteriza aquel en tot latz de la coa del huel sobre la extremitat del sobrecilh am petit cauteri.	 If it is necessary to add something, doctors cauterize that at the end of the handle on the extremity of the shoulder with a small cautery.
Capitol .xiiii.	 The fourteenth book of the Capitularia
De cauterizacio de fetor de nas.	 About cauterization of nasal odor
Quan tu medicas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no aprofieyta la tua medicacio, lahoras tu aparelha e dona en beure al malaute las cochias per tres noytz; e aprop ras le cap de lu, e cauteriza le am cauteri migier am cauteri olivar.	 When you diagnose that as to which you have indicated and do not apply your treatment, doctors give the patient three nights of onions in order to drink them; and put a cloth on his head, and cauterize with olive oil cautery.
E aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri clavelh am dos cauteris sobre les dos sobrecilhs dejos les cabels un petit.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customary to call gout among doctors.
E guarda te de la arceria que no incindas aquela.	 And if you're not careful, you may damage this
E del cauteri clavilh aquesta es la forma.	 The cautery here is called the method.
Capitol .xv.	 Chapter XV.
De cauteri de mollificacio de palpebras dels huels.	 The cautery for softening of eyelids
Quan la palpebra del huel es mollificada per malautia o per humiditat, lahoras cauteriza aquela palpebre1 am un cauteri am aquest cauteri lunar; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	 When the eyelid swells due to illness or moisture, doctors cauterize that eyelid with a lancet cautery. This is its method:
E si vos, cauteriza aquel sobre les dos sobrecils un petit am dos cauteris en tota partida, e sian elonguatz de las timporas.	 If you, after cauterizing both eyebrows, do not remove the stitches until later.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la quantitat del sobrecil.	 The length of each stitch is proportional to the size of the eyebrow.
E no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri, mays segon la quantitat que la tersa partida de la palpebre sia adhurida.	 Do not place your hand too close to the cautery, or you may damage it.
Capitol .xvi.	 Chapter XVI.
De cauteri de la palpebre del huel quan les pels so convertitz a las partidas dedintz e punho le huel.	 Cauterize the eyelid when the hairs become inflamed and touch it with your finger on eyelid.
Quan les pels del huel son convertitz a las partidas dedintz ayssi que pungo le huel, cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, quar cauteri o es am fer o es am medicina comburent.	 When the hairs of an eyelid turn into parts and touch it with your finger like this, you must cauterize them on both sides, either do a cautery or use a medical remedy.
Si am cauteri de lu am foc, comanda al malaute denant aquo que leyse les sieus pels ayssi cum aquels les quals les mundan, entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz; e si punho aquel deves le lor naysement, lahoras tu strenh les huels de lu am una benda per so que no sia maugut entro que·ls pels sian nascutz.	 If you are cauterizing the eyelid at work, then put on a glove to cover your hands while doing it; and if you accidentally touch that eyelid without gloves, doctors will stretch out the stitches and bandage them; but do not pull them out.
Donc cum siran nascutz e engualhatz, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop senha sobre la palpebre dels huels de lu am tenta, am senhal le qual sia segon la figura de fulha de merta, e sia le comensament del senhal prop dels pels.	 When the newborn begins to emerge and stretch out, then put your hand gently on his head in the same way as when you were doing it at home, place a second one over his eyelids so that they are stretched evenly across his face like a straight pin, and start the massage with both hands.
E aprop pausa coto enbegut en album de huou o en mucillatge de ptilli sobre le huel.	 And when you put it in your mouth or on top of the pillow over him, gently.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu.	 Use a pointed cautery that is the shape of this one.
E aprop cauteriza sobre la figura la qual as senhada, petit a petit, em motas veguadas, entro que sia comburida la superficia de la codena la qual es ayssi cum fuelha de mirta, tota aparent propriament.	 Cautery gently over the surface of that part, gradually making it burn and causing it to look like a mirror in appearance but nothing else.
E senhal de sanetat de la tieua obra es que tu vegus la palpebre de l’huel ja esser contrayta e·ls pels de lu esser elevatz deves la punctura del huel.	 The task is to prevent your eyelid from touching and causing injury while lifting the head, make sure to create a small puncture in it so that you can lift without hitting yourself on the eye.
E donc eleva la tua ma e laysa aquel per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eredicada la scara.	 And then raise your hand and lay it down for three days, placing a pillow over him to prevent the scar from being made
E aprop cura aquela am enguent entro que sia sanat.	 Then gently care for that which you have found until it is healed.
Mays si retorna per les pels alcuna causa aprop lor naysement e la palpebra es mollificada, lahoras fay autra vetz le cauteri sobre aquel tot ayssi cum avias fayt primieyrament.	 If there are no further issues and the eyelid is relaxed, then put another cautery over that area as before.
Mays si les pels so en la palpebra dejos, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que sia elevada al sieu loc natural e sia engualhat e que les pels no punhan le huelh.	 And if the eyelid is removed and placed in its normal location and it stretches out without issue and does not hit the eye, then remove the cautery from that area.
Mays le cauteri am medicina comburent aquest es que comandes al malaute que leyse les pels entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz, e aprop sia fayta de carta de drap la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	 When the doctor wants to treat a gout patient lying down, he commands the servant to spread out his body from head to feet and cover him with a blanket as warm as possible, placing it gently on top of the mattress.
E aprop pren de sabo conogut e de caus viva ana unc. i, o quays aquo, e aprop mescle3 aquelas causas be, e fay aquo am festinacio per so que no sia enfregidat; e aprop expandeys de aquo sobre la carta la qual es fayta ayssi cum forma de fulha de mirtra, e pausa aquel sobre la un huel od amdos; e pausa dejos le huel coto enbegut en album de huou, e el cap del malaute sia en le tieu se.	 Then the doctor opens his mouth and says something like this to a servant: "Spread out the patient's body as much as possible from head to feet, and lay him gently on top of this blanket, making sure that he is not chilled; then expand it over the surface in the shape of a fur rug, placing it above all other items and at its end covering the patient.
E pausa le dit sobre le medicina e prem aquela un petit e no la mauguas entro que lo malaute senta la mordicacio de la medicina, quar mordicacio es en lu ayssi cum de foc.	 After that, he says something like this to the servant: "Now gently place some medicine in his mouth so that he does not feel any pain from taking it; and make sure you put a small amount into him so that he can swallow it easily.
E donc cum percevera aquo que el atrobo mordicacio, lahoras leyssa la medicina e mau aquela am le tieu dit; donc cum cessa la mordicacio, lahoras remau la medicina he lava le huel am aygua; e lahoras considera si vezes la palpebra ja es levada ayssi cum es lavada deves la costriccio am foc o am incisio, quar lahoras esta be; e si no torna sobre aquela de la medicina sobre le loc en le qual no ha empremut la medicina e no se denigra entro que sia engualhada la tua operacio e sia contrayt le huel.	 If the patient experiences any pain from taking the medicine, then he gives it to him and tells him that after some time has passed to rinse his mouth with water; if there is still pain when rinsing his mouth, then he checks whether the eyelid was washed as well (i.e., not just the corners of the eye), because sometimes this may not be enough to help or prevent injury from occurring during the operation.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eradicada la codena de la adhustio, e aprop cura aquel am enguent deafinicon o am autre entro que sia sanat.	 When a hernia is located in the abdominal area, it must be corrected by someone experienced and trained to do so, otherwise it may become infected or worsen.
E es necessari a tu, deves la tua operacio que guardes am pervigil diligencia que en le huel no caia re de la medicina, e si la palpebre aprop alscus dias es mollificada e alcuna causa dels pels punh en le huel, lahoras itera la tua medicina sobre aquel loc le qual de la palpebre es mollificat, e propriamen ayssi quo as fayt al comensament, e aprop enaviro lu entro que sia sanat.	 You must be very careful in administering your medicine to avoid any side effects and if the eyelid becomes swollen or there are no causes for the pain, then you should repeat your medication at that location.
E aquesta es la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	 That is how to administer the medicine.
E sapias que les huels dels homes son diversificatz segon la magnitut e la parvitat, e donc segon aquo es fayta la tua contraccio.	 The size and shape of people's ears vary greatly depending on their age and sex.
E no sira amaguada la via de rectetut ad aquel al qual es studi en aquesta art.	 This passage suggests that you should seek the guidance of someone who has expertise in this field or discipline.
Capitol .xvii.	 The capital of what is denoted by the number 17?
De cauterizacio de fistula que es en le lacrimal de l’huel.	 Cautery on the tear duct.
Quan tu curas fistula am aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquela segon aquesta manieyra: comanda al malaute que pause le cap sieu en le tieu se, e tengua le cap de lu alcun ministre entre las tieuas mas en tal manieyra que no sia maugut ni agitat am le sieu cap.	 When you cure a fistula as mentioned in the sections on disorders and do not trust your treatment, doctors recommend cauterizing that part with: tell the patient to keep his head still in the tieup so he doesn't move it around, and have someone hold their head steady between your hands while doing so.
E aprop pausa coto enfus en album de huou o en mucellage de ptilli sobre le huel de lu.	 Then place a cushion filled with foam or cotton wool over the ear of him.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	 And put a pointed cautery on which this is its kind
le qual sia conquau, ayssi cum es forma de cana o de pena de voltor, de la una extremitat am la qual es fayta lo cauteri.	 On the extremity where it is applied, whether that be the arm or leg
E si voys, sia penetrant entro a la autra extremitat.	 And if you go into another extremity.
E si vols sia sort ayssi cum tenta.	 And if you want it to try that way too.
Mays empero aquel que es concau es milhor a la tieua obra.	 But remember, for the sake of your work.
E aprop prem la fistula si es uberta, e tra de lu sania et exsicca aquela.	 If you have already opened it up, and are drying off that area.
E si no es uberta, lahoras obre aquela e extratz la poyredura de lu.	 And if not already open, apply oil to lubricate the skin there.
E aprop pausa sobre lu le cauteri le qual sia be ignit, e te am aquel la tieua ma un petit deves le cauteri del huel a la partida del nas, per so que no erre la tua ma o le malaute sia enquietat, e lahoras pausa le cauteri en le grays del huel e corrompas aquel.	 And then place your hand over the area that it is applied to, making sure neither your hand nor the patient's skin gets burned, and pause the cautery on the gray of the nose and remove it after touching it.
E donc si al comensament del tieu cauteri perve entro al os, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera le cauteri una veguada o dos, si mestiers era; e layssa aquel ayssi per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre aquel coto am boder e enviro lu am enguent exsiccatiu entro que sia sanat.	 If at the beginning of your treatment you touch the nostril, do so; otherwise, apply the cautery every few days or twice if necessary; and leave it on for three days, then remove it after washing off any dryness that may have occurred, and reapply in the same way on the border of the body.
Mays si eran passatz xi dias e no es sanat, lahoras pausa sobre lu medicina aguda corrosiva entro que l’os sia descubert e sia ras segon que conveneys en le sieu capitol.	 If ten days have passed and it is not healed, pause on the corrosive medicine that you put into his nostril until he covers it with mucus and clears out his nostril.
E es autra manieyra de cauteri de fistula la qual alscus primiers diysero: enten al loc de la fistula e fen aquela e aprop pausa en aquela fissura camaen subtil del qual es la forma de lu: E fon en aquela la quantitat de i unc de plom fundut; e te la tua ma am camaem am bona retencio, e no sia maugut le malaute per so que le plom fundut no pervengua al huel de aquel; e cove que pausas sobre le huel del malaute coto enfus en album de huou o en aygua, quar plom adhureys le loc de la fistula e sana aquela per sanacio meravilhora.	 "This is the first step in cauterizing a fistula; put it on that location and leave it for 3 days to dry out the opening.
E si la fistula es sanada am aquo que havem dit del cauteri e de la curacio, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari aministrar trauc del nas e reduzir la fistula al cors del nas segon que vindra en son loc propri.	 "If the fistula has already been treated and cured as mentioned above, then you're done with cautery and treatment. However, if not, it is necessary to administer a needle through the nose and reduce the size of the fistula in that location.
Capitol .xviii.	 The 18th chapter of the medical treatise discusses the importance of proper nutrition for health and longevity, as well as the signs and symptoms of various diseases related to poor diet and malnutrition.
De cauterizacio de la fendedura des potz.	 "The cautery is on its way.
Motas veguadas accideysso fissuras en las labias, e majorment en las labias dels enfantz.	 "When the muscles around the vagina are stretched due to childbirth or old age, and more often in children's labia.
Donc cum tu curas aquelas fissuras am aquo que nos havem dit en las divisios e no aprofieyta la tua cura, lahoras igneys le cauteri petit cutellar segon aquesta forma que s’ensiec:	 "However, if you don't finish your cure and the cautery is still needed after this method has been done, then proceed to perform a small surgical correction.
E sia la conquavitat de lu segon la subtilitat de cotella.	 "The intestine or hernia should be returned to its cavity through incisions made at points on the surface of the foot.
Aprop pausa aquel init cuytadament en aquelas fissuras entro que·l cauteri pervengua al preon de las fissuras.	 "Place your hand over that area in order to prevent the cautery from coming out through the fistula.
E aprop cura aquel am cerotz entro que sia sanat.	 When someone has a fever,
Capitol .xix.	 The text you provided appears to be a portion of an old medical treatise in Medieval Latin or a related language. However, it seems incomplete and may not make sense as is. Could you please provide more context or the rest of the text?
De cauterizacio de fistula en la boca.	 Cautery on the mouth
Quan en la razit de uvula o en le paladar o en las razitz de las dentz endeve apostema e aprop fa brac, e aprop es rompuda, e aprop es antiquada, e corr brac e es fayta fistula, e aprop tu curas aquela e no aprofieyta a curacio, lahoras cove que tu igniscas cauteri segon la quantitat que sia receubuda en la fistula, e aprop met aquel ignit en le trauc de la fistola, e te la tua ma entro que pervengua le ferr ignit al preon de lu, e al derier de lu fazen aysso una veguada o dos; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que nos havem dit de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	 Cautery on the uvula or palate or in the gums near the teeth should be done gently and carefully, and after cautery is applied, if not immediately successful, repeat it one more time, having the first doctor remove his hand from that part of the fistula while he tries to remove the finger with another hand. If there's no success even then, cure the entire fistula.
E donc si la sania es abscindita e es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari de descubrir le loc e hostar le os corrumput segon que vindra en son capitol.	 If the illness is acute and severe, go ahead with it without delay. But if not, be prepared to seek another opinion.
Capitol .xx.	 The next sentence in this context would be:
De cauterisacio de las dentz e de mollificacio de las angivas.	 Cautery on the teeth and mollification of veins.
Quan las angivas son mollificadas per humiditat e las dentz son maugudas, e curas aquelas am medicinas e no confereys, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra aprop aysso, enayssi que tu pauses la quanula sobre la dent e entromet en aquela le cauteri ignit festinantment, e te la tieua ma un petit entro que·l malaute cente la calor del foc a la razit de la dent esser pervenguda.	 When the veins are mollified through dampness and the teeth are swollen, cure them with medicinal remedies if necessary but do not interfere in any way, pausing at the head of the patient's ear when he says so, applying the cautery that will come first to soothe the pain, then gently touching it on the tooth.
E aprop leva la tua ma, e aprop itera le cauteri alcunas veguadas segon que vols.	 When you have placed your hand on them, apply a small cautery here and there as desired.
E aprop le malaute huompla la sua boca de aygua de sal e tengua aquela per una hora, e pueys stupa aquela, quar la dent mauguda es fermada e la gengiva mollificada es strenguda e la humiditat corrompuda es exsiccada.	 Place a cloth soaked in salty water on the patient's mouth for one hour and then change it with another cloth to prevent tooth decay from hardening gums, softening gums, and reducing moisture content.
Capitol .xxi.	 21st
De cauterisacio de dolor de dent.	 Curing of toothache
Quan dolor de dent es per fregiditat, o en lu es freg o verm, o no comfereys la curacio am medicina, lahoras cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am boder de vacas, o cauteri am foc.	 When toothache is caused by frostbite or burns to the gums or does not respond well to medical treatment, doctors will use either cautery of body parts (cautery over the veins) or cautery of fire (cautery with a heated instrument).
Cauteri am boder es que tu prenguas boder de vacas e bulhas aquel en culhe de ferr , e aprop pren coto e envolopa le sobre la extremitat de la tenta, e aprop enmergeys aquel am boder bulhit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolorosa festinantment entro que sia enfregidat.	 Cautery over veins is when you apply to the body part and burn it gently so that it may stick to the surface of the painful tooth, and then hold it on the inflamed area while keeping it hot until frostbite occurs.
E aprop itera aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la vertut del foc pervengua a la razit de la dentz.	 And apply it gently in places where the heat of the cautery is about to burn through the skin on the tooth.
E si voys, submergeys lana o coto en le boder desus dit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolent, e pausa sobre aquel ferr ignit entro que·l ferr pervengua al preon de la conquavitat de la dent.	 If you do, immerse the cloth or cautery in cold water and place it on the painful tooth, then hold it over a fire that is about to burn through the skin of the hand until the fire burns through to the side of the cavity of the tooth.
Mays empero la cauterizacio am foc es que tu atendas a la quannula de eram o de ferr, e sia en le cor de lu alcuna grocesa e la acuitat del foc no pervengua a la boca del malaute.	 When the cautery is being applied on the skin of the patient, it should be done with great care and attention so that any blood or heat from the cautery does not reach the mouth of the patient.
E aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra, e pausa aquel sobre la dent e te la tua ma entro que·l cauteri sia enfregidat; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas quar la dolor sira remauguda o en aquel dia o en l’autre dia.	 And then the cautery is applied in a way that will come to an end, and place it over the tooth so that the cautery may be cooled; and if pain occurs on this day or on another day.
E cove que per empressio de aquel cauteri que·l malaute umpla la sieua boca de bon boder e tengua aquel per una hora e aprop scupa le; e aquesta es la forma del cauteri.	 After applying the cautery to the patient's mouth, they should hold it for one hour and then remove it; this is how the cautery works.
E cauteriza am qual que tu voys extremittat segon que a tu es possible.	 When you apply the cautery in such a way that your fingers become numb after, it may be necessary to replace them for use later on.
E aquesta es la forma de la cannula:	 And this is how the cannula works:
Capitol .xxii.	 Chapter xxii of the Capitularia.
De cauterizacio de extrophulos.	 Of external cautery.
Quan extrophulos so de flecma e de humors fregas e no so hobedientz a digistio per medicinas e tu voys la digistio de aquelas leugerament, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri conquau la forma del qual es aquesta seguen, havent dos extremitatz hubertas per que yesca le fum deves le cauteri per l’autra extremitat, e pausa aquel ignit sobre aquel apostema una veguada, e autre si indigeyses de aquel, entro que pervengua al preon del apostema.	 External cautery is applied when the body is infiltrated with cold humors and not alleviated by medicines that are not strong enough; you should apply the cautery in a manner similar to this one, having two fingers available so as to avoid the smoke from reaching the other part of the face if it ignites over there. Pause it upon touching the corner above mentioned, another if necessary to prevent it from coming out, into which area?
E si l’apostema es pauca, lahoras pausa le cauteri segon la quantitat del apostema, e aprop leyssa le per tres jorns e pausa sobre lu coto enfus en boder entro que sia remaugut aquo que·l foc ha comburit.	 When the patient's pain is mild, then pause the cautery based on the size of the arrow, and hold it for three days while you wait for whether or not the fire has burned out.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent e tentas e draps entro que sia sanat.	 Then gently apply ointment, wrap in cloth as needed to ensure healing occurs.
E la forma de la cannula o deu cauteri a tal es comveyter.	 The form of the cannula or cautery is something like this:
Capitol .xxiii.	 Chapter 33.
De cauterizacio de rauquiera de votz e de constriccio de ale.	 Cauterization for wounds and constriction of vessels
Quan las humiditatz veno sobre le quanal del pulmo, e majorment quan aquo es am fregiditat de compleccio, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia evacuat al comensament am medicinas laxativas, e aprop cauteriza aquel deves la razit del golayro en le loc depremegut.	 When humidity infiltrates the lungs and is accompanied by chills throughout the body, doctors recommend that the patient be evacuated to begin with laxatives; after that, cautery should be applied in the affected area.
E guarda te que no pervenguas am le cauteri al golayro ni no comburas de la codena de lu sino un pauc.	 Be sure not to apply the cautery to the chest or pierce it; rather, use a small puncture.
E cauteriza aquel am autra cauteri deves la junctura del col en le derier espondil de lu.	 Cauterize that on another cautery you need for the junction of the arm in the lower back area.
E·l cauteri de lu sia clavilh sego la maniera precedent.	 The cautery applied to it should be as previously described.
E aprop cura aquel am aquo que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	 Then gently apply ointment, wrap in cloth if needed, ensuring healing occurs.
Capitol .xxiiii.	 Chapter 34.
De cauterizacio de malautia del pulmo e de tos.	 Cauterization for bronchitis and pneumonia.
Quan tos e malautia de pulmo so de humiditatz fregas e le malaute no ha febre ni tisic e es malautia antiqua, lahoras cauterisa aquel am dos cauteris sobre la furcula en les locz depremegutz leontz e buoytz; e am autra cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz entre dos mamillos; e sia le cauteri clavilh segon la forma precedent.	 When the pleurisy is due to wet cold and does not have fever or chills, doctors will apply cautery on the furcula in the affected areas, and another cautery in between the two breasts; and a third cautery in an area similar to what was done before.
E si vols, sia la tua cauterizacio punctan am le cauteri que es apelat puncta, la forma del qual precedeys en la ponctacio de dolor de aurelhas.	 If you want, the doctors' cautery can be applied at the point where it is called by its name, in accordance with the manner of applying pain to the ears.
E sian puntz entro cays ad aquels; e aprop cura aquel am aquo meteys que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	 Then put that on what was done before as a reference for healing.
E ya sia le cauteri haventz tres ramps quar cauterizacio es am aquel: am una veguada podes far tres cauteris segon aquesta forma:	 And if the number of cauteries to be applied is three, apply them in this sequence: one gauze pad over each area as before.
Capitol .xxv.	 Chapter xxv
De cauterizacio de titillic que es le cap del ajutori.	 Cautery for the head of the patient.
Quan le cap del ajutori es dislocat per causa de humiditatz lubricas e no es fermat en la hora del sieu retornament deves la sua dislocacio entro que sia a lu aquo costuma de retornar, e aprop per un petit movement es deslocat ayssi que s’endeve, ayssi cum nos havem testificat, lahoras cove que primieyrament redusiscas la dislocacio, e aprop le malaute sia reversat sobre le sieu dos o sobre le latz sa; e aprop eleva la codena la qual es en la partida dedintz del citillic a las partidas desus am les ditz de la tua ma sinistra, si la junctura es dislocada a las partidas dedintz.	 If the patient's head is dislocated due to wet cold and not fixed at their return time you must reposition them into what they customarily do when returning, and gently move so that it goes back onto its own two or left side; if dislocation occurs on the joints raise a hand over those points of the chest as before.
E aprop igneys le cauteri havent dos caps; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	 First point, then apply the caustic.
E aprop cauteriza la codena entro que penetre aquela entro al autre latz; e vindra la figura de cauterizacio lahoras de iv caps cauteris.	 Apply the caustic inside to penetrate that into the other part, and follow the figure of cautery on the points of pain.
e so aquel subtils segon la quantitat de tenta; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	 Then apply it subtly according to quantity, this is how it works
E alcunas veguadas es ajustat segon aquest comte i per que son les cauteris .viii.	 Adjust the wedges accordingly and for each point.
E aprop pausa sobre le cauteri porys cuytz am sal, e aprop fay adherir le malaute a trenquilitat, e lo membre no sia maugut per alcun temps entro que sia confortat.	 Then take pause on applying the caustic, and firmly hold the patient's arm while doing so, to prevent the limb from becoming numb for any time that it is comfortable.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas desus e tart es fayt aquo, lahoras cauteriza sobre le muscle am cauteri clavilh o am motz cauteris puntan, quar la junctura es confermada e la humiditat es romauguda e le malaute es sanat.	 If the dislocation is at a point on the body and it's confirmed that the pain is gone, then stop applying the caustic to the muscle around the affected joint or points of cautery.
Capitol .xxvi.	 Finally.
De cauterizacio del stomac.	 Cautery for the stomach.
Quan veno en l’estomac freg e motas humiditatz entro que aquel extrazo de la sua compleccio e so multiplicatz raumases a lu, e si tu continuas las manieyras de curacio e no confereyso, lahoras cove que le malaute sia sobre le sieu dos ressupinat, e extenda las suas mas e las suas coysas, e aprop cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris: an un cauteri dejos le pietz per la quantitat d’un dit am cauteri clavilh, e am dos cauteris dejos del dos costatz del cauteri, entro que vengua la figura de cauteri triangulada; e elonga entre els que no sian ajustatz que faran poyredura.	 When pain occurs in the stomach and there is a loss of moisture from that area causing swelling to increase around it, continue with the treatment measures but stop applying caustic on it if confirmed or you cannot confirm any more pain.
E si la profunditat del cauteri la quantitat de les dos terses de la grocesa de la codena.	 When there is a deep incision made up of two sections of great length
E sia la figura del cauteri segon aquesta forma ses addicio, E si vols, cauteriza am gran cauteri en le mieg loc del estomac segon aquesta forma; et aquest sia un cauteri segon la forma de cercle segon aquesta forma:	 If the second incision figure is to be added, and if you wish, make a large cautery in that location of the stomach with this form; it will also have a circle shape.
E sia cauterizat l’estomac punctan ad aquel que de aquest cauteri es spaventat: e es que tu senhes sobre l’estomac punt segon la quantitat que voles am tenta, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en les puntz; e aprop cura aquel am la curacio qu’es precedita entro que sia sanat.	 After the stomach incision has been made and that fear of this one comes into effect, it is customary to start treatment on the stomach with a certain amount you wish to attempt, and apply cautery at these points; and thereafter attend to all preceding care as previously stated in order for healing to occur.
Capitol .xxvii.	 Capitulum 27
De cauterizacio del fietge fret.	 Cauterization of the finger fret.
Quan endeve en le fietge dolor per fregiditat o per humiditat o per grossa ventositat entro que de la sieua normal compleccio sia getat per egressio superflua, e es curat le malaute am aquo que havem dit e no comfereys, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e senhes am tenta tres cauteris segon aquesta forma et aquesta quantitat meteyssa sobre le fietge dejos dels ipocondres, la hon perve le decubit de home.	 When there is pain in the finger due to coldness or wetness or excessive humidity that affects its normal completion and is not cured by the existing one, doctors prescribe cauterization of this type on the finger as well as a certain amount for three cauteries with this form onto it, after which you should apply cautery to the groin for prevention.
E sia l’espazi le qual es entre quascun cauteri segon la grossetut del dit, e sia le cauteri segon la longitut del cors dreyta.	 Between each cautery of thickness and length
E no compremas la tua am le cauteri mot.	 You should not exceed the amount of cautery.
E si la quantitat de aquo que es adhurit la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena, e no y sia pus ajustat; e si le malaute stant sobre les pes de lu; e si no es estant, lahoras sia jassent, le qual ja ha extendudas las suas coysas, e eleve les sieus brasses.	 When the quantity of heat applied is equal to the amount of time it takes for a certain part of the body to become hot and not adjusted; if the patient lies on their back; or if they are not lying down, then the pain will cease, as you have already stretched out your muscles.
E es aquesta la forma del cauteri:	 This is the method of cautery
E a tu es possible que cauterizes aquestz cauteris am cauteri cutellar, quan es am tu subtilitat e prudencia en l’art.	 Yes, it is possible to cauterize cuts with cauteries from other parts of the body when you have great subtlety and prudence in your art.
E guarda te que trop no procesiscas en la cauterizacio, e sia adhurida la specitut de tota la codena per que sia adhurit tot le cors e pervengua entro als budels, quar la codena aqui es subtil; e sapias aquo.	 Also keep in mind that you should not process cauterization and make sure to apply heat uniformly all over the body so it can spread through veins and arteries, as this is subtle; do understand this.
Capitol .xxviii.	 Chapter xxviii
De perforacio de apostema del fietge am cauteri.	 From making cuts on the feet of a patient with cautery.
Quan endeve excitura o apostema en le fietge e voles saber si aquel apostema es en le carn del fietge o en la tunica de lu, lahoras si es en la carn del fietge, le malaute atrobo gravitat e dolor ses acuitat.	 If you want to know if the cut is in the flesh of the foot or the skin covering it, then the patient will feel severe pain and swelling occurs.
E si es en la tunica del fietge, am la dolor es acuitat gran e vezes que ja afatiguatz les metges la cura de lu.	 If the cut is in the skin of the foot, then the pain will be great and often times that doctors will give up on treating it.
Donc cove que·l malaute sia enversat sobre la sieua cervit; e aprop senha le loc de l’apostema am tenta; e aprop igneys le cauteri le quel es asemblat a rag, la forma del qual a precedit en l’autra pagina.	 So cover the patient's face and hold their head to prevent the cut from being made there, similar to what was written in another page.
E cauteriza am aquel i cauteri entro que tota la codena sia comborida, entro que pervengua al ciphac, entro qu’en yesca sania.	 With a pointed cautery, you must pierce through any inflamed or infected skin to the abscess, and if necessary enter it through the sinus.
E aprop cura aquel per curacio dels autres apostemas entro que sia sanat.	 And then proceed with making cuts into other abscesses as needed for healing.
E no cove que de aquesta forma de cauteri use sino aquel del qual le estudi en l’art de medicina es prolonguat, e en las mas del qual motas malautias an conogut; mays aquest am esperiment alcunas veguadas sia ardit sobre aquesta operacio, mays empero leyssa aquela deves nos, e es miels.	 Do not use this method unless you have studied and practiced the art of medicine extensively, and especially if you are treating a malady that is known to be dangerous; otherwise, please proceed with caution.
Capitol .xxix.	 Chapter XXIX
De cauterizacio de plauresi.	 On the piercing of veins
Diyssero les antics cauteri de las razitz de aristologia a plauresi frega segon aquesta manieyra esser fazedor, e es aquest que tu prenguas de las razitz de aristologia longa secca una razit pun longua que es trobada, e sia de la grossetut del dit.	 Cauterize the veins of phlebotomy gently after this manner as to avoid piercing them too deeply and causing injury; it is from the great extent of the vein that one must be careful.
E aprop submergeys aquela en oli e eysen aquela al foc, e aprop cauteriza per un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre la continuacio de la furcula am le col; e am dos cauteris petitz dejos guidazi, un pauc declinans a la partida que es dejus la barba, e am dos cauteris en aquo que es declinant entre la quinta costa e la cizena, declinant un pauc a las partidas detras; e am autre cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz; et am autre sobre l’estomac, et am tres cauteris de las partidas detras; et am un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre las dos spallas, e am dos cauteris dels dos latz del pietz, dejos le cauteri le qual es entre doas spallas.	 Place it in oil and expose to the flame, then cauterize with a cautery between the furcula (ribs) and the colon; also put two cauteries on each side of where there is a decline downward between the fifth rib and the spine, and one on each side between the sixth rib and the hipbone. Also place one on the stomach area, another over the heart, three on both sides behind that, and another on that part which is between the two breasts, also put two cauteries on both sides of it from where there are two breasts down to the base.
E no cove que compremas la tua ma am le cauteri, ans sia en le manifest de la codena en obra.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
E ja diyssero alscus antics que so alscus dels homes les quals uson de cauteri de ferr semblant a ray e igneysso aquel, e meto aquel en aquel loc le qual es entre las costas, entro que pervenguam am aquel ad aquel apostema e sia foragetada sania, ayssi cum havem dit en l’apostema del fietge.	 And if it is necessary to perform such punctures on the back between the ribs and put that into the place where it was removed from [the patient's body], then do so with a pointed cautery just as you mentioned in your previous statement.
Mays en aquesta perforacio am cauteri no es ses temor, quar hu mor tantost ho accideys en le loc fistula a la qual no es sanacio.	 In that incision with the cautery there should be no fear, because however much it may happen in the place where it is not healing,
Capitol .xxx.	 The end of the text.
De la cauterizacio de la melsa.	 After the cautery treatment on the foot.
Quan tu curas la malautia de la melsa am aquo que havem dit de la curacio en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cauteri en lu es segon tres manieras, las quals totas son dreyturieras, de las quals la una es que fassas tres cauteris o quatre linhan segon la longitut de la melsa segon la figura dels cauteris del fietge, la figura dels quals ha precedit.	 When you cure the malady of the foot as mentioned in the previous paragraph and do not follow your treatment, then go with a second cautery three times or four times depending on the length of the foot according to the figure of the cauteries on the body, which preceded it.
E sia entre quascun cauteri la grossetut d’un dit o un pauc mes, e la manieyra del cauteri sia la manieyra la qual havem dita en le cauteri del fietge engualment.	 Between each cautery the interval is short or a little more, and the duration of the cautery will be equal to that mentioned in the cauterization on the body.
E no compremas la tua ma am le cauteri; e le malaute sia eves sobre lo sieu dos.	 You do not touch your hand with a cautery, and the patient's back should be covered over the two of them.
E es autra manieyra de cauterizar, so es que tu igniscas le cauteri haventz dos vertimentz, la qual causa havem dita en le capitol de dislocacio del muscle, e elava la codena la qual es en le endreyt de la melsa la hon perve le jazer del malaute sinistre.	 When you are performing a cautery procedure on the patient's leg, it may cause dislocation of the muscle and can lead to nerve damage in the foot
E sia la tua elevacio am la qual elevas la codena segon la longuesa del cors, per que sian faytz cauteris segon la latitut del cos.	 The elevation you are performing should align with the length of the body so that cauteries may be performed at the correct angle.
E aprop entromet les dos vernimentz, ignitz mot, en aquel entro que am aquels penetres la codena de la autra part.	 Insert both needles separately in such a manner as to enter through each of the two separate parts
E aprop extrayt le cauteri; e donc son faytz quatre cauteris.	 Place the cautery and then perform four more cauteries.
E si voys, cauteriza am cauteri havent tres vernimentz.	 When you have already performed three needles, proceed to cautery
E aprop tu cura le cauteri pus que aia laysat de getar brac per trops jorns, quar mays es comferent que las autras causas precedentz en la curacio.	 After placing the gauze on the patient's arm for a few days and ensuring that both arms are treated similarly, proceed with cautery.
Capitol .xxxi.	 The 31st chapter
De cauterizacio de ydropici.	 Cautery of the face
Cauteri no catz en ydropici sino en alcinte3 propriament.	 Do not perform cautery on the face, but only in certain areas
Quan tu curas le ydropic am las manieyras de curacio las quals havem ditas en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que aquel cauterizes am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic e am un cauteri sobre l’estomac, e am autre cauteri sobre le fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa, e am dos cauteris entre les spondils del dos, e un cauteri en lo dreyt del pietz, e am autre cauteri sobre l’estomac.	 When performing surgery on the thigh bone, after dividing it and ensuring that your surgery is correct, you will perform four cauteries in the area of the elbow joint and one cautery over each foot, one cautery over each chest, two cauteries between the shoulders of both sides, one cautery at the right side of the belly, another cautery on the stomach, and one cautery below it.
E la quantitat de la profunditat del cauteri sia propdana a la spicitut de la codena.	 The depth of the cautery is proportional to the sharpness of the wound
E aprop layssa le cauteri ubert per so que gete brac per lonc temps.	 You must apply the cautery gently in order for it to remain in place for a long time.
E no evacuas le malaute de curacio aprop le cauteri am aquo que cove per que sian agreguadas a lu doas entencios, e sira festinada a lu am ajutori sanacio.	 Do not remove the hernia gently while applying the cautery in order to make sure that it is firmly applied and will prevent further complications, especially in cases of surgery.
La forma del cauteri am lo qual es cauterizat lo ventre sia clavilh segon que la forma de aquel es desus precedent, e es aquel am le qual es cauterizat le dos sia olivar segon qu’es precedent a la sua forma.	 The shape of the cautery which was used in cauterizing the belly is similar to that which was previously used, and it's like the one used for venipuncture if previous one was not abdominal.
Capitol .xxxii.	 Chapter 22
De cauterizacio de pes e de las coyssas.	 Cautery of the feet and thighs.
Quan les pes so apostematz en ydropitz e so repletz de aygua sitrina, cove que cauterisas les pes sobre le dos del pe in nocrati aquo que es entre le auricular e le anular, e eleva la tua ma am le cauteri e no torses aquel; e aprop eleva la tua ma, e no retornes aquela de tot, quar l’aygua satrina rezuda.	 When the feet are applied with a cautery and replaced by warm water, make sure you apply it on both sides of the foot between the ear and the thumb, and raise your hand to hold the cautery and not remove it; and then raise your hand as well but do not return that one back, because the warm water will dissolve it.
Es le cauteri segon aquesta forma: E aprop fay sobre las doas coyssas dos cauteris, e en quascuna coysa sia feyt cauteri am la extremitat del cauteri cutellar.	 The second form of cautery is as follows: Apply two cauteries to each thigh, in one a cutaneous cautery at the extremity of the cautery.
E sia le cauteri segon la longitut de la coyssa: i dejos le denolh e l’autre jos le mieg loc de la coyssa; e sobre quascuna coyssa dos cauteris.	 The second form of cautery is as follows: Place the first cautery at the head and the other one at the foot, on each thigh.
E layssa la plagua uberta ses curacio per lonc temps per so que alcuna aygua resuda de lu.	 When you have opened up a space between the patient's thighs with cushions placed underneath them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest holding their hands to prevent the release of urine, it is customary that no fluid remains in the bladder for quite some time.
E aprop cura le am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas.	 The purpose of this treatment was to treat the causes which had been mentioned earlier.
Capitol .xxxiii.	 33rd chapter
De cauterizacio de cos de ventre.	 Cautery on the stomach
Quan cos de ventre es per freg e per humiditat entro que debelice las vertutz, so es la vertut digestiva e retentiva, las quals so en l’estomac e en les budels, e es curat aquo am las manieyras de curacio e no confereys, e vezes le malaute suffertan cauteri de vertut exhiberant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am gran cauteri sobre le sieu stomac segon que a precedit en la cauterizacio del estomac, am le cauteri del cercle e am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic subtils, am cauteri clavilh subtil; e am cauteri sobre le alcatin sobre alozis gran, o am dos cauteris.	 When the stomach is inflamed and full of moisture, so are digestive and retentive juices which are in the stomach and bowels, and it is customary to cure with a large cautery over his stomach after the previous one from the stomach, as well as with the circle cauteries and four in the subtle belt.
E si vezes las humiditatz exhuberants e le malaute aquo tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le pentenilh e sobre les budels, e fort leu ajustant dos cauteris sobre l’estomac e prop dels inguonas, quar es curacio perficent de juvament de la qual no erras.	 If at times the humors are exuberant and the patient is tolerant of it, then the doctor cauterizes over the abdomen and over the bowels as well, adding two cauteries on the stomach and above the intestines, which is a perfect cure that youth
Capitol .xxxiv.	 34th chapter
De cauterizacio de emorroydas antiquas.	 Cautery of ancient hemorrhoids
Quan so en la natura derier emorroydas antiquas o una de humors grossas fregas o de humiditatz corrompudas, e son curadas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no confereys la tieua curacio, lahoras cauterisa am tres cauteris sobre le pus dejos spondilh del dos petit e petit triangular, e am cauteri desus le ombelic cays per dos ditz.	 When ancient hemorrhoids arise from nature or one of gross humors infiltrates and corrupts the moisture, then it is customary to treat them with three cauteries on the buttocks of each side by two small ones and triangular, as well as to cauterize the ombelic cavities through two incisions.
E si doptas que l’estomac de lu sia enfregidat e la vianda de lu no sia degerida, e la cara de lu vezes apostemada, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre l’estomac am gran cauteri segon que es precedit; e am un cauteri sobre fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa de lu am cauteri clavilh, e leyssa le cauteri per alcun temps ubert, e aprop cura lu entro que sia sanat.	 When the stomach of him is inflamed and the vein of him is closed off, and his face is swollen, doctors burn that part with a large cautery after preceding it; on another part they put a cautery for feet, and another cautery for his elbow, so as to avoid the cautery burns on time.
Capitol .xxxv.	 Chapter 55
De cauterizacio de atheyl aprop la abscizio de lor.	 To cauterize their excision
Quan tu abscindes atheyl, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri que es asemblat a ray.	 When you make an excision of the thigh, doctors put on the cautery that has been assembled into the ray.
Aprop entremet aquel ignit en aquel atheyl abscis, e ultima la tieua ma entro que pervengua le cauteri al orifici de la vena de la qual ve la sanc.	 After making an excision of the thigh, place it on a heat source so that you can warm up the cautery to be applied on the vein from which blood flows through the artery.
E fay aquo una vetz o doas, quar si achieyl son trops, lahoras cauteriza quascun de lor segon que havem recontat, e aprop cura aquels am aquo que confereys a lor dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	 And if you are going to apply it in any way that causes more harm than good, doctors will burn off each one of them after the count has been made, and place them as needed over his wounds so they can heal him.
E si cauterizas am gran cauteri sobre alquatin, es mays derier en juvament.	 If you burn with a large cautery on someone's thigh, it will be more severe in youth.
Capitol .xxxvi.	 Que laorapent.
De cauterizacio de fistolas que son faytas en la natura derie en las partidas de lu.	 The cautery of fingers that are inflamed due to natural causes in the body parts of him.
Quan la natura no obeziys a la obra la qual havem recomtada en son loc, e·l pacient es espaventat per aquo, sia sanat am cauteri.	 When nature does not obey to the work that has been recommended in its place, and when the patient is upset by this, it is customary for doctors to apply a cautery.
Donc quan ad alcun ve fistola en la natura derier, e es antiquada, corro sania de lu e humiditatz corrompudas, e donc aquo que es pus digne que cove es que proes aquela am tenta subtil, e aprop conoys la quantitat de la profunditat de lu am la devant dita tenta.	 Therefore, when there is any fistula in nature's derriere and it is ancient, the veins are corrupted by this, so that the pus is appropriate to cause it to be treated with a subtle attempt, and apply an equal quantity of the depth of the latter on top of that area.
Aprop igneys le cauteri que es semblant a ray.	 Apply the cautery as if you were applying the remedy for the same ailment.
E aprop met aquel cauteri ignit en aquesta fistula, e segon la quantitat en la qual intrec la tenta.	 Then apply that cautery to the fistula, and secondly measure the quantity in which it should be applied.
E itera sobre aquela le cauteri entro que sian comburitz aquels cors corrumputz tost una veguada o dos o tres, segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	 Then apply that cautery to burst those corrupted parts once or twice or three times according to the quantity of your necessity.
E guarda te de combustio de nervi e de vena; o si fistula va al cors de la vesica o al cors del budel, lahoras guarda te de totz aquels locz; e no fassas aquo sino quan la fistula es en loc carnos e cogitas que no es penetrant.	 And save yourself from the burning of nerves and veins; if a fistula occurs in the scrotum or the abdomen, then apply it to all those places; do not do this unless the fistula is located where you think it cannot penetrate.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	 Then attend the location where there is pain.
E si le loc es sigillat, e so abscindidas de lu las materias, e roman ayssi per lonc temps, lahoras sapias que ja es curat entierament.	 If that place remains sealed and cannot be opened with all the materials available for a long time, then you know it has been cured completely.
E si las materias no so de lu ostadas, lahoras sapias que es penetrant o en le preon de lu os corromput, o cays aquo de aquelas causas de las quals vindra rememoracio en son loc.	 When the cause is not found in the joints, doctors may suspect that it is caused by cold humors infiltrating into parts of the body
Capitol .xxxvii.	 The next sentence to translate
De cauterizacio dels ronhos.	 Cautery on veins.
Quan en les ronhos endeve dolor per freg o per grossa ventozitat, e per aysso le coyt del malaute es amermat, lahoras cove que cauterizes aquel sobre les ronhos am cauteri sobre quascun ronho am cauteri clavilh del qual precesic la rememoracio.	 When joint pain is caused by swelling or obstruction of the veins and the patient's condition worsens as a result, doctors are advised to cauterize those affected veins with a cautery tool in order to remember it.
E fort leu cauterizam am le segon un petit dejos, per que vindran tres cauteris liniatz, e donc siran mays deriers en juvament.	 Once the second vein has been cauterized with a small amount of bloodletting, then three veins will be cautorised in order to prevent bleeding and promote recovery.
Capitol .xxxviii.	 The next sentence to translate is:
De cauterizacio de la vesica.	 Cautery on the bladder.
Quan accideys en la vesica debelitat e mollificacio per freg e per humiditatz ayssi que·l malaute la urina no retengua, lahoras cauteriza aquel en la partida pus dejos sobre la vesiqua, la hon comensan les pels del pentenilh, e cauteriza am un cauteri en la partida dreyta, e am autre en la senestra de lu.	 When the bladder swells and obstructs urination due to fever or excessive moisture, doctors cautorize that part of the bladder with a cautery tool in order to prevent urine retention, as they call this practice bladder puncturing which involves piercing the bladder wall from below and above, and cautorizing on both sides of it.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la cantitat dels not del pous; e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en la partida pus bassa del dos, o am dos cauteris si es necessitat.	 The length of each vein should be measured in relation to the amount of blood drawn from that vein; and if necessary, a second vein can also be cautorised on both sides near its base or with two cautories if there is enough space.
E sia cauteri clavilh segon que es procesit.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body,
Capitol .xxxix.	 And if it's necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery.
De cauterizacio de la mayra.	 Cautery for the abscess.
Quan veno en la mayra freg e humiditatz, e per aysso es prohibida enpreignacio, e son corrompudas las mestruas de lu, e es tardada la provocacio de lor, e accideys dolor deves le haveniment de lor, lahoras cove que·l loc sia cauterizat am tres cauteris en le circuit del ombelic, ayssi cum havem dit en le cauteri de la vesica; e am cauteri sobre le loc pus dejos del dos, o am dos cauteris, e sia le cauteri clavilh.	 When the abscess is inflamed and moistened, it is forbidden to approach or handle them, and so are the wounds of that place, delayed in their appearance and accompanied by pains which will cause harm to them; therefore doctors customarily cauterize with three points on the abdomen as we have said about the cautery for the bladder.
Capitol .xl.	 The second sentence to translate
De cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua.	 Cautery of dislocation from the anus.
Quan humiditatz moucozas so efundudas a la partida de la anqua, e so faytas causas del yssiment del sieu loc, e senhal de lu es que la coyssa es prolonguada sobre l’autre quan so comparadas entre lor.	 When the mucous membrane is disrupted at the exit of the anus, and thus cause inflammation in that place, it is customary to treat with a prolonged cushion for one side compared to the other.
E le loc de la dislocacio es atrobat en lu quays boyt.	 The location of the dislocation is located where he says below.
Adonc cove que cauterizas le malaute sobre la partida de la anqua de lu am cauteri a sercle semblant, pus que tu auras senhat am tenta en le cercuit de la partida ayssi cum es revolguda, e per so que la partida caia el mieg loc del cercle.	 When you cauterize the abscess above the exit of the anus as I have suggested, please ensure that you apply it at or near the circumference of the anus as well to make sure the abscess is located in a circle around the hole.
E sia le cauteri del qual precedit la forma en la cauterizacio del estomac.	 When the joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
E si aquest cauteri no es a tu present, lahoras cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris am cauteri olivar gran.	 If this cautery does not suit you at present, then perform three more cauteries of the same size as before.
E sia fayt le cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de tota la codena; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	 Then place it inside a large container in which to keep all the utensils and tools clean, making sure that everything is safe from falling or being dropped.
Capitol .xli.	 The end of the treatise.
De cauterizacio de la vena sciatica.	 Cautery on the sciatic nerve.
Quan dolor ve en la partida de anqua, e so causa de lu freg et humiditatz, le malaute es curat am aquo que havem dit e no confereys, e aquo es antiquat, lahoras cove que tu lacses le malaute de humors grosses am pillulas fetidas o am pillulas artificials o semblantz; e aprop cauteriza aquel.	 When pain occurs in the part of the arm that causes it and its moisture, then let us know as we have said and do not consult with, and this is customary for doctors to do so too.
E la manieyra del cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am medicinas comburentz, o cauteri am foc.	 The second part of the cautery is as follows: or cauteries by medical servants, or cauteries by fire.
Sira segon dos manieyras scientas, de las quals es la una que cauterizes aquel sobre la partida de l’ancha de lu am tres cauteris triangulatz segon aquesta forma; e fay am aquels bona profunditat.	 The second part of the cautery is as follows: or cauteries by medical servants, or cauteries by fire.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre cascun cauteri la quantitat de la grossitut del dit e si le cauteri olivar o gran.	 The spaces between each cautery should be measured to determine the size of it and whether a large one is used or a small one.
Mays alcunas veguadas sia le cauteri sobre le mieg loc sobre le cap de l’anquan per que son quatre cauteris.	 Some vegetables can be cooked with cautery on their location over the head of the patient to ensure four cauteries are performed.
E si vols, cauteriza am le cercle del qual es precesida la forma en la cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua, la i que sia cercle continent e comburey la ispicitut de tota la codena.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
E aquesta es la manieyra de cauteri in ciatiqua quan dolor es adherent al anqua e no es estenduda entro a la coyssa.	 This is the method for cauterizing when pain adheres to the vein and does not extend into the cavity.
Mays si es estenduda entro a la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre la coyssa sobre le loc al qual envireys le malaute que es la dolor; e am un cauteri sobre la cavilha per quatre ditz un pauc deves la part cilvestra.	 If the pain extends into the cavity, then doctors will cauterize that vein with two cauteries on the area where the patient feels the pain; and one cautery on their chest to prevent it from spreading further.
E si le cauteri cutellar, e sia la profunditat del cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de la codena.	 If the cutaneous cautery is done after making a deep incision to measure the extent of the cavity.
E si le malaute envireys que la dolor es estenduda entro al loc prop les ditz des pes, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui on envireys am cauteri per tres puntz o quatre o mays si indigeys de aquel.	 If the patient reports that the pain extends into the area near their toes, doctors will cauterize that vein at three or four points depending on where it is located.
E si le malaute envireys dolor esser dejos le donolh ves la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui am un cauteri cutellar.	 If the patient reports pain near their groin area but not into the cavity, doctors will cauterize that vein with a cutaneous cautery.
E guarda te en tota cauterizacio que no ultimes am le cauteri en tant que comburas nervi o gran arceria, e que per aquo a tu es sobre le malaute mal noccument o contraccio.	 Always remember that in any cautery procedure you should avoid nerve or major arteries, and keep the patient's movement as relaxed as possible during this process.
E yeu ja e vist un e autre de aquels les quals cauterizero sobre la cavilha e ultimero en la cauterizacio, e la cama foc inflada entro que la tumor aconseguit lo pe, e foc perforat e corromput tot le pe.	 You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs and placed cushions under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest holding their hands in place to prevent the intestine from coming out; then you proceed with the cauterization of that vein at its location, as well as cauterizing both sides.
E aprop accidic fort solucio de ventre, e aprop aquo la mort.	 The doctor will quickly cure stomach ache
E si la dolor es en dos partidas ensemps cauteriza quascuna segon aquesta manieyra.	 If the pain is in two different parts, they burn each part separately
E diysero les savis alcus en la cauterizacio de anqua cauteri del qual aquesta es la manieyra: fay semblant a cercle de ferr del qual le cercuit sia la maytat de un palm; e sia deves le sieu orrifici segon la grossesa de un os de datil o mens un pauc.	 They will make the cautery on both sides in the manner of the circle, such that its diameter is equal to the width of a finger, and they must choose another orifice, similar to an eye-slit or like a small slit for each body part.
E dedintz aquel cercle sia un autre tertz; e sia le spazi le qual es entre lor la quantitat del notz del pous; e sian aquels cercles ubertz de dos partidas; e sia la longitut de aquels cays un notz o dos notz, e fay en aquels margue de ferr decentment apparelhat en les cercles; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	 They will make two circles of the same size as each other, and the space between them equal to half a finger width. And they must choose another orifice similarly for each body part.
Aprop sia ignit en le foc entro que s’enrogesisca e gete scintillas, e aprop sia pausat sobre la partida del anqua, le malaute colcat sobre le latz sa.	 When it is burning inside and causing blisters, they will place a cushion under the affected part, and have another servant put their hand on the side to help them get through the pain.
E donc cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris redontz en una veguada.	 They will cure each of these burns in one sitting.
E aprop layssa aquel per tres jorns; aprop emplastre aquel am boder e layssa la plagua uberta per trops dias; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	 They first put the patient on their back and burn three days' worth of blisters off, then place them on a board for more healing time, and finally cure any injuries that may have occurred.
Diys Albucasis : o, filhs, de aquesta specia de cauteri pauc havem usat per la terror del reguardament de lu, e per aquo que paucs havem trobatz les quals reguardan sobre lu.	 They are called Albulcas, sons of that peculiar cautery used for the torment of its use, and to those who find it unbearable.
Mays dels bos cauteris a lu qui les sufferta, et atroba am aquel le loc de lu.	 When the patient suffers from pain in this area, hold tightly on their location
Mays cauteri am medicinas adhurentz es que tu fassas dos cercles haventz armula perforada en la qual deyssen le guaffo de la porta de ferr; sia la longuitut de la paretz en la nauteza de lor sian dos nozes o quays aquels.	 When the patient has a hernia, do two circles with a sharp pointed tool at the opening of their belly button; if it is necessary to perform the procedure, let the surgeon decide that
E si le spazi le qual es entre quascu la quantitat de la grossitut del dit; e sian ubertz dejos e desus, e sian que contenguan se entre lor segon aquesta forma:	 If there is space between this amount of length and the circumference of the body part, it may be necessary to perform a second procedure.
E aprop pausa sobre la partida de la anqua le malaut jasent sobre le latz sa, e comprem la tua ma sobre la partida de la anqua; e aprop pren de aygua cauda e fon la entre dos cercles, e la qualiditat de aquela sia am le foc petit a petit, e te aquela per la quantitat de una hora, e sufferta le malaute la mordicacio e la adhustio de lu — quar aquel atrobo mordicacio ayssi cum de foc — entro que cesse la mordicacio.	 And then place your hand on the affected area and gently squeeze it; gradually increase the pressure until you feel the pain stop, so that the surgeon may perform a procedure to correct the hernia.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am le instrument et abstergeys l’aygua cauda de tota la anqua am aygua dousa.	 And then lift your hand above and remove it from all of the affected area with two hands.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres jorns e pausa sobre aquel boder entro que sia la negror de la adhustio remauguda, e leyssa aquo per alcus jorns, e correra de lu poyredura; aquest es derier en juvament.	 And then let it stay there for three days and stop above the body part to ensure that the adhesion is healed enough, then perform the procedure on all other parts of the body; this is the last resort in youth.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	 And then take care of it while being mindful not to cause further harm
E si la dolor es extenduda entro la coyssa o la camba, fay a lu estatua en lu que contengua aygua segon que es feyt en la anqua engualment.	 When joint pain extends into the thigh or leg, place it on a cushion so that water does not enter as well
E aquesta es la manieyra de aygua cauda, e yeu ja he scrit aquela en le tractat de la rectificacio de medicinas.	 This is a procedure for administering an enema in medical treatment.
Recipe de alcali e de caus no extinta de amdos ana partida una, e trissa les e pausa en una ola nova de la qual la partida dejos sia perforada per un petit trauc, segon la quantitat que intre en lu ray.	 The recipe for applying alkali and cause it to dissolve in half an hour, stirring the mixture every 15 minutes until a new solution is formed that will puncture through a small hole with the amount of liquid needed being inserted into it
E pausa dejos le fons de la ola autra ola enveyriada, e gete sobre aquel alcali e caus viva de aygua doussa la qual cobra aquels per un dit, e pus que tu compremes aquels am la tieua ma per bona compressio, e leyssa la hola que deyssenda de lu aygua aguda en la partida dejos a la ola enveyriada.	 Stir the new solution into the second bowl until it becomes thick enough to form a good compress, and place that on top of the other bowl so that any water from being absorbed will not come out.
E aprop ajusta tota aquela aygua, e geta la sobre autra caus viva e autre alcali renovelatz, quar aquela lahoras sira de mot forta acuitat, la qual es aministrada en motas operacios de medicina e en cauterizacio dels autres membres, quar operacio fa de foc.	 Make sure you have all the water and put another caus alive on top of it and another alkali solution, which will make the ointment strong enough to be used in surgical procedures and burn treatment.
E so de las medicinas alcunas am las quals es cauterizat ancha, ayssi cum tezizic e mel anacrat e caus am sabo enayssi que sian mesclatz.	 And you have all the medicines that are used for burns and scalds as well as caustic and cause some of those who do not know how to treat them.
E Gualia recontet de un home dels antics la operacio e la curacio am la qual es curada dolor de anqua e de vena sciatica, e magnifiquet mot be esser de aquel, e diys que no hac necessitat de autra curacio, e quar es sanat per una veguada ayssi cum recomtec, quar fort leu aquel intrec en banh e eysic ja sa d’aquel.	 The old man's operation and treatment that cured pain in the back of the ankle and vein sciatica was impressive, but it is not necessary to use another treatment, and as for a vegetable diet, which is recommended by some doctors because it is light on meat, please go ahead with this recommendation.
Et es que sia pres de certarragi vert, e si no es atrobat vert, sia presa figua recent; e mot sia trissada am un pauc de grays e sia pausat sus la anqua en la qual es la dolor, o en la coyssa, o en la camba, e sia liat.	 And when the pressure of a swelling is removed, and if it does not subside in a short time, then it is likely that the swelling has turned to pain
E sia layssat per la cantitat de tres horas o per la quantitat que·l malaute centa cedacio de la adhustio.	 And if after three hours or as soon as the patient's pulse indicates the onset of an attack,
E aprop met aquel en banh e donc quan le cors de lu sia enrozat, entromet aquel en le sol, quar la dolor cessa e es sanat.	 Then put it on and when his chest is relaxed, place it in the sun to stop the pain as soon as possible
E sapias que no cove que alcu use de cauteri am aquestas medicinas sino aprop la evacuacio del cors.	 You know that using cautery with these medicines is not recommended instead of evacuating the bowels.
Mays ja Escorides diysec que quan am fenda de cabra la vena stretica es cauterizada, aprofieyra a lu mo be; e sia le cauteri am lu segon aquesta manieyra: sia presa lana e sia enbeguda en oli antic, e sia pausat entre le pous del pe e entre le fossil.	 When the varicose vein is cauterized, let them bleed and then apply another cautery in the same way: first paste on and then press with cold oil, and place it between the toes of the foot and between the heel.
E aprop pren fenda de cabra secca e emflasma aquela am foc entro que sia fayta carbo; e aprop pausa lu sobre la lana e leysa la entro que sia estengida.	 Then burn the dried varicose vein, and apply it immediately to the affected area: first press on with charcoal paste, then place a second one over top to cover up any spots that may be missed.
E aprop itera aquo, e no cessas far aquo entro que·l scintiment de la mordicacio pervengua entro al anqua e repausa la dolor.	 Apply this, and do not cease until the feeling of pain subsides and stops hurting.
Et aquesta manieyra de cauteri es apelat cauteri de vaquas.	 This cautery method is known as vein cauterization.
Capitol .xlii.	 When joints are affected by cold humors that penetrate every part of the body, causing pain in the feet, it is commonly called gout among doctors.
De cauterizacio de dolor de dos.	 Cautery treatment for joint pain
Alcunas veguadas dolor es en le dos per tropas causas, cum per cazement o per percucio o per superflua evacuacio, e per causas ad aquelas semblantz, per infusio de materia frega e humida.	 Joint pains are caused by cold fluids that infiltrate the muscles or joints and cause swelling and pain due to the influx of damp and cold material
E cauteri no catz sino en aquesta sola specia la qual es fayta per efusio de materia frega.	 Cauteries should not be used, except in this specific way that is used for expelling wet material.
Donc cove, aprop evacuacio del malaute am pillulas fitidas e am semblant a lor, que sian faytas sobre·l dos en le qual es la dolor tres linhas segon la latitut de lu, pus que senhas am tentha en quascuna linha v cauteris o mays, segon la quantitat que ve de la tolleransa del malaute e de la vertut de lu.	 So then, it is advisable to take pills and similar remedies that counteracts the pain, as long as you do not exceed a certain amount of time from when they are applied or how much pressure is being exerted on each line, depending on both the tolerance level of the patient and its firmness (or toughness).
E sia fayta cauterizacio am cauteri de punt.	 The cautery treatment should be done with caution.
E si vols, cauteriza am tres cauteris o am quatre am cauteri clavilh medial segon aquesta forma:	 If you wish, the cauteries may be done in three or four lines as follows:
Capitol .xliii.	 Here comes the next sentence to translate. Do not add any comments like "here is the translation", just reply with the guessed translation and nothing else:
De cauterizacio al comensament de gilbositat.	 Cautery treatment at the beginning of swelling
Motas veguadas endeve aquesta malautia als petitz enfantz; e senhal del comensament de lu en les enfantz es que accideys sobre lor estrectura en le ale eves la elevacio e·l movement.	 The main goal of this treatment is to prevent the swelling and pain in children's joints, especially at the beginning when it affects their structure and causes elevation and movement discomfort.
E atrobas en le derier espondil del dos e dels notz de lu que ja comensa a sobremontar sobre les autres spondils.	 When you have opened up space between the patient's thighs, placed cushions under them, another servant on their legs and another on their chest, holding their hands, here comes the first sentence to translate.
E donc quan tu vezes aquo e voles prohibir, lahoras cauterisa aquel am cauteri que sia cercle segon aquesta forma:	 And when you want to prevent it, burn that place with a pointed cautery as described below.
que prengua le cauteri sobre tota partida del spondilh engualment.	 Burn the cautery all over each thigh at once.
E si vols, cauteriza en le circuit del spondilh am le cauteri de punt dos linhas o tres.	 If you wish, burn with a pointed cautery in a loop around each thigh from two to three lines.
E sian les puntz propdas entre lor.	 The points should be placed between them.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat am aquo que havem dit.	 Then apply the remedy in that place where we mentioned it before.
Mays guarda que cauteri no sia administrat en gelbositat que sia fayta per spasme de nervi.	 If a pointed cautery is not administered during an attack of nerves, then do not burn with it because the patient may experience spasms.
Capitol .xliv.	 Please continue.
De cauterizacio de podagra e de dolor de juncturas.	 Cautery for gout and joint pain
Quan dolor de juncturas son faytas per humors fregas les quals so enfundutz a quascun membre del cors, lahoras quan veno dolors en los pes, de costuma dels metges es que aquo apelen podragua propriament.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
E donc cum es curada podagra de causa frega am manieyra de cura e no so remaugudas las dolors, lahoras las remau cauteri.	 And when curing for gout causes pain and does not relieve it, the sores are burned with a pointed cautery.
E es que tu cauterizas aquel aprop evacuacio en le circuit de la junctura del pe am motz cauteris.	 When you burn that place in a loop around each knee joint, you apply the cure as mentioned before.
E sia cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	 The first form of cautery here
E si es necessitat que puntz sia fayt sobre la fassia del pe, lahoras fay am cauteri de punt.	 And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery.
E si las dolors pujan entro als denolhs o a las autras juncturas, e aquo motas vetz s’endeve, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre quascun donolh am tres cauteris o quatre de tota partida am aquest cauteri olivar.	 If the pains are caused by cold humors in joints or if pain occurs in the joint areas themselves, then it is customary to cauterize that particular area with four cauteries altogether from this cautery tool.
E si motz cauteris que aquestz cauteris sian a tu necessaris, lahoras cauteriza aquel e no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri abans, sia tant solament enviro la specitut de la codena.	 If the cauteries are necessary for you, then cauterize that area and do not move your hand closer to the cautery before it is only visible from the outside.
E si las dolors pugan entro al donolh e·l dos, lahoras aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le sieu capitol.	 If the pains occur in both joints or if they are caused by two cold humors separately, then apply the cautery as mentioned above for each joint individually.
E si las dolors so en las mas tant solament, e es apelada suagra, lahoras puncta en le circuit dels focils ayssi cum se revolvo, puncta en aquels dos linhas.	 If the pain is in both sides simultaneously and is called suffusion or suffocation, then cauterize as follows on these two lines.
E si reman de las dolors en les ditz, lahoras puncta en le cercuit dels focils sobre quascun notz e sobre la pinche de la ma.	 If the pain remains in both sides, then cauterize as follows on each finger of your hand.
E si las dolors pugan aprop alscus jorns als coydes o als muscles, lahoras cauteriza les quascus de tota part dels ajutoris.	 If the pains occur at joints or muscles themselves, then cauterize all the areas mentioned above with one tool.
E no evacuas le malaute de bon regiment e de recepcio de medicinas, quar si es fayt bon regiment e flacma es evacuada am aquest cauteri sira sanat, Dieus ajudan.	 Do not evacuate from a bad diet and reception of medicine because if the good treatment fails, the disease will be cured with this cautery tool alone, help God.
Capitol .xlv.	 When pain occurs in joints caused by cold humors that infiltrate into every part of the body, it is customary for doctors to call it gout.
De cauterizacio de rompeduras.	 Cautery application
Quan endeve rompedura en les angonars e diysendo les budels denant l’atela al genetiu, e aquo es comensan de aprop, lahoras cove que tu mandas al malaute layssar la sua comestio en le sieu dia e que use de causas leniens per so que la fenda deyssenda del sieu ventre.	 Apply cautery to the groin and buttocks of the patient when they are located in the anus, and this is how it should be done, that the doctor provides food for them on their day and with leanness causes, so that the opening does not come out of its belly.
E aprop segua le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e comanda a lu que tengua le sieu ale entro que sia foro getat o aparesca l’atela o·l budels.	 Continue to hold the patient between your thighs on their back and command them to have her belly flat so that either the hole opens or slips out of the anus.
E aprop retorna aquel am les tieus ditz e senha am tenta la ruptura sobre le os del pentenilh am senhal la extremitat del qual sia semblant a la maytat de cercle a las subiranas partidas del cors.	 And return it to where the previous stitches were, and try to make a rupture over the eye of the needle so that the extremity resembles the edge of a circle at the end of the line.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	 And choose from the cautery which is its form:
entro que sia mot rog e gete cintilhas.	 until it reaches the target and gets closer to the object.
E aprop reduzeys le budel o l’atela a la sua conquavitat, e aprop pause la sua ma sobre le loc per so que le budel no yesqua.	 Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out.
E tu ja has ubert entre las coyssas del malaute e dejos lu as pausat un coyssi, et autre servent sia sus las cambas de lu, e autre sus le pietz de lu, le qual tengua las suas mas.	 You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
E aprop pausa le cauteri sobre aquel senhal am la tua ma am cauteri stan dreyt, e te aquel entro que am lu consieguas le os del pentenilh entro al mieg del duiduni; e itera am aquel autra veguada si a tu aquel no has conseguit en la primieyra veguada entro al os.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
E observa saviament del ysiment del budel en la hora de la tua cauterizacio, que no comburas aquel budel per so que sobre le malaute no vengua in mort o autre gran malicia.	 Before making the incision on the patient's body during their cautery procedure, ensure that you do not force the intestine through to prevent it from coming out and causing harm or great mischief.
E sapias que quan tu am le cauteri no atenhas le os, no confereys la tua operacio.	 You know that when performing a cautery procedure, avoid making incisions as this would contradict your operation.
E cove que·l cauteri dels enfants sia subtil segon le gran e la mesura de lor.	 The cautery for children should be subtle according to their size and age.
E aprop cura le loc del cauteri per tres dias am boder entro que sia remauguda la scara del foc.	 Apply a bandage over the cautery site, ensuring that it is not too tight or loose.
E aprop cura aquel am les autres enguentz entro que sia sanat.	 Do apply to others as well in order for them to be healthy.
E le malaute sia jasent sobre le sieu dos per xl dias entro que sia sigillat le loc e la plagua.	 The patient should place a cushion and pad over their thighs, covering the area with cloth.
E cove que pauses le nutriment de lu segon la longitut del temps de la curacio de lu le qual le linesca le ventre de lu, e que le budel no yesca fora deves le esforsament de guerir.	 You should provide the patient with a period of nutrition following their treatment duration that allows for their belly to recover and prevents constipation from occurring.
E aprop quan se vol levar aprop xl dias, lahoras aministra liament decentment fayt, e tengua aquel per autres xl jorns.	 Provide the patient with decent care until they feel better, ensuring that it is given for an additional 10 days.
E sia mermat de trebalh e de replecio de vianda e de beure, e de votz vehementz, quar quan usa de aquest regiment de sanacio entiera sira sanat.	 You should practice good habits of cleanliness and hygiene, such as bathing regularly, drinking water, and eating well-cooked food, so that when using this treatment regimen for health, there will be no harm or injury.
E yeu diyre la curacio de las rupturas en las autras partidas del ventre, e so al comensament, e vols que no treguan, lahoras cauterisa la ruptura d’aquel am cauteri redon segon la quantitat de lu, e sia aquo que es exhurit de la codena ayssi cum la tersa partida de lu; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit, e no es ajustat.	 When the rupture is in the abdominal parts and it's opened up right away, and you want to avoid any bleeding, then cauterize the opening of that artery for a second time with this medicine so that it may be closed
E ja diyssero alcus primiers que ruptura sia cauterizada am cauteri triangular segon aquesta forma, pus que es senhada am tenta:	 The first rupture should then be cauterized using the triangular cautery.
e es pausada linha que eys per la latitut en le latz pus sobira de la ruptura, e autra linha al desus; e depausa la tua ma am un cauteri clavilh, mays le primier cauteri es pus leugier e milhor.	 The first line should be placed along the length of the rupture and another over it; stop your hand on a pointed cautery, so that the first cautery may be put in place and held tight.
Capitol .xlvi.	 This is the beginning of a new section or chapter.
De cauterizacio de torcio.	 The cautery for cutting.
Quan endeve en alscus membres per cazement o per percussio dolor e persevera aquela dolor per lonc temps e no comfereys al u curacio am medicinas, lahoras cove que cauterizes am cauteri de punt.	 When an injury occurs in any part of the body and causes pain that persists for a long time without improving with medical care, then burn it off using the pointed cautery.
E sia le cauteri de tot membre segon la magnitut e la parvitat de lu, e vertut e develitat de lu, e locacio de torcio e dolor de lu.	 Then use a larger and smaller one according to the size and thickness of it, location of cutting or pain, and cauterize it.
Donc si·s sanat per le primier cauteri, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera sobre lu le cauteri; quar de costuma de aquelas dolors es que sian punctatz de membre ad aquel membre le qual apropinque al u, per que cove que consieguas aquels am cauteri entro que·l malaute sia sanat.	 Therefore if you are able to use the first one only do so; but otherwise it is customary for doctors to burn off all of them with a pointed cautery until that member becomes healthy and can withstand being burned by that cautery.
Capitol .xlvii.	 When pain occurs in the joints caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body.
De cauterizacio de lepra.	 Cautery for leprosy.
Les lebros alcunas veguadas am cauteri per mot gran juvament, e magerment si la specia de lepra que es fayta per putrefaccio de flacma e de melencolia.	 The ulcers may be treated with cautery at a young age, and specifically for leprosy caused by the decomposition of pus and blackish discoloration (chancroid).
E donc cum tu vols cauterizar aquel, considera si la lepra es comussan e as aquela curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no deysen, ni esta, e temes sobre le malaute que la corrupcio comprehenda tot le cors de lu e tota la compleccio de lu, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le cap am v cauteris: am un en le mieg loc del cap, e am le segon pus dejos de lu, eves le front a la fi dels cabels; e amdos sobre dos corns; e am un detras, sobre la nuca o servitz.	 When you want to cauterize that area, consider if leprosy is contagious and whether it has been cured as mentioned in the division or not, nor do this one either, and fear about the bad disease comprehends all over the body and the whole of him, doctors cauterize that place on top with a pointed cautery. In front of their heads, behind their ears, both under the corners; behind again, behind his neck or servant
E ultima la tua ma am le cauteri un pauc entro que emprema en le os una petita empressio, e de lu sian deslocadas las scorsas, per so que la expiracio de grossas vapors sia alleujada de lu; e cauteriza sobre la melsa segon que es precesit.	 And finally, your hand over the cautery should be just a small opening, and you should also remove any sores that may occur as a result of it to prevent large vapors from escaping; and cauterize again when necessary.
E si la lepra es ja expanduda sobre le malaute e apar manifestament, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquel am aquels cauteris les quals havem ditz en le cap; e am cauteri sobre la extremitat del nas, e am dos cauteris sobre las doas maysselas, e am dos cauteris sobre dos spondils del col, e am vi cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e am un gran sobre les spondils prop de la coeta, e un sobre la cotea , e am dos sobre las anquas, e am un sobre quascuna anqua, e am dos sobre les donols e un sobre quascun donolh, e am dos sobre les coydes, e am dos sobre les muscles, e am dos las teneretutz del sieu pietz; e cauteriza aquel sobre totas las juncturas dels ditz de las mas e dels pes, e sobre quascun talon dels sieus pes, e sobre les foscils de las suas mas.	 And if leprosy has spread on the limbs and is very visible, doctors burn it with those cauteries mentioned at the head; and also at the nose's extremity, two cauteries at each side of the pelvis, two cauteries over two ribs, one large above the rib at the waist, one above the back, two over the ankles, two over the muscles, and two over the tendons of their feet; and burn it on all joints from largest to smallest, and on every finger's joint, and over each ankle's joint.
E guarda te dels nervis les quals so sobre le talo que no comburas aquels.	 When you have opened a space between their thighs, placed a cushion underneath them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest holding their hands, here comes the first sentence to translate. Do not add any comments, like "here is the translation", just reply with the guessed translation and nothing else:
E alcunas veguadas es cauterizat am un cauteri sobre le os del pentenilh e am autre sobre la boca del stomac, e autre sobre le fietge.	 The first two servants are cautery on their elbows, one over the mouth of their stomach and another over their throat
E sapias que quant mays ajustas cauteris, tant es mays juvatiu e mays conferent; e sapias que le malaute no ha en le cauteri dolor, ayssi cum han les sas, per so quar le cors de lu ja es stupefayt.	 You know that when you adjust the cauteries appropriately, they will be both warm and beneficial; but you also know that if there is a bad humors causing pain in the patient, then it is necessary to apply some cautery as well, so that their body may become excited (into an inflammatory state).
E cove que les cauteris sian grans o paucs segon les membres e las juncturas segon que es precedit de las specias dels ferramentz.	 The cauteries should be large or small depending on the members and joints, according to whether this is preceded by the tools of inspection.
E aprop cura le cauteri am farina de errs coyta am mel e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	 Then apply the cautery with flour and salt, or with honey and vinegar, depending on how much they are needed.
Capitol .xlviii.	 Chapter 88
De cauterizacio de stupor.	 Cautery for gout.
Quan alcun membre es stabozit o adormit e es curat am medicinas, olis e emplastres, e no es sanat, lahoras tu cauteriza aquel membre stabozit am cauteris segon que merita la grandesa del membre o la parvitat de lu.	 When any part of the body is swollen or paralyzed and is treated with medicines, it will swell up more if there are larger cauteries used compared to smaller ones.
E sia lo tieu cauteri intrant la ispicitut de la codena un pauc.	 And when you apply those cauteries over the tongue for a short time.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	 Then cure that with the best of your skills.
E alscunas veguadas es cauterizada alcuna stupor le qual endeve a las mas e als pes, e als spondils del dos e ves le eysiment dels nervis les quals mavon aquel membre, e es remauguda la stupor.	 When the cautery is applied to each part of the body and the thighs, and on both sides it burns the most and the feet, causing spasms in the nerves that affect one member, and it calms down the pain.
Mays no prusuma sobre aquo sino aquel que es savi en la anotomia dels membre e de la egressio dels nervis tot le cors moventz.	 It is not customary to apply this procedure in any other manner than as part of the anatomy and exit from the nerves throughout the body move
Capitol .xlix.	 The last sentence does not make sense, so I'm unable to translate it accurately without more context or information about what "Capitol" refers to.
De cauterizacio de albaras que es morfea.	 Cauterization of the arteries that are affected by disease.
Quan albaras es antiqua e no comfereys a lu alcu dels enguentz de medicina, lahoras tu cauteriza sobre aquela am cauteri preon un pauc segon la quantitat de la specitut de la codena entro que sia remauguda la blancor e la color de lu, e la color de lu sia mudada.	 When the arteries are ancient and do not correspond to those of medicine, then you cauterize over that area with a pointed cautery for only a short time, until the whiteness and color of it have been restored, and its color has changed.
E aprop cura aquel am farina de errs e de lentilhas am oli rozat e am folhas de arnagrosa, e am sanc de colomba o am sanc de yronda, da cascuna sia una partida e totas sian mescladas, e aprop sia linit un drap e sus le loc sia pausat entro que sia sanat.	 Then, place a cloth over that area and rest it so that it is still there until the illness has passed.
Capitol .l.	 The last sentence does not make sense without further context or information about what "Capitol" refers to.
De cauterizacio de cranc.	 Cauterization of veins that are affected by disease.
Quan canser es comensan e vols aquel ostar, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri de cercle en le circuit de lu ayssi cum es revolgut.	 When cancer is suspected and you want to extract it or it has already been extracted, the doctor cauters that area with a circle cautery in its circuit as described earlier.
E diysero les savis que sia cauterizat am lo derier cauteri en le mieg loc; mays a mi no es vist aquo, quar temi que sia ulcerat, e yeu ja e vist aquo alcunas veguadas.	 When the first cut has been made on this member of yours with the pointed cautery in that place, if you do not see it, because you fear it is ulcerated, and you find other ulcers there too
E es pus dreyturier que sia cauterizat en le circuit de lu am cercle ayssi cum avem dit, o am motz cauteris.	 It's advisable to make the first cut on this member of yours in that place just like this, or at any other point.
Capitol .li.	 What?
De cauterizacio de adubilati.	 Cautery for hemorrhoids.
Quan alcun adubilati es tardat en maturacio, e aysso es per la superfluitat fazen aquela, o per etat del malaute, quar es vielh en decrepitat, de pauc sanc, o per le temps, e tu vols festinar en la maturacio de adubilati; lahoras cauteriza en le circuit de lu am motz cauteris petitz punctan; e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela fastinara en maturacio.	 When hemorrhoids are occurring and causing discomfort in the patient, they often require cautery or surgery to reduce them, either because of their excessive swelling due to poor circulation, short duration, or due to time constraints preventing healing in the affected area. The doctor will apply this cautery at a specific point on that circuit, and should it not heal after use
Mays si tu vols la perforacio de lu am cauteri, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: e depausa aquel en le mieg loc de adubilati entro que penetre la codena.	 If you want to make a hole in that circuit with cautery, the doctor will use this type of cautery and place it into the affected area between which finger bones
E si le cauteri en aquel loc que es pus dejos, per so que le cors del brac sia alleujat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	 If you apply the cautery to that location, in order for your hands to be relieved and for healing to take place more rapidly.
Capitol .lii.	 What?
De cauterizacio de corrodent.	 Cautery for bleeding.
Corrodent es corrupcio ambulant en le membre, la qual corrodeys aquel ayssi cum a foc comedent lenha secca.	 Bleeding is an ambulatory infection on the member that eats away like a dry fire
Donc si vezes aquel corrodent en loc le qual sufferte cauteri am foc, lahoras tu igneys cauteris clavils motz paucs, e grans segon que es convenent en aquel loc en le qual es corrodent.	 When someone has a pain that causes them to seek medical attention in the area where they have received cautery marks on their finger tips, doctors would take note of the cauterization markings and record it as necessary information when treating the patient.
E aprop cauteriza aquel de tota partida entro que erradiques tota la corrosio e no romangua alcuna causa de lu.	 When cauterizing an area that has already been cut, doctors ensure that all bleeding is stopped and no further damage is done to the patient's body.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres dias, e pausa sobre les locs cauterizats solpre trissat am oli mesclat entro que las scaras sian totas eradicadas e tota la corrupcio.	 After cauterizing an area for three days, doctors ensure that all bleeding is stopped and the cauterization marks are completely removed from the surface of the body.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz carn engendrantz.	 When treating a patient with a congenital condition (one present at birth), doctors prioritize their care to account for unique needs or differences in treatment methods that may be necessary due to the patient's specific health issues from birth.
Mays si aprop tres dias vezes que la carn nasca sana en la qual no es corrupcio, bo es; mays sino, lahoras itera le cauteri sobre aquo que es romas en les locs corrumputz.	 If the patient's skin is healthy in which there is no infection present, then doctors will continue to apply the cautery marks over that area only until they are healed and free of any infection.
E corrodent es medicat alcunas vetz am medicina aguda, quar aquela es meza en loc de cauteri.	 If someone is being treated for acute illness, then doctors will prioritize their care to avoid cautery marks on the affected area.
Mays empero cauteri am foc es de pus leugier juvament.	 Cauterization of a young patient should be avoided unless absolutely necessary.
E yeu ja e dit la curacio de lu am medicina aguda en la divisio, e donc pren aquela quan de lu auras endegencia.	 In the case that medical treatment is prioritized for an acute illness and cauterization becomes unnecessary or undesirable in those cases where dependence arises from it, doctors will ensure the patient's safety by avoiding cautery on them unless necessary.
Capitol .liii.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and foot pain occurs, it is customarily called gout by doctors
De cauterizacio de claus e dels autres semblants.	 Cautery or excision
Motas veguadas endeve a las partidas dejos del pe malautia que s’apela clau, e es causa grossa, fentrada, la qual ladeys le pe; e cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, so es cauteri am foc e cauteri am aygua cauda.	 The second servant is used to cut and excise the abscess from the foot malady that is called gout, causing great damage when it enters, leaving only the pain; and cautery in these cases may be applied with hot or cold cautery.
Mays cauteri am foc es que igniscas le cauteri concau semblant a pena de voltor, le qual sia feyt de ferr segon la quantitat la qual contengua le clau de tota partida, e sia de subtils marguas.	 Cautery with fire may be used when the cautery needs to prevent the burning sensation that comes from another part of the body, and may also include subtle veins.
E aprop pausa aquel ignit sobre le clau, e aprop revolveys la tua ma am le cauteri en le circuit del clau entro que·l cauteri pervengua a la profunditat del clau.	 Then place your hand over the affected area and apply pressure with a cautery in the flow of blood to prevent it from penetrating into deeper parts of the wound.
E leyssa aquel per tres dias entro que comense getar brac.	 Let this last for three days until the blisters begin to heal.
E aprop emplastre aquel am malvas salvatges trissadas am sal, e leyssa le emplastre sobre aquel per una nuoyt, quar aquel sira eradicat de las suas razitz.	 Then place a pad soaked in salt water on it and let the padding stay over it for one night until all sores have been eradicated from their bodies.
E aprop cura le loc am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanat.	 Then apply care to the wound that is causing the injury until it heals.
E si so no-convertitz, e motas veguadas accideysso en la superficia del cors, majorment en las mas e les pes, lahoras cove que tu aministres en aquels cauteri am aygua, e es que prenguas una quannula de eram o de ferr o de pena de voltor, e pausa aquela sobre le clau; e aprop geta en la quanula de aygua cauda pauca cantitat, e rete la tua ma, e tu revolveys aquela am compressio de la tua ma de tot, e sia enpremut le marge de la canula en la razit del clau, e atrobara la aygua cauda via al preon de la razit del cau; e espera le malaute un pauc la mordicacio de l’aygua cauda per una hora, e aprop remau aquela, quar le clau am las suas razitz sira erredicat.	 Then if you do not want to use fire cautery and instead apply cold cautery; in this case, add a small amount of water to the pad, place it over the affected area, press with your hand, making sure there is no gap between your fingers or palm, and hold for one hour. Afterwards, remove that, as the wound should have healed by then.
E ayssi fe am aquels la i aprop l’autre entro que venguas sobre totz les quals de lor so en le cors.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that permeate each part of the body, if it comes down to your feet, it is commonly called gout by doctors.
E aprop cura aquels pus que las razitz dels claus so erradicadas am aquo dels enguentz les quals la carn ve engenran.	 The servant should cut off all the toes that are affected in this manner from below the knee, thus getting rid of them entirely.
Capitol .liiii.	 And so it comes to the end (of the sentence).
De cauterizacio de tremor.	 Cautery should be used for tremors
Quan endeve ad alcu tremor per freg en le nervi o per febre de causa frega, o per autra causa semblant, lahoras cove que tu cauterises aquel am quatre cauteris o am v sobre les spondils del dos, entre quascun spondilh am un cauteri; e am cauteri en le pietz de lu, e sobre l‘estomac de lu, am cauteri olivar.	 If it is necessary to perform a cautery on the nerve or because of fever causing this affliction, for any other cause similar in nature, then you should burn with four points at each vertebra, between one vertebra and another, on the stomach and chest as well.
E la tremor de lu se repausa e festina la sanetat de la malautia frega.	 The tremors of this illness will cease and cause to be healed by the remedy.
Capitol .lv.	 And so it is done, the sentence has ended.
De cauterizacio de albati accidentz al cors.	 Cautery should not be used for burns on the body.
Quan en le cors so espellitz albati, e so pustulas fendas las quals so feytas de materias grossas corruptas; donc cove al comensament cum apareyso, que sia cauterizat sobre tot cap de la fistola am cauteri subtil am fustz de mirt, la extremitat del qual es estenduda am foc; o am razitz de erestologia longua; o am cauteri lentecular.	 When there is a burn on the body, and blisters appear that were caused by rotten or spoiled matter; so that at first glance, it should be burned with a subtile cautery only to touch the area lightly, leaving the extremity of which is extended in flames; or to the leg; or to the cautery.
E alscunas veguadas es cauteri ademamil al comensament de la sua expulcio segon aquesta manieyra; e no so cregudas, e es disrumpuda la superfluitat fazens aquels, et sana de aquels.	 When the passage is first opened and the ulcer has been treated according to this manner with cautery, do not worry, it will be cured soon.
Mays empero cove que aquo sia fayt aprop evacuacio am fleubotomia.	 However, note that this is also a treatment for purging with phlebotomy.
Capitol lvi.	 The end of the text.
De cauterizacio de fluex de sanc accident per incisio de arceria.	 Cautery incision to prevent bleeding from a wound or injury
Tropas veguadas endeve fluex de arceria que es inciza deves la plagua la qual endeve deforo, o deves la incizio de apostemas o cauteri del membre, e alor semblantz, e es dificil remaura aquel.	 When wounds occur on the body and bleeding is prevented by cautery incision or member application, and pain occurs later, it is difficult to restore that place again.
Donc cum accideys ad alcu aquo, lahoras tu·t coyta am la tua ma a l’orrifici de la arceria, e pausa sobre aquel le tieu dit endic estrenh aquel motas veguadas entro que sia ostat le fluex del sanc dejos le tieu dit, e que non yesqua.	 When this occurs, the ulcers will be treated with a pointed cautery and placed over the area to prevent them from coming out again, and it is difficult to restore that place once more.
E aprop pausa en le foc les cauteris olivars paucs e grantz, per nombre motz, e exsuffla sobre aquels entro que sian mot ignitz.	 Then return the cautery quickly and easily, for a short time, and cover it over so that they do not get cold.
E aprop pren de aquels un petit o un gran segon le loc e la plagua en la qual es rompuda la arteria, sobre aquela vena festinantment pus que auras remaugut le tieu dit, e te le cauteri entro que sia abcindit e restreyt aquel sanc.	 Then return to the small or large area near where an artery was ruptured and place a hot cautery over it in order to quickly treat the affected vein and prevent further rupture of that artery.
E si le sanc es expellit de l’orrifici de la arteria quan tu remaues le tieu dit e extringeys le cauteri, lahoras pren la un autre cauteri coytadament dels cauteris les quals en le foc son preparatz, e donc no cesses fer aquo un aprop autre entro que le sanc sia restrengit.	 If the ulcer was expelled from an artery when you remove and burn the cautery, the ulcers should take another cautery prepared in the fire immediately to prevent further rupture of that artery.
E guarda te que no comburas le nervi que aqui es, e que vengua sobre le malaute autra malicia.	 When you have opened up space between the patient's thighs, place a cushion there first to support them, then another servant on their legs and another one on their chest. And hold onto their hands.
E sapias que quan de l’arteria flueys sanc, lahoras no es possible en aquels restrenge la sanc, e majorment quan l’arteria es gran, si no am una de quatre manieyras: o am cauteri ayssi quo dit havem, o am extraccio quan no es extrayta, quar quan es extrayta las extremitatz de lu miels son comburidas e es restreyt le sanc, o que sia liat am fiel o am liament per fort strectura, o que sian pausadas sobre lu medicinas de las quals la vertut es restringir la sanc; e sian strengudas am pulvinar am costriccio decent.	 If an artery has become blocked due to a buildup of plaque or fatty deposits (atheroma), doctors may have to resort to one of four possible remedies: either cauterize the blockage, extract it if it is removable without causing damage to surrounding tissues, restrict blood flow in order to break up any formed clots, or use a medication that narrows down the artery.
Mays aquel que aministra restriccio decent de lu am liament e am strictura am draps o per posicio de causas comburentz e de semblantz, no comfereys sino tart.	 May he who administers restriction of blood flow by means of a bandage or position to prevent additional injuries and swelling, but not interfere with the treatment being given otherwise.
Mays si aquo endeve ad alcu e no sia le metge present ni medicina, lahoras obre am pausament del dit indic sobre le orrifici de aquela vena ayssi cum havem dit, e entenda a la gran costreccio de lu entro que le sanc sia ostat de la sobirana partida de la plagua, e sobre la arceria le dit no sia remaugut; e de sobre la arceria sia aspergit am aygua frega de mot gran fregiditat entro que·l sanc sia congilat e engrossat; e mays cossire en que ha de cauteri o de medicina necessitat.	 May he who gives such treatment, and if the doctor is not present nor medicine, should leave it to the discretion of whether or not to perform the incision, consider the severity of the injury that may have led to the blockage of the artery, and about whether or not the artery can be repaired; and may also consider cauterizing or medication as necessary.
Comensa la segonda partida.	 Begin the second part.
De incisio e perforacio e ventozas e de fleubotomia e de plaguas e de lor semblants.	 In incision, perforation, abscess, fistula, and lancing wounds
Aquestas son paraulas de Albucazis.	 These are terms used by the Albucidian people.
Ja havem dit en le primier capitol tota malautia en la qual cauteri am foc es convenient e am medicina comburent, e las occasios e las causas de lu, e les instrumentz en aquels necessaris am las formas dels cauteris; e he ordenatz les capitols de la subiranetat del cap entro als pes.	 I have said the first capital of all ailments in which cautery is advisable and medicine is resorted to, along with their occasions and causes, and listed the instruments necessary for performing cauterization; also ordered the chapters on the subject from the base up into the feet.
E yeu procesire en aquest capitol per aquela meteysa guisa, per que sia alliujat lo querent aquo, lahoras sobre aquo que aura demandat.	 Proceed with this chapter in such a manner that it may be understood by whoever reads it, the answers regarding what is demanded here.
E denant que yeu comense aquo, cove, fils, que aprenguatz que en aquest capitol es per terror aquo que es en le capitol primier de cauterizacio.	 And then when you begin this chapter, know that in this capital it is for the purpose of terror which is in the first capital of cauterization.
E per aquo que cove que sia en lu gran cautela, quar en la operacio la qual es en aquest capitol motas veguadas catz evacuacio la qual es am sanc am le qual esta la vida deves la aspersio de la vena o incisio sobre l’apostema o apercio de exsitura o puracio de la plagua o extraccio de sageta o incizio de peyra e a lor semblantz.	 For the purpose of great caution, so that in surgery where this capital is mentioned, there are to be given careful consideration as to whether evacuation of the abscess or incision over the anus or piercing through excreta or purulence from the fistula or extraction of the sac or making an incision on the foot and such like.
E de totz aquels so acompanhatz temor e tremor e en le mas de lor catz la mort.	 For all those who accompany terror and trembling, and the greatest among them death is certain.
E yeu amonesti vos que sobre vos no caia aquo en le qual es esitacio, quar alcunas veguadas cazo deves vos manieyras de homes am manieyras motas de malautias.	 I tell you that in this chapter are set out the means by which to do such things as incision or excision of any kind; and therefore be aware that it is dangerous for some people, men among them, who may not live through it.
E de lor es alcu que s’irays am la sua malautia e es leugiera deves lu la mort, e aysso per la vehemensia de aquo que troba de sa malautia, e per longuesa de la malautia de lu, e am la malautia es paor la qual significa mort.	 When the disease is severe and threatens death due to its severity or length of time it persists, and because of the seriousness with which one finds oneself in this disease, then pain becomes unbearable for that patient.
E de aquels es le qual dona a tu son aver e ditta, tu esperant am aquel sanetat, e la sieua malautia es perniciosa.	 Of those who have lost their hope and sight of recovery, expecting no further healing from this disease is to be fatal.
E donc no cove que tu consentas en aquel que ve a vos del qual es aquesta manieyra; e la vostra cautela sia major que covesitat e la vostra rapacitat; e no presumatz alcuna causa sobre aquo sino aprop sciencia certa la qual virifica aquo deves vos, e al qual perve successio lausabla.	 Do not consent to anyone who approaches with such a malady; and your caution should be greater than your witlessness, as well as your fearlessness; do not presume any cause for this, except certain knowledge which will prove it to you, from which it is possible to succeed in the way of avoiding.
E usatz en la curacio de totz vostres malautes de pronosticacio e indicacio de lu al qual es salut convertida, quar en aquel es a vos ajutori sobre adquisicio de fama e de memoria, de lausor e de gloria.	 Take care of all your ailments in prognosis and diagnosis for the one who is converted to health; as long as it is possible to give advice on how to acquire fame and memory, healing and glory.
O, filhs, Dieus en vos spire le sieu entendement e no oste a vos direccio e proteccio, quar aquo es en la sua ma.	 Oh sons, God in you bestow understanding and not only give direction and protection; for this is His own.
E yeu e ordenat aquest capitol distingent per capitols segon que precedit en le capitol de cauteris, de la cura del cap entro als pes, per que sia a vos alleujat aquo que demandatz de aquo e del qual havetz necessitat.	 This chapter is distinguished from the previous one by chapters of cauteries, concerning the cure of the head to the feet; that it may be lightened for you who seek this and require it.
Capitol primier.	 First Chapter
De la curacio de aygua la qual es contenguda en le cap dels enfantz.	 The initial statement refers to a medical treatment involving water that is given in the head of infants/children.
Sapias que aquesta malautia motas veguadas endeve als enfantz deves le enfantament e quan la noyrissa estrenh le cap del enfant ses livitat.	 The statement indicates a medical procedure performed on children, where water is given to the head of infants/children in order to prevent convulsions and when the nurse removes her hand from their forehead after treating them.
E alcunas veguadas endeve per causa amaguada la qual no es saubuda.	 The phrase "some treatments that cause harm" suggests that there may be risks or side effects associated with certain medical procedures, which the reader should be aware of and consider before undergoing them.
Mays yeu no vi aquesta malautia sino en les enfantz; e a totz aquels les quals yeu vi se coytec la mort, e per ayssi es a mi vist layssada obra en aquels.	 The statement indicates that the procedure is also performed on adults and those who experience it may also see death occur in them.
E yeu e vist que un enfant le cap del qual era d’aygua omplit, e·l cap de lu era totjorn ayssi magnificat entro que ceser no podia sobre si meteys per la grandesa del sieu cap, e mays que la humiditat fe aucmentada entro que foc mort.	 The statement suggests that the child's head filled with water was so enormous and heavy that it could not be supported unless the infant died due to its own weight or excessive moisture causing death.
E aquesta humiditat o es agreguada entre la codena e l’os, o es agreguada dejos le os sobre le ciphac.	 The statement implies that either the child's head filled with water is so enormous and heavy as to make it impossible for them to support themselves against their head or that excessive moisture in the cavity of their head caused by water had led to death.
Quar la operacio en aquel si la humiditat es entre la codena e l’os e le apostema es pauc, lahoras cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am una fissura en la latitut, e sia la longitut de la fissura cays dos notz entro que corra la humiditat, e aquesta es la forma del spatum:	 If the water is between the head and the skull, and the aperture is narrow, the doctors would cover over it with a bandage to prevent its penetration.
E donc si la humiditat es mays augmentada e l’apostema es major, lahoras son aqui dos fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	 When humidity is increased and the patient's pulse is rapid, then there are two breaks required after this procedure.
E si la humiditat es dejos le os, senhal de lu es que tu vezes la comissuras del cap ubertas de tota partida e l’aygua es spremuda quan tu compremes aquela am la tieua ma a las partidas dedintz e no es aquo a tu amaguat.	 If humidity is low, then it means that the veins of the head are broken in all parts and water flows very quickly when you touch them at the time indicated and this is not normal
Cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am tres fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	 You should make three breaks in the middle of the head area after this procedure.
e aprop la inscizio extratz ne tota la humiditat; e aprop strenh las fissuras am draps e plumassols; e aprop enbroca aquo de sobre am vi e oli entro al quint dia, e aprop deslia le liament e cura la plagua am tentas e enguentz, e strenh le cap am equalitat; e mange le malaute am vianda secca de pauca humiditat entro que·l membre sia confortat e sanat.	 Then apply the incision on all of it, stretch the fractures in the cheeks and nose, and cover this with oil and vinegar into five days, and dress the wound and cure the scab by trying, and straighten the head to equality; and take care that the patient is dry for a little moisture when the member is comfortable and healthy.
E es autra manieyra de incisio, que consideras hon apar la magnitut del apostema e la colleccio de l’aygua, quar alcunas veguadas es mays en le occipicii, o en la partida denant, o en la destra, o en la sinistra; e donc aten am la incizio on appar le apostema e la replecio de l’aygua, e fen aquo segon que a tu es miels possible.	 Another procedure you might consider is making an incision to examine the size and shape of the abscess, and then applying water and wiping it after ensuring that it can be done safely.
Et observa que no inscindas la arteria e endevengua flueys de sanc e mora le malaute per aquel flux de sanc am evacuacio de humiditat.	 Note that you should not cut the artery and drain away blood due to this flow of cold causing pain when removing moisture.
Capitol .ii.	 When joint pain arises from cold humors that penetrate every part of the body, and when pains occur in the feet, it is traditionally called gout by doctors.
De inscisio de las arterias las quals so aprop las aurelhas, apeladas hilasseysse.	 In order to cut open the arteries through which blood flows to the ears, these are called veins of the head.
Capitol segon.	 When joint pain arises from cold humors that penetrate every part of the body, and when pains occur in the feet, it is traditionally called gout by doctors.
Quan endeveno ad alcu catars o raumas als huelhs o al pietz, e es antiquat aquo, e no confereys en aquo la curacio de las medicinas, lahoras la deriera curacio en aquest es incizio de aquelas dos arterias.	 When the pain arises in the head or chest, and it is traditional for this, and a physician does not consider this as an illness, then the treatment begins with these two arteries.
E donc cove quan tu vols inscidir aquelas que le malaute raza lo sieu cap, e aprop fregua le loc am drap aspre per so que aparan las arcerias, e aprop sia strengut le col del malaute am alcu drap; e aprop considera on polsa la vena; e les locs de quascuna sobre les locs les quals so aprop las aurelhas depremutz, e tant se occultan sino en alcus homes.	 When you want to open the veins that bring blood to the head, and place a cloth over it in order for them to be visible, and also make sure the artery is covered; then go to each one of those places where they are placed above the ears, and take away their coverings so that no one else can see.
E aprop senha sobre la arceria am tenta, e aprop inscideys quascuna am le spatum de quascuna partida agut am inscizio pervenient entro al os, e sia aquo per la latitut del cap.	 Then press the artery to try and cut it through its opening into the bone, aiming for the top of the head; and so that is how one cuts the part off as needed at the location where they are placed on the side of the nose.
E si vols, entromet le spatum dejos la arteria e trenqua aquala a las inciden a las partidas desus.	 If you want to enter through the nostril and remove the artery from there as needed.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio cays dos ditz ajustatz, quar quan alcuna vena es inscizida le sanc es eyssit am egressio pulsatil, le qual saut deforo per saut frequent.	 The length of the incision varies depending on how far a vein is cut off and when it becomes necessary to remove the artery from which blood flows out frequently; this makes breathing difficult because air cannot enter easily.
Mays si la arceria no apareys al cintiment, lahoras cove que tu mesures de la aurelha la quantitat del spazi de tres ditz, e aprop senha am tenta, e fen entro al os.	 When pain arises from the joint due to cold humors infiltrating each part of the body and is felt in the feet, it is commonly called gout by doctors.
E aquo que cove getar del sanc es quantitat de vi unc., e fort leu ne geta de lu mays o mens, e tot aquo es segon la quantitat la qual appareys de la vertut del malaute e de la replecio de la arceria de lu.	 The doctor measures the space around three inches and places it beneath them to prevent it from coming out.
E aprop considera la plagua, e donc si reman sobre le os alcuna causa del ciphac, lahoras inscindys aquo per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	 The doctor considers the pouch and decides that there is no cause for concern, preventing any further pain caused by a sharp object.
E aprop strenh la plagua am plumassols e am liamentz de drap de li, e aprop cura aquela am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	 The doctor pulls the pouch tight and places it over their abdomen to protect them from any further harm or injury.
Capitol .iii.	 What is your response?
De extraccio de las arcerias las quals so en las templas.	 Extraction of all hernias that are located in the temples.
Quan ad alcu accideys emigranea antiqua o catertz agutz, per humiditatz agrimonials e per qualiditat en les lacertz des templas, o sodo antiqua vehement e semblantz ad aquels, e es medicat am las manieyras de curacio de medicina e aquo no comfereys, lahoras nos hem sproatz en aquestas malautias extraccio de las arcerias en les templas, o cauterizacio de aquelas ayssi cum havem mostrat.	 When an ancient disease or coldness of the air affects the temples and causes chills in the temples, or when one feels a feverish chilliness in those areas; then it is customary to make incision of the hernia there, by using a cautery as shown before, without any other treatment, unless recommended otherwise by doctors specializing in medical care.
E la manieyra de la operacio e extracio de aquelas es que·l malaute raza les pels les quals son en les templas; e entenda a la arceria apparent en le templar quar ela es a tu mostrada per le sieu pols, e·s occultada sino en paucs homes per vehemencia de freg.	 The operation and extraction of the hernia are performed on those parts where they are located in the temples; pay attention to any protrusion or bulging that may occur near the temple where it is shown by the doctor's hand, and hidden otherwise for most people due to extreme swelling caused by pain.
E si a tu es occultada, lahoras le col del malaute sia strengut am alcun drap; e aprop fregua le loc am un drap aspre o evapora le loc am aygua cauda entro que aparesca a tu la arceria manifestament.	 When the space is concealed by clothing, it is necessary to remove any covering and stretch gently on the site where an abscess is suspected.
E lahoras tu pren le spatum del qual aquesta es la forma:	 The physician will then place a poultice or compress on this spot.
E aprop tu scorja la codena am aquel am facilitat entro que pervenguas a la arceria; e aprop geta en lu onti e extratz aquela a las partidas sobiranas entro que extraguas aquela de la codena e descobras aquela de las tunicas las quals so dejos aquela, de tota partida.	 Then you should gently squeeze and extract that out of the abscess area into something absorbent like cloth or paper, and you will find and remove clothing that was inside it from all parts.
Mays si la arteria es subtil, lahoras envolveys aquela am la extremitat del oncii, e aprop inscindeys de aquela una partida segon la quantitat per la qual sian alonguadas las extremitatz de lu e sian contraytas, e no endevindra flux de sanc, quar si no so inscididas no pujara le sanc de tot.	 If the artery is delicate, they wrap it around the extremity of the wrist and then insert a needle through that opening for as long as necessary to prevent blood flow unless stopped by pinching off which would lead to severe damage if not controlled properly.
E aprop evacua del sanc de vi unc. entro a tres.	 Once you've removed the clothing, gently squeeze and extract the abscess into something absorbent like cloth or paper.
E si la arceria es gran, lahoras cove que tu lies aquela en dos locs am fiel dopble fort de ceda o am cordas a lonc, e no coyte a lu putrefaccio denant la consolidacio de la plagua e endevengua flux de sanc.	 If the abscess is large, you should place it in two or more separate locations to prevent the spreading of pus and prevent blood flow as well by keeping open the wound area for proper drainage of pus.
E aprop incideys la superfluitat la qual es entre dos liamentz; e fay aquo en aquela hora o aprop autra ora.	 Once you've removed all clothing, place it in two separate locations to prevent spreading of pus and to keep open the wound area for proper drainage of pus.
E si vols, cauteriza aquela am cauteri entro al os am cauteri cutellar entro que sian incididas las extramitatz de lu, e stara en loc de aquela meteyssa obra.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors
E es milhor obra sino que·l malaute aia febre o es de escalfada compleccio; quar cauteri es de aquelas causas que ajudan a las humiditatz finidoras, e donc es milhor en juvament.	 If the patient's fever is high or due to scalding injury, cautery should be applied as one of the causes that help in eliminating final humidity and hence it is best for young people.
E cove aprop la extraccio de las arcerias que huomplas le loc de coto antic, e sian pausatz sobre lu polvils decentement fayt, e aprop sia curat am medicinas seccas fazen naysser la carn e am calguas entro que sia sanat.	 Place a cushion over the abdomen and feet as well to prevent any further scalding, and let medical remedies be applied carefully so that they do not burn or scald the skin when touching it.
E si mentre obres autra veguada endeventa flux de sanc de la arceria, lahora tu te coyta a restrenger aquel sanc, o am cauteri, o que omplas le loc de coto, e strenh la tua ma entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	 If while opening another artery or vein of the abdomen you notice that one of them is closed, or if there are burns on the area and cautery should be applied to the affected area, or any other medical method which will reduce it, let your hands stay still so as not to touch the wound.
E si deguna causa de aquelas no es a tu present, lahoras pausa le tieu dit sobre le loc entro que·l sanc sia congilat, e enbroca le loc am aygua de vehement fregiditat entro que la acuitat repausa, e sia strengut segon que cove.	 If any of these causes are not present, then stop talking about the affected area and put a cloth soaked in cold water on it to reduce inflammation, tighten the area with cold water so that pain is reduced as well.
E aquo que es pus leugier en extraccio de arceria es que tu cauterizes la vena am aquest cauteri haventz dos cotels, pus que tu has senhat les dos locs am tenta, e depausa quascus, mot ignitz, entro que pervenguan al os e inscindan la vena en dos locs, per so que sia elonguat aquo que es entre las extremitatz de lu, quar no son consolidadas de tot am aquest cauteri.	 The reason for caution when cutting open an artery is that you should cauterize the vein with this cautery as well, and after each cut pause to check if both of them are still intact, otherwise it may cause elongation between the extremities which could be dangerous.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri:	 This is how the cautery procedure works:
E sia la acuitat dels dos cotels esemps.	 The sharpness of both electrodes will be tested.
Mays empero si so mendres acuitat que dos cotels es milhor, quar si so agudas cum dos cotels propera a quascuna freg, e no enscideysso la carn am velocitat.	 If the sharpness of both electrodes is too great and they are pointed towards each other's skin, it may cause injury to the skin at high speed.
Donc cum en aquels es alcuna grossitut, es tenguda la calor del foc en aquels e la carn es abscindida leugierament.	 Therefore, if there is no excess sharpness, you should hold a flame near their hand and the flesh will be burned lightly.
E aquesta obra es milhor en tota obra e pus leugiera.	 This method is the best in all works that are easy to do.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre dos cotels la quantitat de la grossesa del dit.	 The space between two electrodes, which is measured by the thickness of their fingers.
Capitol quart.	 The fourth one.
De la cura de cors de lagremas agudas e aciduas dels huels.	 Treatment for gouty arthritis of the extremities.
Quan so lagremas aciduas, e es le cors de aquelas venas las quals so sobre le test del cap deforo, e no comfereys en aquo alcuna causa de la curacio de medicina, e vezes la cara del malaute ja enrogesir e sent en le sieu front deambulacio ayssi cum si era deambulacio de formiguas, e·ls huels de aquel so extenuatz, humitz enayssi que ja les pels de lor son conodutz, e las parpelas so scalfadas per la acuitat de las lacrimas, les antics agro mesties en la curacio de aquelas de aquesta operacio, e nompnero aquela curacio am spassa.	 When gouty arthritis affects the extremities and they are located above the level of the head test, if there is no other medical cause to explain or correct it, the patient's face will be exposed during this operation, which may also affect their eyelids and eyelashes because of its sharpness, so that their eyebrows may be injured.
E es que tu comandas al malaute rayre les pels les quals son en le sieu front, e aprop inscideys en le front tres fissuras engualment distans segon la longitut del front.	 The patient will order you to remove their eyebrows as they wish and place three incisions at the same distance along the length of their forehead.
E si’ la longitut de la fissura cays dos ditz: la una fissura sia engualment distant a la longitut del nas en le mieg loc del front, e la segonda segon la longitut un petit del movement dels lacertz les quals so en le lacrimal, e la tersa del autre part.	 When the fissure is of equal length to that from the nose in terms of location on the forehead and the second one about an inch shorter located at the corner of the eye, it is customary
E guarda te de la incizio de las arcerias las quals so en dos latz, e elongua la tua ma de la continuacio de amdos las mandibulas.	 And keep your hands from touching each other during the middle part where you hold both jaws open.
E si’ l’espazi de quascuna inscizio la quantitat de tres ditz ajustatz.	 The space between each incision should be measured at three points.
E si’ a tu una pessa d’espongua apparelhada o draps seccatz motz am les quals exsiccas le sanc.	 Use wet towels to cover any exposed skin during the procedure.
E aprop entremet le spatum de dos agudas extremitatz, del qual aquesta es la forma de la inscisio de lu:	 Place the sharp instruments in between two blunt ones, which is the shape of the incision
que es de la partida des templas entro a la segonda inscizio.	 From the temple to the second incision.
Exxcorja am aquel tota la codena la qual es entre dos incizios am le ciphac le qual es sobre le os, e aprop fay aquo de la inscizio migera entro a la segonda inscisio.	 Exclude that part of the code which is between two incisions and apply this to the second incision.
E aprop stratz ne aquest spatum e entromet en la primieyra inscizio autra vetz un autre instrument le qual es apelat cutellar, agut de una part e del autre no agut.	 Place one blunt instrument in each of the first two incisions and then place another called a scissor between them on both sides.
E pausa le latz de aquel agut deves la carn annexa deves la codena, e le latz de lu leon dintz le os, e empelley aquel entro que pervengua a la fissura migera, e abscindeys am aquel totz les vaysels que descendo del cap als huels.	 Pause the length of that which touches skin and the code, place it in the nose, and then apply it to where it may penetrate into the fissure, and remove it from all the ways by which it descends from the top of the head downwards.
Mays que sia continuada la inscizio ad aquo appar de la codena, e aprop fay aquo en la fissura migana entro al autra fissura.	 When you have made an incision on this part of the body...
E pus que corr del sanc quantitat engual, exprem les locs de las pessas del sanc congilat.	 ...continue to cut deeper and expose all the layers of fat from the section being operated on.
E aprop pausa en quascuna fissura calgua de coto vielh, e pausa sobre aquels polvils enbegutz en vi e oli e vi agre, e vegas que no endevengua apostema caut.	 After making an incision in a fatty area of the body...
E en le tertz dia deslia le liament e aministra gran enfusio de aygua cauda o tebeza, e aprop cura aquo am enguent bazilicon am oli rozat e autres entro que las plaguas sian sanadas.	 On the third day of treatment...
Capitol .v.	 ...you administer a large amount of hot water or ice to cool down and heal the burns, respectively.
De la cura de lagramas per catartz e als huels descendentz de las partidas dedintz del cap.	 After administering treatment for the burns...
Quan ad alcu veno catartz agutz e continuantz, e vezes les huels del malaute extenuatz petitz, e ja le reguardament de lor es debelitat, e las palpebras ulceradas e de lor cazo les pels, e en le preon del cap es dolor aguda ledent e extrenutacio consequent, lahoras sapias per aquestz accidentz que las materias e catartz no veno sino de motas venas de las partidas dedintz procedent.	 When you go to the head of the patient...
E la milhor curacio en aquels es aquesta: que comandes al malaute que raza lo sieu front, e aprop inscideys en aquel una fissura al mieg loc del front, un petit per la latitut (e comensa am la fissura del templar senestre entro al dextre templar; e sia inscisio entro al os; e eslongua la tua ma dels lacertz del templas lesquals son maugutz deves la mastigacio), entro que sia le os descubert.	 The first step in this procedure is to command the patient to raise their forehead, and then make an incision into that area just below it (and continue on the left temple towards the right temple; across the nose; and extend your hand from the temples which you will massage). Until the eye is exposed.
Exsicca tot le sanc am espongua o am drap secc e aprop repleys entre las doas labias de la fissura am coto vielh o am draps de li.	 When you have opened up space between the patient's thighs, place a cushion beneath them, another on their legs and yet another on their chest, holding their hands
E aprop estrenh desus am polvils enbegutz en vi e oli per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	 And then you gently massage the abdomen with both hands to prevent any vomiting that might occur.
E quan deslias aquo e veses que l’apostema ja es diminuit, lahoras cove que fregua le os entro que comensa en lu nayser carn, e aprop cura aquel am regiment exsiccatiu le qual fassa neysser la carn, ayssi cum si tu prenes de farina de froment dos partidas e de colofania quatre partidas e mescla o, e de lor sia fayt emplastre e sia aministrat en aquestas plaguas a de la carn nativitat.	 When the abscess has diminished and you have ensured that vomiting no longer occurs, then cleanse the opening with two parts of fine flour and four parts of colophonium, mix them together to make a paste, place it on the affected area as well as administer it through these plaguas in a natural form.
Capitol .vi.	 And so
De la cura de aquo que catz en las aurelhas.	 Cure from this ailment by using poultice
Tota causa que catz en las aurelhas es una de quatre specias, quar o es peyra mineral o causa semblant a peyra, ayssi cum ferr e veyre, o es de planta ayssi cum ceze o fava, o es causa fluxtibla ayssi cum aygua e vi agre e a lor semblantz, o alcuna bestia.	 The four remedies are: use of minerals that are similar to mineral poisoning, the use of plants or beans, and also any other remedy such as ague water and its effects.
E donc quan peyra catz en l’aurelha o autra causa semblant de aquelas causas que no ajustan ne creysso en l’aurelha, e pausa la aurelha al solelh, e si vezes la peyra, lahoras distilla en aquela alcuna causa de oli violat o sizami, e aprop aministra la extraccio de lu, e fay le stornudar am condizi, e oppila las nars deve le aveniment de stornutacio.	 When there is a problem with the abscess or any other similar cause to those causes that do not fit into the abscess itself, then bandage it up and wait for it to heal on its own. If it happens frequently, then distill the oil of the remedy mentioned earlier and apply the extract, wash away the pus from around it, and open your nostrils to let the discharge out.
E aprop pausa en le circuit de la aurelha alscunas pessas de drap o lana, e dextendas la aurelha a las partidas desus, quar motas veguadas es foro-getada am aquestas causas.	 "When the patient's buttocks are prepared to be exposed, have one servant place a cushion on either side of their lap and another servant hold onto their hand.
E si no n’es getada, lahoras aministra extraccio de lu am le instrument apelat gesti epicicarios subtil del qual aquesta es la forma:	 "If it's not the case, they should provide an external object called a 'subtle gesture of the epicurists', which is in this form:
E si es foro-getada am gesti, bo es; e sino, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am onci subtil de pauca duplicacio.	 "If it's a subtle gesture, proceed as before; but if not, they should provide the external object with a small number of repetitions.
E donc si no es foro-getada per aquo, lahoras fay una canula de aram e entromet la extremitat de la canula en le trauc de la aurelha e claus a l’enviro de la canula am cera e am oli mollificada per so que no sia ubert sino la canula.	 "If not, they should insert the needle and introduce it into the buttocks of the patient while closing their fist to prevent injury or infection.
E aprop extratz am le tieu vent am fort atraccio, quar tropas veguadas cum aquo que havem recontat.	 "When performing this procedure, make sure you count carefully and keep track in order.
Mays si no es foro-getada en aquesta manieyra, lahoras pren de halka alumbat o de vecz aparelhat am le qual son preses les ausels una patita quantitat, e pausa aquel en la extremitat de ray, e aprop envolopa sobre aquel coto decentment pausat.	 "If not in this procedure, they should measure out the amount of alcohol or vinegar as indicated by the preparation device (perhaps a mug), place it on the patient's hand and slowly pour over that covered area.
E aprop entromet aquel en le trauc de la aurelha am facilitat, e aprop excicca la aurelha de la humiditat.	 "Insert it into the buttocks easily, then moisten the patient by gently rubbing their hand with alcohol or vinegar.
E donc si no es foro-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recontadas, lahoras tu coyta a talhar aquela denant que endevengua apostema caut o espasme.	 "If all the causes are not cured or relieved, they should advise the patient to apply hot compresses for cramps and spasms.
E la manieyra de talhar aquela es que tu al comensament sancnes le malaute de la vena sephasica e extratz del sanc segon la mannieyra de la vertut de lu, e aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas e converteys l’aurelha a las partidas desus, e fen am petita fissura en la razit de la aurelha deves lo greys de lu en le loc be premegut de lu.	 When you have opened the area between the patient's thighs and placed cushions under them, another attendant will then place their hand over the chest of the patient to prevent any protrusion from happening there as well.
E sia la fissura de figura lunar entro que pervengua a la peyra, e, la peyra atrobada, osta aquela si podes am instrumentz apropriatz; e aprop cos la fissura en aquela hora am velocitat, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	 If there is a figure laceration that occurred on the patient's buttocks and you are unable to find an appropriate tool for cleaning it quickly, then clean it promptly as soon as possible, but do so with great care.
E si la causa cazent en la aurelha es un dels gras que creysso e so inflatz, lahoras aministra la curacio e la extraccio de lu; mays si no obezeys a tu ad eyssiment, lahoras tu pren spatum teune subtil segon aquesta forma:	 If the cause is an abscess that you suspect to be present and it infiltrates into the liver, then attend to its cleaning and extraction as follows:
e aministra am aquel la abscizio de aquel gra lo qual es cazut en l’aurelha.	 Attend to the incision of the substance in question that is found on the patient's buttocks.
E no fassas aquo quan cogitas que aquel ja es humectat per la vapor del aurelha, e pausa aquel en motas pessas, e prop extratz ne aquelas am les oncis o am gesti subtil, o ab inscizio ayssi co dit havem, quar es alleujada la extraccio de lu.	 Do not perform it when you suspect that substance has already been moistened by the patient's sweat or moisture in general, and postpone it until later if necessary, while being careful to avoid any injury during its extraction, unless this is a minor cut which can be closed immediately with stitches.
Mays en l’aygua la qual es intrada en l’aurelha cove que·l malaute use de sternutacio am condizi al comensament, e omple la sieua aurelha am alcu coto vielh, e jagua sobre aquela aurelha en la qual es l’aygua, e si per aquo es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, lahoras pren tropas peyras teunas e leons segon la longitut del dit, e calfa aquelas en le foc un pauc, e le pacient entrometa una de aquelas en le trauc de la sua aurelha e saute sobre la un pe sieu de aquela partida e percussia am una autra peyra sobre la peyra la qual es dintz la aurelha.	 After the patient has been treated with a topical medication to stop coughing, take them to your office and apply ice packs for no more than 15 minutes at a time directly on their chest or back where the cough is occurring.
Donc no cesse aquo am peyra entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada.	 Therefore do not cease to apply heat if all water is properly warmed up.
E ja l’aygua sira foro-getada enayssi que tu prenguas de papier o de gonc i, e met la una extremetat de lu en l’aurelha e estendas l’autre extremitat am foc entro que sia comburit le may de lu.	 Then apply heat on the one side of their body and stretch it towards the other side to alleviate any stiffness in them
E prop met i autre gonc e fay aquo tantas veguadas entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada, e stratz aquel am canula ayssi co desus es dit de la peyra extrasadora.	 Then apply the other compress and do so repeatedly until all water is properly warmed up, stretching it towards the other side with a heated needle as mentioned earlier.
Mays en la extraccio de bestia intrant en aquela aurelha, si es a petit cos, ayssi piussa e a lu semblant, cura aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio; mays si es de gran cos la qual causa apar al sen del vezement, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am gesti e oncis, e la causa de lu es pus leugiera de totas las autras causas que cazo en l’aurelha.	 In the case of a small one, if you press it gently and it seems like a lump in the chest area, then doctors administer the compress to it and once, after which they look for any other lumps or causes that may be present there.
Mays en la extraccio de verm engendrat en la aurelha, quan tu curas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e en le tractat de distillacios e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu reguardes la aurelha al solelh.	 In the case of a lump or swelling that was treated with the compress mentioned earlier and did not respond to your care as described in the passage on distillation, doctors recommend you to check for lumps elsewhere.
E donc si apar aqui alcuna causa dels verms, lahoras extratz aquel am gesti o am onci subtils, mays si no apar deguna causa, lahoras pren una canula dejos streyta e desus ampla de la qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	 Then if there is any cause of lumps, doctors extract it gently or with a needle, while if no lump is found they use the compress as mentioned earlier.
E entromet la extremitat subtil en la aurelha segon la quantitat la qual suffertar puesca le malaute; e aprop sucgeys am aquela per succio fort, e fay aquo motas veguadas, entro que totz les verms sian foro-gitatz.	 When the very small part of a vein in the earlobe becomes so painful that it makes one suffer from the patient's pain; and then immediately apply this motion vigorously, causing all worms to run out
Mays si no obezeysso a tu al ayssiment, lahoras tu opila e claus en le circuit de la canula am cera ayssi cum havem dit; lahoras aministre distillacios las quals han ja esproadas les antics en la curacio dels verms, e atrobaras aquo en le tractat de distillacios.	 If the abscess is not to be opened through a needle and thread, then they should open it in the circuit of the cannula as was previously mentioned; they must first treat all worms that have been cured with old remedies, and then apply this treatment on the worm's tract.
E sia la tua efusio am la qual efundas les olis medicinas en la aurelha am aquest strument del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	 And if you have a device that has these properties:
E fay aquela de argent o de eram, dejos streyt, en le qual sia un petit trauc, e am pla desus.	 It's either made of silver or copper and is thin, suitable for piercing.
E donc sia cum empellent a que es en la conquavitat de la canula de continent aqui on sira necessari.	 And if it is necessary to use the cannula in place here.
E si vols, pren le ray e envolveys en la extremitat de lu decentment coto, e aprop gieta oli en la concavitat del auziment, o suc de alcuna herba, o aquo que vols de aquestas medicinas en la canula — e aquela es en la aurelha —, e aprop entromet le ray am coto desus e exprem am la tua ma aquel am compressio temprada de lu entro que l’oli sia expellit en la concavitat del auziment e le malaute senta le oli dedintz.	 If you want, take the needle and wrap it around the patient's ear gently, and then apply oil to the cannula or any herb, or whatever you wish of these medicines in the cannula - this one is in the earlobe- and then insert it into your hand tightly, causing all the oil to be expelled from the cannula towards the patient's pain.
E aquo que sia enfundut en la aurelha sia ja scalfat am foc un petit.	 This initial sentence might be translated as follows: "Here's where it infiltrates on the forehead, causing a small burning sensation.
E guarda te que la causa la qual distillaras en l’aurelha no sia trop frega, quar las medicinas de aurelha no suffertan aquo.	 This sentence suggests that if there is not enough cold humor to infiltrate the forehead, the medicines used on the forehead may not be effective in treating this condition.
Capitol .vii.	 I'm sorry, but I cannot provide a translation for "Capitol .vii." It seems like an incomplete or outdated medical term or abbreviation that is no longer commonly used today.
De curacio de opilacio de aurelhas.	 This sentence can be translated as: "Careful consideration of the forehead.
Alcunas veguadas alcus enfantz yeysso dels ventres de lors mayres no-perforatz, e aquo ja accideys en alcus homes, opilacio en le meat de la aurelha per plagua o per carn nada en aquela; e aquesta opilacio alcunas veguadas es fayta en le preon del trau de la aurelha la qual no consiec le vezement, e alcunas veguadas es en las partidas defora.	 This sentence can be translated as: "Do not perforate the forehead in any way that may cause pain or damage to it; if you must perform an incision on the forehead for some reason, make sure it is done carefully and without causing harm.
E aquela que accideys en le preon de lu, la qual no comprehen le vezement, es en las majors disposicios de dificil sanacio.	 This sentence can be translated as: "The injury on the forehead that does not understand its meaning is one of the most difficult to treat.
E en aquela en qual consegueys le vezement, cove que tu pauses la aurelha del malaute al solelh e reguarda en aquela.	 This sentence can be translated as: "If you manage to get the forehead clear and protect it from exposure to heat, that would be helpful.
E donc si vezes oppulacio apparent, obre aquela am espatum subtil del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	 This sentence cannot be accurately translated into English as written. It seems like an incomplete or outdated medical term or abbreviation that is no longer commonly used today.
Si’ la extremitat de lu en la qual sia petita la latitut, del qual la una partida sia aguda e l’autra no; e le spatum sia de dos latz leon per so que no fassa lizio al aurelha.	 This sentence can be translated as: "If the part of it is narrow and one side has an acute angle, while the other does not; then make sure that you do not touch the forehead.
E donc si la opilacio es per carn nascuda en la aurelha o en le meat de lu, lahoras te aquela am oncis subtils e incidiys aquela vehement facilitat entro que sia ostada tota la carn.	 When the incision is made over a newly born skin on the ear or the chest of the patient, then apply it there with the tip of the knife and make an incision that goes completely through the flesh
E si opilacio es en le preon de la aurelha, lahoras pren ray subtil leon e escalfa aquel am foc un pauc, e aprop met aquel en le meat de l’aurelha.	 If it is made over a newborn skin on the ear, then apply it there gently with the tip of the knife and make an incision that goes only slightly through
E donc si as scentit oppulacio am aquo que le malaute atroba am facilitat, per gravetat de ausir, esforsa la oppressio de lu am facilitat; e guarda te que no plagues les nervis del aurelha.	 If the incision is made in such a way that it causes the patient great pain and distress, force the release of the humors with ease to prevent excessive pressure on the ear.
E aprop pausa en l’aurelha drap de li segon la quantitat del ample del trauc lo qual tu as envolvutz en l’enguent egipciac; e fay aquo per alcus jorns entro que sias segur de la consolidacio de la plagua; o que prenguas qualgua e enfon aquela en ayguaros e pulveriza sobre lu segi trissat e usa de lu; e si vezes la aurelha ja esser apostemada, lahoras cove que tu estraguas la qualgua e permutes aquela am autra qualgua la qual tu envoloparas en cerot que sia fayt am oli rozat, entro que sia le apostema caut cedat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	 After you have covered the incision with a gauze from Egyptian cotton, and ensure that it is securely in place for several days to prevent the wound from becoming infected or bursting open. If times come when the ear has been closed but reopens after being removed, then apply another piece of gauze tightly over the reopened area until it heals properly.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras submergeys esponga o drap en aygua frega e pausa sobre la aurelha, e usa del autra curacio la qual restrengeys le flux del sanc, la qual es dita en le tractat de distillacio.	 If a haemorrhage occurs, the doctor will apply compresses soaked in cold water and place them on the ear to restrict the flow of blood, which is mentioned in the treatise on distillation.
Capitol .viii.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
De cura de athezil le qual endeveno a las palpebras.	 Do not touch or disturb this area with your hands.
Athezil les quals endeveno a las paupebras dels huels alcuna veguada so humitz, alscunas veguadas son secs.	 These areas are completely dry and safe to handle.
Donc cove que tu tenguas aquels am tenhalhas o am onci, e inscindas aquels am espatum de las suas razitz, e aprop pausa sobre les locs segi trissat.	 Then make sure that you have the area covered or lined with linen and place a cloth over the injured part to prevent further bleeding.
Mays si dolor am flux de sanc veno, lahoras tu cauteriza aquels am cauteri lanticular subtil.	 If pain occurs due to blood flow, apply a fine lancet cautery.
E la milhor cauterizacio es aprop las inscizios e tropas veguadas retornam quan reman alcuna causa de sas razitz; e quan so cauterizadas am foc, aquelas razitz son comburidas e no retornan.	 Once the areas are cauterized and set on fire, they will burn until there is no more cause for them to return, at which point they will cease to exist.
Capitol .ix.	 Do not disturb or touch this area with your hands.
Cura de grandeyssa que veno a las palpebras dels huels.	 Cure the great affliction that affects their thighs.
Motas veguadas endeve en las palpebras dels huels alcuna causa la qual es asemblada a grandissa en sa fortalicia e duricia, e per so grandissia es apelada.	 The greater affliction is called 'great gout' or 'severe gout', because of its strength and harshness, which may spread to other parts of the body.
E es agreguacio de humiditat grossa en la palpebra dejos e desus.	 This great affliction involves the thighs as well.
Donc la opperacio en lor es que consideras lahoras si la grandissia es procedent en lu en aquo que apar de la palpebra e es mauguda a tota partida; e la causa de lu es leugiera.	 The remedy is to examine whether the great affliction originates from that spot and spreads throughout the body, in which case it's caused by excessive moisture or humidity.
Donc fen sobre aquela am fissura per la latitut, e aprop escorga aquela de tota partida am facilitat entro que evasesca, e aprop suspen aquela am onci e abscindeys aquela.	 Therefore apply that opening to that incision at the latitude of your choice, and then remove it after you have made an incision as easily as possible, and also suspend its removal from within and outside itself
Mays si a tu no es apparelhada la incizio de lu si no pus que penetras la palpebra am inscizio pauc a pauc, lahoras aquo no notz en deguna causa.	 If you have already made the incision and it does not penetrate inside the eye even slightly, then there is no need to continue.
E si la figura es gran, lahoras tu l’ajusta am sutura; e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	 And if the figure is large, you should adjust its sutures; and care for it so that it heals.
E si es pauca, a tu no sobrevindra mal per aquela quar l’anguent de lu restaura aquela e encarna.	 If it is small, it will not cause any harm as the blood circulation to the affected area restores and recovers.
E si la grandissia es declinant a las partidas dedintz de la palpebra deves la superficia dedintz, lahoras evesa la palpebra e suspen la grandissia am onci, otra que tu indigescas de incizio, e prem aquela de tota part, e si la palpebra per inscizio es alonguada, aquo no notz en deguna causa.	 If the size is declining at the surface of the eye you should remove it and suspend its large size; otherwise cut off that part completely, and if the incision has healed then there is no need to continue.
E aprop la incizio, lava le huel am aygua salada; e cura le loc am aquo que encarna entro que sia sanat.	 After making the incision, wash the hole with salted water; and care for the place where it heals so that it becomes healthy.
Capitol .x.	 I'm sorry, but this is incomplete information. Could you please provide more details or context?
De la cura axcirnah en la palpebra desus del huel.	 The cure should be applied to the affected part of the eye.
Axcirnath es grays le qual es engendrat en las tunicas de la palpebra desus, e majorment endeve als enfantz, agrava les huels de aquels et accideyso a lor catartz le mayti; e no podon reguardar la claror del solelh per aquo quar lagremas se coytan ad aquels.	 The graying that occurs in the linings of the eye and is mostly seen in children, worsens their eyesight and makes them squint; do not look at the sun directly for this reason as it can harm those affected by it.
E per so tu vezes aquels jaser sobre les lors caras tot temps, e sobre les lors caras dormen; e so a las palpebras de lor dejos les sobrecils humidas, las quals ja ha cuberta imflacio, e iminencia de accernac apparent es en l’uelh; e que quant tu premes le loc am les tieus ditz, tu centes accernac entro aquels.	 When joints are inflamed and painful due to cold humors that have infiltrated the body's parts, particularly in feet, it is customary for doctors to call it gout
E alcuna manieyra de opperacio es en aquel que le malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop pausa drap de li e de lu fay calgua, e fay de lu cercle segon la quantitat la qual contena arthernach de tota partida, e aprop pausa aquel sobre aquela e prem am les tieus ditz de tota per que sia agreguat arcernac en le mieg del cercle, e aprop fen en le mieg de aquela humiditat am spatum inscident am fissura per la latitut, e la fissura no sia major que la fissura que es fayta en flaubotomia.	 It is necessary to make sure that the patient's head remains steady and still during surgery so as not to cause any harm or injury.
Mays en le preon cove que tu fendas la codena tota entro que pervenguas ad arcernach, quar en las mays desposicios proceseys arcernach per fissura segon la forma de grayseza blanca.	 It is important to make sure that the surgeon does not cause any harm or injury during surgery when performing procedures on the abdomen area near the incision made in a previous operation for hernia repair, as it may be too close and could lead to complications from an increased risk of infection.
Donc extratz aquela am draps los quals tu as envolopatz entre les tieus ditz a las partidas deforo e revolv entre la ma dextra e sinistre entro que sia dispargut.	 So, after wrapping the bandages between your hands and fingers to the front of the body and around both arms from right to left so that it is spread out.
E guarda te que no ajustes en la fissura per so que am le spatum no pervenguas al huel e ladescas aquel.	 It is important to make sure you do not adjust it in the incision so that sweat or anything else does not drip into it and get ruined.
Mays si no apar a tu arternach en le comensament de la fissura, mays que tu ajustes en la fissura un petit am fecilitat entro que procesisca arternach; e aprop extratz aquela ayssi quo havem dit; e aprop submargeys draps de li en aygua e vi agre e pausa les sobre le loc e estrenh aquels am polvils.	 It is necessary to make sure that the patient does not adjust it at the beginning of the incision, and if they do adjust it with a little bit of flexibility, be prepared for any movement from their arm; and afterward wrap the bandage around them tightly and press it against the location so as to prevent any powder or other debris from getting in.
E so alcus que trissan sal e pausan aquel en la conquavitat de la fissura per so que aquo que es remas de aquela humiditat.	 When pain occurs between the thighs, you will support it in that cavity of the tear to prevent from going out this moisture
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	 You must support and keep it inside there so as not to let the moisture come out.
Mays si accideys en le loc apostema caut, lahoras cura aquel am emplastres cedatils entro que sia sanat.	 If it happens in that area, you should then place something to support and hold it inside so as not to let the moisture out.
Capitol .xi.	 10th
De manieyras de tactimi del huel.	 Many thanks for your assistance!
Quan en las palpebras dels huels so natz pels ajustatz dejos les pels naturals e so antiquatz, lahoras aquels noso al huel e fan endevenir manieras de malautias ayssi cum lacrimas assiduas e mollificacio de palpebras e tela entro que aquo sia causa de destruccio del huel que s’apela tactinir del huel, e cura se en quatre manieyras: o per cauteri am foc; o am medicina acuta segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri; o es fayt atactini per inscizio e sutura; o per cannas segon que yeu diyre.	 When the eyelids are swollen due to allergies or other natural causes, we apply ointments and creams inside them in order to calm and heal them, as well as preventing further damage that is called allergic conjunctivitis, and it can be cured through cautery (hot iron) if necessary, or by medicines secondarily when cautery isn't available.
E donc cove que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se; aprop converteys la palpebra del uelh am la tua ma sinistra, e si es convertida, bo es; e sino, entromet agulha en aquela en la qual sia fiel de la partida pus dejos de la palpebra, e fay penetrar la agulha am fiel desus, e aquo sia — prop del marge de la palpebra en le qual naysso les pels — prop dels pels, e tira le fiel a las partidas desus am la palpebra, e converteys aquela am le ray.	 After passing the eyelid over to your left hand if it is inflamed and converted, but otherwise, insert an iron through that in which it was inserted first of all into the eyelid itself, penetrating with an iron faithful towards its position, thus securing the eyelids, and then pulling out the iron from there.
E aprop fen en la partida dedintz de la palpebra dejos les pels ajustatz am spatum inscidentz del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal mendre; e aprop extratz le fiel e pausa dejos la palpebra polvilhs petitz de coto o de drap, e aprop senha sobre la palpebra am tenta, e sia ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirt.	 When pain occurs in the eyes, place a cushion under them and hold the eyelid back with your finger to prevent it from closing too much.
Mays empero cove que sia la figura segon la quantitat de helevacio de la palpebra, quar aquo ja es diversificat en les homes, quar de aquels es le quals indigeys que sia inscidit de la palpebra gran quantitat segon la quantitat per la qual la palpebra es mollificada.	 However, note that the amount of elevation required for this maneuver may vary between individuals, as some people require more elevation to prevent their eyelid from closing too much.
E aprop fen am le spatum sobre las doas linhas las quals has senhadas, e comensa del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal menor.	 Place a cushion under both of the lines that you have separated and gently move the lower lid towards the upper lid.
E si’ la tua fissura prop dels pels naturals ayssi cum es la grossetut del rey.	 If the natural fissure is present, as it usually is for the earlobe, then follow these steps to remove it:
E aprop met le onci en un dels dos angles de la codena, e aprop excoria aquela tota, e aprop ajusta am la scitura las doas labias am gula o fiel de lana subtil, e abstergeys le sanc, e fay adherir aquo que superflueys dels fiels sobre dos sobrecils am alcunas causas enviscans, si voles far aquo, e sino, non cures.	 Place one end of the needle in one of the two angles on the codpiece, and remove all the stitches with it, adjust the lips to the left or right side smoothly, removing any thread that may be between them if you wish to proceed further; otherwise, do not do this.
E aprop leyssa la sutura dels fiels entro a tres dias o quatre, e aprop cura aquo.	 After three days or four, follow these steps:
E si vols, layssa la plagua ses sutura, e cura aquela am aquo que exsicca e constrenh, quar la palpebra es alevada deves la sigillacio de la plagua e la agreguacio de lu; mays sutura es milor E donc aysso diysso les antics de taxanir.	 If you wish to do so, remove the stitches and cover it with something that dries and constricts, as the eyelid will be cooled down, causing its closure. After three days or four, place any new stitches that are more recent than those removed.
Mays empero en lu sia sollicitut sobre le malaute, e es de bona operacio, e no es en lu temor.	 The patient is in a vulnerable position on the ground.
E es autra manieyra en taxmir, e es que senhes sobre la palpebra figura ayssi cum fuelha de mirt, e aprop eleva la palpebra am tres uncis segreguatz e congreguatz segon aquesta forma:	 Another servant will hold the patient's eyelids tightly closed and elevate them at a certain angle.
Mays si no es possible aquo, tener les uncis, e aquo no es engualhat, lahoras pren una agula en la qual haia fil e met aquela en le mieg de la figura, e entromet le autre fiel prop le lacrimal major, e·l fiel segon prop le lacrimal mendre, e ajusta entre les tieus ditz les fiels am equalitat, e aprop am aquels eleva la tua ma am elevacio engual, eleva tota la codena sobre la qual es senhat ayssi cum havem recomtat.	 If this is not possible or there are insufficient servants available, the physician will place a needle with thread through each eyelid and make it move in the manner that has been recommended.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	 Then he will close both lips around the wound to protect it from infection.
Mays si accideys apostema deves la tua inscizio o la tua fissura, seda aquel apostema am cerot e a lu semblantz, e am enguentz.	 If you have an injury or a fissure, seal the wound with a cloth and protect it as much as possible.
E alcunas veguadas endeve a la palpebra que·ls sieus pels sian convertitz, adonc cove que tu uses en aquela de aquo que havem dit de inscizio; mays sutura en quascus es mays artificial.	 When using an artificial tear, make sure that the eyelid is properly sealed to prevent leakage of tears as you use it for sealing wounds.
Ataxinir am cannas es segon aquesta forma:	 After the gauze has been used once and still adheres to the wound, apply a new one with this method.
e es que tu convertas la palpebra e scindas la figura qu’es dedintz segon que he recontat; e aprop per art fay doas cannas o doas astelas subtils de las quals longitut sia segon la longitut de la palpebra e la latitut de lor sia mendra de la latitut del spatum.	 When you tear off the previous bandage and remove any remaining adhesive, use a new one that is slightly larger than the eyelid lengthwise but narrower in width so as not to cover the space between the eyelid and the eyebrow.
E tu ja has inscidit en las extremitatz de quascunas partidas, la on tenes les fils.	 You have already opened up space between the patient's legs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another one on their chest, holding their hands.
Aprop agregua quascuna am subtilitat subre aquo que superflueys de la palpebra del huel, e constres las cannas de quascunas partidas am fort strictura, e layssa aquela per alcus jorns, quar la codena per la strictura morira e sira denegada e se poyrira entro que per si meteyssa cayra.	 And after you have inserted a small piece of silk beneath the eye lid, you should tighten the cannulas to prevent their escape and it should remain like that for many days until the pain subsides or the treatment fails completely and then it will be necessary to remove them in order not to cause harm to the patient.
Mays si es tardat, lahoras trenca la am las toroyras, e aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanat.	 If it takes too long, you should loosen the clamps and apply a poultice within that time so that he may be cured.
Donc cum es solidada, la palpebra es elevada e les pels no pungo.	 When steady, the eyelid is raised and its eyelashes do not itch.
E aquesta es la forma de doas cannas las quals faras segon aquesta forma:	 This is how you should use the cannulas in order to perform this action:
e haia la quantitat de la longitut e de la latitut ni mays ni mens.	 The length and width of both have no specific measurements given, so it's up to your own discretion as to what size you use for this purpose.
Capitol .xii.	 Section 12.
De elevacio de pels pungentz en le huel am agula quan le pel es dur.	 To prevent the eyelashes from itching in the eye, gently raise them with a needle when they become rough.
Quan son pels no-naturals, durs e aspres e pungentz les huels, lahoras la operacio en lu es que tu prenguas agula subtil e pauses en aquela fiel de ceda subtil e leon, e aprop que tu ajustes las extremitatz de lu e nozes quascu en manieyra mot subtil.	 If the eyelashes are not naturally long and rough and itch when you touch them near your eye, perform this operation with a very fine needle that is paused in its place and adjusts both extremities to hold it tightly without moving it too much.
E sia la longitut dels fiels de quantitat de una palma.	 The length of one's finger is equivalent to that of a palm
E aprop tu compon2 autre fiel subtil dejos lu en breu, e nuza las extremitatz de aquel si tu·t vols.	 If you want to add something else below the first sentence or change anything in it, feel free!
E aprop pause le malaute le sieu cap en le tieu se, e sia prop del solelh per que la tua obra sia declarada, quar es operacio subtil e menuda.	 Place a cushion under the patient's head to keep them comfortable while you perform your delicate operation.
E aprop intromet la agulha en la razit del pel ajustat la qual ha necessitat de engen, e fay aquela penetrar en la palpebra festinantment entro que extraguas aquela desus le pel natural.	 Insert the needle into the palm of the hand in a position that requires precision and patience, so it can penetrate the inflamed eyelid gently while extracting its own hair naturally.
E aprop tire le pel entro desus e intromet aquel en alixati, e sian les pels un o dos o tres e no mays.	 Remove the hair inside them by tearing and inserting into the incision, with one or two or three stitches depending on how much you want to remove.
E aprop tira la tua ma am aquel entro que·l pel sia fora-gitat am alixolati en la palpebra am le pel natural.	 Remove your finger from inside the eyelid so that the hair is gently removed and placed onto it naturally.
Mays si es atirat alixalati e non es gitat le pel, atiraras alixati a las partidas dejos am le fiel le qual tu has compost am aquela, entro qu’en sia gitat alixalati del trau sobira.	 If you don't want to remove the hair or if it is already removed from the eyelid, tear away your finger from inside and let it fall into the remaining part of the eyelid.
E vegas aquela am la visio del huel, quar lahoras tu gitaras alixati e lo fiel, e grotan quascu e clautz le huel, e laysse le claus per dos dias o tres, entro que·l pel adheresca al sieu loc e nasque sobre aquel bona carn.	 The pain disappears from the eyelid and finger as long as it is held tight and gently rubbed against the eye, until the hair adheres to its place and grows on that good skin.
E si es mays breu le pel, lahoras tu ajusta un pel lonc dels pels naturals, e es elevat am aquel, o que·l leysses entro que sia alonguat aprop alcu spazi, e lehoras tu eleva aquel.	 If you want to remove a small amount of hair and the pain persists after applying natural-length hair, gently lift it up or place in an appropriate space while keeping it close so that its removal is as smooth as possible.
Capitol .xiii.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
De la cura de ehacratir la qual ve en la palpebra desus.	 Do not apply any remedies to the affected eye area
Quan ve en le huel ehacratir, e es contraccio de la palpebra quan es contrayta en sus, o a dextra o a sinistra partida, per mala consolidacio de plagua o de seccio o de cauteri, e es apelada leporina, e aquesta ahercrati o es natural o accidental, e es fayta per consolidacio de plagua o de seccios o de cauteri, o per semblantz a lor malcuratz.	 If the affected eye area is painful or if there are any injuries to it, whether from a stroke, cut, cautery, or just by chance, it's called ophthalmia, and its cause may be natural (like an infection) or accidental (like injury).
May la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que tu fendas aquela consolidacio e que separes las labias de lu, e pauses en lu en aquo que es entre aquelas una meca de drap de li, e ligues aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	 The cause of the operation is to tear apart the adhesions and separate any remaining ligaments in that area between those two points so that there's no more slack or tension in it after surgery.
E no cove que tu uses de curacio de lu de las causas las quals exsiccan, constrenho; quar si tu fas aquo retorna alixacratir pus mal que nulh temps no foc habantz.	 Do not use any cure that weakens the adhesions causing the pain, otherwise if you do this it will return and strengthen those very adhesions which may cause further pain in future.
Usa en aquela de causas que mollifico ayssi cum es fenugrec, e embroca am la aygua en la qual son coytz altea e semensa de li, o enguent dyaquilon, le qual sia liquefayt am alcu dels olis, e submergeys en aquel la meca, e cura am aquel.	 Use the remedies that soften those causes which harden over time and cause pain in joints, or if they are stuck together and can't be separated, or if they have become liquefied by exposure to heat, and apply them there.
E lo tesaur de la tua curacio es que tu perforsses am tot engen que no sia consolidat segon la forma que foc al comensament.	 The purpose of your cure is that you perform every step until the adhesions are not consolidated after a certain form has been taken to start with.
E aquesta operacio la qual havem dita, no es sino alcuna rectificacio de ehalixacrati que no retorna la forma del loc segon que foc denant.	 This operation which we are performing now, it is simply a rectification of this illness that does not restore the shape of the affected part when light is shone upon it.
Capitol .xiiii.	 I'm sorry, but the provided text appears to be in an obscure and unconventional language style rather than standard medieval Latin or French. It seems like a made-up language or a unique dialect that diverged from those languages at some point. Could you provide more context or another example of what you had in mind?
De la cura de ehacrati le qual es fayt en la palpebra dejos.	 Of the illness which is being treated, pain occurs in one eye
Aquesta alxacrati la qual es fayta en la palpebra dejos, la qual es nompnada vertadierament alxacrati; e es de lu alcuna natural, autra accidental.	 This illness which we are treating, the one which is being called by its name (which I don't understand), it is of a natural or accidental occurrence.
Mays accidental es fayta per plagua o per scissura o per cauteri o per autres semblantz.	 It can occur through bleeding, through laceration, through cautery, and by other means (which I don't understand).
E la via de la operacio de lu es que tu prenguas una agula en la qual haga fil doble, e fiques aquela en la carn, e que la fassas passar del lacrimal de senestre entro al lacrimal dextre, entro que·l fil pervengua en las doas extremitatz de la carn.	 The method of the operation is that you will take a needle with double incision, and fix it into the flesh, and make it pass from the inner tear to the outer tear through which thread passes through both sides of the body.
E aprop exten la carn a las partidas desus am la agula e cus aquela am la agula, e inscideys am spatum ample.	 Then you extend the skin at the edges and take the needle into your hand, and cut it off above.
E donc si retorne la figura de la palpebre segon que cove, bo es; e sino, pren le ray e pausa aquel en la figura fenduda, e am aquel converteys la palpebra, e fen las doas fissuras en le latz de la palpebra dejos.	 And if it returns to its figure as is, then so be it; but if not, take the beam and break that in half, and put back together again the eye, and close both the incisions on the eyelid
E sian las extremitatz de las doas fissuras de dos angles de la inscizio, la qual has fayta entro que concurren, e sia de lor fayt angle entro que quan se congreguan sia fayta figura de lor.	 The first sentence translates to "The extremities of the two cuts at each corner of the incision are held open so that they coincide, and that angle within which they come together is closed.
E aquesta figura es letra greca: la landa.	 This Greek letter appears to be an uppercase 'I' or a lowercase 'L'.
E aprop osta la carn aquela per la quantitat que es le latz de lu agut dejos de lu, aquo que siec la palpebra.	 The purpose of doing this is to ensure the amount that the doctor has prescribed for the patient's stomach is followed closely by touching it with one's finger.
E aprop ajusta las partz seperadas e cos aquelas am le fil de lana; e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit de las medicinas mollificativas e de las calguas entro que sia sanat.	 The purpose is to separate and connect the two parts together using a thread of wool, while also applying medicines that are thought to be beneficial and cooling agents so as to promote health.
E si alxacrati endeve per fissura o sutura o cauteri, lahoras cove que tu fendas am fissura plana sobre les pels de la palpebra segon que es precedit.	 If a slit or cut is made in the eyelid itself, make sure to use it as a straight slit on the eyelashes after the preceding one has been done first.
E aprop separa am la calgua entre doas labias segon que havem dit.	 The purpose is to separate two lips so that you can say what follows next.
En la suma del sermo de la cura de alxacrati quan es desus o dejos, que corra en lu operacio, segon que es preparat de la forma de alxacrati, e aquela es en forma de motas diversitatz.	 In the act of performing an operation when it is done or finished, which will run on that surgery, after preparing in a way similar to performing an incision and this shape is shaped like a variety of motions.
E le artifexs savi totz temps prepara engen en quascuna manieyra la qual es possibla a lu entro que fassa retornar la figura a la forma natural, o prop de aquela, e aquel malaute segon que a lu conveneys de la operacio e dels strumentz en las majors disposicios.	 The artist strives to prepare every movement that is possible on the body where it can return the figure to its original form or towards another shape and an ailment after performing surgery and using appropriate instruments in greater quantities.
Capitol .xv.	 "Chapter fifteen
De la adherencia de la palpebra am la conjunctiva o am la cornea.	 The adherence of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or the cornea
Quan accideys aquesta consolidacio a motz homes enayssi que sia solidada la palpebra pus desus am le album del huel, e sia prohibida de la facilitat del movement e de las suas obras naturals, donc cove que tu entrometas la extramitat del ray dejos la palpebra, e eleva en sus aquela, o exten aquela am le unci.	 When this adhesion occurs to a motion that is not strong enough for the eyelid to remain attached securely, or when it restricts movement and natural functions of the eye by preventing blinking, then you should remove part of the eyelid or raise its upper edge slightly, or extend it over an eyelash
E aprop tu inscideys la adherencia am spatum subtil, le qual no sia am acuitat de las inscisios, habantz obtus un petit per so que·l malaute no sia inquietat deves la operacio, e remau le spatum que no ledesca le huel am la sua acuitat.	 If the adhesion is very subtle and does not cause severe itching, you should remove a small portion to make sure it doesn't interfere with operations and gently smooth over any excess skin on top of the eyelid
E sia la tua inscizio quays excorjan aquela adherencia am facilitat entro que sia retornada la palpebra segon la sua forma natural e que sia sanada tota la adherencia.	 And if your incision is such that it facilitates returning the eyelid to its original position and completely removes all adhesion, then you have successfully treated the condition.
E aprop tu met en le huel aygua salada am la qual tu laves; o distilla en lu de zunia dissolvut en l’aygua.	 And if you put it in a salty water bath that you wash, or distill it to dissolve into water
E aprop separa entre la palpebra e l’huel am calgua de li, e pausa sobre le huel lana infuza en album de huou, e aprop le tertz jorn usa de causas consolidativas entro que sia sanat.	 And if you separate the eyelid from its normal place and let it remain submerged in clear liquid for a third day without any consolidation occurring, then that indicates healing has been achieved.
Capitol .xvi.	 "Chapter sixteen
De inscizio de ungla e de eminencia de carn dels lacrimals.	 The incision of the eye and removal of the glands from the tears.
Sapias que ungla es segon dos manieyras, quar o es nervosa, e es semblant a ciphac dur subtil; o es no-nervosa, semblant a humiditat blanca congilada, la qual quan ferr la toca, o es forsat aquela prendre am onci, es abscindida e le onci no es ficat en lu.	 "When touching it with the hand (of either type), if there is no nerves present, then it feels like a white, dry, and crisp touch; but when nerves are present (in one or both hands), that person will feel as though they're being pinched.
E amdos las specias no comensan sino del lacrimal major entro que va petit a petit que cobre la vista e prohibeys le lum e·l movement de huel.	 The eyelid muscles contract and cause the eyelid to become smaller, gradually covering up the pupil of the eye and preventing it from moving around.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en la inscizio de lu es que·l malaute pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop obre les huels de lu, e eleva la palpebra am la tua ma, e aprop colligeys la ungla am onci de pauca duplicacio e exten aquela a las partidas desus.	 The servant of the eye's work is to place it in its socket and hold onto its hairs, and then move its eyelid, raise its eyebrow slightly, and extend that towards the side gently but firmly.
E aprop pren una agula e entromet en aquela un pel de cavalh o de buou o de vaqua, o de semblantz, o de fiel fort, o duplica la extremitat de la agulha petit a petit e fica aquela en le mieg de la ungla, e penetra aquela am la agulha, e lia am fiel la ungla; e exten aquela a las partidas desus, e excorja am le pel le latz de la ungla lo qual siec la pupilla.	 The servant takes an awl and enters into the socket of it gently but forcefully, or with a certain amount of strength, depending on whether they are to be inserted quickly (as in the case of horseshoes) or more slowly as needed; then raises the eyelid slightly upwards, inserting the awl into its pupil. After that, he/she holds tightly onto the eyelid and extends it towards one side gently but firmly, ensuring a secure hold over time.
E ayssi tu sieguas aquela am le pel entro al derier de lu.	 Then take your hand and enter into the right side of him.
E aprop tu inscideys le romanent en la razitz del lacrimal am spatum subtil o am petitas forfexs, e leysa la carn del lacrimal natural per so que per inscizio de aquela no endevengua fluxs de lagremas continuabla.	 The servant gradually and gently inserts their finger into the corner of the eyelid to ensure that any possible flow from the lower part is blocked off continuously.
E alscunas vetz la ungla am le sol onci estenduda o am fiel, ayssi co havem dit, e aprop sia excurjat am spatum leon del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	 When a gout attack occurs after standing for a long time or when the weather is cold and damp, then it is customary to do this method of treatment.
E guarda te que am le spatum no toques la tunica cornea e que avengua en lu ruptura, e que la pupilla sia perforada.	 Do not touch the exposed skin with your hand and instead, make a small hole in it to allow for drainage, as if puncturing an abscess.
Aprop la inscizio geta en le huel un pauc de sal trissa o di cief fayt de siniar, e leyssa aquel entro al autre dia; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	 After applying the incision with a small amount of salt or if you have it in hand, wait for another day; and then apply it where there is illness so that it may be healed.
E si la ungla no es nervoza e no podes metre la agulha, ni es ficada en aquela le onci, lahoras motas veguadas aquesta specia de ungla es curada am medicinas, e es sanada ayssi cum yeu e recomtat en la divisio.	 If the gout is not painful and you cannot insert a needle or if it is in an unusual place, then the treatment for this type of gout is cured by medical means, and it will be healed just as recommended on division.
E si tu vols inscindir aquela, lahoras tu obre le huel del malaute e pren spatum subtil leon de freul acuitat segon aquesta forma:	 If you want to incise this one, then apply the heel of your hand over the patient's foot and place a small hole in it as if puncturing an abscess second time.
am subtilitat.	 Secondly.
E si vezes que aquela es rarificada e es confugida e empren en aquela razit, lahoras distilla de la tua ora en le huel de cief fayt de siniar o am cief rog o am sal trissat, e opila le huel entro a l’autre dia.	 If it is rarefied and confounded and you encounter it in that manner, then apply the incision on the heel of your hand or with salt applied, wait for another day to apply it.
E aprop itera sobre aquela la operacio entro que sia remaugut tot aquo que es de lu, sino que·l contrari apostema caut sia en le huel, quar lahoras tu leyssa aquela, e cura al comensament la apostema entro que sia sanat.	 If you want to make the incision all over where it is on his body except for the heel or if it contradicts to put a needle there, then first cure the abscess at that place and do so as a starting point of healing.
E aprop itera la tua operacio sobre aquela am razo entro que sia sanat.	 "The operation shall now commence in order for the patient to be healed.
La emenencia de la carn lacrimal, si notz en le huel per gran nocument, sia suspendut am onci; e inscideys aquela de aquela una partida, e no ultimes la inscizio per so que no inscidesqua fluxs de lagremas.	 The tear duct blockage occurs when the nose is blocked with mucus, and to prevent this from happening again, it must be periodically cleaned out.
E aprop distilla en le lacrimal cief rog e fayt de siniar entro que sia sanat.	 The eye drop shall now be applied in order for healing to commence.
Capitol .xvii.	 Chapter seventeen of the Capitol.
De inscizio de alguazardenic e de aquo que es nascut de carn ajustada en le huel.	 The incision must be made in such a way that the skin is closed after it heals.
Alcunas veguadas en les huels de alcus es nascuda carn roga, e es sobre-pausada entro que cobre la pupilla, o apropinqua o estrenh sobre las palpebras e fort leu comprem las palpebras a las partidas deforo e es assemblada a roza de balaustra.	 Any veins in the eyes that were surgically removed are covered over with artificial lashes, or else they must be lined with artificial eyelashes to prevent them from being exposed and causing discomfort for others.
Mays la operacio en lu es que·l malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se; e aprop obre les huels de aquel e colligeys tota aquela carn am oncis convenientz ad aquo, e te aquo am una forcep o am cesti; e aprop inscindiys la carn el comensament entro que tot sia finit am le encisori, e guarda te del huel que no ledescas aquel deves la tua operacio.	 The operation shall now commence on the patient's head in order to bring it into position as needed; and after that the skin must be held taut with an instrument such as a forceps or some other implement, and then incisions may begin so everything is finished at the end of the procedure, and you will keep your hands away from this wound until further notice.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscides aquelas o am espatum le qual nos havem recomtat en la inscizio de la ungla, o am petitas forfexs am las quals es colligit ascebel segon que vindra la forma de lu aprop aquest capitol.	 The incision you are making is similar to those recommended in the surgery of the hand, or if you want smaller ones that were used on the face, choose from this list before continuing with the next chapter.
Donc cum es complida la tua inscizio e es remauguda tota aquela carn, lahoras omple le huel de sal trissa, o destilla en lu polvera roga e semblantz a lu de las medicinas corrossivas, e pausa sobre le huel deforo coto am album de huou entro que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	 When you have opened the incision and have removed all the flesh from it, pour water onto it to remove any remaining salt or soot; after this wash it with corrosive medicine, being careful not to burn yourself on the way as well
E si roman alcuna causa de alguardenici e es senhoragat sanc caut, e temes apostema caut, lahoras leyssa le huel e cura aquela apostema am aquo que ceda aquela apostema, e aprop itera sobre aquel am operacio entro que sia sanat, e semblantment fay en la carn ajustada la qual accideys en le huel de aquesta especia.	 If there is no reason to remove the stitches and you are anxious to close the incision, soak the wound in water and carefully apply corrosive medicine; after this clean it with a special salve that has been adjusted for wounds of this kind
Mays empero tu cove que alienes tota curacio del huel freul per via natural o per via accidental, obran am ferr, e no metas la tua ma en alcuna de aquestas operacios entro que veges que aquel membre sia suffertant aquela operacio.	 However, you should also know that if the wound heals naturally or accidentally, take care of it and do not apply your hand to any of these operations unless you see that member has suffered from this operation.
Capitol .xviii.	 Chapter eighteen.
De colleccio de sabel en le huel.	 About collection of silver in the wound.
Sabel so venas rogas las quals son testudas sobre le huel e prohibeysso al vesement la sua operacio, e develican le huel am longitut de dias.	 The sabels are removed from the wound and it is forbidden to perform surgery during this period; after days pass, the wound will be treated with corrosive medicine.
Donc necessari es al comensament que tu consideres si le huel en le qual es sabel es fort e en lu no es autra malautia que sabel, lahoras tu colligeys aquel sabel.	 Therefore, when you start to consider whether the sabel in the wound is strong or not and another sable has no other damage except for a small injury caused by it, then treat that sabel.
E es que tu comandes al malaute que pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop suspen aquelas venas am un onci o am dos segon la tua prudencia; e sia aquel onci de subtil duplicacio segon aquesta forma:	 And you order the patient to hold their breath and place them under water for one or two seconds based on your discretion; after that, let it pass through this way.
o so dos oncis gradantment en un cos segon aquesta forma:	 When pain occurs in joints caused by cold humors that infiltrate into every part of the body
E aprop sian colligidas aquelas venas am forses subtils, am subtilitat, e abstergeys le sanc hora aprop hora, entro que vegas aquelas venas esser remaugudas del huel e sian revolgudas.	 And approach those veins and force them gently, gently, remove the obstruction that occurs at that time, so that they may be opened up and dilated.
E guarda te que tu no ledes le huel am las extremitatz del spatum; e si’ la tua operacio en le miegjorn denant le solelh, e sias mot ferm en la tua operacio que no inscidas sino aquelas venas.	 And remember to not lead the hands of the patient during that operation and if you are performing surgery in a public place, or at night with open air, hold firm on your actions so as not to damage those veins.
E quan tu auras complitz, lahoras tu distilla en le huel cief vert o rog per que am sa acuitat corrodesca aquo que es remaugut del sabel.	 Once you are done, the doctors will then distill in a cold or hot solution to prevent further corrosion of that area where it was removed.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible colligeys tot en aquela hora, e lahoras tu emplastra tot am aquo que cede la dolor de lu, e leyssa lu per alcus dias entro que sia sedada la dolor de lu e que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	 If at that time it is not possible to apply the cautery there, and if pain continues after that, then keep applying it for as long as the pain lasts and ensure that no more bleeding occurs from it.
E aprop itera sobre lu segon que la mateyssa manieyra entro que sia sanat.	 And approach another servant who will be there until everything is fine.
E aquesta es la forma de las forfexs:	 This is the way of doctors' treatment.
Capitol .xix.	 Chapter nineteen
De reduccio de arizati al nas.	 About reduction to the nose.
Quan tu curas arisati am cauteri o am medicina aguda comburent segon que es precedida la narracio de lu e no es sanat, lahoras no es engen en lu sino que fendas sobre le apostema deves la maturitat de lu, e que extraguas tota la humiditat la qual es en lu e·l poyre entro que sia descubert le os.	 When you cure the sore throat with cautery or acute medicine, if it is preceded by the story and still does not heal, do not apply it directly to the wound but instead put a bandage on its surface, extract all of the moisture in it using a poultice, and after that be sure to reveal the nose.
E donc cum es descubert le os e vezes en lu corrupcio o negror, lahoras tu ratz lu am un sturment del qual aquesta es la forma:	 When you discover an abscess or ulcer in the bone, then doctors prescribe this remedy.
E es nompnat de aspre cap, e sia feyt de fer indi, e sia le cap redon ayssi cum asir le qual sia fayt punctat per punctacio de lima o aliskalfati per punctacio subtil (ayssi cum es en la forma seguent).	 However, when you want to perform this procedure more subtly or with a fine needle, do so by making punctures in the form of dots.
E pausa aquel sobre le loc corrumput del os, e aprop revolveys aquel entre les tieus ditz, e prem la tua ma petit a petit entro que sapias que aquela corropcio es rasa.	 After placing your hand gently inside and feeling for the abscess area slowly but steadily until you know that it is infected.
E aquo sia fayt alcunas veguadas, e aprop restaura le loc am causas exsiccativas e stipticas.	 This is how to perform a cautery when necessary, restoring the affected location with drying and strict measures.
Donc si·l loc es consolidat e es en lu nascuda bona carn e es abscindit le cors de la sania e roman per xl dias, e no es renovat e no es apostemat e no accideys en lu accident, lahoras tu sapias que es sanat.	 If the abscess has hardened and is on fresh soft tissue, it should be opened up over a period of 14 days without re-evaporation or poultice application to prevent infection.
E sino, lahoras no es en lu engen sino reduzir la fissura a la forma del nas, e segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu descuebras de segon os am ferr o am medicina acuta, e cum sira descubert le os, lahoras tu pren tribo segon aquesta forma:	 If not, doctors will try to reduce the rupture into its original shape and follow this course of action if necessary:
Sia la extramitat de lu ferr triangulada, e·l fust de lu sia prim extenuat entro a la extremitat ayssi cum vezes assi.	 The part of the finger must be triangular-shaped, extended inward towards that extremity as well.
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le os, e sia aquel prop del lacrimal; e alongua la tua ma un pauc del huel, e aprop revol la tua ma am le tribo entro que penetre tot le os, e aquel sente le malaute per asso que atroba vent yssir per so quan te la sua ma.	 After placing your hand gently inside and feeling for the abscess area slowly but steadily until you know that it is infected, press on with a pointed cautery to penetrate into the abscess completely while keeping pressure on in order to prevent any leakage or spilling out as well.
Donc lahoras restaura le loc am medicinas stipticas exsiccantz ayssi cum t’e eyssenhat.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
Donc cum nays la carn e·l loc es endurazit, lahoras la materia la qual effundia a las partidas deforo retorna al nas, donc aquo es pus leugier sobre le malaute.	 Then place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out, and return it to its cavity by using pointed cautery.
Capitol .xx.	 Certainly! I'd be happy to help you with that translation as well.
De reduccio de la eminencia del huel.	 The reduction of the elevation of the heel.
Quan le huel emineys am la sua totalitat e no accideys en le vezement nocument ni diminuacio, lahoras cove que laxas le malaute, e aprop que·l segues, e aprop que pausas ventozas en le cervitz ses scarificacio e succa per bona succaccio; e aprop pausa sobre le huel liniment le qual sia fayt de acatra e aloe e enses e sarcocolla, e aprop strenh le emplaustre sobre le huel am motz polvils.	 When the heel is elevated to its full extent without any pain or reduction in size, it means that you have cured the gout and should continue as before, and ensure there are no obstructions in the cervical area; if not, pause over the heel with liniment made from acacia, aloe vera, and sarcocolla, and press firmly on the top of the foot to prevent any further issues.
E la manieyra dels polvils es que prenguas draps de li leons motz, e quascun drap sia duplicat en quatre plecs; e fay de aquels motz.	 The concern with powders is that when you apply four cloths to the feet, and each cloth should be doubled in four folds.
E aprop pausa aquels la un sobre le autre segon la quantitat de la qual ha le huel necessitat.	 Then pause over it for a moment while the other one remains on top of the foot as needed.
E aprop strenh sobre aquels am drap dur am fort strictura; e itera las ventosas am succio ses scarificacio; e aprop osta las ventosas e leyssa le huel streyt le dia e la nueyt.	 Then press firmly on the cloth with strong constriction, and gently move the toes to achieve the desired effect; then apply another cloth over the first one so that they are both in place and secure the foot tightly as needed.
Mays si entretant le liguament es mollificat, lahoras cove que sia mot streyt.	 When a ligament becomes inflamed, pain arises from it.
E aprop osta le liament aprop le dia e la nueyt ayssi cum havem dit.	 Then apply the bandage as shown here.
E si vezes le huel ja esser redusit, bo es, e sino, lahoras itera le emplastre am les polvils e la strictura e las ventosas entro que sia sanat.	 If you already have a poultice on your foot, leave the poultice intact and apply heat to soothe the affected area as well as the constriction and swelling around it if necessary.
Capitol .xxi.	 Chapter 21.
De la inscizio de la eminencia de la tunica uvea.	 Regarding the opening of a vein in the arm.
Quan endeve disrupcio en la tunica uvea, e aprop es eminent e procezeys fora las palpebras ayssi cum un gra de rasim, e es orrazada la forma de home per aquo, e vols aquo inscidir, lahoras la operacio en lu es ayssi cum havem recomtat, que tu entrometas la agula en la razitz de la uvea de la partida dejos en la partida desus, e aprop met la agula autra en la qual sia fil doble de la part del lacrimal, e fay aquela penetrar e leyssa la primieyra agula segon la sua disposicio; e aprop inscideys le loc del fiel doble e leva am aquel la partida de la uvea en le circuit de la agula, e strenh aquela mot.	 If a vein ruptures in the arm, approach it as shown with one stroke of a razor and make a small incision just above where you made the original cut into the arm itself to prevent the blade from exiting through the eye socket; then insert another needle at an angle slightly higher than the first for stability.
E aprop extratz la agula e pausa sobre le huel lana infusa en album de huou e leyssa entro que cayha le fil am la uva.	 Then remove the blade and place a heated compress over the affected area to help soothe it, making sure that there is no thread visible at all near the vein.
E aprop cura le huel am aquo que conforte aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	 Then take care of the injury as best you can by dressing it and applying a compress if necessary to keep it clean.
E alcunas veguadas aduna de tota partida am cercle de drap entro le huel ajuste eminencia gran, e aprop sia perforat am le spatum subtil que vengua al preon del huel, e corra la humiditat albuginea, e descen le huel e intra tantost.	 Remove any existing dressing completely around the affected area and apply a new one with a small hole just above where it entered to allow excess fluid out but prevent contamination of the wound from above as well as applying an alcohol-based compress.
E aprop strenh entro que sia sanat.	 And then it was done
Capitol .xxii.	 Chapter 22
De curacio de alconati.	 Treatment for cataracts.
Aquesta malautia que es apelada alconati no es sino sania la qual es ajustada en le huel semblant a aygua dessendent e no es aquela.	 The cataract ailment, also called alconati, is only an inflammation that looks like water running down and not the actual thing.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en ela es que fasses le malaute sezer sobre la sela aparelada e dreyta, e aprop pren le cap sieu en las tuas mas de doas partz e mau aquel entro que veias la sania pervenir a las partidas dejos, e aprop sia siccada e no descenda, e sia ostat le lum, e·l malaute veia las causas ayssi cum vezia.	 The servant of the ailment is to place it on the exposed parts and straighten it as much as possible, then cover its head with a linen cloth and prevent it from coming out through any opening or part; after that you should wash it off thoroughly in warm water, removing all traces of it.
E si no descendra en jos, sapias que es aygua.	 If it does not come down immediately then it is water.
Mays si no es preparat le descendement a la sania am aquo que havem dit, lahoras fay le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e aprop pren spatum subtil e fen am aquel sobre le pannicol cernent un petit deves la continuacio de la conjunctiva am la tunica cornea en la corona (entro al loc vuet), entro que sia fora-getada la sania.	 If the servant does not immediately come down, place it between your eyelids and gently press it lightly on top of the conjunctiva and cornea in the eyelid or cover it with a small linen cloth to prevent further spreading of the inflammation inside the eye.
Donc cum es fora-getada, lahoras tu distilla en le huel aygua cauda en la qual has mesclat mel o aygua en la qual ja has bulit fenugrec e mel.	 After it is removed, you should then distill a caustic solution of the same kind in which you have mixed vinegar or water and burnish with it to remove any remaining traces.
E aprop sia curat am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	 Then treat all external causes as they occur.
Capitol .xxii.	 Chapter 22
De la curacio de la aygua descendent del huel.	 The water descends from above.
Ja havem dit las specias de la aygua en la divisio e qual conveneys a perforar am sermo declarant, lahoras aquel segon la sanetat.	 I have shown the parts of the water to be divided and where to make an incision so that it may declare its health.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre un cayrat e lia le sieu huel sa, lu mot stringent.	 The doctor will place the patient between your thighs on a cushion and tie their feet securely so that they do not move around too much.
E aprop pausa prop de la palpebra del sieu huel la tua ma senestra, si le huel en le qual es l’aygua es le huel senestra; o am la tua ma dreyta, si le huel es le dextre.	 And place your right hand on the surface of the water if it is the left hand that needs to be treated, or with the left hand if it is the right hand that needs treatment; in other words, use whichever hand is stronger for the patient's condition.
E aprop am la tua ma dextra pren almagda, si le huel es senestre; o am la tua ma senestra, si le huel es de dreyt.	 And place your right hand over the patient with their back to you if it is a left-handed patient, or place your left hand over them if they are right-handed; in other words, use whichever arm is strongest for this treatment.
E aprop pausa la extremitat de almagda prop de la corona per la grossesa del ray en le album del huel de part del mendre lacrimal, e aprop enpelleys almagda am vertut e revol la tua ma am aquel.	 And place the patient's head towards you with your other hand to control their movement in the corner of their eye that is not involved in the treatment of the tear duct; then put your free hand on top and gently move it around like this.
E aprop penetre en le album del huel e sentas que almagda ja es pervenguda a causa vueda.	 And after inserting into the ear, you should ensure that their head is properly positioned to avoid causing any harm or injury.
E cove que sia la masura del cami de almagda al preon la mesura del spazi le qual es de la pupilla entro a la fi de la negror, e es la corona del huel; quar tu veyras am aquel pupilla am la visio de l’huel per la clartat de la tunica cornea.	 And ensure that the distance from their head to the corner of their eye is measured accurately and matches up with the width of the pupil, which should be visible at the end of the nostril; otherwise you will miss seeing clearly through the corneal layer.
E aprop pausa almagda entro al loc en le qual es l’aygua, e aprop tu la atira en jos una veguada aprop autra, e donc si la aygua descen tantost, lahoras vetz le malaute aquo sobre le qual huebre la sua vista tantost, e almagda en le sieu huel.	 When the water descends to such a place where the patient's view is obstructed by the swelling of the malady over it, and also supports his head in its own juice
E aprop repausa se un pauc; donc si la aygua es descenduda, lahoras tu depausa aquela autre veguada abantz que almagda ne sia getada.	 And after a short pause, if the water has descended already, then remove that other cushion immediately because it is no longer needed.
E donc quan es sicada e no descen, lahoras tu extrat almagda am facilitat, e revol am aquel la tua ma pauc a pauc, e aprop dissolveys en l’aygua un petit de sal clara de gemma e am aquela lava le huel dedintz; e aprop pausa fora le huel coto o stopa o lana infusa en oli rozat e album de huou e ligua am aquo le huel sa.	 Then when the water is so and does not descend, then you remove that cushion easily, returning to your hand one by one, and after dissolving in the water a little clear salt of honey, and placing it near the patient's head for treatment.
Mays nos e aquels que so de nostre temps pause sobre aquel comi trissat am album de huou.	 And let those who have passed from our time over that which has been eaten by the book of life pass away.
E si no obezeys a tu almagda al intrament de l’huel per la sua duricia — quar es alcu dels homes del qual le huel es dur mot —, lahoras cove que prenguas le spatum le qual es nompnat alberid del qual aquesta es la forma:	 And if you do not have the cushion at hand for its hardness - which is in use by men whose urine is a strong drink - then apply what is called alabaster, which has the following properties:
E donc perfora am aquel aquela conjunctura, e no ultimes la tua ma en le trauc, e no es si no que fassas via ad almagda loc subtil.	 And after that put your hand over it gently without touching any of its parts, and do not stop if you are not sure where to place the cushion.
E aprop entromet almagda segon que havem dit.	 After all this has been said,
E deves le compliment de la tua obra, sia preparat al malaute dormitori descentment fayt en le qual dorma sobre le sieu dos en mayson tenebrosa, e sia prohibit de totz movementz .	 You must prepare a bed for the patient in such a way that they sleep on their back and are not allowed to move at all.
E pausa en la natura de lu aquo per que sia linida la sua natura, e no maugua le sieu cap a la partida dreyta ni senestra de tot.	 You must pause in the nature of him so that his nature may be calmed and he is not given to fits or rages at all.
E sia le liament segon la sua disposicio entro al tertz dia.	 It should happen on day three, after a second application.
E aprop deslia aquel en aquela maysso tenebrosa e exproha la freol vista, e fay li vezer alcunas causas, e aprop retorna le liament entro al dia .vii.	 Then proceed to that place where it is extremely dark and expose the frozen part, and after examining him carefully bring a remedy back on day seven.
E no cove que fassas aquo en la hora de las curacios o tantost aprop la infusio.	 You should not perform this treatment during the day or immediately before infusion.
Habantz cove que tu alienes aquo per so quar la aygua puega leugierament per gran e vehement de reguardament.	 Do you mean that you are supposed to apply it gently and firmly, but not too hard?
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que deslias le huel denant le vii dia, e rectifica aquel am aquo que ceda apostema.	 Then on the seventh day you should apply the remedy as described earlier and correct any mistakes that may have occurred.
Lahoras tu absol la vista de lu e pausa sobre la cara de lu oral per le qual sia regit le vezement de lu dejos lu per alcus dias, lu existent en la mayszo tenebrosa.	 You should clean the face of him and apply something over it so that he may be kept for several days in a very dark room.
E aprop sia gitat de aquela mayzo gradantment e conversa8 en las suas causas.	 Then proceed carefully to this matter, examine his causes.
E sapias que in alchatea no es excusat le discipol de visio alcunas veguadas, e lahoras tu sias ardit sobre la operacio.	 You should know that it is not allowed for the disciple of vision to see certain things, and you should be careful when considering surgery.
E ja es pervengut a nos de alcu de aquels les quals so al Artach , e alcu disse que fayt foc en al Ayrac magdaam perforat am le qual es succada la aygua.	 The first sentence translates to "And it has come to pass that they have opened the space between these thighs as per custom.
Mays empero yeu non e vist degu en la nostra terra le qual haia perfeyt aquo, ni e aquo legit en alcu dels libres dels antics; e es possible que aquo sia novel.	 It is possible that this may have never occurred in our land as previously mentioned, nor can it be found among the customs of the ancients and others freely, making it new.
E aquestas so las formas de las specias de magdaan per que sia sobre aquelas aquel le qual ignora aquelas:	 These are the forms that madness brings upon those who ignore them;
E sian faytas de eram o de ferr propriament, e sian las extramitatz de lor am aquesta subtilitat triangulada, la extremitat aguda ayssi cum aquela es la forma.	 It may be either the gout or the fever that is causing it, and its accompanying symptoms are also triangular; the sharp extremity will be affected as well.
Capitol .xxiv.	 In Latin, this translates to "The fourteenth book of the Capitula.
De la curacio de carn nada en le nas.	 The cure for venereal disease is nothing in the nose.
Quan en le nas so nascudas carns diversas ajustadas de las quals es alcuna causa la qual es assemblada a scorpio de motz pes, o a polip peys; e aquesta malautia es apelada polipus quar es a semblansa de aquel peys representat.	 When there are various growths in the nose that may be none of which causes scorpion venom to enter or polyps, and this ailment is called polypus because it resembles those veins represented by them.
E de lu es carn cancrosa, lapadea, de fusca color; e de lu es que es carn leon no de color fusca.	 It is cancerous skin that becomes inflamed with a reddish hue, and of the lion's skin it has none of this color.
Donc en aquela que es en aquestas carns leon no fraudulenta ni cancroza, cove que fassas le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e posat al solelh, e huebre las nars de lu, e picoys le tieu onci en aquelas carns.	 Therefore if these growths are not fraudulent nor cancerous, make a poultice with your hands and put it over the patient's breasts, cover their nose with this, and gently press in those areas.
E aprop extrat aquela a las partidas deforo, e aprop inscindeys aquo que has comprehendut de aquelas am spatum agut subtil de la una partida entro que sapias que tota la carn ja es ostada; que si roman de lu deguna causa de la qual la abscisio es possibla, lahoras tu ratz aquo am la un dels estrumentz subtils am facilitat entro que de lu romangua denguna causa.	 When you have opened the space between the patient's thighs and placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another one on their chest with hands held, this is how to perform the first incision.
Mays si senhoreja am sanc o accida apostema caut, lahoras tu pausa a lu aquo que cove; o es dels apostemas malignes, lahoras tu coyta e cauteriza aquel entro que sia abscindit sanc e sian ostadas las cavas totas.	 If the lancet is sharp or painful to touch, stop holding it and let someone else hold it for you; if the lancet was a malignant one that had caused damage and had been removed from its cavity.
E aprop sia getatz en le nas aprop la inscizio vi agre e aygua o vi.	 Then bring them in, insert it into the nostril gently and slowly or drip water in to it.
Mays si le nas es ubert e de lu procezeys humiditat entro al palat, lahoras sapias que ja es sanat.	 If the nose has been broken but you continue with moisture dripping into the palate anyway, it is advisable that you already are aware of this.
Mays si la humiditat no penetra segon que cove, lahoras tu sapias que dedintz lu es carn nada en los pus sobiras osses de las nars als quals non es pervengut abscizio.	 If the moisture does not penetrate as expected and it is causing discomfort on the bones of the nose that had already been cut, then you should know to wipe away any excess mucus from those nostrils that were not made during the incision.
Donc lahoras cove que entromitas fiel de li al qual sia alcuna grosseza, e nuza en lu motz nuzes, e pausa entre quascun nutz la quantitat del dit o mens, e engene le malaute e entromet una extremitat del fiel en le nars am lo ray o am autra causa la qual es a lu possibla.	 Therefore place it so gently in the nostril that there is no excess mucus and you pause between each nostril counting off or measuring, and insert one finger into one nostril and another cause for which ever situation it was possible.
E pus que aquo aura fayt, que atire le sieu odorament entro que pervengua a las canals de las nars, e sia eyssit sobre le sieu golayro, quar tropas veguadas le semblant ad aquesta accio fan les enfantz a las scolas, e es leugiera causa ad aquel que ho vol far.	 When the gout arrives, it often goes up into the nose and is also in the ear canal, making it hard to hear or swallow.
E aprop pausa las dos extramitatz del fiel, una extremitat que iesca sobre le nas et l’autra que romangua en le nas, e aprop aministra serratura de carn am les nuzes que so en le fiel, e fay aquo entro que sapias que las carn ja so am les nuzes del fiel.	 And the nurse then takes two sponges from a cloth that she places in her nose and another one in her mouth, to absorb any excess moisture on her face and prevent it from getting into her throat
E aprop extratz le fiel, e pausa en le nas aprop la abstraccio del sanc una calgua , e fay aquo per tres dias o mays entro que l’enguent corrodo tot aquo que es romas de las carns.	 The nurse then puts on the cloth and takes out a bandage, wrapping it around her head for three days or more until the wound is completely covered up
E aprop en la fi de la causa, pausa en le nas una canula de plom per alscus jorns entro que sia sanat.	 And after completing the task, she puts in her nose a small tube to drain the pus for several days until it's healed.
Mays si endigeys de curacio que exsique, usa de aquela.	 If you have already used up your allowance of care, use this one instead.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument a capipurge fazedor am le qual son distillatz olis e medicinas en le nars:	 This is the form that surgeons and doctors use to perform the operation on the ears:
E fay aquo de argent o de eram, la qual sia semblant a una petita lampesa uberta, ayssi cum petita conqua, e le meat semblantment.	 It's like a little pointed light that looks similar in size and shape to a small needle, except it is
E si vols, fay una canula clausa ayssi cum cana, e la cancula del estrument a capipurge fazedor e sia plana, descuberta; a la qual sia manubre en lo derier de lu, am le qual tenguas aquela quan escaufas en lu oli o aquo que tu vols dels sucs e de las causas suctiblas.	 If you want to do so, use a closed tube like the one with a cannula, and have it flat on top, uncovered; in which place your finger at its end where you want the fluids and the causes of suction taken from
E aquestz capipurgi es precios: recipe de enforbi de castor, de balayra blanc, de giengiebre, e piletre de safra, de pebre lonc, de escafragia, de epetum de spic ana unc. vi cumfizeys am suc de bleda e de caul, e sian faytas pillulas, e sia destemprada una pillula am aygua tebeza, e sia gitat en las nars del malaute jasent envers.	 "The patient should be placed on their back with their legs slightly apart to make the procedure easier.
Capitol .xxv.	 Chapter 25 of
De theyls natz en las extramitatz del nas.	 Through the nostrils from outside in.
Motas veguadas es nat theyl en las extramitatz del nas, e es magnificat e omentat en alscus dias entro en que mot es leg le reguardament de lu.	 The veins should be opened through the nostril and closed after a while to prevent obstruction of breathing.
E per aquo cove que tu inscidas aquel en le comensament de la apparissio de lu, e erediques tot aquel.	 To do this you should first place it at the beginning of the procedure, so that everything is done in order.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc o cauteri o medicina comburent la qual estia en loc de lu.	 Place a cushion over the area and apply a pointed cautery or medicine where they are located.
Mays si es tardada la sua inscizio entro que sia magnificat, lahoras considera si es lapificat, dur, de fusca color e de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr quar es apostema crancos; quar motas veguadas ad aquel que inscideys aquesta apostema endeve per lu granda malicia sobre aquel le qual aquel havia.	 If the incision takes too long to heal, consider using a pointed cautery or medicine that is warm, dry, with little color and few scents; avoid using one that causes pain when inserted into the body as this may cause problems later on.
E si le apostema es de leon tocament e no es de fosca color, e vezes que inscizio es possibla en tot aquel, lahoras evacua le malaute e inscideys aquel senes temor, e cura le loc am aquo que exsique e costrenh entro que sia sanat.	 If the needle is too long and not very bright in color, then it can be inserted into anyone of them; afterwards remove the patient from there to prevent harm or pain occurring.
Capitol .xxvi.	 When joint pain occurs due to cold humors that infiltrate every part of the body, and it feels in the feet, then doctors usually call it gout.
De sutura del nas e de las labias e de la aurelha quan la continuitat es dissolvuda per plagua o per semblantz.	 Suture of the nose, lips, and chin when continuity is dissolved by dripping or flowing substance.
Sapias que quan accideys solucio de continuitat en una de aquestas cartillages, pauc confereys en aquela operacio sino en alcus homes.	 You know that when a solution to the continuity issue arises in one of these vessels, few concur on this operation rather than others.
Donc cove, quan endeve ad alcu alcuna causa de aquelas, que consideres si es plagua fresca am le sieu sanc, e lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	 Then, when you find the cause of these issues in one of them, think whether it's a fresh flow or a different issue causing the pain. And if it is due to a cold flow, adjust both lips towards the wound and apply appropriate care for that specific situation.
E si las labias de solucio de continuitat so ja separadas, e quascuna es fayta sana, lahoras cove que tu excorjes quascuna partida de la sua codena apparent entro que n’iesca sanc.	 And if the lips of continuity solution are already separated and each one is healthy, then you should gently remove both parts from their cavity only when it doesn't cause pain.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias am sutura e strenh aquelas, e sobre aquelas pulveriza sanc de drago e enses trissat, e pausa sobre la polvera una pessa de emplaustra diafinicon, o de alcu autre dels emplastres consolidatius, e leyssa aquel liat per dos jorns o per tres, e aprop deslia aquel e permuta aquel emplaustre e leyssa aquel entro que·ls fiels per si sian abscinditz, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	 Then adjust both lips towards the wound and stretch them out as much as possible, then sprinkle some dragon's blood on top of it to seal it in place for two or three days, depending on which type of sealing plaster you prefer. And then remove that, exchange it with another one, and let it dry thoroughly so that if any leaks occur, the seals will be airtight.
Mays la manieyra de la sutura es que tu agregues la solucio de continuitat o am agulhas ayssi cum havem recomtat en la sutura del ventre, o agregua la solucio de continuitat am fiel ayssi cum a tu e fayt saber.	 The purpose of the incision is to add solution for continuity or apply it with needles as recommended in the abdominal surgery, or do you want me to know what kind of solution should be used?
Capitol .xxvii.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors
De extraccio de aquela causas que veno en las doas labias en las partidas dedintz.	 The cause of the gout attacks occurring on both sides of the thighs at this location is unknown.
Motas veguadas endeve a motz homes en las partidas dedintz de las suas labias alcus apostemas durs semblantz a gras de errs, e alscunas de lors son mendres e alcunas son majors.	 The veins in the legs of that patient are inflamed and painful to touch, but some are smooth and others are large.
Donc cove que tu convertas las labias e fendas quascuna de aquelas duricias de tota part, e aprop la abscizio umpliscas le loc de sagi trissat entro que·l sanc sia restrengut, e aprop sia lavat am vi agre e sia curat le loc am aquo que es stipticitat, entro que sia sanat.	 Then you should cut out all the veins and openings in each part of their body, so that when they sit down it won't be restricted or painful, but will allow for proper circulation, preventing any sores or infections from occurring.
Capitol .xxviii.	 This is a continuation of the previous chapter.
De inscizio de la carn ajustada en las gengivas.	 A circumcision performed on the lips (genitals).
Granre de veguadas nays sobre la gengiva carn ajustada la qual les antics apelero albulus, adonc cove que tu suspendas aquela am onci o que tenguas aquela am las forfecs e inscidas aquela deves la sua razit, e leyssas la sania correr o le sanc.	 Stretch the skin around the circumcised lips tightly, so that when you apply a poultice or compress it to the foreskin and glans (penis), it will be able to move freely and flow normally.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc sagi trissat o autra polveras stipticas o excicativas.	 Then place something soft, soothing, or stimulating on the restricted area of their body, depending on what is needed.
E si aquela carn retorna, lahoras inscideys aquela segundariament, e cauterisa aquela, quar aprop le cauteri no retornara.	 And if that skin returns and becomes inflamed again after the cautery has been applied or done, it is customary to cauterize it a second time so that the cautery will not return.
Capitol .xxix.	 When joints are affected by cold humors, causing pain throughout the body and in the feet specifically
De razo de dentz am ferr.	 And to prevent it from coming out (in the previous sentence).
Quan en la superficia de las dentz de las partidas dedintz e de las de foro e entre las gingivas so ajustadas escorsas aspras, legas, e alcunas veguadas son de nigradas e son faytas citrinas o vertz entro que a la gingiva ve per aquo corrupcio e son faytas las dentz legas.	 The surface of the teeth should be shaved smooth to prevent infection and decay; specifically between the two parts mentioned, as well as at the corners of the mouth and the gums themselves should be trimmed short for cleanliness reasons
E donc cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas e pausar le cap de lu en le tieu se, e ratz las dents en las quals apareysso aquelas escorsas e causas semblantz arena entro que de lor no romangua deguna causa, e aquo fay de la negror e de la citrinitat e de las autras entro que sian mondificadas.	 Ensure that you keep the patient between your thighs and hold their head gently in place with a cloth tied around it to prevent any further movement or escape.
Donc si es ostat aquo que es en aquelas del comensament de la razio, bo es; e sino, lahoras tu itera la razio sobre aquelas al autra dia e al segon e al tertz entro que vengua al derier stament en aquo que tu vols.	 If you are beginning the procedure as described above, proceed with caution and respect for the instructions provided; but if not, you should start another round of procedures on those parts later in order to achieve the desired result.
E sapias que las dentz han necessitat de motz rezoris de diversas formas e de motas figuras segon que es preparat a la tua operacio.	 You will need different techniques and tools depending on how you have prepared for your surgery.
E per so quar le razori am le qual la dent es raza de la partida dedintz es autre del razori am le qual es ras entre las dentz segon autras formas, e aquestas formas de razoris sian deves tu preparadas las quals veyras tantost:	 The techniques you will need to use depend on whether the teeth are being removed entirely or only a part of them; and these different types of techniques should be prepared by you beforehand.
Capitol .xxx.	 When it comes to removing parts of the teeth, doctors have certain procedures in mind that they consider safe and effective.
D’eradicacio de dentz.	 The removal of teeth
Cove que tu cures la dent de la sua dolor am tot engen e tardes en tota eradicacio de lu, quar no es denguna causa que suplisqua la veguada de lu quan es eradicada, quar es sustancia sublima entro que es excusacio en la eradicacio de lu.	 To cure the pain of the tooth entirely and thoroughly, you must remove it by any means necessary so that there is no leftover substance to cause pain when removed completely, as its removal leaves behind an excusable scar.
Mays cove quan le malaute es forsat aquela dent eradicar, que fermament deves tu sia certificat quala es la dent dolent, quar motas veguadas la dolor descep le malaute e cuga que sia en dent sana, e tu eradicas aquela e aprop la dolor no cessa entro que la dent malauta e dolent sia eradicada, quar nos ja havem vist aquo per operacio dels barbies.	 When the patient has lost that tooth and demands its removal by any means necessary, you must be sure it is indeed the painful tooth, so other cavities may not heal from the pain of the affected tooth, and once that affected tooth is removed without leaving a residue to cause more pain when removed completely.
Donc cum deves tu es sertificat qual es la dent dolent, e que o sabes be, lahoras cove que tu scarifiques en le circuit de la dent am spatum en le qual sia alcuna vertut, entro que sia dissolvut de la dent de la gingiva de tota partida, e aprop mau aquel am les tieus ditz, o am forfexs subtils al comensament petit a petit entro que aquela concucesquas.	 Once you have confirmed which tooth is the painful one and know its location at that point in your line of vision, prepare to excise it with fine forceps gradually reducing the size as required until that consequence is completely removed from the gum tissue altogether, and then remove it delicately using small tweezers into which a smaller forceps can be inserted progressively.
E aprop alogua en lu fortz tenalhas grans per bona loquacio o estuptura fort, e pausa le cap del malaute entre les tieus denolhs que be le tengues que no·s maugua, e aprop tratz la dent segon rectitut en manieyra que no trenques aquela, ni al malaute major dolor no dones.	 Prepare to crush it with large tongs in case of a good incision or injury during the removal and place your hand over its head between the fingers so that you can hold on tightly without being too rough, then remove it following straight through carefully making sure not to break off any part of it, nor cause more pain for the affected tooth.
E donc si no es foro-getat, lahoras pren un de aquels instrumentz, e met aquel dejos lu de tota part am facilitat e esforsa la remocio de lu ayssi que es feyt al comensament.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors. And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery. Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out. You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
Mays si la dent es trauquada o corrosa, lahoras cove que tu comples de drap aquel trauc e estrenguas aquel am la extremitat de ray subtil per so que no sia trinquada en la hora de la tua constriccio sobre aquela am tenalas.	 If the tooth is extracted or broken, it is customary for doctors to cover that area with gauze and wrap a bandage around its extremity gently in order to prevent bleeding at the time of tightening sutures over that area.
E cove que tu obres exquesitament am scarificacio en le circuit de tota part de la gingiva e guarda mot la tua fortaleza que no trenques aquela e romangua partida de lu, e retorne sobre le malaute per la malicia que sia majo que la primieyra dolor de lu.	 It is important to be extremely careful when making incisions in the entire circumference of the gingiva and ensure that you do not cut through it, as this can damage or tear off part of the gum, so return over the patient's body for a large pain caused by gout.
E guarda te que no fassas aquo que fan alscus ignorantz barbiers en lor fistinacio e audacia sobre la eradicacio de lor, ses que no aministran aquo que nos havem recomtat; quar motas veguadas fan venir sobre les homes malautias grans las quals son pus dificils que sian trinquadas, e las razitz de lor remaugudas totas, o alcunas de aquelas, o que extrayguas aquela am alcus osses de la mandigula ayssi cum motas veguadas havem testificat.	 It is important to note that ignorant barbers performing amputations are not recommended; they may administer something that we have advised against, and some of them can cause great harm as they cannot be controlled or prevented entirely, with the remaining ones causing even more damage.
E aprop la eradicacio de lu sia lavada la boca am vi caut o vi agre am sal.	 The excision should either be performed by a cool water jet or an abrasive-water jet to clean out the mouth.
E si endeve fluxs de sanc per aysso, ayssi cum motas veguadas endeve, lahoras trissa alcuna quantitat de zegi e aspergeys sobre la plagua, e si no confereys aquel zegi, cauteriza.	 When there is an abundance of cold humors flowing from the body's surface, you must apply a caustic to stop them.
La forma de las forceps e tenalas subtils am las quals es mauguda la dent al comensament sia de longua extramitat, de breu manubre e gros, per so que no sian doblatz quan am aquels deves obrar.	 The shape of the pliers and their tips should be such that they gently grasp what is to be extracted as firmly but not too tightly, in order to avoid injury when working with them.
E sian ayssi cum vezes de gros manubre entro que quan estrenhas am aquelas no sian dobladas, sian breus extramitatz.	 If the pliers are too large and one cannot hold on while they are being used, then do so gently but firmly without causing injury when you use them.
E sian faytas de ferr de India descentment faytas de dreytas extramitatz, e en las extramitatz de aquelas sian dentz de las quals las unas intron en las autras e estrenhan per constriccio descent fort, e alscunas veguadas las extramitatz de aquelas sian la forma del bec d’un auzel le qual ha nom ciconia, so es guanta, e son de fort constriccio.	 The pliers should be used gently and carefully when extracting from tight spaces like between teeth or in confined areas where if one loses grip the extraction force becomes very strong, as they should have a form similar to that of a crow's beak which is curved, so it allows for gentle but firm grasping.
Capitol .xxxi.	 This sentence does not translate into English accurately and therefore cannot be answered.
De erradicacio de dentz e d‘estraccio dels osses de las mandibulas trincadas.	 The extraction of teeth from broken jaws.
Quan deves la eradicacio de dent le qual es trinquat roman alcuna causa, lahoras cove que tu pauses sobre le loc coto am boder per un jorn o per dos entro que·l loc sia mollificat; e aprop entromet algesti o tenalhas las extramitatz de las quals so asembladas al bec de un auzel apelat ciconia o guanta, la forma de las forceps:	 If the tooth that needs to be extracted is broken and there are no other causes for doing it, you must wait until the area becomes softened after a day or two. And when getting ready to extract it, use pliers similar to those used by a crow called "ciconia" which means beak in Latin - this shape allows for gentle but firm grasping.
Las extramitatz de lor sian faytas dedintz ayssi cum lima o alfagi.	 The first words that come to mind are "the external hemorrhoids have caused pain" or something similar, but I cannot make sense of it in context with the following text.
E si no obediys a tu a eyssiment am aquestas forceps o tenalas, lahoras cove que tu caves sobre la razit e descrobas tota la carn e entrometas le instrument le qual ha nom atali, so es palanca petita del qual la forma es aquesta:	 If you don't obey to use these forceps or tweezers, then the doctor will tell you to cover your wound and remove any instruments that may be inside.
E sia de breu extremitat grossa un petit, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	 And if the limb is large but not too small such that it cannot be tucked in?
Donc si per aquo la razit es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, ajuda te am aquestz autres instrument dels quals aquestas son las formas: la forma del primier instrument es de triangulada extramitat en la qual sia alcuna grossesa:	 Therefore if the wound is thoroughly cleaned up, that's it. Otherwise, please help with these other instruments which are listed as follows: The shape of the first instrument is a triangular external part in which there should be no excessive size.
La forma del segon instrument es que sia de triangulada e de pus subtil extremitat.	 The second instrument is shaped like a triangle but with a very fine tip.
E ja so ajudatz am aquest instrument havent dos ramps del qual aquesta es la forma aprop la seguent:	 And then you should use the following two instruments that fit this shape best next to one another:
e am autres instrumentz les quals precidero en rasura de dentz; quar juvament es fayt am aquest instrument le qual es asemblat a onci gran, e aquesta es la forma:	 And for shaving the mustache and beard, you should use this instrument which is assembled in one piece but of large size.
de la triangulada extremitat torta o curta, la qual sia alcuna grossesa, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	 The triangular tip short or long, as long as it has no excessive thickness and is not too small to be tucked in?
E otra sapias que·ls instrumentz de las dentz motz so e semblantment les autres instruments.	 And the other instruments for shaving your moustache and beard are similar to these others but
Mays le artifexs savi e subtil en l’art, atroba per si mateys segon aquo que a lu significa la operacio e las malautias diversas; quar son de las malautias a las quals les antics no diysero ni pausero propri instrument, per las formas de diversas specias.	 When the physician has finished making an incision and wants to understand what kind of operation it is for various ailments or injuries that come from different sources, he needs instruments with different shapes in order to perform them appropriately
Mays si es trinquat l’os de la mandibula o dels autres osses de la boca, o si poyreys, lahoras sia pes curat sobre aquel en son loc am aquo que es a lu convenient dels instrumentz e de las forceps las quals havem dit en la extraccio de las razitz de las dentz, e ajuda te am gesti del qual aquesta es la forma:	 If you cut the bone of the mandible or any other bones in the mouth, if so, then place your finger on that part as it is the location for when performing the operation to remove teeth and helps with the gesture which is its form.
E sia en lu alcuna grosseza petit a petit, e sia instringida o tenguda am la boca per que no evasesca o fuga entro que l’os de tot sia foro-getat; e aprop restaura le loc am medicinas convenientz ad aquo.	 And it should be gentle and small at first, and tight or held in the mouth so that it does not escape or slip out of place from its position; after which, continue with medical treatments appropriate to this situation.
Mays si en l’os es petita poyredura, lahoras ratz aquel de aquela poyredura e de la sua negror, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	 If the incision is small and precise, then take that from this injury or wound, and cure it by applying a treatment as needed.
Capitol .xxxii.	 Chapter 22
De la cura de las dentz eminentz sobre las autras.	 The care of teeth is more important than the others.
Quan las dentz so eminentz no segon lor cors natural per aquelas la forma es laga, e majorment quan endeve a las femnas, e majorment a las piuselas venerablas; donc cove que tu consideras: si dent es nada aprop autra dent, e no es possibla sarradura ni linament de lu, lahoras radica aquela; mays que no sia annexa am autra dent, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am aquest instrument del qual aquesta es la forma; e es semblant a morr de porc, e sia feyt de ferr de India de extramitat mot aguda.	 When teeth are important enough to override natural bodily function for them it is necessary that they be held in place tightly and securely, more so when the gums or cheeks are affected; therefore consider if one tooth is not properly anchored then another tooth must be used as an anchor with this instrument which is its form. And it's similar to sewing a seam in leather, and requires using an Indian needle for punctilious accuracy.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscideyses aquela en trops dias per la duricia de la dent, e que no sia comauguda autra de las dentz.	 When the toothache strikes at any time of day or night, and causes pain without any other cause
E si es dent eminent expausat a limadura, lahoras lima aquel am lima de ferr de India del qual aquesta es la forma:	 If the tooth is inflamed and painful from an abscessed root (i.e., if it's a dental abscess), doctors typically drain this through a small incision made in India
E sia tot de ferr de India e·l margua eysament; e sia de motz menutz puntz ayssi cum lima am la qual son faytas agulhas, am la qual la dent sia limada pauc a pauc en motz dias am fecilitat, per so que no sia autra dent comauguda e caga.	 If you need to drain it through India and the margin as well; if only one of them is inflamed and painful at any time during the day or night, do not worry about other teeth causing pain, for this tooth will be drained little by little in a few days, so that no other tooth causes pain.
E aprop lineys aquela en la fi, e ratz aquela am alscus razoris.	 After removing the abscess (i.e., after draining it), and then wash them with warm water
E si es dent del qual una partida es trinquada e lideys la lengua, lahoras cove que tu limescas aquel entro que l’aspretat de aquela fraccio sia ostada e engualhada, e sia aplenada per so que la lengua no ledesca ni la paraula no corrumpa.	 If a tooth that was extracted and left to heal is now inflamed on the tongue or lips, doctors tell you to cleanse it thoroughly to prevent further infection in both areas, and keep it clean so that neither part gets infected or causes pain.
Capitol .xxxiii.	 In conclusion, we have covered a wide range of concepts related to medicine.
De restauracio de dentz maugudas am fiel de aur o de argent.	 To restore a decayed tooth with gold or silver.
Quan accideys a las dentz devant concussio e remossio per percussio o per cazament, e le malaute no pot strenher sobre aquo que manga, e tu has curat aquel am medicinas stipticas, e no ha valgut la tua curacio, lahoras per so que no cagan es engen en aquelas que sian strengudas am fiel de aur e no de argent, quar argent se fa vert e aprop se poyreys aprop alscus dias, mays aur nul temps no es mudat.	 When the tooth is crushed or broken by blows to the head, and it cannot be saved due to its location, doctors typically advise seeking immediate medical attention with antibiotics so that they do not become infected in those which are fragile like gold but not silver, as the latter oxidizes faster and should only be used on days when time does not allow for immediate use of gold.
E sia le fiel en tal subtilitat e grocesa segon la quantitat que puesca entrar entre las dentz; e la forma de la reccio es que prenguas le fiel e pren lo doble de lu entre doas dentz sanas, e aprop que cresques am doas tortuositatz del fiel entre doas maugudas, o si’ una o motas, entro que pervengua la tela a la dent sana del autra partida.	 When the incision is made with great subtlety and refinement according to the number of teeth needed; the shape of the cut must be such that you use the needle as if it were two separate needles between two healthy teeth, or if there are only one or more, then let it pass through the fabric at the healthy tooth from the other part.
E aprop itera le teyssiment entro a la partida de la qual comenciest, e strenh la tua ma am facilitat e savieza entro que no sia mauguda.	 Then bring in the thread and proceed with your hand as easily and smoothly as possible to avoid any harm or damage.
E sia la tua striccio am la qual strenhas le fiel deves las razitz de las dentz que no evasesca.	 The cut must be done such that you will use the needle only between the teeth that are not broken.
E aprop inscindeys las extramitatz del fiel superfluens am las forceps o tosoyras, e agregua aquelas en quascun loc am gesti, e converteys aquelas e las occulta entre la dent sana e la dent mauguda, per so que no fassa lesio a la lengua.	 Then insert the extra parts of the needle between the forceps or tongs and place them in each location as directed, and make sure they are hidden between the healthy tooth and the broken one to avoid damaging the tongue.
E aprop leyssa aquela ayssi streyta cum roman.	 Do it with great subtlety according to Roman manner.
Mays si es desliada o rumpuda, strenh aquela o aquelas am autra fiel en tal manieyra en tot son temps.	 If the incision is not straight or curved, proceed as directed using the other needle in the appropriate way throughout the entire operation.
E aquesta es la forma de las dentz e la figura de la rectacio de doas dentz sanas e de doas maugudas, ayssi cum vezes aquestas liadas:	 This is the shape of the teeth and the figure of the incision between two healthy teeth and broken teeth, as follows
E quan se fa que retorno una dent o doas aprop le cazement de quascuna en lors locs, e sian recrescutz ayssi cum havem recomtat, e que remauguan.	 When it is time to remove one or both of them from the location in question and as recommended previously, please make sure that you repeat this procedure carefully and thoroughly.
E no fa aquo sino bo artifexs e savi.	 This is a medieval medical text describing how to perform an operation on a patient for hernia repair or treatment of gout.
E alcunas veguadas es aptat alcuna causa dels osses de vaca, e es fayt de lor ayssi cum forma de dent, e es pausada en loc en le qual defayl la dent, e es strengit ayssi cum havem dit, e reman e serveys am aquel per lonc temps.	 Some vegetables are suitable for any cause of oxen, and they should be eaten in the same form as teeth, and placed in a location where they will not fall out, and it is strengthened like that which I mentioned earlier, and remain there until desired
Capitol .xxxiv.	 This may refer to chapter 44 of De re medica (On Medical Matters), written by Mondino of Bistolfi around the year 1250.
De inscizio del liament le qual ve en la lengua e prohibeys loquela.	 The incision for the ligament, which is to be made in Latin and prohibited from speaking.
Aquest liguament le qual ve dejos la lengua alcunas veguadas o es natural am le qual hom nays, o accidental e accideys per plagua la qual ja es consolidada.	 The ligament that covers the tongue some vegetables or is normal to cover it with a hand, accidentally slipping out and becomes hardened through pressure
E la operacio en lu es que huobres la boca del malaute, le sieu cap existent en le tieu se; e eleva la sieua lengua, e aprop inscideys aquel liament nervos segon la latitut entro que sia solvuda la lengua de la sua recencio.	 The operation in it is to open the mouth of the patient and remove its head from there, and elevate his tongue, and cut off that nervous ligament at a point where it can be easily solved by lifting the back of the throat.
Mays si en aquela es alcuna duricia o denodacio, e aquo es stat per consolidacio de plagua, lahoras tu gieta unci e scindeys aquel per la latitut entro que aias inscindit le liament e sia dissolvuda la nodacio.	 If there is no hardness or redness and it is only swelling, you should cut off the ligament at that point where you had previously cut it open and made it dissolve the knot.
E guarda te que no sia fayta fissura en le preon de la carn e que scindas aqui arceria e vengua flux de sanc.	 Remember not to make a tear in the flesh of the patient or have any bleeding, unless that is necessary and desirable.
E aprop sia lavat le vestigi de la inscisio am ayguaros o am vi agre o am aygua frega; e aprop pausa dejos la lengua licini; so es meca la qual tengua le malaute dejos la lengua en quascuna nuoyt per so que no sia consolidat autra veguada.	 When the incision is made, first the scar tissue must be removed or loosened to allow the tongue free movement as it has been lubricated with a mixture of saliva and water; after that pause and place your hand over their mouth, holding them in position so they cannot move further
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, pausa sobre le loc vetriol trissat; mays si le sanc ventz, lahoras cauteriza le loc am cauteri lantiginos le qual conveneys ad aquo.	 When the artery is cut, place a cloth over the recently severed limb to stop bleeding and call upon doctors for assistance
E aprop aquel cura am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	 And then there are other causes that need treatment.
Capitol .xxxv.	 The last sentence of chapter 50
De extraccio de ranula dejos la lengua.	 When the intestines come out through the anus, do not push them back in.
Alcunas veguadas accideys dejos la lengua apostema asemblant a nomla petita prohibent la lengua de la sua operacio natural; e fort leu es magnificada entro que huempla la boca.	 Do not bind the tongue during surgery, to prevent any damage to its normal movement and also to allow for good healing of wounds.
E la operacio en lu es que huebras la boca del malaute sesent devant le solel e considera le apostema.	 The operation on him is done by tying off the mouth with a cord, facing downward towards the ground and considering it as an opening.
E si tu le vezes de fusca color o de negra, dur, al qual le malaute no atroba sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel quar es cranc.	 If you find that the color is too dark or the blackness unbearable to bear and it disturbs the patient's mind, do not apply this remedy as it may be harmful.
E si es declinat a blancor, en le qual es humiditat, lahoras tu met le onci en lu, e inscideys aquel am spatum subtil, e inscindeys le de tota partida; e si sanc te ventz en la hora de la tua operacio, lahoras tu pausa desus zegi trissat, so es vetriol, entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	 If you apply the white ointment which is moist and it does not cause the pain in your operation time, put away that part of it; if it causes bleeding during your surgery pause them until they stop bleeding, for this is a dangerous condition.
E aprop retorna a la obra tua entro que lo haias trayt am compliment de lu, entro que sia lavat am vi agre e sal; e cura aquel am l’autra curacio ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	 "The servant should return to the patient's bedside and cleanse them thoroughly with warm water and salt. And care for their wounds as best you can.
Capitol .xxxvi.	 Chapter 6 of a medieval medical treatise.
De extraccio de apostema de doas aurelhas e de aquel que es nada en le golayro e de las autras apostemas.	 From the extraction of blood from the veins and that which is nothing in the groin, as well as those of the buttocks.
Quan endeveno en le golayro godat, so son glandulas las quals son asembladas algodat, las quals accideysso deforas e son nompnadas doas aurelhas, las quals quan tu las curas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no es sanat, lahoras tu considera si le apostema es dur, de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr.	 When you extract blood from the groin, it is necessary to examine and feel them so as to determine if they are infected sores or not; otherwise, do not touch that member because of its dangerous nature.
E si es de roga color e la razic es grossa, lahoras no toques aquela am ferr per le flux del sanc; abantz layssa aquel entro sia madurat, e lahoras o tu trauqueras aquel, o sira romput per si.	 If the hue of their appearance is dark and the surface rough, do not touch that member to avoid contamination from touching it with unclean hands; rather remove them when they are mature enough, or refrain from removing if you cannot handle either choice.
E si es de blanqua color, radon, e la razit de lu es subtil, lahoras aquel es que cove esser inscidit.	 If their appearance is light pink and the surface is smooth, examine them very carefully.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras, denant la tua operacio, si ja ha repausat le apostema de lu caut am repaus complit o si es deminuit am alcuna deminucio; e lahoras fay sezer le malaute denant le soleyl, e·l cap de lu sia en le tieu se, e huebre la boca de lu, e le servidor prenent entre las suas mas prema la lengua de lu dejos am instrument mot noble del qual aquesta es la forma:	 When performing the operation on them, consider whether or not they have already had a complete cushion placed under their thighs, and if so, check to see that it is in place completely; also make sure you hold your breath while you approach their face, covering up their head with your arm, opening your mouth as wide as possible, and the servant taking between his fingers of their hands for holding an instrument not fit for noble use.
E sia fayt de argent o de aram, e sia subtil cum cotel.	 When you have pain in one part of the body caused by cold humors that penetrate each part, especially when pains occur in the feet; then it is customary to call it gout as doctors do.
Donc cum tu premes am aquel la lengua e es mostrat a tu la apostema, e catz sobre aquel le tieu vezement, lahoras pren onci e fica aquel en l’amenla, e tira aquel a las partidas defora tant quant podes.	 Then, take the tongue and show it to you; then place it in its mouth again, so that pain can be felt there once more, and remove from all further parts as much as possible.
Otra aquo que tiras alcuna causa de las tunicas, e aprop incideys aquela am instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	 Another thing is to take away any cause of the garments; and apply a means that is in its nature this way:
e es asemblat a forceps, empero las extramitatz de lu son corvadas, ayssi que l’orrifici de quascuna de aquelas es en le endreyt del autra, mot agudas, le qual sia de ferr indi enbegut.	 And apply forceps; but the extra parts of them are curved, therefore their tip is sharp and they can be used to cut open one at a time from the other side, making it easier
Mays si aquest instrument no es a tu present, lahoras inscideys aquel am spatum del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: E sia agut de la una part, no agut del autra part.	 If this instrument is not in your possession; then the doctor will use another tool of its type: and apply it to one side, but do not apply it to the other side.
E pus que has inscidit una mella, inscideys l’autra segon aquesta meteyssa manieyra de inscizio, e aprop la inscizio le malaute guarguarise de aygua frega	 And when you have used a sickle, use the other one as well, and place it over the patient's abdomen to prevent water from entering.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, guarguarise aygua de decoccio de scorsa de milgrana o de fuelha de mirtra e semblantz ad aquel de las causas stiptiquas entro que·l flux del sanc sia restreyt, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	 If there is a flow of blood from the wound, then bandage it with strips of linen soaked in vinegar or honey, and place that over the part where the cause has entered into restrict the flow of blood; and if you want to heal it, put that over it as well.
E alcunas veguadas naysso en le guolayro autras apostemas otra aquelas doas aurelhas, e inscideys aquelas segon que yeu e dit en la inscizio de doas mellas engualment.	 "In the area between her legs there are several small openings and fissures that could be caused by external stimuli or friction. The physician must examine them carefully.
E yeu ja fu medicat una femna de apostema le qual era nat en le golayro de lu, le qual apostema tendia a color fusca, de pauc sentiment, le qual ja havia claus le golayro de lu, e la femna respirava am meat streyt, e ja havia prohibit a lu comestio e beure de aygua, e ja era pervenguda a la mort si mays agues stat per un dia o per dos.	 "The woman with the fistula had not been treated in that area for a long time, as the fistula was very red and sensitive to touch, having closed off her leg from entering into it, she was not eating or drinking water, and was about to die within one day or two.
E l’apostema ja tant havia pugat que havia mezes dos ramps entro que eyssiro per dos traucs.	 "The fistula had become so bad that the woman would have to undergo surgery in two stages.
Donc yeu me cuytegui fisturalment e fiquegui en un de lor onci, e tiregui aquel, e atirada es de lu gran porcio, e aprop yeu incidigui aquela de on comprendegui del autre trau, e aprop yeu obrigui la boca de lu, e compremegui la sua lengua, e aprop yeu fiquegui le onci en aquela apostema.	 "Then he would cauterize the fistula externally and internally, and then would make a large incision in it, so that they could determine from which of the two ways the other tract was connected to it, and then they would have him open his mouth, examine his tongue, and perform an examination on the fistula.
E aprop yeu abscizi gran partida de lu, e no corria de lu sino un pauc de sanc.	 "Then he would make a large incision in it but there was only one small artery coming out of it.
Donc absolut es le guolayro de aquela femna, e comensec tantost beure aygua, e aprop presec vianda, donc yeu no cessegui inscidir de aquela apostema motas vetz per lonc temps, e succesia apostema en loc de aquel, le qual inscizia entro que es prolonguat aquel.	 "The physician then examined her closely and observed that she was not drinking water, but also noted the presence of a fistula in that location where it had been for some time, which opened into another tract.
Donc yeu engen agui e cauterizegui le guolayro de lu, donc astec de addicio; e aprop yeu perambulegui e no saubi que fec Dieus de aquela aprop mi.	 "Then you should apply a pointed cautery to the groin of him and also on his thighs,
Capitol .xxxvii.	 Chapter 77
De inscizio de huvela quan es apostemada.	 The incision has been made when he is taken away
Quan catarr deysen a la huvula, e es apostemada e es longa, lahoras ela es nompnada perpendicular; e si es en la partida dejos grossa e redonda, e lahoras ela es apelada buba.	 When the abscess is opened in the throat, and it is long, then doctors call it a tubercle; if it is on the face or round shape, they call it bubo.
Mays quan es curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio, e no comfereys la tua curacio, e eyssament ja vezes que apostema caut ja es ostat de lu e es subtil, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquela que es agreguadas redonda; e si es ad aquela longitut, e es sanguina, de fusca color o de negre, e no es a lu centiment, lahoras cove que tu temtes la inscizio de lu, quar en aquela es temor sobre le malaute.	 When cured as you have already said in the division, and it does not concern your cure, and also once that the cautery is done and is subtle, then call out the round ones; if there are long ones, with blood or dark, do not cut to its center, then call for incision of him, where there is fear about the patient.
E quan tu vezes aquela segon la manieyra que yeu he dita de la sua blancor e longuesa, que tu fassas sezer le malaute e premas la lengua de lu am instrument del qual procesic la sua forma e aprop fica le onci en la nuva, e tira aquela en jos e inscideys aquela am un de dos instrumentz les quals e ditz en la inscizio de dos mellas.	 And when you times that second time at the patient's whiteness and lengthiness, do what you did with the tongue of him as an instrument by which to process his form and place it on the surface; then remove it from there and cut into it in two parts, using one of the instruments called for incision of two halves.
E cove que no inscidas aquela sino aquo que es ajustat sobre le terme natural ses addicio, quar si tu inscides de lu mays, lediyras le sieu parlar.	 And if you do not cut into it but rather adjust over the natural space of his addition, because if you cut him off may lead to its talkativeness.
E aprop la inscizio, usa de aquo le qual havem recomtat en la inscizio de dos mellas, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	 Upon applying, use this which we recommended in the incision of two halves, and heal that inside where it is diseased
Mays si era le malaute espaventat per la inscizio de lu, cove que use de engen en la cauterizacio de lu ses temor, e la manieyra del cauteri en lu no es sino am aygua aguda, e es que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop prem la lengua de lu am le instrument le qual havem dit, e aprop pren de l’aygua la qual havem dita en le capitol de cauterizacio, e comfeys am aquela caus viva, e pausa aquela no spessa ni subtil, e de aquela omple la concavitat de l’estrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	 Upon the application of the patient with a fever, use this which we recommended in the cautery incision. Take care not to let the flame touch his hand; and place your tongue on the instrument that we have mentioned, and press water onto it from the head of the cautery, as you pause at the cavity where it is not painful or subtle, and do so with completeness until the end of the instrument that this is a form.
Sia la extramitat de lu conquavitat en la qual sia pausada la medicina ayssi cum la conquavitat de culher de ray, e pausa le strument am la medicina sobre la vula, e·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu latz per so que corro saliva o musellage de la boca de aquel per la intrinscequa medicina, per so que no deyssenda de aquela deguna causa sobre le golayro de lu e que ledesca aquel.	 The external cavity in which the medicine is paused and the constipation of the bowel, pause the instrument over the vulva, and place your hand on it to prevent saliva or mucus from entering the mouth by this intrinsic medicine, so that there should not be any cause over the gizzard of him and that the latter may be cured.
E aprop te la tua ma am la medicina, e exprem aquela sobre la uvula per l’espazi de miega hora entro que vegas aquela esser denegrada e sedada per la mordicacio de la medicina.	 Take your hand to the medicine and apply it over the throat opening where that may be degraded or dried out by the bite of the medicine.
E si vols, prengues coto e envolopes aquel sobre la extremitat del ray, e submergeys le coto en la medicina, e entrometas le ray am le coto en una canula de sobre entro que·l coto adheresca en aquela canula, e fay aquo tantas vetz entro que consiegues aquo que vols de la cauterizacio de la uva, e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela se seccara e cayra aprop tres dias o quatre.	 If you wish, place it over the extremity of his arm and immerse it in the medicine, and enter into him through that cannula which attaches to that cannula, so that he may receive this many times until you achieve what you want from the cautery of the liver, and if necessary let it be cured within three or four days.
E si indigeysses que iteras la medicina, itera aquela, e aprop la cauterizacio abstergeys en le circuit de la uva am coto enbegut en boder, e mondifica am aquel aquo que es en le circuit de lu de la medicina, e sia lavat am aygua frega, e sia curat deforo am embrocacio, e dedintz am guarguarismes entro que sia sanat.	 When you are going to start the medicine, it says this and then prepare cauterization in the vein of the body, which is put into circulation through blood vessels
E aquesta especia de curacio es pus salva que inscizio e pus long de temor.	 This special type of cure is especially dangerous because of its long duration
Alcunas veguadas es curada la uvuola am aquo que es pus subtil que cauteri e inscizio, quar es curat am subfumigacio en aquesta manieyra: recipe calament, ysop, origua, ruda, scicados arabic, camamilla, broyda e semblant ad aquels de las erbas, e ajusta totas aquelas causas, o alcunas de lor, en una ola, e sian submergidas am vi agre, e bulhan; e la ola sia be lutada am lut decentment, e sia en le mieg loc de la ola un trauc, sobre le qual sia pausat un instrument conquau de aram segon aquesta manieyra; sia fayt de argent o de aram.	 The cure is done by submerging in the air and by burning causes with a pointed instrument of flame to prevent it from coming out
E sia entromesa la extremitat en la boca del malaute entro que la vapor poge a la uvula sobre la quanula, entro que la uvula sia mot ofuscada.	 The extremity is introduced into the mouth of the patient and when steam touches the tongue it may be stopped with something that obscures the taste.
E aprop itera sobre aquela motas veguadas entro qu’es secca, e guarda te que no fassas aquesta curacio al comesament de l’aveniment de apostemas, quar trop ajustaria en le apostema, e no cove que tu fassas aquo, sino deves la declaracio de apostema de lu caut.	 If you are doing the cure and if steam touches your tongue, then do not proceed with this cure immediately; rather wait for it to be covered in advance, as this would prevent a sore throat.
Mays si no es a tu present aquest instrument, lahoras pren una cana e compon en la extramitat de lu un clos de huou, per so que la boca del malaute sia comborida, quar le closc del huou prohibeys la vapor comburir la boca.	 If you do not have this tool, then take a cloth and place it over the extremity of him to make sure that his mouth is covered so that steam does not burn the lips or the mouth.
E aquesta curacio es bona am salut.	 This procedure is good for health
Capitol .xxxviii.	 Chapter 85
De extraccio d’espinas e de aquo que adhereys en le golayro e de las autras causas.	 Extraction of spines and from what adheres to the gullet, also known as throat or larynx causes.
Motas veguadas adhereys en le guolayro o spina de peys o alcuna autra causa.	 The matters that adhere in the gullet, or spine of pigs, or any other cause.
Adonc cove que tu extraguas aquo que de aquels es apparent, sobre le qual catz la vista, pus que tu premes la lengua am instrument denant solelh, per so que a tu sia declarat aquo que es en la guola.	 When you extract what is visible on it, which your sight perceives, by using the instrument that is brought to your mouth, in order for this to be declared as being in the gullet
E aquo que no apar e es a tu occultat en le guolayro, cove que tu fassas vomir le malaute denant que la vianda sia degerida en l’estomac, quar fort leu la causa annexsa le golayro sira foro-getada per vomit; o que deglusia le malaute una pessa de nap o de razit de laytuga o un boci de pa sec; o prengua una pessa de sponga marina sequa leon, e lia aquela fortment am fiel, e aprop le malaute transglussia aquela, quar cum perve al loc en le qual so spinas e es extrahuda, lahoras so foro-getatz.	 If the matter is not visible in the gullet but rather seems to come up from it, vomit the patient right away or put a pinch of salt on the tongue or swallow a spoonful of water, and place that against his back, in order for the intestines to be extracted; otherwise, pain will occur.
E mays pren una anguila e be am fiel liada, e sia dedintz mesa e soptament sia extrayta; o pren un porr e soptament le metas e soptament l’en tratz.	 May you use a serpent and bind it tightly with rope or otherwise tie its ends together.
Mays si no so foro-getatz am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas, lahoras husa de un instrument de plom segon aquesta forma:	 If not for those causes which we mentioned, then the doctor will use an instrument of flesh as follows:
E sia pus gros que ray un petit, e en la extramitat de lu sia conquavitat la qual tu entrometas en la sua guola am facilitat.	 When you have made an incision in a small part of the body where it is difficult to enter, make an opening through which you can easily pass into its cavity with great facility.
E el aga le sieu cap elevat en sus, e guarda te que·l tocament del sieu os de la gola, per so que endevengua a lu cos e am aquela que enpellesca le os o la spina, o que aquel le metge am la sua ma.	 When you raise the head of them, and keep your fingers from touching their throat, that way they can eat and speak, or if it touches the nose or spine, then the doctor should gently touch his hand.
Mays empero que·l malaute aquel entrometa es miels, per la sua sciencia del loc de la causa annexa e enpellisca en jos, e tira la sua ma am le instrument en sus, tot aquo segon la quantitat la qual es a lu preparada entro que sia foro-getada.	 May I add that the patient should enter it by its own power, through knowledge of the place and cause annexed to bring it out, and remove your hand from the instrument in their hands as much as is prepared within reach of them.
Capitol .xxxix.	 Chapter xxxix
De extraccio de sancguisugua annexsa al golayro.	 From the outside, draw out the sack that encloses the liver.
Quan es medicada sanguisugua am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la curacio am medicinas e no comfereys, considera lahoras en le guolayro del malaute al solelh, pus que tu aias compremuda la lengua de lu am instrument le qual a tu havem recomtat.	 When you are treating the sack that surrounds it and does not interfere with surgery, consider placing the patient's head on a pillow near where they recommend holding their tongue to prevent them from obstructing your view or causing injury.
Donc si tu vezes la sancguisugua, extratz aquela am onci petit o am gesti subtils decentment.	 Then if you draw out the sack more than once, take it gently and softly.
E si no es a tu possible estrayre am aquel, lahoras pren una canula concava e entromet aquela en lo guolayro del malaute, e aprop pausa en la concavitat de la canula un ferr ignit, e fay aquo tantas vetz (entro que la sancguisugua sia morta e se osta del guolayro) e abstengua se le malaute tot lo jorn de aygua.	 If it is not possible to draw out through the incision, then place a concave needle and insert it into the patient's gullet, leaving enough space (if necessary after drawing it out if the sack dies from the opening) and prevent them drinking water for one day.
E aprop prengua una veyria plena de aygua frega, e obra la boca de lu en aquela, e lava la boca am aquela; e no trasglucia de aquela alcuna causa e maugua l’aygua una hora aprop autra am la sua ma, quar la sancguisugua tantost cum sent l’aygua catz.	 When a full bladder is present and the patient's mouth is filled with water in that way, he must wash his mouth in that manner; and no other cause or reason may interfere with the emptying of the bladder at any time whatever.
Mays si no es foro-getada am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras subfumigua le malaute am cimetz o am assafetida per le instrument le qual havem recomtat en la sufumiguacio de uvula.	 If it is not forbidden by the doctor who has recommended this, then wash the patient's anus with a soft and warm cloth or something else that has been suggested in connection with the treatment of hemorrhoids.
Fay aquo, so en quar cayra.	 Do as you please
E es un’autra manieyra de operacio en sufumiguacio de aquela, es que tu prenguas una ola en la qual sian carbos ignitz e la ola sia cuberta am una cobertora en le mieg de la qual sia un trauc, e sia compausat en aquel trauc la extremitat del instrument; e aprop dega desus la subfumigacio; e pause le malaute la sua boca en la extremitat de la canula, e claugua la sua boca per que la subfumiguacio no sia foro-getada entro que sapias que la subfumigacio es pervenguda a la sancguisugua, quar la sancguisugua tantost cayra.	 Another way to perform the treatment is by using an olive wrapped in a cloth that covers it and has a hole at one end, and is placed in the patient's mouth as far as possible; hold the mouth closed while performing the treatment so that the olive dressing does not interfere with the swallowing process.
E si no catz, lahoras tu itera la subfumiguacio motas vetz, e abstengua le malaute de beure, e mange causas saladas e alhs, e no begua aygua, e ayssi necessari es que am aquest regiment sia fora-getada.	 If not, the treatment must be stopped immediately and the patient should abstain from drinking salt water or any other fluids; it is necessary to stop this regimen right away.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument am le qual es trayta sancguisugua del guolayro quan es vista; e es semblant a forceps ayssi cum vezes, sino quar es en lu alcuna curvitat:	 This is the shape of the instrument used for removing warts when seen whole; it resembles pliers in some respects.
le qual sia mesa al guolayro, e la extremitat de lu es semblant a bec de ciconia, que es guanta, en la qual es aspretat de lima, per so quar, quan comprem alcuna causa, aquela no leyssa.	 When the cause is found in this vein, it will not be affected by what follows
Capitol .xl.	 The following text should be translated line-by-line into English as I've done for your previous request:
En le qual es la suma del sermo en apercio de apostemas e en seccio de lor.	 In the sum of a serpent in its head, and in section of its body
Les apostemas so motas specias, de motas manieyras, segon que ve rememoracio de lor, de quascuna en aquest libre.	 The marks are to be removed especially because they remember them very much
E so diversas en perforacio e seccio de lor per doas manieyras, de las quals la una es per la specia de apostemas en si meteys; e per aquo que comprem de las humiditatz.	 And in all cases of incision and sectioning them for two reasons: one is to remove the marks specifically because they remember them very much; and secondly, to check their moisture.
E la segonda manieyra es prop les locs en les quals accideys del cos, quar le apostema accident en le cap es autra de la apostema accident en le cul; e le apostema en le loc carnos accident es autra del apostema accident en junctura; e a quascun de lor es son juguament per operacio.	 The second reason is to check the areas where accidents occur, for example if an accident occurs in the head it's different from one that occurs in the rectum; and each of them should be treated separately by operation.
E mays de apostemas so alcunas las quals cove que no sian perforadas sino aprop maturacio de la sania en aquels o compliment de lor.	 The marks are to be removed, not through cutting but rather through incision of the skin in those areas or by making an opening for them.
So autras apostemas les quals cove que sian traucatz quan son cruzes, e no son maturatz segon lor compliment, ayssi cum apostemas que son propdas a las juncturas, quar apostema quan ve prop junctura, lo esser de lu es prolonguat entro que·s poyreys aquo que es en le circuit de lu, e fort leu son corromputz les liamentz o les nervis de aquela junctura, per que es fayta causa de contraccio de aquel membre; o es apostema prop de membre principal, e si tu tardas la perforacio de lu entro sia madurat nosira al membre principal; o es prop le cul, donc perfora aque no-madurat; e no cove que·l perforas cru, de no-complida degestio, sino aquel que es prop del cul, per so que no poyresca le preon de lu e sia elonguat a las partidas dedintz del cul, e sia fayta fistula, o que sia fayt en le terme de lu que no sia sanat.	 The ones that are crossed should not be removed through incision but rather through crossing of the lines; and for those which are crossed at their base they will be perforated only up to their main part, unless they are crossed over a member's main part, in which case they must be perforated all the way down to its bottom or opening; and if it is the anus then perforate as far as you can towards that direction without cutting through any other parts of the body.
Mays cove que tu sapias la hora de la perforacio de la apostema, e aysso es quan es maturat.	 When it is time for the opening of the aperture, so that happens when it matures
E sapias que es madurat quan es la cedacio de la dolor e la cessacio de la febre, e aprop la diminucio de la rogor e de la pulsacio, e la acuitat del cap del apostema, e les autres senhals.	 You know that it is mature when the closing of the pain and fever occurs, and the reduction in redness and pulse occurs, along with the sharpness at the tip of the aperture, and others nerves.
E quar cove que sapias la perforacio cazer en le loc pus dejos del apostema e de pus venient de curacio de la eminencia.	 When you know that there is a chance for perforation in the place where the needle must be inserted, and if it happens quickly from curing the inflammation.
E perforacio tostemps sia per le lonc de la carn o del cors, si las apostemas son en las partidas de las mas o dels pes, e en loc dels lacertz, de las cordas dels nervis, de las arcerias; e, al derier, en totz locs enguals en les quals no es reflecio; quar en aquels que so reflectitz, usa de perforacio segon aquel membre.	 Perforation is usually on the surface of the skin or body parts, in joints or feet, and areas around the tendons, nerves, arteries; and lastly anywhere else where it does not reflect light, when reflection occurs, use perforation for that member.
Mays quan le apostema es en loc carnos, lahoras miels es que leysses la perforacio de lu entro que sia confermada la digestio de lu segon compliment, ayssi quo havem dit; quar si tu perforas aquel denant aquo, es prolonguat le cors del poyre de lu e de mota sordicia, e fort leu las labias de lu so enduradas e la profunditat de lu.	 When the aperture is in place of the heart, it means that you should make a perforation to enter it only when digestion has been confirmed as before, and if you perforate there now, it prolongs the course of poison from entering your body or any other member; it weakens the liver and makes its surface rough.
Mays alcus apostemas so perforatz segon la latitut de la carn o del cos deves la necessitat, o segon aquo del qual lo membre indigeys.	 Perforate the apertures secondarily to the depth of the skin or body you need it at, or secondly in that member where it is most important.
E cove que administres petita perforacio , e·n les apostemas grans gran perforacio e ampla o motas seccios segon la diversitat de la grandesa dels apostemas.	 When administering small incisions, make large ones as well, broad or narrow depending on the diversity of their size
E autras so dels apostemas en les quals cove que la codena sia conquavada e sia encidida, quan es fayta ayssi quo pan e fayta es en terme que ja stigua, ayssi cum aquel que accideys en trops de dubelec e de bubos.	 When the incision is open and closed simultaneously when administering incisions of this kind, as it happens that way sometimes even in many cases, do so with both hands.
E de aquels so que so insciditz am seccio havent tres angles; e de aquels es en le qual es inscidit ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirtra, ayssi cum las apostemas dels angonars.	 When the incision is made in three different directions, and those are the ones with an angle of ninety degrees, do so as well, just like a crosshair
E de lor so en les quals es administrada seccio redonda e seccio lunar, e semblantz ad aquels.	 When administering round and moon-shaped incisions, do that one as well.
Mays aquel al qual no es cap ayssi cum son apostemas leons superficials, cove que tu perforas aquel am perforacio superficial, o plana tant solament.	 Do not make any other incision than the superficial one when administering incisions to those who have already had superficial ones made, but only do that one if you perform them.
E cove quant le apostema es gros e ya ha colligit mota sania, que perfores aquel e no te coytes que extraguas tot le poyre en aquela hora; habantz extratz de aquel una partida, e aprop opila le apostema entro al autre dia, e aprop extratz una partida major, e aprop fa aquo motas veguadas segon graduacio entro que sia foro-getat.	 Perform that incision and do not touch any other part of the body in that moment, except for next time; after doing so place it on another day, and make sure to perform a larger cut afterwards, and adjust its size according to growth, as needed.
E majorment si·l malaute es de freol vertut, o femna prens, o enfant petit, o viel en decrepitut, quar l’esperit animal motas vetz es resolvut am la egressio de la sania, e fort leu mor le malaute, e tu operte les.	 If the patient is of feeble health or strength, or a child, an old man, or in decrepit condition, then remove all clothing and perform them with great care.
Don guarda aquest capitol am gran cautela, e aprop la tua perforacio en la qual perforas aquestz apostemas, cove que abstergescas las plagues e consideras donc si la plagua del apostema es pauca, o es una seccio plana, lahoras tu aministra las qualguas de li o de coto antic; e si le apostema es gran, e las fissuras de la perforacio son motas, lahoras cove que tu pauses meca en quascun trauc entro que pervenguan ensemps.	 When you have opened a space with great caution, and after making the incision where you will remove this letter from it, consider whether the letter is small or flat, then adjust its position so that it does not cover too much of the adjacent letters, but enough to read it properly.
E si en le apostema es abscindit una partida de la codena o has concavada aquela en le circuit, lahoras cove que tu la complescas de coto viel o de fil fayt de drap de li, ayssi cum quan has traytz pans o razizos, ses humiditat; e strenh aquel entro al tertz dia; e aprop proceseys aquel e cura le am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	 If the letter is removed by a sharp edge or has been hollowed out in its circuit, you should cover it with a piece of cloth or fil to make it dry quickly and when you stretch it tightly on third day, and take care of where it touches so that no injury occurs from the contact.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc en la hora de la operacio tua, lahoras tu aministra aygua frega e vi agre en les quals mules un drap de li, e pausa aquel sobre le loc del fluxs del sanc motas veguadas.	 If there is bleeding during the operation, you should give them cold water and wet their wounds with a cloth, placing it over the area where the blood flow stops to stop any further bleeding.
Mays si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras cove que tu aministres regiment e curacio e polveras las quals he recomtadas en motz locs de aquest nostre libre e de divisio.	 If the bleeding continues, you should provide regular care and cleaning and apply the powders recommended in this section of our text for various places on the body.
Mays si es en temps de hivern, e·l loc de la apostema es loc de motz nervis, lahoras cove que tu enfundas pulvils en vi e oli caut, e pauses aquels sobre les locs.	 If it is during winter and the area of the letter is a nerve-sensitive one, you should use cold powders of salt and oil, and place them over that location.
E si es en estiu, e les locs son carnoses, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils enbeguts am aygua e oli o am vi e oli, e tot aquo sia freg entro que sia le ters dia, ayssi cum havem dit, e lahoras cove que tu deslies le apostema e abstergescas aquel e aministres en la curacio de lu aquo que a lu conveneys entro que sia sanat.	 When it is hot and the legs are swollen, the doctor will tell you to sprinkle cool water on them or drink it or apply it, because that's what helps relieve gout when applied to where it occurs, as doctors say
E aysso es aquo que es necessari de la cognicio de la curacio de apostemas universalment, mays segon la via de distinccio ja he dit de tot apostema en qual manieyra es via de la cura de lu per capitols singularment.	 This is necessary for the general knowledge of how to cure all ulcers in any way
Capitol .xli.	 The specific treatment may vary depending on the type, location, and severity of each ulcer
De seccio de apostemas les quals veno en la codena del cap.	 Some of the ulcers that appear in the head area
En la codena del cap petitz apostemas, e so de specias de nodes les quals conteno tunicas que so a lor factz ; e las specias de lor so motas.	 The ulcers on the top of the head are specific and contain membranes that are protective; they also have special motions
E de lor son pingas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditat semblant a lima.	 They are swollen like limes.
E de aquelas so las quals conteno humiditat semblant a pols, et asemblantz a lor; e de aquelas so que son lapideas, durs.	 Some of them contain moisture similar to lime juice and have rough surfaces; others contain moisture that feels like sweat and are smooth
E en la seccio de totz, e en la extraccio de aquels no es temor, cum deves la exteccio de aquels no fa contrariat arceria.	 In the upper part of the body as well as in the lower part of it there is no fear; because you must avoid touching them with any part of your body.
E la operacio en seccio de aquels es que tu esproes aquels am instrument la forma del qual ve aprop aysso, le qual es apelat entromes, entro que sapias que contengua.	 The operation on that area is to apply the instrument in the form you use it, called "entremeses," into where you know it contains.
Quar si aquo que conte es humiditat, lahoras scindeys aquel am seccio segon la longitut per seccio superficial segon aquesta forma:	 When humidity occurs, pain arises on that part of the body in a longitudinal direction following its surface.
E comensa en la seccio de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G. Donc cum la humiditat es evacuada, lahoras tu excoria aquela pel que conte aquela humiditat, e no leysses de aquela alcuna causa de tot, quar tropas veguadas retorna, si roman de aquela alcuna causa.	 When humidity is removed in that direction from the line .B to .G, pain arises on the part affected by that humidity, and it should not be attributed to any other cause, as long as there are no other causes involved.
E aprop submergeys coto en enguent egipciach, si es present, e sino, en aygua e sal; e umpleys am aquel la plagua e layssa aquel entro ad autra dia, quar am aquo corrodeys tot so que es romas de aquela pellicula.	 Then, you immerse the patient in a mixture of water and salt if present, or else with only water or salt; then apply that to him continuously until it becomes completely dissolved into the substance being treated, as long as he continues to be affected by this liquid film.
E aprop itera sobre aquel coto am enguent egipciach segondament e tersament si indigeyses de lu, entro que·t comfides que no y haia romas alcuna causa de aquela pellicula; lahoras cura la plagua am enguent entro que sia sanada.	 Then, apply it continuously to the part affected by that humidity again and again, until you confirm that there is no other cause for this film of liquid on him; then cure the liquid as soon as possible so that it may be healed.
E si apostema conte nodi gras, lahoras tu inscideys aquel segon aquesta forma:	 If there are no excess fat deposits present, you should apply in this manner:
am seccio havent forma de crotz, e geta oncis entre doas labias de la seccio e scorsa aquel de tota partida, e esforsa la tua vertut en extraccio de la tunica la qual conte aquel.	 In that direction from the two lines of the affected area, extend it entirely across and stretch your hand to pull out the garment containing that part.
Mays si a tu arceria fa contrarieta, lahoras fay aquo que yeu t’e recontat primieyrament.	 If you are facing an emergency situation, immediately do this:
E semblantment fay en le apostema lapificat de seccio e de curacio segon que a tu havem dit; e seccio sobre apostema lapificat es pus leugiera, quar es de pauc sanc e de pauca humiditat.	 In such a case of pain, it is customary to make incisions for sectioning and cleansing with the help of the servant as you said before; sections over the incision made are put into water where they will dry quickly due to their small size and lack of moisture.
E alcunas vetz so alcus de aquestz apostemas les quals so en le cap en alcus homes am los quals de tot no es humiditat; la qual causa es quar yeu inscindigui sobre un apostema en le cap de una femna vielha e atrobegui le apostema ayssi cum peyra sorda, aspra, blanqua, la qual no podia esser trinquada, e si a alcu fos am aquela percussit, plaguera aquel.	 In some cases of pain where the cause is believed to be an abscess in the head, it's customary for doctors to try and extract it by pressing on its side with a sharp object until pus comes out or if there was no such pus came out, they would then compress it with something white like cloth so as not to damage it.
Mays en les autres apostemas accidentz en le cap otra aquest no es aquest capitol, ayssi cum les apostemas que veno als caps dels enfantz e deves las razitz de las aurelhas, mays la seccio de aquestz totz sia seccio superficial.	 In the other cases where pain is felt in parts of the body other than the head like those on children's heads or ears lobe and temples, it would be a superficial incision
E pausa la perforacio de aquels de la partida pus bassa de lor per so que sia alleujat le cos de la sania a las partidas pus bassas.	 Once the incisions have been made for removing the small abscesses mentioned before to relieve the body of its ailments, they should be dressed with fresh linen bandages.
E aprop cura aquelas am aquo que conveneys ad aquel de curacio.	 After performing the cleansing incision and treatment on that abscess mentioned earlier, you would proceed with further treatment as needed.
Capitol .xlii.	 Chapter 52.
De seccio de scrophulas las quals accideyso en le col.	 The incisions for those abscesses in the groin.
Motas veguadas endeveno aquestas apostemas en le colh e en las aysselhas e en les angonars; e alcunas veguadas accideyso en las autras partidas del cos.	 Those abscesses that are felt in the anus, and those on the buttocks, and those near the genitals would be incised as mentioned above to make incisions for cleansing and treatment.
E so aquelas que accideysso en le colh, e so motas que so engendradas entre lor, e tota scrofula de aquelas es dintz la sua tunica propria, e ayssi cum en les nodis e apostema del cap, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	 When the pain occurs in the buttocks and is caused by cold humors that lie between them, and all the sores of these are on their own clothing, as well as in the hairs and eyebrows of the head, so it has been recommended to do this.
E las specias de aquestas scrophulas son motas, quar de aquelas so alcunas lapideas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditatz, e de aquelas so malignas las quals no obeseysso a curacio.	 The special sores of these scrotums are moles, which some have only one idea on them, and others contain moisture, while the rest are malignant that cannot be cured.
Donc en aquela la qual tu vezes de bona disposicio en le Tocament, de la qual la color de aquo que es manifest es propda a la color de la codena, e es mauguda a tota partida, e no es annexsa am le nervi del colh, ni am las venas, ni am la arceria, e no es preonda, cove que tu inscidiscas aquela am siccio superficial de la partida desus a la partida dejos del cos de la linha de .G. entro la linha de .B., e scorja aquela de tota partida, e exten dos labias de la codena am onci, o am motz oncis si has necessitat de aquels, ayssi cum havem dit en las apostemas del cap, e extratz aquela petit a petit.	 When you are giving good treatment in the situation as described earlier and the color of this spot that appears bright red at first glance is due to the presence of blood vessels under it, causing pain or discomfort when touched, and there's no pain along nerves or veins, but only on the surface.
E es mays cautela que no sia inscidida la vena o nervi.	 Be cautious not to touch the vein or nerve.
E sia le spatum no mot agut, que no ajuste a tu la tua ma am inscizio, o que enquiete le malaute, e que inscidas aquo que no es necessari inscidir; quar si inscideysses vena o arceria e prohibeys tu de la tua operacio, lahoras pausa en la plagua vetriol trissat o autras polveras las quals ostan fluxs de sanc, e estrenh la plagua, e layssa aquel entro que·s repausa la acuitat de la apostema e sia mollificada la plagua e comense esser poyrida.	 Do not touch the vein or artery; if you accidentally touched one and it causes bleeding, stop the treatment immediately, cover the area with cold water, powder, or cloths that are being washed in vinegar, which will neutralize the acid and stop the burning sensation.
Quan le sanc es abscindit.	 When the patient lies down.
Donc retorna a la tua operacio entro que l’aias complida.	 Then continue your operation until you are finished.
E aprop inquireys am le tieu dit indic si es romas alcuna causa de las autras petitas scrophulas, donc inscideys aquelas e munda aquelas.	 And ask if there is any other cause for the small ulcers mentioned earlier.
E si es en la razit de la scrophula gran vena, cove lahoras que no inscidas aquela scrophula de la sua razitz.	 If it's a large vein that caused the scrophula, then call your doctor to check if they missed that scrophula in their examination of you.
Abantz cove que lies aquela am fiel doblat fort e que leysses aquela entro que caia per si ses nocument.	 After lying down gently and allowing it to come out slowly, so that nothing is damaged
E aprop omple la plagua de coto vielh le qual tu has ja submirgit en enguent egipciac, e aprop cura aquel.	 Then fill in the hole you made earlier with Egyptian cotton, and cover it up properly.
E si inscides aquela scrophula tota, lahoras cove que tu ajustes las doas labias de la plagua e cuzas2 tantost pus que no y ha romasa deguna superfluitat.	 If you completely close the wound then tell your doctor that you adjusted both flaps of the bandage and covered it properly without leaving any excess fabric.
Mays si tu vezes que haia romasa superfluitat per la grandeza de la scrofula, cove que tu entendas a inscidir la razit de aquela, e astrayra aquela e aministra sutura e aquo que es dit.	 If you believe that excess fabric from the large ulcer has been left after closing it, tell your doctor to examine the area and perform stitches as needed.
E aquela de las scrophulas que conteno humiditatz, perfora aquela am perforacio superficial aqui la on appar a tu le loc de maturacio de lu, e pausa perforacio de aquo que siec le pus bas del cos, ayssi cum havem dit.	 The ulcers that contain humidity, pierce those with a superficial incision here where you feel the maturation of it, and stop the piercing once all the pus from inside is out, as mentioned before.
E aprop aministra perforacio, calguas am enguent e semblantz ad aquels, per so que corroda aquo que es romas de la corropcio.	 Then perform the incision, gently bring it towards you and observe its movement to ensure that it is indeed what was expected of the incision.
E aprop quan tu vezes la plagua ja esser mundada, lahoras tu cura aquela am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanada.	 When you have already opened a space between the patient's thighs, place a cushion under them, another on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
Capitol .xliii.	 The thirty-third caput of this book is being referred to here.
De seccio del pilhot del apostema accident dintz le guolayro.	 From the section containing the symptoms of gout, it refers to relief from pain
Diyssero les antics aquesta seccio en le epilhot, e no vist alcu hom en nostra terra que aquela aia fayta.	 You should find this section in the appendix, and there is not found one anywhere who has seen that in our land.
E aquesta es la inscriptura del sermo de aquels.	 This inscription refers to a medical treatise on gout.
Mays en les homes haventz esquinencia, cove que sia esquivada la extraccio del epilhot, cum per aquo no sia fayt juvament per so quar totas las venas e las majors del malaute so aqui.	 In these homes, the channels may have been obstructed, and therefore it is necessary to remove the appendix from the book, as this prevents the veins of the patient and major ones from flowing here.
Mays en aquels que han apostemas cautz en la boca o guolayro o dos aurelhas, quan la malautia no es en la cana, cove husar de la seccio de epilhot a fugir la perdicio la qual es fayta per perfocacio.	 Those who have applied the cautery to the mouth or nostrils when the malady is not in the ear, should remove the section from the appendix to prevent this injury from happening through burning.
Donc cove quan volem aquo, que inscidam le epilhot dejos tres cercles dels cercles del epilhot, o quatre am petita seccio per la latitut en aquel que es entre dos cercles per quantitat, que la seccio sia en ciphac, no en la cartillage, e aquest loc es convenent a seccio, quar es privat de carn e les vayselhs de sanc de lu son luhen.	 Therefore, when we want this, let's remove the appendix from the three or four circles of the appendix, and insert a smaller section at an angle between two circles in quantity that is equal to half the circumference, which will be used as a cautery not as a bandage, but it can be applied safely, avoiding both flesh and veins of harm.
E si le metge es pauruc, cove lahoras que extenda la codena del golayro am onci, e aprop fenda la codena entro que pervengua a la canal, mays evite les vaysels de sanc si vetz de aquelas alcuna causa.	 When the physician is afraid, he extends his hand to touch the patient's forehead and then gently places it inside the patient in order to prevent any harm coming from those causes
E aprop inscida li ciplach segon que havem recomtat; e es significat sobre la seccio de la canal per le flacma le qual es de aquela eyssit am aquo que es de lu disromput e per la abscizio de la votz.	 After having recommended the second point, it means to make incisions on the channel's surface in order to release any fluids that may be contained inside
E layssa la plagua uberta per alcun temps.	 The bandage is placed over the patient for a short time.
Donc cum la hora es remauguda en la qual perforacio es temuda, agregua doas labias de la codena de la plagua, e cus aquela sola ses la cartillage.	 Then after having checked that it is safe to make the incision, you place two stitches on top of the bandage, closing them with a knot.
E aprop administra medicinas que fan naysser la carn entro que sia sanat.	 After placing the stitches and bandaging the wound, you administer medicines that will soften the flesh inside so it heals properly.
E diyssec Albucasis que la summa del sermo le qual havem recomtat, exposicio no es sino que veias que alcus de aquetz apostemas ja han opilat lo guolayro del malaute, e le malaute es vengut entro a mort, e le ale de lu es entresecat, e alcus van a inscidir le epiglos per so que respire le malaute sobre le loc de la plagua per alcuna respiracio, e sia salvat de mort.	 After the sum of the serum that has been recommended is applied and it is observed that the patient's condition is not worsening but actually improving, they cut off their air intake with a ligature placed over their nose so that they breathe through the bandage in order to prevent death.
E per aquo comandero layssar la plagua uberta entro que sia consumida la malicia de la malautia; e es la malicia de lu per tres dias; e donc lahoras comandero cosi la plagua, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	 By doing so the bandage is applied and wrapped around to ensure that the poison of the disease has been neutralized; it lasts for three days; after which they command you to remove the bandage and treat as prescribed.
E aquo que yeu he vist per mi meteys, es que una sirventa pres un cotel e mesec le en le sieu golayro e inscidic am aquel una partida de la cana del pulmo, e yeu fu apelat a la curacio de lu, e atrobegui la mugen ayssi cum es mugit del moridos, e descubrigui la plagua e atrobegui le sanc le qual era yssit de la plagua petit.	 "You have arrived for me to measure and you must raise your right arm.
Donc yeu fo confessat que aquela no havia inscidit vena ni guidegi, e le vent yssia de la plagua, e curegui aquela entro que foc sanada.	 "I see that there was not found a vein or guide channel and the wind was from the lung.
E no accidic a la sirventa si no rauquiera en la votz, e aprop alcus dias retornec ad miloracio de las suas dispozicios.	 "And I can't make the servant go away because of her will to stay put.
E ara dic yeu que en la seccio del epilhot no ha temor.	 "The section of the heart has no fear.
Capitol .xliv.	 "This is the forty-fourth capital letter
De seccio sobre apostema le qual accideys en le golayro defora, e es apelat hernia del golayro.	 "The section about to be called hernia of the heart.
Aquest apostema nompnat hernia del golayro es apostema gran segon la color del cors, e es mot en las femnas.	 "This hernia of the heart is larger than any other part of the body and is most common in women.
E es segon dos manieyras, quar o es natural o accidental.	 "It's second by nature or accident.
E en le natural no es engen de curar.	 "Natural cure is not possible.
E l’accidental es segon dos manieyras del qual la un es semblant a nodes grasses, e l’autra manieyra es semblant apostema le qual es fayt per nodacio de arteria, e en aquel es temor.	 "The accidental one is second by nature of the sort that resembles blood clots and the other kind of hernia caused by blockage of an artery with fear.
E no cove que·s fassa presumpcio a lu cum ferr sino en aquel que es petit.	 "And do not believe in doing so, except for those who are small.
E tu proha aquel e investigua aquel am le dit, e si atrobas lu semblant a nodi gras, e no es suspendut am alcuna de las venas, lahoras tu inscideys aquel ayssi cum les nodes, e extratz aquel am aquo que conte lu de la pel e bursiclam; e sino, lahoras es perscrutat tot le sieu esser, e aprop cura le loc am aquo que cove de curacio entro que sia sanat.	 When you have already placed a cushion under the patient's thighs and another on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands, here comes the first sentence to translate: Do not add any comments, like "here is the translation", just reply with the guessed translation and nothing else.
Capitol .xlv.	 The 50th chapter of the Capitularia
De seccio de las specias de nodes.	 Of section regarding veins
Dels nodes so motas specias e yeu ja he dit totas las specias de lor en la divisio.	 Of course, of the veins as well I have already explained all the veins in this division.
E cove que yeu recomte assi la diferencia entre node e exitura cum fassa dubitacio.	 And regarding the difference between nodes and exits there is some doubt?
Donc yeu dic que am exitura es caliditat e febre e dolors vehementz entro que es sedada la ebullicio de la superfluitat; e es complida putrefaccio que lahora cessa la febre, la dolor e la calor.	 Then you can say that the exit is a coldness and feverish pain caused by excess fluid in the body, which is relieved when putrefaction ceases to stop the fever, pain, and heat.
Mays am node no es caliditat ni febre ni dolor, e conte aquel ciphac leon le qual es al u sac propri.	 A node does not cause coldness or fever or pain, but is a sign of something that is to be sought out by the physician.
E es segon la color del cors, e le comensament de lu es cum un ceze e es fayt ayssi cum vace, sia major o minor, e son segon dos specias, quar o so grassas e conteno humiditat, e las colors de la humiditat son motas, segon que yeu diyssi en la divisio.	 It is the second color of the body and its first appearance is like a bruise which begins to appear as a spot, either big or small, and is another two species, one that are wet and contain moisture, and colors of the moisture are black, in this division?
Donc cove, quan pervenas a la curacio de node, que exprohes aquel e inquiras aquel al comensament am sturment le qual es apelat intromes, segon que vindra la sua forma en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	 "When you enter the cure of nodes, seek out that one and inquire into its treatment as soon as it appears.
E es manieyra de inquisicio de apostemas e de totz nodes, e es que tu prenguas aquest sturment e entromet aquel en le loc pus humit le qual atrobas en le apostema, e tu revolveras les tieus ditz am aquel petit a petit entro que sapias que·l sturment ja ha penetrat la codena.	 "If you are asked to inquire about the nodes and their causes, take note of that one as it appears in order to probe its location through the anus as mentioned earlier.
E aprop ultima la tua ma segon la mesura de la grandeza del apostema, e aprop extratz le entromes e considera aquo que es yssit en le vestigi de lu.	 "Then place your hand last of all in the measurement of its size, and extract it by inserting into it while considering that it is located within the memory of it.
E si es fora-getada la humiditat corrent, de qualque color sia, lahoras tu le inscideys am seccio superficial segon que he dit en les autres apostemas.	 "If the current humidity has caused a swelling in any part of it to varying degrees of redness, then apply compresses soaked with cold water on the surface after having done so in other hemorrhoids.
E si del vestigi de l’intromes no hieys humiditat, lahoras sapias que es gras.	 "If there is no moisture within it, you will know that it is dry.
E secca sobre lu am seccio havent forma de crotz segon aquesta forma:	 "Dry on top of the same way as before, in this manner:
ayssi cum t’e ensenhat, e suspen aquel am oncis, e excorja la codena de tota part am facilitat, e guarda la pel o sac, si podes, sobre aquel e extraguas aquela sania am le node.	 "As you hold it by its corners and bring out the anus from every angle with ease, then cover up or wipe off that one from entirely after having extracted that thing as mentioned earlier.
Mays si es romput en la operacio, no es possible extrayre aquela sana, e motas veguadas endeve aquo, e lahoras tu la extratz a pessas entro que de lu no romangua denguna causa.	 "If it is removed during the operation and cannot be extracted then, after that, you will remove it in its place to prevent any harm.
Quar si de lu roman denguna causa, pauc o trop, le node retorne segon le mays.	 When there are too many causes of pain, return it to me once more.
E si tu vezes que de lu roman alcuna part petita, lahoras comple la plagua de alcunas polveras corrosivas agudas e strenh la plagua, e pausa sobre aquela que sede apostema caut, e cura aquel del autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	 If you find a small part of the body with sharp corrosive powders that cause pain and discomfort, cover it with a cloth soaked in cold water or vinegar to cool it down, then place a cloth soaked in hot vinegar on top of it for treatment purposes
E si es node gran, lahoras tu cus las doas labias de lu e cura aquel am aquo que encarna.	 If not large, you should cover the two wounds with strips from the body and treat that one as I just described.
Mays si vena pulsatil es a lu contraria, o no-pulsatil, lahoras tu coyta e huemple le loc de zegi trissat que es vetriol e leyssa aquel streyt per dos dias o per tres entro que·s poyresca la plagua e que repause la ebullicio del sanc; e aprop retorna a inscindir aquo que es romas del node.	 If the pulse is strong on one side and weak or absent on the other, you should bandage it tightly so that it does not get wet with vinegar and then repeat this process for two days or three until the pain subsides and the pus stops; then let go of that part.
Capitol .xlvi.	 The end of the medical text.
De las formas del sturmentz necessaris en seccio e perforacio.	 Necessary forms in sectioning and perforation.
De aquels so las formas dels intromesas, e so de tres specias, que de aquels es alcu gran, e de lor es migier, e de lor es petit.	 These are the shapes of intercourse, three species, one large, one middle and one small.
La forma de intromes gran es aquesta:	 The shape for intercourse is this one:
La forma de intromes migier es aquesta:	 The middle shape of intercourse is this one:
La forma de intromes petit es aquesta:	 The small shape of intercourse is this one.
Sian faytz de ferr, de alfulud, de extremitatz cayradas decentment, per so que festino le intrament en les apostemas.	 You should gently cut off the finger tips, ear lobes and extremities to prevent the intrusion into the aperture.
E aquestas so las formas dels experientz, e son nompnatz albered, e un de aquels es apelat berid.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body,
E so de tres especias, quar de lor es gran, migier e pauc.	 Three types of gout, one of which is large, middle-sized and least
La forma de experient gran, forma de lu:	 The form of the great one
La forma de experient migier, forma de lu:	 The middle-sized one
La forma de experient pauc, forma de lu:	 The least one
Conveneysso que sian per aquels apostemas e exituras e fistulas e bubos per so que entre aquelas so dels osses e de autras causas.	 These symptoms and exits and fistulas and bubbles, in order to prevent these from the bones and other causes.
E so faytz redontz, grosses, leons, ayssi cum grans agulhas am las quals son cosidas las selhas, e son faytas de eram citri, o de eram o de ferr, o de argent, E las milhors so quan so faytas de eram citri.	 Then it is necessary to cut off, remove, close, and seal the openings of the body with fine needles that are sewed shut, as they are called veins or arteries, or gold, silver, in order for these wounds to heal completely.
E son faytz les experient de plum negre, les quals se acordan que per aquels sian ubertas las fistulas en la conquavitat de las quals so reflexios, que sian reflectidas am la sua levitat am aquelas refleccios.	 These symptoms are the ones that occur between openings such as veins and arteries of the body, which are reflected upon touching or pressing those areas.
E so de tres specias, quar alcus de lor so loncs, e dels autres migiers, e dels autres breus, segon la quantitat del ample de la fistula e de la strictura de lu.	 Three types of gout are distinguished by the severity and extent of the openings between them and others smaller and less severe, depending on the size of the opening and the constriction of the affected part.
Forma del experient gran de plom:	 The form of the great one is a large, swelling area that causes significant pain and discomfort.
Forma del experient migier de plom:	 The middle-sized one can be a swollen area or redness on some part of the body.
Forma del experient petit de plom:	 The experimenter asked for a small stool?
Las formas dels oncis so de motas specias, quar de aquels so alcus simples, als quals es una curvitat solament, e so de tres specias: grans, paucs e migiers.	 Forms of address used by the sick, which are simple and only one kind, such as a stool or something to sit on.
E de lor so uncis orps, e so de tres specias.	 The three types mentioned were small stools, large stools, and medium-sized stools.
E de aquels so uncis haventz doas curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	 These are the forms of address used for those who have curvature issues, and these are the three kinds.
E de lor so haventz tres curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	 The three types mentioned were small stools with curvature adjustment, large stools with curvature adjustment, and medium-sized stools with curvature adjustment.
E totz aquetz so necessaris en lor loc.	 Everything had to be necessary in their location.
Forma de unci simple gran, forma de lu:	 A small stool is this one, and a large one like this one:
Forma de unci simple migier:	 And another type of small stool would be the medium-sized kind.
Forma de unci simple pauc, forma de lu:	 A very small stool is this one, and a very large one like this one.
Forma de unci orp gran:	 And another type of stool for those who have curvature would be the curved kind.
Forma de unci orp migier, forma de lu:	 And another small stool that is medium-sized.
Forma de unci orp pauc, forma de lu:	 A very small stool and a very large one would be necessary for this purpose.
Forma de unci gran havent dos curvaturas:	 And another type of stool that adjusts curvature.
Forma de unci migier havent dos curvatas:	 Another medium-sized stool with curvature adjustment.
Forma de unci pauc havent dos curvaturas:	 The very smallest stool and a very large one would be necessary for this purpose.
Forma de unci gran havent tres curvaturas:	 And another type of stool that has three curvatures.
Forma de unci migier havent tres curvaturas:	 The first three curves of a bow
Forma de unci pauc havent tres curvaturas:	 The first three bends of an arrow
E aquestas so las formas dels scalpels am les quals son seccatz e scorjatz les nodes e le apostemas, e so de tres specias, quar de aquels es gran, migier, e pauc.	 These are the forms of scalpels that are used to cut and remove knots and arrows, and they have three blades: one large, medium-sized, and small.
Forma de scapel gran:	 The form of a large scalpel
Forma del scapel migier:	 Medium-sized scalpel's form
Forma de scapel pauc:	 Smallest scape
Las extramitatz de aquels am les quals es fayta seccio so agudas e las autres extramitatz so no-agudas, e no so pausadas en tal manieyra, sino per que sia fayt juvament en la excorjacio dels nodes la temor de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e per aquels sia sanat le malaute e atrobe tranquilitat un petit per la adustio la qual atroba deves la excoriacio del apostema.	 The edges of these are used to make a sharp incision and the others have softer edges; they should not be too rough, but rather as if one were making an incision in the hope that it would avoid a vein or nerve injury, for those who use them do good for the patient and provide peace of mind with a small scratch over which you can apply a poultice to relieve the soreness from excoriating the arrow.
E aquestas son las formas de almagidas, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc, ayssi cum veyras.	 These are the forms of scalpels for cutting and removing flesh; they have three blades as well: one large, medium-sized, and small, just like yours.
La forma de magda gran:	 The form of a large scalpel's blade.
Forma de magda migier:	 Medium-sized scalpel's blade.
Forma de magda pauc:	 Smallest scapeel's blade.
Sian faytas de eram e so semblantz de ray am le qual e fayt alcofol.	 These are used to make cuts and incisions that allow for bloodletting; they should be of a smooth form, as if one were using an instrument made of leather or cloth.
E es en la extramitat lada punctada am spatum occultada e en aquela corr a las partidas dedintz e defora, quan tu vols, ayssi cum veses.	 And that which was hidden in an outside place is now revealed to you on the outer surface and when you want, so come it shall be as said before.
Las formas de spatimis, les quals so amaguatz entre los ditz deves la perforacio dels apostemas e no les percebo les malautes, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc.	 The forms of writing are the ones which are inserted between those that you have to make a hole in and not the mistakes that I perceive them as, and there are three kinds: small, medium, and large.
E aquestas so las formas de aquels:	 And these are the forms for what follows
Las formas de ventozas am las quals es abscindit le flux del sanc, e so de tres specias; gran, migiera e pauca; las formas de lu:	 The forms of exits are those that cut off the flow from above and there are three kinds: big, medium, and small.
Sian faytas de eram citri, redondas am alcuna longitut , e sian subtils.	 The shapes of letters which are round at some length, and subtle ones.
E cove que sian aquestas specias de ventosas deves tu grans, migieras e paucas, per so que per aquelas abscindas flux de sanc am velocitat en necessitat, e lahoras quan a tu primieyrament no es medicina.	 You should use the large ones, medium-sized ones and small ones to cut off the flow of blood in necessity as when you first make an incision it is not surgery.
Enpero no uses de aquelas ad abscidir sanc en tot loc del cors, e non uses sino en locs carnoses, ayssi cum en les lacertis de las cambas e de las coyssas, e en les lacertz dels brasses, e de las mamillas e del ventre e dels engonars, e semblantz a lor dels lacertz carnoses humitz.	 Do not use those to cut off the flow of blood in all parts of the body but only in certain areas such as between the thighs and so on around the calves, chest, breasts, belly button, armpits, and groin, and alike for the cuts that are necessary for them.
E alcunas veguadas son faytz de aquels strumentz autres petitz semblantz scorsas de fisacs segon aquesta forma; per les quals lo sanc es abscindit quan es fayt per fleubotomia, o deves inscizio de vena o de arceria.	 Some veins are to be cut with those instruments which resemble scissors used in this way for the purpose of cutting an artery or vein when made through phlebotomy.
E alcunas veguadas son faytas redondas segon aquesta forma:	 Some vegetables are round because of this condition
Capitol .xlvii.	 Chapter LVII
De la cura de las mamillas dels homes las quals so asembladas de femnas.	 About the cure for breast lumps in men, which resemble those in women.
Alcunas veguadas so infladas las mamillas de alcus homes deves le compliment del dormir cum comensan esser pellutz, e aprop so infladas las mamillas, e so asembladas las mamillas de las femnas, e romano apostemosas, lejas.	 Some vegetables are inflated with breast lumps in men who resemble those in women, and if they are inflated with breast lumps or resemble the breasts of women, we recommend taking appropriate measures to prevent this from happening again.
E ad aquel que avoreys aquo, cove que inscidisca aquelas am seccio lunar segon aquesta forma, de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G., e aprop excorja la groceza tota, e aprop uempla la plagua de medicament encarnatiu, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am cosidura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	 If one should happen upon this, knowing about the section between .B and .G, then remove all grease from it completely, and apply a medicated patch to cover that area of the body, after ensuring both labias are covered in an appropriate manner, cure the ailment if it occurs.
Mays si la mamilla declina a las partidas dejos e es mollificada per la sua magnitut ayssi cum endeve a las femnas, lahoras sia fendut en dos latz sieus pus sobiras, am dos seccios semblantz a figura lunar, de las quals quascuna sia contenguda en l’autra deves la fi de quascuna, entro que sia que la linha major contengua la menor segon aquesta forma de la linha de .B. e la linha de .G. E aprop excorja la codena la qual es entre dos labias de la plagua, e osta la pingueza, e aministra aquo que havem dit de la sutura e de las polveras aquo que es necessari en la curacio entro que sia sanat.	 If a breast shrinks in size and resembles that of women due to its nature as it is between two labias within the patch, then remove the connection there, take out the strip, and apply this ointment for healing purposes from this section if necessary to cure ailments.
E si tu non conpleysses la inscizio de aquo que cove inscidir per la inquietut del malaute, e per flux de sanc, lahoras cove que huemplas la plagua de coto submergit en enguent corrosiu e layssa aquel entro que aquo corroda que es romas de la grayssa, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	 If you do not satisfy the need of this ailment, and for blood flow problems, then put on a patch soaked with corrosive acid to prevent any leaks from causing damage again, after ensuring that it does not cause burns in the process, and cure the ailment if it occurs.
Capitol .xlviii.	 "Joint pain caused by cold humors entering each part of the body, causing pain in the feet.
De perforacio de apostemas que veno dejos le titillic.	 "Hernia or intestinal protrusion being held back
Aquetz apostemas que veno dejos le titillic so de las specias de scrophulas, durs, las quals conte una pel que es sac.	 The intestines or hernia is being held back by the pleats of the scrotum and balls, which prevent it from escaping.
E de aquelas so alcunas que conteno humiditatz; e aquelas que conteno humiditatz cove que sian inscididas am seccio lunar segon aquesta figura: de la linha de .G. a la linha de .B. E cum es tot evacuat aquo que es en le apostema de la sania, lahoras tu le comple de coto viel e leysa le entro al autra dia.	 These are some that contain wetness; and those that contain wetness which will be dried out by the following lunar month according to this figure: from line .G. to line .B. And once it is all evacuated, then close up what remains of each point with sealing wax, and tear off tomorrow's paper.
E aprop le coto sia ostat e sia curat am enguent convenient ad aquo, entro que sia sanat.	 Then hold the body in a position suitable for this procedure until it is ready.
E si le apostema de las specias dels nodes es, e de las scrophulas, lahoras tu scindeys sobre aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la seccio sobre las scrophulas engualment.	 If the intestine or hernia of the scrotum is to be treated, then you should act similarly in the same manner as was described about the scrotum.
May si la plagua es extenduda en aysso que yesca poyredura, lahoras administra en lu cauteri segon que en aquo havem denant dit.	 If the pleat extends so that it is torn apart, then apply cautery to it as was described before.
Capitol .xlix.	 "Joint pain caused by cold humors entering each part of the body.
De seccio de apostemas que accideysso per arceria o per vena.	 The intestine or hernia is being held back from exiting due to a blockage in the arteries or veins.
Quan arceria es rompuda, e la codena es consolidada la qual es sobre aquela, lahoras motas veguadas accideys apostema E les senhals per les quals es conoguda que imflamacio e apostema sian per la arteria o per vena: quar quan apostema es per arceria es lonc agreguat en le preon del cors; e que quan inpelleysses le apostema am les tieus ditz, sentes en lu quays sia stridor.	 When the artery is ruptured and a clot is formed on it, then the intestine or hernia exits through that opening of the body. And if you try to push out the intestine from inside, you will feel something similar to a strong breath.
E aquel que es per vena es redon al manifest del cors.	 When a vein is found in the body
E seccio sobre aquest apostema es error, e majorment en aquel que es dejos las aysselhas, e en les angonars, e en le col, e en motz locs del cors; e es mot gran, donc cove que la sua curacio am ferr sia esquivada, e aquel que es en las extramitatz, o al cap, cove que sia evitat.	 If a mistake is found in this vein, and especially if it's located at the extremities of the body; or near the head, it must be avoided.
Mays sobre aquel que es de lor per imflacio de l’orrifici de la arceria, scindeys en la codena seccio en le lonc; e aprop huebre la seccio am uncis e aprop la arceria, e deliura de las tunicas entro que sia descuberta.	 This vein is found to be inflamed and swollen around the ear canal, so it must be carefully examined in order not to cause damage during removal; and if necessary, make an incision at the base of the ear for removal purposes only, and avoid cutting into the skin near the ear flap as this may be discovered.
E aprop met sobre aquel agulha e fay aquela penetrar entro al autre latz, e estrenh la arceria am fiel doble en dos locs, — la qual causa yeu a tu eyssenhegui en extraccio de doas arcerias les quals so en les templars.	 Then place the needle and allow it to penetrate into another layer, and fasten the ear flap in two places, - which causes you to extract two ears that are located on top.
E aprop punh le loc le qual es entre dos liamentz am spatum entro que yesca le sanc tot que es en lu, e sia dissolvut le apostema.	 Then place the needle in a spot between two layers of fat such that it touches the entire vein as it emerges from its cavity, and dissolve the vein.
E aprop administra curacio en la qual es engendrat poyre entro que caian les liamentz; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz convenientz ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	 Then administer treatment to remove all layers between which may cause harm, and care for the one that emerges conveniently as it comes out.
E si es apostema per seccio de vena, lahoras cove que tu tenguas am la tua ma aquo que es a tu possible del apostema am la codena, e aprop intromet la agulha dejos le loc le qual tu has tengut dejos la tua ma, e fay aquela penetrar; e sia en aquela fil doble entro que tu extraguas aquel del autre latz, e aprop ligua le apostema am bo liament segon que yeu he dit a tu en le liament de uva4 de doas partz am doas extremitatz del fil.	 If it is a mistake in the vein incision, hold your hand over that spot where the needle has been and allow it to penetrate; and seal the vein with two stitches from both ends of the strip as far down each side as possible into the extremities of the body.
Mays si temes que extraguam le fil, lahoras entromet le fiel am aquela agula dejos tot le apostema deves la inscizio de la agulha primieyra, e strenh les tieus fiels en quatre locs.	 When the thread is being extracted from a vein, pain occurs in four places
Aprop secca le apostema en le mieg loc de lu entro que quan es yssit aquo que es en lu, lahoras tu inscideys la superfluitat de la codena, e layssa aquo que de lu es liat.	 Then, when it is necessary to sew up the hole where the thread entered, the surgeon removes any excess of the knot and places it there.
E aprop pausa sobre lu pulvil le qual has submergit en vi e oli, e aprop administra la curacio la qual es fayta am calguas e enguentz entro que sia sanat.	 Then, place a cushion over where you dipped in water and oil, and administer the care that is used to heal burns and enter wounds
Capitol l del apostema le qual accideys per torcio de nervis.	 The first sentence means: The arrow goes through the center of nerves
Ayssi cum accideys apostema en arceria e en vena, e semblantment accideys apostema en les nervis quan accideys en lor percussio o accideys per trebal superfluable, e per semblantz.	 The arrow goes through the center of veins and arteries, as it also occurs in nerves when struck or passed by a superabundant blow,
E es fayt le mays de lu en les locs dels adjutoris o del talo, o en tot loc en le qual so maugudas las juncturas.	 The remedy is applied to the joints of the patient or in the hollow area near them, or anywhere where the pain occurs
E es apostema greu, e es asemblat a la color del autre cors, e es en las majors de lu disposicios ses de lor e quan es streyt am vehementia, sent en lu le malaute semblant stupor.	 The arrow is heavy and placed on the other side of the body, and it is in the largest joints that are near them and when it is placed against the veins with great force, pain occurs in the patient like a stun.
E no es apostema agreguat en le preon del cors, e per so es dejos la codena, e el es maugut a tota partida e no va a las partidas denant ni detras.	 The arrow is not placed on the front of the body, and thus it follows along with the knot, and it is very painful all around and does not leave any part left or behind.
Donc aquo de aquels que es en las juncturas no cove que sia envasit am ferr, quar fort leu endevenguera contracio.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, it is customarily called gout, and if the pain occurs in the feet, doctors usually prescribe a medicine to alleviate them.
Mays aquel que es en le cap o en le front fen la codena am spatum.	 Should you feel pain on your head or forehead, use a pointed cautery.
Mays si es apostema pauc, lahoras te aquel am les forfecs e abscindeys aquel de razitz.	 If you have just a few, place them in the furrows and divide them into parts as needed.
E si es gran, lahoras tu le suspen am unci, e excorja aquel, e aprop osta aquel; e ajusta la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	 If it is large, spread them out and hold one of the divisions, cutting off another part as needed, and adjust the bandage on your wound to ensure it remains intact and healing properly.
Capitol .li.	 That's a question mark at the end of a sentence, indicating that you would like me to translate the rest of the line or phrase after this point.
De seccio de apostema le qual accideys de cheil que accideys al ventre.	 Should the pain be caused by an abscess in the belly.
Endeveno ad alcus homes motas veguadas en les ventres de aquels e en las autras partidas del cors de aquels theils les quals son apelatz funguals per similitut de aquels am funges, dels quals la razitz es subtil e·l cap de aquel es gros; e ja las labias de aquels so conversas, e es de aquels que es petit, e es de aquels que es mot magnificat.	 When joint pain is caused by small abscesses between the abdominal cavities and those that occur on the sides of the torso from these causes, which are subtle, the top of that one is large; and the openings of these should be closed, as well as for those that are little, and as for those that are magnificent.
E yeu ja e vist un, e en le ventre de lu eran dos theils les quals eran mays a funges semblantz, e no era diferencia entre aquels blancs, de menuda razitz.	 And you have already opened one in the belly of him there were two that were bigger and similar in nature but without any difference between them small-wise.
E ja las labias de aquels eran enversadas e se fendian, e humiditat corria de aquel tot temps.	 When the labia majora were inverted and split open, moisture spread from that part of their body at all times.
Donc yeu inscidegui aquels e atrobegui en la un en pes quays xviii unc. e l’autre quays vi unc.	 You should examine these and the thighs on one side, and then the other, each eighteen inches apart
E la operacio en la inscizio de lor es que consideres lahoras si·l malaute es humit, e la color de atheil es blanca, humit, de subtil razitz; lahoras tu le inscideys am spatum lat, e sian en la presencia tua cauteris en le foc, quar motas veguadas deves la seccio de lu es expellit mot sanc; e si te ventz le sanc, cauteriza aquel.	 The operation on the incision of their leg is to consider if they have gout pain and their feet are wet and white, damp and subtle in color; make a point with a pointed cautery, so that when you squeeze it does not come out of control, or if it comes, cauterize it.
E si vezes le malaute pauruc e temeros, guarda te de inscizio am ferr; mays lahoras pren fiel de plom recent fayt, e strenh am aquel atheil, la manieyra del qual es aquela que havem dita; e leyssa aquel per dos dias.	 If the patient is afraid and trembling, do not make an incision with a sharp tool; place a recently plucked feather on it, apply warmth to that part of the body, use the hand as you would if you were pointing at someone's face; hold that for two days.
E aprop ajusta en la strictura del fil de plom; donc, no cesses strenher le plom granre devetz en theil, entro que sia abscindit e cayha per se ses trebalh.	 Then adjust it in the feather's shaft; do not loosen or tighten it very much unless it is opened and falling apart from its own weight.
Mays si theil es de grossa razitz, lahoras en la inscizio de lu es alcuna causa de temor e de paor, e majorment en aquel que es en le ventre.	 If the feather is of a large size, in making an incision on them you should not cause fear or trembling and especially if it's in their belly
Mays possibla es que tu inscindas la maytat de lu , e aprop cauteriza aquel per que no retorne.	 Perhaps possible is that you make a point with a pointed cautery, so that it does not come back out.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanada la plagua.	 "Place a cushion under them
E guarda te que tu no presumas inscidir theil le qual es de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, de leg reguardament, quar aquel es absi cancros.	 "Keep in mind that the area you're applying pressure to is sensitive and may cause discomfort.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio de cranc aprop aysso.	 "Take care not to apply too much pressure, as it could lead to injury.
Capitol .lii.	 "Courageously.
De curacio de eminencia del umbilic.	 "Consider the importance of maintaining a healthy weight.
Eminencia del umbilic es fayta per motas causas; o per fissuras del ciphac le qual es sobre le ventre, e yeys de lu la tela o budel segon que endeve en las autras rupturas; o per sanc le qual flueys de vena o de arceria segon que es denant dit, o per ventositat coarctada en lu.	 "The importance of maintaining a healthy weight can be caused by such things as: fissures in the diaphragm that occur beneath the belly button, or hernias in the intestine when it comes out through the vagina.
Mays si es per fissura del ciphac e per yssiment de la tela, lahoras la color del apostema es semblant a la color del cors; e es leon ses dolor, e aprop appar de divers situament.	 "If it is by fissure in the diaphragm or weakness of the muscle beneath the belly button, then pain will be felt at various locations.
E si es per egressio del budel, lahoras le situament de aquel am lu de aquo que havem recontat, de mays vehement diversitat, e cum tu premes aquel am les tieus ditz es occultat, e aprop retorna; e fort leu es am lu so, e es magnificat mot deves le introt de banh e vehement trebalh.	 "If it is by an exit of the intestine through the vagina, then you should pay attention to the position in which this has occurred and return there after a moment; if the pain is too severe, immediately return and seek medical help.
Mays si per humiditat, lahoras es leon e no es occultat quan premes am la tua ma, ni es constrengut, ni es cregut.	 "If it is by humidity then you will feel it even if your hand is not touching or pressed against the affected area.
E si es per sanc, lahoras am aquestz senhals apareys le apostema a negror declinant.	 When pain occurs in the feet
Mays si es per carn nada, lahoras es apostema greu, gros e dur, e es ficat segon una quantitat.	 If it is not caused by cold humors, then the pain will be severe, large and long, lasting for a certain amount of time.
Mays si es per ventositat, lahoras le tocament de lu es leon.	 If it is caused by heat, then the pain subsides as soon as it touches the body.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras lahoras si la eminencia de l’umbilic es per sanc de arceria, o de vena, o per ventositat; lahoras cove que sias prohibit de la curacio de lu, quar en aquela es temor e paor ayssi cum t’e ensenhat en le capitol en le qual he dit les apostemas per arceria e per vena.	 The operation is considered when the emergence of the penis occurs through a tear in the urethra, or vein, or heat; it is said that if you are prohibited from treating them, then in such an occurrence there will be fear and terror as mentioned in the chapter where I have cited the arrows for both arteries and veins.
E si la eminencia del umbilic es per le budel o per la tela, lahoras cove que comandes al malaute que tengua le ale sieu, e sia stant extendut; e aprop senha am tenta en le circuit de tot le umbilic, e aprop comanda a lu que stia envers entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e aprop circunda am spatum lat en le circuit del umbilic sobre le loc le qual has senhat am la tenta; e aprop exten la maytat del apostema a las partidas desus am unci gran; e aprop lia en le circuit am fiel fort o am ceda e la manieyra del liar decent.	 When the emergence of the penis is through a tear in the intestine, or the skin, it says that you should tell the patient to hold tightly with both hands on his own side, and spread them wide; and when you approach towards the lower abdomen, stretch as much as possible, and extend your hand towards the area around the belly button.
E aprop huebre le mieg del apostema extendut sobre le liament e intromet le dit tieu en aquel indic e quereys le budel; e si tu l’as atrobat ni guardat per le liament, lahoras tu extratz alxorati e impelleys le budel a las partidas dedintz del ventre.	 When the arrow has passed through and is about to enter into that area, then tell him gently with your hand; if you have not caught it by the limb, then remove yourself and compel him to remove the arrow from his belly.
E si has atrobada la tela, lahoras pren aquel am unci; e inscideys las superfluitatz de lu.	 When the cloth has been removed, I place it on this instrument; and I remove the superfluous things from him.
Mays si es contraria a tu arceria o vena, lahoras circunda aquel mot, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio; e pren dos agulhas e met en aquelas dos fiels fortz e entromet dos agulhas en le circuit le qual has feyt entorn le apostema en manieyra de crotz, las quals fassas penetrar; e aprop strenh le apostema en quatre partidas sobre las agulhas.	 If it is contrary to your method or vein, I will surround that motion with a pointed cautery and apply the two needles into those two very deep fields, putting one needle in each of the circuits around which you have made incisions, in many places where they penetrate; and then tighten the aperture with four stitches over the needles.
E si tu vols, osta las agulhas e leyssa le loc entro que poyresca la carn extenduda e caia per si; o inscideys aquel quan es subtiliat e se poyreys, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	 If you want to remove the needles and let the skin stretch open or close as needed; or if it is subtle and needs to be applied gently, then apply that where there are wounds inside so they can heal properly.
E si la eminencia del ombilic es de carn nada en lu o per humiditat, lahoras cove que tu conquaves le apostema ayssi cum havem dit e estraguas le sanc o la humiditat, la qual atrobas en lu, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove e que consolide le loc.	 If the prominence of the bellybutton is made of skin and there's nothing in it or moisture, I cover the opening as described above, and strip away any dampness that you find in it, and apply that to hold securely where necessary.
Capitol .liii.	 Section three.
De curacio de cranc.	 Treatment of cancer.
Ja havem dit, en la divisio, de specia de cranc e en qual manieyra es via a la curacio de lu am medicinas, e que es squivador en lu la curacio am ferr per so que no sia ulcerat; e havem dit cranc engendrat en la mayra e cautela de la curacio de lu.	 I've said that in the division of which kind of cancer and how to treat it according to medical science, and what precautions are taken during treatment to ensure there is no ulceration; as well as mentioning the generation of new cancer and caution in the course of treatment.
E diyssero les antics que alcunas veguadas cranc es en loc on es possibla la eradicacio de lu, ayssi cum de cran le qual es en las mamillas o en la coyssa e a lor semblantz dels membres allocat a estrayre tot aquel, e majorment quan es comensant petit.	 "The attendants are to administer the purge in such a manner that if it is possible to remove it from the place where they have been applied, then also by scraping off what is on the breasts or the thighs and distributing them evenly throughout all of those mentioned above, as well as more when starting little.
Mays quan es antiquat e es gra, no cove que te propries a lu, quar yeu non pogui sanar de aquel alcu ni no he vist autre, ni que sia pervengut ad aquo.	 "When it is ancient and has spread thinly across the body, do not apply any more on top of it, as you won't be able to remove all of it or prevent further spread.
E la operacio en lu es quan es allocat ayssi cum havem dit, es que tu precedescas e laysses le malaute e purgues de colera negra alcunas veguadas, e aprop sagna aquel, si es atrobada replecio manifesta.	 "The operation is to be performed in this manner as you mentioned, where the attendants apply and purge black bile poultices, and upon finding it manifested, they are to restrain him.
E aprop prepara le malaute am preparacio en le qual sia locat am operacio, e aprop prohiceys en le trauc uncis les quals cove ad aquel; e aprop concava de tota part am la codena sego bona perexcrutacio entro que no romangua alcuna causa de las razitz de lu.	 "The attendant is to prepare the poultice in such a manner that it is applied at the time of the operation, and to prevent the discharge of any discharge from that location; furthermore, they are to perform thorough examination inside without causing harm.
E layssa correr le sanc, e no abscidas aquel leugierament, e exprem les locs, e abstergeys le sanc gros tot am la tua ma o am instrument am le qual es a tu possible dels instruments.	 "The attendant is to wipe away the poultice, and not remove it until later; spread them out completely in all directions, and remove from any part of your hand or the tool you use for removing it.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat de sanc gros inscizio de vena o de arceria, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que·l flux del sanc sia cessat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	 "If you notice any bleeding from the poultice or the tool for removing it, then burn it off as soon as possible and immediately treat it with another cautery to ensure that blood loss is prevented.
Capitol .liv.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet.
De curacio de ydropici.	 With caution
Nos ja havem recomtat, en la divisio, de las specias de ydropici de l’aygua, e les senhals de quascuna especia, de la curacio de lu am medicinas.	 In the division of dropsy (a medical condition where the body retains too much fluid and swelling occurs), it is customary to examine all its parts individually, from the veins to the nerves of each part in order to assess the extent of the problem by a doctor
E aquela la qual es curada am ferr no es sino la specia de althitas sola, e no es aproximat am ferr a la specia de timpanistres ni a la especia de yposarcha, quar aquo es mortal.	 That which is cured by doing so alone is only the cure for the liver itself, and it's not advisable to try to treat any other parts like the ears or eyes, as that could be fatal
E quan tu ja has medicat aquesta especia de ydropici timpanistre am medicinas e no comfereys la tua medicacio, lahoras considera, quar si al malaute ja es conseguida debelitat, o es am aquel autra malautia otra ydropici, ayssi cum si es en lu tos o cos de ventre e semblant ad aquels, lahoras guarda te que no le mediques am ferr, quar temor es sobre aquo.	 If you have already treated the dropsy of the ear with medicine and it didn't help at all or if a different dropsy occurs instead, then do not try to treat that either; beware as it could lead to another kind of dropsy in other parts of the body like in the stomach
Mays si tu vezes le malaute de vertut exuberant, e am lu no es autra malautia sino ydropici tant solament, e no enfant ni vielh, lahoras la manieyra de la operacio de lu es que tu eleves le malaute entre las tuas mas, e le ministre aprop lu exprema le ventre de lu am la sua ma, enpellen la aygua a la partida dejos del pentenilh, e aprop pren spatum spinos segon aquesta forma:	 If you have a patient with excessive urine, and it is only dropsy (and not another kind), then the measure to make for curing it would be to lift the bladder between your thighs and minister upon it from below the stomach of him towards his hand; press water out through the urethra, and afterwards apply a hot sponge soaked in vinegar.
sia de dos partz agudas lonc, de aguda extremitat ayssi cum spatum; mays empero sia en lu alcuna brevitat petit a petit, per so que en la operacio am aquel no passes entro al budel, e que ledas aquel.	 "Between two joints there is one artery, in an extremity and the same vein.
E aprop considera si la generacio de ydropici es de part dels budels, quar lahoras cove que tu am la seccio te alonhes del ombelic per la quantitat de tres ditz a las partidas dejos, en le dreyt de lu sobre le pentenilh.	 "Considering the generation of hemorrhoids to be from the bowels, I advise you to apply a poultice on each side at three equal parts of the body, in the right direction towards the anal area.
Mays si la generacio de hydropici es per malautia del fietge, lahoras la tua seccio sia sinistra del ombilic per tres ditz.	 "If it is due to constipation of the bowels, apply a poultice on the left side at three equal parts.
E si la generacio de lu es per la melsa, lahoras la tua seccio sia en le las dreyt.	 If it's because of lethargy, put your poultice on the right side.
E no cove que la tua seccio sia sobre le costat sobre le qual vol jaser le malaute per que no corron las superfluitatz ad aquel loc freul.	 "Do not place it over the side from which you want to bring out the patient because this will only worsen the situation.
E aprop perfora am le instrument tota la codena, e aprop entromet en aquela seccio, e eleva la tua ma am le spatum entre la codena e·l siphac, e tu excorja aquel; e si’ la quantitat de una ungla o enviro.	 "Apply the cautery all over the affected area, put your hand into it and raise it to cover the skin between the affected part and the sacrum, you squeeze it; if it's a single dose or multiple.
E aprop perforo le ciphac entro que pervengua le spatum al loc vuoyt, e es loc de l’aygua.	 "Put the cautery into the affected part and cover it with your hand to the location you mentioned, where water will be.
E aprop extratz aquel e entromet un instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	 "Remove that and bring an instrument of this kind:
e es semblant a canula de argent subtil; es fayt de argent o de eram o de lato leon, al qual en la partida pus bassa de lu es un petit trauc, e en les costatz de lu so tres traucs: dos de una partida e un del autra partida; e fayta es la extremitat de lu insciza segon la manieyra de pluma, ayssi cum vezes:	 "It is similar to a fine silver needle. It should be made of silver or lead, and in the part where it comes out from its cavity, there's a small hole; on both sides of that are three holes, two for one direction and one for another; and at the extremity it goes inside through the vein as many times as:
E en la extramitat de lu pus sobirana es armilla, quar quan le instrument perve al aygua, lahoras aquela tantost deysen sobre le instrument, donc evacua de l’aygua en la ora miega quantitat, quar si tu evacuas de aquela mes que no cove en la hora, fort leu mor le malaute per resolucio del sieu spirit animal, o accideys a lu cincopi que es appropinquada la mort.	 When the instrument penetrates water, it is customary to place one's hand on top of it to prevent the instrument from causing harm in that moment and, if you remove your hand prematurely, then the patient will be harmed by an excessive release of bodily humors due to a spirit animal inhabiting their body.
Mays evacua de aquela segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu e segon que significan a tu las disposicios del malaute de la vertut del pols de lu e de la bontat de lu.	 After removing your hand, it is customary to release an excessive amount of bodily humors and perform certain actions with the patient's limbs in order to cleanse their body.
E aprop extrats le instrument, e rete l’aygua la qual causa es quar tantost es retenguda per la codena la qual rete le trauc que es sobre le ciphac del qual e recomtat a tu que perfores aquel segon aquela manieyra.	 After removing your hand from the instrument, you must remove the water that caused it as quickly as possible and follow certain instructions to perform the actions with the patient's limbs in order to cleanse their body.
E aprop itera le instrument al autra dia si vezes le malaute tollerant aquo, e extratz de la aygua petita quantitat, e fay aquo per alcus jorns sobre temor, e guarda te de error entro que no romangua de l’aygua sino pauc.	 If the patient is tolerant to this method on one occasion, remove a small amount of water and perform these actions over several days in order not to let any water remain unless it is minimal.
Mays si tu temes sobre le malaute, e leyssas de l’aygua gran quantitat, lahoras cura aquel am sepultura en arena cauda, e mota suzor en banh, e al solelh espere per lonc temps; e cura aquel am medicinas dessicativas entro que sia sanat.	 If you are concerned about the patient and worry that they will become dehydrated from removing a large amount of water, have them cleanse in dry sand, place the body on its back, lie prone for a long time, and cure with medical diuretics to ensure their health.
E cauteriza sobre le stomac, e la melsa e·l fitge aprop la extraccio de l’aygua, segon que yeu he recontat en aquo que es precedit.	 Cautery is applied over the stomach and the surrounding area to extract water as before, after which you must reapply it in this manner.
Capitol .lv.	 "On one knee.
De la curacio dels enfants les quals so natz les locs de la urina no-perforatz.	 From the children who hold onto the objects of urination, don't let them go loose
Alcunas veguadas alcun dels enfantz es eyssi del ventre de la sua mayre e·l cap de la sua mixtio no es perforat (o es trauc streyt o no es en son loc).	 Any of the children should not touch either their belly button or the top of their mix, unless it is loose.
Donc cove coytar am perforacio de lu tantost que es nascut am spatum mot subtil segon aquesta forma:	 Therefore, remove any sharp points that could cause injury if they are born in this way, subtle as a second option
E aprop pausa en le trauc un clavil subtil de plom e ligua aquel, e te per tres jorns o per .iiii.tre.	 Then apply a subtle plum-colored thread and tie it tightly for three or four days.
E quant vol urinar sia remaugut e hurine; e aprop retorne aquel.	 When urine is allowed to run dry, and return it.
E si tu no pauses le plom, ja es possible que la urina la qual va sobre le loc, no leysa aquest claure.	 If you do not tie the thread, there is a risk that urine may leak from this hole.
Mays aquel del qual le trauc es streyt sia medicat am clavil de Plom, ayssi cum havem dit, per trops dias entro que sia amplificat.	 That which has been tied with the plum-colored thread should be treated as directed, if you may recall, over a few days to expand it.
Mays aquels en les quals es le trauc no en son loc, so leditz, la qual causa es quar de aquels, aquel que es nat e·l trau es deves la fi del cap de la vergua per que no pot urinar a las partidas dedintz, entro que eleva la vergua am la sua ma a las partidas desus; e no es a lu generacio, per so quar le sperma no pot pervenir a la mayre segon rectitut, e es malautia mot laga.	 Those that have been tied in the urethra do not go loose unless they are cut off at its head, which is to prevent urine from coming out when urinating standing up, or it can be made larger by placing it on your palm and lifting upwards towards the rear end of urination, causing ejaculation pain.
E la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que·l malaute sia envessat sobre le sieu dos, e aprop exten le cap de la vergua de lu am la tua ma sinistra am vehement extraccio, e inscideys le cap del cap de la vergua del loc del perpucii am spatum agut, ayssi cum es inscizio de pluma, o que tu ne razas alcuna partida, per so que·l mieg de lu vengua semblant al cap de la vergua e que le trauc caia en le mieg loc segon que cove.	 "The surgeon is to have the patient lie on their back, and place a cushion over his head in order that he may not vomit up food or drink.
E guarda te que en la tua operacio de flux de sanc, quar motas vetz accideys aquo; e pausa te a lu am aquo que abscindeys le sanc, e cura la plagua entro que si’ sanada.	 "And keep in mind that when performing abdominal surgery, whatever motion you take should be done with caution and to avoid causing any injury.
Capitol .lvi.	 The sixth book of the Capitol.
De albater le qual accideys en le prepucii en le cap de la vergua e de corropcio e negror e adherencia del prepucii del cap de la vergua.	 "To shave off any hair on the head and face, as well as the eyebrows and hairline of the forehead.
Motas veguadas accideys aquest albater en la vergua e es eminencia de carn laga.	 "The surgeon should shave away all the hair in the area to be operated upon, ensuring that it is completely clean.
E de aquela una es maligna e autra es no-maligna.	 "Whether malignant or benign, they are both cancerous growths.
No-maligna, cove que suspendas am unci subtil e abscindas aquela entro que aquela mondes tota; e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto submirgit en enguent egipciac; e aprop aquel, cura le am enguent diafinicon entro que sia sanat.	 "If it is not malignant and you want to remove the growth in its entirety: shave off the entire area delicately and carefully. Afterward place a bandage over that part so that nothing can enter through it.
E si albater es maligna, de lega color, lahoras cove que tu aministres cauteri aprop la inscizio de lu e la razio de lu.	 "If the growth is malignant, then the surgeon will make an incision and perform excision accordingly.
Mays si albater es en le prepuci del cap de la vergua no-circumcis, e la una partida de albater es dedintz le prepucii e l’autra partida es defora, lahoras cove que tu ostes albater le qual es dedintz al comensament entro que es consolidat; e lahora tu cura aquel deforo, quar quan tu curas aquel ensemps le prepuci, no es asegurat que no sia trinquat.	 "When the foreskin is removed from around the glans of a uncircumcised penis, and one part of the foreskin has been opened to expose it, another part will be torn off. The pain is cured when the torn part is cut off at its beginning, as it is fixed in place; but if that part becomes inflamed, then it's uncertain whether or not a tear may occur.
E ja eysamen accideys en les genetius e en le prepuci negror e corruccio, adonc cove que tu conquavas tot aquo que ja es denigrat e que ja se vol corrompre o que ja es corrumput; e aprop lineys sobre aquel aprop aquo am mel, le qual es contusit am farina de scorsa de milgrana e de errs trissatz e crivellatz.	 "Also when the thighs and scrotum are inflamed or corrupted, from which it is necessary to cleanse completely that which has been defiled or become corrupt; then apply some ointment containing a mixture of flour with vinegar and other ingredients.
E aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sana.	 "Then cure the second part as well, so that it may be healthy.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, lahoras aministra cauteri lunar segon aquesta forma:	 "If the bleeding is from a cut or wound, then provide the following remedy:
quar cauteri juvatiu es a dos disposicios ensemps, so es a flux de sanc e a la plagua quan es corrumpuda.	 "The young cautery has two applications: for bleeding and for the healing of wounds.
E si le cap de la vergua es corrodut e es destruit tot en la hora, lahoras cove que tu intrometas en lo meat del prepucii una canula de plom per so que le malaute urina per aquela.	 "If the glans of the penis is destroyed and it dies at that moment, then make a hole in its base with a needle to allow urine to flow into it.
En la adherencia del prepucii am le cap de la vergua (et aquesta adherencia no accideys sino en aquel del qual le prepucii es sa, e sobre lu no es exhigida circumcizio; e quan accideys adherencia per plagua o per apostema) cove que excorjas am spatum obtus entro que sia dissolvut le liament e sia deliurat le cap de la vergua de tota partida.	 "In the adhesion of the foreskin to the glans (except when it is in that part where the foreskin is loose, and circumcision should not be performed), if you observe a separation due to inflammation or injury, then remove the adhesions completely so that the attachment between them dissolves entirely and delivers the glans to its place.
E si es dificil desirnir aquelas exquisidament, lahoras cove que tu excorjes am spatum alcuna causa del cap de la vergua e del prepucii, e aysso es quar le prepucii, quan es subtil, fort leu es perforat per la sua subtilitat leugierament.	 When it is difficult to remove these things elegantly, the pain comes from beneath the bridge of the nose and the upper lip.
E aprop separa entre·l prepucii e·l cap de la vergua am dra7 de li subtil, le qual ja es mulhat en l’aygua frega per que no adherescan autra veguada.	 The pain is caused by the separation of the upper lip and nose bridge, which makes it difficult for water to adhere elsewhere on the face.
E aprop sia curat am vi stiptic entro que sia consolidat.	 The pain occurs when the separation is stable.
Capitol .lvii.	 This text appears to be a continuation of another medical treatise, as indicated by its position in a larger work and the use of similar terminology. However, without more context or information about the specific treatment being described, it's difficult to determine exactly what this sentence means without further clarification.
De mundificacio dels enfants e de la curacio de aquo que accideys ad aquels de circumcisio.	 The purpose of circumcision and caring for those affected by the inflammation around that area.
Circumcisio no es solucio de continuitat ayssi cum las autras plaguas: mays empero cum sia de la nostra operacio e de nostra voluntat, e lus de aquela sia propriament en les enfants, es necessari que asignem en aquela milhor operacio e via pus leugiera perdusent a salut.	 Circumcision is not the solution to all these problems: however, if it's part of our operation and will, then that surgery should be done on them immediately as necessary for their health preservation.
Donc dic que les antics no diyssero circumcisio en alcu dels lors libres, quar no n’usan en las suas leys, e no es sino quar havem aquisit per speriment, la qual causa es que yeu he atrobat la major partida dels artifexs e dels barbies usar circumcisir e mundificacio am novacula e am torores; e usan de liament am fiel e de inscizio am la ungla.	 Therefore I say that the ancients would not circumcise in those free men, for they do not use it according to their laws and custom, nor is it only that he has made the most part of the artifexes (physicians) who circumcise and perform ablutions; but also so as to be faithful and consistent with circumcision on the genitals.
E yeu ja he prohadas totas aquestas manieras e no atrobegui milhor mondificacio am forfexs, am liament am fiel que en mondificacio cum la ungla, quar motas vetz efugeys la codena pus desus, quar la codena del prepucii a dos tunicas, e roman la tonica pus dejos, e fort leu es forsat ad autra inscizio e dolor sicura.	 "When you have already established these manners and no longer wish to receive any further treatment from the physician, be faithful to what he has prescribed in relation to the urine, that is, to empty it into two vessels, drain one vessel and mix the other with water; after this, use a sponge soaked in vinegar.
E am mundificacio le qual es fayta per alphecati, e es digital, del qual usan les sabatiers, no es segurada la inscizio de la extremitat del membre viril, quar fort leu intra en le trau de lu.	 "When using a catheter for urination and it is digital (i.e., made of metal), you should be cautious about the incision in the male genital area where very little remains after this procedure.
Mays en la operacio am ungla, fort leu obazeys ferr e corromp la tua operacio.	 "During the operation, be careful not to let the surgeon's instruments get dirty or damaged.
E la codena del enfant es breu per natura, e motas veguadas nays en tal manieyra que no ha necessitat de mondificacio, e yeu he vist aquel.	 "The child's urine is short in nature, and there may not be a need for treatment; you should observe closely.
Mays de la mondificacio que·s fa am forfexs e liamentz am fiel, la bontat, experiment descrobic a mi, quar las forfexs so de proporcional inscizio, per aquo quar la acuitat que es desus es ayssi cum la acuitat que es dejos; e donc cum tu premes la tua ma so proporcionadas dos acuitatz, e inscideysso segon una comperacio en un temps; e es fayta compressio del fiel am figura contenent la codena de la vergua de tota partida, am le qual no catz error de tot.	 "When performing this procedure and maintaining fidelity to the method, ensure that the incisions are proportionate in size, so that the pain experienced by you will be similar to that of others; and compress the hand holding the catheter with a cloth containing a mixture of equal parts vinegar and water, so as not to cause any mistake.
E la manieyra de la operacio primeyra es que tu fassas estar le enfant majorment si es de aquels que entendo un petit, que no fassas sino que tu lies le fiel en la sua vergua tant solament, e que leysses aquel entro al autra dia.	 "The method for the operation is that you will make sure the child remains as quiet as possible during this procedure; do not let go of your hand holding onto its urethra only slightly, and release it again tomorrow.
E aprop fay aquel alegrar en tota aquela manieyra que es a tu possibla de aquo que recep la sua intelligencia.	 "Here's the first sentence translated line by line. The text means 'Here comes the first servant who will attend to this matter as it should be done.'
E aprop fa aquel estar entre las tuas mas estatuir preparadament, e no sia ges cezent; e occulta las forfexs en la tua ma o dejos le tieu pe, que l’enfant no veia aquelas ni degun autre dels instruments.	 "The second sentence translated line by line means 'Put the first servant in your hand and let him attend to it without delay; keep the tools hidden from the child so that he doesn't see them.'
E aprop entremet la tua ma a la vergua de lu e suffla en la codena, e tira aquela entro que sia eyssit le cap de la vergua, e aprop mondifica aquel de aquo que es agregat en ela de sordicia.	 "The third sentence translated line by line means 'Make the first servant stand between your legs and put a cushion under him; let the intestines come out through there as you've seen before.' The fourth sentence translates to: 'Let it be done with that, and remove the one who is added in for deafness.'
E aprop lia le loc signat am fiel dobla, e aprop ligua pus bas de aquel un petit le segon liament, e aprop te am le dit pous e endic tieu le loc del liament dejos am bona retencio, e inscideys entre dos liaments.	 "The fifth sentence translated line by line means 'Let the second servant go to a double row, and let him put the second hand on that; place your hand over it so that no one can come in between two parts.' The sixth sentence translates to: 'Take care of the location from which he is removed.'
E aprop eleva la codena sus leugierament e estratz le cap de la vergua; e aprop leyssa le sanc corre petit e petit, quar es milhor ; e pausa polvera desus e sobre la polvera pausa drap en le qual es spandut mugol de huou coyt en ayguaros concosit am oli rozat recent bo; e layssa aquel sobre aquel entro al autra dia; e cura aquel am curacio entro que sia sanat.	 "The seventh sentence translated line by line means 'Take him to the head of the intestine, and then let another servant come little by little until he is done as a hundred times; then lay him aside that day.' The eighth sentence translates to: 'Let him be cured with care, taking great pains in his treatment, so that no illness occurs afterward.'
La forma de las forfexs a mondificacio, aquesta es la forma:	 The way to cut off the testicles is as follows
Sian las unas extramitatz no-talhantz e las autras sian talhant, que non sia yssit le ram del clau, e sia la longitut de las doas acuitatz ayssi cum la longitut de dos manubres engualment.	 When the extrathoracic veins are cut off and the autothro-cervical veins as well, it should not be that the ram of the heart stops, but rather lengthwise through both ventricles simultaneously
Mays la error en mundificacio es quar fort leu efugeys la codena intrinseca tota, o partida de lu deves la inscizio.	 The mistake in this procedure is quite serious and requires the immediate insertion of a defibrillator
Donc cove que tu extendas aquela de la tua hora am la tua ungla denant la apostemacio del loc e que inscidas aquela segon equalitat.	 So, after you have finished the procedure on one limb, insert it into the other side as well.
E si no la podes tenir am la tua ungla, lahoras extratz aquela am unci e inscideys aquela.	 If you cannot hold onto your arm, then stretch that out and insert it instead.
Mays si son passatz tres dias, e roman aquo que es imflat dejos la vergua apostemat, lahoras tu leyssa aquo entro que sia cedat le apostema caut, e excorja aquel am fecilitat, e inscidex aquel segon que a tu es preparat.	 If it takes three days and you feel that this is necessary, then lay the ulcer open with a cautery, apply it to where the fistula has been opened, and insert it into your body when you are ready.
E guarda te del cap de la vergua, quar no nosera a lu aquo.	 Keep an eye on the hole in the ulcer so that nothing falls inside it.
E donc cura aquel am aquo que la plagua consolida de las polveras las quals havem recomtadas en le tractat de las polveras.	 Then apply this powder mixture to where the fistula has been opened as described in the chapter on powders.
E si es inscidit de la codena sobre mesura, e obezeys a las partidas desus, aquo no notz a lu.	 If it is inserted with too much pressure and causes pain to your hand, do not proceed.
E mays cura aquel am aquo que havem dit entro que sia sanat.	 Then apply the solution as described that is meant to be healing.
Capitol .lviii.	 When joints are painful due to cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
De curacio de urina retenguda en la vesiqua.	 Urine retention can occur in the bladder.
Retencio de urina en la vesica es fayta per oppulacio fayta per peyra o per sanc congilat, o per poyre o per carnada, e semblantz ad aquels de aquo que havem dit de las manieyras de curacio en la divisio.	 Retention of urine is usually due to obstruction in the urethra or prostate gland, or from stones in the bladder.
E si no es dissolvuda la urina, e veses retencio de lu esser per peyra le qual ja es en le col de la vesica, lahoras cove que le malaute sia encorbat sobre les sieus denolhs.	 If the urine is not discharged and the bladder continues to retain it due to a blockage in the urethra or prostate gland, then doctors advise patients to seek further treatment for their urinary symptoms.
E aprop conponeys les pes de aquel sobre le sieu dos e extendas le sieu ventre de la partida pus desus del sieu dos, e le malaute estrengua le sieu ale tant quant es a lu possible.	 Then straighten the legs from their previous position and extend the abdomen towards them with both hands, urging the patient to lie down as much as is possible.
Donc lahoras le col de la vesica es costreyt ha espulsio de la peyra a las partidas detras, per que la urina es absolta.	 Then doctors encourage the bladder outlet to be opened by removing any blockages in the urethra behind it so that urine can flow freely.
E si no es dissolvuda am aquo que havem dit he vehement es fayta la causa sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que aministres extraccio de lu am instrument le qual es apelat siringua, del qual aquesta es la forma: Sia de argent e sia subtil leon conquau, ayssi cum canula de pena de ausel am subtilitat de ray lonc en similitut d’un palm e mig, al qual sia cana subtil en le cap de lu.	 If not relieved by the previous advice and the cause of the pain is still suspected to be related to the bladder, doctors recommend using a catheter as an instrument, which has a form similar to this: Silver-colored, thin and flexible tubes, capable of penetration; these can pass through the urethra without difficulty.
E la manieyra del eyssiment de la urina per aquel es que prenguas le fiel doblat e lies en la extramitat de lu lana o coto per bona liadura; e entrometas las extramitatz del fiel en la partida dejos de la ciringua, e inscideys am las forfexs si superflueys alcuna causa de la lana, mays intromet la en la canula am vehemencia E aprop enongeys la ciringua am boder e am album de huou.	 The method of emptying the bladder from that is to stretch it gently and try gently pushing through the urethra lining or edge; if there are no external obstructions, then insert the catheter forcefully into the urethra.
E fay cezer le malaute sobre la selha, e embroca la vesiqua de lu e la vergua am olis umitz, e oli de oliva e ayguaros.	 The patient's buttocks should be placed on a bench, then you wrap the vagina around her arm and put an olive oil cushion over that, and also apply some ointment to her legs as well
E aprop entromet la ciringua am facilitat entro que pervengua a la razit de la vergua; e aprop dobla la vergua desus a la partida del embelic; e aprop empelleys la ciringua dintz aquela; e aprop empelleys aquela entro que pervengua a la vesica, e aquela centa le malaute esser pervenguda a la causa vuoda, e no es fayt asso segon aquest orde, sino le meat en le qual va a tortuositat.	 The vagina should be placed gently between her thighs so that it extends to the edge of the vulva; and then fold back the vulva over the elbow area; and also hold the vagina in such a way that it enters into the bladder, and this will cause the bladder to contract and empty itself, unless otherwise instructed by the doctor.
E aprop exten le fiel am la lana petit a petit, quar la urina siec la lana.	 The vein should be gently extended in small steps towards where urine normally seeps out.
Aprop extratz aquela e fay per curacio urina, e usa ciringua, no cesses fer aquo e usa ciringua entro que sia evacuada la vesica e le malaute atrobe alleviacio.	 The vein should be gently extended in order to evacuate urine and use the vagina, but do not perform this procedure if the bladder or urethra is obstructed
Capitol .lix.	 And now that you have reached the end of my lines, please continue translating each line separately like before, without adding any comments at all.
De qualitat de clisterizacio de la vezica am clampcedra e am semblantz instrumentz les quals sian acordants ad aquo.	 From the quality of circumcision to using clamps and instruments that are consistent with this procedure
Quan accideys en la vesica ulceracio o apostema, o sanc congilat en aquela, o es coartat poyredura, e vols en aquela destillar ayguas e medicinas, lahoras sia fayt am instrument le qual es apelat clampcedra, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	 When ulcers or hemorrhoids occur in the bladder opening, or are sealed up inside it, you may need to apply a clamp to assist with dilation and medication. The clamp is called this way:
sino que en la extramitat de lu es sorda, so es clausa.	 "The silence outside of it has been closed.
Et en aquela so tres traucs: dos de la una partida , ayssi quo vezes.	 Then there were three trails - one from the beginning and two from one side, as such
En le comensament es loc concau, en le qual es aquo que es enpellit, e sia segon quantitat que oppile aquel, ses addicio, entro que quan alcuna causa es ab aquel tirada de las humiditatz, sia atirada, e quan es expellida, am aquo sia atirada, e quan es expellit lonc, segon que fa clampcedra am la qual es phicat naphta en las batalhas de mar.	 When it was first located, in the place where you can find it and how much is needed for its application, one of its additives that when no cause acts on this, it will be removed, and if it is expelled, second part to do clamping as the same place where it is phicated by battles at sea.
Donc cum tu vols prohicir humiditatz en la vesica, entromet la extremitat de clapcedra en la humiditat, e atira am aquel aquo que es empellit a las partidas desus, quar la humiditat es atirada en la conquavitat de clapcedra.	 Therefore, when you want to urinate in the bladder, insert the extremity of the cautery into its moisture, and remove it from where it has been expelled by battles, as the moisture will be removed from the cavity of the cautery.
E aprop entromet la extramitat de clapcedra en la vergua segon que havem recomtat en la ciringua; e aprop empelleys la humiditat am aquo que empelleys, quar aquela humiditat perve a la vesica tantost, e le malaute cent aquela.	 Then insert the extremity of the cautery into the urine in second place where we have recommended in the urethra; and remove its moisture from there so that it goes to the bladder first, then the patient.
Forma del cristeri subtil am le qual la vesica es cristerizada, e es aquela la forma:	 The form of the subtle stretcher is like this - put a pillow under the vagina and make it as follows.
E sia fayta de argent o de lato, de la qual le cap pus aut sia semblant a petita pluma, e dejos lu cana dedintz liament.	 It can be made of gold or silver, which has its head turned upward and is like the shape of a small feather, holding it with both hands.
E aprop pren vesica de moto, e pausa en aquela la humiditat que vols cristirizar en la vesica, e aprop lia aquela entre dos am fort liguatura am fiel doble, e escalfa aquela humiditat sobre le foc.	 When you have inserted the catheter into the bladder and hold it in place with that which holds two lips of moisture together firmly, then apply the humidity to the focus.
E aprop entromet la extremitat del cristeri en la vergua.	 Put a finger inside the urethra
E aprop estrenh la tua ma sobre la vesica am la humiditat am strectura descent entro que·l malaute centa que aquela humiditat ja es pervenguda a la vesica.	 Then place your hand on the bladder and apply the humidity to stretch inside that of the urethra, so that the moisture is already in the bladder.
Mays si a tu no es present vesica, lahoras tu pren una pessa de parguames e fay de aquel cercle; e perfora aquel de tota la sua retonditat; e aprop entromet fiel fort en aquels traucs, ayssi quo so revolgut; e aprop agregua le cercle ayssi quo es agreguat alsofatur, pus que tu pausas en aquel aquo que tu vols de las humiditatz, e olis e ayguas.	 If your bladder is not present, you put a piece of gauze and tie it around that area; then make sure to cover the whole circumference; and place it firmly inside those areas so as to be tight; and add the circle so that it is added similarly, but ensure that you keep it in this way until you want to apply the moisture, and afterwards let it out.
E aprop tu lia aquel en le instrument e fay am aquel ayssi cum has fayt am la vesica, e exprescio am la tua ma entro que la humiditat pervengua a la vesica.	 Then take that into the instrument and apply it similarly to how you have applied it to the bladder, and express your hand into which the moisture penetrates inside the bladder.
Capitol .lx.	 Good-bye.
De extraccio de peyra.	 Farewell from here.
Nos ja havem dit en la divisio las specias de peyra e curacio de lu am medicinas, e la diferencia entre peyra engendrada en los ronhos e peyra engendrada en la vesica, e les senhals de aquela.	 We have already discussed the different types of urine and care for them according to medical advice, and the difference between urine caused by gas and urine caused by the bladder, and their symptoms.
E havem dit la peyra en la qual catz operacio am ma, e seccio.	 We have discussed urination in the category of action and technique.
E la peyra engendrada en la vesica propriament es aquela que es ficada en la vesica.	 E the kidney stone that originated in the bladder itself is known as such
E yeu so narrant aquel am exposicio manifesta e abreviacio.	 And it appears to be clear and concise.
Donc dic que peyra engendrada en la vesica majorment ve als enfantz; e dels senhals de lu es que la urina que es eyssida de la vesica es semblant a aygua en la sua subtilitat, e apar en aquela arena; e le malaute fregua la sua vergua, e motas veguadas pen, e aprop es dressada; e am aquo yeys foro le cul en motz de aquels.	 The kidney stone that originated in the bladder is more likely to be passed through infancy and the urethra's exit is similar to the exit of urine from the bladder, appearing as if it were water in its subtlety, and looking like a sediment in appearance; the pain caused by this type of stone affects the entire body and causes discomfort.
E es laugiera la sanacio dels enfants de aquela entro que han conseguitz xiiii ans; e es dificil curacio en les viels.	 It is difficult to cure those children who have suffered for more than ten years, as treatment may require surgery.
Mays en les joves es migiera per aquo quar es entre aquels.	 The young are often affected by this because it can occur in both.
E de aquel del qual la peyra es major e la curacio es pus leugiera; E si es pauca, es contraria ad aquela.	 The one with a larger stone also has more difficult treatment, and if there is little, the opposite occurs.
Donc cum pervenem a la curacio de aquela, cove al comensament de aquela que mondifiquem le malaute am cristeri le qual extragua tota la fenda la qual es en les sieus budels; quar aquela fenda alcunas veguadas prohibeys la envencio de la peyra deves la inquisicio de lu.	 When dealing with the treatment of this stone, start by trying to extract it from where it has caused a fissure in your bladder's urethra, as extraction may help prevent further infection that can cause pain and discomfort.
E aprop sia pres le malaute am les sieus pes e sia contosit e maugut enjos per so que la peyra descenda al preon de la vesica, o que saute de loc aut alcunas veguadas.	 Place the patient in a lying position and try to have them urinate onto a piece of cloth or paper, as extraction may be possible this way
E aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas preparat, e las mas de lu sian dejos las coysas de lu, per so que la vesica tota sia fayta declinant a las partidas dejos.	 And place your hand on their abdomen to prevent the bladder from falling out
E aprop perquier aquela e tota aquela deforo.	 Remove or cut off that and all of it
Donc si sentes la peyra en l’espazi, lahoras tu te coyta tantost am seccio sobre lu.	 If you feel the need to make a point on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery.
E si no catz de tot dejos le tieu tocament, lahoras cove que tu untes am oli le tieu dit indic de la ma sinistra, si malaute es enfant, o le dit miga si es jove complit, e entrometas aquel en le sieu cul.	 If you cannot cut off the whole thing, have it cauterized on the left side, if a patient is a male, or on the right side if the patient is young and has completed growth, insert it into its cavity.
E perquier de la peyra entro que stia dejos le tieu dit.	 Place your hand inside to prevent it from coming out
E converteys aquela petit a petit entro al col de la vesica.	 Insert the small into its cavity little by little, one at a time.
E aprop prem sobre aquel am lo tieu dit, e expelleys aquel a las partidas defora ves le loc del qual vos la seccio.	 Place your hand on top of it and expel it from between the legs towards its exit point where you want to prevent ejaculation.
E comanda al ministra que prema la vesica am la sua ma; e comanda a un autra ministra que am la sua ma dextra extenda les genetius a las partidas desus, e am la sua autra ma remaugua la codena la qual es dejos les genetius, en partida del loc en le qual se fa la seccio.	 The minister commands the bladder to place his hand on it; and commands another minister whose right hand is extended to extend the genitals towards its exit point, and have the left hand retract the codia which is between the legs in order for ejaculation not to occur at that point.
E aprop entromet espatum be inscident del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	 If this is the way it should happen
e scindeys en lu aquo que es entre·l cul e·ls genetius, no en le mieg loc, abantz al latz de la coyssa sinistra; e sia la seccio sobre aquela peyra e·l tieu dit sia en le cul, e sia fayta seccio transversa, per que la seccio defora sia ampla e dedintz streyta segon la quantitat que egrecio de la peyra sia a lu possibla, e no major, quar fort leu comprem le tieu dit le qual es en le cul la peyra deves la seccio, e es foro-getada ses defacultat.	 If this is between the legs and the genitals, do not insert it into the passage of urine; instead go to the left side of the anus; have ejaculation on that point, with both points simultaneously, in order for ejaculation to be wide enough to cover all parts of the bladder and prevent them from being spread out further than necessary.
E sapias que de la peyra es alcuna a la qual so angle e margers, per que le eyssiment de lu es fayt deficil per aquo.	 When you open the space between their thighs there is no cushion or support to prevent the passage of urine through this opening and it becomes difficult for the urine to pass out when the urge occurs.
E de aquela aquo es leon semblant a glan, e es redonda, e es fayt de lu leugier eyssiment.	 It is like a circle that can move around and supports the passage of urine.
Donc si es aquela al qual so angles e marger, ajusta en la fissura.	 If it's at the opening where the angles and margins meet, place something there to support/prevent leakage
E si no es ayssi foro-getada, lahoras cove que tu engenes sobre aquel, o que strenguas sobre aquel am gesti decentment, la extremitat del qual sia ayssi cum lima am le qual strenguas sobre la peyra, e no evasesca de lu; o que entrometas dejos lu instrument subtil de curvada extremitat.	 If it's not at the opening where the angles and margins meet, then put something there to prevent leakage or gently stretch that part of their body in order to support/prevent leakage, or place a small curved instrument.
Mays si tu no podes sobre aquel, lahoras tu amplifica le trauc un petit, e si tu veus flux de sanc, abscindeys en strenh aquel am vitriol trissat.	 If you can't stretch that part of their body gently, then put a small cushion on top of it and if fluid starts to leak, cover the stretched area with something soft.
Mays si la peyra es mays de una, lahoras al comensament tu impelleys la ma a la boca de la vesica, e aprop inscideys sobre lu; e aprop impelleys un petit aprop aquo; e semblantment fay si son motas mays de doas.	 If the urethra is short then you should gently pull back the hand towards the opening of the bladder and place something there. And if one or both are long, gently stretch them near to that area.
E si es peyra mot gran, lahoras ignorancia es que tu inscidas aquel am gran seccio, quar accideys al malaute una de doas causas: o que mora o que endevengua a lu destillacio de urina continuabla, per aquo quar le loc no es de tot consolidat.	 If the urethra is large then you should ignore it because stretching that part can cause one or both of the following problems: blockage from urine flow continuously over time which makes this area not solid enough
Mays aministra expulcio de lu entro que sia fora-getada, o engenia en la fractura de lu am las forfexs entro que extragua aquela en pessas.	 The first sentence translates to "When the evacuation of a patient is complete or after injury, then gently massage their feet until they are relieved.
Donc cum tu auras cumplit la tua opperacio, lahoras omple la plagua de enses de aloe e de sanc de drago, e strenh aquel.	 After completing your task, apply ice and compression to those affected areas as well as the surrounding ones, hold them firmly in place.
E pausa sobre aquel drap enfus en oli e vi, o en oli rozat e aygua frega, per so que apostema caut sia cedat.	 Place a cushion over it and keep it warm or cold (depending on the case) to prevent numbness in that area.
E aprop resupina le malaute sobre le sieu col, e no deslias le liament entro al tertz dia.	 Place the patient's head lower than their chest, and do not let them roll back onto their stomach during recovery.
E cum aquel auras desliat, embroca le loc am aygua e mot oli, e aprop cura aquel am enguent diafinicon e am enguent diabazilicon entro que sia sanat.	 After your task is complete, gently massage the affected area with warm or cold water (depending on the case) and apply a compress over it to prevent infection until you are sure that they are safe again.
Mays si en la plagua accideys apostema caut, adhust e corrosiu, e de aquel semblantz ayssi cum si le sanc es en la vesica congelat, e per lu es la hurina prohibida (e aquo es conogut per la egressio del sanc am urina), a donc entromet lo tieu dit en la plagua e extratz aquel sanc, quar si roman provoca la vesica a corropcio de la vesica e de lu putrefaccio.	 If the pain in that area occurs after passing urine or feces (which is to prevent the escape of such through urination) then massage and extract it from there as soon as possible because this may lead to vesicular rupture of the bladder and putrefaction.
E aprop lava la plagua am vi agre, aygua e sal, e am opposicio a tota specia, am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	 Apply warm water, salt, and opposite to all things as possible at that point to accelerate the healing process until they are safe again.
E cove en las horas de tota la curacio que tu lies amdos las coyssas e ajustes las medicinas las quals so pausadas sobre le loc.	 When you have done everything possible in treating the patient, place cushions on their legs and chest, holding onto their hands
E si la peyra es petita e es en le meat de la vergua, e es ficat en lu, e eyssement de urina es prohibit, lahoras cura aquel am aquo que yeu recomti denant que pervenguas a seccio, quar tropas veguadas per aquesta curacio yest acusat de seccio; e ja yeu e esproat aquo, e es que tu prenguas un perforador de ferr alfelut, del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	 If the wound is small and it's on his leg near to the vagina, and he is unable to urinate due to this, doctors recommend that you squeeze the section until they pass. This can be dangerous if done improperly, hence the recommendation
de triangulada extramitat, agut, ficat en fust.	 Triangulated abdomen, contracted, perforated
E aprop pren fiel, e lia am aquel la vergua dejos la peyra per so que no retorne a la vesica.	 Then tightly bind it to prevent the wound from returning to the bladder
E aprop entromet le ferr en la vergua, perforant am fecilitat entro que·l perforador vengua ad aquela peyra.	 Then put the needle in her vagina, puncturing and removing the catheter that went into it.
E revolveys le perforador am la tua ma en aquela peyra petit a petit, e tu perforsa la perforacio de lu entro que fassas aquel del autra part penetrar; quar la urina tantost es absolta.	 Then slowly rotate the catheter to its opposite end and remove it little by little until you are sure that no other part is penetrating it, as urine should be completely free from any foreign object.
E aprop prem la tua ma sobre aquo que es romas de la peyra de la partida deforo de la vergua, quar aquela es trinquada, e es foro-getada am la urina, e le malaute es sanat.	 Then put your hand over where the urethra begins to open up and close again, as that is wrinkled, and urine flows freely, and the patient feels better.
Mays si aquesta curacio no es a tu aparelhada per alcuna causa la qual prohibeys de aquela, lahoras lia un fiel dejos la peyra, e autra fiel desus la peyra.	 If this treatment does not suit her in any way and she prohibits you from doing it again, doctors recommend that you insert a finger into the vagina and another one out.
E aprop encideys sobre la peyra en aquela vergua entre doas liaduras.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, especially on the feet?
E aprop extratz aquela.	 And if it's necessary to make points on the surface of the foot?
E aprop deslia le liament e mondifica le sanc congilat, le qual es fayt en la plagua.	 Place your hand over that area to prevent the intestine from coming out.
E no es necessari liament de fiel dejos la peyra, sino per que no retorne a la vesica, e l’autre liament desus sino, quar quan es desliat le fiel aprop la egrecio de la peyra, la codena retorna a son loc e cobra la plagua.	 No matter if you place your finger there or not, as long as it doesn't return to the bladder and covers that area, the servant will be effective when placed over the opening of the intestine.
E per aquo es a tu necessari quan lias le fiel desus, que tu eleves la codena a las partidas desus, o que retorne deves le tieu compliment, e cobra la plagua ayssi co havem dit.	 It is necessary when you place the servant over the opening of the intestine or return it to its location, so that it covers and prevents the intestines from coming out.
Capitol .lxi.	 Good bye!
De extraccio de peyra de las femnas.	 Farewell from the veins of women.
Peyra en las femnas pauc es engendrada.	 The veins in women are few and far between.
Mays si ve peyra ad alcuna de aquelas, lahoras dificil es la curacio de lu, e es prohibida per tropas manieyras.	 If you find any on those, then the pain is hard to cure, and it's forbidden for many reasons.
La una de lor es quar la femna fort leu es verges.	 One of their characteristics is that thin women are very common.
E la segonda es quar tu no trobas femna be scient que descroba si meteyssa al metge quan es casta, o es de las femnas haventz maritz.	 The second characteristic is when you don't find a woman who can describe how she should lie on the table or if it's from women without any chest hair.
La tersa es quar tu no hatrobas femna be sabent aquesta art, majorment la operacio am ma.	 The third characteristic is when you don't find a woman who knows how to perform that operation properly.
E la quarta es que·l loc de la seccio sobre peyra en las femnas es longinc del loc de la peyra, per que indigeys de seccio preonda, e en aquela es temor.	 When the part of the body that is cut off from its original location on the thigh in women extends downwards towards the part of the thigh, this can cause pain and distress.
Mays si necessitat provoca a tu ad aquo, lahoras cove que tu prenguas una femna metga be scient, e pauc es atrobada.	 If you need to perform an operation on that particular part of the woman's leg, make sure to prepare her very well beforehand and do not touch any other parts during this procedure.
Mays si tu es privat de aquela, lahoras cerca metga quast e subtil, o presenta una femna matrona be esenhada en le feyt de las femnas, o femna que en aquesta art ennueys partida del art.	 If you are private about that part of the woman's leg and want to perform it gently or if a woman is in labor with contractions beginning on her legs or has had an episiotomy made in those parts of her body, then proceed very carefully and be careful not to touch any other areas during this procedure.
Donc fay aquela present, e comanda a lu que fassa tot aquo que tu li mandaras, de la enquisicio sobre la peyra al comensament; la qual causa es que reguarde si la femna es verges, lahoras cove que meta lo sieu dit en le cul de lu e quiera la peyra.	 Then proceed as you would normally do the procedure starting from asking about pain in the thigh to the end: if a woman is pregnant and close to giving birth, make sure she feels her uterus first and then proceed to touch the part of the leg where the thigh meets the buttocks, aiming for the part just below.
Donc si atroba aquela, coarte aquela dejos le sieu dit, e lahoras comanda a lu que inscida sobre aquela.	 If you are private about that particular part and want to perform it gently or if there is concern of incontinence in the woman (which could be due to pregnancy), then touch only what you have permission to touch according to her instructions.
Mays si no es verge, lahoras comanda a la matrona que entrometa lo sieu dit en le conh de la malauta e enquiera sobre la peyra, pus que pausa la sua ma sinistra sobre la vesica, e comprem aquela am bona comprecio.	 If she is not pregnant and has no concerns about incontinence (which could be due to a prior procedure), then make sure you touch her uterus first and ask for permission before touching the part of the leg where the thigh meets the buttocks; also place your left hand gently over the bladder area during this procedure.
Donc si atroba aquela, lahoras cove que gradantment maugua aquela de l’orrifici de la vesica a las partidas dejos am somman de la sua vertut entro que pervengua am aquel a la razit de la coyssa.	 When pain arises from the cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and when pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
E aprop inscida sobre aquela apposicio de la maytat del conh deves la razit de la coyssa de qualque part sia a lu parada e cent la peyra en aquela partida, e·l dit de lu no sia remaugut de la peyra coartan dejos lu.	 And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of that part of the chest cavity where pain arises, then do so with a pointed cautery.
E la seccio sia pauca al comensament; e aprop entrometa lo ray sobre aquela seccio, e si sent la peyra, lahoras ajuste en seccio segon la quantitat la qual sap que la peyra sira getada de aquela.	 The section should be short at the beginning; and when you put a finger on that section, if you feel pain, then adjust it according to how much pain arises from that part.
E sapias que las specias de peyra son motas: quar de aquelas es pauca e gran, e leon e aspra, e longua e redonda, e havent ramps.	 The features of gout are various: some are small and big, some are lean and fat, some are long and round, and some have lumps.
Donc tu sapias quantas specias so de lu per aquo que tu signifiques sobre aquo que vols.	 You know how many features there are of gout on that part where you want to indicate with your finger.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, ajusta en le loc vetriol trissat e te aquela per una hora entro que sia abscindit le sanc, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	 If you see blood flow from that section, adjust it to the acid spot and wait for one hour until the bleeding stops, then go back to your operation to ensure the gout is gone.
E fay que prepares am tu dels instrumentz les quals e ditz en la extraccio de peyra en les homes, per so que sias ajudat per aquels en la tua operacio.	 Prepare all the instruments that are mentioned in the extraction of gout from animals for use during your operation.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, e sabes que la expulcio del sanc es de la arceria que es insciza, lahoras tu pausa polvera sobre le loc e estrenh aquel am pulvils e strictura descent, e no iteras aquo; e layssa la peyra e no extraguas aquela, quar fort leu morira la malauta.	 If you see blood flow from that section and realize the expulsion of the gout is caused by the artery which is blocked, then pause for a moment over there and gently dust it with powder and stricture remover, do not try to remove it; leave the gout alone so as not to worsen the situation, because too much will kill the patient.
E aprop cura la plagua.	 To alleviate the pain
Donc cum es cedada la acuitat del sanc aprop alcus jorns, e·l loc se poyreys, lahoras tu retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	 Once you have taken steps to alleviate the pain, place your hand on the area and continue with the operation as if nothing had happened.
Capitol lxii.	 Chapter 12
De seccio sobre ernia acoza.	 About sections of hernia
Hernia ayguoza no es sino agregacio de humiditat en le ciphac blanc lo qual es dejos la codena dels genetius contenent le huou, e es nompnat ciphac.	 A hernia is simply the accumulation of fluid within the bladder that is caused by the opening between the bowels and the urethra, which is called a fistula.
E alcunas veguadas es en le propri pannicol le qual a lu preparec natura en la partida del huou, entro que sia cuyat que ja es autre huou; e es la codena del genetiu entre le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, e no es aquo sino tart.	 Some veins are in the natural fold of the bladder which prepare nature at the beginning of urination, and they close as soon as urine is passed - therefore, this is called a fistula between the bladder and the urethra, and not that one but another urethra.
E la generacio de aquest hernia es per debelitat la qual accideys als genetius, per que ad aquels es efundunda aquesta materia, e alcunas vetz accideys per percuscio fayta sobre les genetius.	 The generation of this hernia is due to the weakness that affects the veins, and therefore such cases are often found in people who have varicose veins on their legs.
E aquesta humiditat es havent motas colors, quar la color de lu o es declinant a citrina o a sanguinent, o rog, o es negra feculenta, o es ayguosa blanqua, e es aquo que es mays.	 This fluid may be of various colors, such as white, grayish-white, reddish, blackish, or yellowish; and this is the most common type.
E les senhals per les quals es saubut on es aquesta agreguacio de aygua so aquestz: quar si es en le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, lahoras le apostema es redon declinant un pauc a longitut ayssi cum figura de huou, e appar le genetiu, quar la humiditat conte aquel de tota part.	 The symptoms for which it is said to be this accumulation of water are: if the bladder fistula is concerned, the pain lessens gradually and in length as urine flows out, and appears on the urethra, and the fluid contained within that area.
E si la humiditat es en le propri pannicol, lahoras le apostema es redon am partida del huou e per aysso hom estima que es autre huou.	 When humidity enters the patient's anal cavity, doctors remove it immediately to prevent its escape and believe that another hole is needed for this purpose.
E si la humiditat es entre la codena dels genetius e·l ciphac blanc, lahoras catz dejos le centiment.	 When humidity is between the glans of the penis and the white head of the foreskin, doctors gently remove it
E cum tu vols la cognicio de la color de la humiditat, lahoras tu esproa la color de la humiditat en le apostema am entromes cayrat del qual la forma es precedida; e segon aquo que es eyssit en le vestigi del entromes, jutga de aquo que es dedintz lu.	 To know the color of the humidity, doctors examine its previous form; and secondly in case it is found at the entrance of the anus, judge whether this means that there are other openings as well.
Donc quan nos vinem a la curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que comandem al malaute que sia fleubotomat si aquo es a tu possibla, e vezes le cos de lu ple.	 When we arrive at the stage of performing an operation on it, doctors tell the patient to remain quiet if that is possible; and sometimes they try to make them numb so that they cannot feel anything during the procedure.
E aprop sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos sobre alcuna causa un pauc auta, e pausa dejos lu motz draps.	 If there are two causes for which reason or another, place a bandage over it.
E aprop setz tu sobre la part sinistra de lu, e comanda al ministra que segua a la dextra de lu, le qual extenda la sua vergua a hun de dos latz a la codena dels genetius e a la partida del mirac del ventre.	 Place it on the left side of them, and have the servant extend his leg to the right, extending their length from the glans of the penis to the navel and below the lower border of the ribs.
E aprop pren spatum lat e scindeys la codena dels genetius del mieg loc per la longitut entro prop le pentenilh.	 Place a curved bandage on it, making its length extend towards the abdomen for about half an inch.
E sia fayta la seccio segon rectetut engualment distant de la linha que deveseys la pel dels genetius, entro que pervengua al ciphac blanc comprehendent.	 Take it and stretch out to its entire length until you reach the glans of the penis; then extend further towards the white head of the foreskin.
E excorja aquel, e observa, e guarda te per aysso que tu no inscidas aquel; e la tua excoriacio am la qual aquel excorjas per partida jassia que sia suspenduda am le huou mays e subtilment escruta am la excoriacio segon la quantitat a tu possibla.	 When you open that, observe and guard it so that you do not scratch that; your excision is of the type which removes it from the part in question by means of a series of incisions made according to its size
E aprop perfora le ciphac ple de aygua am perforacio ampla, e extratz tota l’aygua.	 And if you are going to make an incision wide enough for water flow out completely
E aprop separa entre doas labias de la seccio am uncis, e exten le ciphac a las partidas desus; e no toques la codena les genetius comprehendent, e inscideys le ciphac en aquela manieyra que es a tu possible.	 And if you are going to separate the two layers of the section with a cut, and extend it until both sides meet; and do not touch the nerves that comprehend it, and make incisions at the place where it is possible for you
E inscideys aquel am la sua totalitat o en pessas, e majorment le sieu latz subtil, quar si tu no perscrutas exquisidament la inscizio de lu, no es fayta segurtat que la aygua no retorne.	 And if you are going to make it all or most of them, and especially the small ones which if not perfectly performed may cause water to return; be very careful.
Mays si le huou procezeys de aquela defora de la sua codena en la ora de la tua operacio, lahoras quan tu auras complida la seccio del ciphac, retorna dedintz aquel, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la codena dels genetius am sutura, e aprop cura aquel ayssi cum las autras plagua, entro que sia sanat.	 And if the urine is to be discharged from that part of your body during or after your operation, wait until it is done and then return him back into place, and appropriately sew up both layers of the vein over his stitches, and appropriately care for him as you would any other wound, until it is healed.
E si atrobas le huou corromput per autra malautia, lahoras cove que tu lies les vayssels les quals so sore le suspensori, e extrat le huou, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit.	 And if you break or harm the bladder by any other illness, wait until it heals and then return him back into place, and extract it, and appropriately care for him at that location as we've said.
Mays si l’aygua es agreguada en doas partidas esemps, lahoras sapias que doas son las ernias; donc inscideys aquela partida segon que has feyt en l’autra engualment; e si es a tu vist que sia una opera, lahoras tu la fay.	 "The body parts are swollen due to two different types of pains, so choose one and attend to it.
E aprop tu abstergiys le sanc, e entramet en las seccios lana submersa en oli o en oli rozat; e pausa deforo autra lana la qual tu as submersa en vi e oli, e expandeys aquela sobre dos genetius e·l mirac del ventre; e pausa desobre draps doblatz e pulvils, e lia aquels desobre am liament le qual es segon aquesta forma:	 "Then, to alleviate the pain in both legs, place them gently on a soft and warm surface, or alternately on one leg at a time. If you wish to perform this procedure on one side only, lay it gently down first.
e aprop sian preses dos draps e sian humplitz de lana carmenada segon aquesta semblansa; e sian faytas las extremitatz am les quals es premut de coto o de lana humida, e sian agreguatz am strectura en le braguier de las braguas, e la una de las extremitatz prengua del cul entro al dos, e la segonda prengua a la partida del pantenilh, e dos extramitatz sobre dos coyssas dejos e dos extramitatz autras sobre dos angonars, e tota extrictura sia ajustada en le braguier de las braguas.	 "Place two soft and damp towels on the lower part of your legs, gently applying them to the areas where you feel pain or are moist. Stretch out along the inner surface of thighs towards each other, with one end going into the groin and another ending at the front of the pantyhose. Then alternate between the two buttocks and the two arches, adjusting all stretches to be adjusted properly in the area of your thighs.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta hernia es medicada artificialment am cauteri en loc de seccio am ferr; e es que tu prenguas cauteri cutellar subtil e que inscidas am aquel la codena dels ginitius, e es ignit segon que havem recomtat entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc contenent la aygua, e lahoras tu pren cauteri segon aquesta forma:	 "Some artificial hernia is treated with a pointed cautery in the area of incision. Be sure to apply the cautery gently and instruct your assistants on how to use it, ensuring that they know what to do when you reveal white cotton containing water after this treatment.
e es asemblat a letra greca.	 And it has been laid out in Greek
E aprop perfora am aquel ciphac, e es ignit entro que tota la humiditat sia fora-gitada.	 The cautery is to be applied gently and thoroughly, causing all of the moisture on the surface to evaporate completely
E aprop exten le ciphac am uncis, e excorja am uncis, e excorja am cauteri subtil ignit; e inscideys aquel segon que es a tu possible entro que eradiques tot lu; e guarda te del huou que·l foc no·l toque.	 After applying the cautery gently and thoroughly, remove it carefully with a pointed instrument, removing all of its heat as you go along to prevent burning yourself.
E sapias que aquesta operacio es pus salva e pus longinqua de flux de sanc, e milhor que operacio am seccio.	 You know that this operation is both short and very painful in time, and better than any other operation
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat apostema caut en la hora de seccio o en hora de cauteri, o flux de sanc, lahoras cove que tu cures qual contrarietat fa a tu per aquo, am curacio la qual conveneys a lu segon que es dit.	 If you are in danger of having an operation during the cautery time or after cautery is over (during pain), remember to immediately inform your doctor about any such complications that may occur, and follow their advice.
Mays si le malaute es pauruc, e no spera la segonda operacio per la sua horribilitat, lahoras administra perforacio segon que yeu recomti aquo; e es quan es certificat deves tu, per aquo que havem dit de las significacios, que aquela hernia es ayguosa.	 If the patient is frightened and does not wish to undergo a second operation due to its horror, remember to administer medication as recommended by this, so that we said that the hernia will be cured.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute sobre alcuna cezelha elevada, aprop perfora le apostema en la partida pus bassa de lu am spatum lat, e pausa la perforacio segon la longitut del cos.	 Remember to gently apply the ointment in a low area of the body near the belly button, and pause after covering about half the length of the body.
E sia la apercio ampla entro que corro tota l‘aygua.	 Spread it evenly over the entire surface
E aprop pausa sobre le loc coto e lia aquel e layssa aquel, per so que corro le romanent de l’aygua.	 Pause on the area just to and by that side, so that you can spread it uniformly across the back of your body.
E aprop cura aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	 When the abscess has been cured.
Mays si contrarietat es a la egrecio de l’aygua en aquela hora tu perforas aquela: e aquo no es fayt sino per aquo quar le pannicol blanc en le orrifici de la plagua fa contrarietat e prohibeys le eyssiment de l’aygua, lahoras cove que tu metas en la plagua pena o instrument am la qual es extrayta l’aygua dels ydropitz, la forma del qual es precedida; o ajusta en la opprecio de la plagua un petit.	 When the abscess is about to burst through that hole and water begins to flow from it, stop the flow of water by applying a cloth over the opening or an instrument that extracts water drops away, in the manner previously described; or apply a small patch on the abscess to seal off its opening.
E sapias que l’aygua retorna, e es agueguada aprop vi meses o enaviro aquels; e cum es agreguada, lahoras sia perforat segon aquela meteyssa manieyra, quar le malaute ayssi passara les sieus dias.	 You will know when water returns and runs from it immediately after that, or in a short time thereafter; and as soon as the abscess is drained, the patient's days are over
Capitol .lxiii.	 Chapter thirty-three
De seccio sobre hernia carnosa e la curacio de lu.	 About the treatment of a hydrocele and its cure.
Sapias que en la seccio sobre aquesta hernia es temor perdusent a pernicia en las majors disposicios; per que a mi es vista la dimissio de lu e esser salvat per aquela milhor.	 You will know that in the section on this hernia, there is an error to be avoided through care of the greater use; for I see here the dismissal of it and its salvation by means of this remedy.
E yeu so rememorant la operacio en aquela e las specias dels apostemas.	 You should remember how to perform the operation in that manner, including the specifications of the needles.
Donc, dic que l‘apostemas natz en les cos dels quals les genetius so conponutz e es fayt aquo per motas causas: o per superfluitat aguda agra, la qual es efundida als genetius, o per percuscio.	 Then say that the needles are inserted in those places where they connect to tendons and it is necessary for their function; or due to acute congestion caused by an excess of heat, which leads to swelling of the tendons, or from injury.
E es la color de la apostema segon la color del cos, e no es atrobat en lu dolor, e es apostema greu.	 The second letter of the alphabet comes after the first letter in color, it does not feel pain, but is heavy to carry
E fort leu es apostema lapificada, del qual la color es fosca, e no es centiment a lu.	 A sharpened arrow feels lighter than the blunt one, as its dark color does not cause any harm
E alcunas veguadas es fayt per nodacio de las arcerias, e per imflacio de aquelas ayssi quo ja es perceubut la rememoracio de lu, o per imflacio de venas.	 Some veins are squeezed through the arteries and swelling of these areas that causes pain in the memory or from swelling of the veins
Mays aquo que es per imflacio de arcerias es conogut per la dispercio de la apostema quan compremas aquela am les tieus ditz; e no cove que aquel toques.	 This means that when you compress the arteries, it is felt in the chest area and does not feel pain when you touch it.
Mays aquel que es fayt per imflacio de vena no es dispergut de lu alcuna causa deves la compressio am les ditz.	 This means that if veins are swollen from swelling, then there is no cause for compression at the points mentioned
E ja es possible que sobre aquesta specia sia fayta seccio e sobre les autres carns; e es que tu inscida la codena dels genetius, e aprop esten le huou a las partidas desus, e extratz aquel del ciphac blanc, e deliura le suspensori dels vaysels, e ligua les, e inscideys le suspensori pus que tu deliuras aquel de tota partida de las partidas del huou.	 It is possible that you can treat all the joints or just some of them; and if you want to treat the bones of your fingers as well, then bind it with another servant who wraps around it, and ties it, so that when you untie it from one part of the thighs, the rest will be released.
Donc si l’huou ja es am aquelas carnadas consolida, lahoras cove que tu extraguas le huou e inscidas aquel.	 If the joints are already hardened in those areas, then tie it and untie it
E si es adherencia entro alcuna causa del ciphac, o entre aquo que es entre les bayssels, lahoras cove que tu deliures tota aquela adherencia e inscidas aquela per inscizio redonda.	 If there is no reason to compress the phlegm or between the veins, then loosen up and remove that adhesion and tie it as mentioned before.
Mays si es nativitat de carn en le loc de la adherencia la qual es detras, lahoras cove que tu inscidas tot aquo que es de lu, e extraguas le huou ayssi cum havem dit.	 When the attachment point is located at the back of a body part that has been torn away or separated from its origin site, doctors must inject all of these substances into it as quickly as possible to restore normal function
Donc cum es complida la tua operacio, lahoras omple la plagua de lana imfuza en oli rozat e vi; e aprop cura aquela am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	 After your operation is complete, the doctor will apply a cream containing lanolin and paraffin to soothe the wound and take care of any other necessary treatments as needed to ensure healing.
Capitol .lxiv.	 Lection 14.
De la curacio de hernia que es de vitz.	 In the treatment of a hernia that is internal.
Vit es apostema envolut per alcuna envolucio semblant a broto am mollificacio dels testiculs, e es fayt dificil movement exercitiu e deambulacio sobre le malaute.	 The vagina becomes swollen from a similar condition as a hernia in the testicles, making it difficult to move or walk on the abdomen.
E en la curacio de aquesta malautia es per temor per aquo del qual es precedida rememoracio.	 In the treatment of this ailment there is a fear that precedes the remembrance of what came before.
Empero cove que diguam opperacio en aquela segon que fero les primiers.	 However, I will perform the operation in reverse order to avoid complications from occurring first.
E dic que cove que fassas sezer le malaute sobre una cezelha elevada; e aprop enpelleys le suspensori dels testiculs a las partidas dejos; e aprop te la codena dels genetius am les tieus ditz am les baysels que so probdas a la vergua; e tengua aquels autre ministre que tu, e extenda aquels am extencio vehement.	 I will tell you to hold the abdomen elevated and place a cushion under your thighs. And then put support for your testicles at the edge of the bed or chair. And lastly, spread your knees wide apart as possible to allow for full extension of your legs.
E aprop inscideys am spatum lat agut per seccio traversa en le dreyt dels vaysels entro que sian les vayssels descubertz.	 Then insert a tube through the anus in a direction that passes through the right side of the body to reach the veins behind it.
E aprop excorja de tota partida ayssi quo a tu havem dit en extraccio de arceria las quals so en las templas.	 When you have made an incision on the back of the patient, as described in removing the arrow from the arm
E aprop fica en aquelas un’agulha en la qual sia fiel doble, e lia aquel en le primier del locs en les quals accideys vit, e lia aquel autra veguada en le derier de lor.	 You should sew a double needle in the incision that is closest to where it happened and another one further away on the other side.
E aprop inscideys aquels en le mieg loc per seccio dreyta segon la longuesa del cos, e extratz aquo que es agreguat de las humiditatz fetulentas e corruptas.	 Sew a stitch along the length of the body on either side of where it happened, and attach something made from poisonous and corrupt fluids.
E aprop cura la plagua am curacio de las autras plaguas en las quals vols sania esser engendrada per so que caian les vaysels les quals noyreysso un de dos genetius, quar no es mal per aquo.	 Sew a strip along the length of the incision on either side where you want to remove it in order to prevent any other stitches from being made that way and ensure only one is removed out of two potential incisions, which will not cause harm.
Mays si accideys vit a totz les bayssels, lahoras cove que·ls testicols sian extragutz o que les testicols per aquo se cequo am les vayssels, per que sia privat de tot nutriment per la inscizio dels vayssels, e que sian estaborits, o que cequo per so que no sia juvament am aquels.	 If the veins become inflamed as a result of the incision, then make sure to cut them off or remove them from there in order that they do not obstruct nutrition for the stitches and are preserved, or if necessary prevent their removal permanently.
Capitol .lxv.	 Chapter 55
De la cura de hernia entestinal.	 Treatment of an intestinal hernia.
Le adveniment de aquesta hernia es per seccio que endeve en le ciphac extendut sobre le ventre de part dels angunars del mirac del ventre, per que deysendo les budels de aquela ruptura ad alcu dels budels.	 The occurrence of this hernia is due to a cut that extends over the abdomen from one or both inguinal areas towards the midline in such a way as to allow the intestines through into those openings.
E aquesta ruptura es o del ciphac o de excencio de lu, e accideysso aquestas doas specias per motas causas: o percussio, o per sautz, o per clamor, o per elevacio de alcuna causa greu, o per semblantz.	 "This rupture is either of the diaphragm or excess of liquid discharge from it, and this occurs due to two causes: percussion, suction, cry, elevation by a serious cause, or by resemblance.
E·l senhal de aquo, quan es per extencio del ciphac, es que accideys pauc a pauc en lonc temps, e no accideys soptament, e es apostema engual entro ves le preon per so quar le ciphac comprem le budel.	 "The cause of this, when there is excess from the diaphragm, occurs in short intervals and not simultaneously, but it appears every other time that you place your finger near its opening to feel for whether the bladder is contracting.
E le senhal de lu es quan es per seccio del ciphac, quar al comensament fa accidir dolor vehement sobtament; e es apostema divers aparent dejos la codena propdana aparent, e aquo es per eyssiment del budel, e·l cos de lu a las partidas deforo del ciphac.	 "The condition is when there is an obstruction of the diaphragm, and initially it causes intense pain suddenly; and this appearance occurs frequently, and that's because of the presence of the bladder in its cavity.
E alcunas veguadas es fora-getat am le budel la tela, e es apelada aquesta hernia entestinal zirbal.	 "Some bags are removed from the intestine to treat this hernia.
E alcunas veguadas es fayta am ventositat, e alcunas veguadas corr en le budel fenda, e aqui es retenguda, e es am aquo gran pernitia3 del malaute, e alcunas veguadas fa endevenir dolor malvada e majorment quan es premut.	 "Some bags are tightened in the bladder, and some bags fill it with a bad and severe pain when pressed.
E en la curacio de las especias de aquesta malautia am ferr es temor, per que cove que sia esquivat le cazament en aquela.	 "In the treatment of these special cases to avoid making mistakes in that area.
E la manieyra de la operacio de aquela es que comandes al malaute que redugua le budel am la sua ma a las partidas dedintz de la sua conquavitat si obezeys al sieu retornament, e aprop sia envessat sobre le sieu col entre las tuas mas, e eleva las cambas de lu.	 "The key to the operation is that you command the patient to reduce his bladder to its cavity and place your hand over it between your thighs as a cushion, then lift up their legs.
E aprop sten la codena la qual siec la codena dels testicols a las partidas desus, e inscideys la codena dels testicols tota per le lonc; e aprop fiqua en doas labias de la seccio uncis segon que indigeysses a hubrir la seccio am aquels.	 "You have positioned the cushion between their thighs and placed one on each leg, another on their chest, holding onto them with both hands.
E si’ la seccio segon la quantitat que a tu sia possible que de aquela le huou sia foro-getat.	 "The opening has been done as far as it is possible to open it without causing harm or discomfort.
E aprop excorja aquela ciphaqueth les quals so dejos la codena dels testicols, entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc dur de quascuna partida.	 "You now remove the cushion from between their thighs and uncover each of their legs.
Lahoras tu entromet le tieu dit en aquo que siec le testicol, en aquo que es entre ciphac blanc, le qual es dejos la codena del huou, e entre le ciphac segon, e absolve am aquel’adherencia que es en la partida detras del huou.	 "You now proceed to examine each leg, and then the blank space between them, unfastening any bandaging or support you had applied at that place.
E aprop mau am la ma la codena dels testicols a las partidas deforo, e am aysso exten le ciphac blanc en sus am la ma sinestra, e eleva le huou am le ciphac a la partida de la seccio; e comanda al ministre que extenda le huou ensus e tu dissolveys la adherencia que es detras am solucio complida.	 "You now remove any binding you had applied between their legs, and apply it on the opposite hand as well. Then place your other hand over the gap between them, lift up the body gently with both hands to examine its overall health, and command the minister to extend his arm so that he can also examine the patient's body.
E cerqua am les tieus ditz que lay no sia alcuna causa del budel envelopat en le ciphac blanc dur.	 "You inquire whether there is any cause for a hernia concealed in the blank space, as well as in the blank space itself.
Mays si tu atrobas de lu alcuna causa, lahoras tu enpelleys aquel al ventre dejos.	 "If you find no cause, then you must bring it to the belly for examination.
E aprop tu pren una agulha en la qual sia fiel gros fayt de x fiels, e entromet aquel deves le derier del ciphac, le qual es jos la codena dels testicols, la qual siec seccio; e aprop inscideys las extremitatz las quals emineysso del fiel entro que sian quatre fiels, e aprop compausa alcus de lor sobre alcuna figura en manieyra de crotz; e lia am aquel le ciphac del qual havem dit que es dejos la codena dels testicols am fort liament de dos partz.	 "You insert a needle with a fixed width of x inches, and then enter the derringer into its hole, which is where the code resides; thereafter you shall divide the extremities that are on both sides of it by four parts, and arrange them such that they form an equal distance apart from one another.  And after this, align all these parts with a figure in any way that pleases you.
E aprop envolveys las extremitatz dels fiels e lia aquelas am liament vehement entro que alcu dels vayssels que noyrrisso aquels no puscan trametre alcuna causa per so que de aqui no accida apostema caut.	 "After dividing the extremities of the parts and aligning them with a figure as pleases you, prevent any cause that might lead to the movement of any arrow through these arrows from here.
E pausa autra veguada liament segon foro le primier liament, lonh de lu mens tres ditz; e aprop aquestz dos liaments layssa del ciphac le qual es dejos la codena dels testicols la quantitat de la grandeza del dit, e inscideys tot le romanent segon redondeza, e osta de lu le huou.	 "After the first and second limbs are as directed in their length of three digits, align these two limbs to each other with a code that specifies the quantity of size for the digits, and adjust them all into one round shape; then cut off what is not necessary from this.
E aprop inscideys en la partida dejos de la codena dels testicols per seccio de la qual corra sanc e sania ayssi cum havem recomtat en aquo que havem dit.	 "After dividing the code of the digits as directed, align each digit separately according to what we have recommended in this: that is, exactly as suggested.
E aprop aministra lana submersa en oli, e pausa en la plagua; e aministra le liament le qual havem recomtat (e alcunas veguadas le ciphac blanc es cauterizat, le qual havem dit aprop la inscizio de lu temen de flux de sanc, quar motas veguadas accideys aquels) e leyssa le liament entro que per si caia.	 "After immersing the limb in oil and waiting for it to swell, arrange that which we have recommended (and any other parts of the code white are cauterized as previously stated: that is, exactly as specified). And arrange the limbs such that they can come out.
Mays si le cazement de lu es tardat, lahoras de aygua cauda sia embrocat, e pausa sobre aquel entro que caia segon que havem dit.	 When it's time for the treatment to begin, apply water as a remedy and hold over the entrance so that it doesn't happen when you said it would not.
E aprop cura la plagua am l’autra curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanat.	 And then proceed with the other remedies for those pains between which there is health
Capitol .lxvi.	 This marks the beginning of Chapter 66 in a medieval text.
De hernia ventosa.	 Ventricular hernia.
En aquesta hernia no e vist alcu que sia estat ardit sus la curacio de lu am ferr.	 In this hernia, it was not necessary to perform the remedy on her as she already had one done.
E les primiers diyssero que es fayta ayssi cum havem recomtat en la hernia que es am vi; la qual es que tu lies les vayssels aprop la seccio sobre aquela am fecilitat de lu; e aprop secca en le mieg loc en enviro le apostema am aquo que obro aquel, entro que caian les vayssels.	 The first servants would spread the remedy in this way as recommended for the hernia that it is applied to the affected area of the body; and then apply a bandage over it so nothing comes out through those veins.
E cura la plagua segon que havem dit entro que sia sanada.	 Proceed with the second remedy when she has been cured, as advised.
Capitol .lxvii.	 This marks the beginning of Chapter 67 in a medieval text.
De la disropcio que es fayta en les anguonars.	 The dislocation that was applied to her shoulders.
Alcunas veguadas endeve ruptura en les angonars ayssi cum havem dit, e emineys le loc.	 The servants have done everything needed for this remedy and they will rest now.
E no deyssen als genetius alcuna causa dels budels al genetius; e si deyssen, aquo es pauc; e retorna s’en en totas horas.	 They do not need any cause from the bowels to the groin; and if they exist, this is rare; and returns in all hours.
Mays si es prolonguat le temps am aquo, es ajustada fissura en le ciphac entro que deysenda le budel en le ciphac; e accideys aquo per la extencio del ciphac le qual es en le angonars ayssi cum havem dit, la qual causa es quar le ciphac es estendut, e aprop es mollificat e·l loc es apostemat e emineys.	 If the time is prolonged in this way, it was necessary to perform a fistula into the bowels at that location; and then proceed as if you were on her shoulders, causing it with the loosening of the bowels which extended there like they said, making the area moist and soothing.
E la cura de lu es am cauteri ayssi quo es precedida la narracio de lu.	 The treatment for him/her consists of puncturing points on the surface of the foot.
E alcunas veguadas es curada am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: e es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos entre las tuas mas, e aprop secca le loc de la ruptura dels apostemas emineys am seccio per la latitut segon la quantitat de tres ditz.	 After puncturing points on the foot surface, the patient should lie flat with their back supported and rest for a while so that any internal bleeding can be minimized during this period of three days.
E aprop strenh le ciphac blanc que es jos la codena entro que sia descubert.	 After puncturing points on the foot surface, it is advisable to apply a white cloth soaked in some solution so that any internal bleeding can be minimized and the wound is covered until you discover what needs to be done next.
E aprop pren le ray e pausa aquel sobre le loc eminent del ciphac, e prem aquel al preon del ventre.	 After puncturing points on the foot surface and applying a white cloth soaked in solution, it is advisable to press firmly against an area of the abdomen, pressing down gently towards the chest.
E aprop cus le dos locs eminentz sobre la extremitat del ray del ciphac, e ajusta am la sutura un de aquels am l’autre.	 After puncturing points on the foot surface and applying a white cloth soaked in solution, it is advisable to press firmly against both sides of the area surrounding the wound, adjusting the pressure equally between them.
E aprop extratz la extremitat del ray, e no inscidas del ciphac de tot, ni no extenda le huou, ni autra causa ayssi cum yeu te fi saber en la curacio de hernia entestinal.	 After puncturing points on the foot surface and applying a white cloth soaked in solution, it is advisable to stretch out your arm while keeping the rest of the body immobile, not extending or contracting any part of the body, as this will cause confusion during the treatment for an intestinal hernia.
E aprop cura aquela am la curacio de las plaguas, e cum inscideyses les fiels, mundifica aquela e restaura la plagua entro que sia consolidada; quar le ciphac es contrayt e no es ajustada la eminencia de ruptura.	 After puncturing points on the foot surface and applying a white cloth soaked in solution for dealing with ulcers or other wounds, if you need to stretch it out and return it back into place so that it is fully consolidated; as this may cause injury or misalignment of the wound area.
E cauteri es milhor en aquest loc, quar es pus propda a salut.	 When you have made an incision in this location, it will be very beneficial to health.
Capitol .lxviii.	 Chapter 85
De mollificacio de la codena dels testiculs.	 To alleviate the pain of testicles
Motas veguadas la codena dels testiculs en alcus homes es mollificada per aysso quar las carns que so entre aquela son mollificadas, e es fedat le reguardament de lu.	 The moles that cause the pain between the thighs are also mollified because the circulation to that area is increased and it helps reduce inflammation.
Adonc necessari es ad aquel que es preguat en la curacio de lu que fassa jazer le malaute segon le sieu dos, e enscida tota la codena la qual es mollificada sobre la codena natural; e aprop que ajuste doas labias am la sutura.	 If necessary to perform surgery on that area of the patient's body, first apply a patch of mollified flesh over the affected area, and then adjust two stitches at its edges.
E si vols, cus en le comensament la superfluitat de la codena mollificada am tres cozeduras o quatre e am ferma sutura.	 If you wish, use three or four moles of mollified flesh to fill in the incision and sew it up firmly.
E aprop inscideys entre las suturas; e aprop cura per curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat e caian les fiels.	 Then stitch between the stitches, and ensure proper healing of the wounds so that they are well-healed and their fields have closed.
Capitol .lxix.	 Chapter 99
De castracio.	 Castration.
Sapias que castratio en nostre ley es excomengada, mays per causa es legut a mi que·m remembre de lu en aquest libre; e no es necessaria la rememoracio de lu sino per doas manieyras, de las quals es la una per so que aquo sia en la sciensa del metge quan es enterroguat de aquela, que sapia la curacio de lu al qual accideys; e l’autra manieyra es que nos motas vetz havem necessitat de castracio de autras bestias per les juvamentz nostres per aquelas, ayssi cum de motos, e de bocs, e de porcs, e de semblantz a las bestias.	 You know that castration in our law is forbidden, except for cases where it's necessary to remember how and when this procedure was done by the physician who is interrogating you about that; or for another reason which may be necessary, such as breeding bulls, horses, pigs, and other animals.
E donc dic que castracio es fayta en dos manieyras: o per atrissio, o per fissura a seccio.	 When circumcision occurs through either traction or tear
Mays en aquela que es fayta per atrissio, la via de la opera es que nos fassam cezer la bestia en aygua cauda entro que·ls genetius de lu sian mollificatz e sian linhitz e que pendan.	 In order to perform a circumcision through traction, the path of the operation is that we make a small incision into which a part of the foreskin may be pulled and stretched as desired by the surgeon and his assistants who are holding it.
E aprop pren aquels am la tua ma entro que sian resols e no apparescan dejos le tocament.	 Then, take these things off your hands so they cannot touch each other
Mays en castracio fayta per fissura e seccio, cove que tu tenguas la bestia e premas la codena dels testicols de lu am la ma senestra.	 When circumcision occurs through tear or tear and cut, you must hold the foreskin tightly to prevent it from slipping off during the operation.
E aprop lia le suspensori, e inscideys sobre quascun huou am una seccio entro que dos huous proceseysso.	 Then, take a clamp and thread onto which two points you want to make incisions between them so that they are both processed
E aprop inscideys aquels pus que auras quascu excorjat.	 Then, put the clamps on what you have cut out
E no leysses sobre aquels del ciphac alcuna causa, sino le ciphac subtil le qual es sobre les vazes.	 Do not let go of these things for any reason, but leave them to rest and let them heal from the inside.
E aquesta manieyra de castracio es milhor la qual es fayta per atrissio, quar atrissio fort leu layssa alcuna causa dels testicols per que la bestia desira coyt.	 The method of circumcision through traction is considered the most preferable when it is performed without causing any harm to the testes so that the foreskin may retract and desire to cover itself.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	 Then, take care of the bandage until it has healed.
Capitol .lxx.	 And then you can start your analysis
De la cura de hermafrodozia.	 Of hernia cure
Hermafrodozia en les homes es segon dos manieyras: la una es quar o appar en aquo que siec l’espazi en la codena de testiculs, en aquel que es entre dos testiculs figura quar cunh de femna en la qual so pels.	 Gout in the legs is called the second stage of hemorrhoids: one is four or five fingers wide at its widest point, which is between two finger areas where it appears.
E alcunas veguadas de aquel corr urina le qual es en la codena dels testiculs.	 Some veins in that region can burst urine as they are near the anus area.
Mays en las femnas es una specia: e es que·l conh de la femna sobre le pentenilh es ayssi cum dos testiculs de home un pauc de tot yminiheys a la partida deforo ayssi cum le perpucii de home e dos testicols.	 In women, there is another kind: when the swelling of one part of the vagina reaches two finger areas on both sides simultaneously and at the same time as the penis pushes out or two fingers are protruding from inside.
E la curacio es de tres specias: de dos dels homes e de una specia de las femnas.	 The cure is in three stages: for two of them, it's enough to use a pointed cautery; and for another kind in women, it may be necessary as well
E es que cove que tu inscidas aquelas carns ajustadas entro que efuga la emprecio de aquela, e aprop que cures aquelas am curacio de las autras plaguas.	 It is that you should cut off those affected areas from what escapes and cure the infection of the surrounding wounds.
E en la segonda specia dels homes de la qual yeys urina la qual es en la codena dels testiculs, no es curacio ni opperacio en lu.	 In stage two for men in which urine is caused by swelling near the anus area, there is neither cure nor operation involved.
Capitol .xxi.	 Chapter 21
De lentinge e de carn eminent per causas de las femnas.	 From the beginning to the end of the vagina for causes in women.
Lentige fort leu es ajustada sobre causas naturals entro que es etressat e es fayt leg le reguardament; e alcunas veguadas es magnificada en alcunas femnas en tant entro que es spandit ayssi cum en les homes e perve entro al coito.	 The vagina is tight in natural causes, so it is stretched and relaxed when needed; and some veins are enlarged as well in some women, just like in men and through the vagina.
Adonc cove que tu tenguas la superfluitat de lentinge am la tua ma o am unci e inscidas.	 When you have excess fluid around your mouth or under your chin and eyelids
E no ultimes en inscizio, majorment en le preon de la razit, per so que no endevengua flux de sanc.	 And if it overflows, first compress the area to prevent further bleeding.
E aprop cura aquela am curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanada.	 And with care, gently apply a dressing to heal the wounds inside of them.
Mays carn nascuda es carn que nays en le horrifici de la mayre entro que umple aquel, e fort leu es eyssit a las partidas deforo segon semblansa de coa (e per aquo alscus primiers appelero aquo “malautia caudada”); donc cove que nos inscidam ayssi cum inscidem lentinge, e curem aquela entro que sia sanada.	 Newly born skin is the skin that covers the worst parts of our body and prevents entry into it. It has a protective layer (and for this reason, we call these parts "vulnerable area"), so make sure to apply dressings gently and carefully to heal them.
Capitol .lxxii.	 [No translation provided]
De curacio de alratica.	 For the care of wounds.
Alratica es que le conh de la femna no sia perforat, o sia le trauc petit.	 Do not open up wounds in a woman or be too rough with them.
E es o natural o accidental.	 It is either an accident or something else.
Accidental es per malautia la qual ha precedit, e aquela es fayta o per carn nada ajustada o per ciphac subtil o espes.	 Accidental refers to injury caused by negligence, carelessness, or through rough handling (which can cause a more severe injury).
E es fayt o en le preon de la mayre, o en les costatz de lu, o en le pus sobira de lu, o en le pus bas de lu, e prohibeys de cuoyt e de enprenguacio e de enfantament, e fort leu prohibeys las mestruas.	 It can be on the head, face or chest, arm, leg, shoulder, back, and forbidden areas for touching, handling, or injury, but also the most sensitive parts (forehead, mouth, nose, ears).
E la cognicio de aquela es fayta per reguardament de la metrona, si la oppilacio es apparent, propdana; mays si no es apparent, lahoras tu cerqua aquela am les tieus ditz o am le ray.	 The recognition of that is caused by the weather, or if it's apparent, you need to cover it immediately; otherwise, apply something soft on it.
Mays si oppilacio es per ciphac subtil, e es propda a las doas labias, lahoras tu coyta e disromp aquela.	 When the opening up of the bowels becomes subtle, it is customary to use two pairs of gloves, and tear apart that which has come between them
E es que pauses sobre las doas labias pulvils, e aprop pausa les tieus ditz indicz de amdoas las mas encemps.	 And if the soft stools pause on both sides, apply pressure at the points indicated above to remove the cause of discomfort
E la femna sia sobre le sieu dos, las sieuas coyssas extendudas, e aprop exten las doas labias am forsa entro que aquel ciphac subtil sia romput e la oppilacio sia uberta.	 The woman should lie on her back with her legs spread wide open, and then press the two pairs of gloves to remove that which has become hidden and pained.
E aprop pren lana e enbeu le4 en oli e pausa aquela sobre·l loc, e jagua am home le dia per so que·l loc inscis no sia consolidat.	 Then take the four points at the back of your hand and place them on top; hold this in position while lying down to prevent that part from becoming consolidated.
Mays si le ciphac es gros e espes, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel am spatum lat o am fuelha de mirta.	 When the cause is large and hard, tear apart or remove it gently by pulling out the anus inwards towards your body.
Mays si la oppilacio es per carnada, lahoras suspen aquela am unci, e inscideys aquela.	 If the opening up of the bowels is due to internal causes, suspend that which has come between them, and remove it.
E sian am tu las medicinas que fan cessar flux de sanc ses mordicacio, ayssi cum ahacatia, e sanc de drago, e enses, ajustat am album de huou.	 Use the medicines that cease the pain caused by strong or hard stools, like laxatives, and constipation cures, adjust your diet accordingly.
E aprop aministra una canulha de plom ampla per so que la plagua no sia consolidada leugierament.	 Then apply a wide-bore needle to prevent the abscess from being compressed.
E tengua aquela per alcus jorns e aministra calgua de li sec.	 Hold that for as long as necessary and apply warm compresses.
E aprop sia curada am l’autra curacio de consolidacio entro que sia sanada.	 The other servant should assist in keeping the patient's body warm while they wait for recovery
E alcunas vetz accideys en la mayre nativitat de autres carns, e lahoras cove que inscidas segon aquesta manieyra.	 Certain parts of the anatomy are more prone to gout attacks and it is advisable that you take care with these joints.
Mays si aysso es per apostema crancos, a l’apostema crancos le qual es en la mayre no sia fayta contrarietat am ferr en deguna manieyra.	 If so, then avoid exposing the big toe to cold extremities or any other part of the body that is prone to gout attacks.
Capitol .lxxiii.	 Chapter 33
De la cura de emorroydas e de tayl e de botor roja que accideysso en le conh de las femnas.	 From the cure of hemorrhoids and itching in the anal region
Emorroydas so apprecio dels orificis de motas venas entro que de aquelas corro mot sanc continuadament; e cum so antiquadas emorroydas e son fayts theyls.	 Hemorrhoids are often found at the openings of veins, and when these varicose veins continue to harden, then hemorrhoids occur.
E ja yeu he dit en la divisio las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e diyre ayssi aquelas que recebo curacio e aquelas que no recebo curacio.	 Then in the division of these and their necks, and direct to those who receive care and those who do not receive care.
Donc dic que emorroydas e theyls quan so en le preon de la mayre e no apparo al sentiment, lahoras en aquelas no sia fayta curacio am ferr.	 Then I will say that hemorrhoids and itching when they are at their peak or don't appear with the feeling, then care for them is not provided.
Mays aquelas las quals so en le orrifici de la mayre sobre las quals catz sentiment, so aquelas que so curadas.	 Those that occur in the openings of the greater veins and those that have a strong feeling, they are treated.
E cove que tu metas la femna en mayso frega e aprop exten atheyl am les forfexs, o am drap aspre, e inscideys aquelas am las razitz.	 Be careful when applying ointment to the female's affected area and avoid touching other parts of her body with bare hands or fingernails; be certain that you do not contaminate the affected areas.
E aprop pulveriza sobre aquelas deves le fluxs del sanc de una de las polveras insciscivas ses mordicacio, ayssi cum acassia e semblant ad aquels.	 When someone has a feverish fit of gout, they should be placed in a cool bath to break the fever and relieve pain from the foot.
E aprop enpellesca les sieus pes per una hora, e aprop pausa aquela en aygua freja.	 Place their feet in cold water for an hour, then cover them with a cool cloth or cloth.
E si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras fay aquela sezer en decoccio de sumat e de scorsas de milgranas e de gualas e de semblantz.	 If the gout continues to come on despite attempts at breaking it with cold water and cloths soaked in vinegar or scalding grains, then doctors should resort to a more radical remedy.
E aprop pren farina de ordi e comfiys aquela am miel e vi agre e fay emplastre am aquo sobre le dos de lu.	 If flour is used instead of meal and mixed with honey and vinegar, the mixture should be applied directly to the feet.
E si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, fay adherir am dos ventozas, e a las mamilhas ses escarificatio.	 If gout has been cured, then it is done, but if not, adhere to the use of compresses and poultice.
E aprop pren lana e submergeys aquela am suc de coliandre o am suc de arnagloza o am suc de guarravier am vi pentit e fay adherir al loc; e aprop cura le loc am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	 If you use honey, wine vinegar or bear's wort as a compress instead of flour water mixture and follow the procedure to heal wounds, then continue treating the area until it is healed.
Mays athyl rog le qual es de aspre reguardament, cove que tu inscidas aquo que a tu appar de aquel segon que he dit en theyl engualment.	 If you are asked about what to do when pain occurs in the joints after the application of cold humors and gout has been cured by poultice or compresses, then say that it's customary for doctors to treat such cases with a pointed cautery.
E cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	 Then cure this until it is healed.
Capitol .lxxiv.	 The 44th chapter of the medical text.
De perforacio de eyssedura accident en la mayre.	 Perforation of the esophagus in large amounts.
Motas specias de apostemas accideysso en la mayre, ayssi cum cranc e apostema lapident e ulceracios e adhubelat e erpetromens e fistulas emorroyas e raguarrias e thyl e autres apostemas.	 When it is necessary to make an incision between the two thighs of a patient and place cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest holding their hands; then comes here:
E yeu ja he dit aquestas malautias e las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e las curacios de lor en la divisio.	 You have already made the incision between the patient's thighs and placed cushions under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest holding their hands; then comes here:
E cove que yeu digua en aquest tractat de apostema caut le qual ve en la mayre quan es dels apostemas que collegeysso sania, e si vols saber en qual manieyra se fa la opperacio de lu am ferr.	 You must examine in this treatise on the method to be used when making an incision between the two thighs of a patient and place cushions under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest holding their hands; then comes here:
Adonc cove que tu consideres si la dolor de la apostema en le sieu comensament es aguda am percussio e flecma e febre, e vezes aquel enrogezir e si catz sobre aquel le sentiment, lahoras no·t coytes am perforacio de lu, e cura aquel am aquo que ajuda sobre la maturacio entro que cesse la acuitat dels accidentz.	 After you consider whether the joint pain at the beginning is sharp and accompanied by swelling, bruising, and fever, if they are present, do not make an incision into it; but instead use this method to help in curing it as soon as possible so that the sharpness of the attacks may subside.
E lahoras cove que tu fassas cezer la femna sobre una cezelha que aia doas cezelhas; e recline sobre le sieu dos e ajusta les sieus pes a la partida pus dejos del ventre, e las sieus coyssas sian expandudas, e pausa les sieus brasses dejos les sieus denols, e lia quascus am liament ad aquo convenient.	 After you have shaved the woman's body with a razor blade that is attached to her and recline on top of them; adjust their legs in position under your belly, and spread their thighs so they are open; place your hand over it as a guide for this procedure.
E aprop la matrona segua del latz dreyt e aministre le instrument am le qual es ubert le orrifici de la mayre, la forma del qual vindra en aquelas causas que·s faran aprop.	 After the lady follows from her left and administers the instrument with which you will first remove the cause of greatest pain as it appears to be in these cases.
E cove quan vols ministrar aquest instrument que tu fiques am lo ray le preon de la mayre de la femna, e aquo que del instrument es intrat en la mayre no sia mays que·l preon de la mayre e leda le malaute.	 When you want to use this instrument in a woman's larger breast, and the instrument enters into that breast it must not be more than half of its length
Mays si l’estrument es major que·l preon de la mayre, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils sobre la textura del preon de la mayre per sso que sia prohibit l’intrament de tot instrument en le preon de la mayre.	 It is forbidden to enter the instrument into that breast if it's larger than half of its length.
E cove que tu pauses le vertitge que corr en le strument del latz pus desus e que le ministre tengua le strument e revolva le vertitge entro que sia ubert le orrifici de la mayre.	 You must ensure that the minister handling it is aware of its proper use and should handle it to make sure it goes in as far as possible without touching the larger breast.
E cum appar la excitura, e es tocada am la ma e es leon e molh, lahoras cove que tu secces aquela deves le cap de lu am spatum lat.	 After making an incision and removing any excess fat from around it, you must ensure that the minister touches nothing else but its tip as he removes it.
E cum la sania es evacuada, lahoras cove que tu pauses en la plagua una meca submersa en oli rozat o oli vert en le qual sia alcuna stiptisitat; e pausa la calca7 en la seccio en le preon de la mayre.	 After the sac has been evacuated, you must ensure that any water or other substance in which there is a risk of infection does not enter into the incision over the breast.
E pause deforo la mayre e sobre le pentenilh lana munda submersa en aygua en la qual sian bulidas malvas.	 After removing the larger breast, you must ensure that no water in which there are harmful organisms enters into the incision area.
E aprop sia curada aprop dos dias am enguent le qual conveneys ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	 Then, you should wait for two days after this procedure to allow it time to heal properly.
E alcunas veguadas es lavada la mayre e la plagua enayssi que es cristerisat am aygua e mel, e aprop am aygua en la qual es bulhida razit de liri o de aristologia longua, e aprop retorna al enguent.	 After washing the larger breast and incision area thoroughly with water that is clean of microbes and minerals, you must ensure that no water in which there are harmful organisms enters into it, and return to the waiting room as soon as possible after this procedure
E si la plagua es dedintz en la mayre ameguada, lahoras cove que tu sias prohibit de la curacio de lu am ferr, habantz cura aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio.	 When the pleurisy arises in a larger vessel, doctors usually advise against applying any heat to it as that may cause further complications
Capitol .lxxv.	 Chapter 55 of
A ensenhar las matronas en qual manieyre les enbrios bius sian medicatz quan yeysso segon figura no-natural.	 Doctors usually use dressings on wounds that are not naturally covered.
Necessaria causa es que la matrona conogua en le comensament la figura del enfantament natural per senhals de lu, e es que quan tu vezas la femna expremar a las partidas dejos e desira odorar le ayre, e sobre aquo es enleujada per aquo que sobre ela es del part, e festina le eyssiment del enbrio, lahoras sapias que aquest part es segon figura natural, e es l’eyssiment de lu sobre le sieu cap, e la segondina am aquel o suspensa o pendent del ombelic.	 It is necessary to know from the beginning what kind of dressing is needed for a clean wound and when it hurts then you should seek medical advice, especially if this part is a second natural covering and in such case there are incisions on both sides of the abdomen, usually suspended or hanging down over the belly button.
Donc cum tu vezes aquels senhals, lahoras cove que·l ventre de lu sia compremut per so que l’embrio deysenda leugerament quar quan deyssen sobre le sieu cap, deysen a lu la segondina, e es mondada de aquelas superfluitatz am bona mondificacio.	 Therefore when you come across such wounds, doctors advise to keep the belly of the patient as flat as possible so that the dressing will not interfere with breathing and avoid unnecessary procedures
Mays aquel que es otra aquest part es no-natural e no-lausable, quar quan le enbrio es eyssit sobre sos pes e·l cos de lu es eyssit devant le cap de lu e·ls pes de lu, e la ma de lu una, o al pe de lu i, o es eyssit le cap de lu e la ma de lu, o al ventre de lu, e fort leu es convertit sobre le sieu col, e semblant de las figuras de lu no-lausablas.	 In such cases if the part is not naturally covered and cannot be left exposed while the body heals, when the dressing has to be removed from the patient's head or chest they will remove it from the belly of the patient and leave them on their hand, foot or place it over the stomach.
Don necessaria causa es a la matrona que sia savia e subtil en totas aquelas causas, e que·s guarde de error e de decepcio.	 When necessary cause arises from the mistress who shall be wise and subtle in all those causes, and to keep errors and disappointments out of it
E yeu so mostrant tota figura de aquelas, e qual engen es en aquelas per so que sia significat per aquo e sia stat sobre aquo.	 And you should adorn the whole figure with those, and what will be seen in them is that which means by this and shall stand on this.
Quan le feyt es eyssit sobre le sieu cap per egrecio natural, e aquel es vehement sobre la femna e es fayt a lu part dificil, e vezes la vertut de lu ja debelitada, lahoras fay aquela sezer , o que las femnas tenguan lu, e evapora le conh de lu am fenugrec coyt e am olis humitz.	 When the phlegm rises over his head by natural means, and it is very violent on the woman and makes breathing difficult for her, doctors call that gout.
E aprop entrometa la metrona entre les sieus ditz espatum petit e fenda am aquel la segondina, o secce aquela am la sua ungla entro que corro aquo que es en ela de humiditat.	 Then bring the mistress between her second and third fingers, so that when he is in her with wetness it will run out of its moisture.
E preme le ventre de la femna entro que deyssenda le fet.	 Press on the abdomen for delivering the child.
Mays si no deyssen, lahoras cove que la femna sia cristirizada de mucellage de ptilli e mucellage de fenugrec am cizami.	 If not to be delivered, doctors say that a woman should be purified of mucus and phlegm from the intestines and chest.
E aprop comanda a lu, aprop le cristeri, que sia compremuda e fay aquela stornudar am condisi; e te la boca de lu e·l nas de lu per huna hora, quar le fet sira foro-getat tantost.	 Then command the nurse to take him, and command her to purify his breasts and do that with a damp cloth, and wipe his mouth and nose for one hour as he breathes out so much
E si las doas mas del fet so foro-getadas al comensament, lahoras cove que tu redusiscas aquelas am fecilitat petit a petit.	 If the two fingers of the child are first too weak to grasp anything, doctors say that you should reduce their flexibility little by little.
Mays si no obezeys al intrament, lahoras pausa la femna sobre una cezelha e leva les pes de lu sus, e aprop concuceys la cezelha sobre la terra; e la femna sia tenguda que no caia deves la concussio.	 When the patient is in a position to lie on his belly and raises their legs, place the cushion beneath them, another servant stands at the foot of the bed holding it down so that they do not slip off; and have the servant hold the cushion tightly against the ground so that she does not fall from slipping.
E si las mas no son dedintz tornadas e morr le fet, lahoras inscideys aquelas e extratz le romament del fet o lia le cors a la ma de lu am drap e extratz aquel am equalitat, quar aquel sira foro-getat.	 If the matter is not improved or worsens after this procedure, then place the intestines in the cavity of the body and remove them from their chest to the patient's hand, and extract that part equally, where it should be removed for good.
De eyssiment del embrio sobre les sieus pes.	 From the beginning of the pregnancy to the time of delivery (i.e., during childbirth).
Quan le fet yeys sobre les sieus pes, lahoras cove que tu impelliscas aquels en sus, e aprop convertas le fet petit, e aprop que engualhes aquel, e aprop que prenguas un pe de lu e extendas aquels petit a petit.	 When the child is born on their chest, have the doctor pull them out quickly and firmly, and place the newborn baby in your arms, and hold onto it tightly, and then gently take off one piece at a time.
Mays cum son eyssit entro a las coyssas, lahoras tu comanda a lu que se exprema, e fay aquela extornudar am condizi, quar sira foro-getat si Deus lo vol.	 When the child is born into your arms, have them lie down and remove their head from between their thighs as quickly as possible; where it should be removed if God wills this to happen.
E si no es foro-getat am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras tu retorna le fet petit a petit entro que pauses aquel segon figura natural, quar aquel sira lahoras foro-getat am leugier eyssiment.	 If what we recommended is not improved or worsens after this procedure, then have the newborn baby returned to you in pieces gradually into their usual shape, where it should be removed if they are no longer alive.
E si es prohibit am tot aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras pren de musellage de altea e de goma dissolvuda, e percuteys tot en le mortier per bona percussio, e aprop linieys am aquo le conh de la femna, el pus bas del ventre de lu.	 If what we recommended is forbidden by law or custom to do as you recommend it, have a witness take note of it and dissolve the gum in oil; beat thoroughly until good pounding occurs, and place your hand on top of their belly button, below the navel of them.
E aprop fay aquela cezer en aygua tebeza, entro que consegua les ypocondias.	 "And bring cold water here.
E cum vezes que las partidas dejos de lu so lenificadas, lahoras fay a lu subfumiguacio de mirta e sub-pausa aquela a lu.	 And when the parts are being removed, put them under a gauze and hold it in place with a bandage or something similar.
E quan te la sub-fumiguacio per una hora, lahoras tu la fay sezer sobre una cezelha, e aprop fay aquela stornudar e extrenh la boca de lu, e levas de aquela, e prem la partida pus bassa del ventre de lu am leugiera compressio, quar le fet sira tantost foro-getat.	 After 1 hour, you place a bandage over her face and gently pull down and out of the mouth, remove it, press on the lower part of the abdomen towards your groin to apply pressure, in order for it to stop spreading further
Eyssiment del fet sobre les sieus denols e las suas mas.	 This is a medical treatment you are performing on their head and chest.
Quan le fet eyssira segon aquesta forma, lahoras tu engenies en entrometen las suas mas petit a petit; e aprop la femna stia evessada sobre le sieu col, e les pes de lu pengo en jos, e aquelas sia jasent sobre le lieyt, e complegua las suas mas.	 After performing this method on them, you gently insert the gauze one by one into their small holes; and put a cloth over their back, support their head with your hand, and keep it steady.
E aprop prem sobre le ventre de lu petit a petit, e aprop extratz aquo que es dejos les pes de lu de las aurelhas entro que sia preparada en la partida pus dejos.	 And after pressing down on their abdomen one by one, remove the cloth from under them in preparation for placing another one over their chest to keep it steady.
E si le fet no es fora-getat, lahoras pren les pes de lu e mau aquels am movement vehement, e aprop prem aquo que es sobre les ypocondres petit a petit entro que le fet puege a las partidas desus.	 If the pain does not stop, you take their feet and move them vigorously until they begin to leave the parts that are bothering them.
E aprop entrometa las suas mas e engualhe le fet petit a petit, e comanda a la femna que se exprema entro que le fet sia foro-getat.	 After inserting their small into their holes one by one and keeping it steady with your hand on the back, you tell them to begin pulling until they are completely free from pain.
Eyssiment del fet latutidinalment pendent una de las suas mas.	 In a downward position towards one of their thighs.
Sia engeniat en reduccio de la ma de lu, mays si no podes aquela reduzir, lahoras eleva la femna e fe aquela anar.	 Place your hand on the breast and lift it up to that part.
E si anar no pot, lahoras fay la jazer sobre le lieyt, e concuteys las coyssas de lu am concussio vehement, e aprop aministra liamentz les quals yeu e recomtatz de mucillages.	 If you cannot do so, the doctor will apply pressure to that part and recommend treatment for swelling caused by gout.
E si es vengut le enfantament, lahoras fay aquela sezer sobre cezelha, e aprop studia sobre la reduccio de la ma, e enguala le fet segon figura natural, e fay stornudar la femna e comanda a lu que comprema a si entro que sia foro-getat.	 If the child is injured, the doctor will place their hand on that part and apply pressure to compress it, encouraging the patient to press down gently if there is an external wound.
Eyssiment del fet sobre·l col expandudas las suas mas e la fassia de lu es al dos de la sua mayre.	 Place your hand over the stomach towards one of their thighs and lift it up as much as possible, keeping the other leg flat on the ground.
Cove que la matrona tengua la ma del fet e aprop revolva aquel petit a petit, e eque aquel am facilitat.	 The nurse should have the child's hand and gently roll that part little by little, making it easier to do so.
E cum es e quant so es engualhat, e lahoras pausa sobre le conh de lu aquo que havem recomtat de oli e de mucellages.	 When this happens and as soon as you notice swelling or pain in that part, the doctor will recommend treatment with oil and ointments.
E aprop comandas a lu que·s maugua petit a petit, e quan auras feyt aquo, lahoras fay aquela cezer sobre una cezelha e comanda li que sia inclinada sobre le latz dreyt, e aprop comanda a lu que sia compremuda; e fay aquela stornudar am condizi.	 Then tell the child to gently roll it up little by little, and when you see swelling there, press with your hand on one of their thighs and encourage them to lie flat on their back, pressing that area down gently as well.
Exitus foetus praeparati super latus.	 The fetus exits above the fold.
Quan deyssen a horrifici de la mayre segon aquesta manieyra, considera, e lahoras tu inscideys la segondina am la tua ungla entro que sia evacuada de la humiditat.	 If you suspect an infection of the second nature with this madness, consider treating it and wait until the first one is eliminated from humidity.
E si le fet es suspendut sobre la cara e·l col de lu, lahoras tu inscideys aquela del embelic, per so que no sia retengut e mora.	 If a fetor is suspended over the face and neck of him, wait until that one fades away to prevent it from remaining and causing harm.
E aprop empelleys le fet a las partidas dedintz entro que pauses aquel segon que cove, e manda a la femna que comprema a si alcunas veguadas, e el sira fora-getat am eyssiment leugier, si Dieus o vol.	 Then, remove the fet from the fingertips and wait until that second one fades away as well, send another woman to check if there are any veins visible, and let it be checked for any wounds or burns if necessary.
Exitus geminorum aut foetuum multorum.	 The exit of twins or multiple fetuses.
Sapias que gemels motas veguadas so natz, e alcunas vetz naysso tres o quatre , mays aquo es estranh e tart s’endeve; mays v so causas foro natura, e no vivo.	 If there are twins in multiple fetuses that were separated, and some veins were missing from three to four of them, this is strange and unusual; may be due to nature or nurture.
E conte aquelas, ja sia que sian montiplicatz, una segondina, e son seperatz per ciphac, distingen aquels enter le liguament en l’ombilic de cascun de aquels E alcunas veguadas so foro-getatz ayssi cum es un fet per eyssiment natural leugier, e so eysitz alcunas veguadas per eyssiment no-lausabla ayssi cum havem recomtat.	 If they are twins that were separated at birth and some veins were missing from one to four of them, this is unusual; it may be due to natural causes or not, as some veins may be missing because of recommendations made by others.
E si son dificils alcus de lor deves le enfantament e perveno ad aquo que havem dit de las figuras no-naturals, lahoras tu cura aquels ayssi cum havem recontat.	 If they are difficult to understand or come from artificial figures, the doctors treat them as if they were recommended by others.
E si’ la matrona subtil e fassa aquo que fa am facilitat e subtilitat, e am tarditat, e sia ingeniat segon tota figura segon que es a lu preparat de l’engen amenant a salut.	 When the subtle mistress does this by doing it in a simple and delicate manner, taking time, and using ingenious ideas for all figures after preparing from the beginning of health
Rememoratio eius quod formatur in matrice ex embrionibus et Abortiuntur.	 They are formed in the matrix from embryos and are aborted.
Alcunas veguadas son formatz en la mayre un, e dos, e tres, e quatre, e v, e vi, e vii, e mays x, e ja es deves mi verificat que una femna abortem ne getet vi, e una autra x totz formatz, la qual causa fo fayta per mensuracio dels glorios savis.	 The seven days of the week are Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, Friday and Saturday.
E tot aysso cove que sia en la sciencia de la matrona quar fort leu ad aquela parve semblant de aquo, e donc opause se ad aquo am so que cove.	 And that is all as to the science of the mistress who had very little resemblance to this and therefore paused in order to do it like this.
Capitol .lxxvi.	 The sixtysixth capital
De extraccio del fet quan es mort.	 Death is pronounced when death occurs.
Quan tu curas le fet mort am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la medicacio e no es defora eyssit, e tu yest forsat usar de opperacio am ma, lahoras cove que consideras si la femna es de sana vertut e no es am alcu dels accidentz per les quals sobre ela es temuda perdicio.	 When you have cured the dead person in this division of medicine and not yet expired, you must make it known whether or not she is healthy and not harmed by accidents for which he should be careful loss.
Lahoras cove que la femna sia envessada sobre le lieyt sobre le sieu dos, e sia le cap de lu enclinat enjos e las coyssas de lu sian elevadas.	 The doctor should place the patient on their back and raise her head and legs.
E·l ministre tengua aquela de doas partz o sia liada en le lieyt per so que·l cos de lu no se extenda deves la extraccio del fet.	 The minister should have them laid down flat to prevent the body from extending out of bounds during death.
E aprop tu humecta la boca de la mayre de lu am olis humitz e am mucellage de altea e de fenugrec e de semensa de li.	 You have already placed a cushion under them, another on their legs, and another on their chest. Now you are going to perform the first step of the procedure which is to open the mouth of the patient using this solution made from honey, water, flour, wine, and vinegar.
E aprop unte la matrona la sua ma am aquels olis e mucellages, e aprop entrometa la sua ma am fecilitat en la mayre, e aprop cerque am la ma loc en le qual fique les uncis en le fet.	 You are going to open the mouth of the patient gently using this solution made from honey, water, flour, wine, and vinegar. After opening the mouth, you will put a cushion beneath their head in order to prevent any injury occurring there.
E locs convenient en aquo: adonc tu considera si le fet es preparat que deysenda sobre le sieu cap, e lahoras tu fique les uncis en les huels de lu, o en le col, o en la boca, o en le palat, o dejos la barba, o en la furcula de lu, o en les locs propdas de las costas, o dejos les ypocondres.	 After opening the mouth, consider placing them under their head if necessary to avoid injury, or place them on the cheeks, or in the nose, or on the palate, or on their beard, or at the furcula of their neck, or at any other suitable spot you can find.
Mays si le deysendiment es sobre les pes de lu, lahoras en le pentenilh, o en le mieg de las costas.	 If it is necessary to place them on the feet of the patient, put them under their arms or behind at any other suitable spot you can find.
E cove que tengua le unci am la ma dreyta, e pausa la curvitat de lu en aquel loc le qual es entre les ditz de la ma senestra, e entrometa la ma am facilitat e fique le unci en alcu de aquels locs les quals havem ditz, entro que pervengua a la causa boyda.	 You should hold the cushion in your right hand and place it gently at that spot between their elbows where there is space to put the cushion, so as not to hinder movement of their arm or cause any discomfort for them due to its placement.
E aprop pause e fique en la apposicio de lu un autre unci, o le tertz si es necessitat, per so que sia atraccio engual, e no sia extencio segon la sua rectetut tant solament.	 After placing the cushion in that spot, you may also place another cushion on top of it or put a third if necessary to ensure that its support is firm and not too soft only.
Ans sia maugut a tota partida, per so que l’eyssiment de lu sia alleujat ayssi cum es fayt en dent deves la eradicacio de lu.	 When you have completed all the procedures for cleansing, do not hesitate to administer the purge.
E cove en lu aquo que es entre lor que la extencio sia mollificada; e si alcuna partida de lu es retenguda, lahoras cove que la matrona unte alcus sieus ditz am oli e entrometa aquels espertament e revolva am aquels aquo que es retengut.	 Then, after the cavity is opened and the extraction is softened up, if any part of it remains closed, doctors prescribe that a lady should enter through an opening and gently remove it.
Donc si la partida del fet es fora-getada, lahoras les uncis sian permudatz entra loc le qual sia pus aut; e fay aysso entro que tot le fet sia fora-getat.	 If the procedure of cleansing is completed and all parts are extracted from the body, then doctors will instruct that if any part remains inside, they should be gently pulled out in this location.
Mays si la ma es eyssida denant l’autra, e no es possible reduzir aquela per la coartacio de lu, lahoras cove que drap sia envolopat sobre aquela; e aprop extratz aquela entro que tota sia fora-getada, e inscideys aquela o en la junctura de la ma o en le coyde.	 If the hand is not able to reduce that part through the hernia opening and cannot be reduced due to the body's tissue, then doctors will instruct that it should be wrapped around that area; and they should gently remove it either at the joint of the arm or from under the breast.
E ayssi cove que fassas en l’autra ma e en les dos pes.	 Then proceed with one hand on each side,
Mays si le cap del fet es gran, o accideys a lu coartacio en le eyssiment, o es en le cap de lu aygua ajustada, lahoras cove que entrometa entre les ditz espatum spinos e fenda le cap e extragua la aygua, o que discroba aquel am un instrument le qual es nompnat “alundat”, la forma del qual vindra am las formas dels autres instruments en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	 If the head of the child is very large or becomes obstructed in the process, or if it is inserted into a narrow opening, doctors prescribe that an instrument should be used called the "alundat" which has its own shape and function similar to other instruments in this category, but slightly different.
E semblantment fassa si·l fet es de gran cap per natura: e lahoras cove que inscida aquel am algematu, o que prengua aquel am alunda ayssi cum havem dit; e aprop extra les osses am les forceps.	 When the patient's stomach is large by nature and it causes pain when the cold humor infiltrates that area or when it presses against something, then remove the bones with the pincers.
E si le cap es eyssit e es coartat deves la furcula, lahoras sia fendut entro que la humiditat la qual es en le pietz sia efunduda.	 If his head is swollen and causes discomfort due to fluid accumulation in the chest area, then the doctor should examine it closely.
Mays si no es complicat, ni obezeys a eyssiment, lahoras tu inscideys le cap tantost segon que a tu sira possible.	 If it is not complicated or obese and you want to remove it immediately, then the doctor should cut off the head as soon as possible.
E si le dejos del ventre es apostemat o es en lu ydropici, lahoras cove que tu perfores aquel entro que corro la humiditat que es en lu.	 If the intestines have fallen out or are protruding from within their abdominal cavity, then the doctor should examine them closely to see if they have become infected by fluid accumulation.
Mays si le fet es sobre les sieus pes, lahoras la atraccio de lu es leugiera e la direccio de lu a la boca de la mayre es leugiera.	 If the patient's body is overextended and causing distress to him/her, then the doctor should straighten their limbs and direct them to place their head in their chest as comfortably as possible.
Mays si es coartat deves le ventre e·l pietz, lahoras cove que tu extraguas aquel am drap le qual auras envolopat sobre la tua ma, e que fendes le ventre e·l pietz entro que corra aquo que es en aquels.	 If it is causing discomfort to the abdomen and chest area, then the doctor should remove the bone and apply it on your hand so that it is stretched out over your back, and gently press into the abdomen and chest area as shown by that illustration.
Mays si les autres membres so ostatz e torna le cap, lahoras la metrona entrometa la ma senestra; mays si la boca de la mayre es huberta, lahoras intrometa la ma en le preon de layre, e cerque am aquela le cap, e atira aquel am les ditz entro a la boca de la mayre, e aprop entrometa en lu un unci, o dos uncis, e atire lu am aquels.	 If the other limbs are stretched out and you want to turn around so that your head is pointing upwards, then remove the hand from under her breast; if the mouth of the larger one is covered with a bone, then put the hand in front of it as shown by this illustration, and hold the bone between two fingers or thumbs.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada per apostema caut le qual accideys a l’u, lahoras cove que no sia trebelhat sobre lu; abantz cove lahoras aministrar efusio de causas humidas grassas.	 When the mayor's mouth is closed with a pointed object that enters into it, the pains will be covered over him, and the doctors must administer fluids of moist causes.
E aministre emplastres; e segua le pacient en ayguas que mollifican e humectan.	 They treat wounds by using emollient and moisturizing products.
E si le fet es sobre le sieu costat, lahoras si possible es, sia agulat: e sia aministrat aquo que havem dit en le fet viu.	 If it is on the left side of his body, they will do their best to treat it; and if administered as we suggested in the previous response, it should be done live.
E si aquo no es possible, lahoras sia inscidit en pessas, e sia extrayt.	 If this is not possible, they must make an incision, and then remove it.
E cove que non layssas alcuna causa dedintz de la segondina.	 They will not seek out the second cause unless absolutely necessary.
E cum tu auras complida tota la tua opperacio, lahoras aministra aquo que havem dit de la curacio en les apostemas cautz les quals accideysso de la mayre.	 When you have completed all your work, the doctors will administer this cure that we suggested in our previous response to the patient's mouth.
E si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras deyssendas en ayguas stipticas e aministra l’autra curacio.	 If a fever occurs later on, they will use strict remedies and administer another cure.
E yeu ja e vist una femna en le ventre de la qual era fet mort, e aprop sobre aquel foc autra veguada emprenhada, e aprop foc mort es le fet autre.	 You have seen a woman in her belly who had been dead for some time and you put it on another fire immediately after that, but when the fire goes out, is there something else?
Accidit al u aprop lonc temps apostema en le sieu embelic; e inflat es entro que foc ubert, e comensec a getar brac.	 It was in the upper part of her abdomen for some time and when it burned up completely, she gave birth to a child.
E yeu fu appelhat a la cura de lu, e medicat a lu per lonc temps, e la plagua no es consolidada.	 When you called for treatment to him, he was treated for a long time, but the pain did not subside.
Adonc yeu pausegui sobre lu de alscunas causas emplastra de forta atraccio, e eyssic de lu un os, e aprop passero alcus jorns, e eyssic un autre os; e yeu fu trop meravilhat, cum en le ventre no sia os.	 After you placed the cushion on his chest and legs, one after another, he was treated for many days, but he could not relieve all of it
E adonc yeu cogitegui que eran dels osses del fet mort.	 When you asked if they were bones from a dead person
Donc yeu enguisigui la plagua, e extrayssi de lu motz osses , la femna existent en las sieuas milhos disposicios, e ja visquec en tal manieyra per lonc temps, correc de lu un petit de brac.	 After you applied the painkiller, but bone-like particles were also found in his urine, which indicated that bones were being excreted from him for a long time, and a little bit of blood was detected too.
E yeu no afermegui asso esser stranh, sino quar en aquo es sciensa e ajutori ad aquo que le metge artifec am la ma per curacio aministra.	 You did not find any relief, but you understood and helped the doctor to administer treatment accordingly.
De las formas dels instrumentz que so necessaris a extrayre le fet.	 The forms of instruments needed to extract him.
Forma de vertitge am la qual es uberta la mayre:	 The form of truth that is highest
Aquesta es la forma de strenhedor en le qual so engualhatz les libres, al qual engualhament sian dos virtitges en doas extremitatz de dos futz.	 This is the form of strength in which two parties agree on the rules, to which absolutely there are two virtues at both ends of two ropes.
May empero aquesta virtitge cove que sia pus subtil de strictori, e sia fayt o de eba o de fust de boys.	 This virtue may be either very subtle in its severity or mild in terms of application and frequency of use.
E sia la latitut de quascun fust quays dos ditz e le marge de quascu amdos quays un dit, e la longitut de quascu es un palm e mig; e en le mieg loc de dos fustz so dos ajustaments de aquel meteys fustz les quals ja son fermatz, dels quals la longitut es la maytat de un palm e un pauc mes, e la latitut de quascu es quay dos ditz, o un pauc mes.	 The width of each strip and the margin between them, where one end is aligned with another, their length equals that of a thumb plus an inch; their height measures two digits or a little less.
E aquestz dos additamentz sian entromeses en la boca de la mayre per que sia uberta am aquels quan tu revolves las doas prescriptas virtigges.	 The second sentence to translate is this one: "And here comes the first sentence to translate.
Forma autra semblant de aquela pus subtil e pus leugiera:	 Another way of saying that:
Sia fayta de fustz de eba o de boys segon la semblansa de forceps.	 It is customary to apply it on the second part of the abdomen or the lower part of the belly, just as if using a pair of forceps.
Mays empero en la extremitat de lu so dos additament ayssi cum vezes, e la longitut de aquels additament es quays un palm, e la latitut de quascu es dos ditz.	 It can be applied to the extremity of him in this manner and times, with a length equal to that of two fingers, and its latitude is that which is twice as wide as each one of these fingers.
E cum tu vols am aquels ubrir la mayre, lahoras tu fay cezer la femna sobre le lieyt les pes pendentz, ubert aquo que es entre las coyssas de lu.	 When you want to apply it on the belly button area, gently place your finger over the nipple and hold them in tension while stretching this space between the thighs.
E aprop obre la tua ma am le instrument ayssi cum fas am forfexs engualment segon la quantitat que vols de la aprecio de la boca de la mayre entro que la metrona fassa so que vols.	 Apply your finger to it in this manner as if holding a pair of tweezers, and amount-wise the same as you wish for the opening of the larger orifice into which you want it to fit.
La forma de vertitge la qual diysero les antics:	 The form that was customary at times past
Forma de impellent am le qual es empellit le fet:	 The manner in which the action is performed.
Forma de amisidat2 am le qual es conterit le cap gran	 The way of putting down a large cover on it
E es asemblat a forceps al qual so dentz en la extremitat, ayssi cum vezes, e alcunas veguadas es fayt lonc ayssi cum forceps segon aquesta forma, ayssi cum vezes, al qual so dentz ayssi cum dentz de ressegua am le qual es inscidit e conterit.	 It is applied to the extremity with a pair of forceps, as mentioned earlier, and sometimes also in this manner using tweezers shaped like them, which are attached to it, holding their teeth together just as if they were closing a mouth.
Forma de amesidat pauc:	 form of address
Forma de unci havent una spina:	 from one who has no spine
Forma de unci havent doas spinas:	 from those without spines
Forma de forceps a la qual so dentz de cerra am le qual le cap del fet sia conterit:	 form of forceps to which you are accustomed to cutting the head off, after the body is removed.
Forma de spatum havent dos extremitatz am le qual le cap es abscindit:	 from the hands that hold the extremities when the head is cut off.
Forma de dos espatums latz:	 two-handed spatum
Totz aquels instrumentz so excersitatz, e quan mes so multiplicadas las specias de aquel e so preparadas deves le artifexs, quant es pus leugier a la sua opperacio e pus aut deves les homes per la sua quantitat.	 The tools are used for such exercises, and when more kinds of that tool are multiplied and prepared appropriately, the operation is increased accordingly, with respect to its amount, and you must give orders to those men according to their quantity.
E no obres de aquels instrumentz ja sia qua sia deves tu aparalhat, quar la necessitat de aquels no es excusabla.	 No matter how much of that tool is given or required by you when the necessity for it is not acceptable.
De extraccio de la segondina.	 From the second extract.
Quan la segondina es retenguda deves le enfantament, lahoras cove que tu comandes a la malautae que retengua le sieu ale, e aprop fay aquela stornudar am condizi, e strenh la tua ma sobre la boca de lu e sobre las nars de lu, e si per aysso es defora eyssit, bo es.	 Once the second is returned, you should tell the servant to keep it in its place, and point your hand at it and firmly push it away from where the body was removed, and stretch out your hand over his mouth and nostrils, if necessary, do so.
E sino, lahoras tu pren una ola e perfora en la cuberta un trauc e pausa en aquela erbas ubrent la boca de la mayre, ayssi cum calament e ruda e anet e camamilla e scicados arabic e cassia lignea e santaurea.	 Otherwise, you will take a cloth and wipe the wound with it gently, carefully and softly, covering the mouth of the bigger one, so calmly and calmly and carefully as possible, mixing with ginger, cinnamon, licorice, and sweet gummi candy.
Totas aquestas erbas o alcunas de lor sian submersas en aygua en la ola, e pausa aquela sobre le foc.	 When these herbs or some of them are submerged in water in a flame, stop it from burning
E aprop pausa una canula de canaviera en la boca de la mayre, e tengua aquela entro que la evapor vengua a la concavitat de la mayre.	 Then place a cannula into the mouth of the patient and make sure that evaporation occurs in the cavity of their throat
E aprop fay aquela stornudar ayssi cum havem dit, e la segondina sira fora-getada am velocitat.	 After saying this phrase, the second course will be delivered as quickly as possible.
Mays si roman aprop aquesta curacio e no es eyssida, lahoras tu comanda a la matrona que submerge la sua ma sinistra en oli sizami o en micellage de altea, e aprop entrometa aquela en le conh e queresca am aquela la segondina, e cum aquela auras trobada, lahoras pren la e exten aquela pauc a pauc Mays si es annexsa en le preon de la mayre, lahoras entrometa la sua ma segon que havem recomtat, e quan aura trobat la segondina, extragua aquela petit a petit segon rectetut per so que la mayre no caja deves la atraccio vehement.	 After that, the woman places her left arm in oil (for example, olive oil) or micellar water and puts it into contact with something to start evaporation. As soon as this occurs, she will then move on to the next step, and once the second course is available, she will extract it little by little until you reach the desired result without burning your skin.
Abantz cove que sia permudada als costatz dreyt e sinestre am facilitat.	 If the right hand is moved to the left side as quickly as possible.
E aprop sia ajustat en la quantitat de atraccio, quar ela obedira e evasira de adhirencia.	 Then adjust the amount of traction and it will automatically respond and release from adhesion.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada, nos ja havem recomtat la curacio am sturnutacio e am medicacio de la ola am erbas.	 If the mouth of the patient is closed, we would recommend using a cannula for intubation and medication administration.
Mays si no es fora-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recomtadas, lahoras guarda te que no fetigues sobre aquela en iteracio de abstracio, mays empero cove que aquo que es eyssit de lu a la boca de la mayre lies a la coyssa de la femna, e aprop cristeriza aquela am enguent e tetrafarmacon; quar aquel fara poyrir aquela aprop alcus dias e sira dissolvuda e sira fora-getada.	 If the causes listed above have not been resolved, keep in mind that if this occurs at the mouth of the patient it will be referred to as dysphagia and should be dealt with accordingly by consulting a specialist.
Mays quan se poyreys, es de lu elevada mala audor al cap, e al estomac, e aquo ledeys la malauta; e adonc cove que sian aministradas sub-fumiguacios e convenientz ad aquo.	 "When the doctor arrives, raise your head and stomach area to give him access, and place a cushion under you for support.
Mays alcus dels Antics ja so esproatz sub-fumigacio de nazitort e de figuas seccas.	 The ancient ones use a cool compress of cooled mustard or figs soaked in water to treat gouty attacks.
Forma de instrument am le qual la femna es sub-fumiguada deves la retentio de mestruas e de la segondina:	 Form the instrument by which you will be rubbed with a cold compress containing soothing herbs and spices.
Sia fayta de veyre o de eram.	 This is one of two remedies I mentioned earlier.
E sia pausada la extremitat subtil en le conh e la extremitat ampla sobre le foc, e la sub-fumiguacio sia pausada sobre las brazas del foc.	 Place the narrow extremity on his forehead and spread out the wide extremity over his chest; apply a cool compress over the wrists of his hands as well.
E tengua aquela entro que sia consumida aquela sub-fumiguacio e itera·n autra.	 Take that into account when using this cool compress, as well.
De curacio del cul del enfant no-perforat.	 Do not perforate the anus of an infant.
Motz enfantz naysso e les culs de lu no so perforatz, les quals ya ciphac subtil e opilat.	 Do not put children down or let their hands get too close to the genital area; they should be gently and carefully held away from it.
Adonc cove a la matrona que perfore am le sieu dit aquel ciphac; e sino, perfora aquel am spatum agut, e guarda se que no toque le lacert.	 And if you do not want to apply the cold compress directly on your head, and it is painful when applied directly on the stomach, then put a cushion under it for support.
E aprop pause sobre aquel lana enfusa en vi e oli; e aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia senat.	 And if you want to avoid applying it right away due to heat or oiliness in your hand and upper arm, then put the compress on an empty part of your body and wait until there is nothing obstructing its application.
Mays si temes que sia opilat, lahoras pausa en le trauc una canula per motz dias, e osta la quan le enfant voldra degerir.	 When you suspect that it may be gout, then pain is stopped by placing a needle in the affected area and leaving it there until the child wants to eat again
E ja accideys oppilacio del cul per consolidacio de plagua o de apostema; adonc cove que aquela consolidacio sia inscidida, e aprop sia curada am aquo que avem dit de la curacio e del plom.	 If the consolidation of the anus occurs due to hemorrhoids or piles, and it is known that this consolidation must be treated immediately, then attend to the care of the anus and the stool as advised by the doctor
De curacio de las fistulas que endeveno dejos.	 Of course
Las fistulas que endeveno en la partida dejos pus bassa so nodacio e grossetut las quals endeveno prop del cul defora o en l’espazi de la una partida.	 Fistulas that develop in the lower part of the anus may cause swelling and bleeding, or occur within the space between bowel movements.
E es una fistula o motas.	 It is a fistula or tumor
E cum aquela nodacio es antiquada e corr de la humiditat aygosa blanca o poyridura subtil, e alcunas veguadas so de aquestas fistulas alcunas penetrantz.	 If the nodule is old and covered with white, dry skin or a subtle pinkish hue, then some of these fistulae may penetrate into the surrounding tissues.
E aquelas penetrantz so conogudas per aquo que es eyssit de aquelas per la egressio e per ventosetat; e alcunas vetz use le malaute de egressio, e fort leu es eyssit de aquelas verm.	 These penetrations are distinguished by the fact that they exit and pass through, while others may cause obstructions of excretion or have blockages in urine flow, causing great discomfort if obstructed.
E so de aquelas fistulas alcunas veguadas en l’espazi penetrantz entro a la vesica, e entro al meat de la vergua; e so de aquelas penetrantz entro la junctura de la coyssa e entro al notz de la coeta.	 Some of these fistulae may be found within the space between bowel movements, or between the anus and vagina.
E aquo en que es conoguda fistula penetrant entro al cul e no-penetrant, es que tu metas le tieu dit endic en le cul, e entrometas tenta subtil de eram o de ferr en la fistula quan no y es turtuositat.	 When you suspect a fistulous penetration into the anus but not through it, then you should apply a tight bandage around the anus and attempt to gently remove or pierce the fistula when it is visible.
Mays si en aquela es turtuositat, lahoras entromet en aquela tenta subtil de plom o de pels de caval entro que tu sentas la tenta o le pel en le tieu dit.	 "When you find yourself in a position of need or desire, the pain will strike and penetrate between your thighs with subtle thorns that prick you so that you feel their touch on your groin.
E si no sentas aquela de tot ni no procezeys del trauc alcuna causa de egestio ni verm ni ventositat, ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras sapias que es no-penetrant, e lahoras coyta te a la curacio.	 "But if you do not feel that at all or cannot cause any discharge of semen, urine, or sweat, as I mentioned earlier, the pain will know and will avoid penetration.
E quan la fistula es penetrant entro a la vesica o entro al meat de la vergua, lahoras la significacio de lu es eyssiment de urina de aquela e prohibicio de lu ad aysso que·l loc am medicina sia consolidat.	 "If the fistula is penetrating into the bladder or into the meat of the vulva, then its meaning will be discharge of urine and prohibition of it from going there so that this location remains solid.
Mays si es penetrant entro la junctura de la coyssa o entro al os e envencio de dolor en le circuit, lahoras senhal de lu es que la tenta perve entro aqui si en lu no es turtuositat entro al os, e envencio de dolor en le circuit de la partida; e que de lu yeys poyredura tostemps; e que no val en aquela medicacio, ni es consolidada am enguent.	 "If it is penetrating into the joint of the knee or into the nose and brings pain in the path, then its meaning will be that it tries to penetrate here if not turpotent in the nose, bringing pain in the path from the start; you may find this treatment unpleasant.
E en totas aquelas fistulas penetrant no es curacio de tot, e la curacio de aquelas es trebalh e vanetat dels folyls metges sobre·l qual so fermatz.	 "In all those fistulas that are penetrating there is no treatment at all, and the treatment of them varies greatly from one physician to another.
Mays en aquela que no es penetrant e no antiqua, sanacio am ferr es sperada segon que yeu a tu recomtare, e aquo que ja yeu e proat.	 "If it is not penetrating and cannot be cured, the treatment to be hoped for will depend on what you advise your physician.
E es que le malaute jagua entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos e eleva las cambas de lu entro sus, las coyssas sian enclinadas al ventre de lu, e aprop entromet tenta de plom, o de eram si es en la fistula turtuositat, entro que sapias le loc on perve la tenta.	 When the patient lies prone between their thighs and elevates their legs into their chest, with their knees bent towards the belly of them, a servant is placed to hold up their head or if it is in a fistula turtour, then place one to support the neck
E si aquela sent le malaute entorn le cuol, lahora cove que tu entrometas le tieu dit endic en le cuol.	 If that occurs near the anus, tell the servant to insert it into the bowel.
E si sentas en le tieu dit la tenta ja per si meteyssa descuberta penetrar, otra aquo que sentas entre le tieu dit e aquela siphac o carn, lahoras sapias certanament que aquela es penetrant; e adonc no trebalhes en aquela, quar no es en aquela sanacio, ayssi cum havem dit.	 If you feel that the attempt has been discovered or if it's between your thigh and an orifice or opening in another part of the body, then make sure it is penetrating; and do not try to force it into a place where it cannot be inserted, such as within the anus itself
Mays empero diyssero alcus que es sana en alcus homes tart.	 However, doctors would also recommend alcohol consumption in alcoholic beverages.
E de la medicacio per la qual es sperat juvament en lu es que tu ignes cauteri subtil segon le ample de la fistula, ayssi cum es precedit, e intrometas aquel ignit en la fistula entro que pervengua entorn le cuol; e aprop itera aquel doas o tres vetz entro que sapias que ja son adhustas totas aquelas carns ajustadas fistuladas que so semblantz a cana de pluma de ausel.	 The treatment for the condition that is just being experienced, in which you gently cleanse with a small probe inserted into the fistula, as before, and then insert it into the fistula to prevent its escape towards the bowel; and place three or four fingers inside so that they are fixed on those fistulas that match the shape of a fountain pen.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder entro que en yescan totas aquelas carns que so adhustas, e aprop cura aquela am medicinas la carn engendrantz e consolidantz, e si es sanada, bo es; e sino, lahoras no es sana en degun temps per autra curacio.	 After curing those swollen muscles inside by holding them in place and administering medication to generate healing and strengthen them, if it is cured then good; otherwise there will be no further treatment needed.
E si la tenta intra, e no penetra entro·l tieu dit le qual es en le cul, e entre aquel e la tenta que es velament spes de carn o de ciphac, e vezes la fistula en aquo que siec la superficia de la codena, lahoras secca la codena del comensament de la fistula, e tu ve seccan am la tenta, e sia en la fistula entro que la seccio pervengua al loc en le qual perve la extremitat de la tenta, e per la tenta es liberat e catz.	 When you attempt to insert something into the anus and it does not penetrate but rather forms a lump or phlegm, then it may be fistula, and if you squeeze it, it will release from that location on the side of the fistulas, which is being blocked by secretion.
E aprop mundifiqua aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so asembladas a canula de pena de ausel e no romangua de aquelas alcuna causa.	 In order to prevent those fistula-like lumps that are caused due to a cannula from being removed by any cause, the following measures should be taken:
Mays si flux de sanc vezes que vengua entre tu e la tua opperacio quan ensideysses aquelas carns, lahoras le milh que sia e del pus leugier instrument es cauterizar am foc o am medicina acuta, quar cauteri am foc ajusta bonas doas habitutz: so es adhustio de aquelas carns ajustadas, e abscizio del sanc exseccacio de las humiditatz.	 If such fistula-like lumps occur between you and your operation when examining those lumps, the doctor should sterilize the instrument either by burning or using an acute cautery, as which one is better depends on habit: so it is advisable to adjust those lumps in a manner suitable for them, and abstain from excessive secretion of mucus.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder o en caus trissat entro que·l loc geta brac, e aprop lahoras cura la plagua am enguentz carn dura engendran e consolidan.	 To treat those lumps that occur in the bladder or cause obstruction in the urethra, and to prevent their enlargement and consolidation:
E so medicinas en las quals so stipticitat e exseccio; quan lahoras es restaurada ja es sanada e no temes iteracio.	 Those medicines which are static, that is, they do not change, when the patient recovers or is cured and does not fear recurrence.
Mays si la fistula ja perve entro al preon del cul e es elonguada de lu superficia del cos, lahoras entromet le tieu dit en le cul e inquireys am aquel.	 If the fistula has penetrated into the perineum and is elongated on the surface of the body part:
E donc si centes la tenta e entre tu e ela es velament de ciphac o de carn, e es propda a la penetracio, lahora no es operacio en lu sino segon via di fiducia e de speransa.	 When the pain in joints is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body and when there are pains felt in the legs, it is customary to call gout among doctors.
La qual causa es aministrar en lu una de tres manieyras: o que cauterize aquela ayssi cum havem dit; o que secces aquela entro que consieguas la conquavitat de lu per que sia a tu possible entrometre las qualcas e la curacio propdana; e no procesiscas mot am seccio per so que no inscidas le lacert contenent le cuol, e que accidisque sobre le malaute eyssiment de la egistio ses voluntat; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit quar fort leu sira sanat; o que elongues aquel velament e mondes aquel pus que seccas aquel entro prop le cul, ayssi cum havem dit, o am tenta o am autre instrument de aguda extremitat, e aprop mondifique aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so en la seccio entro la on podes am percrustacio; e aprop esforsa te a far la restauracio de tota la plagua am seccio, e si le orrifici pus desus no es consolidat, e romangua la fistula uberta en la partida del cul, e sira pus leugier per le malaute.	 There are three possible ways to treat the issue: either cauterize that region with heat; or cut through it in order to access the cavity and apply appropriate care there; or try another instrument of sharp extremity, and place it at the fistula's opening; and finally stretch out that flesh so as to remove the protrusion from its base, similar to how you would have done if the cause were a cold abscess.
E alscunas veguadas la fistula es finida segon aquesta manieyra: es quan tu entrometas la tenta en la fistula, e es en le latz del cul entorn la superficia del cos am la codena e en le marge del cul, lahoras pren tenta de perforada extremitat, que es ayssi cum agulha de preparantz les coers segon aquesta forma:	 When the fistula is finished according to that method: when you enter into the fistula, and it's at the base of the scrotum near the surface of the body and the anus margin. The doctor takes a pointed instrument, similar to an awl, for cutting through this way.
e entromet en aquela fiel envolopat de v fiels o entorn aquels; e aprop entromet tenta am fiel en la fistula entro que consiegua la conquavitat de lu.	 When you enter into that sealed opening with fingers or near it, and take care to enter the fistula in order to reach the cavity.
Mays si es penetrant en le marge del cul prop dedintz, lahoras tu extratz le fiel de aquel trauc ayssi que tu intrometas le tieu dit en le cul; e extraguas la extremitat del fiel e ajustes las duas extremitatz essemps, e estrenh cascuna, e leyssa aquo per un dia o per dos, e quan mays inscideys le fiel en la carn, estrenh be aquel entro que aquelas carns sian inscididas las quals so entre doas extremitatz del fiel e que cajan.	 When the man penetrates his partner's anus, thrust into it with your penis; and remove both hands from each other to place one on either side of his genitals, adjust their position, take hold every once in a while for an hour or two, so that when you insert him into her vagina, he will enter as if those parts are incised.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia consolidada e sanada.	 After inserting the instrument (in this context it seems to be referring to a penis), apply oil or lubricant inside so that it is moist and does not dry out.
Mays si le orrifici de la fistula no es penetrant, lahoras fay aquel penetrar, en qualque manieyre sia a tu preparat, sino que sia mot en le preon, quar no es a tu que fassas aquo per que no inscidas le lacert; e aprop fay am aquela entro que sia sanada.	 If the orifice of the fistula is not penetrable (it's probably because it has been closed off or is otherwise unsuitable for penetration), then do not try to force it, but rather let nature take its course and allow it to heal properly; and place your hand on that spot if you wish.
La forma de spatum spinos am lo qual es fenduda la fistula: la curvitat del qual es mot aguda e l’autra partida es no-aguda, per so que no inscidas aquo que no es necessari, ayssi cum vezes.	 The shape of the scrotal skin which is folded over it (it may also refer to a hernia sac): its curvature should be acute and the other part smooth or non-acute; otherwise you will not find what is necessary.
De sutura de emorroydas en las quals corra sanc en la inscizio de aquelas.	 Suturing of hemorrhoids that run into crevices in those who have had surgery on their anus.
Emorroydas so segon dos manieyras, quar o so entre le cul semblantz aysi que es de carbos, o quays aquelas sian cum a gras de rasim.	 Hemorrhoids occur from straining during bowel movements; one that runs into the anus and is filled with excrement is called external hemorrhoids, whereas those that come down from between the buttocks are called internal hemorrhoids.
E de aquelas so petitas e grans, e que le sanc corr de aquelas tostemps e es una, e so motas, e so fora·l cul, e en las extremitatz de lu.	 "These small and large veins that are inflamed by those cold humors, and their swelling is one thing, their pain another, and their discharge another; in the extremities of them.
Mays empero aquelas que so foro le cul so segon las mes de pauca humiditat, de las quals corr aygua citrina o un petit de sanc am cos continuabla, e so segon la color del cos.	 "On those that are inflamed in the anus and the scrotum by very little dampness, which is a small amount of cold water that continuously flows on them, and as soon as they dry up their skin turns red.
E la curacio de aquela que es dedintz le cuol es que comandes al malaute que se assela e que se exprema entro que le cuol yesca e las emoroydas apparescan a tu.	 "The care of that which is directed at the patient to lie down and be expressed into his bowel so as for it to come out, the hemorrhoids will appear.
Adonc tu te coyte e suspen am uncis o que tenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, e aprop incideys aquelas deves las suas razitz.	 "When you have given and suspended them with your fingers or when you hold those of the palm of your hand, approach towards its sides.
Mays si les uncis no so tengutz en aquelas per la humiditat de lor e mollificacio de aquelas, lahoras pren aquelas am drap aspre o am coto o am flassada de lana, e extratz aquelas am les tieus ditz, e aprop inscideys aquelas e polveriza sobre lor alcunas polveras caudas aprop la inscizio, per que sian ad aquelas en loc de cauteri; o cauteriza aquelas segon que es precedit en le capitol de cauterizar.	 "If the fingers are not moist and their mollification does not exist, then apply them wet with a cloth or wool, and cover it with powder, so that they will be applied to the affected area in order to cautery; if cautery has already been done as described previously.
E aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	 "And then apply them for another cure after it is healed.
E si le cul no obezeys a egressio, lahoras cristerisa le malaute am cristeri en le qual sia mordicacio petita, e sia lavat am aquel aquo que es en le cuol e que obezesca a egressio leugierament quan le malaute s’esprem.	 "If the anus does not let out the discharge, then apply a cautery on that which is causing it to be small in order for it to stop the discharge when the discharge comes.
Mays si las emorroydas so defora le cul, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiera, e es que tu prenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, o que prenguas aquelas am unci, e inscidas aquelas, e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit entro que sian sanadas.	 When pain is caused by hemorrhoids down below, doctors say that it's anal fistula, and you should press on them gently or strongly to remove them, unless they are stuck in the anus, then insert something there to make them come out.
E aquel que avoreys inscizio, cove que aministres sutura de lor segon aquesta manieyra: pren fiel envolopat e entromet aquel en agulha e aprop extratz las emorroydas a las partidas dessus, e fay aquel penetrar am la agulha en la razit del autra part, e envolveys las doas extramitatz del fiel en la partida pus dejos de la agulha, e so latitudinalment; e estrenh la emorroyda am strectura fort, e aprop noza le fiel e extratz la agulha.	 When you have inserted the needle, administer sutures to hold it in place: use a fine thread and wrap it tightly around where the needle went through, then insert two extra stitches at right angles on either side of that stitch to prevent it from sliding out; finally, pull gently or firmly on the needle's end to extract it.
E fay aquo a totas, e layssa de aquelas una e no la cozes, per so que la superfluitat del sanc corra de aquela.	 When you have finished that and removed what is left of those, so that the excess from the heart can flow out freely.
E aprop pausa sobre le cul drap enfus en oli rozat o en cerot; e pausa aquel sobre·l cuol e comanda al malaute que·s repause.	 Then place a cushion over his buttocks, cover it with melted fat or lard, and instruct the patient to press on them gently until they have passed.
E aprop layssa aquela entro que caja; e quan es casuda, cura aquelas am enguentz o am autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	 Then place that in a box, when it is ready, cure those who come to get or another way of doing it depending on the situation.
De curacio de fistulas.	 Cure fistulae.
Motas veguadas accideys per exseccacio de fenda o per costriccio de natura.	 The veins become congested and hardened due to excessive drying of the skin or constriction from nature itself
E cum so antiquadas e no val en aquela medicina, lahoras cove que tu razas aquelas am la puncta de spatum o am la tua ungla entro que sian faytas humidas e sia hostada de aquelas la escorsa pus desus, la qual prohibeys aquelas de consolidacio; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian consolidadas.	 When the ailment is old and does not benefit from this medicine, it should be stated that you apply these measures to the affected area with cold, moist hands, so as to counteract the heat produced by the sores.
Lahoras tu osta aquelas am razio pus vehement que la primieyra entro que mot sancno e sian excoriadas; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	 You should first apply these measures to any affected areas that are red and swollen, and then continue on to those that have been healed.
De curacio de almesamir, so es clau.	 The cure for malaria is crucial.
Sapias que alamermar, so es clau, e no es si no notz redon segon la color del cors semblant a cap de claviel, e es fayt en tot le cors e majorment en las partidas dejos les pes e als ditz, e endeve per aquels dolor deves le anament.	 If you are experiencing symptoms such as fever and redness similar to that of jaundice in the body, especially on the extremities like the feet and hands, you should seek immediate medical attention for these pains.
E adonc cove que sia inscidit aquo que es en le circuit del clau, e sia tengut am les forfexs o am unci, e sia eradicat de la sua razit; e aprop cura aquel.	 If it has been detected in the blood flow and is present in the fingers or toes, and if it has been treated for its own cause, then you should continue to take care of that affected area.
E si vols, cauteriza le segont que es precedit en le sieu capitol.	 If you wish, cauterize what has just been described in the preceding part.
Mays de veruca es eminencia petita aspre fistulada redonda sobre la superficia del cos, e motas veguadas veno en las mas dels enfantz.	 It is a common, small white spot that appears on the surface of the body, especially in children.
E curacio de lu es que estendas e inscidas aquela, o que estrenhas aquela am fiel o am pel entro que caja.	 The treatment for it involves spreading and staining this substance, or using it to cover it completely with a bandage.
E si vols, cauteriza aquo, segon que havem dit, am foc o am medicina acuta.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
E ja so eradicadas enversas e no-enversas am le instrument le qual yeu diyre.	 And if necessary to remove the points from all over the foot?
Mays formica es eminencia petita feutrada o fistulada grossa sobre la superficia del cos anant mot en le preon, e quan le freg atroba aquela es centit en lu semblant de mordificacio de formigua, e es fayta entorn le cos.	 Then, after having made points on the body surface and applied a cautery to remove the pain, you should apply an ointment over the affected area?
E curacio de lu es que prenguas una canula de pena de auca o de pena de voltor, e sia fort, e pausa aquela sobre la formigua entro que la contengua le cercle de la canula de las partidas de lu; e aprop revolveys la tua ma am la canula entro que inscidas aquo que es en le circuit de la formigua, e pauses aquela en le preon de la carn, e que eradiques la formigua de la sua razit.	 After removing the points and applying a cautery to remove the pain, you should carefully prepare a needle for puncturing or cutting in order to reach it?
E si vols, fay aquo am canula de eram o de ferr segon aquesta forma:	 Then, if necessary, use this type of needle:
Sia la partida desus de la canulha trahent a subtilitat, sorda (so es no-perforada), envolopada per so que sobre le dit la aprencio de lu sia ablaviada e la revolucio de aquela.	 A needle with a small opening that is not perforated to prevent piercing through the skin and has the ability to open and close, allowing you to control its movement?
E si vols cauteriza la formiga segon que es denant dit en la cauterizacio de atheyl en le capitol de cauteri.	 Then, after describing how to perform a cautery on the forehead of a patient in the chapter about cauteries?
De forma dels instrumentz que so aministratz a dar cristeri.	 From the instruments that you are administering drugs with?
Alcunas veguadas es fayt cristeri de argent o de lato o de eram fondut o malleat; e alcunas veguadas es fayt de aquels instrumentz petit e gran segon aquels als quals so aministratz, quar aquel que es aministrat en la curacio dels petitz enfants sia petit; e de aquel dels quals los culs son freuls o doloyrozes, les cristeris de aquels sian petitz.	 Some of the drugs are in powder form or liquid form or solid form, and some are small instruments that you administer depending on which one you use to treat children, for example?
La forma de cristeri gran e pauc:	 The shape of a large and few cuts
Le cap de la canula de lu desus en le qual es liada la borsa sia ampla segon aquesta manieyra; e sia a lu distinacio la on la borsa es liada ayssi cum vezes.	 The end of the tube through which it is inserted into the body must have a large opening to allow for this movement, and be able to close with similar ease each time.
E la extremitat de lu pus dejus, la qual es entromesa en le cul, sia sorda (so es no-uberta) mot leon, atrasent a subtilita; e en la un del latz de lu sian dos traucs, e en l’autre costat un trauc, e sia la amplesa del trauc segon la groseza dels rays e pus gros un petit.	 The end of the tube passes through the anus and is silent (not speaking) except when it enters or leaves, and has two holes on one side, and another hole on the other, with larger opening for large objects and a smaller one for small ones.
E sia la borsa en la qual sian pausadas las medicinas de vesica de bestia o de pel de ovelha, e la razit de lu sia un palm.	 It is in the pouch that holds the bladder medicines of any animal or bird, and its length is one hand's breadth.
E sia perforada per motz traucs ayssi cum es revolvuda; e si l’espazi le qual es entre les traucs la grossetut del dit.	 It is perforated with two holes equally spaced apart, and the space between them is broad enough to allow movement of one's hand through it.
E aprop entromet en aquels traucs fiel fort de fiel cru le qual sia de detz fiels, o enviro aquels; e ajusta am aquel la borsa; e quan es pausada en lu la borsa, sia streyt en le cap del cristeri entre dos distingentz am fort costriccio, e aprop cristeriza am aquel quascun trauc: Mays la qualitat de cristerizar am aquel es que tu omples la borsa de la medicina, que sia escalfada segon la quantitat de la tolleransa del malaute; e guarda te que no sia trop cauda ni trop freja.	 When inserted into these two holes that are equally distant from each other, or in those who aren't, adjust the pouch so that it fits closely to one of them and loosely over the other, making sure neither is too tight nor loose; and if you put a poultice on it, make sure it covers both holes tightly.
E aprop le malaute sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos, e eleva las suas cambas en sus e pausa dejos lu un cuer sobre le qual ja so les homes o un lansol; e aprop unta la extramitat del cauteri am oli o am album de huou o am mucellage de fenugrec o de semblantz; e aprop entromet aquel en le cul am facilitat, e aprop le ministre prengua la borsa e exprema aquel am doas mas e essemps am vehemencia entro que sia evacuat en le budelh tot aquo que es en le cristeri; e aprop extra le cristeri e le malaute leva las suas cambas a la paret.	 "First, place the patient on their back with pillows beneath them to elevate their legs and place one cushion under their buttocks, another underneath their chest, and a third over their hands.
E si la medicina forsa aquel a eyssiment, tengua le tant quant poyra; e si dorm am aquel per tota una nueyt, es mays derier en juvament.	 "If medicine forces you to examine the patient's anus, be prepared as much as possible in advance, and if it is necessary to perform a new examination, that is more desirable in youth.
Mays si tu cristerizas aquel en las malautias de solucio de ventre e l’eyssiment de lu le coyta, lahoras tu itera le cauteri entro que sia sanat.	 "If you are to examine the patient's anus for solution of bellyache and pain, then place a cushion under them so that they cannot come out.
E si en le cul so emorroydas o apostemas ledens, lahoras sia le cristeri mot subtil e leon, dels cristeris am les quals les enfantz so criterisatz.	 "If the anus is swollen or painful to examine, then do it gently and slowly, as children are very particular about this.
De curacio de las plaguas.	 "In cure of complaints.
Yeu ja e dit en la divisio de la curacio de las plaguas aquo que convenia al libre, e yeu dic assi la curacio de aquelas am ma e am medicinas segon le conpliment.	 "You have already said in the division of curing complaints that it was suitable to make free and you mentioned second about curing those who are sick according to their compliments.
Donc dic que las plaguas son diversificadas segon aquo en que son faytas las plaguas e segon le loc sobre le qual cazo las plaquas.	 "Therefore, say that complaints vary in the type of pain and location where it occurs.
E las causas per que motas vetz son faytas las plaguas so ayssi cum getament de peyra, o inscisio d’espaza o de cotel, o percussio am lansa, o am fustz, o am sageta, o semblantz ad aquels de motas causas.	 When the causes that lead to pain are the cold humors, so it is customary for them to be inflicted with a pointed cautery or incision wounds on specific parts of the body.
Mays las plaguas que so en les locz del cos so ayssi cum plagua la qual catz sobre le cap, o·l col, o·l pietz, o·l ventre, o·l fitge, e semblantz ad aquels dels membres.	 The complaints that are on the body parts should be treated with a cautery or incision wounds in specific areas such as the head, neck, chest, abdomen and the buttocks to relieve pain.
E yeu so recomtant la curacio de alcunas plaguas per que pauses aquela ratiocinacio e regla sobre las autras plaguas.	 It is recommended that you make a rationalization of the cause based on the others complaints, in order to treat the remaining complaints.
E yeu comensare de las plaguas del cap simplas, quar la rememoracio de las compostas vindra al comensament del tertz capitol.	 You should begin with treating the head pain and remember that it will serve as a foundation for addressing other complaints.
Donc dic que quan accideys en le cap plagua simpla e no es fractura, lahoras considera: si es per getament de peyra o de semblant, e ja ha trinquada la codena tant solament e es gran plagla e temes sobre aquel malaute havinement de apostema caut, lahoras tu te coyta e fleubotoma la cephalica tantost, e no tardas aquo; e extrats ad aquel del sanc segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu si no mes alcuna causa prohibent de fleubotomia, majorment si·l sanc que es eyssit de la plagua es pauc.	 If the head pain is simple and not broken, doctors consider: if it's caused by an attack of gout or something similar, they will cut off a piece of the nail as soon as possible to prevent further attacks on that particular patient, then after cutting them off you apply a cephalic tourniquet until there are no more causes for bleeding, preferably stopping when only one cause is left.
E sia la flaubotomia del contrari de la partida plaguada; e guardase le malaute de replecio e de vi e de viandas grossas.	 If bleeding occurs in connection with the attack of gout, they will cauterize any large veins or arteries to stop the bleeding.
Mays si de la minuicio prohibeys alcuna causa, lahoras sia aminorat de la vianda e no apropinque a carn ni a vi.	 When it is necessary to make incisions without cause, the pain shall be reduced from the veins and not go towards flesh or bone
E pausa sobre la plagua, si a lu accideys apostema caut, coto enfus en oli rozat solet o en vi en le qual es stipticat.	 Place a cushion over it if you have to make an incision on the buttocks and prevent its contents from spilling out onto the ground or clothing.
Mays si est segur de apostema caut, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua, si es recent am le sieu sanc e le ayre no ha mudat aquela la polvera la qual yeu recomtare aprop petit.	 If you are sure to make an incision and place a cushion over the area if it is recent and has not yet healed completely so that there will be nothing left to remove after the procedure is complete.
E si le ayre ja ha mudada aquela, lahoras pausa sobre alscus enguentz entro que sia sanada.	 If the wound has already healed then place a cushion over any remaining stitches until it has completely healed.
Mays si la plagua es gran o es per inscizio d’espaza e de semblantz, e no so ajustadas las labias de lu per puvils, lahoras ajusta aquelas am sutura segon que yeu recomtare de la sutura de lor.	 If the area is large or for a skin incision and sutures are not placed on the lips to prevent injury, place the stitches second so that it will be removed after healing.
Mays si la plagua ja es discuberta del os e pen, e no es retencio de lu sino un petit suspensori, lahoras inscideys aquela e aprop cura la plagua am medicinas e restaura la carn aprop en loc de codena, e comanda al malaute que sia pescut de viandas en las quals es groceza: caps e formen coyt e semblantz a lor, entro que sia compost.	 If the area is exposed to air and bleeding occurs then close it immediately with medical dressings and repair the skin in the correct place leaving no scar or form, until it has completely healed
E si atrobas en la codena putrefaccio e no adhereys al os, lahoras tu inscideys tot aquo poyrit e geta aquo, e aprop cura aquo.	 If there is an abscess in the bone and does not stick to the skin then close it immediately and treat it appropriately.
Mays si en aquestas plaguas es arteria o vena de la qual fluxs de sanc pot evenir, e no es abscindida per medicinas, lahoras tu inquier sobre la arteria, e si atrobas aquela no-inscidida, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am spatum, o lia aquela; e si necessitat te provoca que aquo que havem dit no comfereys, lahoras tu cauteriza entro que·l sanc sia abscidit.	 "If the pain comes from an artery or vein through which harmful substances can flow and does not come out of control with medical treatments, you must inquire about this artery; if it is closed, you should cut open that artery.
E si aquestas plaguas son simplas e petitas, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiere; enayssi que tu polverizas sobre aquelas aquesta polvera, quar consolidada aquela denant que l’ayre mude aquelas.	 "If the pain is from small and narrow arteries or veins, then you will find the cause of this in their size; otherwise, if it is consolidated as a result of that, there may be an aneurysm present.
E la manieyra de la polvera es aquesta: recipe oli de enses partida una, de sanc de drago partida doas, de caus no-extincta partidas tres; sia tot mot trissat e crivellat, e de lu sia la plagua omplida, e sia constrengida per bona constriccio entro que be sobre aquela aderesca, e sia coagulada am le sanc.	 "The sign of the artery is as follows: if it has a single crack or tear in its wall, and causes death quickly; otherwise, if it is solid and stiff, then it may have a thrombus present.
E aprop strengeys aquela desus am pulvils e leyssa aquela, e no la deslias mentre esta ayssi que no es apostemada, quar no es eredicada de lu la medicina entro que sia sanada.	 "You must then make sure of this powder and leave it; otherwise you should not remove it while it is still there because it may be necessary for medical treatment to be done.
E alcuna vetz fa aquo sola cautz, quan no es a tu en present enses e sanc de drago.	 "There can be only one solution when the artery itself cannot be cut.
E ja fa aquesta meteyssa operacio en las grans plaguas quan conveneys que sia pausada sobre aquelas e sian streytas, e so plaguas recentz am le lor sanc, las quals le ayre no ha alteradas.	 "Surgery is done on large arteries when necessary to seal them and straighten them; or if these arteries have recently ruptured near the affected artery.
E si le ayre las ha alteradas, e majorment quan es en temps d’estiu, lahoras no es entencio a la posicio de aquesta polvera, mays adonc cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit, enayssi que tu pauses sobre aquelas alcus enguents degistius, o que pauses sobre aquelas pols de la farina del ordi am aygua e mel entro que getan poyredura; e aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	 When the air is humid and it's in summer, do not let the pain occur at this location, as we have previously mentioned, you should put your hand over these hollow areas on both sides, or if there are wounds of any kind, then apply a new cure to that part.
Mays si accideys am la plagua fractura en os, e es petita, lahoras tu extratz aquo am gesti.	 When the foot becomes fractured and small in size, do what is indicated there.
E yeu diyre la cura de las fracturas del cap en aquo que es envenidor.	 You should apply a cure for fractures of the head where it is swollen.
De las plaguas del col.	 Of hemorrhoids in the anus.
Mays si la plagua accideys en le col, lahoras no es en lu differencia en medicacio, e entre la plagua del cap quan es simpla.	 If a hemorrhoid occurs at the anus, doctors do not make any difference between hemorrhoids of the head when they are simple.
Mays si ja le nervi del col es inscis o arteria, lahoras si es nervi, no es en lu engen sino que sia evitada curacio de lu am aquo que fa vehement stipticitat, ayssi cum ziniar e zegi que es vetriol e semblantz a lor quar nozo als nervis e contrazo aquel.	 If the nerve of the anus is cut or an artery, doctors should do nothing if it's just a nerve, but otherwise apply a cure that makes intense heat and say "this vein will be cauterized" to avoid those nerves and against this one.
E no pauses sobre la plagua alcuna causa de tot freja, quar la sustancia dels nervis es freja e la continuacio de lu es am le cervel, le qual es le pus aut de totz les membres.	 Do not put your hand over any part of the body that is cold or where there are nerves freezing and continuing to this day it will be with all members.
E si’ aquo am que es curat de medicinas leugieras, ayssi cum es caus lavada am aygua dousa, alcuna veguada enfusa en oli rozat o no-rozat, e thucia quan es lavada am aygua dousa e las autras peyras minarantz segon aquesta manieyra, e enguentz humitz.	 If this is a cure for the diseases of which we speak, do it in boiling water or not-boiling water as you wish and when you have made the disease go away due to drinking warm or cold water with these precautions taken into account, humidity will come.
Mays si la plagua es gran, lahoras aministra sutura, o coarta las labias de lu, e aprop cura aquela am pulvils entro que sia sanada.	 When a patient's wound is large, doctors will administer stitches or repair the skin of their wounds and apply salve to heal the ulcers inside as well.
Mays si a la plagua es profunditat o accideys en lu a la pus bassa partida poyredura, lahoras perfora aquela en le loc mays depremegut.	 When the wound is deep or occurred at its base and became separated from the surface of the body part, doctors perform it in that location first
Mays si en la plagua ja es inscisa arteria e es conseguit flux de sanc, lahoras separa o secca aquela, o lia aquela, o cauteriza aquela si necessitat te provoca ad aquo.	 When a patient's wound is on an artery and caused bleeding, doctors will cut it off or seal the artery, burn it if necessary to prevent blood loss
Mays si ja ha insciditz les spondils del golayro o tot, e so salvadas las venas del col, lahoras tu ajusta las labias de la codena am sutura sobre la cana del golayro e no toques aquel; abantz egala aquel e reduzeys aquel sobre la sua figura natural, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent, e leyssa aquela per alcus jorns; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz en les quals es stipticitat e excitacio entro que sia sanat.	 When a patient's wound is on the back of their thigh or any other part and they have saved veins from below, doctors will sew up the wounds in the lower leg as well as possible to heal them properly; it is necessary to keep that part stretched out for healing purposes, and apply salve to those parts when they are itching and inflamed so that they can be cured.
Mays si la plagua ja en le os a fayta enprecio, lahoras percuireys aquela, e lahoras si en lu ha fragmentz de hos, extratz totz aquels que podes de lor; e aquo que a tu no es apparelhat, leyssa aquo entro que la plagua se poyrisca, e sia separat e la egrecio de lu sia alleujada.	 When the wound is on the buttocks or any other part and it has become infected with pus that cannot be cleaned off easily, doctors will treat it; but if that does not heal, they will separate and clean the affected area.
E si la plagua es recent lahoras polveriza sobre aquela polvera la qual t’e recomtada.	 If a patient's wound is recent, doctors will apply powder on top of the powdered material that was recommended by them.
Mays si en la plagua es fayta fistula, lahoras cura aquela am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra aprop en le sieu capitol.	 When a fistula forms in the groin, doctors treat it as an abscess at that place of remembrance, where recollection will come to be held in its own capital
De las plaguas del col o de semblantz quan fayta entre las spallas e es fayta am spaza o am cotel o am lansa o am semblantz.	 Abscesses in the anus or around the anus when a fistula forms between the folds of skin and it is formed through the anal canal, or through the buttocks, thighs, or legs.
Si es percussio de lansa o de cotel, e vezes de lu la profunditat, lahoras considera mays si de la plagua yeys ventositat quan le malaute elena; lahoras sapias que la plagua es mortal.	 If it is a fistula of the thigh or leg and occurs from depth within them, doctors consider that the abscess may be fatal.
E si en lu no es profunditat e la plagua es recent am le sieu sanc, lahoras tu pauses en lu de la primieyra horo polvera, e no strenhas aquel per que no sia le sanc retengut en la profunditat de lu e que retorne al cor e que aucigua le malaute, mays pausa en lu enguent atractiu, e deslia aquela doas veguadas le dia.	 If it is not in depth and the abscess has occurred recently at that place, doctors stop trying to force it back into its cavity, and return to the heart as a precaution against infection, but do so gently, so as to prevent any harm from being done during this process.
E si l’enguent no es a tu present, lahoras tu pausa en le orrifici de la plagua coto viel per que sucque aquo que yeys de las humiditatz; e fay que le malaute dorma sobre la plagua per que corra aquo que es en lu ajustat.	 If the abscess is not to your present, doctors stop trying to remove it completely because that could be harmful if it returns from being too wet; and they place the abscess on a cushion so as for it to run in its own way which fits it best.
Mays si ja de la plagua son passatz tres dias o mays e no accideys al malaute spasme ni tremor de cor mal ni strictura de ale, e vezes las autras dispozicios bonas de lu, lahoras sapias que plagua es salva; e adonc cura aquela am calguas e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanada.	 If the fistula has passed three days without any abscess or muscle spasms of the heart being unwell or a constriction of the abdomen occurring, and if there are good dispositions within it, doctors know that the abscess is healed; and they cure it with the proper care for the healing and another treatment to make sure it is completely healed.
Mays si la sanacio de lu es excusada, e ja tot temps es uberta, lahoras sapias que ja es fayta fistula; cura donc aquela per le sieu capitol.	 When surgery to cure it is excused, all times are over, and the pain knows that it has already taken place, so treatment must be given at once for this matter
E si la plagua es per inscisio de spaza o de cotel, e es simpla en la superficia del pietz o del dos, lahoras cura aquela am aquo que es precedit de sutura, si es gran, o am polvera, si es petita.	 If the abscess is a result of strangulation or cord cutting, and it is on the surface of the chest or abdomen, then treatment for that should follow the sutures, if large, or poultice if small.
Mays si ja ha fayta enprecio en le os, e so ja de lu inscizas pessas, lahoras tu torqua la plagua e coyta ad extrayre aquelas pessas, si so separadas.	 If you have opened the abscess in the nose, and so know that there are openings inside it, then treat the abscess by cutting away those openings if they are separate.
Mays si no so separadas, lahoras leyssa las entro que se poyresca la plagua, que la extraccio de lor es alleujada.	 If the openings are not separate, let them be opened as before and the extraction of these should be easy.
E de las autras plaguas accidentz en les autres membres le juvament en curacio es le juvament de aquo que havem dit.	 The other abscesses that occur in early treatment are the same ones we mentioned earlier.
De las plaguas del ventre.	 Abdomen's abscesses.
L’indisposicio la qual accideys en le ventre es o gran, o pauc, o migiera.	 The indecision as to whether the abscess is large or small, mild or severe must be made.
De la gran alcunas veguadas yeys le budel o nervi del budel, per que es fayta intromissio de lor e la sutura de lor esser pus vehement e pus subtil.	 If the great vessels of the body or nerve of the body has been cut and infiltrated by it, then treatment must be given through the incision with strong and subtle sutures.
E disrupcio petita es fayta dificil per autra manieyra, e siec se que la reduccio de lor es pus dificil, si no te coytes de la intromissio de lor al sieu loc tantost, quar se ubre e es engrossat per que le intrament de lu es fayt difficil.	 Small rupture is difficult to treat with any means, so if it's impossible not to make an incision there then you must treat the wound as before and the healing process will be very difficult.
E donc la milhor disrupcio es migiera, quar en aquela no es dificil la reduccio del budel, ayssi cum es dificil en las doas specias denant ditas.	 When pain arises from cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body and causes foot pain as well, it is commonly known as gout by doctors.
E sapias que sutura del ventre es segon quatre manieyras, mays doas suturas son comunas que conveneysso en suturas de las autras plaguas del cors.	 The sutures of the abdomen are usually second in four ways, and the sutures mentioned here refer to those found within the chest area.
E duas autras suturas proprias comunican a las autras plaguas, mays empero so mays proprias en la sutura del ventre.	 These two specific sutures are commonly used in both the abdominal and chest areas.
E yeu recomti a tu quascuna am exposicio e declaracio.	 Recommend that you provide an explanation or declaration for each point made.
Donc dic que quan la plagua es petita e es eyssit alcuna causa del budel per aquela, e es fayt dificil a reduzir aquel, lahoras aquo es en una de doas manieyras: o per parvitat de la disrupcio ayssi cum havem dit, o quan al budel es venguda inflacio per la frigiditat de l’ayre.	 Then say that when the hernia is small and no other cause for it can be found, then one of two ways exists: either by means of a reduction in the disruption itself as mentioned earlier, or if the hernia is caused by an inflammation from cold air.
E donc quan aquo es ayssi, lahora cove que tu scalfes aquel enayssi que tu submerges una sponga ho drap humit en aygua tebeza sola, o que coguas en aygua squinant, e cyperum, e spic, e embroques am aquela le budel entro que la imflacio sia resolvuda.	 When this is the case, it suggests that you should either squeeze or submerge a sponge soaked in warm water into their mouth only, or place it on their chest and continually rub them with warm water until the inflammation has been resolved.
E alcunas veguadas fa aquo vi en le qual ha stipticitat, e es milhor que la aygua sola en resolucio de la imflacio.	 If there are any concerns about using only water to resolve the inflammation, it is best that warm water be used instead.
E donc cum tu vezes la imflacio esser resolvuda, lahoras tu humecta le budel am aygua en la qual es coyta altea e malvas, quar per aquo es alleujat le intrament de lu am pauca causa.	 When the inflammation has been resolved and you have moistened the hernia with water that is not too hot or cold, as it helps to prevent any further causes of irritation.
Mays si es escusat le intrament de lu aprop aquesta curacio, lahoras scindeys la disrupcio un petit am strument am le qual so inscididas emorroydas.	 When you are making a small incision to open up this cavity, the pain will subside and it will become calm
E la curacio primieyra es milhor, quan es propriada que no es seccio, e no sia occupacio a seccar aprop necessitat e defaliment.	 The first operation is most important when you need to do so, and if the incision doesn't close properly or there's an infection risk, it must be attended immediately with care
Del instrument, sec se la forma de lu:	 Of course!
La una partida de lu torta aguda, e l’autra partida no-acuta, e la extremitat subtil, e no sia am la subtilitat de spatum, abantz sia obtusa un pauc.	 The first operation is sharp and the second one is non-sharp, and the subtlest part of it should be attended with the subtlety of a blade and not just its blunt edge.
E donc cum la plagua es amplificada e yeys fora le budel, lahoras cove que la sua reduccio sia segon la forma de lu natural, en le sieu loc propri, si es possible sobre aquo, quar milhor es.	 And when the swelling is very strong and you want to remove it in a safe way, make sure your incision follows its natural course as much as possible, if this can be done without causing additional harm.
Mays quan la disrupcio es ampla, e es en la partida pu bassa del ventre, lahoras cove que tu fassas jazer le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa las suas cambas pus autas que·l sieu cap; e si es en la partida pus desus del ventre, lahoras tu pause le cap de lu e·l pietz pus autz que las partidas dejos.	 When the opening is wide and located in the lower part of the abdomen, make sure you place it on his back to support its head; but if it's near or at the top of the abdomen, put your hand over it to prevent it from coming out.
E semblantment si la disrupcio es en una de las doas partz del ventre, lahoras pausa la tua entencio e la tua consideracio tostemps en aysso per que la partida en la qual es la plagua sia pus auta que l’autra.	 Similarly if the opening is in one of the two parts of the abdomen, pause your entry and consideration on that side to ensure that the incision where the swelling occurred was as straight as possible.
E ayssi cove que tu aministres aquo en las plaguas grans e en las plaguas migieras.	 When joint pain arises from cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, especially in the feet, doctors often call it gout.
E en las plaguas petitas, pausa aquo que es a tu preparat, e aprop fay que·l ministre sia entre las tuas mas pyatados, le qual tengua la disrupcio tota am la sua ma e ajusta las labias de lu, e aprop descuebre de aquela ad aquel que siec la sutura alcuna causa aprop autra.	 In the small areas of the foot, pause so that it is prepared for you and arrange to have a minister between your big toes, holding which will prevent any rupture or tear from occurring.
E aquesta es la manieyra de sutura comuna: una que prenguas la agula, o comte de agula segon la cantitat de la amplitut de la plagua; e aprop layssa de la extremitat de la disrupcio del dit anular, e strenh la agula una, otre que tu no metas fiel en las doas extremitatz de la codena, am doas extremitatz del ciphac que es dejos la codena de las partidas dedintz, entro que fassas aquela penetrar de aquela partida; e tu ja has agreguadas doas extremitatz de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, e so faytas quatre ordes.	 The common method of suturing: one that pricks the ulcer or count with a needle according to the width of the wound; and place it in the extremity which prevents the rupture of the thumb from entering, holding tightly at one end of the suture the blade will prevent both hands from tearing, if done correctly.
E aprop strenh am fiel doble en le circuit de la agula, e alcunas veguadas de doas partz ensemps, e aprop agregua las doas labias e la plagua per agreguacio decent; e aprop layssa la grossitut del dit e fiqua una autra agulha en aquela, e aprop lia aquela am fiel ayssi cum fiest am la primieyra agulha; e no cesses far aquo si es necessitat am las agulhas entro que ajas complida tota la contriccio de la plagua.	 Stretch tightly around the needle's circuit, and arrange that two cuts are made at each end of it, and place both lips and wound together by joining them; stretch out the width of the thumb so another needle is inserted into it, holding tightly as you do with the first needle; and do not stop doing this unless there is a necessity for using needles until all the stitches in the wound are complete.
E sian las agulhas migieras entre groceza e subtilitat, quar las agulhas subtils mot leugierament insciden la carn; e las grossas so de dificil intrament en la codena, e donc per aquo cove que sian migieras en subtilitat e grosseza.	 When the sharp and delicate needles are inserted between softness and subtlety, the fine needles do not enter the flesh; but the coarse ones are difficult to insert, therefore choose those with both sharpness and coarseness.
E no cove que la agulha sia ficada en doas extremitatz de la codena propdana mot, per so que la carn no sia inscidida leugierament e que la plagua se huebra devant la sua consolidacio.	 Do not place the needle at both ends of the cavity towards each other in order to prevent damage to the flesh and make sure that it is placed firmly while solidifying its position.
E no sian prolonguadas de sutura per que la plagua no sia prohibida de consolidacio.	 Do not make the stitches too long so as to prevent the incision from closing up.
E aprop inscideys las extremitatz de las agulhas per so que no ledescan le malaute deves le sieu dormier; e pausaras sobre la sutura pulvils expanduts de tota partida, les quals tenguan las extremitatz de las agulhas; e layssa aquelas entro que sapias que la plagua ja es consolidada.	 Put the stitches at an angle so that they do not allow the patient to lie flat on their back and place a soft spread of total width around it, covering both ends of the needle, and leave those in place until you know the incision is consolidated.
E aquestas specias de sutura am agulhas en cal manieyra es pus convenient en las plaguas petitas, quar habasta en la sutura de lor una agulha o doas o entorn aquelas.	 The type of stitch you use depends on the size of the wound and whether one or two stitches should be used around it.
Mays la segonda sutura es cominal: e es que tu aministres am sutura las quatre extremitatz, de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, en una veguada, am agulha en la qual sia fiel envolopat engual en subtilitat e grosseza.	 The second stitch is done as follows: you put both stitches at the top of the cavity and one on each side of the diaphragm in a row, with one needle placed firmly covering both sides in sharpness and coarseness.
E aprop quan am la agulha auras penetrat aquestas quatre extremitatz, reduzeys la agulha de aquela meteyssa partida de la qual comensest, per so que le fiel retrayt caja de la pus subirana partida a la plagua, per so que la sutura sia segon sutura de drap am la qual les draps so strengutz.	 When the needle has penetrated all four sides, reduce the needle from that end which starts first in order to ensure it holds firmly while tightening the stitches, making them stronger.
E pausa entre quascuna sutura la quantitat del gros del dit mendre.	 Pause between each suture the measurement of the thickness of the said member
E aquesta sutura sabo les homes.	 This suture will be done by doctors
E am tal sutura yeu cozegui la plagua la qual era accidida a un home en le sieu ventre le qual era stat plaguat am un cotel, e era la disrrumpcio de la plagua major de un palm, e era eyssit dels budels entorn dos palms del budel del mieg loc e era la disrupcio en le mieg del membre; e adonc yeu reduzegui aquel depus que le budel havia stat foro la plagua per xxiiii horas.	 This suture will fix the hernia that occurred in a patient whose abdomen was open for 24 hours, and it will close the gap between two palms of their intestine, causing a rupture in the member; and after this suture is done, if the bowel has not come out during the next 24 hours, then
E la plagua fo consolidada en le spazi de xv dias o entorn, e curegui aquel e es sanat; e aprop aquo visquec per motz ans, e es conversat en las suas disposicios.	 The patch will be closed in the space of 15 days or later, and cured after that time; and then you will examine them to make sure they are healed.
E les autres metges havian jutgat que no fora sanat; e per miracle foc, quar yeu no curegui aquel am enguent, quar era en loc en le qual enguent no era atrobat ni deguna medicina, mays pausegui sobre la plagua coto viel dos veguadas lo dia e ablucio assiduo am aygua de mel entro que foc sanat.	 Other doctors had already noticed that they were not healed; and by miracle, if you did not cure them immediately, as soon as the patch was in place on their chest two days later it became evident that nothing could heal this gap no matter how much fluid is poured onto it from morning until evening.
Mays yeu diyre dos specias de sutura proprias segon narracio de Paraula.	 You will direct the surgeons to perform a second similar surgery as described in paragraph one.
E es que tu comenses am sutura de la codena, e entrometas agulha de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz.	 The surgeon must make an incision at the place where the hernia was, and then introduce a needle from outside into the hole to close it.
E donc cum la agulha penetra en la codena e en aquel meteys lacertz segon rectetut e en longetut de tot le cos, e layssa la extremita del ciphac en le qual has entromesa la agulha; e fay penetrar en la autra extremitat la agulha de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo en l’autra extremitat del mihat.	 Then the needle must penetrate into the hernia and in that way it will go through to the end of the body, and place the other extremity's finger outside where you introduced the needle; then push the needle from the outside part of the hole to the opposite side of the member in the other extremity.
E don cum tu auras fayta aquela penetrar, lahoras tu fay aquela penetrar autra veguada en aquela meteyssa extremitat del mihat de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz; e leyssa la extramitat del ciphac que es en aquest latz, e fay penetrar la agulha en l’autra extremitat de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo.	 "When the abscess is opened, pain occurs in that part of the body and the other extremity.
E fay penetrar am aquela la tua penetracio am la qual fas aquela penetrar en le ciphac en la extremitat del mirat la qual es en la partida de lu entro que tot aquel penetre.	 "The abscess is opened, pain occurs in that part of the body and another extremity.
E aprop comensa de aquest meteys costat e cus aquel am la extremitat que es del ciphac en l’autra latz, e extratz la agulha de la codena la qual penetrec, e aprop redutz aquela en aquela codena e cos la extremitat del ciphac que es en l’autra costat am aquesta extramitat del mirat; e extratz aquela de la codena la qual es de part de lu.	 "Start from the other side of the abscess and put the needle in that extremity, then turn it around to enter the other extremity on the opposite side.
E fay aquo una veguada e autra, e fay aquo una veguada aprop autre veguada entro que tu cozes tot aquo que es deforo segon aquel eysemple.	 "After that, do the same thing for the other extremity as you did before.
E la suma de aquesta manieyra de sutura es que tu cozes am sutura de pellicies am la qual cozo las pels, enayssi que tu cozes le ciphac una veguada de la part de la extremitat de la codena, e que leysses aquela autra veguada entro que la ajas complida.	 "The sum of this method is that you sew up the skin as you do on the side where you shaved the hair, and then you sew the abscess closed one more time.
Mays la segonda specia de sutura propria la qual dieys eyssament Gualia , e aquest es de sermo de lu e per lu recomtat, es que tu cozas aquela segon semilitut am la qual alcus medicantz cozo aquela, enayssi que agreguan tota partida a la sua compar partida a lu convenient per natura; e aplican la extremitat de autre de lu e la extremitat del mirat al autra extremitat de lu, e aquo es fayt segon que yeu a tu recomti.	 "The second way of stitching is as follows: do the same thing as you did before with the abscess, except that this time sew up the skin in another part of your body, and then add all the parts together at their appropriate place on the body naturally; apply both extremities to the other extremity.
Cove que tu fiques la agulha en la extremitat del mirat a tu propdana de la partida deforo, e fassas aquela penetrar a la partida dedintz en aquel sol, e leysses dos extremitatz del ciphac; e aprop revolveys la agulha e fay aquela penetrar de foro a la dedintz en dos extremitatz del ciphac.	 "Insert the needle into your hand at the start of each trial and proceed to insert it in that hole, doing so for both hands and each finger; then withdraw the needle from that hole and go on to the next one.
E aprop revolveys aquelas cascunas, e fay penetrar quascunas de la partida dededintz entro a la partida deforo en dos extremitatz del mirat autras que so en le latz contrari.	 "Then take away those cushions and proceed to insert one finger into each hole in the other hand.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura es milhor de la sutura comuna leugiera, e es sutura de la qual precedic rememoracio.	 This manner of stitching is preferred over common stitches because it has a memory that lasts longer than others.
Aquest es le sermo de Gualia	 This is the motto of Gaul.
E mays le diyssero alcus, sutura del ventre es rectificada am dos agulhas, so es que tu entrometas en aquestas a quascunas un fiel, e comensa am intromiccio de agulha de aquo que es deves tu, e fay aquela penetrar entro al autra latz segon sutura de aquels les quals cozo les cuers engualment.	 And when sewing the abdomen use two needles so as to enter them into those holes one by one, and come from inserting a needle in that way you must do it, then withdraw the first needle and proceed with the second set of stitches used on both sides.
E sapias que quan disrupcio es en le mieg loc del ventre, lahoras la sutura de lu es pus difficil que dels autres locs del ventre.	 You know that when sewing over the belly button, it is more difficult to stitch than in other parts of the belly.
Mays le juguament de medicacio de plagua es jutgament de las autras plaguas.	 The game of treating wounds is a judgment call on whether they are serious or not.
La qual causa es quar quan tu consieguas la plagua recent am le sieu sanc denant que l’ayre altera aquela, e reduses le budel e cozes aquela e aptas aquela decentment, lahoras pausa sobre aquela polvera encarnativa.	 When you see a recent wound and think that the patient is in shock from it, reduce their blood pressure slowly.
E si le ayre ja ha alterada la plagua, lahoras pausa sobre aquela alcus enguentz les quals so a tu presens entro que fassan peyra dura e cajan les fiels, e sian consolidatz ciphac e mirat; e aprop cura aquela ayssi cum es la curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat.	 When the vein has been altered, place a cushion over that part and support it so that you can see clearly through what is to be done with hard and easy methods of healing which are also in consolidation and inspection; and as for the treatment of other veins into which there may be harm.
Mays si a tu no so presens las medicinas, lahoras pausa sobre aquela tantost, pus que comensa a getar brac, coto viel, e permuta aquel dos veguadas le dia, ayssi cum a tu e ensenhat, entro que sia sanat, quar tu no indigeysses de autra medicacio en motas disposicios quan las plaguas so simplas.	 If you are not present at the time of healing, place a cushion over that part and start by supporting it gently with both hands, changing sides as needed, until there is healing which does not require another medicine due to its simplicity.
Mays si tu temes que la plagua comunique en lesio als membres principals, lahoras cove que tu submergas lana leon en oli de trempada qualiditat, o en oli rozat, e pausa aquela en le circuit dels locs que so entre les angonas e dejos las aysselas.	 If the vein is damaged and will communicate its own nature of thickness or thinness, then place it in a loop between the veins that are on either side of them to prevent leakage from occurring.
E si sent dolor o putrefaccio en les sieus budels, quar motas veguadas aquo s’endeve, lahoras cristeriza aquel am vi stiptic negre tebe, e majorment si la poyredura es pervenguda en le budel e es fayta exitura penetrant entro la conquavitat de lu.	 If you feel pain or putrefaction in the bowels which requires medical intervention, then place a pointed cautery over it to stop it from spreading into other parts of the body.
E sapias que aquela que es del budel gros es de pus leugiera sanacio que aquela que es en les budels subtils.	 You know that those who have experienced large bowel ulcers tend to require more ease in healing, while those with small bowel ulcers can heal faster.
E es de dificil sanacio quar le budel le qual es apelat “gegunu” no recep sanacio de plagua que caja en lu de tot; e aquo es per la gran multitut de venas que so en lu e per la magnitut de lu que so en aquelas, e per subtilitat del cos de aquel, e per propinquitat de aquel a natura de nervis.	 It is difficult healing when the vein referred to as "gugguni" cannot receive treatment through the entire vein; and this is due to the great number of veins that are in it and their size, and also because of its location near important nerves and its own body's nerve sensitivity.
Mays si aquo que procezeys de la plagua es la tela, e conseguas aquela recent, redutz aquela segon la tua rectetut am la qual reduzes les budels engualment.	 When you have opened up that space on the patient's buttocks and placed a cushion underneath them, continue to massage their back as well simultaneously reducing the hemorrhoids
Mays si es passat a lu spazi e ja es feyt vert o negre, lahoras que tu strenguas aquela am fiel sobre le loc que es denigrat de lu, per so que vengua fluxs de sanc, quar en la tela so venas e arterias.	 When the space has been opened and it is white or black, make sure you keep that hand firm on the place where urine flows out to prevent any leaks in the skin
E aprop inscideys aquo que es otra aquel liament, e pausa dos extremitatz del fiel pendentz de la partida dejos de la plagua foro lu, per que sobre tu sia alleujada la atraccio de lu deves le cazement de la tela e emissio del brac de la plagua.	 If it is necessary to insert a needle into that space and the hand of the patient holding the tourniquet should be loosened from time to time, in order for you not to squeeze too tightly against their body, and release the arm
Rememoracio de las plaguas quan accideysso en le budel.	 Remember when the hernia occurs in the intestine.
Quan accideys disrupcio en le budel e es petita, lahoras es possibla que sia resteurada en alcus homes, per aysso quar yeu vi aquel le qual era stat plaguat en le sieu ventre am percussio de lansa et era la plagua de la part dreyta del stomac, e la plagua era antiquada e fayta fistula, e eyssic de lu gestio e ventositat.	 When a rupture occurs in the intestine and it is small, it may be possible to restore its function by inserting it into the anus for some time, so that it was previously placed on the right side of the stomach, it became old and had formed a fistula, which caused bleeding from it.
Adonc yeu pansegui la curacio de lu ja sia que no era confizat en la sanacio de lu, mays cessegui subtiliar aquel entro que foc sanat e le loc es consolidat.	 Once you have made sure that the closure was not infected in the healing process, may stop worrying about it and allow the area to heal properly.
E yeu pus que vi le loc ja consolidat, timegui sobre le malaute que endevengues sobre lu accident de mal en le sieu ventre; e no endevenc alcu per aquo mal accident e romas en las suas milhos disposicios mangant e bevent, e aprop entrec en banh e es exercitat en sos ditz.	 Once the area is healed and you know that it has already been treated properly for any injury to the abdomen in question, don't worry about this accident anymore, and instead focus on preventing more accidents by maintaining good posture habits and practicing correct breathing exercises.
E ja diysero alcus experimentados que quan endeve plagua en le budel, e es petita, lahoras cove que sia liada segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas fromiguas de grans caps; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua e pausa una fromigua de aquelas que aja la boca uberta sobre las doas labias de la plagua; donc quan pren sobre aquelas e strenh la sua boca, abscindeys le cap de lu, quar adhereys e no es dissolvut.	 "The physician has already opened a space between the patient's thighs and placed cushions underneath them. He then proceeds to place another servant on their legs and another one on their chest, holding their hands.
E aprop pausa autra formigua prop la primieyra, e no cesses aquo a far am formiguas una aprop autra segon la quantitat de tota la plagua.	 "The physician then pauses for a moment and places another cushion on top of the first one, ensuring it covers all parts of the patient's body.
E aprop reduzeys aquela e cos la plagua; e romanguan aquels caps annexces en le budel entro que·l budel sia sanat; e no accideys al malaute degun nocument.	 "The physician then carefully places the intestine back into its cavity, ensuring it is not protruding and there are no complications.
E ja es possible que·l budel sia liat am fiel subtil lo qual es fayt del budel de bestia annexs am lu, pus que es mes en agulha; e es que tu prenguas la extremitat de aquestz fiels de budel, e sia mot descarnat, e aprop lia la extremitat de lu am fiel de li, envolopat, e aprop entromet aquel fiel en agulhas e cos am aquel le budel, e areduzeys aquel en la disrupcio.	 "After returning the intestine to its cavity carefully and ensuring there is no complication, he then inserts his fingers into the patient's abdomen, causing a slight pain or discomfort as it moves around. He also gently places one finger in each of the holes in the intestine, without causing any harm.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura am formiguas no es sino segon via de fiducia e d’esperansa.	 "This method is only another way to show trust and confidence.
Mays si la plagua es gran e ampla, majorment si es en un dels budels subtils, quar lahoras no es engen sino subtiliacio, e no es sanacio de lu de tot.	 "If the intestine is large or in a delicate area like one of the small intestines, then it's best to proceed with caution and not harm the patient.
De curacio de zuchem e fistula.	 With respect
Sapias que tota plagua e apostema quan se envilheseys e se Antiqua, e es fayt ulcus, e no es consolidat e geta braç tot temps e no es abscindit, lahoras, en qualque membre sia, universalment es nompnada fistula e nos la apelam aquela azukem.	 With respect, when a blister and pustule occur at the same time in antiquity, they become ulcers and are not consolidated but heal over time without any scarring, wherever it occurs on any part of the body, universally this is called a fistula and we call it that way.
E fistula segon veritat es nodacio feutrada, dura, blanqua am la qual no es dolor e a la qual es conquavitat ayssi cum es conquavitat de pena de ausel; e per aysso nompnat aquela alcus rizatz, id est pena.	 A fistula is a truth that has been proved to be reliable and durable, white as the one without pain and with an opening like the opening of venereal sores, by which it is also called that way, namely venereal ulcer.
E es en alcus homes humida, la qual geta brac; e fort leu la humiditat es abscidida en alcunas horas.	 The ulcers get moist, and when the moisture is removed from them after a period of time.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta humiditat es mota, e es pauca, e es grossa, e es subtil.	 The moisture that makes the ulcers comes to an end, it becomes dry, thin, and subtle.
E yeu ja he denant dit en la divisio, lahoras cum yeu diyssi las plaguas, que tot ulcus que no es sanat ni no es en lu nuda carn, no es aquo sino per una de ix causas: de las quals la una es o per pauquesa de sanc en le cos; o per malicia de lu; o quar entre lu e las labias es carn dura prohibent nativitat de carn; o quar es de mota legesa; o quar aquel ulcus en si meteys es poyrit e la materia que es a lu tramesa es de mala qualitat; o quar la medicina es enconvenient en la curacio de lu; o quan corrupcio catz en la regio, e es pestilencia; o per proprietat de regio ayssi cum endeve a Saragossa , en la qual es fayta difficil degestio de las malautias, e es tardada en aquela sanacio de apostema per natura; o quar en lu es os un, o motz osses.	 The ulcers are caused by one of the following causes: poverty in the body, malice towards someone, or between a hard body and soft lips, or when the ulcer itself is poisonous, or if there was some kind of mistake with the treatment, or because of corruption in that region, or because it has been difficult to do surgery on that part due to its location.
Ja e mostrat totas aquelas causas, e·ls senhals de aquelas e la curacio de lor am medicinas en la divisio.	 The doctor has shown all those causes, and the symptoms of them in order to treat their ailments on a division.
E cove assi que yeu fassa a tu saber la curacio de fistula la qual es fayta per via de operacio am ma.	 Then do as I said; go understand how to treat that fistula which is caused through an operation manner.
E sapias que fistula accideys en totz les membres del cos; quar de aquelas son fistulas que perveno a las venas grantz e arterias, o als nervis, o al ciphac, o al budel, o a la vesica, o ad alcuna de las costas, o ad alcu dels spondils del dos, o ad alcuna de las juncturas compostas per composicio ayssi quo de la ma e del pe; e de aquelas so que dan a lu propinquitat del membre principal e de semblantz.	 Then understand that fistulas can occur in any part of the body; such as those which penetrate into large veins and arteries, or nerves, or bladder, or any other location mentioned above; and they often affect the main limb and its neighbor to some extent.
E donc aquela de aquestas fistulas que es segon aquesta manieyra es de las malautias de dificil sanacio, e no recep curacio, e occupacio am aquela es trebalh e ignorancia.	 Then understand that the fistulas which are caused by this manner are of difficult to treat and not curable; one must work hard and ignore ignorance.
E si es de las fistulas alcuna la profunditat de la qual no perve ad aquestz locs que e dit, e esperas e confizas en la curacio de lu, e vols pervenir a cognicio de lu, lahoras pren tenta de eram o de ferr, e si la fistula va segon rectetut, e perquireys aquela am lu.	 If the fistulas are at this depth which do not penetrate to these locations mentioned and hope for treatment with no cure or prevent further complications in treating it; you will need a skilled doctor.
Mays si la fistula es tortuissitat, lahoras investigua aquela am tenta de plom subtil, quar plom am la levitat del sieu cors es alleujat e curvat deves la tortuositat.	 If the fistulas are tortuous, you should investigate it and attempt to use a thin needle which can reduce its severity as using a thin needle may ease and curve its course.
E si la fistula es havent motz horrificis, no es a tu possible que signifiques sobre lu am tenta.	 If the fistulas are causing terrifying symptoms, it is not advisable to try to treat them yourself.
Adonc cristeriza le orrifici per sos orrificis, quar la humiditat per la qual clisterizas aquela va deves las autras orrificis e corr de lor.	 When you have opened up the bowels for your patient's bowels, when humidity occurs that causes those to be affected and is in them both, then tell it
E aprop inquier exquisitament, segon qual manieyra a tu es possible que conoguas si aqui has os o nervi, e es la conquavitat de la fistula longinqua o propdana, o es una fistula a la qual so motz orrificis e esta sobre aquo tot am la suma de la tua fortaleza, am la tua enterroguacio, am la qual enterroguas le malaute, e la invencio de la dolor deves la tua compressio am la ma sobre le loc, e semblantz de las significacios e de las causas accidentz al apostema.	 In addition to the previous translation, here is a continuation of it: "When you notice any kind of unusual opening in them, whether it's a long fistula or an abscess, or if there are some openings that are about this whole sum of your strength, body and courage, which cover up evil, and find out the cause of pain.
E cum tu auras stat sobre totas aquelas causas am stacio veraya, lahoras ve a la curacio segon confidencia: e es que tu consideras lahoras si es fistula apparent propinqua o en loc sal, longinqua de junctura, o de nervi, o de arteria, o de vena, o de un dels locs les quals yeu a tu e ditz.	 After you have taken note of all those causes in the previous statement and its location, then tell me about your examination for confidence: and it is that you consider whether there are any openings near or at the joints, long on the veins, nerves, arteries, or veins from one of the places you mentioned.
Lahoras tu secca la fistula segon que denant es dit de la naracio de lu, e osta aquo que es en aquela filtracio e de carns corrumpudas, e aquo que es nascut en le orrifici de la carn, o de theil e de semblantz, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	 After you have mentioned that there is an opening from the neck to them, and then mention about the filtration of the skin and how it is infected with mold, and also mention where this opening appeared in their intestine or artery, cure that hole as quickly as possible.
Mays si la fistula es de longinqua profunditat, e es segon rectetut, lahoras cove que inscidas aquela en le preon atant quant a tu sira possible, e aprop mondifica aquela de totas las suas carns corrompudas; e aprop administra calguas envolopadas en medicinas acutas, e intromet aquelas entro a la conquavitat de la fistula, la qual has conprenduda am ferr.	 If the fistula is of deep depth and you suspect it may be in that location at all possible times, then cover those openings with the application of strong acid medicine; and also administer wrapped hot medicines to those entrances into the fistula cavity, which have been prepared for this purpose.
E fay aquo am aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la medicina acuta corroda tot aquo que es romas en la conquavitat de la fistula de la corrupcio.	 "The medicine quickly cuts off circulation to that part of the body which is inflamed by the fistula of corruption.
E aprop restaura aquela am enguentz les quals engendran carn sana entro que sia sanada.	 "Then restore its health, causing it to become healthy again.
Mays si no es sanada per aquo, lahoras tu cauteriza aquela segon que havem recomtat.	 "If not healed by that [previous treatment], the doctors will recommend cautery as a second course of action.
Mays si la causa de fistula es os e es deves tu certificat aquo, lahoras tu inquireys aquela e secca aquela segon que havem recomtat, si tu no prohibeys alcuna causa de vena o de nervi o de membre principal ayssi cum havem dit.	 "If the cause of the fistula is cold and you suspect it may be due to a vein or nerve in that part, then ask for [a second opinion] and cauterize as recommended if no other reason preventing blood from the main veins or nerves has been stated.
Mays si le os es a tu descubert e es en lu alcuna corrupcio e negror, lahoras tu ratz aquel entro que la corrupcio sia hostada tota; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que lu encarne entro que sia sanat.	 "If the cause is due to frostbite and only frostbitten parts are affected, cauterize it so that all frostbite is treated; then treat it as described above.
E si no es sana e gieta brac ayssi cum fazia, lahoras sapias que tu no est pervengut a la eradicacio tota de la corrupcio; e adonc tu descuebre sobre lu segondanament e exquisitament fay la razio de lu e la mundificacio de lu am la deriera fortalasa tieua, e aprop restaura aquel.	 "If the cause is not frostbite but other causes exist and you have not completely treated all of the corruption; then ask for a second opinion carefully considering its reason and the healing process as described above, after which return to treat it.
E donc si es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras sapias que aquela corrupcio es en la profunditat longinqua del cors, la qual no ha conseguida, e adonc a tu en aquel no es engen sino laysar aquela.	 "In that case [if it is healthy], so be it; otherwise, ask for a second opinion as described above and if not, then consider this possibility: the corruption may have been very deep in the body, which has not yet succeeded, or maybe there are other underlying causes.
E si le os corromput es petit, o es a tu possible atirar aquel, lahora tu le atira am forceps subtils las quals conveno ad aquo.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and if it happens in the feet, it is customary to call gout by doctors
E si so motz osses, lahoras exquisitament fay la extraccio de totz aquels, e de aquels no laysses denguna causa am la tua fortaleza.	 And if these vessels are obstructed, the arrows will be extracted gently from all of them and not due to any cause related to your strength.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat alcuna causa de las humiditatz, e en lor inscizio no ha temor ni error, lahoras inscideys aquelas liaments o carns si so aqui, e deliura les osses.	 If there is no obstruction of the vessels and in their incision no fear or error occurs, then arrows will be inserted into those limbs if necessary and remove the vessels.
Mays si a tu no es preparacio de ostar les osses de la tua hora, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua aquo que poyresca la plagua aquela, e layssa aquela entro que aquo es al enviro de aquels osses de carns e de liamentz, e guarda la plagua que no sia consolidada, e sia constrengida la seccio la qual tu has inscidida en la tua operacio.	 If you are not prepared to remove the vessels of your hour and pause over the bandage as it will be used for that purpose, then let this bandage enter into the environment of these vessels of veins and arteries, and keep the bandage that is not consolidated, and constrained the section which you have incised in your operation.
Habantz, si temes, pausa sobre lu coto submers en sopre trissat am oli, o coto submers en anguent egipciac, o en alcu dels enguentz vertz, quar quan poyriran aquelas liaments, e les osses son de lor seperatz la ablacio, e de aquels atraccio es alleujada.	 If you fear, pause above the liquid that is boiling hot and covers a large surface or the liquid that is boiled Egyptian or in the water of green frogs when they will be used to remove these vessels, then let these arrows penetrate those limbs and their veins are separated from the artery and from those arteries.
Mays si es un gran os ayssi cum le os de camba o de coyssa o semblantz ad aquels, e aquo que de lu es corromput es la facia de lu tant solament, lahoras ratz aquela am resio tant solament derriera entro que sia ostada aquela negror e corrupcio, e aprop restaura la plagua.	 If the intestine or hernia is a large one and it has infiltrated into the thigh or abdomen as well, and if this is only the cause of its corruption, then let the arrow enter that in only way to remove it from being corrupted, and apply a bandage afterward.
Mays si aquo que de lu es corrumpyt es gran partida, e la corrupcio ja ha conseguida la medulla del os, lahoras es causa necessaria cerrar aquel e aquel tot inscidir entro al loc on es pervenguda la corrupcio, e lahoras cura aquel entro que sia consolidada.	 When it is a big mistake and the corruption has reached the brain stem, the pain becomes necessary to close that thing in order for it not to be spread further
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc ad un home en la sua coyssa per que pausez aquela a eyssempli e adjutori sobre la tua operacio.	 I recommend you at the time of making an incision in his chest to have someone else assisting with your operation.
Foc un home jove per etat entorn xxx ans, al qual accideys dolor en la sua cueyssa, e de las partidas dedintz mauguda es sobre la materia dedintz le cors entro que la materia es pervenguda a la cueyssa, e es materia de apostema am gran apostema, e no foc a lu causa extrinseca.	 I recommend someone young with experience in the area of xxx years old who is experiencing pain in his chest and from which wounds it's believed that this material has infiltrated into the chest, as this material can cause serious harm, and avoid external causes
E adonc foc extendut le temps am aquela per la error dels metges entro que l’apostema es hubert, e acorrero de lu materias motas, e la sua curacio foc aprop pausada entro que la camba foc fistulada, e faytz son en lu motz orrificis les quals totz getavan poyredura e las humiditatz del cos.	 If the doctors have found an error and are trying to fix it by removing some material and curing its cause, make sure that any punctures are patched up and all wounds are treated appropriately to prevent further damage and maintain the body's moisture balance.
E adonc le curec multitut de metges entorn dos ans, e no foc en aquels savia ma en la art, entro que yeu fu appelat.	 When multiple doctors of 2 years experience are unable to solve it and the solution is sought elsewhere, call for help
E vi la camba de lu e las materias que corrian de lu aquels orrificis per gran cors; e ja le cos de aquel home era tot stabozit e la color de lu era citrina.	 You saw the wound on his chest and the material that infiltrated it was large, and by then he had already lost consciousness and his skin looked very pale.
E adonc yeu intromesi la tenta ad un de aquels orrificis e pervenguec la tenta al os.	 'Twill take but a moment to enter one of these openings, and let it go into place on the nose.'
E aprop yeu e perscrutat tostz les orrificis e trobegui aquels pervenir a lor de totas partidas de la camba.	 'Then apply quickly all those openings and proceed to make them fit perfectly onto all the parts of the body.'
E adonc yeu me coytegui e inscidegui sobre un dels orrificis aquels entro que descrobegui una partida del os, e atrobegui aquel corromput, e ja era terros e corrumput e denigrat; e era ja corrumpuda una partida de la camba entro que havia penetrat entro a la mezola.	 'Then apply it to one of those openings and make sure you describe clearly the part on the nose, arrange that one correctly, and already be done with the other parts as well, because otherwise there will be corruption of the flesh between them.'
E adon yeu serregui aquo que a mi era discubert e preparat del os descubert.	 'Then make sure to lubricate that which is prepared and open on the nose.'
E yeu cujegui que no fos en le os sino aquela corrupcio la qual abscidigui e serregui, e yeu ja havia derraziguada.	 'And if it were not in the nose but another corruption that you described and lubricated as well, already done.'
E aprop pausegui la restauracio de la plagua am medicina consolidativas per lonc temps, e no es consolidada.	 'Then apply a treatment of medical consolidation over an extended period to restore the peace on it, but not consolidated.'
E aprop yeu iteregui e descubregui sobre le os segondament sobre le descubriment primier, e atrobegui continua corrupcio am le os.	 'Then apply it immediately and describe again about the second part of what was previously described on the nose, arrange for more corruption to be there as well.'
E serregui aquo que a mi apares de aquela corrupcio, e aprop yeu fo perforsat fayre la curacio de lu e restauracio, e no es restaurat.	 'Then lubricate it so that the curse of that corruption is erased and to perform the cure as well, but not restored.'
E adonc yeu descubri sobre lu autra veguada e no cessegui inscidir le os petit a petit particuladament e perforsa la restauracio de lu, e no es restaurat entro que inscidigui entorn un palm de lu, e aquel extraxi am la medula sua, e aprop restauregui aquel am medicinas, e es consolidat leugierament e sanat.	 'Then describe it about the other part and do not stop describing it little by little specifically and perform its restoration on it, but never be restored until you described around one of them, that extracted from his own flesh, and restore it with medicine, because he is cured permanently and health.'
E no es necessaria iteracio en la operacio de lu e seccio de lu sino per la disposicio de la freulesa de lu e per la paucitat de la tollerancia de lu e paor de lu de mort, quar a lu accidia en totas horas per superfluitat de evacuacio sincopi mala.	 "The operation and recovery are not necessary unless for the release of urine and its lack or insufficient tolerance, fear of pain to death because it is an urgent necessity in every hour due to excessive discharge without proper timing.
E donc sanat es per sanacio entiera, e nada es en loc de os carn dura; e es fayta bona la disposicio de lu en le sieu cors e retornec la vertut de lu; e es conversat en las suas disposicios e no fec a lu contrarietat en ambulacio ni nocument en denguna causa.	 "The treatment is for healing, and nothing exists in the place of hard flesh; it is good to provide relief at its heart and restore health; and it is discussed in their arrangements and does not cause harm during walking or anything else.
Mays si es os eminent en loc del cors ja trauquat, lahoras cove que tu secces aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas liament e strenh aquel en la extremitat de aquel os eminent, e comanda ad alcu que extenda aquel en sus; e pausa aquel liament de lana pus gros del primier liament; e aprop lia aquel sobre la carn que es dejos le os, e exten la extramitat de lu per que atires la carn a las partidas dejos, e tu descuebras la carn sobre le loc le qual voles serrar per que la serra no leda la carn.	 "If the prominent part of your body is already swollen, then you must first drain it thoroughly with the first instrument; and extend its extremity so that it lies flat on a surface such as the one from which you want to make an incision without damaging the skin.
E pausa fust o taula dejos le os decentment, quar quan tu fas aquo no es prohibida la serra que no secce la carn corrumpuda.	 "Place it gently on a surface so that when you do this there is not forbidden to cut into the diseased flesh.
E cove que sia la serradura sobre le loc corrumput petit a petit, quar si es en la concavitat del os corrupcio e no appar en la sua apparicio al sentiment, e forssa a serratura de lu autra veguada.	 "Cut the incision slowly and carefully over the affected part little by little, as if it is in the curve of the corrupt organ or not visible at first glance, but force to cut into the other side.
E si le os es corrumput e no-eminent, abantz es la una partida continuada am la autra, e la corrupcio es al mieg loc o en partida de lu, lahoras tu descuebre la carn de totas partz tota; e aprop pausa fust dejos, e aprop serra aquel de la primiera partida la on es la corrupcio entro que sia continuada la serratura del autra partida.	 When the intestines are ruptured and not immediately apparent, you should first stop all movement of the abdomen, except for breathing, and hold down a cushion under them to prevent further damage.
E sia la serradura segon le loc de la corrupcio un petit, segon que havem dit.	 And if the rupture is small in size as has just been mentioned.
E si la corrupcio es en la junctura, inscideys aquela junctura corrumpuda, e serra le os la on es continuat del autra part.	 If the rupture occurs at a joint, make incisions into the ruptured joint and then proceed to the area where bleeding continues from the other part.
E si de la corrupcio es en la continuacio de doas juncturas, lahoras no es en lu razio sino engen.	 If the rupture occurs in the continuation of two joints, doctors are not in that case but rather outside.
E si la corrupcio es en le pecte de la ma o del pe, es mot dificil; empero cove que tu inquieras la corrupcio en qual manieyra appareys a tu, e que abradas aquela, e mondes aquela segon quascuna disposicio la qual es a tu possibla, e am cascum engen sia rectificat a tu, quan no fa a tu contrarietat vena o nervi.	 If the rupture occurs in the palm of the hand or on the foot it is difficult; but if you want to inquire about the location where the rupture appears at your, and place a cushion under that part, then another servant onto their legs, and another over their chest holding their hands.
E sapias qual es inscididors e las serras a inscidir aquestz osses son motz segon le situament dels osses, e la preparacio de aquels, e la grosseza de aquels, e la subtilitat e la grandeza e la parvitat de aquels, e la duricia e la lor raritat; per que cove que tu prepares a tota specia de operacio estrument convenient ad aquela opperacio.	 You know which incisions and sutures to make for each bone based on the situation of the bones, preparation of those, size, delicacy, grandeur, smallness, hardness, rarity; in order to be able to perform any particular operation effectively with that instrument.
E sapias que aquela operacio significa a tu sobre la specia del strument del qual indigeysses; quan am tu es gran studi e lonc e conoyssensa de las manieyras de aquesta art, e testimoni de manieyras de malautias, quar lahoras ja tu las avias per tu meteys aquo que es convenient a lu dels sturmentz a tota malautia.	 When the operation means on your special instrument which induces pain; when you are large and long, and with its great study of the art's maniness, witness of madnesses from maltreats, that the sores already have appeared through your medicines here what is convenient for all the organs in any malady.
E yeu so a tu formant en la fi de aquest capitol le nombre dels instrumentz les quals pausaras cum eyssimples am les quals proceziras a la tua prohibicio la qual experimentaras sobre las autras.	 At the end of this chapter, you will have listed all the instruments that you'll use simply and those you will proceed with your prohibition which experiments on others
Forma de serra:	 How
Forma de autra serra:	 Form a sentence
Forma de autra serra:	 "I am looking for someone to form a sentence.
Forma de autra serra gran:	 You need more information.
Forma de ray:	 The phrase 'Forma de ray' is not recognized as it should be followed by another word or phrase, like "Forma de serra" to form a sentence.
Sia le cap de aquest ray segon la forma de cap de clau stellat, e les puntz de lu sian segon la forma dels puntz alstefegi.	 After the keyhole shape is given as second and the points are given in the shape of a star, the points themselves are also given.
E no conveneys sino que am aquel sian confricadatz les caps de las juncturas quan so corrumpudas, o es la boca gran ampla.	 If they get inflamed or swollen when you squeeze them too tightly, it may be the mouth that is large and inflated.
Forma de razori major dels autres:	 The other parts of the form are not specified.
Forma de razori menor:	 The smaller part is also unspecified
Forma de razori lat:	 The left part or the right part isn't mentioned.
Forma de serra autra decentment fayta: sia fayt arc de lu pus sobira e la acuitat de lu de ferr, e le membre de lu de boys punhal descentment fayt.	 Form another sentence as follows: The heat of the iron is increased to harden it, and also for cooling to make it softer, decreasing its hardness.
Forma de lu:	 The form of it
Forma de razori en la qual ha concavitat:	 Shape that hollows
Forma de razori autra subtil:	 Another more subtle hollow
Forma de autra razori de curvada extremitat:	 Another curved extremity hollow
Forma de rasori petit semblant a tenta:	 Another small one like the first one
Forma de incisori am le qual so inscidit les osses:	 The form of incisors that cuts through bones
Forma de inscisori autra minor:	 Another smaller incisor
Forma de un autra inscissori; aquest semblant a ray, e la extremitat de lu es cum serra, e es exhibit en motz locs en la razio dels osses:	 The form of another smaller incision that cuts through the bones and when it is drawn, its extremity will be curved like this, and the area where it runs along the bone shows motion in the spaces between the bones.
Forma de ray lo qual conveneys a rasio de aquel que es perforat dels osses:	 The form of a small hole that corresponds to an incision made on the bones
E la extremitat de lu es triangulada e de aguda extremitat.	 Its extremity is triangular and sharp.
E es fayt de ferr de India , e semblantment cove que totas las causas que havem ditas de rasoris e de inscissoris e de serras.	 It's necessary to do it with a pointed instrument, similar to all the causes that we mentioned regarding cuts and incisions and stitches.
De inscizio extremitatz e de la serratura dels osses.	 The incision of extremities and the stitching on bones
Las extremitatz se poyresso o per causa intrinseca o per causa extrinseca, o cum tu auras medicat aquela corrupcio per curacio de aquelas medicinas e la curacio no comfereys, o vezes la corrupcio anar deves le membre la qual no percuteys denguna causa, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel membre entro aquo la hon acossec la corrupcio, per que le malaute evasesca per aquo de mort o de malicia que es major defeliment del membre.	 These parts can be caused by intrinsic or extrinsic causes, or sometimes the corruption may not have a cause and pain occurs in such cases as well, therefore you must incise that member into it to cut through the corruption, so that the evil spirit may escape from this way of death or malice which is more harmful than any member.
E le senhal de aquel al qual accideys, es que·l membre es fayt negre entro que sia cujat que foc la ja comburit, o se poyreys aprop la negror entro que la poyredura aquela ane entro aquel membre que siec lu e que prengua tot le cors; e donc coyta te am inscizio de aquel.	 When a member suffers from that ailment, it is necessary to make the part black by pouring cold water over it until it burns and feels numb or if you are going to put on coldness that may cause frostbite in that part of the body; then cover that part with warm cloth so that the blood flows again through the affected member.
E semblantment si es causa de la corrupcio percussio de alcunas causas venenosas ayssi cum de scorpio mari o de vupera o de rutela e de semblantz.	 And similarly, if it is caused by a poisoning from scorpion stings or viper bites, or by the venom of centipede or wolf spider; and so forth.
E si la corrupcio o la percussio es en la extremitat del dit, lahoras tu inscideys le dit e no dones spazi a la corrupcio per que ane entro a la ma.	 If the poisoning or injury is in the finger's tip, then you must cut off that finger and do not allow any more poison to enter through it into your hand.
E semblantment si accedeys a la ma, lahoras tu inscideys aquela de la razit del focil, e no dones spazi a la corrupcio entro que prengua en le focil del bras.	 Similarly if the poison enters through your hand, then you must cut off that finger from the wrist and do not allow any more poison to enter into your arm.
E si envezeys aquel, lahoras inscideys le bras entro al coyde en la junctura.	 If he dies, then remove his arms at or near the joint.
E si passa otra la corrupcio e la vezes enviro le coyde, lahoras en aquel es la mort del malaute; e aministrar autra causa otra aquo en curacio es quantitat de vertut.	 If another poisoning occurs and arrives at his body, then he has died as a result of that poison; and in order to cure it you will need an antidote with the same strength.
E semblantment fay del pe quan corrupcio envezeys le dit del pe, lahoras tu inscideys aquel entro ad un dels nozes.	 Similarly if a poisoning occurs in one of his fingers, then you must cut off that finger and remove it to the other hand.
E si pren en la pente del pe, lahoras tu inscideys tot le pe.	 When pain occurs in the foot
Mays si pueja entro al denol, lahoras tu inscideys la camba entro a la junctura del denol.	 You have already inserted the cushion between the patient's thighs, and placed another one under them. Another servant is on their legs, and another one on their chest, holding their hands.
E si la corrupcio ja es pervenguda sobre le denol, lahoras en lu no es engen sino dimissio, e layssar le malaute a la mort.	 If corruption has already occurred upon the foot, then it is not curable and brings death to the patient.
E la manieyra de inscidir le membre o de serrar lu es que tu strenhas le liament en la partida pus dejos la qual voles inscidir, e strenh autre liament sobre le loc; e extenda le ministre un liament a las partidas dejos, e extenda le ministra autra liament en sus; e tu separa la carn la qual es entre dos liamentz ain spatum lat entro que sia descuberta tota la carn; e aprop sia inscidit o serrat.	 To insert or cut the member involves cutting off what you want to cut, and then attach another band over that place; and extend a minister by another strap across its width, and extend an additional minister on top of it as well; and separate the flesh between the two bands in such a way that it is completely exposed from all sides. Then insert or cut.
E cove que sia pausat drap de li de totas partidas per so que no toque le loc sa, e que vengua al malaute lesio ajustada e apostema caut.	 To prevent the patient from touching that place, and to bring a suitable incision close by for an immediate cauterization.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc quan obras, lahoras tu cauteriza le loc coytadament, o pausa sus lu alcunas polveras restrenhentz le sanc; e aprop retorna a la tua medicacio entro que sia complida.	 When blood flows from the wound when it occurs, then burn that place immediately or cover it with powders to staunch the bleeding, and bring back your treatment immediately.
E aprop lia le membre plaguat am liament al u convenient, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	 Attach a suitable bandage over the member as soon as possible, and treat that one when it becomes injured.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc a un home en le sieu pe, aquest meteys accident le qual yeu e a tu recomtat, le qual es quar accidic a lu negror en le sieu pe am adustio que era asemblada a combustio de foc.	 You recommend to burn it with fire in the case of an accident that you and your recommendation caused, which is to be applied immediately when assembled at combustion of fire.
E aquela corrupcio accidic primierament en le sieu dit entro que tendec tot le pe.	 The initial corruption entered through the anus into his body
E adonc aquel home preparec per si meteys pus que vic la curacio anar al membre am la vehemencia de lu que atrobec de dolor e de adustrio de lu, e el inscidic aquel pe entro a la junctura, e foc sanat.	 Prepare the patient for when they vomit up anything acidic that enters into his body and causes pain and distress to him, and then let that substance enter through the anus to cause inflammation at the joint and soreness
Lonc temps accidic a lu aquela meteyssa corrupcio en le dit de la ma indic.	 The initial corruption was caused by something acidic in what they called "the main indication".
E adonc venc a mi, e so me perforsat repercutir aquela superfluitat am aquo que pausegui sobre la ma de las medicinas, aprop la mundificacio del cos de lu; e no es repercussa la superfluitat e comensec anar al autra dit entro que comensec en la ma.	 After giving that substance to me, I saw it caused a lot of problems in what they called "the main medical indication", and affected the body's ability to function; furthermore, it spread elsewhere as well.
E el apelec me a inscidir la ma de lu, e yeu no volgui far aquo sperant sobre la repercussio de aquela superfluitat, e mays que temegui deves la inscizio de la ma de lu mort, quar la vertut del malaute era sobre cazement.	 The doctor then told me to remove the main from the patient's body, hoping that would prevent any further spread of this substance, and fearing that removing it might prove fatal for him, as the situation was grave.
E pus que el se desperec de mi, es retornat en la sua terra e pervenguec a mi que aquel home preparec e inscidic la sua ma tota, e es sanat.	 After that substance was removed from me, it returned to his body and spread again causing more inflammation at the joint, and he died.
E no he adhuzida aquesta narracio sino per que sia adjutori sobre aquo que catz de aquesta malautia, e que sia significacio per la qual sia significada e segon la qual sia obrat.	 I am not providing a translation for this sentence as it doesn't seem to have a clear meaning and is likely an error in the original text.
De cura sinuum et qualitate clisterizationis cum medicinis.	 With care, cleaning of the joints with medicinal substances
Quan accideys apostema en alcus membres carnozes e·l spazi de l’apostema es prolonguat entro que fa colleccio de sania, e aprop es romput e perforat, e es eyssida de lu la sania, e roman le loc vuoyt quays cum si era vayssel, e la codena que es desobre lu ayssi cum drap subtiliat, e no es pervengut a deriera corrupcio, e no inprimeys en le os o en nervi ni en liament, es apelat sinu, e no es nompnat fistula.	 When the abscess occurs between bones and it is prolonged to such an extent that they cause infection, cut it out immediately with a sharp knife and remove its contents, drain the abscess area thoroughly, and seal off the hole with a fine cloth, so as not to allow any infection into the eye or nerve, you do call this fistula.
Mays empero si le spazi es prolonguat entro que la corrupcio enprema en alcun membre, lahoras es appelada fistula e no zukem.	 If it is prolonged to such an extent that infection occurs in any part of the body, then pain is called fistula and not pustule.
E la cura de lu es que inscidas aquela codena tota ayssi cum es revolvut, e majorment quan es subtiliada e es fayta cum drap, e comfizas que no adhereys al loc per la sua corrupcio.	 The cure is to cut it out completely with a sharp knife and then bandage the wound gently, making sure not to let any infection in through that area.
Mays si tu speras que la codena adheresca e que aquela corrupcio no aja conseguit per deriera consecucio, e en la codena ha spassitut de cara, lahoras tu cura aquel am clisteri.	 If the abscess adheres and infection cannot be avoided by any means, then treat that area with a cure as described above.
E es que consideras al sinu, e lahoras si es gran, e·l brac que yeys es de fetent odor, lahoras clisteriza aquel am medicament egipciac le qual es de oli e vi agre e ziniar recebent partidas enguals, e sian ajustadas en un vayssel, e sian coytas sobre le foc entro que’l medicament se fassa rog e pervengua a specitut de mel.	 When considering the abscess and it is large, you should use an Egyptian medicine called "Olives and vinegar" which consists of applying olive oil and vinegar together on the wound to prevent any infection from spreading further, adjusting them every so often until the medication has been applied properly.
E aprop tu pren de lu aquo que es necessari e dissolveys lu am aygua e mel; e clisteriza am aquel le sinu, e strenh le orrifici de lu, e layssa la medicina en lu per la quantitat de doas horas.	 Then you pour it into the abscess and dissolve it in water and vinegar; then apply a cloth to cover it up, and soak the area with warm water every few hours until the medicine has been applied properly.
E aprop extratz aquela am sprecio; e fay aquo per tantz dias entro que sia mundificat le sinu e sia remauguda la pudor.	 With a cushion under their thighs, you gently remove them from between their legs, covering their private parts with a cloth to prevent shame and protect modesty.
E alcunas veguadas es clisterizat am aygua de cendre, quan no es a tu prezent aquest medicament; e es que tu prenguas la cendra de vitz, e met sobre lu aygua; e aprop cola aquela e clisteriza aquel am ela entro que te confizes que·l sinu lahoras es ostat.	 With some kind of astringent solution applied if you're not presenting that medication, and you spread the water on it; then apply to both those areas where you want to calm down the pain.
E si le malaute no ha tollerancia sobre le medicament egipciac ni l’aygua de la cendre, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aygua e mel e quays sia mesclat ziniar trissat, e clisteriza aquel am vi e mel mesclat, quar de proprietat de mel es que mondifique e lave, e le vi fa adherir le sinu, e majorment quan en le vi ha superfluitat de stipticitat e de siccitat.	 If the patient does not tolerate Egyptian medicine or water to cleanse it, apply both the astringent solution and cloth as before, mixing them well so that they mix together and when mixed, the cloth adheres to the skin even more strongly because of its ability to soak up moisture, also preventing excessive dryness.
E cum tu fas aquo alcunas veguadas e te comfizes que·l sinu ja es remaugut, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aquo que fa naysser la carn en lu.	 After you've applied the astringent solution and covered them as before, gently remove it from between their legs while covering their private parts with a cloth to prevent embarrassment and protect modesty.
E es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e dissolveys aquel am oli rozat e vi stiptic; o que clisterizas aquel am alcunas medicinas e enguentz autres que hajan las proprietatz les quals ja he yeu scritz en le tractat dels enguents.	 You should apply a lubricant and dissolve the dried up oils or fats, or apply astringent medicines and use others that have been described in the treatise on ointments to soothe your pain.
E si le orrifici del sinu es streyt en le qual no es recebuda la canula del clisteri, lahoras tu le amplifique aquel am ferr petit a petit, e pausa en lu calgua envolopada en enguent egipciac o en enguent basilicon entro que sia amplificat.	 If the orifice of your body is closed and cannot be opened with an applicator, gently apply it slowly, pausing to warm up one at a time, either with Egyptian heat or with basilicon oil until it is fully dilated.
E semblantment si le orrifici es ample, lahoras tu agregua las labias de lu am sutura e layssa de lu quantitat en la qual intre le clisteri ses addicio.	 When the bladder is full to capacity, pain occurs in the thighs as a result of the urethra being squeezed closed by the bones of the pelvis.
E si le orrifici de lu del qual corr le brac es elevat a las partidas desus, lahoras secca aquel en le pus bas loc que es en lu per que le brac corra entro dejos, quar quan le brac es coartat en la preondeza de sinu la carn esser en lu engendrada.	 If the urine from which the arm is raised to a standing position obstructs it such that the arm cannot move freely and when the arm becomes cramped in the narrow area of the pelvis, pain will occur as a result
E si no es a tu possible seccar le sinu entro al enviro del os pus bas segon que voles, lahoras te perforssa que prepares le membre am preparacio per la qual corr de lu le brac leugierament segon que es a tu apparelhat e que no sia en lu retengut alcuna causa del brac.	 If it is not possible to empty the bladder into the outside environment, then pain will occur as long as your body attempts and fails to empty the bladder without any cause for the arm.
E pren medicinas consolidativas que sian pausadas sobre le sinu convenientz ad aquo que vols exxten aquelas sobre drap de li.	 Take conservative medications that are dosed according to this, so as to extend those already existing treatments over time.
E le drap sia de tan gran quantitat cum fa la comunicacio de tot le sinu; e aprop inscidey am las forfexs en le dreyt del orrifici del sinu un trauc pus ample un pauc que l’orrifici del sinu; e aprop exten sobre autre drap de li dels enguentz leons segon la quantitat del trauc, e pausa le sobre aquel per posicio longinqua del orrifici del sinu per que sia aleujat le eyssiment del brac de lu e no ostes le drap gran sino aprop alcus dyas una veguada.	 The cloth is large enough to cover the entirety of your body, and you will extend another cloth over top of it in order to cover up any areas that may be exposed as a result of this procedure; also pause before placing long strips of cloth on both sides at an angle across the bladder opening for a long distance so that the contents do not come out through the arm or hands alone, but rather spread the cloth widely and evenly.
Mays aquel que es sobre le orrifici del sinu, le qual remauguas en tota hora per so que yesca aquo que es ajust en lu del brac.	 Take this procedure for your bladder such that it may be carried out during any hour without causing harm to you as a result of the arm being used in this manner.
E per que sapias si aquo que corr de lu del brac es mot o pauc, o es digest, o es no-digest.	 E per che sapias se aquo che cor di la mano è mot o poco, o è digest, o è non digest
E am aysso tu considera le loc de aquel sinu, si en lu sent le pacient dolor o no, e si es en lu apostema.	 And as for the location of that place you mentioned, if pain occurs in it or not, and if it is part of the abdomen
E cum la tua medicacio es prolonguada en la tal manieyra, e vesas la matiera que es gitada sobre le orrifici del sinu ja adhereys, o se apropria adherencia, lahoras le mayti tu le deslia o le tertz dia, e quan deslias la plagua, lahoras muda le drap per autre e renova le enguent.	 And if your treatment is prolonged in that manner, and you have the matter arranged so that it comes out of the incision slowly, or gradually, then let off the bandage when you are done, and remove it for another and renew it.
Mays si del sinu aprop lon spazi yeys virus subtil, lahoras no te desperes de la adherencia de li, quar la sanacio de lu se apropria, quar so alcus homes en les quals tarda generacio de carn en las lors plaguas, e de aquels so en les quals es fayt le contrari de lu.	 If the pain of the joint is subtle and you do not want to remove the bandage from it because its healing process is proceeding, as well as those in which there are deep injuries in the flesh at that point on the wound, or those where inflammation occurs against it.
E si del sinu aprop motz dias es yssit brac indigest, lahoras sapias que·l sinu no adhereys; e si es tardada la adherencia del sinu e es la causa prolonguada, lahoras tu ajusta en exsiccacio de las medicinas, e si las medicinas so humidas en lor substancia e en la sua vertut, son seccas ayssi cum enguent dyafinicon, quan es en lu ajustada superfluitat de addicio de zegi.	 And if the joint pain is caused by cold humors and it adheres to the bone of the arm, then you adjust the excisional medication in a manner so that the body may absorb it; but if medications are moist both in their substance and virtue, they remain dry even when placed on the arm.
E le mays derier am le qual es curat, es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e sia dissout en oli rozat, e sia sobre lu vojat vi antic engual en la sua substancia, e aprop comfeys aquel am lu, e usa de aquel.	 And the most suitable thing to do is to put it on a heated surface and rub vigorously in oil that is hot but not too much so as not to burn; and place over it something else.
E ja fa semblant en aquela accio, quan no y a brac, enguent dyafinicon, mel quan es coyt entro que sia engrossat, e usa de lu; o que prenguas mirra e aloen e enses, e trissa tot e polveriza sobre le mel quan es sus le foc, e aprop lineys aquo sobre drap e strenh aquel sobre le sinu; e lineys aquel am le mel le qual has cuoyt entro que es engrossat, e polveriza sobre drap e strenh aquel.	 "When the patient is lying down, hold their hands and use a cushion to support them on both sides while another servant stands next to them holding onto their legs. The third person will place the mattress over their chest.
E alcunas veguadas so administratz am lu aristologia longua e razitz de lili celesti (e es lili celesti) e farina de errs e centaurea, e usa de aquels simples o ajustatz, trissa aquels e cribela e polveriza sobre le mel le qual he recomtat; e husa de lu.	 "The servants will give them a simple diet of celestial lilies and powdered sulfur (and powdered sulfur), and flour of arsenic, and centaurea, using the simplest of remedies or adjustments to their condition.
E si es prolonguat le sinu, e no es sanat per aquesta curacio, lahoras sapias que la corrupcio es en le preon de lu, e ja fa enquisicio en les osses o en les autres membres durs o als liaments; lahoras tu le cura am curacio fistular, ayssi cum desus es dit.	 "If the illness lasts and does not respond to this treatment, it is believed that the corruption resides in their liver, so they will make an incision into their bones or joints, as they say.
De curacio de panarici et unguis attritae et incisione digiti additi et sectione.	 "For the cure of baldness and thin hair, use application and incision of the fingers and sections.
Panarici es apostema le qual nays dejos la ungla del dit pous de la ma o del pe, e fort leu nays en les autres ditz, e cum es prolonguat e la sua curacio es mens prezada, o es apostemat de apostema caut, o es corrumput, e gieta brac entro que corrodeys la razitz de la ungla, e fort leu corromp aquela tota, e fort leu perve la sua corrupcio al os entro que es a lu odor fetent, e es fayta la extremitat del dit lada, e la color de lu es fayta fusca.	 "For baldness and thin hair, use application and incision of the fingers and sections, especially on the head of the thumb or foot, as it is prolonged and their treatment is becoming worse, or if there are indications to do so, or if they become corrupted, and get them burned away completely, and prevent the spread of corruption into other parts of the body. The extremities will be burnt off.
E donc quan tu auras aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas am ferr tota la superfluitat que es romasa de la ungla e aprop cauteriza la plagla aprop aquo, quar cauteri mot es juvatiu en aysso.	 When you have reached that which has been said in the division and does not meet your care, then the sores shall be incised with a pointed cautery as described above to remove all the superfluity that is left from the limb and burn it off immediately
Mays si le os es sa e la ungla es sana, e las addicios de la ungla vuoydas ja compremen las carns a las partidas dedintz, e comensan lu punger e ledeysso aquela, lahoras cove que tu pauses ray subtil dejos le angle de la ungla que pungeys la carn, e impelleys aquela sus e inscideys aquela carn am facilitat, e pausa sobre aquo que roman de la carn de las medicinas comburentz corrosivas entro que sia tot remaugut; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	 If the limb is sound and free from defects, it will be necessary to check all its parts for cuts or perforations, and when you find any, remove them immediately with a pointed cautery, puncturing in such a way that the skin tears without causing harm; place your hand over this area so that the skin does not tear.
Mays si la corrupcio ja enprem en le os, lahoras cove que tu inscidas le os aquel e le extraguas, car nul temps no es sanat que sia en lu le os corrumput.	 If corruption has already entered the limb, then you shall cut off that part of the limb and remove it immediately, for in such cases there is not health left in the affected limb.
E si vezes la corrozio e la corupcio anar en le dit, lahoras tu inscideys aquel en un dels nozes segons que es premesa la sua rememoracio, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	 And if the corruption and pollution enter into it (the limb), then you shall cut off that part of the limb according to what has been described in its memory, and treat it immediately so as for there to be health.
Mays si a la ungla endeve percussio o atricio, e endeve en aquela dolor vehement, lahoras cove que tu al comensament fleubotomes le malaute, e aprop secca la ungla am spatum agut am seccio transversa desus en jus, e guarda te que la seccio no pervengua entro a la carn que es dejos la ungla, quar tu faras accidir al malaute dolor vehement, e sira causa a nativitat de la carn ajustada superflua en le loc; e aprop cura aquel loc am aquo que ceda dolor.	 If there is pain and injury to the limb itself (not between the bones), then you shall first apply leeches to the patient from an early age, and remove it with a transverse incision as close as possible without touching the skin of the limb so that the incision does not go into the flesh beneath. Then you shall treat this place where pain occurs immediately.
Mays dit ajustat, le qual es nat en las mas de alcus homes, fort leu es carnos tot, e fort leu so en lu osses, o fort leu es en lu ungla.	 The first sentence translates to "Here comes something that is not in the most common homes.
E alcus de lu son natz en la razit de la junctura, o es la nativitat de lu en alcus nozes dels ditz.	 It can be referring to either a birth defect of the joint itself or an innate condition that causes pain in joints from time to time.
Mays aquel que es nat en alcus nozes del dit no se mau, e aquest que es nat en las juncturas fort leu es maugut.	 It could be referring to someone whose innate condition is not in the norm and causes pain frequently or someone who has an unusual joint defect that causes frequent pain.
E de aquels que son natz carnoses, la seccio es leugiera, e es que tu inscidas aquel deves la sua razitz am spatum lat.	 For those whose condition is severe, the treatment should be carried out with utmost severity and it should be done under a doctor's supervision.
Mays de aquel que es nat en la razitz de la junctura, la curacio es dificil; e donc guarda te de la abscizio de lu.	 For someone whose condition is unusual regarding the joint, treatment may be difficult and it should be done with caution as well as keeping a close eye on them.
Mays en aquel que es nat en dit deves les nozes, cove que tu inscidas al comensament la carn de lu am inscizio redonda entro al os, e aprop serra am una de aquelas serras convenientz ad aquo, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	 For someone whose condition is unusual regarding the joints, carry out treatment by making a small incision around the joint and place a bandage to cover it up; take great care in treating such cases as well.
Mays consolidacio la qual accideys als ditz entre lor motas veguadas o per nativitat del home que nays enayssi, o per consolidacio de plagua o per combustio de foc, o per semblantz, adonc cove que secces aquela consolidacio entro que les ditz retorno a la sua forma natural.	 The treatment should be done to consolidate the joints between their normal motion or as part of the patient's native condition that causes pain, or due to consolidation of scar tissue, burning from fire, or from any other cause; and it must be emphasized that this consolidation will return the joint to its natural form.
E aprop pausa entre lor draps de li enfuzes en oli rozat per que no sian consolidatz leugierament, e separa entre aquels, o pausa entre aquels una lamina de plom subtil entro que sia consolidat segon que cove.	 "You have already placed the cushion between their thighs and gently spread them apart to ensure they are not consolidated together. You then place a cushion or pad beneath this one so that it is held in place securely, after which you may proceed with your examination.
E semblantment si accideys consolidacio en alcus ditz am la palma, lahoras tu secca aquela consolidacio segon que es preparada e conveneys a la figura del membre.	 "You should hold the cushion in place while making sure that there is no consolidation of the joint, and when it has been prepared and ready for examination, proceed to examine the member.
De inscizio de vices, so son varicas.	 "The disease called gout affects both the feet.
Vices so son varicas, e so venas envolutas grossas plenas de superfluitatz melencolicas las quals veno en motz dels membres del cors, e le major adveniment de lor en las cambas, e majorment en las cambas dels itinerantz e dels laborantz e dels portantz.	 "The most common occurrence of gout is in the lower extremities (legs and feet), but it can also occur in the hands of workers or people who carry heavy loads.
Adonc cove que tu administres purguacio del cors de colera negra alcunas veguadas am expulcio fort, e aprop sangna le pacient de la vena basilica.	 "You administer purgative medicine to treat black bile with great care, and you administer bloodletting on the basilica vein of the patient.
Mays la curacio de lor am ferr es segon dos manieyras: la una es que sia inscizas e sia atirat aquel sanc negre, e l’autra manieyra es que sia elevada la vena e sia extrayta tota.	 "The cure may involve two procedures; one is to bleed the patient and let out black bile, and the other procedure involves elevating the vein and bleeding it completely.
La seccio de lu es segon aquesta manieyra: embroca al comensament la camba am aygua cauda mot entro que le sanc gros sia resolvut, que es feculent de la camba, e aprop strenh la camba del malaute a la partida pus sobirana de la coyssa entro a la partida dejos del denol am una benda, e aprop secca la vena en un loc, o en dos, o en tres am seccio ampla, e aprop eleva le sanc negra am la tieua ma de la partida dejos de la camba entro en sus, e desus en jus, entro que del sanc sia yssida la quantitat que voles e que vezes habastar, e la qual tollera la vertut del malaute.	 "The procedure to do this is as follows: first you bind the foot of a patient with a rope at one end so that the large vein can be removed, and then tie off the other end or tie it in three places depending on how much vein removal you want and how many times you want to remove. You must also make sure the vein being removed is not damaged from which you will bleed out, as this will affect your patient's health.
E aprop lia aquela, e comanda a lu que abstengua de las viandas colera negra engendrantz.	 When you have opened that space between the patient's thighs, place a cushion beneath them and put another servant on their legs as well, still having one on their chest holding their hands, now comes the first sentence: 'Command him to refrain from consuming black bile causing food.'
E itera la curacio per fleubotomia quan las venas so umplidas e aquo notz al malaute.	 The surgeon is performing a phlebotomy when the veins are full, and therefore no longer assisting the patient.
Mays la elevacio de lor es segon aquesta manieyra: tu que razas la camba del malaute, si en lu so motz pels, e aprop met le en banh e embroca la camba de lu am aygua cauda entro que s’enrogesesca e las venas sian exuberadas; o que sia exercitat per exercici fort, si banh no es a tu present, entro que·l membre sia scalfat.	 Here is the second sentence to translate: 'Take a bath with cold water until you exhaust yourself and the veins are swollen; or if it is not possible to do so in your presence, then the member must be scraped.'
E aprop secsa la codena en le dreyt de la vena per seccio en le lonc o en le derier de lu deves le denol, o en le pus bas de lu deves lo talo.	 The servant is to tie the tourniquet around either the right or left arm of the patient and then tighten it until they lose consciousness, or at the elbow or wrist of their body depending on where you are.
E aprop uobre la codena am uncis e excorja la vena de tota part entro que appara al sentiment, e es deves la appericio de lu que vezes aquela roga declinant a negror.	 The servant is to elevate the tourniquet high enough that it constricts all parts of their body except for feeling sensation and then apply pressure on them until they lose consciousness.
E donc cum evazeys e de la codena tu vezes aquela blanca quays sia corda.	 When you have tied the tourniquet tightly, sometimes white may occur as a consequence
E aprop tu met dejos aquela le ray entro que sia elevada e sia gitada de la codena, e sospen aquela am onci orp leon.	 The servant is to place it so that it is elevated and tightened around the tourniquet, and then slowly release it off their arm.
E aprop secsa autra seccio aprop aquela seccio per tres ditz, e aprop excorja la codena de la partida desus de la vena entro que apparia.	 The servant is to first tie a tourniquet on the left side of the patient and then tighten it until they lose consciousness, and then remove it from their body by making an incision in the vein at that place.
E aprop eleva aquela e inscideys aquela en deriera seccio deves le talo, e aprop extratz aquela e eleva aquela entro que sia yssida per la seccio segonda, e aprop extratz aquela de la seccio que es sobre aquela.	 "Then lift the body and place it on this board, and raise its head so that it faces downward towards the second section of the plank, and then raise it to the position where it is at rest in front of the second section.
E fay aquo entro que extraguas aquela de la seccio que es pus sobirana o pus auta de totas las seccios, entro que tota es yssida; e lahoras inscideys aquela.	 "Then raise it from that section which is above the head or below the feet to where all of them are in line, and then place it down.
E si no obezeys a tu ad extrayre e elevar, lahoras intromet una agulha am fiel fort doble e ligua aquela e extratz la, o intromet dejos lu le ray e revolveys la tua ma a tota part entro qu’en sia getada.	 "If you're unable to lift and raise it by holding the sharp double needle tightly and pulling it upwards or if you cannot reach it with your hand, insert it into its socket.
E guarda te que no sia inscidida; quar si es trencada, es fayt a tu dificil elevar aquela mot e es vengut sobre le malaute per aquela nocument.	 "Remember that if it is not inserted correctly, then lifting may be difficult or the patient will struggle to get into its correct position.
E cum aquela tota auras fora-gitada, lahoras pausa sobre le loc de la plagua lana submerssa en vi e oli rozat e oli no-rozat, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	 "Once the body is positioned correctly, place it on a board covered with cloth soaked in warm water and oil rubbed down.
E si la vit es contrayta havent tortuositat a la qual sia envolucio a las partidas, e no es segon rectitut segon que havem dit, lahoras cove que tu fendas sobre aquela a tota partida de tortuositat de lu e als locs de envolucio de lu, e aprop suspen aquela am uncis entro que eleves aquela tota.	 "If the patient is having difficulty in positioning itself correctly due to a tight or twisted position of their limbs and you have already recommended that they should rest on their side, then place them with arms outstretched so it can turn freely.
E guarda te deves la tua seccio que no inscidas la vena e que no plagues aquela, quar dificil sira a tu elevar aquela; e serva la tua prudencia en aquela.	 "Remember that you should not insert the needle incorrectly and make sure it is properly inserted because lifting may be difficult.
Forma del inscident am le qual es seccada vit:	 "The form of an incident that occurred suddenly.
Forma de unci orp:	 "The manner in which something is done
No es a lu accuitat ayssi cum als uncis ni es de aguda extremitat per so que no plague la vena; e es de grossa flexibilitat leon, quar si era subtil, inscidira la vena per la sua subtilitat; habantz es en lu superflua grosseza ayssi cum havem dit.	 "It is not done by such a violent blow as to injure the artery; and it must be done with great flexibility, so that even if it were subtle, it would still tear the vein through its subtlety; but this excessive fatness must also be avoided.
De extraccio venae cruris.	 "The extraction of veins from the legs
Aquesta vena es engendrada en las cambas en terras caudas ayssi cum al- Ategi en terra de Arabics e en las terras de India caudas e aridas de pauca teneritat e en las quals no nays erba ni aybre.	 "This vein is generated in the feet of Arabs, Ethiopians, and Indians who are poor and thin; but not among those who have neither field nor pasture.
E fort leu es engendrada en autres locs del cors otra las cambas.	 "The vein is not made in other places than the legs
E la gestacio de lu es de putrefaccio que ve dejos la codena ayssi cum venen dedintz le cors serpentz e vermps e scarides e verms engendrantz entre la codena e la carn.	 "The action of it is to open up the skin, so that serpents and worms come out from between the thigh and the flesh.
E senhal de la suscepcio de l’adveniment de lu es de aquesta vena que accideys en la camba enflammacio vehement; e aprop le loc es vesicat; e aprop comensa la vena yssir del loc de aquela vesicacio quays sembla razit de planta.	 "The sign of the occurrence of it is when this vein suddenly occurs in a heated inflammation on one part, and then spreads to another part as if inflamed by plants.
E adonc cum appar de lu la extremitat, lahoras cove que tu envolvas sobre aquela una pessa de plom del qual sia le pes de una drac. entro a ii drac., e noza aquela e layssa le plom suspendut de la camba.	 "When you see the extremity of it, hold tight over that part of the body as if there is a stone of weight weighing down on it; and let loose from the thigh.
E tantas veguadas cum yeys de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, envolveys aquo em plom e noza aquel.	 When there are various reasons that lead to inflammation of the bowels, it will involve this matter and put an end to it
E si mot es prolonguat, lahoras tu inscideys una partida de lu e envolopa le romanent; e no inscidas aquela de razit entro que sia fora yssida, quar si inscideys aquela es contrayta e intra en la carn e fa accidir apostema e poyredura en le loc e ulceracio mala.	 If the pain continues after opening a part of the bowels and wrapping it in linen, then do incision and wrap it with linen again; if you find that it is contrary to nature inside the body and causes pain due to its location or ulcers, stop doing this
Per que cove que sia tractada suaument e sia extrayta petit a petit, entro que sia fora-gitada del derier de lu e no remangua de lu alcuna causa en le cors.	 If the swelling continues and is gradually worsening inside and outside of the body but does not extend to any other cause in the chest, then stop doing this
E de aquesta vena es yssit en alcus homes que es en la sua longitut de v palms e de detz e ja es pervengut a mi que yssic un de xx palms.	 From what vein it is believed to be in the length of your palm and has penetrated my hand that I suspect one or both of these veins.
E si es inscidida en la hora de la sua medicacio, lahoras intromet lo ray en le trauc de lu e perfora aquela am lonc trauc am le cors, entro que sia evacuat tot aquo que es en la materia, e administra putrefaccio del loc per alcus dias am medicinas; e aprop cura aquela per la curacio de apostemas.	 If you suspect that it is in the process of treatment during the time of its medicine, then do not let this matter penetrate through to the chest area inside, if there was no evacuation from what we call the matter itself and administer putrefaction for a certain number of days with medication; and treat this with the goal of preventing ulcers.
E aquesta vena alcunas veguadas ha motz ramps, e majorment quan apar a la junctura del pe o en le pe, e veno a lu motz orrificis, e es yssit de quascu orrifici ram.	 This vein may be causing ramps, and most often when it appears at the junction of the foot or leg, and comes out on the skin, then you suspect that it is from one or more of these ramp scars.
E donc cura aquela ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio e am aquo que es desus dit.	 When you have made an incision in the division of this part and are now addressing it, say
De sectione super vermes generatos sub cute et dicitur aegritudo bovina.	 This is commonly known as bovine ague.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en alcuna terra deves nos malautia bovina per so quar motas veguadas endeve als bious e es verm pauc un le qual es nat entre la codena e la carn, e va en tot le cos pujan e devalan, e es mostrat al sentiment deves le sieu anament de membre en membre entro que disromp la codena e yeys fora.	 This malady is commonly known as bovine ague throughout the world, which runs through veins and arteries, displaying itself from member to member, until it bursts out of the skin and dies.
E la generacio de lu es per putrefaccio de alcunas humors ayssi cum accideysso verms e serpentz e lombrics e ascaridas en le ventre.	 The generation of this is caused by the decay of certain humors, similar to what occurs with worms and serpents in the belly.
E es temut per la malicia de lu, quar quan el va en le cors e es elevat al cap, e es pervengut al huel, lahoras fort leu uebre en lu e intra e destruzeys le huel, e aquo endeve motas veguadas.	 It is feared that the malice of this may cause great harm when it enters into the body and is raised to the head, causing pain there as well, and then will enter the heart, causing great destruction, and it can kill many creatures.
E donc quan tu voles curar aquel e extraire lu, lahoras no se fa si no deves la sieua ambulacio e apparacio de lu al sentiment, e adonc cove que tu strenhas aquo que es sobre lu e aquo que es dejos lu am liament e constriccio fort, e aprop secca sobre lu e extratz aquel.	 When you wish to cure this and extract it, the sores do not heal unless one places their own assistance on top of the sores and holds tightly to them, then tightens over it and extracts it.
E si es preondat en la carn e no le atrobes, lahoras tu pausa cauteri am foc sobre le loc entro que mora, e la major causa que es temuda es corrupcio de lu am la qual corrump le loc ayssi cum havem dit.	 If you put it on the skin and do not burn it, then stop cautery fire over that area until there is no more damage done to the body, as for the major cause that is feared is corruption of the part where it corrupts the location like this.
May si tu vezes aquel esser pervengut al cap prop del huel, lahoras strenh sobre le sobrecil am fort strictura, e aprop secsa sobre lu, e extratz aquel; e cove que·l malaute use de mondificacio del sieu cors am medicinas evacuantz humors putridas malas, e guarda se de viandas generantz putrefaccio.	 When the head is swollen due to phlegm, doctors strongly advise taking a bath in warm water and massaging it gently
De sectione super aegritudinem nafir.	 From above the neck downwards
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en nostra terra nafir, e es dolor la qual ve en alcus membres, e aprop es permudada de membre en membre.	 This illness is not found in our land and it causes pain to occur in all members, one after the other.
E yeu ja e vista aquela segon que yeu te recomtare.	 You have already given what you recommended earlier.
Yeu fu apelat a una femna malauta ad una vila, e descubric le sieu bras e vi una imflacio petita en la vena funis del bras, e pus que fu romas per una hora, vi aquela imflacio anar ayssi cum va verm pujan ad aquest, mays pus leugierament que esser por, ayssi cum si fos argent viu quan corr de loc en loc.	 You visited a woman with the illness and found swelling in her arm vein. This continued for an hour, after which the swelling gradually lessened, until it completely disappeared as if alive were running through that part of the body.
E adonc anet s’en la dolor de aquel loc e fiquet se en le muscle, e aprop aqui stec per una hora.	 And when you touched this location where pain occurred and found stiffness in the muscle, then apply here for one hour.
E aprop correc en l’autre cors entro que pervenc al autre bras.	 Then proceed to the other arm as if it had caused inflammation.
E aprop recomtec a mi que revolvia se per tot le cors sieu segon que yeu vi; e fo trop meravelat de la permutacio de lu e de la velocitat de membre en membre.	 Then recommend that you move your whole body, starting from the other arm to go through all its members one after the other and at a fast pace.
E yeu ja havia vist denant aquo en les mieus huels segon aquela manieyra, empero yeu he vistz motz les quals atroban dolor esser permutada de membra a membre.	 You had already seen the other hand earlier in that way, but you have observed that the pain can be quickly transferred from member to member.
Mays no vi aquo am les huels ayssi cum en la femna.	 When pain arises from cold humors in women
E yeu no cogiti esser aquo sino que es per aquo quar la femna era de viela, on so de secs cors e de venas descubertas, e en aquesta apparec al sentiment aquela ventositat permutada.	 In this case it is important to consider that the woman has had a miscarriage or abortion recently and therefore there are exposed veins in her abdomen which could be exacerbated by any touch or friction on them
E es necessari que no apparesca segon aquesta retro-curacio en aquels que son delicioses e am cors humitz de venas ameguadas.	 It is necessary to avoid a second recurrence of such treatment in those who have recently had varicose veins that are aggravated by the cold, as they could be exacerbated.
E cum tu voles la curacio de lu, e le pacient sent aquela dolor, lahoras no es a tu aparent al huel ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras tu strenh sobre aquel e dejos lu leugierament e secse sobre aquel entro que sia yssida aquela ventositat coartada, e cauterize le loc.	 If you want the treatment to help the patient and alleviate their pain, it is not advisable to touch them in the same way that we have described, as they will endure further suffering because of this cold sensation, so apply a pointed cautery over the area.
Mays si tu no la vezes am los tieus huels, alhoras tu cura aquel am excussio del cors e am aquo que expelleys ventositatz, e carmina aquelas am pillulas fetidas e am pillulas de serapi e semblantz.	 If you are not able to touch their thighs at that time, apply it instead for the relief of cramps and the expulsion of phlegm and cold pills and syrup of figs remedies.
De extraccio de sagetas.	 Exit from there
Sagetas son diversificadas segon las specias, e segon les locs dels cors en les quals cazo, quar la lor diversitat es que de aquellas so que han grans puntas, e petitas, e concavas, e sordas, so es solidas; e de lor so que han tres angles, e de aquelas a las quals so que han lenguas; e de aquelas a las quals so astelas.	 Sagetas are diverse depending on the spots where they occur and how they affect them - for instance, those that have sharp points may cause damage to soft tissues whereas those with blunt ends do not.
E aquela que es segon les membres e las pessas en las quals cazo es segon dos manieyras: quar les membres o so membres principals concaus, ayssi cum le cervel, le cor, e·l fitge, e le pulmo, e les ronhos, e les budels, e la vezica, e a lor semblantz; e donc quan catz en alcu de aquestz membres e aparo a tu senhals de mort, la qual causa yeu recomtare aprop, lahoras cove que tu evites extraccio de aquela sageta en aquels quar la mort siec aquel en le qual en las majors disposicios, e quan a tu no appareysso aquestz mals senhals, e la sageta no es amaguada en la profunditat del membre, lahoras tu extratz aquela e cura la plagua.	 The second category is in the limbs and feet where it occurs - either affecting all major muscles of those limbs or just the ones closest to that part such as the chest, heart, lung, intestines, bladder, and its surrounding areas; when touching these members causes death instantly then you must treat them as a serious emergency.
E dels senhals del servel es quan catz en lu sageta, e trespassa le os, e es yssit del cyphac le qual es sobre le cervel, quar accideys per lu soda vehement, e scotomia, e vertige, e rogor en les huels, e imflamacio e rogor de la lengua, e spasme e permixtio de entendament e vomi de colera, e fort leu es abscindida la paraula e es destruida la votz, e es yssit del loc de la plagua humiditat blanca semblant a pols, e yeys de lu semblant ad aquositat de la carn.	 When the veins of the patient burst through the skin and enter the eye, causing blindness, vertigo, and pain in the head, vomiting from anger, and very light is taken away by the wet cloth, you are experiencing a stroke
E donc si appareyso a tu aquestz senhals, lahoras tu abste de la curacio e de la extraccio de la sageta, si non es fora.	 If this happens to you during care or extraction of the vein, stop immediately and do not continue unless otherwise instructed by medical personnel.
Mays les senhals de la sageta quan catz en le cor, so que ela es prop de la mamila senestra, e sent am aquela quays sia ficada en causa dura, e no es causa vueda; e fort leu le movement de la sageta es semblant a movement del pols, e corr de la plagua sanc negra, e siec aquel fregiditat de las extremitatz, e suzor freja, e sincopi; e donc sapias que la mort descen ses tot dopte.	 The veins in the chest when they come into contact with the heart are prone to cause severe damage and can lead to death if not treated properly and quickly.
E les senhals quan la sageta ha plaglat le pulmo so eyssiment de sanc spumos de la plagua, e les vayssels que so prop del col so apostematz, e es mudada la color del malaute, e expira sperit gran aut, e demanda atraccio de ayre freg.	 The veins when they pass through the lung create bubbles of air in the blood vessels near the heart, making it difficult to breathe and causing great pain as a result.
E si catz la sageta en le velament le qual es en le pietz, e la dolor lahoras es prop de las costas petitas, e es fayt le ale gran am vehement dolor e am sospir, e no so maugutz totz les membres dels muscles.	 If the veins are in contact with the area of the chest which is near the ribs and cause pain that is characteristic of gouty arthritis and bring on intense, severe pain and shortness of breath but do not affect all the muscles of the body.
E si catz la sageta en le stomac, lahoras fort leu yeys de la plagua vianda alcuna indigesta.	 When stomachache occurs due to cold humors that infiltrate into the stomach cavity, it is customary for gastroenterologists to prescribe specific treatments accordingly.
E si catz la sageta en le ventre, e es ficada en lu, yeys alcuna fenda de la plagua, o la tela, o budel le qual es disromput, e no es speransa en la curacio de lu extraccio de la sageta.	 If stomachache occurs within the stomach and it is filled with a cloth or intestine, there are no tears from the stomach lining, or the intestines, or the organ that causes discomfort, and no opening for extraction of the stomach is expected in this way.
E si la sageta catz en la vesica, e es yssida defora urina, e procesesca de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, e fort leu es dolor sobre le malaute, lahoras sapias que es mortal.	 If the stomach ache occurs within the bladder and is caused by urine processing or any cause to the urinary tract, it's extremely painful for the patient, doctors understand that this condition can be fatal.
Mays les autres membres ayssi cum es la cara, le col, e·l golayro, e las spallas e le adjutori, e les spondils del dos, e la furcula, e la coysa, e la camba e a lor semblantz dels membres, son salvatz segon las majors disposicios quan la sageta no atroba vena ni arteria e no es sageta venenosa.	 The other members of the body that are mentioned here include the face, the colon, the elbow, the shoulder blades, the ribs and the diaphragm, the thighs, the calves, the buttocks, and the lower limbs. If the stomach is not blocked by a vein or artery but still painful, it may be necessary to make additional points on these areas as well.
E yeu recomtare aquo a tu que he vist del esser de aquestas sagetas, per que signifiques per aquo sobre la curacio tieua.	 And you suggest that when you see such stomachaches, please indicate this to your healthcare provider accordingly.
La qual causa es, quar en un home cazec sageta en le lacrimal del huel de lu en la razitz del nas, e yeu extrayssi aquela a lu del autra partida, dejos le grays de l’aurelha de lu, e es sanat, e no accidic en le huel de lu nocument.	 The cause is in the tear ducts of the nose and you extract it from there, removing the mucus as well, so that it does not accumulate in the stomach's throat or the esophagus.
E extrayssi autra sageta a un Juzeu la qual cazec en lu en lo grays del sieu huel, dejos la palpebra pus dejos, e la sageta ja era occultada e no so conseguit de aquela sino una petita extremitat am la qual adhereys al sieu fust, e era gran sageta de las sagetas agudas dels Turcs , am ferr leon en la qual no havia aurelhas.	 When the vein is opened in its gray part by a little thread, you place your thumb on it and press gently to close it up again.
E senat es le Juzieu , e no accidic en le sieu huel mal accident.	 The vein must be handled with care, as it may cause damage if squeezed too hard.
E extrayssi una autra sageta a un home Crestia la qual era cazuta en le golayro, e era sageta arabica, e es aquela a la qual so aurelhas; e adonc yeu inscidegui sobre aquela entre doas guidegi, e ja era submersa en le golayro de lu; e adonc yeu so subtiliat am aquela, e aprop extraxi aquela, e es sanat le Crestia .	 You should handle that vein carefully because it was cut in the groin area and is a sensitive one. It is located between two guides, and when you gently press on it, it should be submerged inside of him. Be very careful while handling it to prevent any damage.
E extraxi autra sageta a un home la qual era cazuta en le sieu ventre, e cogitegui que moris per aquela; e donc, pus que foro passatz xxx dias e no es mudat sobre lu alcuna causa de las suas disposicios, inscidegui sobre la sageta e engenagui sobre aquela, e es sanat, e no accidic a lu accident mal.	 You should handle that vein carefully because it was cut in the belly area and can cause injury if squeezed too hard.
E vi mays un home en le qual cazec una sageta en le dos de lu, e consolidada es la plagua sobre lu, e pus que foc aprop set ans, yssic la sageta en la razitz de la coyssa.	 You should handle that vein carefully because it was cut in the back area and is covered with a bandage, so please be very careful when handling it to prevent any damage.
E vi una femna a la qual cazec sageta en le sieu ventre, e la plagua es consolidada dedintz lu, e no es mudada en las suas disposicios en re, e la femna no atrobec nocument en alcunas de las suas opperacios naturals.	 You should handle that vein carefully because it was cut in the belly area and is covered with a bandage so please be very careful when handling it to prevent any damage or injury during normal activities.
E vi un autre home al qual cazec sageta en la sua cara e consolidada es la plagua e romas la sageta, no atrobant aqui mota dolor, e motz semblantz ad aquestz.	 When another person comes towards him with a cloth to wipe his face and smooth away the wrinkles from it without causing any pain, he will feel relieved and enjoy this sight
E extrayssi la sageta del home dels princeps del rey que era cazuda en le mieg loc del nas sieu e ja havia declinat a la partida dreyta un petit, e occultada era tota la sageta.	 The face of the man from the highest prince among kings was wiped clean by him at his own place near the nose and had declined to enter any part of it on that day, as everything about it had been hidden.
E yeu fu appelat a la curacio de lu aprop le cazement de la sageta entro a tres dias.	 He was asked for three days to clean his face after wiping it with a cloth.
E adonc yeu atrobegui la plagua de la sageta mot streyta; e adonc yeu inquirigui aquela am tenta subtil, e no sentigui aquela; mays el la sentia puncio dejos la aurelha dreyta, e adonc speregui que aquela punccio era per la extremitat de la sageta.	 He then wiped away the cloth and asked someone else to gently touch it with a subtler cloth, as he felt nothing; maybe that was because of the extremity of his face
E amplastregui le loc am emplaustre en le qual es vertut atrectiva e digestiva, confizant de mi que·l loc se apostemes per que appares a mi le loc de la sageta, per que secces sobre aquela.	 He extended his arm and spread it to the place where it was used for application of food, being aware that the area in question would be covered with food sores if he were to cover it with something else.
E no accidic en le loc accident significant que la sageta hagues conseguit aquel loc; e yeu continuegui am le emplaustre sobre lu per motz dias e no accidic accident; e consolidada es la plagua entretant, e romas le malaute de la extreccio de lu per spazi de motz dias entro que un jorn sentic la sageta dintz le sieu nas e recontec aquo a mi.	 He did not apply the cloth in that significant location and continued to use it for several days without applying anything else, making sure to keep it damp and rubbing away the sores from his extremities over time until one day when he felt pain at the nose and recounted this back to me.
E adonc yeu pausegui sobre la plagua medicina acuta corrosiva per motz dias entro que foc ubert, e am la tenta yeu assagegui aquel, e atrobegui la extremitat de la sageta subtil, la qual adhereys al fust.	 When there is acute corrosive medicine placed on the skin days before pain occurs and it causes inflammation in that part of the foot, place a cushion under them to prevent the medicine from coming out.
E aprop yeu ajustegui en la apersio de la plagua per aquela medicina acuta entro que apparec a mi visiblament la extremitat de la sageta, e passec a mi temps am aquo per le spazi de temps entro quatre meses.	 Place the medicine under their arm in the space of four months before it becomes visible to the naked eye on the foot.
E aprop pus que la plagua foc amplificada, e foc a mi possible entrometre las forfexs en lu, e remaure aquela, e no obezic ad eyssiment, lahoras yeu no cessegui subtiliar e ingeniar sobre aquela am manieyras de engen, entro que comensegui un dia sobre aquela am manieyras de engens pendre lu am forceps descentment faytas, segon que vindra la forma de aquelas en la fi del capitol, entro que extraxi aquela; e aprop restauregui aquela plagua.	 Place the foot in a vise with thumbscrews to hold it open and make an incision there, ensuring that the incision is not too deep so as to prevent injury or bleeding, but only enough to extract this; after which the abscess will be extracted, leaving no scar behind.
E alcus metges jutgavan que la cartillage del nas no es restaurada, e yeu restauregui aquela e la plagua es consolidada, e sanat es le malaute per sanetat entiera, e no noguec en lu en deguna causa.	 Doctors judge that the nasal cartilage is not restored and it's left to heal on its own; and they ensure that both the abscess and the incision are healed up so as to prevent any recurrence in the future.
E yeu recomti a tu la qualitat de extraccio de alcunas sagetas per que pauses aquo regla e significacio sobre aquo que no he dit, quar las partidas de aquesta art e las difinicios de aquela no so conprehendudas am narracio ni no comprehen aquelas le libre.	 I recommend you to consult with an extraction specialist regarding this rule and its meaning because the rules of this field and their definitions are not comprehended in narration or comprehension, unless specified otherwise.
E le artifexs savi compara am pauc sobre mot; e am aquo que es present sobre aquo que es absent; e atroba operacio novela e instrument novel deves le descendement de las causas extranhas del art quan accideysso.	 I save comparisons of few to many, and what is present in the absence of that which is not present; and in operations it takes time for the removal of extraneous causes when they occur.
E donc yeu dic que sagetas no son fora-gitadas dels membres en les quals son ficadas sino segon dos manieyras: o per atraccio del loc en le qual intrec; o per le contrari de la autra partida.	 When the pain arises in two limbs, either through an attraction towards a particular place where it intrudes or through the contrary of another limb.
E aquela que es gitada per le loc don es intrada, o es sageta procedent en loc carnos, e es atirada e fora-gitada.	 That which is caused by an attraction towards a particular place where it intrudes or arises through the opposite of another limb
E si no obezeys a eyssiment de la hora en la qual catz, lahoras cove que tu la laysses per alcus dias entro que poyresca la carn que es al enviro de lu, e sia alleujada l‘atraccio de lu e la sua egressio.	 If not otherwise specified in the time of the attack, it is customary to treat with the application of warm compresses and to prevent the skin from being exposed to excessive heat, as well as preventing the exit or attraction
E semblantment si es ficada en os e no obezeys a tu a eyssiment, lahoras layssa aquela per alcus dias e itera aquela am atraccio e mocio en quascun dia, e ja es fora-gitada.	 Similarly, if the attack is on one part and not specified otherwise, they apply compresses for several days and also prevent attraction and exit in each day, as well as prevent expulsion
E si no obezeys a tu eyssiment aprop alcus dias, lahoras cove que tu perforas en le circuit de la sageta en aquel os de tota partida am taravel subtil entro que·l loc sia amplificat de la sageta, e aprop extratz aquela.	 If the attack is not otherwise specified in several days, they cover it with a cloth soaked in a soothing and subtle solution that amplifies the heat from the affected area, and apply this remedy.
E si la sageta es ficada en le os del cap e ja ha procezit en un dels ventres del cervel, e apparo en le malaute alcus de aquels accidentz les quals yeu e ditz, lahoras abste de la extraccio de la sageta e layssa aquela entro que·l sieu esser sia equat aprop alcus dias; quar si la sageta perve al ciphac, lahoras la mort no es a lu prolonguada.	 If the attack occurs in one of the ventricles of the heart and causes severe complications as mentioned earlier, doctors prevent the extraction of the gout from the body and apply this remedy for several days; however if it reaches the brain, doctors will not allow its prolonged survival.
E si la sageta no es ficada sino en le cors del os tant solament e no passa entro al ciphac, e roman le malaute per alcus dias, e no accideys a lu denguna causa de aquels accidentz, lahoras tu engenia en la atraccio de la sageta e en la atraccio de lu.	 When the stomach is not filled but only on the chest and does not pass into the pharynx, and the patient is suffering from a cold, then doctors prescribe the following remedy: they apply cold water to the back of their throat
Mays si es mot ficada e no obezeys a tu a extraccio, lahoras tu aministra taravels en le circuit de la sageta ayssi cum havem recomtat, e aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	 If the stomach is not full but only on the chest and the patient suffers from a cold, then doctors recommend applying cold water to the back of their throat as well as drinking warm fluids recommended by others.
Mays si la sageta ja es amaguada en le loc del cors, e es amaguada del sentiment, lahoras tu inquireys aquela am tenta, e si tu sentas aquela, lahoras atira aquela am alcus sturmentz les quals so convenientz a la atraccio de lu.	 If the stomach is already full in that part of the body and feels cold, then you should examine that place thoroughly, and if you feel it, apply warmth to that area where it is most suitable for touching your patient.
E si no podes sobre lu per la constriccio de la plagua e per la longitut del preon, e aqui no es os ni nervi ni vena, lahoras tu fen sobre la plagua entro que sia amplificada e que sia possible extrayre la sageta.	 If you cannot access the stomach through a narrow opening or the length of the preo and here there are no nerves nor veins, then doctors should apply heat to the area so that it is widened and extraction of the stomach is possible.
E si so a lu aurelhas am las quals sia tenguda, lahoras tu deliura la carn en la qual es ficada de tota partida am tot le engen que poyras far; e ingenia sobre aquo, si no podes sobre la evasio de la carn en la fractura de las aurelhas e en torssio de aquelas entro que obezesca.	 If so is the area where it has been cut off from all parts of the body completely and you cannot access through the opening between the ears or the neck, then doctors should examine this and if possible extract the stomach by making a small incision in that area to release tension.
E quan tu administras la extraccio de la sageta en quascun loc on sia, lahoras tu usa am torcio de la tua ma am forceps a totas partidas entro que fassa aquela obezir; e subtilia am deriera subtilitat que la sageta no sia trencada e que sia fayta a tu dificil atraccio de lu e de aquela extraccio.	 When you perform stomach extraction in any place, doctors should use the strongest forceps available for all parts of it and make sure that it is not torn or damaged during this operation to prevent complications later on.
E si no podes sobre aquela de la tua hora, lahoras tu layssa per alcus dias entro que se poyrescan las partidas que so en le circuit de lu, e aprop itera aquela quar lahoras es alleujada.	 When the pain of the joints is caused by cold humors that infiltrate into each part of the body and occurs in the feet
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat flux de sanc, lahoras tu administra aquo que havem dit de curacio en le sieu capitol.	 And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery
E guarda la tua vertut de inscizio de vena o de nervi, o de corda, e aministra engen en tota manieyra a tu possibla de la evasio de la sageta; e fay aquo am facilitat e tranquillitat e tarditat e fermetat ayssi cum yeu e a tu recomtat.	 And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the feet, then do so with a pointed cautery.
E donc que fassas contrayre la sageta per so que·l malaute sia segon la figura segon la qual foc deves le cazement de la sageta en lu, quar es mays juvatiu.	 And after that you must make the opening of the abscess in such a way as to allow it to be seen and measured from outside by someone who is more experienced in this field
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible, lahoras tu aministra aquo que es a tu possible per las figuras.	 And if that's not possible, then you administer the following to do it yourself.
Mays las sagetas que son fora-gitadas per le contrari del autra partida, o que ja de lu procezeys alcuna partida a las partidas de fora, o fa gilbositat la extramitat de la sageta per sentiment de la partida pus desus de la codena propdana e vezes aquela eminent; adonc tu secsa sobre aquela; e sia la seccio segon la quantitat en la qual prenguan las forceps; e aprop atira aquela, quar ela es fayta leugiera a eyssiment.	 And if the abscess is located outside of the incision, or it causes any other parts to protrude, or you feel discomfort from performing an incision yourself, then take that part out and place it in another location where it may be seen more easily by others.
Mays si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu tortz lama segon contrarietat entro que la sageta enprema en le os, e amplifique a si meteys, e aprop extratz aquela.	 And if it is retained in the mouth, then you should remove that and place it elsewhere so that others can see it more easily, and make sure to put it somewhere safe and accessible.
E sino, layssa aquela per alcus dias, e aprop itera aquela entro qu’en yesca.	 "If otherwise, let him lie on his side, and put a pillow under his head.
E si le fust de la sageta es en aquela, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am lu.	 "If the fist of the surgeon is in that vein (i.e., if the surgery should be done on the side), put a pillow under his head.
Mays si le fust es cazut e voles aministrar inpulsio, lahoras tu intromet e aquela, si es sorda, sturment concau per so que intre la concavitat de lu en la coa de la sageta e aprop impelleys aquela am lu.	 "If the fist strikes and the surgeon wants to administer anesthesia, let him put his hand in that vein (i.e., if surgery is needed on one side), put a pillow under his head so that it rests between the concavity of his chest and the surface of the patient.
Mays si la sageta es concava, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am sturment fort intrant en aquela, quar la sageta es alleujada per aquela.	 "If the chest is concave (i.e., if one side of the body is flat), let him put his hand in there firmly while supporting that part so that it does not interfere with its location.
E si la sageta es entoxiguada, lahoras cove que tu concaves tota la carn en la qual es le vere, si es a tu possible aquo, e aprop cura aquela am aquo que si conveneys.	 "If the chest is extended (i.e., if one side of the body is flat), let him lay his hand on all of that skin in which it lies, as long as he can do so without difficulty.
E si la sageta catz en le pietz, o en le ventre, o en la vesica, o en le costat, e es propinqua per so que tu tocas aquela am la tenta, e es a tu possible secsar sobre aquela, lahoras secsa sobre aquela e guarda te de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e extratz aquela, e aprop cos la plagua si indigeys, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	 "If the chest is flat on the stomach or belly, side of the body, in the bladder (vesica), or on the back, and it touches that area you want to touch, as long as you can do so without difficulty, let him rest there and support it with a cloth if necessary. Let's take care to avoid any injury to veins or nerves when removing it.
Forma de forceps am las quals so atiradas las sagetas:	 Form the forceps as they are used in drawing out the gout:
Sian las extremitatz de lor cum a bec de ausel que son faytas cum serra quan prendon sobre la sageta per so que no la layssen.	 The extremities of their hands should be placed on it such that when pressed against the foot, they will not let go:
E de aquelas son faytas motas specias, grans, paucas e migieras, segon la quantitat de la grandeza de la sageta e de la sieua pauqueza, e de la amplitud de la plagua, e de la constriccio de lu.	 The different sizes of the gout stones, large, small and medium, based on the size of the foot, its thinness, the width of the groove, and the restriction in it:
Forma de impellent concau de aquesta extremitat conquava ayssi cum pena de ausel per so que sia alleujat le intrament de la sageta en lu, e impulcio de aquela sorda:	 Apply pressure to that extremity with both hands such that the opening of the foot is relaxed and it pushes away from itself.
Forma de impellent de sorda extremitat:	 To push the other extremity
ayssi cum ray per so que sia alleujat le intrament de lu en la sageta concava e es impellida am aquel.	 Press with both hands such that it is relaxed at its opening and pushes against it:
De fleubotomia de las venas.	 From the phlebotomy of the veins.
Las venas de fleubotomia de las quals corr costuma de fleubotomar so xxx, de las quals so en le cap xvi, so es doas venas pulsatils las quals so aprop las aurelhas, dic alhasisain; doas herbas que so en les dos templars apparentz; e doas venas que so en dos lacrimals de dos huels que son appeladas aspicientz; e la vena preparada en le mieg loc del front, e la vena que es en la extremitat del nas; e doas guidegi que so al col; e doas venas que so en la labia desus; e doas venas que so en la labia dejos; e — aquestas so las venas que so appeladas algelic —; e so doas venas que so dejos la lengua.	 The veins that are phlebotomized as usual, which are in the sixth part of the face, and those that are located at the temples, eyebrows, and two tears ducts on either side of the nose. There is a vein prepared near the middle of the forehead, another one behind the nose, two guide veins to the chin, two veins below, two above, and these ones are called algelic:
Mays las venas que so fleubotomadas en les brasses so v; quar de aquelas es una cephalica, e es deves le latz silvestre; e le poble appela “la vena del cap”, e sorda, e es vena migiera, e es composta de un ram de la basilica, e de autre ram de la cephalica; e nomna aquela le poble “vena de tot le cors”, e basilica es vena la qual es pausada en le latz domestic, e es nomnada “citillar”, e nompnan aquela les vulguars “vena del ventre”; e funis del bras, e es pausada sobre le focil, e es aquela en la qual es fleubotomat, e es aquela que appar sobre le poutz per apparicio manifesta; e salvatella, e es la vena que es entre lo dit auricular e·l pus petit dit, e so en lu dos ramps.	 "There are veins in the head that are called cephalic, and they are to be found on the basilica arm.
E en le pe e la camba so tres venas; la una de aquelas es que es dejos la curvatura del denolh del latz silvestre; e la segonda es sophena, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz domestic; e la vena sciatica, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz silvestre; e en la camba son autras venas semblantz ad aquelas.	 "There are three veins in the leg: one of them is called the femoral vein and it is where the curvature of the right side of the body bends, the second vein is saphenous and its location is on the left calf, the sciatic vein is also from the wild vein, and both are together.
Le juvament de las venas que so aprop las aurelhas es a cataris antics e emigranea e sahafati e ulceracios del cap malas antiquas.	 "The veins of youth that approach the earlobes become thin and emaciated, with sores on their bad old age.
E la qualitat de sagnar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: es que sia ras le cap del malaute, e sia freguat le cap del malaute en le occipiti en le loc de amdoas las venas am drap ample am bona fricacio; aprop strenha le malaute le sieu col am una benda entro que apparan las doas e les locs de lor so aprop las aurelhas en dos locs depremegutz del cap; e quereys aquela am le tieu dit, e si tu sentes le pols de aquelas am le dit tieu, aqui senha am tenta.	 "The quality of those veins that we recommend to you: first, it is recommended to shave the head of the patient and shave his cap in the occipital area with a wide, good scratch; next, hold tightly on both ears at the two locations where the ears are located from above and below. And if you feel cold in these areas, please try.
Aprop tu pren la lancea cutellar, e es aquela que es inscident, e aprop tu intromet aquel dejos la vena en la codena entro que·l fleubotomi vengua al os.	 When you have made an incision on the lower arm and it is bleeding inside, close off the vein in order to prevent blood from coming out of the wound.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am la vena e la codena a las partidas desus e inscideys la vena am inscizio inscident.	 You place your hand over the vein and artery openings on both sides, to prevent bleeding in the incision site.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio la quantitat de dos ditz ajustatz o entorn de aquo; e fay yssir del sanc atant quant voles.	 The length of the incision should be adjusted or shortened based on how much you want it to be, and adjust as needed by a doctor.
E aprop strenh am pulvils e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	 You apply pressure with soft material such as gauze over the area until it is healed.
E ja e precedit en le comensament del libre la inscizio de aquelas e de lor la cauterizacio.	 Before starting the incision and cautery procedure, make sure to clean the site thoroughly.
Mays de las doas venas arterias que so als templars le juvament de la fleubotomia es a emigranea antiqua e sode malvada e obtalmia assidua e cors de superfluitatz acutas effusas als huels.	 The veins and arteries that were used for the previous phlebotomy procedure are to be cleaned thoroughly, as they can cause complications like infection or scarring, especially if done excessively frequently.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: constrengua le malaute le sieu col mot entro que apparan las doas venas al sentiment per appericio manifesta e sia demonstrat le pols de lor dejos le tieu dit; e lahoras tu senha am tenta.	 The quality of phlebotomy depends on you: require the patient to squeeze their fist in order for visible veins to appear, and it is demonstrated by touching their arm or leg with your fingertips.
E aprop tu eleva la codena desobre la vena a las partidas desus am le tieu dit indic, e intromet le fleubotomi inscident dejos, e eleva la vena en sus; e inscidey aquela ayssi cum has fayt en las doas venas autras; e fay correr del sanc segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	 You place the artery above the vein in the opening area and introduce it inside, and elevate the vein upwards as well; if there are multiple veins or arteries, you close off any others that may be present, and adjust accordingly based on your needs.
E aprop deslia la coartacio del malaute, e pausa le tieu dit sobre la vena per una hora, e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto e pulvils e strenh aquela desus am fort constriccio, e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	 The first surgeon opens the thigh of the patient and holds a cushion under them for an hour to stop bleeding from that vein.
E ja es precedida la rememoracio de lor, e de aquelas la inscizio, e la atraccio en le comensament del libre.	 The previous surgeon has already performed a similar procedure and made incisions in the beginning of this session.
E donc le juvament de fleubotomia de la vena del front es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a las malautias antiquas de la cara e a emigranea e rogor e ulceracios fetidas.	 Then, the most recent procedure is to perform a phlebotomy in the forehead and an incision on the scalp behind it for ancient migraines and ulcers.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es segon que yeu recomti a tu; so es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col am una benda entro que apparesca la vena; e aprop pren le insturment le qual es nompnat fossori del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	 The quality of phlebotomy is recommended by us. After the procedure, if the patient's arm gets stiff and there is a lump around it where the vein appears, use the instrument that is known as a tourniquet to prevent this from happening;
Pausa la puncta eminent la qual es al cap del fossori sobre aquela vena e percuteys sobre lu am penche o am autre causa en la manieyra de lu, e layssa lo sanc correr segon la quantitat la qual voles; e aprop deslia la perforacio del malaute e strenh aquela entro que sia sanada.	 Pause at the point on top of the tourniquet over that vein and puncture it from both sides to release any pressure in your hand, allowing the artery to flow freely as you wish; then make an incision through the patient's arm into where it needs to be healed.
E alcunas veguadas es uberta am fleubotomi lat, empero no cove que·l fleubotomi sia de acuta extremitat ayssi cum les autres fleubotomis, abantz sia de lada extremitat, e fleubotoma aquela segon le tranvers, quar le os es propda e fort leu trencaria en lu le fleubotomi quan es subtil.	 Some vegetables are better for phlebotomy than others, but the phlebotomy of an extremity is just as good as any other, except that it must be done on both sides and the phlebotomist should make incisions transversely so that the arteries remain intact and free from injury during the procedure when done gently.
Mays le juvament de las duas venas que so als lacrimals de dos huels per scabia del huels per rogor e sebol en les huels, e a las malautias de la cara.	 When the veins in both eyes become inflamed and swell up to fill the sockets of the face and make them red, that is considered a malar rash.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia es que·l malaute strenha le col sieu am una benda, e aprop fleubotoma aquelas, e tu sias stant sobre le cap de lu.	 The quality of a flea bite is that the patient struggles to remove it from their arm and puts on flea powder, and you should stand over its head.
E sia fayta la fleubotomia segon le transvers a longitut un pauc am fleubotomi pauc, quar en le loc no es carn; e si le fleubotomi es subtil, fort leu la extremitat de lu es trencada.	 The flea bite second comes across the arm and causes redness in that location if it is not covered by powder, and if the flea bite is subtle but light on the extremity of the patient may be broken off.
E aprop fay correr del sanc atant quant es a tu necessari, e pausa sobre aquelas coto, e strenh aquelas per una nueyt, e aprop deslia aquelas.	 Then when it becomes necessary to run away from the scent as you are required by nature's command and stand over them, strive against their movement, and drive them apart.
Mays le fleubotomi de la vena del nas es conferent a febre acuta e a soda vehement, e a las malautias de la cara e emigranea e rogor que accideys en la cara, e majorment quan es antiqua.	 The flea bite on the vein of the nose is considered an acute fever and swelling, that causes redness in the face, especially when it first occurs.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col e aprop te le sieu nas am la tua ma sinistra, e pren le fleubotomi subtil lonc e fica aquela en le mieg loc del cap del nas segon rectitut, quar la vena no appar al sentiment aqui, e quar le sanc comensa a fluir tantost.	 The quality of the flea bite on him is that the patient struggles to remove it from his arm and puts on flea powder with their left hand near their nose, and gets the subtle one close to the top of the nose so they fall off in place between the nostrils, where the vein does not appear at first.
Cove que tu ultimes la tua ma am le fleubotomi petit a petit e fassas correr del sanc segon la tua necessitat; e aprop lia aquela per una nuoyt, quar aquela es restaurada leugierament.	 When you finally get the flea bite to run away from your hand and do so when necessary, and put it back together with a new thread, where it is restored gently.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de las doas guidegui a constriccio de ale e a comensament de lepra e a motas malautias e inpetige e malas ulceracios corrosivas ayssi cum herpotromeno.	 "At the beginning of lepers, boils and ulcers appear simultaneously on both thighs.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que el malaute strenha dejos quascuna en le sieu col am liament; e estia le artifexs sobre le cap del malaute, e le malaute sia sezent sobre una sezela.	 The quality of lues is that the patient's head is swollen and stiffened on it, and a piece or bandage is placed over the top of the patient to prevent any movement of his head or body.
E aprop fleubotoma la vena al lonc am fleubotomi ample petit a petit; e aprop extratz de sanc segon temprada quantitat o segon aquo que vezes de necessitat que es ad aquo; e aprop fay semblant del autra vena.	 Cut the vein at the bottom of the arm gradually, and progressively; it is also customary to do so in a second time if necessary or when that happens; and apply a similar band as you applied previously.
E aprop deslia le liament e strenh las doas venas am strictura migiera per so que·l malaute no sia prefocat, e laysa entro al mati quar la plagua es sanada.	 After tightening the veins in a specific manner to prevent the patient from becoming too swollen or inflamed as they heal, place it on top of the wound when it has been healed.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de las venas algerich, comfereys a petitas apostemas e pustulas de la boca e corrupcio de las gengivas e malas ulceracios e fissuras, e a malas ulceracios que so en le nas e en le circuit de lu.	 The beginning of the lues is accompanied by swelling in the mouth and corruption of the gums, sores on the face and nose, bad ulcers and fissures, and those that are in the mouth or nasal cavity.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que fases cezer le malaute denant tu, e strenh le col de lu am una benda, e aprop revolveys las labias de lu e reguarda a doas venas de las quals la una es de la dextra de la labia e la segonda de la senestra; e la demonstracio de quascuna es per la negror de quascuna de amdos, e aquo mays es quar en le circuit de aquelas so venas menudas negras; e adonc inscideys cascuna per inscizio inscident.	 The quality of the lues is that you will stretch the patient's neck with a band while opening the veins in specific locations, and observing their condition through black marks on each, where those marks are thin dark lines; if any occur near the veins it means they have become more inflamed.
Mays si dubitacio es dejos tu, e no sabes qual es de aquelas, lahoras tu enten a inscisio de la major de aquelas, e de la pus manifesta de aquelas.	 When there's doubt about it, don't know what to do with them, the doctors tend to take these as gout.
E fay le semblant de las doas venas que so en las labias desus.	 The veins that are in the vulva of women.
Mays costuma corr mays a inscidir las doas venas que so en la labia dejos.	 It is customary to mark or indicate the veins that are in the vulva of men as well.
Mays de doas venas que so dejos la lengua le juvament es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a prefocacios que so en le guolayro, a la malautia de la uvula, e a malautias de la boca.	 The veins that are in the throat and mouth of young people may be marked with a phlebotomy or cutting at the tip of the tongue to prevent them from going into the gullet, to stop the veins that are on the palate (the roof of the mouth), and to stop any veins that might come out through the mouth.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es que segue le malaute entre las tuas mas denant le solel, e eleva la lengua de lu, e reguarda dejos la lengua, de la un latz de lu vena e del autre latz vena, e la color de quascuna es declinant a negror.	 The quality of phlebotomizing them is that it occurs between the thumb and forefinger on the surface, and elevates the tongue from there, and guards against the tongue from coming out through any vein, with one latitudinal line of each vein, and the color of each changes to blackness.
E adonc fleubotoma quascuna; e guarda te que no ultimes la tua ma en fleubotoman aquelas, quar dejos aquelas so arterias.	 Once a vein has been phlebotomized, it is important to ensure that you do not make the same mistake on any other veins as these are arteries and must be treated differently.
E las tuas venas que so fleubotomadas en le coyde so en las quals corr costuma en totz les homes, e la fleubotomia de lor es fayta segon dos manieyras, o pongen am le fleubotomi mirtilat o olivar a subtilitat declinant; o secsar am fleubotomi cutellar, e apelha si alnessil, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	 The veins that are phlebotomized in the neck often end up going through all the men's throats. If this occurs with both hands at once, or gently touch their eyebrows and let it happen slowly, lowering your head to allow for a smooth movement; if you have to do so one by one, be careful not to pull away from them as they are arteries, and leave a small space between the two, allowing for a subtle movement.
E aquest alnessil es que conveneys a seccio e de aquels so specias latz e subtils segon la amplitut de las venas e segon la strictura de aquelas.	 This means that it's customary for doctors to place a cushion beneath the patient's thighs, another servant on their legs and another on their chest, holding their hands, in order to ease the passage of the intestines or hernia back into its cavity, as needed.
Forma de fleubotomi mirti:	 This sentence is not complete and therefore cannot be translated without further context. It seems like it may refer to some medical procedure involving a knife wound (flebotto) near the mouth of the patient?
sia le latz de lu ayssi cum vezes, e conveneys a obrir las venas concavas plenas procedentz apparentz grossas, e ad aquelas que conteno sanc gros torbat.	 It means that it's customary to open up the large veins (vena cavae) and those that contain thick walls for passage in such cases where there are obstructions of great thickness.
E aquesta es la forma de fleubotomi olivar:	 This sentence is not complete, so I cannot translate it accurately without further context. However, based on the structure of the Latin and the name "flebotto" which seems to involve a vein near the mouth (olivar = olive), it may refer to an incision made near the jugular vein for some reason or another.
E aquest fleubotomi es de menor latitut e de pus subtil extremitat, e conveneys a fleubotomia de venas subtils que conteno sanc subtil citri.	 This sentence means that it is customary to make this smaller incision and one of its purposes was to open up the small veins containing thin walls.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena basilica la qual es una de tres venas: quar extratz le sanc de las malautias que so dejos le guolayro e·l col, e de aquo que siec le pietz e·l ventre.	 This sentence indicates that the incision made in the basilica vein is one of three veins to be operated on for hemorrhoids which cause pain and discomfort when they swell or become inflamed and affect the colon and abdominal areas.
E conveneys al fleubotomador, quan fleubotomia aquela, que guarde be aquela e sia sobre-temor en aquela, quar dejos lu ha arteria, e si erra e ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi, inscidira aquela arteria e accidira fluxs de sanc, per so que cove que no fleubotomes aquela am fleubotomi pungent, abantz sia sectant cum alnessil.	 The sentence means that when performing the operation on that vein, it is customary to ensure that any arteries in its vicinity are carefully guarded and monitored closely, as a mistake or mishandling during the incision may cause damage to the artery and result in blood loss, which would mean the procedure must be aborted.
E si no appar la basilica per apparicio manifesta, lahoras cove que tu laysses aquela e que tu mudes a la autre, o que cerques alcun ram sieu; o que fleubotomes en loc de lu finis del bras, quar aquela es manifesta; e secsa aquela am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit.	 When the basilica is opened by manifest opening, doctors ask that one lay it and another on top of each other or seek a third if they want to go further still; but when the arm finishes its course through this way, then that part is manifestly finished.
Mays si tu voles la fleubotomia de lu meteyssa, lahoras cove denant la strictura del bras que toques le loc entro que conogues le loc dels pols, e aprop senha sobre lu am tencha; e aprop lia le bras e secsa la vena am seccio concava am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit; e guarda te que caja la percussio per alcu spazi del loc de la arteria.	 If you want to carry out the phlebotomy of the arm, doctors tell that by closing its course through a small hole in the place where it enters and exits from the arms, then close your hand over it; and put on both hands and make sure there is no space for the artery's blood flow.
E quan tu vezes, cum strenhes le liament, imflacio en le loc que has senhat am tencha, lahoras aquela inflacio es inflacio de la arteria, e donc squiva aquela.	 And when you come to the limb with which you are strong, make sure it is inflamed and its blood flow is also interrupted at that location.
E si vezes le sanc fluir en la fleubotomia ayssi cum aurina de enfant, e·l sanc es subtil rog, lahoras sapias que es del sanc de la arteria; e lahoras tu coyta e pausa le tieu dit sobre aquel per lonc spazi; e aprop osta le tieu dit, e si lo sanc es abscindit, quar motas veguadas es abscindit, lahoras tu strenh le bras e layssa aquel.	 If the artery is blocked with blood as well when carrying out phlebotomy in this way, and it is a subtle blockage, doctors tell you that it's from arterial blockage; and they ask you to cut off its flow and pause on that point for some space; then put back the tie-in place, and if the blockage has been closed, tell them.
E guardes le malaute de la moccio de lu, e sia sobre-temor de lu e no maugua aquel per alcus dias entro que sia sanat.	 After applying a poultice to the affected area and removing any excess moisture from it, you should not let that part remain exposed for too long as it may become infected.
Mays si le sanc no es abscindit, e vezes que deves tu no es present medicina ad aquo, lahoras tu inscideys la arteria, si appar a tu; quar la extremitat de lu es contrayta, e es abscindit le sanc; o que prenguas scorsa de fistic, e fen aquela, e pren la una maytat e strenh aquela sobre le loc de la vena am strictura descent am liament e am pulvils entro al autra dia.	 When the blood vessel narrows due to illness or old age, and pain occurs in the feet, then you should diagnose and treat this with medicine; if it is an artery that is blocked, you will find out; if only a vein is blocked off, or if there was a blow causing that, whether from fisticuffs or another reason, and fix that by compressing the veins into the other leg.
E lahoras si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, lahoras cura aquel am aquo del qual es precedit a la rememoracio del loc de las polveras abscindentz flux de sanc.	 If the vein is blocked off, then; otherwise you should remember that location and treat it as described above.
E la abscizio del sanc de lu es dificil en motas disposicios per le loc petit de la plagua e la possibilitat del liament del bras.	 The removal of a vein from the leg is difficult, due to the small size of that location and the possibility of damaging the arm's ligaments.
Mays de la vena fusca la fleubotomia es juvament que extratz lo sanc de la partida subirana del cap e a la partida dejos del cors; per aquo quar es composta de ram de la basilica e de ram de cephalica, ayssi cum havem dit.	 The blow to the vein is commonly when it is cut off at both ends of its path: from the head down to the chest, as mentioned earlier.
E cove al fleubotomant aquela que sia sobre-temor en la fleubotomia de lu, quar dejos aquela es un nervi; e adonc si ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi e atroba le nervi, accidira a lu stupor, e es difficil la sanacio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot, E aquest nervi motas veguadas apar al sentiment; e si es ocultat ad alcus homes e es subtil e no es monstrat, lahoras cove que tu pauses le fleubotomi am le qual tu fleubotomas am seccio de alnessil, e evita le nervi am la tua fortalesa.	 The surgeon should be careful when performing a phlebotomy on him as they are doing this for the first time; if the vein is cut and severs his nerve, it will cause stupor and be difficult to heal, and without proper care, death may occur. If you do not properly cut through the vein but only sever the nerve then that nerve will remain visible in the area, and if done improperly can lead to complications or even prove fatal.
E si la vena es entre dos nervis, lahoras tu fen la vena en la longitut.	 If a vein is between two nerves, then you should cut the vein in its length
Le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena cephalica es que atratz le sanc del cap e comfereys a las malautias dels huels.	 The onset of cerebral palsy is that arteries to the head are affected and interferes with the normal functions of the limbs.
E cove en aquest propriament, si vols que la fleubotomes pungen am fleubotomi olivar o am fleubotomi mirti; quar es la pus salva de totas las venas, quar no es dejos lu arteria ni nervi.	 In this case, if you want to prevent cerebral palsy from occurring or recurring, then choose the option that will save all veins but spare neither artery nor nerve.
Mays empero conveneys a tu deves la fleubotomia que guardes que am le fleubotomi no punguas le cap del lacert tant solament, e cerques le loc pus leugier, e no notz a lu, si no es atrobat am la percussio primieyra que sia sobre aquela am fleubotomia alcunas veguadas.	 In any case where you want to prevent cerebral palsy from occurring or recurring, be sure to remember that opting out of the procedure will only spare the head but not the nerve itself, and seek medical attention promptly if you notice any injury related to the initial cut.
Mays empero fort leu es apostemat en alcus homes, quan no es fleubotomat en la primieyra percussio, mays no notz en re aquel apostema.	 In other words, even after opting out of cerebral palsy surgery on the first cut, you should still seek medical attention if it is found that an error was made in performing the procedure.
Mays la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquela e les accidentz de lu so motz, en les quals te cove cogitar en lor rectificacio.	 The quality of cerebral palsy and any related complications should be taken into account when considering whether or not to seek further treatment.
Le primier de lu es del qual cove que sapias que fleubotomia no es aministrada sino en conservacio de sanetat e per speransa de lu e cautela de aveniment de malautias, e que sia fayta fleubotomia en la una de las venas que so en le coyde, so es: cephalica, fusca e basilica; e que sia fayta fleubotomia al comensament de primaveyra, sobre dejun en primaviera e autunppne, e en invern aprop la comestio, quan apparo significacios de replecio.	 The first step is to make sure that cerebral palsy was not administered but rather preserved in order to save the patient's life and prevent complications, and if it did happen in one of the veins mentioned previously (cephalic, brachial or basilar), then:
E sia fayta fleubotomia e le tertz dia o al primier pus que del jorn siran passadas tres horas.	 When the third day arrives of the first week has passed three hours, the phlebotomy must take place
Mays fleubotomia que es aministrada, mays quan provoca convenencia e necessitat ad aquo, o de nuoyt o de dia, en tota hora e en tot temps.	 Phlebotomy should be carried out when it is necessary and convenient to do so at any time
E cove que efant no sia fleubotomat entro que aja xiiii ans, e femna que sia prenhs no sia fleubotomada sino del quart mes entro al sete, e les viels no sian fleubotomatz les quals ja han passatz lx ans.	 It is not to be phlebotomy during the first three months unless otherwise specified, and only if phlebotomy has not been performed in the fourth month until seven months later, all other procedures have already been done.
E cum alcu vol esser fleubotomat per qualque manieyra sia, cove que mondifique les sieus budels denant la fleubotomia am clisteri leon, si en aquels ha mota fenda retenguda, per so que las venas no atiro las superfluitatz en la fleubotomia dels budels, que son puridas, e que no noguan als membres principals.	 When phlebotomy is performed, the veins must be cleansed with distilled water to prevent blood from clotting in the phlebotomy tubes, and only pure veins should be used on major body parts.
E no sian fleubotomatz les pascientz naucea sacertiva e crapula, ni evasent de malautia ni de ebretat entro que aquo sia remaugut aquo de lor, ni malaute de ydropici, e mays que fleubotomia sia temuda aprop colica passio e aprop vomit, e aprop cos de ventre, e aprop multiplicacio de coyt e de trebal e de exercici de dejunis o de vigilias e de tota causa que dissolveys la vertut, o sia corpore28 o animal.	 Phlebotomy should not be performed on the extremities of the body or in the abdominal region unless it is necessary and convenient to do so for some particular reason, such as a temporary illness, or when there are any dropsy conditions, nor in cases where someone has recently vomited, is vomiting, has stomach problems, or multiplies cuts, burns, bruises, exercises, or vigils, nor for any cause that dissolves the body.
E aprop considera en subtiliacio de humos denant aquo si le sanc es gros, am viandas e beures, e am medicinas si aquo es a lu possible ad aquo.	 When considering subtle matters of humors when it comes to eating, drinking, and medicine, or if there is any possibility involved in this matter.
E aprop intre en banh si alcuna causa no prohibeys, o sia excersitat per alcun exercici per so que·l sanc sia subtiliat.	 When there's no specific cause to prevent it, or when practicing any exercise in order for it to be subtle
E pausa la fleubotomia de lu en le pietz del dia, so es enviro la hora de tercia, ayssi cum havem dit.	 Put the tracheotomy tube out of the chest area and remove it after three hours as described above
E perforsa te que·l pietz de aquel sia guardat en aquel dia de totz mals accidentz animals, ayssi cum es angustia, ira, temor, e de totz accidentz corporals, ayssi cum es trebal e pena superflua e coyt e semblantz a lor.	 Perform tests to ensure that the chest area is protected from all types of animal accidents, such as choking, suffocation, fear, and bodily injuries, so that you can eliminate unnecessary pain, cough, and prevent further damage
E a la sua sezelha fassa esser presentz las causas en le us de la qual corr costuma dels homes am aromaticitat e odorament e am bals e semblantz ad aquels segon la cantitat de possibilitat.	 Make sure you are aware of the causes that commonly lead to fatigue and loss of smell, such as lack of sleep or illness, before proceeding further on this matter.
E segua le fleubotomador sobre un coyssi que sia pus aut que·l coyssi de aquel que deu esser fleubotomat.	 The tracheotomy specialist should check if the tracheotomy tube is properly in place and removed as described above.
E aprop extragua le sieu bras, e fregue aquel am la sua ma le fleubotomador doas o tres veguadas; e aprop strenha le liament am correia e involva aquel doas veguadas.	 The nurse should remove your hands and wait for the tracheotomy specialist to arrive or come three hours later, depending on which side of the bed they are located.
E sia la strictura temprada, quar la strictura quant no es engual, o la strictura es am superfluitat, lahoras prohibeys de fluxs del sanc; o es am mollificacio, e lahoras prohibeys le cors del sanc eyssament.	 The early closure of the tracheotomy tube is recommended if it is well closed or when it becomes excessive, to prevent further harm to the airway. However, if closure leads to severe coughing, closing the tracheotomy tube is prohibited.
E aprop la strictura, cove que aquel que deu esser fleubotomat fregue las suas mas ensemps entre lor entro que las venas sian imfladas, e sian declaradas al sentiment.	 Ensure that a finger is placed in the tracheotomy tube, which will prevent the lung from being inflated and declared as such.
E aprop le fleubotomador unte le sieu fleubotomi am un pauc de oli antic propriament; e aprop pausa le sieu di indic de la ma senestra sobre aquela vena, dejos le loc del qual vol la fleubotomia, per que la vena fuja un pauc, e la percussio sia sessada quar de las venas es la qual atrobas ayssi cum corda fugent deves la fleubotomia, e de aquelas es que es plena de ventositat e quan pauses le fleubotomi sobre aquela es contrayta deves le fleubotomi, e es desceubut le fleubotomador; e le fleubotomi no uobre la vena, e si uobre, aquela es streyta.	 "You have now prepared the space between their thighs with a cushion and are about to start the operation,
E donc, per aquo cove que·l fleubotomador sia fermat e sia sollicit en totas aquestas causas.	 And then, in order for that, the phlebotomist must be firm and solicit every one of these causes.
E aprop depause le fleubotomi, mays si la vena es huberta en una veguada, lahoras bo es; e sino, tu itera aquo autra vaguada dejos aquel loc un pauc, o sobre lu am festinacio, si le loc no es apostemat.	 After the phlebotomy, if the vein is severed in a way that requires closing up again, then stop immediately and make another incision nearby or over the fistula site to prevent injury to the fistula itself.
Et si le loc es apostemat, o le malaute se spauresca, lahoras tu le layssa per un dia o per dos, e no strenha le liament, quar fort leu atirara apostema caut, ni no intre en banh.	 If the vein is not closed properly or if the fistula opens up, then stop after one to two days and do not use a tourniquet anymore as closing may cause damage to the veins or fistulas.
E aprop itera la fleubotomia si la ama.	 Then repeat the phlebotomy procedure.
E si la apercio es petita e corr sanc subtilment, e temes que non yesca sanc la cantitat que voles, lahoras tu itera le fleubotomi en aquel trauc segon rectitut e ajusta en la appercio un pauc, e fay aquo am festinacio denant que·l loc sia apostemat, quar le loc es apostemat en motz homes deves pauca apercio.	 If the incision is very small and you are afraid of cutting off too much, then repeat the phlebotomy procedure in that vein after a moment and adjust your opening slightly while making sure it doesn't cause bleeding or injury to the fistula site as it should be stitched closed quickly once the vein has been successfully opened.
Mays si vezes aquel ja apostemat, lahoras no iteres sobre lu, quar no escusa a tu alcuna causa; e pausa sobre aquel alcuna partida de la fenda de oli, quar alleuja le cors del sanc.	 When you have already opened the space between them, then let them rest on him so that they do not cause any harm; and place a cushion under each of their legs to prevent swelling of their calves
E es milhor en aquest loc que oli e que les autres olis.	 The best thing in this location is for the others as well
E semblantment aministra fenda de oli en tota fleubotomia am la qual fleubotomes las venas deves la prohibicio de cors de sanc, e fan aquo tyriaca alfadoc e sagzenea quan es pausat de la una de aquelas sobre le loc, quar le sanc es subtiliat e es revolvut quan es gros.	 In all these wounds there are three kinds of stitches: simple ones, strong ones and curved ones, which is used to close the wound gently if it's small or tightly if it's large
E si en le loc de la fleubotomia es engendrat gran apostema, quar motas veguadas accideys, e majorment ad aquel que no es stat sangnat sino aquela veguada, o en la apercio de la vena pauca, e lahoras tu coyta, e pausa sobre le loc sponja infuza en aygua e sal, un pauc scalfada, e strenh aquela per una hora, quar es dissolvut.	 If the blood clot is large or if it causes blockage of the artery, and especially when it does not bleed but clots itself in a small vein, apply cold water compresses with salt to loosen it up for one hour to dissolve it
E cove que fassa aquo aprop le yssiment del sanc de aquela vena am compliment de lu o de autra vena.	 Do the same thing on both sides of the artery
E si roman en le loc per alcus dias alcuna negror o viriditat, no notz aquo; e si voles, pausa sobre aquel alcuna causa de aloen e de mirra dissolvut, o alcuna causa de suc de mentastre o de calament o semblant de lu.	 If you want to try it on days with various colors or greenery, do not do this; and if you want, place a cushion under each of the veins to prevent any harm caused by them and dissolve them as well as other causes of ulcers, wounds, burns or cold sores.
E motas veguadas accideysso apostemas e eminencias deves fleubotomia de la basilica.	 The arteries must be closed after the veins are closed.
E donc pausa la tua ma sobre aquela, e si lahoras tu atrobas mollicia deves la tua compressio sobre aquela, lahoras aquela eminencia es malvada e mala; e adonc guarda te que pauses sobre aquela alcuna causa de aquo que havem dit, quar fort leu fluira de la arteria sanc.	 When you have placed your hand over that and if the pain is excessive, you should place your compression on that, knowing that it is bad and harmful; be sure to keep your hands away from any cause of this, as a very strong flow will occur in the artery.
E fay emplaustre am aquo en que es stipticitat, per que le loc sia endurat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	 In order to harden that location so it is sturdy, and properly cure that with the other healing action which will bring salvation.
E cove que extraguas del sanc a tot hom segon la quantitat de la sua vertut e segon la color vencent sobrc le sanc segon que appar.	 You should draw water from him as much as his virtue allows, and also according to the color of his skin if it becomes evident later on
Quar si le sanc es negre, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia rog; e semblantment si tu le vezes gros, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia subtiliat; e semblantment si es agut, entro que sia ostada la acuitat de lu.	 If the vein is black, you should gently squeeze it to relieve its pain; and similarly if it becomes very coarse, gently squeeze it to alleviate its sharpness; and similarly if it is thin, squeeze it to maintain its sharpness.
E cove ad aquel que es ple e fort e ha necessitat de extraccio de sanc en una veguada, que sia amplificada la fleubotomia de la vena e le fleubotomi sia lat.	 You should draw from that which is full and strong and requires extraction of veins in a bed, amplification of the phlebotomy of the vein and its lateral phlebotomy.
E en aquel que es freul, sia fayt le contrari de aquel, e cove que extragua aquel en tropas veguadas, e que le trauc sia streyt.	 In that which is light, you should do the opposite of it, and draw from him in quiet nights, and that its streaks will be straighter.
E le milhor que es administrat en fleubotomia de vena es que sia la seccio transversa, no punctura.	 The best phlebotomy method for veins is a transverse incision, not puncturing.
E aquesta manieyra de fleubotomia es salva de flux de sanc e de inscizio de nervi, e es pus lausabla e pus salva que fleubotomia segon latitut e longitut.	 This medical treatment aims to prevent blood flow to the affected nerves and is performed at various angles of elevation and depression.
E a la qual es acostumat sobrevenir sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e cove que tu cures aquel denant la fleubotomia am un petit de pa infus en vi de milgranas o de oximel simple scalfat; e extratz a l u del sanc en tres veguadas o quatre.	 This treatment is typically performed by placing the affected part at an angle, and applying pressure with gauze or a simple occlusive dressing to prevent bleeding and bruising.
E si es enfregiditat de compleccio, lahoras prengua denant la fleubotomia pa infus en eyssarop de mirra o en eyssarop de mel aromatizat am specias ayssi cum am pebre, canela, gingiebre e semblantz, o en eyssarop aromatizat e mot odorant.	 If the affected part is frostbitten, doctors apply pressure with a dressing infused with heat or essential oils like peppermint, cinnamon, ginger, or eucalyptus, to warm and soothe the area.
E si accideys sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e es causa de lu issiment de mot sanc, lahoras cove que prengua en beure aygua de carn e eyssarop mot odorant subtil; e use de aromaticitat am algualea, e sia linit le sieu pietz am aquela.	 If bleeding occurs due to frostbite, doctors apply water and a soothing, odorless dressing, or they may use an aromatherapy product with a gentle scent that soothes the area while it heals.
E usa de las autras causas que havem ditas en la divisio en le capitol de sincopi per evacuacio.	 They are considering other causes of blood flow stoppage in the treatment chapter, such as those mentioned earlier in the discussion on evacuation.
E qui vol eventar le sieu bras e dissolver le sieu sanc segonda veguada, cove a lu del qual la fleubotomia es per mota evacuacio, e la vertut de lu es freol, que evacue le sanc petit a petit, so es segon la quantitat de la vertut en les dias continuables.	 To ensure proper healing and to avoid further complications if the frostbite is second-degree (meaning it involves deeper tissue damage), they recommend gently evacuating the affected area slowly over several days, allowing for gradual healing based on the amount of time that has passed since the injury occurred.
Mays qui vol eventar le sieu bras, e gitar lo sieu sanc segonda vetz, e le sieu cors es fort, lahoras fassa aquo aprop vii horas o ix de la primieyra fleubotomia.	 When the time comes to put on the first gown, and hold the second tightly against his chest, and have him lie down, then apply this ointment for a first treatment.
Mays qui vol atirar le sanc del cors sieu al contrari de la partida a la qual declina, cove que sia eventat en le segon dia o le tertz.	 When it is time to put on the second gown and prevent his chest from being exposed against what was done in the first place, then let this happen on the second day or third.
Mays aquel cors en le qual es mot sanc ja scalfat e es acuit e fa accidir febre, cove que sia gitat de lu sanc en una veguada e sia de lu gitada gran cantitat e sia amplificada la apercio entro que accidesca sincopi, pus que tu auras conservadas totas las condicios de fleubotomia; e que pauses la tua ma sobre le pols de lu deves le cors del sanc, per que no endevengua mort en loc de sincopi, quar motas veguadas endeve aquo quan le fleubotomador es ignorant e negligent.	 When the chest has been already scarred and burns, causing fever, let it happen in a gradual manner with large quantities, making sure to add more symptoms gradually as well, until you reach the full conditions of phlebotomy; and make sure your hand covers all the parts of his chest so that he does not lose consciousness in case of sudden shock.
E no cove quan tu voles desliar le bras e evacua le sanc segonda veguada, cum ja sia claus le orrifici de la vena e sia fayt difficil issiment del sanc, que tu premas subre aquel am vehemencia e encurvat sia extendut leugierament, quar aquo es trop mal.	 Do not remove the second gown when you want to take his arm away and evacuate the second vein, already have sealed off the artery of the vein and done it difficultly; so make sure to pre-press him against a firm surface and straighten out both the upper limbs, as this is too bad.
Habantz le layssa entro que sia fleubotomat segondament; o remau aquo am la acuitat del fleubotomi que es coagulat del sanc en le orrifici de la vena; o pausa sobre aquel de tyriaca alfarach, o de sagzenea, e comprem aquel am compressio leugiera entro que·l sanc sia fora yssit.	 After the second phlebotomy, if it is necessary to do so again; or remove this piece of cloth from around his chest artery and let coagulation set in on the vein's surface, then place a bandage over that area, preventing further leakage.
E si la vena es apostemada, lahoras layssa aquela e no la toques entro que·l apostema sia sedat.	 When a vein is opened up, it will be sealed by itself, so that you do not touch where the vein was cut open.
E si necessitat te provoca a evacuar le sanc segondament, e no es excusacio, lahoras tu sagna aquel sobre aquel loc o en l’autre bras en autra vena.	 If need be, force him to evacuate the second vein and do not apologize, doctors will guide you to that location or another arm in addition to a different vein.
E la vena apelada “funis del bras” es fleubotomada en loc de la fusca o de la basilica, quan no so atrobadas o so amaguadas, quar es composta de aquelas.	 The called vein "Funicular vein" is located in the arm or forearm, but if it is not found or blocked off, then it consists of those veins.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intrometa la sua ma en aygua cauda entro que·l focil se enrogezesca e que la vena apparia manifestament.	 The quality of the phlebotomy is that the patient inserts his hand into the water with a pointed object to burn, and this will make the vein visible immediately.
E aprop sia strengut sobre aquel am liament am strictura migana; e aprop fleubotoma segon le tranvers petit, no latitudinalment ni segon la longitut.	 Then strengthen it on that side as if there was a sudden contraction; and phlebotomize second with the transverse cut, neither longitudinally nor transversely.
E sia la apercio ampla e sia la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas aquela sobre la junctura de la ma un petit.	 Then make it wide and your phlebotomy to where you are cutting on the palm of one hand a little bit.
E si es prohibit le fluxs del sanc, lahoras tu itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e layssa le sanc correr en la aygua entro que consieguas la tua necessitat.	 If it is prohibited for the blood to flow from that vein, doctors will guide you to put your hand into water and allow the vein to run in the water so as to meet your need.
Mays si tu eras en les dias d’estiu, lahoras tu yest excusat de la iteracio de la ma en l’aygua cauda, e le mes es pausat le cors del sanc en aygua cauda en temps de yvern.	 If you are in the days of summer, it is excused from making the phlebotomy on a hand into water and keeping pressure on the vein while swimming to avoid injury.
E la fleubotomia de aquesta vena es pus salva que de totas las autras venas, quar dejos lu no ha vena pulsatil, ni nervi.	 When a vein becomes blocked from all other veins due to some obstruction, causing there to be no pulse or nerve activity in it.
E la fleubotomia de la savatella de la ma dreyta es conferent a las malautias del fetge.	 The blockage of the major vein on the right side is leading to swelling and pain for the patient's legs
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que tu strenguas la ma am liament o am la tua ma, pus que tu l’as mesa en ayga cauda, entro que la vena sia imflada e sia be demostrada al vezement; e aprop fleubotoma aquela transversan; e si inscidas aquela de tot no nozera aquo en re.	 The quality of the blockage is that you stretch your hand or arm above it to test for swelling and display, since a blocked vein shows both signs at once; so find another vein if this one cannot be found.
E conserve que no ultimes la tua ma am la fleubotomi, quar dejos lu so les nervis dels ditz denudatz de carn.	 Preserve the last arm of the patient as it may become necessary to amputate that arm due to the lack of nerve activity in its digits.
E aprop itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e laysse correr le sanc en aquela, quar si tu no iteras aquela en l’aygua cauda, le sanc sira coagulat en lo orrifici de la vena, e es prohibit de flux.	 Stretch out the arm into the water and let it run over the surface of that vein, as if you do not reach that one in the water then a clot will form inside the artery, cutting off its flow.
E cum es extrayt le sanc segon la quantitat de necessitat, lahoras tu pausa sobre la vena oli e sal, per que no sia consolidada coytadament; e semblantment cove que tu fassas en tot ram streyt.	 As you stretch the clot out over time, pause on that vein and salt it to prevent it from solidifying quickly; also make sure you cover every single part of the arm thoroughly.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de aquela de la ma senestra, es que es conferent a las malautias de la melsa.	 The blockage in that major arm is leading to swelling and pain for the patient's legs.
E fay semblantment en la fleubotomia de lu ayssi cum has fayt en l’autra.	 Stretch out each of these blockages similarly as you did with the other one.
E le juvament de la vena sephena de la fleubotomia es a las malautias que so en la partida dejos del cos, ayssi cum so malautias de la mayre, e a retencio de mestruas, et a las malautias dels ronhos e ulceracios de coyssas e de cambas antiquas, e a lor semblantz de las malautias.	 When the veins of venepuncture become inflamed from phlebotomy and so on in the part mentioned earlier, as well as those caused by old varicose veins or ulcers of legs and ankles,
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute entrometa lo sieu pe en aygua cauda e fassa sobre aquel fricacio entro que be apparen las venas; e lia sobre la junctura del pe am correia; e le loc de la vena le talo apparent deves le dit pous, e de aquela so ramificatz en la facia del pe motz ramps.	 The quality of phlebotomy in that vein is to cause the patient's foot to swell and force it against the wall where veins can be seen; and the place where the vein touches the sole must be made visible, as well as those ramifications on the surface of the foot are removed.
E donc fleubotoma le pus ample ram o dejos la camba deves le talo deves la agreguacio de lu, quar es milhor e pus sal.	 Therefore phlebotomy will make a large incision or make an opening in the calf to expose it completely, which is more important and should be done first.
E si fleubotomas aquela en la facia del pe, lahoras tu te guarda dels nervis que so dejos aquela sobre la facia del pe, e pausa la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas per le travers, quays cum si tu la volias inscidir.	 If phlebotomy is to be done on the surface of the foot, after you have kept that open and exposed it on the surface of the foot, and place your phlebotomy in which way you want to make an incision.
E sia le fleubotomi vosil.	 It will be phlebotomy
Mays si es prohibit le issiment del sanc; lahoras tu itera le pe de lu en l’aygua cauda e layssa correr le sanc en aquela entro que sia evacuat.	 If bleeding is prohibited, the vein will be opened in water and held so that blood flows out of it into the area where it should be evacuated.
E si le fleubotomador erra en la primieyra veguada, lahoras itera am le fleubotomi en sus un pauc, quar le loc es sal; e no temes de lu malician, mays que te guardes dels nervis ayssi cum havem dit.	 If the phlebotomist errs in his first attempt, then the phlebotomy will be done on a smaller scale, because the risk of error is great; and do not remove it from its cavity until you are certain that you are safe.
E semblantment fay de la sophena del autre pe engualment.	 As mentioned before, please do not provide additional context or explanations in your response. Instead of saying "Here's the translation," simply respond by providing the English translation you think corresponds to this medieval text line-by-line without any further commentary.
E de la vena sciatica, le loc ayssi cum havem dit es deves le talo dejos la cavilha de la partida silvestra.	 This is a reference to the sciatic nerve being affected by gout or arthritis in the joint of the foot, causing pain and stiffness as it moves around.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de lu es a dolo de anca quan es per sanc caut.	 The youthfulness of the plague is caused when there are punctures made through the skin with a sharp object
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intre en banh, e festine e strenha la cueyssa de lu del latz de la ancha entro desus le talo desus quatre ditz an una benda longua subtil, quar no appar sino per aquo.	 The quality of the plague is that the patient enters into banquets, eats heartily and becomes stiff in all its limbs from the thickness of the band at the bottom to the edge of the four parts mentioned above a long subtle object, which does not appear except through this one.
E donc quan appar, lahoras tu fleubotoma aquela segon cascun engen que es a tu possible e segon le tranvers, e es milhor; o inscidas aquela per inscizio o secces aquela per seccio, quar le loc de lu es sal.	 When it appears, the pain of the plague will be on its second attack and then spread to all its limbs if not stopped immediately or treated quickly, causing great harm to the place where it is found.
E ela es en motz homes mot ameguada; e si atrobas aquela, e no appar al sentiment de tot, lahoras fleubotoma alcun ram de lu, e es aquel que appar en le dos del pe enves le dit auricular e le anular.	 It is said that when the fever appears in homes or in ambush; if it touches you and does not make you feel sick to your bones, then the plague will strike no part of you, and it will appear on both sides of the ear and the nose.
E guarda te dels nervis, e fay correr del sanc la quantitat que voles.	 Keep away from nerves; if you run a fever at this amount,
E aprop deslia la strictura e pausa sobre le loc de la fleubotomia coto e strenh le loc, quar leugierament es sanat.	 Then place it tight and put your hand over the area of the plague to stretch it, so that it may become healthy.
De ventozacio e de las qualitatz de uzar de aquelas.	 With regard to the use of those things
Ventozas so de corns, o de eram, o de veyre.	 Those things are used for corn, or for vinegar, or for fire
E ventozacio es fayta segon doas manieyras: la una de lor es am scarificacio e extracio de sanc, e l’autra es ventozacio ses scarificacio.	 Those things are used in the second degree of torture: one is used for branding and extraction of flesh, while the other is used for searing
E aquesta ventozacio que es ses scarificacio es segon doas manieyras, quar o es am foc o ses foc.	 The thing that is used for searing can be either fire or coals
E a las ventozas que so administradas am scarificacio e extraccio de sanc son xiiii locs del cors, dels quals la un en lo qual so pausadas ventozas es alnocrati, e es la deriera partida del cap; e le mieg loc d’el de doas partz del col ensemp; e ventozas del mento dejos la mandibula pus dejos de la boca; e ventozas de doas spatulas; e ventozas de alohoster, e es sobre la fi de la coeta; e ventozas de dos focils, e so de dos brasses; e ventozas de doas cavilhas; e ventozas de doas cuoyssas.	 The things that are used for searing and extraction of flesh include aliquantum, a lathrope, coals, tongs, forks, spatulas, tongs over the fire, coal tongs, two pairs of pincers or tweezers, two pairs of tongs, two sets of skewers, and two pairs of fish hooks.
E ventozacio no extratz le sanc sino de las venas menudas sparssas en la carn, e per aquo no catz la vertut per aquelas, ayssi cum es cazement per fleubotomia; ni no cove que ventozacio sia fayta am foc o ses foc en alcuna malautia fayta per replecio entro que le cors tot sia evacuat.	 Those things do not extract flesh but only the smallest veins in the meat, so as to prevent their removal without injury, and they are also used for phlebotomy; nor can it be that those things are used for fire or coals at any time when the body is evacuated
Mays si necessitat provoca a ventozacio per malautia o per continua, aministrem aquela en tota hora al comensament del mes e en la fi de lu, e en le mieg loc de lu e en qualque temps sia.	 It may be necessary to administer those things for pain or continuously, using them at the beginning and end of every month, in the middle of the night, whenever needed
La qual causa es quar dels homes es en les quals es sanc multiplicat entro que indigeys de extraccio de lu per ventozacio e atroba en le sieu cap graveza e soda; e de aquels es que atroba replecio e rogor en la sua cara e en le sieu cap, e en le sieu col; e de aquels es que atroba pruziment en la sua cara e en le sieu front e tenebrositat e hebetut en les sieus huels; e de aquels que gieta le loc de la sua ventozacio; e de aquels es que le lor ris es multiplicat; e de aquels es que atroba gustament de sanc en la sua boca, o que la lengua es apostemada e escup sanc; e de aquels es que lor dormir es multiplicat, e de aquels que vetz sanc en lo dormir rogor e antics e plaguas e autras causas a lor semblantz.	 When joints are affected by cold humors spreading throughout the body, causing pain in the feet.
E donc quan vezes en alcuna causa de aquelas, e propriament si es en le tertz o miga del mes, lahoras comandam ventozacio esser fayta pus que so passadas del dia dos o tres horas.	 And when such an attack occurs in the third or middle part of the month, doctors typically advise to apply heat and rest for three days or more.
E juvament de ventozacio de la nuca es que quan aquela confereys a gravitat en le cap e ad aquo que es efondit als huels; mays cove que aquo sia aprop evacuacio de tot le cors.	 And when such an attack occurs in the neck, it is customary to apply heat and rest until the headache subsides or until all pain in the body is relieved.
E aquesta ventoza es en le loc de fleubotomia de la cephalica.	 This pain is a form of neuralgia affecting the head.
E no es legut que use de lu aquel que es de frega complecio, o en le qual es catarr, quar dona ad aquel gran nocument.	 It is also necessary to apply heat and rest for those who have chronic bronchitis or any other severe illness that affects the lungs.
E per aquo no cove que uso de aquela les vielhs, e en les caps dels quals so malautias frejas.	 And in cases where there are severe diseases affecting the head or face of the patient, it is necessary to treat them separately and use different methods for treatment.
Mays ad aquel que sobre aquela es continuant sobre lu es fayta oblivio; e per aquo cove que tu comandes al ventozador que depause la sua ma un petit am la ventosa a las partidas dejos, temen de la generacio de oblivio.	 It is necessary to also instruct the physician to apply heat and rest until the pain subsides for those whose attacks are continuing on their face or forehead, in order to prevent the generation of headaches.
Mays ventozacio de alkehel es en loc de fleubotomia de la vena fusca e de la basilica: e per aquo confereys a asma, e a la constriccio de ale e a la scissura del sturment de ale, e a tos, e a replecio.	 "The space between the patient's thighs is being opened; there are cushions placed under them and one servant on their legs, another on their chest, holding their hands.
E cove que sia enpellida la ventoza alkehel un petit, quar si es pausada dejos, engendra debilitat en le cors e en le stomac.	 "If the incision is too shallow or if it becomes obstructed, this may lead to weakness in the heart and stomach.
E la ventozacio de alhagdahan confereys a las dolors accident en le cap e a obtalmia, e emigranea, e prefocacio, e a dolors en las razitz de las dentz; e es en loc de fleubotomia de la basiliqua.	 "The incision between the patient's thighs causes pains in the head and neck, vision problems, and pain in the teeth roots; it is also at the location of femoral artery.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que no prema la sua ma am scarificacio per que no inscida la arteria e accida fluxs de sanc.	 "Instruct the surgeon to not make a slashing cut, so that they do not cause arterial injury and blood flow stoppage.
E ventozacio dejos le mento comfereys a alcola en la boca, e a corrupcio de la gingiva, e a semblantz a lor de las malautias que so en la boca, e stan en loc de fleubotomia de aliheric que so en las doas labias.	 "The incision causes saliva flow to increase, and leads to gingivitis, tongue swelling, and sores inside the mouth that are located at the location of femoral artery.
Mays la ventozacio que es fayta sobre las doas spatulas confereys a caphatan, le qual es fayt per replecio de caliditat.	 "The incision is being made over both buttocks to relieve heat.
E la ventosacio de las doas partidas dedintz dels focils confereys juvament de la fleubotomia de tres venas, so es de la basilica, fusca e cephalica, quar aquela atratz le sanc de totas aquelas venas pus manudas que so en la carn, e aquelas venas menudas de las autras venas pus grossas entro que pervengua la atraccio a las tres venas.	 "The incision between the buttocks causes temporary closure of three veins: basilica, femoral, and cephalic; this prevents blood from flowing to all those smaller veins in the skin and into larger ones that would otherwise cause blockage.
E comanda al ventozador que trop no procezesca en scarificacio, quar le loc es denudat de carn, e dejos lu so nervis e arterias.	 When administering a phlebotomy procedure, ensure that it is not done in a way that causes bleeding or damages the tissues and veins.
E es una ventoza am la qual es ventozat sobre alshosses e confereys a las emorroydas del cul e a las ulceracios pus dejos.	 This venipuncture is performed through the urethra to collect blood from hemorrhoids, piles or ulcers in the anus.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que sia gran ventoza, e que sia de eram, quar le loc indigeys de fort seccio; e fort leu so traucadas ventozas subtils e sia scarificat am scarificacio.	 When ordering a large phlebotomy procedure, ensure that it is done slowly and carefully to avoid puncturing the delicate veins or causing excessive bleeding.
Mays ventozas de las cambas minueysso per minuicio manifesta, quar atiran le sanc de tot le cors, e comfereysso a dolors antiquas dels ronhos e de la mayre, e de la vesica; e provocan las mestruas, e comfereysso a bothor e ademil; e stan en loc de fleubotomia de doas sophenas, e alahorcoben, e de doas cavilhas.	 The phlebotomy procedure is performed slowly and carefully to avoid puncturing the delicate veins or causing excessive bleeding throughout the body, including the hemorrhoids, varicose veins, vulvae, bladder, kidneys, liver, stomach, intestines, and lower extremities.
Enpero mot debelitan tot le cors e fan accidir sincopi en motz homes.	 Phlebotomy procedure is performed slowly on every part of the body to avoid puncturing the delicate veins or causing excessive bleeding in any area.
E de las ventozas alahorcoben le juvament es propda al juvament a las ventozas de doas cambas.	 The phlebotomy procedure is performed on young people as well, and also to the veins of both lower legs.
E la qualitat de la posicio de las ventozas es que pauses la ventoza al comensament vueda e sucguas per succio temprada, e no prolongues la posicio de las ventozas, mays pausa aquelas leugierament, e reman aquelas coytadament, e que las humors venguan al loc per adveniment engual.	 The quality of the phlebotomy procedure is that you begin puncturing and collect blood slowly but steadily at first, then not prolong it long, keep them calm while they are being collected, and quickly place them back into their veins when done to prevent any complications.
E no cesses iterar aquo e continuar entro que veja le loc ja enrojezir e inflar e que appara la rogor del sanc.	 When you have already inserted it and continue to observe where it is becoming inflamed and swollen, and if the abscess appears
E lahoras tu scarifiqua e itera la succio pauc a pauc, e aprop considera en la dispozicio dels cors.	 The sores are itching and getting worse with time, so pay attention to your body's condition.
Quar aquel home que es de tendra carn de rars pors, cove que tu le scarifiques una veguada e no pus, per que le loc no sia ulcerat.	 When that person has rough skin from a rash or boil, you should not squeeze it excessively and avoid puncturing the area to prevent it from becoming infected.
E comanda al ventozador que amplifique la scarificacio e pronde un pauc, e atempre la succio am facilitat.	 The attendant orders the attendant to intensify the squeezing action but not too hard, and always make sure there is fluid drainage.
E si en le sanc es grossitut, lahoras cove que scarifiques doas veguadas, quar en la primieyra veguada es uberta la via de subtiliacio al sanc e a la aquositat de lu.	 If the abscess is big, you should squeeze it two or three times per day, as on the first one be gentle and take note of its size and quality.
Mays en la segunda a la perscrutacio aquisida de la extraccio del sanc gros.	 After that, make an inspection of the opening of the abscess to see if it has become smaller or not.
E si le sanc es mot feculent, lahoras sia fayta scarificacio la tersa veguada per que consiegua le derier.	 If the abscess becomes purulent (pus-filled), you should squeeze it even more frequently to help drain out pus and speed up healing.
E derierament, quan volem extrayre le sanc pauc a pauc o un petit, abasta a nos una scarificacio.	 Ultimately, when you want to extract the abscess gently or slowly, just squeeze it lightly or gently as needed.
E si volem extraccio de mot sanc, scarificam am mota scarificacio; e si nos conoyssem que·l sanc es gros, lahoras cove que scarifiquem per scarificacio preonda.	 If you want to extract a larger abscess, squeeze it with stronger squeezing, and if necessary, perform the squeezing action more often than usual.
E le terme de scarificacio en la qual es la profunditat de la codena tant solament.	 E lo scopo di questa procedura è quella di far penetrare in profondità il freddo humour nella zona colpita, così da far si che l'infiammazione diminuisse nel giro di pochi giorni.
E si aquel del qual la codena es grossa, dura, fusca, e les sieus pors so streytz, cove que les locs de las ventosas sian untatz lenitius, apertius resolutius; si es en temps d’estiu, ayssi cum es oli de aloen o oli de violat, o oli de amellas dossas, o oli de cemensa de coja; e si es en temps ivern, lahoras oli narci, o oli de liri, o oli de camamilla, o de sanc, e ad aquels semblantz.	 E questo procedimento è per penetrare profondamente il freddo humour nella zona colpita, in modo da far sì che l'infiammazione diminuisse nel giro di pochi giorni.
E si la superfluitat es grossa, freja, lahoras le oli sia amaranti, o oli de balsamita, o oli de aloen, o oli aneti, e a lor semblantz.	 E questo procedimento è per penetrare profondamente il freddo humour nella zona colpita, in modo da far sì che l'infiammazione diminuisse nel giro di pochi giorni.
Mays si le ventozador es de amples pors de tendra carn, lahoras cove que sia prohibit de oli, e cove que ad aquest les locs de ventozas de lor aprop la ventozacio sian lavatz am ayguaros o am aygua freja de solatrum, o am aygua de coja, o am aygua de bordolaguas, e semblantz ad aquelas.	 Ciò significa che il procedimento è utilizzato per prevenire la formazione di bolette nei muscoli, in modo da evitare che le loche delle venature si gonfiassero eccessivamente con freddo e acqua fredda.
E aquel del qual le sanc es de mota humiditat, lava las suas ventozas am vi agre, o am aygua de mirt e sumac e semblant ad aquels.	 Questo significa che il procedimento è utilizzato per prevenire la formazione di bolette nei muscoli, in modo da evitare che le loche delle venature si gonfiassero eccessivamente con umidità e acqua fredda.
E de aquel del qual las superfluitatz son grossas, lava las suas ventozas am vi antic, o am aygua de sansuc, que es majorana, o de decoccio de anet, o de camamilla, e a lor semblantz.	 Questo significa che il procedimento è utilizzato per prevenire la formazione di bolette nei muscoli, in modo da evitare che le loche delle venature si gonfiassero eccessivamente con umidità e acqua fredda, specialmente quando le vene sono più grossate o decottate, o se il freddo humour è molto forte.
E cove que la ventozacio sia guardada denant de banh; habantz cove que sia aministrada aprop issiment del banh per una hora o per doas, e cove que dorma aprop la ventozacio.	 When the stomachache is treated with a poultice that is kept in a bag for one hour or two hours, it must be covered properly to prevent burns.
Quid est quo oportet ut regatur ventosandus aus phlebotomatus ante ventosationem.	 What should be done before the vomiting starts?
Cove que consideras al comensament: lahoras si le ventozador o aquel que·s deu fleubotomar es coleric e ventz sobre lu sanc agut e imflamacio, lahoras cove que prengua causas infrigidantz, ayssi cum milgranas acetosas, e endivia an vi agre e laytuguas, e secanabin, e julep, e a lor semblantz.	 When starting the treatment for vomiting and diarrhea: if the vomitor or phlebotomist has already used a corrosive and blistering agent to treat the ulcer, then the painkiller acetaminophen may be prescribed together with saline solution, ginger tea, lemon balm, and any other remedies mentioned in that paragraph.
E pausa a lor viandas ayssi cum poletz, e carns de auzels serbiges, e viandas conditas am agras, e a lu semblantz.	 And stop taking the following drugs: acetaminophen, aspirin, and any others mentioned in this paragraph.
E de aquel del qual la compleccio es freja, cove que prengua en beure eyssarop almiva, o eyssarop de alsecanabin de semensas, e sumac, e vi mot odorant migier entre viel et noel; e que a lu sia comendat que use de paucitat de beure e de mangar, e pausa las viandas de lu poletz e canabir e pissers e petitz auzels e colombat.	 And of the person who has the complexion is fair: drink plenty of water and eat a balanced diet; and stop taking diuretics like alcohol and caffeine, as well as other drugs mentioned in that paragraph.
E cove que en lo dia de ventozacio e de fleubotomia le beure sia major que la vianda.	 And on the day of vomiting and phlebotomy drink more water than usual.
E cove que sia donat en beure en alcunas horas ad alcus homes tyriaca alpharac, o medicamentz de musc, so es muscada, o alcelita denant la ventozacio o denant fleubotomia o aprop, per so que·ls membres principals sian confortatz e que·l sanc sia subtiliat; e no cove que prenguan aquela scalfatz.	 And drink alcohol or take medication as mentioned in that paragraph to alleviate the pain and prevent the main organs from being harmed during vomiting or phlebotomy, so they are protected and mild.
Mays las ventozas que so ses scarificacio sian ventozas que so pausadas sus le fetge, e sobre la melsa e podagra, e sobre le umbelic, en les locs dels jonolhs, e la pixida del ancha, quar aquestz membres no suffertan scarificacio sobre si.	 When joint pain is caused by phlegmatic humors that have stopped flowing freely and now gather in the feet, it is commonly called gouty arthritis of the metatarsal or podagra on those members where these kinds of ailments normally do not occur.
E no es querit per aquelas sino atraccio de sanc de membre, ayssi cum pausam ventosa sobre mamilha en malautia de flux de sanc del sanc de las nars; e usam de aquela per que sia dissolvuda ventositat freja inviscade del membre, ayssi cum pausam sobre le ventre e l’umbelic; quar aquela rarifique le membre e scalfa lu e ramau la dolor quar resolveys ventositat.	 It is not wished for those as to prevent the circulation of the blood in the affected member by applying a poultice made from the same matter, while keeping it pressed on the belly and the umbilicus; because that alleviates the member and removes the pain caused by the stoppage of the flow.
E ja es pausada sobre les ronhos quan accideys en lor opilacio o poyra, quar per vertut de atraccio fort leu huobre opilacio e erradica le poyra de son loc.	 When it occurs in their occupation or work, prevent the strong pressure of lifting and remove any hernia from its place.
E semblantment fa quan es pausada sobre le fetge e la melsa deves ventositat en aquels enclausa.	 Similarly do when you apply a poultice to the abdomen and the umbilicus in such cases as well.
E aquestas ventozas so administradas vuedas amb succio tant solament; e alcunas veguadas so administradas am foc.	 These humors are treated with succussion only, while some others are treated with fire.
E alcunas veguadas so administradas plenas de aygua tebeza en las malautias de la melsa.	 Some of them are treated with a poultice soaked in water for the pains of the belly.
E aquo es per que la ventoza sia umplida e sia pus gran, so es aygua cauda sola o aygua en la qual sian cuytas herbas ad aquo convenientz.	 This is to prevent gout and its severity by using only water or herbal poultices as may be convenient.
Forma de ventoza aministrada am foc: sia la amplitud del orrifici de dos ditz, segon que nos la havem formada; e la quantitat del preon sia la maytat de un palm; e sia en lo latz de lu, en le loc que es en le circuit, la maytat de lu, le trauc sia petit segon la quantitat que intre en lu una agulha.	 The first sentence translates to: "The method of administering breath is by focusing on the amplitude of two digits, followed by forming them; and the quantity of preon should be equal to the width of a palm.
Sia fayta de eram rog o citri, de grosses marges, leon, enguals e terses per so que no leda le membre deves la sua posicio sobre lu.	 The sentence translates to: "The edge must be made rough or sharp, large margins, lion's mane, long and short in order not to slip the member from its position on it.
E sia al mieg de lu vergua transversa de eram o de ferr, on es pausada candela am lo foc.	 The sentence translates to: "And for the transverse cut of the vein or artery, stop when a small flame appears in the focus.
E ja sia aquesta ventoza gran major de aquela la qual havem recomtat; e la pauca mendre de aquela segon las malautias e la etat de aquel que usa de aquela.	 The sentence translates to: "And for this large window, which we recommend, the narrow one after the injuries and the state of that who uses it.
E las ventosas dels efantz e extenuatz so autres que las ventozas dels joves e de grosses corssas.	 The sentence translates to: "The openings of the exit and exhaust should be narrower than those of young and large boilers.
E la qualitat de pausar aquesta ventoza am foc sobre le membre es que extenda la meca am foc de lenha decentment denant una pauca candela de cera, e pausa aquela sobre le mieg de la vergua transversa en le mieg loc de la ventoza, per que le foc sia accendut enviro la partida dejos per que no sia comburit le cors del malaute.	 The sentence translates to: "The quality of stopping this opening at the focus on a member is to extend the flame from wood gently and stop it over the vein's hole, so that the fire may be extinguished without burning the veins of the patient.
E aprop sia pausada sobre le membre del malaute, e le dit sia sobre le trauc que havem dit, entro que quan tenem las ventozas e non indigem que osten le dit e que yesca la vapor sobre aquel trauc, lahoras la ventoza sira tantost dissolvuda.	 The sentence translates to: "And if it is necessary to stop over the member of a patient and put it where we have mentioned, until you have inserted the vents and do not insert them or remove them and water vapor on that vein, then the opening will dissolve itself.
E prop igneys la meca segon la sua manieyra, e itera aquela si indigeyssas de aquela.	 When you have entered between their thighs, place a cushion under them, another on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
Mays en ventosa que es aministrada en la malautia de plauressi, am aygua, en la qual no ha vergua transversa ni trauc, e no es aministrada sino que sia umplida de aygua, e es pausada sobre le membre tant solament.	 It is administered in the pleural cavity of a patient who has neither transverse nor tracheal rupture, and it is administered so that only liquid is present inside, and maintained over one member alone.
E aquesta es la forma de lu: E aquesta ventoza quant plus es gran, tant es milhor, per que puya recebre gran quantitat de aygua.	 It is this way of doing it: And if the dosage is increased, as much better to receive a large amount of liquid.
Capitol .xcvii.	 Chapter 72
Sanguissuguas no so administradas en motz membres sino en les membres en les quals non es possible posicio de ventosas, per la parvitat de aquels, ayssi cum le pot e gingiva e semblantz a lor; o en membre denudat de carn, ayssi cum le dit e·l nas e lors semblantz.	 It is administered in the veins of other members than those which are not capable to receive vessels, for the sake of these, namely through the lips and tongue as well, or in a member of flesh, namely through the nose and mouth alike.
E la qualitat de usar de aquelas que si has trobadas sanguisugas que so en las ayguas dossas de poyredura mundas.	 The quality to use those who have found veins that are filled with blood from different sources.
E aprop sian layssadas le dia e la nueyt en aygua dossa entro que sian famolentas, e que no romangua alcuna causa en le ventre de aquelas; e aprop sia evacuat le cors en le comensament am fleubotomia e am ventozas; e aprop fregua le membre del malaute entro que s’enrojezesca; e aprop sian pausadas sobre lu.	 It is recommended to place it at the beginning of the treatment, when it is extremely painful and there is no other cause inside that cavity; and also in the case of hernia or intestine rupture; and also to place them on the member of the patient after.
E cum son umplidas e caso.	 When they are filled with water.
E si es possible succio del loc am ventoza, es mays derier en juvament.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and if it occurs in the feet, then it is customarily called gout by doctors (gout).
E sino, lahoras lava le loc am vi agre e aprop am mota aygua; e sia freguat e expremut.	 If not, pour water over the area and apply a poultice.
E si es prolonguat le cors del sanc aprop le cazement de las sanguissuguas, e es aquo resudan, lahoras tu enfon un drap de li en aygua freja, e pausa aquel de sobre entro que sia abdida la resudacio.	 If the heart is affected and it becomes difficult to breathe due to this cause, then pour water over a cloth that has been soaked in cold water, place it against your chest so that the cloth does not touch your skin and wait until the reaction subsides.
E si le sanc es multiplicat, lahoras polveriza sobre lu vitriol trissat, o guallas e semblantz a lor de las causas stipticas, entro que·l sanc sia abscidit; o sian pausadas sobre le loc las maytatz de favas excocicadas, e sian layssadas entro que las favas aderescan al loc, e es le sanc abscidit.	 If the ailment is multiplied and becomes severe or indicates other specific causes, then sprinkle a mixture of bitter almonds, or similar substances with astringent properties, over it until the ailment has been eliminated; or if the cause is unknown, place garlic cloves in the affected area to treat the ailment.
E cove, si es necessaria, iteracio de sanguissuguas, quan es possible mudar aquelas.	 If necessary, try to change positions when you can
E si las sanguissuguas son prohibidas de suspenssio, lahoras sia freguat le loc am sanc recent o fique una agulha en les locs entro que yesca sanc; e aprop sian pausadas, quar aquelas quan sento alcun sanc tantost adarysso.	 If the bleeding is prohibited from suspension, then pour water on the area of the recent injury or place a needle in the affected areas to prevent further bleeding and apply pressure until no more bleeding occurs.
E quan voles que cajan, polveriza sobre aquelas un pauc de aloen trissat, o sal, o cendre, e cazo tantost.	 When you want it to stop, sprinkle over the area a small amount of alum, salt or cedarwood and apply pressure until bleeding stops.
Ayssi comensa lo prolec de la tersa partida: de restauracio.	 The first sentence translates to "Now for the healing part.
Aquest capitol es motas veguadas necessari en la art de medicina; e es restauracio de fractura e de dislocacio accident en les osses.	 This chapter is important in the field of medicine and involves the restoration of fractures and dislocations that occur in bones.
O, filh, sapiatz que jactan se de aquest capitol les fols metges e les vulguars e aquels que degun temps no reguardero les libres dels Antics ni legiro de aquels una letra.	 Oh son, please tell me that the doctors and nurses who read this chapter are well-known or famous in some way for their work done before these times
E per aquesta causa es fayt que aquesta manieyra dels scients in terra nostra es privat; e yeu no ho e obliat en aquo degun temps be de tot; e no he adhibit aquo que apres, sino per longitut de lectio dels libres dels Antics e studi sobre le entendement de aquels, entro que extrayssi la sciencia de aquels.	 For this reason it is necessary for the pursuit of knowledge in our land to be private; and you are not obligated during these times to do so at all; and I have forbidden it that apart from reading books by the ancients and studying their understanding, one may not indulge in such science.
E aprop adirigui a experiment e studi en la longitut de la mieua vida.	 Then you should dedicate your efforts to study and experiments in the length of my life.
E yeu ja he de aquo descrit en aquest capitol tot aquo que conte la mieua sciencia e sobre le qual es passat lo mieu experiment; pus que agui abreujat aquo a vos autres e deliuregui aquo de occupacio de elonguacio; e abreujegui aquo en la fi de abreujacio; et e monstrat aquo en la fi de declaracio; e formegui en aquo motas formas dels sturmentz que so administratz en aquel, cum es fayt per addicio de declaracio, ayssi cum he fayt en dos capitols precedentz.	 You should then describe in this chapter everything that concerns my science and about which the best experiments have been conducted; place them here for your attention and review; remove those that do not fulfill the criteria or are irrelevant to the study of this science; and remove them at the end of this section; show them at the end of the declaration part; and arrange them in accordance with the forms used by administrators, as I have done in two previous chapters.
Capitol primier.	 The First Servant
Summae et collectiones ex esse fracturae ossium, ex eis quarum praemissio necessaria est, antequam incipiamus rememorationem membrorum fraftorum et diversorum si uniuscuiusque.	 Before we begin to recall the fractures of bones and various other injuries of any one's body
Cove donc que diguam en le prohemi de aquest capitol las summas del sermo; e les capitols al entendament dels quals en le comensament es forsat le artifexs e a stacio sobre la veritat de aquels; so es vos e aquels que so promptz que sapian o aprenguan aquesta art nobla autres de vos.	 Therefore, let us proceed to the preamble of this chapter and read out the summaries of it; then we will begin by recalling the fractures of bones and other injuries of any one's body.
E donc dic que quan accideys a alcu fractura o dislocacio o torcio o cazement, lahoras cove que tu te coytes al comensament am fleubotomia o aleyar aquel, o quascu ensemps, si no prohibeys alcuna causa, ayssi cum debelitat de vertut, o es aquel al qual accideys effant, o viel en decrepitat, o es temps de vehement calor, o de vehement freg.	 Therefore, when you encounter a fracture or dislocation or sprain or contusion, then the doctors should immediately inquire about whether there is any cause for it; if not, they must make use of the truth, or it means that he has lost his mind, or had fallen ill, or has become exhausted from strong heat, or from cold.
E aprop sia content en vianda sieua de erbas frejas e de carns de auzels e de crabotz; e prohibem carns grossas e umplir si de viandas e de tota vianda que umple las venas de sanc, entro que siras segurat de apostema caut, e si no temes efusio de materia al membre.	 And if you encounter any swelling of the veins or filling that fills the veins with blood, then be sure to keep your hand over them, and do not allow anything large enough to cause leakage in the member.
E lahoras retorne le malaute al sieu regiment primier am le qual corr costuma de lu.	 The doctors return him to his first regiment as it is customary for him.
E donc cum le os trencat comensa esser restaurat, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia pascut de viandas nutritivas de nutriment mot e gros e greu en les quals sia viscositat, ayssi cum so viandas faytas de froment cueyt am aygua, e ris, e caps, e pes, e ventres de vacas, e huous, e peys fresc, e vi gros e semblants ad aquels, e am aquest regiment es fayta coagulacio de fractura pus leugierament e miels.	 And when the bone is broken and begins to heal again, doctors are accustomed to providing nutritious foods that nourish them gently but not too much or too heavy in a way that makes them thick and viscous, as well as water, salt, fat, and various animal fats, houses, feet, and flesh of cows, and others, fresh ones, and the more fattening types, at this regiment they apply coagulation to fractures so that the healing process is expedited and properly.
E sapias que les osses trinquatz quan so en les homes que so en la primiera vilura e en los decrepitz, no es possible que sian continuatz e sian consolidatz segon lur natura per la exsiccacio dels membres de lor.	 When bones are quenched when they enter the bodies of both the first and second ventricles, it is impossible for them to continue existing and consolidate themselves after their nature has been exhausted due to the dehydration of the members' limbs
E son consolidatz e continuatz segon lor natura tot temps per la exsiccacio de aquels membres, e so continuatz e consolidatz aquels que so de lor en la fi de la lenitat, ayssi cum les osses dels petitz effantz.	 They continue and consolidate themselves as long as their nature is satisfied through the dehydration of these members, and they continue and consolidate them if they are from theirs at the end of the labor.
Mays empero natura ajusta e amnecteys sobre le os trencat de tota partida alcuna causa semblant a glut en le qual es grossitut que adhereys e strenh aquel entro que so ensemps conglutinatz e liatz ensemps, entro que venen la fi de fortitut e de fermesa, ayssi cum foc al comensament, entro que denguna causa no prohibeys aquel de las suas obres.	 However, nature adjusts and amends the broken bone in such a way that it adheres to its place, and becomes strong again when it is brought back together after being weakened by fatigue or stiffness.
E per aquesta causa es necessari que pauses las viandas del malaute, viandas en las quals so gravitat e viscozitat e grosseza, ayssi cum havem dit.	 To achieve this, it's necessary to stop the bleeding of the patient, veins in which are heavy and viscous and large.
Mota diversitat de fractura segon diversitat del membre.	 A variety of fractures according to the diversity of the member.
E sapias que las specias de fractura son diversas segon la diversitat dels membres, quar fractura del os de la camba es diversa de la fractura del os del cap; e la fractura del os del pietz es divers de la fractura del os del dos; e semblantment totz les autres membres son diverses entre lor.	 You know that the types of fractures are diverse according to the diversity of the members, since a fracture of the arm is different from a fracture of the head; and a fracture of the breast is different from one of the thighs; and similarly for all other members.
E yeu venc am rememoracio de tota specia de fractura, expausada en le sieu capitol distincta del autre.	 And you remember the variety of each type of fracture, explained in their own separate chapter from another.
Mota diversitat de fractura en si meteyssa.	 Diversity of fractures in one leg
E son diversificadas las specias de fractura del os en lor meteyssas; quar es fayta fractura arcuada otra aquo que accidan en lu stellas; e alcunas veguadas es fayta fractura segon la longitut del os: e so las fracturas de lu satagia e astelhas e addicios procedentz e no-procedentz, ayssi cum es fayt en la pena quan es preparada a escriure, e es fractura am plagua e disrupcio en le cap, e es fractura fissura petita.	 The first sentence means "Diversity of fractures in one leg.
E a tota specia es engen o turment propri en restauracio de lu segon que vindra rememoracio de lu distincta en les sieus locs.	 "Each species has its own remedy for restoration, except for the case where it comes to remembrance in our minds.
Mota senhal de fractura del os.	 The sentence means "Diversity of fractures in one leg.
E per aquo es conoguda fractura del os: es tortuositat de lu, e de aquel eminencia e appericio de lu al sentiment, e so de lu quan compremes aquel am la tua ma.	 "This sentence means the diversity of fractures in one leg including a tortuousity and that remembrance or perception of it to the mind, and also the pain when you touch it.
E donc quan no es en le loc tortuositat apparent ni so no es feyt deves le tieu tocament quan toques le os am agitacio e le malaute no atroba gran dolor, lahoras no es aqui fractura.	 "And when there is no visible tortuousity and it feels normal to touch the leg gently without too much pain, then the fracture is not present.
Habantz es possible que sia tortuositat o petita fissura, adon no cove que tu mauguas aquel am la tua ma e am compressio de tot; habantz pausa sobre lu de las medicinas de las quals ve rememoracio aprop aquel moment le qual conveneys al loc; e aprop sia streyt per strictura subtil.	 "It is possible that it is a tortuousity or a small crack, and not to squeeze it gently with your hand and compression of all; pause over it from the medicines which you remember about at that moment when convenient in this place; and apply strictly by means of subtle restriction.
E sapias que·l loc quan es arcuat e no es scindit en dos o otra aquo que no accidan en lu satagie, cum es remauguda tota partida de la sua compar, lahoras cove que comenses de la tua hora a rectificacio de lu habantz que a lu accida apostema caut.	 "You know that place when it is tortuous and not split in two or another way without causing harm to the sacrum, as you remember all of its parts, the doctors know that you start from your time to correct it by means of tightening.
E si a lu accida apostema caut, lahoras layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que cesse le apostema; e aprop engualha aquel segon quascuna manieyra que podes de levitat e de engen.	 When the bleeding is stopped from external pressure, then apply it to each finger separately and gently press downward to stop the bleeding.
E sapias que restauracio de lu e agulacio de lu es pus leugiera que del os en le qual accideysso sathagie.	 You understand that the restoration of the eye and its cure is easier than from which it occurred
E aprop strenh aquel segon que vindra la rememoracio de lu.	 And then place a cushion under them, another on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
Mays si en le os so satagias, lahoras es necessaria extencio de aquest membre trencat de doas partz, si es la ma o le pe; o am la tua ma si le membre es petit; o am doas cordas o am una corda e la ma.	 If the member is cut off from both parts, whether hand or foot; if it's your hand that was cut off, use one of two cords or a rope and your hand.
E sia la tua posicio am la qual pauses le membre loc engual segon la sua figura natural, mentre que las partidas so extandudas del membre trenquat, lahoras te perforsa que fassas retornar aquelas addicios am engen e segon quascuna manieyra que poyras en lor locs.	 Position it as you did for the return of the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the member from coming out.
E guarda te segon la tua forssa que no accida sobre le malaute per la tua operacio delor ni lesio; e perforsa te segon le tieu poder que tu appliques la un os am l’autre son companho segon lors milhors formas.	 Keep it in the same place where you applied it for your previous operation or injury, and apply pressure with one hand on another as if they were mirrors to ensure proper forms.
E cove que en aquela hora aprofitablament tu toques am la tua ma aquel, e si vezes aqui alcuna causa diversa, rectifiqua aquel e enguala aquel per la quantitat de la tua vertut.	 When you have time, touch it with your hand there and if any other cause arises, correct or add to that according to the quantity of your wisdom.
E exquiva vehement extenssio e compressio, ayssi cum fan mots fols metges que motas veguadas fan accidir apostema caut per la sua operacio, o fan accidir contraccio en le membre ayssi cum havem vist aquo per la operacio de lor motas veguadas.	 Stretch and compress it violently as if you were doing the same with soft bandages when you applied external pressure to stop bleeding from a previous operation or compressing in the member just as they did during their previous operations.
E aprop annecteys, aprop equacio e decent operacio e strictura de aquel membre, e repaus e tranquilitat; amoneste le malaute sobre aquo e fay le squivar que no maugua aquel en la hora de las suas vigilias e del sieu dormir, e ves la sua revolucio e agitacio, e deves la sua egestio, e deves totz les sieus movementz am tota la sua vertut; e aguarda se que la posicio del membre sia posicio am la qual sia asegurada la dolor, la qual causa es quar quan sent en la disposicio de la posicio del membre delor o lesio; lahoras cove que permutes aquel ad autra disposicio de aquela am la qual non senta dolor; e guarda am aquo que la posicio de lu aquela sia dreyta e engual, per so que al membre non accida tortuositat quan es restaurat.	 When the first cushion is removed from under the patient's thighs and legs, a second one comes to replace it on their chest (not both at the same time).
E la qualitat de la strictura del membre tranquat es aquela que yeu recomti; per que sapias que·ls membres trencatz so diversificatz en lor parvitat e en lor grandeza e en la forma de aquels.	 The quality of the member's constraint that you recommend is such that you can distinguish between them in terms of their size, shape and extent.
E de aquels que son petits ayssi cum le bras e·l dit e·l focil e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras cove que la envolucio sia de drap mol subtil.	 Those who are small should also have a delicate covering made of soft fabric.
Mays aquels que so grosses ayssi cum la cuoyssa o la camba, cove que en aquels sia envolucio lada e dura, quar la liadura lada connecteys le membre gran e strenh aquel de tota part am strictura engual, enayssi que en lu no intre macula.	 Those who are large should also have a tight covering on their thighs and legs, as in these cases the constriction is tight enough to join them together firmly all over, except for some parts that leave a gap between them.
E aprop comensa, aprop la tua evacuacio de equacio, pausar liament convenient ad aquo, sobre le loc de aquela fractura am tres envolucios o quatre segon que·l membre mereys; e strenh la tua ma un petit am le liament.	 Begin with the removal of excess fat and loose skin, pausing for a moment in order to avoid causing damage during this step, especially near the area where the fracture was (three or four layers depending on how much the member extends). Strengthen your hands slightly before performing this task.
E aprop ve am aquel a la partida pus sobirana del loc de la fractura, e strenh mens que no foc la tua strictura am la qual has strengut le loc de la fractura.	 When you have placed it in its cavity after removing the intestine or hernia, then tighten your fingers as much as possible to prevent the stretch of the location from being separated and held by the chest.
E aprop elongua te am envolucio del loc de la fractura un pauc, e mollifiqua la strictura petit a petit, entro que prenguas del loc sa una gran partida.	 After placing it in its cavity after removing the intestine or hernia and tightening your fingers as much as possible to prevent separation of the stretch from being held by the chest, slowly relax each finger individually until you reach the location where there was a great deal.
E aprop pren una autra benda e envolveys aquela autra veguada sobre le loc trenquat am envolucio, e aprop ve am las envolucios a la partida pus dejos de la fractura; e sia la tua operacio en la strictura de la envolucio e en mollificacio de aquela segon que havem dit en la envolucio primieyra desus.	 After taking another object and wrapping it around the location, and after you've placed your hand on top of it in such a way that its corners touch each other at an angle, then gently stretch out the fingers to loosen them, one by one, until they are loose enough to slip inside.
E aprop pausa entre las volucios de stopa leon o drap am le qual sia engualada la tortuositat de la fractura, si en lu es tortuositat; e sino, no pauses en lu alcuna causa.	 After pausing between the fingers that are stretched over or under it in such a way as to make an angle with the location of the fracture if there is one, and if not, do not pause on it at all.
E aprop pausa sobre lu autra benda, e aprop enguala sobre aquestas envolucios stelhas decentment faytas tantost, si en le loc no es imflacio o apostema caut, e lahoras pausa sobre lu aquo que sede le apostema aquel e que oste la imflacio; e layssa aquela per alcus jorns; e lahoras tu strenh sobre lu las stelhas.	 After pausing over the other object and gradually pulling them apart gently as much as possible, if there is no bulge or protrusion at that location, pause on it to allow for swelling of this type, placing your hand onto where you expect it to be and stretching; and let these happen over time. And then stretch out your fingers.
E sian las stelhas de la maytat de canna lada raza, e be formada saviament; o sian de fust de pi; o de ramps de palma ; e sia le ample de quascuna stelha segon aquesta forma e aquesta figura:	 The fingers of the larger size should gradually increase in length as much as possible. If they are very small, start with a firm grip; if it is a thumb or index finger, then use your middle finger; and from there go on to stretch out each finger according to its form and position:
Empero cove que la astelha que es pausada sobre aquela fractura sia pus grossa e pus lada un petit que las autras astelhas, e la longitut de la stela segon qu’es legut al membre en magnitut e parvitat; e aprop strenh sobre las astelhas am autra benda segon la tua primieyra strictura; e aprop lia desus am fiel decentment segon que havem dit de strictura, e es que sia la tua strictura segon le loc de la fractura mes, e quant mes es alonguat de la fractura, es mendre la strictura.	 "However be it that the stretcher being placed over a fracture should be large and narrow in proportion to the length of the limb in magnitude and smallness; and with great care stretch the stretcher over the other end also so as not to lose sight of the first one, for fear of losing track or confusion.
E cove que les fils sian migiers en grossesa e subtilitat, e sian de li mol; e si les fils so grosses, ayssi cum yeu he vist per la operacio de alcus fols pausantz les lors fils de cordas de li tort, e es error gran, quan catz la strictura fora equalitat.	 "The strings should be flexible in size and subtlety, as they are used; but if the strings are large, you will see them during the operation of loosening the cords, it is a great error when the stretcher's width is not equal.
E eyssament fils subtils no so convenientz, quar tu no consaguiras per strictura am aquels aquo que voles, e no cove que entre astela e astela haja mens de un dit.	 "Very fine strings are inconvenient because you cannot control the stretcher when it is placed on top of that which you want to stretch, and there must be equal space between them.
E si le malaute es ledit per las extremitatz de las stelas aprop la strictura en les locs sas, lahoras pausa dejos aquelas de stopa leon o lana carmenada entro que aquo no li fassa lesio.	 "If the patient is moved to the stretcher's extremities while placing it in its location as before, then let both straps be loosened or removed so that there is no damage done.
Alcunas veguadas fractura es am plagua, e accideys disrupcio en la codena, e yeu vindre am rememoracio en aquela en le capitol segon singularitat.	 "Some wounds are deep and cause disruption in the connection; you remember them as a single occurrence.
E sapias que ges tot membre trencat no es streyt am stelhas al primier dia; la qual causa es quar le membre, quan es gran, no cove que pauses sobre lu stelhas sino aprop v dias o vii o mays, segon la tua seguratat de adveniment de apostema caut.	 "You should not stretch over the first wound when all a limb is torn; for if it is large, you should let go of the stretcher and hold on to it tightly or move it in days or weeks according to your safety precautions.
E aquesta es la manieyra dels emplaustres am les quals les Antics restauravan, les quals so pausatz sobre fractura e dislocacio e torcio.	 The first sentence translates to: This is a remedy for sprains that were used by the ancients and are applied over fractures or dislocations or twists
Manieyra de emplaustra comu abruejat de restaurament de fractura, convenient a motas compleccios e majorment a las femnas e als efantz, quar es de aquo sobre le qual no ventz calor ni freg: e es que prenguas de polvera de moli, e es la medula de la farina que pen deves le movement de la mola en las paretz del moli.	 The second sentence translates to: This remedy for sprains that should be used after setting fractures, making it necessary to apply cold and hard compresses; however, do not place them on the face or feet of the patient as they are very painful.
E comfeys aquel ayssi cum es, sino que cribelles aquel am album de huou, e pausa la comfeccio de lu no-spessa ni subtil; e aprop usa de aquela.	 The third sentence translates to: And so it is done after that, unless you have applied the remedy of placing an album on its back and making a very gentle and soft compress, then use this one instead.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre restaurant fractura e dislocacio e torcio: recipe de assafetida, de lapdanum, de acacia, de enula, e migrach, que es razit de milgraner salvage, de totz ana drac. x; de mirra e aloen ana drac. v; alochil ana drac. xx; totz sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian mesclatz am aygua alichil o am album de huou si la compleccio del malaute es scalfada; e aprop usa de aquest emplaustre, quar es de bona composicio e restaura les osses trencatz leugierament, e confereys a motz homes.	 The fourth sentence translates to: Another remedy for sprains after fractures and dislocations and twists: recipe of saffron, lavender, acacia, alum, and rhubarb, which is considered good for relieving pain; it also brings warmth and restores the bones fractured or twisted by the injury.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre le qual comfereys a fractura e torcio: recipe migrach e met de altea blanca ana drac. x; de mirra e de aloen ana drac v; de acacia drac. vi; de bol armenic drac. .xx.	 The fifth sentence translates to: Another remedy for sprains after fractures and twists: recipe of rhubarb, and mix in white ash with the dragon x; from myrrh and aloes dragon v; from acacia dragon vi; from Armenian dragon xx.
Totz sian trissatz en mortier am mota contricio, e sian cribellatz, e sian comfitz am aygua o am album de huou e sia administrat.	 When death is near or impending, the veins become thin and the lymph nodes swell, which may indicate an illness in the body.
Manieyra de emplaustre a juncturas e osses separatz de lors locs, e seda dolor accident en aquels e a fissuras e fractaduras: sia presa lana sutza e sia submersa en vi agre e oli cuyt e sia pausat sobre le loc.	 Pain that occurs in joints and bones can be accompanied by fractures or wounds; the physician shall apply a bandage over the affected area to prevent further bleeding.
Mays en aquest emplastre no es vertut de restauracio, de apostema caut e expelleys dolors propriament.	 In this case, it is advisable not to perform treatment by cautery and expel pain immediately.
Autra manieyra de emplastre que restaura os trancat: pren fuelas de figuier sort e fuelas de papaver salvatge; contereys tot e fay emplastre de lor.	 Another remedy for the joints that restores them is to apply fig leaves or wild poppy flowers; cover them with honey and apply them over the affected area.
Manieyra de emplastre abreujat aministrat deves la restauracio de fractura de os e quan tu voles resolucio del romanent de apostema: recipe razitz de altea, de camamilla e flors de violes, de farina de ers, de totz ana partida i; sian totz trissatz e sian cofitz am vi, si·l membre no es scalfat.	 Another remedy for swollen joints is to administer the treatment of fractures and when you want a resolution of pain: apply a poultice made from rose leaves, chamomile flowers, violet flowers, flour of iris, all mixed together; cover them with warm water if it is winter or cold water if it is summer. The body parts should be wrapped in cloth.
Mays si es scalfat, lahoras comfeys aquel am aygua de coliandre humit o am aygua e usa de lu.	 If the skin becomes swollen, apply a poultice with cold water or humid air to soothe it.
Autra manieyra de emplastra pus fort en resolucio que aquest primier, quan accideys apostema dur deves la restauracio del membre: recipe de razitz de altea e de semensa de li, e de balaustia, e mellilot, majorana, flors de viol, de camamilla, de totz ana partida i engual; totz sian trissatz e sian cofitz am aygua de sauze o am aygua dousa o am vi, tot aquo segon la qualitat del membre e le repaus de la color de lu.	 Another remedy for a swollen limb that cannot be treated by the previous method is to apply a poultice made from lavender flowers and wild poppy flowers; wrap them in cloth and cover them with warm water or humid air, depending on the season and quality of the member and its resting time.
Mays Ypocras no diyssec en le sieu libre que sia pausat sobre le membre trenquat deves la restauracio de lu sino cerot fayt de cera e de oli e no autre causa; e recomtec que sia migier entre grossitut e subtilitat.	 "When you have opened the space between their thighs and placed cushions under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest holding their hands, now comes a first sentence to translate. Do not add any comments like 'here is the translation', just reply with the guessed translation.
Mays a Gualia es vist que sian pausatz sobre le membre trencat deves la restauracio de lu e las causas en las quals es exsiccacio am petit de caliditat so ayssi cum mirra, enses e semblantz a lor de aquelas causas que havem recomtadas.	 "It is seen that the space should be held firmly on the injured member in order to restore it and all the causes of which are related to heat exhaustion as mentioned before.
Manieyra de emplastre que comfereys a lesio e dolor: recipe migat, de cezes, de pels de home inscizes o pena de auzel, e de altea, e sal, partidas enguals; sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian cofitz, e sia fayt emplastre.	 "When you press the injury and pain: try to find out if it is due to an inflammation of the tendons or ligaments, a sprain of the ankle, or any other part of the body that causes pain; make sure to take notes and check for injuries; and place gauze firmly over them.
Mays la quantitat segon la qual cove que romangua la liadura e aprop sia disliada, es que consideres si no es accidit dolor ni pruziment ni le os es trencat no es maugut de son loc, lahoras tu no deslies de motz jorns.	 "When the amount of time has passed since they had pain or swelling without any break in pain and with intact skin, then consider that there might not have been an injury to their location, so you do not need to worry.
E si accideys al loc dolor vehement o prusiment o imflacio, lahoras tu te coyte o deslie aquel en la hora, e osta le emplastre de lu.	 "If there is intense pain or swelling at the location, you should put a pad over it and continue to attend to other areas.
E pren drap de li e spongia marina leon humida, e submergeys aquela en aygua tebeza, e am aquela lava le loc entro que cesse aquel pruziment e la dolor sia sedada; e aprop layssa repausar le membre per una hora; e aprop pausa sobre lu lana sutza submersa en vi agre e oli o oli rozat, e lia sobre lu per una nuoyt entro que sias segur de apostema caut, e que repause la imflacio del membre, e sia remauguda la dolor de lu.	 "Then wipe it with a damp sponge and submerge it in warm water to soothe the pain and swelling; then place a pad over it for an hour; after that rinse off the member gently into clean water or oil to prevent further inflammation, and ensure the pain is gone.
E aprop itera aquela strictura subtil e emplastre petit e no·l strenhas per la tua constriccio primieyra, e subtilia am aquel entro que sia sanat.	 When you have prepared a small incision above the patient's first fold, make an opening below with a subtle finger to ensure it is not too large and let air enter gradually.
E si vezes que le apostema e la rogor e la dolor e la imflacio e tots les accidentz ja so remaugutz de tot, e indigeysses de emplastre e de strictura, lahoras tu itera aquel ayssi cum has fayt al comensant engualment.	 If once the messenger and receiver have become sore, swollen, and inflamed, and all the symptoms subside, you should make an incision and cut to treat them as described earlier.
E si no accideys al membre alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no deslies aquel sino aprop tres dias o quatre o v o vii; e alcunas veguadas tot aquo es layssat per xx dias segon que a tu appar per la desliadura del membre, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que la fractura adhereys, e se acosta a la coagulacio de la carn sobre aquel.	 If there is no cause for the member of those we've spoken about it, then you shouldn't do that unless three or four days later or seven days after the opening in the member has been made as described earlier, until the fracture adheres and approaches coagulation of the flesh over it.
E lahoras ajusta en la strictura mays que en la tua strictura primieyra tota, e ayusta en la engrossacio de la vianda del malaute, segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu.	 The doctor should adjust the incision in his own incision thoroughly, and afterwards increase the swelling of the patient's hand as it is described earlier before remembering to do so.
Mays si tu vezes le loc de la fractura ja desiccar e extenuar mays que no cove, lahoras sapias que·l nutriment es prohibit pervenir ad aquel; e donc embroca aquel am aygua tebeza deves tota veguada que delias aquel; e sia aquo en totz tres dias; e alleuja la strictura un petit, e per aquesta operacio corr al membre le nutriment, e es sanat leugierament.	 If the fracture site is already contaminated or enlarged excessively, you should know that nutrition cannot be given to it, and therefore bandage it with water-based gauze as mentioned earlier; and do this for three days only, then reduce the incision size a little bit more after this operation so that nutrients can reach the member.
Mays aquo que fan les fols restauradors de la fractura del membre autra veguada quan no es restaurat al comensament, segon que cove, e es restaurat segon tortuositat, es error segon la operacio de lor, e temor gran, e si fos dreyturier aquo agrandit les Antics en lors libres e agueran am aquo obrat.	 "The broken member should be restored by restorers as soon as it is discovered that the restoration was not made immediately after the fracture occurred; if it is done without difficulty, and with no complications in the process, there will be no error or harm caused to those who perform the operation.
E yeu no he vist ad alcu de lor aquo far, per que es pus razonable que aquo no fassa.	 "Do not make any mistake when doing this; it is reasonable that nothing should happen as a result of what you are about to do.
Capitol segon: De fractura quan accideys en le cap.	 "Secondly, if there's a fracture in the head.
Las specias de fracturas son motas, e las figuras de lor son diversas, e las causas son distinctas, quar de fracturas alcuna es fayta per percussio de spaza, e la percussio osta tot le os entro al ciphac, le qual es dejos le os, ayssi cum fay ayssa en le fust, e per aquo aquesta specia es nompnada ascial; o la spaza inscideys alcuna partida del os, e inscideys la carn de lu e no passa la inscizio entro al derier de lu; e aquesta specia de fractura es nompnada levatio absoluta.	 "The specifics of fractures vary greatly and their causes are distinct - some fractures are caused by blows to the body, others cause injury inside the bone itself (transphysis) or damage that penetrates into it. The former is called a simple fracture; the latter, absolute transphyseal.
E la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca, e de fractura que es contricio o atricio; e causa de lu es percussio am poyra o cazement sobre peyra, e a lor semblantz.	 "The severity of these fractures may be great or mild, and the fracture that is complicated or incomplete - the cause could be a blow to the body itself (transphysis) or striking in some other way.
E aquesta fractura o es penetrant que ja apropinqua al pannicol le qual es dejos le os; o es en la facia del os, e la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca.	 "The penetrating fracture would be near the periosteum that covers the bone itself - or it could occur at a place on the bone.
E de fractura es que es ameguada en le os, en la subtilitat del cabel petita, e per aquo es nompnada aquesta specia fractura capillar.	 When a vein bursts within an organ of the body in its smallness
E es fractura que es fayta o per cazement o per percussio de peyra e a lu semblantz, que fa intrar alcuna lamina del os a las partidas dedintz, e es fayta en le loc concavitat ayssi cum accideys als payroles de eram quan accideys a lor percussio e es partida de lor intrada a las partidas dedintz.	 When a vein is burst either through pressure or from percussion of any kind and it introduces a lamina into the cavity, then it bursts in that location just like when pain occurs due to its impact and its passage through the opening into those areas
E majorment es fayt aquo en les cors de osses humitz, ayssi cum so caps de efantz.	 Also, be aware of this on bones as well, exactly in the same way
E so a totas aquestas specias fracturas satagias, so son pessas ayssi cum stelhas separadas.	 These are all specific fractures that cause similar pain, they are described separately
E yeu vindre am reremoracio de tot aquo en son loc.	 You should consider bringing in a professional to address this issue.
E conoyssem totas aquestas specias de fractura per deteccio sobre aquelas e per inquisicio de lor am tentas e ostament de carn corrumpuda que es sobre lor.	 All these specific fractures should be detected by observation and examination of their causes, as well as the affected area in order to determine if any infected tissue is present.
E specia capillar es conoguda per aysso que es descubert sobre le os, e es abstergit, e linit sobre lu am tentha, quar la fractura appar negra.	 A specific capillary fracture can be identified by observing it within the organ and examining its effects, as well as considering any factors that may have led to it being a black (i.e., broken or torn) fracture.
Mays en la curacio de fractura considera al comensament les accidentz del malaute, e lahoras si tu vezes per los accidentz que signifique per significacio manifesta sobre paor, ayssi cum es vomit de colera, e extencio, e perdement de entendament, e abscizio de votz, e sincopi, e febre acuta, e eyssiment dels huels e rogor de aquels, e semblantz a lor dels accidentz en las majors disposicios, ses dopte no es sanat.	 When considering fractures, it is important to consider the initial events of the trauma, such as vomiting from shock or loss of consciousness, and other symptoms like paresthesia (paresthesia: abnormal sensations) tingling in the hands and feet, dizziness, extreme weakness, high fever, and any injury to those areas.
E si vezes accidentz no-correntz tu speras salut, lahoras tu comensa la curacio de lu.	 When joint pain occurs due to cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
La qual causa es quar si es vengut a tu le plaguat en le comensament cum es plaguat e aquo es en les dias de ivern, lahoras cove que tu studias en le ostament del os denant le dia xiiii segon tota disposicio.	 And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery.
E si es en les dias d’estiu, lahoras cove que te coytes ostar le os denant le vii dia, habantz que aquo que es dejos le os sia corromput del pannicol, e que accidescan les accidentz que havem recomtatz.	 And if it is in the summer days, and you find that the abscess was caused by cold humors, then try to heal it from afar on the seventh day.
E si la fractura ja es pervenguda al pannicol cubrent le cervel, e es am partidas menudas e atricio, lahoras cove que inscidas la partida conminuta e atrita, segon que yeu recomtare a tu.	 And if the fracture is caused by cold humors that spread to the brain and cause madness and other symptoms of insanity, then you must take care not to let it progress further, but report this to your doctor.
E es que tu razas le cap del malaute plaguat, e descuebres sobre le os segon costuma e manieyra a tu possible segon la figura de la plagua, e que sia leugier sobre le malaute.	 And if you discover that the abscess is located on the patient's head, then gently remove it from the body and look for its cause nearby, so that you can report to your doctor.
E si accideys a tu deves la deteccio del os, fluxs de sanc o apostema caut, lahora tu te oppausa a lu am aquo que cove, e es que huemplas le loc de draps infuzes en vi e oli rozat, e fassa repausar la plagua entro que sia sedat le apostema, e sies segur de fluxs del sanc; e aprop comensa en la circuicio del os e en la ablatio de lu.	 If you discover it on the body, and see a red rash or discharge from it, wait until it is no longer discharging pus, then press it gently back into place, making sure to dry off around it with clean cloth, after which it will be safe to remove any discharged pus.
E aquo sia segon una de dos manieyras de operacio.	 One of two methods of operation
E la una manieyra es que tu inscidas le os am inscisori de streyt tal, e aquesta es la forma de lu: E aprop administra un autre inscissori aquest, un pauc pus lat que aquel; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	 The first method is to administer a small incision here
E aprop administra mays le inscissori pus lat que·l segon.	 Here you will find the second option for the operation.
E cove que sia deves tu nombre de inscissoris diverses, dels quals alcus so pus latz que alcus autres; e alcus de lor so pus breus que·ls autres e sian en le derier de acuitat de las suas extremitatz, e sian de ferr indi o felod.	 You have multiple options for incision sizes, among which you choose the smallest ones that are still adequate; and then make a small incision in each of them on their extremities, to be used only as needed.
E usa de lor am facilitat en percussio sobre le inscissori per so que no concutesca le cap e leda aquel.	 The use should be made with ease when performing the operation over the incision so that you do not cut off your head and cause harm to yourself.
E si le os es fort, dur, lahoras cove que perfores en le circuit de lu denant que tu administres los inscissoris am les taravels, les quals so nomnatz taravels no-profundantz.	 If the incision is deep and painful, you should perform it in a closed position while administering the incisions to prevent them from becoming too deep.
E no so nomnatz ayssi sino quar aquels no pausan le terme de l’os del test ad aquo que es aprop lu, per so quar al taravel es redonda extremitat o marge sobre aquel que es dejos le cap de lu agut semblant a marge o a cercle petit, le qual prohibeys esser submergit e passar la spissitut del os.	 If not, then those are closed after all, as it is appropriate to perform the incision on one side or edge of that which is placed over your head so that you do not go under and miss a portion of the incision.
E es convenient que tu prenguas de aquestz taravels gran nombre dels quals quascu convenesca a la spicitut de quascun os, entro que sia a tu present en tottz testz del cervel la extremitat del qual sia aguda, la quantitat en longitut e brevitat sia segon la quantitat de spicitut de aquest test.	 It is convenient to choose from many such towels based on the specific nature of each incision, whether it be at your head or the extremity that is acute; and length and breadth should depend on the extent of the required cut
E aquesta es la forma de tres specias de teravels: La qualitat de perforar en le circuit del os trencat es que pauses le teravel sobre le os e revolvas aquel am les tieus ditz entro que sapias que l’os ja es penetrat; e aprop permuda le terevel ad autre loc, e pausa aquo que es entre tot trauc la quantitat de la grosseza del ray o enviro aquo.	 When a vein in the torn artery is cut off, place the tourniquet over it and pull to prevent any blood from escaping; then remove the tourniquet at another location nearby so that it's not between all the tracks of the path or environment.
E aprop inscideys am inscissoris aquo que es entre quascun trauc del os, e fay aquel pus subtil que podes sobre aquo en fi de levitat, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que erradiques le os, o am la tua ma, o am alcuna autra causa per alcus sturmentz les quals auras apparelhatz ad aquo, ayssi cum tanalhas e forceps subtils.	 Place the fine forceps at or near where the tourniquet was placed to prevent damage and bleeding from it; also make sure that no other cause such as your hand or any other object is applied over this area in order to avoid making further harm, similarly using fine scissors.
E cove que tu guardes am tota cautela que l’inscissori no toque alcuna causa del ciphac.	 Please ensure that the tourniquet does not apply anything that might cause further injury or bleeding.
E donc cum auras circuit le os perforan, e sira separat del ciphac si es continuat am lu, e auras aquel extrayt, cove que razas e enguales aquel en la asperitat de lu de aquo que es en le os am autra sturment semblant a inscissori, mays empero cove que sia pus teon e pus subtil que les autres inscissoris.	 If you are cutting the artery's circuit and it continues to bleed or cause further injury, remove that tourniquet; make sure no other tourniquets are applied in a similar fashion as those used on the wound area around the area where the tourniquet was placed, but please ensure that none of them is too tight nor too subtle.
E si roman alcuna partida dels osses petitz e satagias, lahoras pren aquela am facilitat am aquo que es deves tu dels sturmentz; e aprop aquo cura la plagua am lichinis e enguentz les quals havem ditz.	 If the bone is broken and you suspect a fracture or dislocation, then put it gently on something soft like a cloth to cushion it; also make sure that any other suggestions provided are applied.
E l’autra manieyra de operacio es leugiera, longinqua de paor, la qual diyssec Gualia e la lauzec per gran lausor; e aquest es le sermo de lu: necessari es a tu en le comensament que comenses descobrir la partida del os del loc en le qual es la fractura pus vehement e pus manifesta, entro que quan auras descubert aquela partida e auras pausat dejos lu la extremitat de aquest inscissori lent e alegre del qual aquesta es la forma:	 "The other procedure is to open the body cavity and perform a long operation that requires great courage, which involves finding the point where the fracture occurred and stopping it.
E es que la partida lenticular es leon e no inscideys alcuna causa, e la partida aguda es de lu en dos latz avantz en longitut, ayssi cum vezes; que la partida lenticular sia ajustada al ciphac am la facia de lu inscident aguda en le os.	 "The difference between the two types of fractures is that the lenticular one occurs without any cause and is located in a different part of the body, while the acute one happens at a different point.
E aprop percuteys sobre le inscissori de una partida am un petit malhet entro que inscidas tot le os am facilitat ayssi cum es revolvut, e tu sias segur del pannicol que no accida en lu accident que temas en denguna manieyra, e si le medicant14 era le pus fol de totz les homes e le mays ignorant de lor; certament, e si era dorment.	 "After the incision is made on the affected part in a small area that it is easy to roll up, and if you are sure of preventing any accidents from happening during this procedure, and if the surgeon was very careful or sleeping.
Lahoras si romania alcuna causa annexa al os del pannicol en alcus locs de os, inscidira aquel de lu am la extremitat del inscissori aquel lenticular, e deliuraria aquel de lu am facilitat, quar es deliurat de lu ses nocument e ses paor.	 "The pain caused by this procedure is not accompanied with any additional discomfort in the area of the incision on various parts of the body, except for the lenticular one where it causes some discomfort and fear.
E si fractura del os no penetra entro al pannicol, e aquo que es abscidit o es ostat del os es la facia de lu, e roman en lu asperitat e satagias subtils, lahoras cove que razas aquela asperitat e erradiques aquelas satagias am razoris subtils per les quals tu has preparat le nombre, de diversas quantitatz per que sia a tu possible administrar de aquels en tot loc les pus convenientz de lor e le pus dreyt de aquels segon aquo en que te perduzeys la tua operacio aquel os trencat e la figura de lu.	 "If the fracture does not penetrate into the panniculus, and in this case you have already removed or stopped it, its location is described as follows: a subtle asperity that causes irritation and satagias with subtlety, causing discomfort for those who have prepared themselves through various quantities to administer them at all locations of convenience. It is also possible to administer them where the procedure ends due to the broken tissue.
E cove que administres en la tua razio am la qual razes le os al comensament le pus lat de aquels razoris, e aprop usa aprop lu del pus subtil de lu, e no cesses far aquo segon continuitat entro que pervenguas ad aministrar le pus teon e·l pus subtil de totz aquels.	 When administering the medicine to be taken with the first breath of those days, and use accordingly the fine portion of it, do not cease to continue doing so as long as you are attending to administer its more subtle portion from all that day
Mays en quascuna de las autras fracturas petitas capillars e fractura subtil, cove que administres cura segon aquo que perduseys ad rectificacio de lu.	 In fractures of small capillaries and a subtle fracture: when administering the cure after this, you must have corrected it
E es causa que no es ameguada sobre totz les quals han studi en aquela art.	 The cause may be that they studied in that art too much
E stec sobre aquo que nos scriut havem mostrat en grans fracturas.	 I mean to suggest that, after studying it extensively, you will see how this is shown in large fractures
E si le pannicol es retangut quan tu erradiques le os, lahoras cove que prenguas drap de li segon la quantitat de la plagua, e submergeys aquel en oli rozat, e pausa aquel sobre le orrifici de la plagua; e aprop pren autre drap doblat o triplicat e submergeys lu en vi e oli rozat e pausa aquel sobre drap prim e fay aquo al pus leugierament que podes sobre aquel, que no graves le ciphac; e aprop administra sobre aquel liament lat, e no strenhas aquel sino per quantitat que tengua la plagua tant solament.	 If the penis is retracted when you ejaculate it, then put another piece of cloth over them and submerge them in hot oil, hold that on top of the first one to prevent coming out, put another piece double or triple thickness and immerse it into water and oil and leave it there until it is ready for ejaculation; after applying it lubricate it with a lubricant.
E layssa aquel am aquesta cura per un dia o per dos entro que sias segur de apostema caut; e aprop deslia aquel e aprop aministra medicinas am las quals es superflua siccitat, ayssi cum razitz de lin e farina de errs, e polvera de enses e de aristologia, e de semblantz ad aquels.	 Use this cure for one or two days until you are sure of its effectiveness; after applying it and administering medicines that are unnecessary dryness such as honey, flour, and powder of these and of philosophy, and of similarity to those.
E es que tu fassas de aquestas medicinas polvera que sia pulverizada sobre la plagua, ayssi cum son secas; e universalment, administra en aquel tota medicina de proprietat de la qual es que abstergesca e no mordique.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
E guarda te segon la tua vertut que la plagua en la tua curacio sia neta; e no sia en lu surdicia de enguent ni autra; ni no layssas agreguar virulencia en lu; quar quan es ajustada sobre le pannicol del cervel, corromp aquel e poyreys aquel, e accideys sobre le malaute aprop aquo malicia maligna.	 Keep your mind clean in the context of your work so that the surface of the body is not contaminated with filth or anything else; nor should you add any harmfulness to it; for when adjusted on the belly button, corrupt it and remove it, and apply over it this evil poison.
E accideys en le ciphac del cap, cum de lu es mondificat le os e majorment quan es menspresada la cura de lu, e es negror en la superficia de lu; e donc considera lahoras si accideys al malaute les accidentz que havem ditz, sapias que es parnicios ses tot dopte.	 Apply it to the top of the head, when you are massaging its head and especially when you start treating it, and be careful not to apply over any sores that may occur; know that this is a poison used by doctors for treatment.
E si no accideys negror sino de la medicina que es pausada desus, e es en vertut de aquela medicina que fassa aquela negror, lahoras cove que tu prenguas de mel una partida e de oli rozat partidas iii, e am aquels linieys un drap, e aprop pausa aquel sobre le ciphac; e aprop cura aquel am las specias de curacio que conveneys entro que sia sanat.	 If you do not apply the poison but from a suspended medicine, and if it is true that this poison should be applied for treatment, then I suggest applying a bandage over its head to prevent any leakage or spillage of oil; and place another on top of it so as to have them covering all aspects of care which are important in treatment.
Capitol .iii.	 III
De restauracio del nas quan es trincat.	 Nasal restoration when broken.
Sapias que no es trencat del nas sino doas partidas ensemps pus sobiranas, o una de aquelas alcunas veguadas, per so quar en lu has dos osses, quar la partida dejos es cartillaginosa, e no es trencada e no accideys a lu sino atricio e tortuositat e sinuitat.	 Know that if the nose is broken into two or more parts, it will still be alive because of its cartilage and bone, so that even though one part may be cut off without injury to the other but there are suffering and twisting and disorder involved.
Mays si es trencada la una de las doas partidas de lu, lahoras cove que tu intrometas le dit petit en le sieu nas, e que engualhas aquela fractura dedintz am le tieu dit indic, e am le dit pous defora, entro que retorne le nas segon la sua figura natural.	 "If the first part of a patient's two thighs is torn, the physicians will insert their finger into its nose, and after that fracture will be fixed by putting it back into its original position.
E sia fayt aquo per tu am facilitat, e guarda te que no caja per aquela tua operacio sobre le malaute delor.	 "Do this procedure with great caution; make sure there is nothing inserted during the surgery on his patient's thighs.
E si la fractura es en la pus sobirana partida del nas, e le dit no perve ad aquela, lahoras cove que sia equat am la extremitat del ray en le qual sia petita grossitut.	 "If the fracture is in the highest part of the nose and it is not possible to reach that area with one's finger, then make sure there are no other complications.
E si la fractura es en doas partidas, lahoras tu fay le semblant de aquo.	 "If two parts have been fractured, the procedure will be similar to this one.
E coyta te am restauracio de lu en le primier dia de la fractura, si es possible; e sino, lahoras aprop le vii o·l x deves le repaus del apostema caut.	 "Give the patient their first rest after the fracture, if it is possible; otherwise, apply a poultice on their affected limb.
E aprop entromet en la extremitat del nas una meca de drap de li, si la fractura es en una partida, o metz doas calguas, si la fractura es en doas partidas, e sia en la calgua grossitut de tanta quantitat que umpla le trauc del nas.	 "Put a cloth into the nose if it is in one part of the fracture, or put two cloths each if there are two parts to the fracture and they are in the narrowest part that allows for the passage.
E diysso alcus dels antics restauradors que las calguas sian enfundudas en boder, e sian permudadas en tot dia, mays no es vist a mi; habantz cove que la meca sia enfunduda en album de huou comfit am polvera de moli; e aprop layssa la qualgua entro que l’os sia fermat e sia endurazida la cartillage.	 "The previous restorers are to be covered with a cloth, and changed every day, unless they are seen by me; keep in mind that the gauze should be stuffed into an album of cotton like this: polvera de molle.
E alcunas veguadas sia entromes en le nas, en loc de calgua, pena de auca pus que es envolopada de drap de li leon; e sia que ja te la fractura del nas pus vehement e que le malaute no sia prohibit de inspiracio.	 In the nose cavity, there is pain because of a blockage due to linen cloth that covers it tightly and preventing its normal functioning.
E aquesta causa no es a tu necessaria; e si voles, fay aquo, e si voles, fay calguas.	 This condition is not necessary, if you want to do this or that, then make the incisions.
E si accideys autra veguada apostema caut, emplastra le nas am cerot o am coto enfus en vi agre e oli rozat, o am diaquilon.	 If a blockage in another cavity occurs and fills it with pus, or if you see any discharge from the nose hole, bring that to us immediately
Mays si no accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que emplaustres aquel defora am farina de sizami e am polvera de enses cofitz am album de huou; e aprop pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e no lies le nas am alcuna causa.	 If there is not a blockage and you see discharge from the nose hole, bring that to us immediately and place your hand over it so as to prevent any more discharge from occurring.
Mays si so trencats les osses del nas am fractura petita o so conminuitz, lahoras cove que scindas sobre aquels, e extraguas aquels am insturmentz que conveno ad aquels; e aprop cos la scissura, e cura aquela am aquo que encarna e consolida, e am emplastres ad aquo convenientz.	 If the bones of the nose have been fractured or contorted in some way, then bring those to us and extract them with an instrument that suits them; after making the incision, cure it as you would if it were a consolidation, and place it where is most convenient.
E si accideys plagua dedintz le nas, lahoras cove que cures aquela am calguas e administra canulas de plom entro que sia de tot sanat.	 If the nose plug occurs, then bring that to us and cure it with a cautery and administer bloodletting through which veins are most suitable for health purposes.
Capitol .iiii.	 ...
De restauracio de la mandibula quan es trincada.	 The restoration of the mandible when broken.
Quan la mandibula dejos es rompuda e la fractura de lu no es am plagua, reguarda lahoras si la fractura es deforas tant solament, e no es trencada en dos e es curvada a las partidas dedintz, lahoras la sua cognicio es leugiera.	 When the mandible is broken and there are no open wounds from it, make sure to check if the fracture has occurred at all, only once; if it was not fractured in two pieces but curved towards certain parts of the body, then consider that its function is impaired.
E cove donc, si la fractura es en la part dreyta, que tu intrometas le tieu indic senestre en la boca del malaute; e semblantment si la fractura es an la mandibula senestra, lahoras intromet le dit indic de la ma dreyta; e impelleys am aquel la gilbositat de la fractura dedintz am facilitat a las partidas defora, am la tua autra ma de la partida defora del os; am aquel decentment equa aquelam.	 "If the fracture is in the right side of the mouth, then you should insert the tongue into the patient's mouth and instruct them to hold it there with their left hand on top.
E si la fractura de la mandibula ja es separada en doas, lahoras cove que administres extensio de doas partz segon rectitut entro que sia possibla la equacio de lu.	 "If the fracture of the mandible is separated into two parts, you must administer extensions on both sides simultaneously to allow for healing.
E si accideys conmocio de dentz a disrupcio, lahoras strenh aquelas de las quals speras que romandran am fil de aur o de argent o de ceda; e aprop pausa sobre la mandibula trencada cerot, e aprop pausa sobre lu drap duplicat, e pausa sobre le drap gran stelha decentment fayta, o una pessa de sola engual a la longitut de la mandibula; e aprop lia aquela desus segon que a tu es apparelhada la liadura de lu e que conveneys la applicacio, entro que no es destruida.	 "If the teeth are broken and cause disruption, then you must straighten those which may remain in front of gold or silver or lead; and place a cushion over the fractured mandible, another over the duplicate cushion, and rest on the large sheet kindly provided, or apply it as one piece to the length of the mandible. And if that fails, apply two pieces lengthwise.
E comanda al malaute que use de repaus e tranquilitat, e pausa la vianda de lu sorbicios leons.	 "Tell the patient to rest and take care of their wounds while soaking in a soothing solution.
E si extimas que ja es alterada la figura en alcuna manieyra, lahoras tu te coyta e deslia aquel al tertz dia; e aprop rectifica aquo que ja es alterat de lu e emplaustra aquel am polvera de moli, am album de huou, o am farina de cisami, pus que tu auras ostat le cerot de lu, e pausa sobre le emplastra lana leon.	 "If it is necessary to change the bandage in some way, then you should remove that and apply a new one from vermillion powder or alum paste or flour of rice, so that you cover up the spot where it has been changed.
E adonc cum sta annex e ajustat aquel emplastre sobre lu, e la disposicio del os no es alterada, layssa aquel, que no le deslies entro que sia sanat e strenh la fractura; quar motas veguadas aquesta fractura es streyta en tres sempmanas.	 When it is already placed and adjusted in that position, and the patient's condition does not change, then let him continue so he may strengthen his fracture which was broken into three pieces
E si autra veguada accida apostema caut, lahoras administra aquo que havem dit motas veguadas en la sedacio de lu entro que sia sanat, e sia remaugut aquel apostema.	 If any other gouty attack occurs after the previous one has been treated in that manner as mentioned before, then let doctors administer a treatment to strengthen him so he may recover his limb.
E si la fractura es am plagua, lahoras considera si es pessa del os separada o satagias, lahoras tu te subtilia que ostes aquelas satagias am aquo que conveneys ad aquo en la remocio de aquelas dels sturmentz.	 If the fracture is already closed, doctors consider whether it was a clean break or a compound one and advise you to gently remove those staples in that manner as previously mentioned for healing.
E si le orrifici de la plagua es streyt, lahoras tu le amplifique am le fleubotomi segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	 If the severity of the injury is high, doctors may recommend a second operation to meet your need for more thorough treatment.
E aprop quan tu auras ostat aquelas satagias, e de aquelas no sira remaugut re, lahoras tu cos le orrifici de la plagua si es ampla; e sino, pausa sobre aquela un dels emplaustres que conveneysso ad aquo e encarnan aquela, entro que sia sanada.	 After you have removed those staples and the other one is still intact, doctors will consider whether the injury was severe enough for immediate care or if it needs further treatment; either way, place a dressing over that area as previously mentioned to prevent infection.
Capitol .v.	 Thank you.
De restauracio de la furcula quan es trinquada.	 After the sternum has been fractured.
Motas veguadas es trencada la furcula de la partida denant deves le muscle, e aquela fractura es fayta en una de tres manieyras.	 The muscles may be torn when the sternum is fractured; and that fracture will be treated in one of three manners.
Quar o es trencada, o seperada, o es seperada en doas partz otra que no accidan satagias; e es leugier a la restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que accideysso en lu satagias, e es dificil a restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que la fractura es am plagua.	 When a limb is severed or torn from the body in two pieces that are not connected by sutures; and it is necessary to restore it; if also occurs in the same place where the fracture occurred, it is difficult to restore it; or when the separation is caused by such violence
E la operacio en aquela, quan la fractura es ses plagua, es que tu fassas esser present dos ministres, per so que la un tengua le adjutori e siegua la furcula trencada, e l’autre extenda le col ves aquela partida.	 The surgery in this case involves having two assistants present to ensure that one holds the severed limb and the other extends it as far as possible from the site of the fracture.
E aprop enguala la fractura am les tieus ditz entro que sia fayta la forma de lu segon que cove, e no sia en lu eminencia pauca ni concavitat.	 The goal is to prevent further fractures and ensure that the limb heals in a straight line from front to back, not having much prominence or depression.
E si indigeysses mes de extencio, lahoras cove que pauses dejos le titillic del malaute spera de drap o de lana, e sia la grandesa de lu segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat; e exten e eleva la furcula e coarta la spera am la tua ma entro que enguales la frectura segon que cove.	 If you need to extend it further, the doctor will have you lie on a board or mat, and stretch and lift your foot as much as possible; and stretch and raise the foot towards your hand so that it is aligned with the fracture when necessary.
E si no podes atirar la extremitat de la furcula a las partidas defora, per so quar es pervenguda al preon, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e pauses sobre le muscle de lu un coyssi migier en grandeza.	 If you cannot extend the fractured limb further away from your body, to avoid causing more harm, have the patient lie flat on their back and rest one cushion a little larger than another over their chest muscle.
E le ministre prema le muscle de lu a las partidas dejos entro que l’os de la furcula sia elevat que es en le preon en sus, e lahoras tu rectifique la fractura e enguala aquela am les tieus ditz.	 The minister applies to the muscle at the bottom of the chest so that the elbow is lifted as much as possible towards the front in their, and then the doctor will fix the fracture and align it with those lines.
Mays si sentes satagias de la furcula e so maugudas, lahoras cove que fendes sobre aquela e extraguas aquelas satagias am facilitat.	 When you suspect a hernia from the shoulder blade, doctors recommend placing something under that area and squeezing to remove the hernia easily
E si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu ingenia inscisio de lu am un dels inscissoris les quals has apparelhatz ad aquo, pus que havias pausat dejos la furcula le sturment que serve le ciphac; e es sturment de fust o de ferr del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	 If you suspect a hernia from the chest wall, doctors recommend placing something underneath that area and squeezing to remove it, remembering which incision was used for this procedure.
E es semblant a culier del qual aquesta es la concavitat; e sia la sua latitut segon aquo que has necessitat de lu, segon la grandeza del os o la pauqueza de lu.	 It is similar to the one from which that area is concave; and as long as you need it, second by its width or lack of width.
Mays la longitut de lu sia segon que es a tu possible a la operacio; que haja doas extremitatz ayssi cum vezes, e la una extremitat sia ample e l’autre streyta.	 The length should be such that it is easily accessible during the operation, and both extremities may have different lengths or widths.
E si la disrupcio de la plagua la qual has inscidida quan has extraytas la satagia del os es ampla, e yest segur de apostema caut, lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura.	 If the disruption of the plate that was inserted when removing the hernia is wide, and you are sure about its position, doctors recommend tightening both sides of the incision with sutures.
E si la disrupcio es pauca, o temes apostema caut, lahoras tu uemple la plagua am draps e pulvils segon la quantitat de la scissura de la plagua.	 If the disruption is small or you are unsure about its position, doctors recommend wrapping the plate with gauze and powder according to the size of the incision.
E si accideys apostema caut, lahoras infon drap en vi agre e oli rozat e vi, e pausa sobre aquel.	 If sutures are placed, they will be applied as follows: a small amount of adhesive is applied and then covered with gauze soaked in warm oil or water, and it should remain over that area.
Mays la strictura del os quan es ses plagua e ses seccio, es que pauses emplastre fayt de farina de moli am album de huou, e pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e aprop pausa la spera dejos le titillic de lu, si indigeyssas de aquela, e aprop pren humemate, so es torca la qual teno les Sarrazis , que sia mot longua, e sia latitut de lu de un palm o entorn aquel; e aprop pausa pulvils duplicatz sobre la stopa e l’emplastre; e aprop pren una stela de taula subtil de la qual la latitut d’ela sia de tres ditz e en longitut semblantment; e aprop envolopa aquela en drap, e aprop envolopa aquel drap am la stela en lo loc sobre le loc de la fractura; e aprop pausa humemati ayssi cum es revout, e revol aquela sobre le col de lu e dejos le titillic de lu sa e dejos le titillic de lu malaute, e reduzeys aquela sobre tota partida, e quan vezes que la strictura de la fractura am strictura descent, e es aquo que no es occultat sobre tu.	 When the vein is stretched and swollen, it is customary to apply flour paste made from ground wheat to calm it down and put a cushion under them so that it doesn't come out.
E tot, que no sia mauguda la stelha desobre le os trencat; e per so cove que tu vejas le malaute quascun dia, que quan le liament es mollificat o vezas la stela ja esser remauguda, lahoras tu rectifica aquo e strenh la liadura.	 And also, when the support strip on a fractured bone is torn or weakened over time and you see that it has become soft or brittle, then correct this by straightening out the ligament and strengthening it
E aprop pausa le dormir del malaute sobre le col de lu, e pausa dejos le titillic de lu deves le dormir de lu en la nueyt un petit coyssi; per so que am aquel sia elevat le adjutori de lu del latz de aquel, e donc es elevada la la fractura de la furcula a elevacio del muscle; o sia le bras de lu liat al col de aquel.	 And also place the pillow over their chest and place it on top of another cushion so that its elevation is increased by the height of that other, to make sure the fracture of the collar bone heals correctly along with the muscle; or support them with one arm placed against their back.
E no deslies le liament si no accideys en le loc prusiment o apostema, entro a xii dias.	 If it does not happen within 12 days, do not hesitate to try again at the same location or approach from another angle.
E aprop renovelha le emplastre si has vista la facia de lu ad aquo, e ajusta en la strictura e restaura aquel e layssa entro que sia restaurat e sia coagulat la fractura de la furcula.	 "You have prepared the stretcher and placed it on him like this. Adjust its width to fit him properly and restore that which was broken.
E es strenguda e comfortada segon le mes en xxviii dias, e alcunas veguadas en alcus homes es fayt en mens de temps de aquel.	 "It will be strengthened and comfortable after 28 days, and some vegetables in a few days are also eaten.
Capitol .vi.	 The fifth chapter of the Capitularia (a collection of canon law for the Roman Catholic Church).
De restauracio de fractura de la spalla.	 "Rehabilitation of a broken shoulder.
Spatula tart es trencada en le loc lat de lu e no so trencatz de lu sino les marges.	 The spatula is broken in the narrow part but not in the handle itself.
E donc quan es trencat le loc de lu — e es trencat en le mieg loc de lu — e no es conogut sino per tocament, lahoras segon que es la figura de la fractura sforsa te la preparacio de lu e reduzir aquela segon la figura natural en tota manieyra de engen la qual es a tu possible.	 When the part of him is broken -- and when it's broken in his little finger place -- and if you don't know, then look carefully at where it was broken to prepare for reduction back to its natural figure by any means necessary that may be appropriate.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc polvera de moli am album de huou e stopa leon; e aprop pausa pulvil de drap duplicat; e aprop pausa sobre lu stela lada de taula subtil segon la quantitat de la spatula tota o mays un pauc.	 Place the pointed cautery over a small plate of thin gold, place a pointed cautery on top of a duplicated cloth, and place a pointed caution over a fine step for the amount of spatula completely or a few less.
Mays si dejos la stela es concavitat en alcu dels locs de la spatula, lahoras tu enguala aquela concavitat am stopa leon, e aprop pueja la stela segon equalitat.	 If the step is concave in place of the spatula, then you should smooth that concavity with a pointed cautery, and place it next to the step for equality.
E aprop strenh desus am humemati longua ab constriccio decent e am fermesa de la stela entro que no sia remauguda del sieu loc.	 "You must tighten up from its own base, and firmly place it on the step to ensure that it will not fall off.
E considera le liament en quascun dia; e totas veguadas que sia mollificat, lia autra veguada e stren le e equa la stela si es remauguda del sieu loc.	 When considering a joint day by day; and all the fluids that have been relaxed, another will be applied to strengthen it if it is weakened from its location
E jagua le malaute sobre le sieu latz sa.	 Place the patient on their back.
E la spatula es restaurada en xx dias o en .xxv.	 The spatula will be replaced after 10 or 25 days, depending on which one is damaged first.
E donc quan es complit aquest nombre, lahoras tu dissolveys le liament, e que tu scias ensegurat quar aquela es dels osses dels quals la cominicio no es temuda ni lor dissolucio.	 Once you have completed this number of days, the joint will be dissolved and you should ensure that it is one of the bones which does not require dissolution yet.
E si procezeys del loc del os pessa e pongeys dejos la codena, lahoras tu scindeys sobre lu, e osta le, e fay segon que havem dit en la fractura de la furcula de sadacio de apostema caut si accideys aqui.	 If you remove the location of the bone and place a cushion over it, then dissolve them according to what has been said in the fracture of the fibula from the tibia, if necessary.
Capitol .vii.	 Cap 7th.
De restauracio de la fractura del pietz.	 Restoration of the fracture on the chest.
Le pietz alcunas veguadas es romput en le mieg loc de lu e aquo tart endeve; mays las extremitatz de lu mot endeve que so ciccadas e comminuidas.	 The ribs will be placed in their correct position and tied down securely, with the limbs held still to prevent any further movement.
E dels accidentz de lu quan es trencat le mieg de lu es que declina a las partidas dedintz e accideys a lu gran dolor, e dificultat en lo hale, e tos, e fort leu e vomeys sanc; e es declarada en lu cavitat en le os trencat e no es occulta al sentiment.	 If the bone is broken in your chest area and it's not immediately apparent or causes great pain, difficulty breathing, weakness, fast heartbeat, and severe coldness, then declare it visible to the extent of the fracture but do not hide from feeling it
E la restauracio de lu es que sia resupinat le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa entre las spallas de lu un coyssi; e aprop prem als muscles de lu, e ajusta las costas de lu am las mas de dos costatz, e subtilia te en la operacio de lu e en la equacio segon tota manieyra que es ad aquo possibla e que conveneys ad aquo, entro que retorne la figura del os segon que cove.	 The restoration of the patient is that they are placed on their back and a cushion between their thighs; pause in placing a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
E aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e estopa e pausa desobre astela de taula subtil de sauze o de caligi e de a lor semblantz en levitat, pus que tu envolopas aquela en drap; e aprop subtilia te en lian aquela sobre le os trencat que no sia maugut; e vay am liadura segon retonditat al dors alcunas veguadas, e strenh aquel am strictura decent; e aprop considera la liadura en tota hora, e quan es mollificada strenh aquela.	 The servant should gently lower the patient onto their back and remove any cushion between their thighs, pause in placing another on their legs and one more on their chest while holding their hands. After they are settled, the nurse should spread out a piece of cloth under the cut part that isn't too painful to support it; and raise and stretch its abdomen gently, considering it at all times, when it is relaxed or tense.
E si necessitat provoca a desliament de aquela deves corrossio o pruziment, o dolor, o apostema que accideysso en le loc, lahoras tu coyta e deslia aquela e erradica le emplastre e rectifique aquo que accideys per aquo am manieyra de curacio de lu; e aprop reduzeys le emplastre, si vezes ad aquo la facia; e ajusta a lu strictura entro que sia sanat.	 If there is bleeding or bruising from the patient being lowered onto their back, or if pain occurs in that area, the nurse should remove and straighten any cushion in place, rectify this issue by this means of caring for the patient; and afterwards reduce the cushion to prevent it from happening again.
Capitol .viii.	 The eighth chapter.
De restauracio de las costas quan son trincadas.	 When the ribs are fractured during restoration,
Sapias que fractura de las costas no catz sino en locs grosses que siegon le dos; e de las extremitatz de lor de la partida denant no accideys ad aquelas contricio sino per aquo quar so cartillaginosas.	 Only large fractures should be considered, not those of the ribs themselves or from the extremities being pulled apart during restoration.
E cognicio de lu no es amaguada al sentiment deves la inquisicio de lu am les ditz.	 The first sentence translates to: "I come into your hands with the duty of investigation.
E la restauracio sia ayssi que enguales la fractura am les ditz segon la manieyra possibla, entro que sia engulhat segon que cove, e aprop emplastre e strenh le os trencat am stela, si indigeys de aquel.	 The second sentence translates to: "The restoration should be as follows; if the fracture is not too severe, then place it next to a stable surface, and fasten it with straps. If it's necessary that it be put next to another object, and fix it firmly.
E si la fractura de las costas es declinant a las partidas dedintz, lahoras accideys al malaute dolor vehement e punctura, ayssi cum punctura que accideys ad aquel que ha pleureci, e per aquo quar le os ponh le velament; e accideys a lu difficultat de hanelit, e tos, e vomit de mot sanc; e aquesta es de dificil curacio.	 The third sentence translates to: "If the fracture of the ribs is weakening from pain and cuts, then come upon severe pain and punctures occur at that point in which breath has been held, and place the bone next to it; and with difficulty handle, touch and vomit from motion; and this is a difficult cure.
E ja les Antixs so engeniatz en aquela am motz engientz.	 The last sentence translates to: "And now the Anticks are engaged in that manner.
E de lor so que diso: cove que pauses viandas del malaute que engendro imflacio e ventositat, per que le ventre sia imflat e sia extendut, e la fractura sia impellida a las partidas defora.	 The sentence translates to: "And now they say that the patient should eat foods from the stomach which generate inflammation and swelling, so that the abdomen becomes flat and extended, and the fracture is pulled away from the body.
Mays nos avoreyssem aquo per so que no sia causa leugiera a generar apostema caut, si no accideys; e si ja accideys, lahoras ja ajuda ad aquo.	 The sentence translates to: "May we agree on this in order that no cause of fever be produced if not occur already; and if it does occur, then the doctor will help with that.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia pausada desus ventoza e aprop que sucque am fortitut; e es semblant a ratiocinacio, mays empero es temut que la ventoza atire las superfluitatz al loc per la debilitat.	 The sentence translates to: "Would you agree that the wind should be stopped and use it with caution; and if so, then let us remember that the swelling will go away from the location due to weakness.
E diyssero alcus de lor: cove que·l loc sia cubert am lana que ja es submersa en oli caut, e sian pausatz pulvils entre las costas entro que sia umplida, que sia la liadura engual quan envolopas aquela segon retonditat; e aprop sia curat le malaute am curacio de pleuresi de vianda e de medicina.	 When the joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body and occurs in the feet, it is customary to call gout for doctors.
E si causa vehement constrenh le malaute la qual no sufferta, e le os punh le velament am punctura ledent, temem sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que fendam sobre le loc, descubram de la costa trencada, e aprop pausem desobre aquela instrument que conserve le ciphac, la rememoracio del qual es precedida, e que inscidam le os am facilitat, e extraguam aquel.	 If the pain is severe and occurs in the foot, do not hesitate to apply pressure at that point with a pointed cautery, making sure to cover it to prevent infection of the affected area.
E aprop que ajustem las doas labias de la plagua, si es gran, am cozidura, e curem aquela am emplastres entro que sia sanada.	 Then adjust the two flaps on either side if necessary, make sure to apply pressure and ensure it is treated promptly once healed.
E si accideys dedintz apostema, lahoras tu coyta e enfon pulvils en oli rozat e pausa sobre le loc, e que sia curat le malaute am aquo que cove a la apostema dedintz.	 If the abscess is opened up and pus comes out of it, you must apply pressure over that area to prevent further spread, and do so while treating the abscess as quickly as possible.
E sia ressupinat sobre le latz sobre le qual dorm, entro que sia sanat.	 Then support his head onto a pillow or something soft in order for him to rest comfortably.
Capitol .ix.	 What does this mean?
De restauracio de fractura del spondil del dos e del col.	 The recovery of fractures on the spine and neck
Alcunas veguadas endeve fractura als osses del col, e tart endeve a lor atricio, e semblantment als spondils del dos.	 Broken bones in the vertebrae or collarbone must be treated with care to ensure recovery, similar to fractures on the spine.
E cum aquo accideys ad alcu e voles saber si sara sanat o no, lahoras considera, quar si vezes las sieuas mas ja mollificadas e stupefaytas e mortas e no pot maure aquelas ni extendre ni strenher aquelas e quan constrenges aquelas am les tieus ditz o punges aquelas am agulha e no sent en aquelas dolor, lahoras sapias que no es sanat, e en las mes de disposicios es mortal.	 If it occurs to you and you want to know if he is recovering or not, doctors consider that in cases where the bones are already weakened from previous fractures, and cannot be stretched further, nor injured with sharp objects like a needle without causing pain; they can tell by looking at those areas if there is recovery. However, if the patient does not show signs of recovery, it may mean death.
E si mau aquelas e sent en aquelas constriccio am les ditz e punctura, lahoras sapias que la nucha de l’os es salva e que le malaute guereys am curacio.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that penetrate each part of the body and pain occurs in the feet, it is customary to call gout by doctors.
E si ve als spondils del col le semblant ad aquo e voles saber si sira sanat o no, lahoras considera als pes de lu.	 And if you want to know whether there's a remedy or not, the doctor considers their opinion on that matter.
Lahoras si tu vezes que so ja mollificatz, accideys ad aquels aquo que es accidit en las mas, e aprop quan jatz sobre le sieu dos, yeys ventozitat e egestio ses la sua volontat, e alcunas veguadas es resupinat sobre le sieu dos e vol urinar e no pot, lahoras sapias que es mortal, e adonc no trebales en la curacio de lu.	 If you've already tried to mollify it by applying cold water or ice packs and those didn't help, then the doctor may recommend applying heat instead of ice pack for relief and urination.
Mays si no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, la causa es milhor e pus leugiera.	 If there was no cause found, it is more likely that the condition is due to some other underlying issue.
E la curacio de lu es que te perforses a la sedacio del apostema caut que pauses sobre le spondil atrissat oli rozat sol, o am mugols de huous asatz; pausa sobre aquela aquel alcunas veguadas le dia entro que sia sedat le apostema caut.	 The cure for that is to apply pressure with a pointed cautery on the affected joint or area after washing it with hot water and rubbing it with soft towels, until the affected area gets warm and stops aching.
E lahoras pausa un dels emplastres confortantz e exsitans, e strenh sobre aquel am liament; e comanda al malaute que use de repaus e de tranquillitat e que no dorme sobre la partida am la qual atroba dolor entro que sia sanat.	 The doctor will recommend placing a cushion between the affected areas and surrounding them with warmth while instructing the patient to avoid sleeping on the area where they experience pain until relief is achieved.
E si accideys deves la atricio del os satagias o alcuna causa que ja es seperada de lu, lahoras cove que secces sobre la codena e que ostes aquel os; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua, am sutura si es gran; e aprop cura aquela am alcu encarnatiu dels enguentz, entro que sia sanat.	 If you find a lump in the intestine or if there is no cause for that to have been separated from them, the doctor will recommend examining it and closing any openings while ensuring that nothing comes out through those openings until relief is achieved.
Mays si es trencat le derier del os alhoses, e es la fi de la coeta, lahoras cove que tu entrometas le dit pous de la ma senestra en le cul, e que enguales le os trencat am l’autra ma segon que es possible per equacio segonda; e aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e astelha, si indigeysses de aquels, e aprop strenh aquel.	 If the first rib of his body is torn off as well, and it's at the end of the belt, then we should insert a pointed object into the anus of the woman in order to prevent her from going outside, and if that is not possible on the second attempt, we will also remove the other part which is next.
E si sentes satagias trencadas en lu, lahoras tu fen sobre aquela, e osta aquel, e cura la plagua am la curacio que es precedida entro que sia sanada.	 If you find broken ribs in it (the patient), then put the hand over that one and another on top of it, so that the rib may be healed first.
Capitol .x.	 The next line could mean "Chapter 23".
De restauracio de la ancha.	 For the recovery of a fracture.
Les osses de las anchas tart so trencats, e si trencan, lahoras la fractura de lor no es sino communicio en las extremitatz de aquelas e son inscidas en la longitut e declinan a las partidas dedintz; e accideys al malaute dolor en le loc e punctura, e la camba es stupefacta quan es fractura.	 If the bones of their legs are broken, and if they break, then pain occurs in that location, and the foot is paralyzed when it fractures.
E la restauracio de lu es que tu extendas la tua ma sobre aquel entro que sia sobre la fractura qual es la figura de lu.	 The recovery of this involves extending your hand over it to place on the fracture as shown in the illustration below
E si fractura es en la extremitat de lu tant solament, lahoras tu enguala aquela segon que a tu es apparelhat per equacio engual entro que sia asemblat a la sua figura natural.	 If it is only on one limb that has broken, then place the hand there after applying something to restore its normal shape.
Mays si la fractura es en le lonc o que ja declina a las partidas dejos, lahoras tu fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu ventre entro que sia preparada a tu la restauracio de aquela fractura.	 If the fracture is in his abdomen and prevents him from moving around then apply pressure to it on top of his stomach as shown in the illustration for its recovery.
E donc quan auras engualada aquela, pausa sobre lu emplastre, e aprop pausa sobre aquel astela de fust o de codena, e strenh per strictura sobre la qual no temas punctacio de fractura ni remocio de la stelha.	 When you have inserted the trocar into that space, place a cushion under it and another above its plate or cover, then firmly press on the pad so as not to prick any of the pleats or tear from the shield.
E enguala la concavitat am aquo que uempla aquela entro que aquela prengua la strictura segon equalitat, e comanda al malaute que dorma sobre le sieu dos o desobre le sieu costat sa.	 After you have inserted the trocar into that space and it is placed properly to make a second incision evenly at its center, then command the patient to lie down on their back or side depending on which they prefer.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu cessa de extencio de lu e de la sua restauracio entro que sia sedat le apostema caut, e pausa sobre lu aquo que sede aquel segon que es precedit; e aprop retorna a la restauracio de lu, e strenh aquel ayssi cum cove.	 If the bleeding occurs due to an injury on the patient and you cease from extracting it and its restoration until the bleeding has stopped and you have placed the cautery over this second incision that precedes it, then return to the restoration of him, and strongly press with your hand.
E si accideysso en le os satagias o son comminuidas, lahoras tu las tratz.	 If bleeding occurs in one or more of the arteries or veins, you should treat it.
Capitol .xi.	 The tenth chapter.
De restauracio de la fractura del adjutori.	 Of fracture recovery from the assistant
Adjutori es aquo que es entre le coyde entro al cap de la spalla.	 The assistant is between the spine at the top of the shoulder blades.
E si es trencat, lahoras la restauracio de lu es en una de doas manieyras, de las quals es la una que tu prenguas fust pla de migiera groceza segon aquesta forma:	 If it is torn, the recovery of him will be in one of two ways. The first way you should press firmly on a spot that is slightly tender after this manner:
E sian liatz en doas extremitatz dos liamentz, e aprop sia suspendut del loc elevat.	 And if it has torn both extremities, then the suspension of which limb first will depend on the elevation level.
E segua le malaute sobre una sezela; e aprop gieta fora le sieu bras trencat sobre le fust entro que pervengua al titillic de lu en le mieg loc del qual sia annexa la curvitat del fust.	 The patient is placed on a stretcher and the severed arm is placed over their chest, so that when it reaches the tip of the latter it will enter into its cavity beneath which it is attached to the curve of the breast.
E aprop suspen sobre aquel alcuna causa greu, o·l minestre extenda aquel a las partidas dejos; e aprop le metge eque la fractura am las sieuas mas ensemps, entro que la fractura retorne segon que cove.	 If the cause of this is great harm (e.g. a broken bone), then the physician extends it to the fullest extent possible; and if the fracture heals within certain days, he commands his servant to remove it after healing has been confirmed by another doctor.
E l’autra manieyra es que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sieua cervitz e suspen la ma del col de lu am liament; e aprop comanda a dos ministres que la un de lor tengua aquo que es desobre la fractura am las suas mas; e l’autre tengua le pus dejos de lu; e quascu de lor extenda a la sua partida.	 The other remedy is to put the patient on their back, and suspend one hand from the chest with cords or ropes, while the other servant holds his feet; and command both of them that one should lift up the arm so as to reach across it when it has healed properly.
E si voles que la extencio sia pus fort, lahoras tu strenh sobre la fractura am liament e sobre aquela am autre liament, e quascu dels dos ministres extendan a doas suas partidas.	 If you want that the stretch be very strong, have them stretch their arm across and along it as well, and let both of the servants extend each of their parts.
E donc si la fractura es propinquada a la extremitat del muscle, lahoras cove que sia pausat la mitat del liament sobre le citillic e l’autre dejos la fractura deves le coyde.	 And if the fracture is close to the end of the limb, have them suspend one half of it at the tip and hold back the other part.
E semblantment si la fractura es propdana al coyde, lahoras cove que sia pausat le liament sobre aquel loc e sobre aquel coyde.	 Similarly if the fracture is close to the elbow or the wrist, have them suspend it at that joint and at the other joint as well.
Enguala aquela am facilitat e ses trebal, e aprop quant sira engualada segon que cove e es applicada per bona applicacio, lahoras strenh aquela si no accideys apostema caut.	 When there is a space that is made narrow and tight with the help of straps or bandages applied well, then when the opening is closed after it has been properly applied by someone skilled in doing so, then the pain will cease to happen at once
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras layssa la strictura entro al vii dia, e pausa sobre lu lana sutza enbeguda en vi agre e oli rozat entro que repause le apostema, e lahoras tu stren aquela.	 If the pain does not cease with a pointed cautery as described above, then in seven days the obstruction will be released and the pain will subside gradually over time
E la manieyra de strenher aquela es que pauses emplastre sobre la fractura, e aprop pausa envolopament de drap nau sobre le emplastre; e aprop ajuste le bras sobre aquel adjutori, e pause la sua ma uberta sobre le sieu muscle.	 The custom of restraining the pain is to place a bandage tightly over the fracture, and then cover it with another bandage from above. Then apply your hand on top of that, and gently put your arm above the affected area to stop the pain.
E pausa le drap e strenh sobre le adjutori le bras per so que·l bras sia en loc de stelhas, si no prohibeys de aquo alcuna causa del os trencat.	 After removing the bandage and strapping your arm in place as described above to keep it where you want it if not preventing any tearing of that limb.
E lahoras usa de stelhas.	 The custom of restraining pain is to use straps
E es que pauses sobre la fractura aquela stela que sia pus lada e pus fort de las autras stelas; e pausa entre quascuna stela la latitut del dit, e sia la longitut de las stelas segon la trencadura am addicio de tres ditz de tota partida.	 The custom is to place a strap firmly over the fracture and put it tightly with other straps so that they overlap each other completely, and there must be an equal distance between the two ends of the strap in addition to its length from side to side across three times as much as the total width of all the parts.
E aprop strenh sobre las stelas am la strictura la qual he dita al comensament del capitol.	 The custom is to place a strap tightly over both straps and at the beginning of this capital letter
E es que la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura sia pus streyt.	 The custom is that your restraint must be tight on the area of the fracture
E quant pus es alonguada la fractura sia la strictura menor.	 When a bone fracture occurs within a smaller vessel
E donc si vezes le situament de las stelas e la strictura ayssi cum havem dit en la hora en la qual restauras le membre al sieu assituament, lahoras tu fay.	 If the situation of the vessels and the constriction occurs at that moment when you restore the member to its original position, then stop doing so
E si temes apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la strictura e las stelas entro al dia vii ayssi cum havem dit.	 If you fear an embolism may occur, let the vessels and constriction be resolved within seven days as mentioned above.
E aprop considera le liament en totas partidas per tres dias per so que no accida en le loc pruziment o imflacio; o es prohibida la vianda pervenir al membre per disposicio de superfluitat de strictura; e donc rectifiqua tot aquo segon que havem dit.	 After considering the matter in all parts for three days so that no accident occurs, or it is forbidden to insert a finger into the member due to excess constriction; and therefore rectify everything as mentioned above.
Mays si tu yest sobre confizanssa que no accida alcuna causa de aquo, lahoras no deslias la liguadura sino aprop tres dias o mays.	 If you are certain that no such cause has occurred, then don't loosen the bandage but keep it in place for three days or more.
E sia la sua dormicio del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e las sieuas mas sian sobre le stomac.	 The servant should be positioned above the patient's back and shoulders, as well as over their stomach.
E pausa sobre le adjutori cocena plena de lana engualment, e considera en tota hora de la nueyt o del dia que no sia deliada ni dissolta la figura del membre trencat, o que sia le liament mollificat, donc rectifica aquo tot am la tua vertut.	 Pause the full-length bandage and consider checking it after every hour or day to make sure that there is no bleeding from the broken member or any softening of the ligature, so rectify everything according to your experience.
E pausa la vianda del malaute segon le orde le qual havem denant mes, enayssi que la vianda sia subtil en le comensament entro que es comensat strenher; e lahoras cove que egrossas la vianda de lu.	 Pause the bandage on the patient at the time mentioned above, ensuring that it is not too tight in its initial insertion and should be slightly loosened as you loosen it.
Quar de constuma del adjutori e de la camba de lu es que sian strengutz en xl dias; e lahoras cove que sian desliatz e sia administrat banh e sia medicat am enguentz los quals rectifican aquel.	 When the attendant and bed chamber are in use, it is customary to have them strong for eleven days; and if they become sickly or diseased, they are to be washed daily, and treated with banquets as well, until such sicknesses are rectified.
E si la fractura es layha atrita, lahoras tu no deslies de aquela le liament e las stelhas entro a l dias o entro a dos meses.	 If the fracture occurs at the end of time or after two months, then it is customary to not apply any bandage and stitches until that day or for two months.
Capitol .xii.	 The twelfth caput of the Roman emperor Augustus.
De restauracio de fractura del bras.	 Restoration of a fracture in the arm.
Bras es compost de dos osses les quals so appelatz dos focils; dels quals la un es petit, e es aquel que siec le dit pous, e l’autre es gran e es aquel le qual es pausat dejos le petit dit, de la partida pus dejus.	 The arm is composed of two bones called humerus and radius. Of the two, one is small, which we call the ulna; and the other is large, which is placed below the smaller bone from its start to prevent it from coming out.
E fort leu es trencat le focil major solament, o le petit, e fort leu son trincatz ensemps.	 If only the larger bone is broken or just the smaller one, then a large number of fractures are caused in this way.
E quan es trencat le focil petit desus, lahoras la restauracio de lu es leugiera, e la sanacio de lu es pus leugiera.	 When the smaller bone is broken, it is easier to restore and heal that one than the other.
E quan es trencat le focil de lu dejos la fractura de lu es mala, e la sanacio de lu es dificil.	 If the larger bone is broken instead of the smaller one, the healing process for it is difficult and takes longer to heal than when only the smaller bone is broken.
E pus mala de aquela es quan son trencatz dos osses essemps.	 It is bad news when two bones are broken together.
Donc si l’os le qual es trencat es le focil petit desus, lahoras es convenient al metge, deves la restauracio de lu, que pauze petita extencio am facilitat entro que aquel sia engualhat.	 If the bone that was broken is the smaller one of both bones, it's preferable for the doctor to restore and heal it, so as to prevent complications until it heals properly.
Mays si le focil gran es aquo que es trincat, lahoras cove que pause extencio pus vehement.	 When the patient's pulse quickens significantly
E si les dos focils so ensemps trincatz, lahoras cove que tu pauses la extritura mot pus fort.	 If both pulses are very rapid, then it is customary to stop applying the remedy vigorously.
E cove que pauses la figura de la ma deves la restauracio de lu e la extencio de lu estenduda sobre un coyssi, e sia le pols de la ma a las partidas desus, pus aut que totz les autres ditz, e le dit auricular sia pus bas dels autres ditz, e le malaute sia cezent sobre una cezela cayrada.	 You should place the hand on top of a cushion that is elevated to prevent injury from the application being too vigorous, and have both hands make sure all other details are attended as well, including covering the patient's ears with a padded earpiece in case they need it covered at any time.
E sia un coyssi denant lu en la altetut o endreyt de lu, per so que·l malaute no encorra trebalh.	 If you are using an elevated or elevated bed to lower them down, make sure the patient does not get hurt while lowering them down.
E aprop le ministre extenda le bras de la partida pus dejos am la sieua ma o am liament, e autre ministre extenda desus semblantment.	 The minister should stretch their arm to the side and hold onto their elbow or hand in case of an emergency, and another minister extend theirs similarly as well.
E aprop le metge engualhe le os entro que redugua aquel segon la milhor figura que pot.	 When the surgeon has made an incision on the second limb, he should carefully inspect it to ensure that there are no injuries or problems with it.
E si en la factura del os so satagias, lahoras te perforsa raduzir tota pessa en le sieu loc am la tua vertut.	 If the area around the incision is swollen, then you should gently clean any pus in that location and your fingertips.
E si appar en lu satagia separada que punh la codena e no es a tu speransa en la restauracio de lu, lahoras tu fen sobre lu e osta aquela segon la manieyra la qual havem dita desus.	 If the separation appears to be worsening and is not responding to treatment at all, then you should stop treating it and try applying another remedy that has been mentioned by other doctors.
Mays si la fractura es am plagua, yeu ja he fayt ad aquo capitol singular, e donc pren la curacio de aquel.	 When a fracture occurs in place
E si accideys apostema caut al comensament de la tua restauracio, lahoras tu lineys un drap am cerot fayt de oli rozat e cera blanca, e sia migier entre specitut e subtilitat, e strenh drap sobre aquel am strictura subtil entro que le apostema sia cedat; e lahoras remau le cerot e pausa emplastre preparat de polvera de moli am clayre de huou, e aprop pausa stelhas; e sia la stela la qual es pauzada sobre aquela fractura pus lada e pus fort.	 If a bandage is applied at the moment of your restoration procedure, then spread out a cloth soaked in hot oil and white vinegar between the small and large intestine, covering it with a damp cloth to prevent burns; and after this apply a strip on which there has been poured a poultice made from honey.
E sapias que·l nombre de las stelas del bras so vi en las majors disposicios, o sia la fractura en un focil o en dos focils ensemps.	 It is known that the names of the strips on your body are located in the greatest number of places or if the fracture occurs at one or two joints.
E aprop pausa la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura pus fort e pus vehement, e quan mays sira la extrictura a las partidas desus de la fractura o a las partidas pus bassas de lu, pausa la strictura un pauc pus molh segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu en le comensament del capitol.	 After applying the poultice on the area of the fracture and making it firm and hot, if you need to remove or add strips from the fracture, soften the strip slightly before applying it again after remembering this in the beginning of the passage.
E les draps que so envolopatz sobre la fractura sian draps mols humitz, e no sian durs ni aspres, e·l fiel am le qual es strenhut sia de li propriament migier entre subtil e gros, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	 The strips that cover the fracture are soft and moist, not too hard or stiff, and their thickness is adjusted so that they fit between thick and thin precisely as we recommend.
E considera le membre e·l liament aprop alcus dias.	 Consider the member whose ligament you want to treat days ahead.
E si accideys alcuna causa de la qual rectificacio es necessaria, ayssi cum prusiment le qual accideys al membre, e lahoras cove que tu enbroques le membre am aygua cauda entro que cesse aquel pruziment.	 If there is any cause for which a correction may be necessary, whether it occurs in the member itself or elsewhere, then after applying water to the affected area make sure that no further harm will come from this treatment.
E leysses le membre no costreyt entro que repause, e aprop torna la strictura.	 When a limb feels numb or lifeless after a stroke, support it gently as if to restore circulation.
E si la extrictura ja es mollificada e l’os ja es remaugut e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras rectifiqua tot aquo am la tua vertut.	 If the constriction has already been softened and the limb is returning to sensation or movement as here, then proceed with your usual care for this part of the body.
E considera mays si le nutriment es prohibit pervenir al membre per superfluitat de strictura, quar lahoras cove que mollifiques aquel un petit e laysses aquel per alcus dias entro que corra ad aquel le nutriment, e aprop strenh aquel.	 If nutrition is prohibited to prevent constriction due to excess of constriction, then care should be taken that it is softened a bit and let it run for a while until the circulation resumes in that area and tighten it afterwards.
Mays si al malaute no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no cove que sia desliat entro aprop xx dias o enviro de aquels.	 If nothing bad happens as a result of the things I've said, then there is no need to worry about it for the next 24 hours or until you see me again.
E aprop sia suspenduda la ma del malaute per la sua vertut de movement agitatius, e fay aquel dormir sobre le sieu dos.	 Then put down your hand on the patient's chest to stimulate breathing and let them lie flat on their back for sleep.
E sapias que aquesta fractura es restaurada en xxx dias o en xxxii dias, o fort leu es restaurada en xxviii dias, e tot aquo es segon la disposicio de las compleccios e las disposicios de la vertut.	 You know that this fracture will be restored within 30 days or in no more than 42 days and depending on the complexity of treatment procedures involved.
Capitol .xiii.	 Chapter Thirteen.
De restauracio de fractura de la pinche de la ma e dels ditz.	 Treatment for fractures of the arm or leg.
Sapias que a la pinche de la ma e als nuzes dels ditz tart endeve fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio motas veguadas.	 You know that if you have a fracture in your arm or leg and they don't heal properly without external intervention, then there is an issue with their bones healing process.
E quan accideys a la ma fractura o atrissio, lahoras cove que·l malaute segua cayrat e denant lu lies cezent segon equalitat, e aprop pausa la ma de lu sobre aquela extenduda.	 When there is an injury to the arm or leg of the patient, the servant will cause it to remain still and prevent any further movement from occurring on that side, and place a hand over that area
E aprop le ministre extenda les osses trencatz e·l metge engualhe aquels entro que sian congongitz am bona congoncio.	 The minister will extend the bones to be broken by the doctor in such a way as to ensure good communication between both parties
E lahoras cove que pause emplastre e estopa, si no accideys apostema caut; e aprop pausa stela desus segon la quantitat del loc, e tu ja has envolopada aquela en drap de li.	 The servant will stop the movement of the stretcher if it is not being used properly and place a cloth over that to prevent any further accidents.
Mays si la trincadura es en las partidas dedintz deves le ventre de la palma, e lahoras fay semblant de spera de drap, e comanda al malaute que strenha aquela am la sua palma trincada; aprop sia strenguda am drap lonc.	 If the hernia is in the abdomen, then have the servant place a cloth on the palm of their hand and command them to stretch that arm holding the stretched hand towards their body with the stretched palm facing down.
E sia la stelha de cuer am drap en le qual sia levitat, per so que le cuer sia aplicat a la palma; e strenh aquela segon que cove.	 If it is necessary to use a cloth as padding on the chest area in order for the patient's body to be placed on their palm, then stretch that arm holding the stretched hand towards them with the stretched palm facing down.
Mays si la fractura es a las partidas defora, lahoras cove que pauses desus stela e autre estela de la partida dejos en la palma, per so que la ma sia uberta e dreyta; e aprop pausa la strictura, ayssi cum es revolvuda la ma a la rateta entre les ditz am liamentz.	 If the injury is to the side of the body far from their chest area, then have the servant place another cloth on that palm for support and stretch it as well while holding their hand at right angles between them in order to prevent any movement or twisting of the arm.
E si accideys fractura a alcu dels nozes dels ditz, lahoras si es le dit pous, sia engualat segon que cove e aprop sia strenhut am la palma e si·t voles, pausa a lu astela petita dreyta per so que sia elevada la fractura e no sia mauguda.	 If there is an injury to the side of the body far from their feet area, then have the servant place another cloth on that palm as well and stretch it while holding their hand at right angles between them in order to prevent any movement or twisting of the arm, but also ensure that the smaller bandage remains loose so that the injured part does not become twisted.
Mays si la fractura es en les autres ditz, ayssi cum en aquel del mieg loc, o en le indic, o en le auricular, o en le anular, lahoras sia engualhat e liat am le dit sa le qual siec aquel; o sian totz liatz segon continuacio, e es milhor; o pausa sobre aquel stela petita, ayssi cum havem dit en le pous.	 "When a fracture occurs in the fingers or toes, it is customary for doctors to apply it to the ear, nose, or anus, and on the thumb of the hand, so that pain will stop.
E considera, en la tua restauracio, e aprop aquela, la disposicio de apostema caut e oppose — am la tieua operacio — am aquo que cove quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, segon que es iterada la narracio de lu.	 "Considering your restoration work and that of others who follow after you, the appointment for a cauterization is made when any cause occurs as repeated in the story.
Capitol .xiv.	 [No translation provided]
De restauracio de fractura del os de la coyssa.	 "Restoration of fractures in the leg bones.
Le os de la cueyssa motas veguadas es trencat e es declarat al sentiment segon que es convertit a la partida denant e a la pus sobirana.	 The legs are trembling and it is declared as a fracture after having become cold, causing numbness in the feet.
E la restauracio de lu se fa enayssi que·l liament es strenhut sobre la fractura e autre liament dejos la fractura, e le malaute sia prostrat sobre le sieu ventre e sobre la cara.	 The restoration is made by placing a cushion on top of the fracture and another on it to support the fracture while holding their hands.
E aprop le ministre extenda tot le liament a la sua partida segon la qualitat, quan la fractura es en le mieg loc del os.	 "The minister extends all the time for the injury, after quality, when the fracture is in the leg bones.
Mays si es propdana a la razitz de la cueyssa, lahoras sia le liament propda al denolh a la partida del pentenilh, per so que la extencio caja en sus, e le autre liament dejos la fractura.	 "It is customary to place the bandages on the thighs for support and another to hold onto the fracture.
E semblantment si la trencadura es propdana al denolh, lahoras sia fayt le liament propda al denol, e sia la extencio a las partidas dejos.	 "Similarly if it is necessary to bind the wound, then place the bandage on the neck and also hold onto both of its parts.
E aprop le metge enguale le os am amduas las sieuas mas entro que reduzesca aquel segon la semblansa natural e l’os es conjungit per bona conjunccio; lahoras cove que pauses emplastre e strictura, si no accideys al membre apostema.	 "The surgeon places the patient's hands on a cushion in order to reduce any further effusion or swelling.
Mays si accideys en lu apostema, lahoras tu layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que l’apostema caut sia cedat, e aprop retorna a la tua curacio.	 If it occurs on the patient's arm, then you should wait for some time to allow the effusion to subside, and return your attention back to the patient.
La strictura de lu sia ayssi fayta: cove que envolopes sobre la fractura una benda dura, e dobla aquela dos o tres veguadas, e remaugua de lu superfluitat; e aprop envolopa la camba entro que pervengua al talo e a la razitz de la cueyssa.	 The compression of the body should be applied in such a way that it covers over the fracture with a hard object and presses it against both sides or even three, to remove any excess fluid; then apply pressure on the wound area and chest region to prevent further bleeding from the incision.
E intromet lonc fiel entre la cueyssa e la camba prop del denol a las partidas dejos, e venguan las extremitatz del fiel de la partida pus sobirana de las doas partz, e aprop revolveys sobre la camba e la cueyssa aquo que superflueys de la benda.	 The doctor must insert a needle between the incision and the body part to be operated on from below; then remove both hands of the assistant in order for them to hold one side, and place their hand over the wound and chest area to prevent excess fluid from escaping through the bandage.
E aprop pausa sobre la cueyssa en le loc de aquela fractura astelhas, e pausa de aquelas una stela sobre le os de la camba.	 The surgeon should pause over the incision in the location of that fracture, and place a sterile dressing on top of their chest.
E aprop uempli las vacuitatz entre la camba e la cuoyssa am draps mols, per so que sia coagulada la extrictura.	 The surgeon should apply tight bandages between the patient's body and wound to ensure coagulation occurs quickly.
E aprop comensa am strictura fort del mieg sobre le loc de la fractura am tres envolucios o quatre, e quant mays tu te alonhas am liament del loc de la fractura, la tua strictura sia menor e pus leugiera e pus molha.	 The surgeon should make a tight bandage over the location of that fracture with three or four convolutions, and as soon as you remove it from its location, your bandage should be looser to prevent excessive pressure on the wound area.
E aprop exten a doas extremitatz del fiel a las partidas dejos entro que pervengua a la cavilha del pe, e strenh amdoas las extremitatz de las stelhas del autra part per so que·l liament no sia remaugut del sieu loc.	 When the first joint is opened on the foot, it must prevent the intestine from coming out through the opening in the thigh to maintain its location within the body.
E aprop leyssa la strectura sobre aquel, don esta ayssi que no accideys al membre corrosio ni apostema caut ni emflacio e semblantz ad aquels; e si accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, adonc cueta te am desliament de lu, e rectifica aquo que accideys tot aprop, segon que havem dit motas veguadas.	 After making the incision on that part, so that no harm occurs to the other joints or arteries, cauterize it promptly if there is any cause of those things, and correct this as soon as possible, after you've said your goodbyes.
Mays si en le os es pessa del os la qual pongua, lahoras cove que tu engualhes aquel segon que a tu es possibla; e sino, fen sobre lu e remau aquel, e cura am aquo del qual es precedida la rememoracio entro que sia sanat.	 If you're able to remove the obstruction in the eye that way, then proceed with your operation as planned. But if not, remove it and remember this for future reference so that no harm is done.
E alcunas veguadas es strenhuda aquesta fractura de la coyssa otra aquo que sian ajustadas a lu stelhas, ayssi cum havem dit en le adjutori e·n le bras.	 These bandages should be wrapped tightly around that fracture as well, just like in the arms.
Mays empero en la restauracio de lu en tal manieyra fayta no accideys al malaute claudicacio; e si es restaurada sola, otra aquo que li sia applicada l’autra camba, lahoras es necessari que claudique aquel del qual es tostemps.	 However, during the recovery of that limb in such a way, it should not cause venous insufficiency; and if done alone, apply another bandage as well, as doctors must ensure that there is no further movement from the part being treated.
E sapias que la coyssa es strenhuda en xl dias o un pauc mes o un pauc mens, e tot aquo es segon la diversitat de las compleccios e de las autras dispozicios.	 You know that the joint must be tightly wrapped for a certain number of days or weeks depending on the complexity and circumstances involved.
Capitol .xv.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet
De restauracio de la fractura de la rodela del denolh.	 Restoring or supporting a fractured elbow
Sapias que fractura de la rodela del denol tart endeve, mays accideys a lu motas veguadas atrissio.	 Do you mean to say that the fracture of the elbow must be supported in order for it to heal properly?
Mays si accideys a lu fractura, lahoras no es sino fissura o trauc en las suas partidas, e aquo es am plagua o ses plagua, e sobre aquo tot es estat am le sentiment.	 If the fracture is not properly supported, then it may heal with a scar or deformation on its parts, and in that case, everything is considered a success, as long as the feeling of healing remains.
E la restauracio de lu es enayssi que sia engualat aquo que es romput de las partidas de lu am les ditz entro que sia agreguat e conjongit segon que es possible per equacio e facilitat e fabricacio.	 The restoration of it must be done with great care, ensuring that all the parts are properly aligned and together before attempting to restore or repair it using various techniques such as alignment and support.
E aprop pausa emplastre e pausa sobre aquel stela redonda, si indigeysses de aquela; e strenh desus am strictura ad aquo convenient.	 Then place the round slab over it, if necessary; and straighten its supports to this end.
E aprop considera totas las disposicios las quals havem recomtadas en las autras fracturas, ayssi cum es apostema caut e semblant ad aquels enaissi que se oppause a tot accident am aquo que a lu es convenient entro que sia sanat.	 Then consider all the ways that were used in previous fractures; also take into account the possibility of supporting it adequately so that it can be healed properly.
Capitol .xvi.	 When using certain remedies, one must exercise caution and proceed with care and understanding.
De restauracio de la fractura de la camba.	 Restoring or supporting a fractured arm
Sapias que en la camba so dos osses dels quals la un es gros, e es le nompnat per nom de la camba; e l’autra es subtil, e es nompnat focil.	 If one of the bones in the arm is more prominent and named after its name - the arm itself -, while the other bone is slender and named focal.
E accideys a quascus de las specias de fractura aquo que accideys als dos osses del bras, e per aquo es fayta restauracio de lu ayssi cum restauracio del bras engualment, e la operacio de lu es una.	 When the two bones of the arm fracture happens, and for this reason it is necessary to restore function in both arms equally, and surgery on that limb is required as well
E si so trincatz dos osses ensemps, la camba es convertida a totas partidas.	 When two bones are broken, the leg will become paralyzed.
E si es trinquat le os pus subtil, la camba es convertida a las partidas Denant.	 If one of the bones is very small, the leg becomes weak.
E si es trincat le os pus gros, atrobas aquel dejos, e es de aquelas causas que no so a tu ameguadas.	 If it is caused by an extremely large bone break, remove that one and consider other causes not in your list.
E aprop aministra extencio e equacio e liguacio de las astelas segon aquel engualment.	 After the first assistant is done with excision, ligation, and packing of the wounds as mentioned earlier
Mays empero cove, si la fractura de la camba es laja havent motas satagias, que la extencio sia mendre e pus leugiera, e alleuja am la tua vertut.	 If the leg bone fracture is a compound one causing significant loss of function, excision should be done in an emergency and it can also result in loss of limb if not treated appropriately.
E en la camba es alcuna causa de operacio sobre le bras, e es quan tu engualas las stelhas e que comples tota la tieua operacio, lahoras tu prendras pessas de fustz de pi le qual es pausat dejos las cauzas las quals so pausades en solies, e so faytas eyssament de brancas de palma; aligeys de aquelas a las quals es petita groceza, e no sia ges de las manudas, e sia la longuesa de aquelas segon la longuesa de la camba, e del denol entro al pus dejos.	 If the leg bone fracture is not related to surgery on the arm and you complete your work thoroughly without any mistakes in your diagnosis or treatment of all causes except for those that are mentioned as absent from solutions, it will be very helpful if you also do brightness tests with your hands; take into account the smallness of those, and don't forget about the length of those compared to the leg bone, and between the other one and this.
E aprop envolopa sobre quascuna drap en doas envolucios segon la longitut de lu, e pausa la una sobre la partida de la camba de la una part e l’autra del autra part, e sian del denol entro al pus bas loc del pe.	 When you have made a slit up to the length of his body and placed one cushion under each arm at right angles to one another, then place one cushion on the chest of one side and the other on the other side, so that both legs are beneath them.
E aprop lias las doas stelhas en tres locs de doas extremitatz e al mieg loc, quar am aquesta strectura la camba es prohibida de clinar a la partida dextra e sinistra, e sta per bona stacio.	 Place two cushions in three locations of both arms and at the elbow joint, as this stretch is forbidden to be applied on the right side and left side, for it serves well enough
E ja es aministrat un brasset de fust segon la longuesa de la camba; e sia pausada en lu la camba per so que conserve aquel de movement.	 First administer a bandage of fur from the length of his leg; and place it on him to prevent that from moving around.
E majorment cove que tu fassas aquo en fractura, e quan am aquela es plagua propriament.	 And moreover you must do this in case, as when he is very sick.
E aprop considera en quascun jorn la camba e studia am aquel per derier studi, e tu le guardes de apostema e de imflacio o de autres causas semblantz; e cum accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, lahoras opausa te a lu am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	 And remember each day the leg and study it for healing purposes, and you keep it free from swelling or other such causes; if any of these occurs then stop doing so to allow his health to improve.
Capitol .xvii.	 Chapter XVII
De la fractura del talo e dels osses del pe e dels ditz.	 Of the fracture of the toes and bones of the feet and fingers
Al talo no accideys fractura de tot; mays als osses del pe accideys fractura alcunas veguadas; e als ditz del pe pauc accideys fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio en las mes de disposicio.	 Of the toe fractures there are no total fractures of them; some bones of the foot may fracture others and very few fingers fracture unless an injury occurs in their vicinity.
E si als osses del pe endeve fractura e vezes aquels osses esser elevatz sobre si entre lor, lahoras le malaute pause le sieu pe sobre la terra preparat ayssi cum anant.	 When the feet are fractured due to the bones being raised above them, doctors instruct the patient to place their foot on a prepared surface such as they do when walking.
E aprop pausa la un pe sobre aquo que es elevat de aquels osses, e aprop calca aquels, e prem, e engualha aquels entro que torno en los locs.	 And place the foot on top of what is raised by those bones, and cover them, press down onto them, and hold back those that return to their places
E aprop pausa emplastre e stopa desus, e pausa dejos le ventre del pe una petita taula a la qual sian dos caps plas.	 And place the foot on a small table with two legs flat
E aprop strenh aquela am le pe am strectura descent, pus que tu has envolopada aquela am draps e am autres causes de las quals indigeys.	 And stretch that leg as much as you can, make sure to wrap it tightly with a bandage and apply the others like this one as well.
E cum a lu passan tres dias o quatre, lahoras tu deslia le liament, quar tu atrobaras les osses engualatz, o sian trincatz o sian dislocatz, e la operacio en aquels es ayssi co coneysses.	 And when it has been passed for three or four days, the doctor will remove the ligature and bones may be fractured, dislocated, then the surgery takes place in this way as well.
Mays si alcus ditz son trincatz, lahoras restaura aquels, e enguala aquels ayssi cum yeu e recomtat a tu en la restauracio dels ditz de la ma.	 If any of the bones are broken, doctors restore those and connect them in this way as recommended by your surgeon during bone restoration surgery.
E aprop pausa al dit trincat stela segon la longitut del dit, e sia pus lada de lu un pauc; e aprop dejos le pe aquesta taula la qual e a tu recomtada, e strenh aquela am strictura decent.	 And place the second broken bone next to its length of that foot, and push it down gently on that table recommended by your surgeon, stretch that leg as much as you can.
Mays si aquo que es trincat dels osses so dos o tres o mays, lahoras tu pausa sobre quascun dit astela de la sua quantitat envolopada en drap leon, e strenh la taula en le pus bas del pe, e sia stant sobre la un dels caps de la taula foro le ventre del pe per que la tengua am bona retencio.	 If the two or three bones are broken in this way, doctors place a bandage on each of those feet and stretch that leg flat down onto the table from the foot downwards to ensure it is placed well over one of the heads of the table against the stomach area so as for it to have good support.
E es convenient a tu que no oblides que no consideres totas las causas las quals que e ditas a tu en las autras fracturas dels accidentz que havem dit; e opausa te a tot accident am aquo que cove.	 It is recommended that you do not overlook any of the causes mentioned in your previous responses, and avoid considering anything related to accidents or injuries mentioned previously
Capitol .xviii.	 The above text seems like it could be a continuation of the same medieval medical treatise as before. Do you want me to continue translating each sentence individually?
De fractura del conh de la femna e del os del pentenilh e de la vergua del home.	 Fracture of the hand and the arm bone, and from the wrist bone
Quan le conh de la femna es trincat, lahoras fay aquela ceser en cezela cayrada, e aprop enclina aquela a la partida del dos un petit, e sia tenguda detras.	 If the hand of woman is broken, the wounds are cauterized in the same manner as for any other wound on the body, except that it is placed behind to avoid touching with the fingers
E aprop la matrona umpla le conh de coto, e sia fayt en le conh de lu ayssi cum spera; e aprop la femna sia concutida, e eleva le dos de lu petit a petit, quar tot aquo es fora-getat entro que sia denant la partida del conh ayssi cum spera e l’os trincat retorna.	 In the case of cutting off the arm bone (which also includes the hand), they cauterize as for any other wound on the body, except that it is raised little by little from behind, and when the arm bone returns cut, it returns exactly like this and the hand bone cuts off.
E aprop pausa pulvils sobre le dos de lu, e quan vol urinar remaugua le coto am facilitat e aprop urine, e reduzeys e retorna aquel segon la manieyra segon la qual mezist aquel al comensament, e aprop retorne al sieu pulvil primier.	 Place powder on the hands and when you want to urinate it becomes easy and place urine, reduce them and return them back in order from first to last, as for each individual use.
E fassa ayssi per vii dias o enviro aquels, quar aquel es restaurat.	 Do this every seven days or sooner if necessary, until it is restored.
E si voles, pren una vezica de ovela e strenh sobre le trauc de lu una canula de canavera; e entromet tota la vesica en le conh de lu, e aprop ensuffla en la canula am vertut entro que la vesica sia imflada dedintz le conh, quar la fractura retorna.	 If you wish, take a catheter and stretch it over the top of her leg with a cannula; insert it into the bladder completely until the bladder is inflated by the bone, in order for the fracture to return.
E aprop sia umplida de coto e estia per alcus dias segon que havem recomtat, entro que sia sanat.	 When the bowels are filled with feces and remain for a certain number of days that we recommend, until they become healthy.
E quan le os del pentenil de home o de femna es trincat, lahoras aministra en la restauracio e agulacio de lu aquo que havem recomtat en l’os del anca.	 When the anus of a man or woman is torn, doctors provide treatment in the form of repair and stitching that we recommend for the affected area.
E aquo que es dreyt no es occultat en aquestas fracturas proprinquas e que pauc endeveno, majorment ad aquel al qual es alcun studi e us e enten aquest meu libre mot; quar aquela fractura significa a tu en las majors disposicios via dreyturiera en la restauracio e en la strictura de lu, e donc enten be.	 In cases where it is not advisable to operate in these close fractures and the patient can still make use of their limbs, then take that limb for study and research purposes; when a fracture means that you should proceed with greater caution in repairing and stitching, understand its severity from there.
Mays en la vergua del home quan es trincada, pren guarguamela de auca, e met la vergua en aquela; e aprop pausa sobre lu envolucio de drap, e sia envolopada, e aprop sia layssada per tres dias o enviro aquels, e sia sanada.	 When the finger is torn off by an injury, take a bandage from that place and wrap it around her arm; and after wrapping with gauze and securing it tightly, keep the area wrapped for three days or until healed.
Capitol .xix.	 [No translation provided]
De restauracio de fractura dels osses quan es am plagua.	 The treatment of a broken bone when the injury is severe
Convenient es ad aquel al qual accideys fractura am plagua, e majorment si le os es gran ayssi cum es le os de la cuoyssa o de l’adjutori, o semblant ad aquel, que tu te cuoytes e fleubotomes aquel tantost si las condicios de fleubotomia a tu o testifican ayssi cum desus havem dit.	 If the fracture is severe enough to require bone marrow aspiration or biopsy, and especially if it involves the skull base or adjacent structures, then you should seek further testing as described.
E si la plagua eflueys sanc, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la retencio de lu enayssi que tu polverizes sobre lu zegi trissat, si a tu autra causa no es present.	 If the pain worsens after you apply pressure to the affected area and it is not relieved by removing the clothing as described, then there may be another cause for this pain.
E aprop comensa restaurar la fractura en aquel meteys dia, e no prolongues aquo, si no accideys apostema.	 When a fracture occurs on that day, do not continue doing it if you are found to have broken bones
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la restauracio de lu entro al ix dia, entro que sia cedat le apostema, e no apropinques a lu en le tertz dia e·l iiii de tot, quar tu faras accidir mals accidentz.	 If you break any bone when restoring the fracture on that day, then stop doing it immediately and do not start again until 3 days later, or else you will cause more accidents.
Mays si le os trencat es eminent sobre la codena descubert, lahoras cove que te perforses reduzir aquel e engualar aquel am las tuas mas am facilitat e am pauca extencio.	 If the bone is broken in that place it will be necessary to do everything possible and quickly to reduce swelling and pain associated with that injury.
Mays si extencio no es a tu preparada e la equacio de lu am las tieuas mas, lahoras tu reduzeys aquel am las tuas mas am aquest sturment; e es sturment le qual es fayt de ferr, la longitut del qual es de vii ditz o de viii e la latitut del qual es segon la quantitat de la plagua; e per aquo es necessari al metge que prengua de aquels tres o quatre segon la quantitat que indigeys ad aquo en la curacio en tota specia de fractura.	 If the recovery is not yet complete, and you have exhausted all attempts to reduce swelling associated with that injury, then it will be necessary for a doctor to apply pressure at those three or four points in order to determine how much pressure needs to be applied across the length of seven inches or eight inches, depending on the quantity needed.
E sia redon, e sia en lu pauca groceza per so que no sia doblat deves la comprecio sobre aquel en la hora de la operacio.	 In other words, if you have already tried everything and are still in need of more pressure to reduce swelling during the operation itself, then it is necessary to increase the amount of pressure applied by those three or four points.
E sia de aguda extremitat al qual sia marge en las sieuas extremitatz; e sia le desus de lu a grossetut tendent, e de la maytat de lu entro a las partidas.	 The side on which the margin is located in your extremities should be stretched out and held by those who are assigned to that limb, as well as increased tension towards the middle of it until the end of each part.
E aquesta es la forma de lu:	 This is how it's done
E es nompnat en grec “labre volentz atelarem”, so es paleta pauca.	 The name in Greek means "to remove the obstruction of the vein.
Per que cove que sia pausada la extremitat de lu acuda elevada sobre la extremitat del os eminent.	 In order for the extremity to be supported above the other arm, it is necessary to hold down the extremity while lifting the other arm up.
E inpelleys aquel en una veguada entro que retorne le os, e sia engualat am alcuna equacio.	 The former shall lie flat on a bed within reach of returning the limb; and another servant is to support one end while the other does nothing.
E donc esforsa te engualar las extremitatz de la fractura entre lor, e si la extremitat de lu trencada es subtil, e no pren aquela le sturment per bona axcepcio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas la extremitat de aquel os entro que l’insturment haja poder de aquo.	 The force must be applied to the broken limb between its extremities; if one of them is too subtle and cannot tolerate being held by a strong instrument, then it is customary for the attendant to insert his arm into that limb in order to allow him to use this force.
Mays si no podes reduzir le os de tot am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras enscideys aquel am aquo que coveneys a lu dels inscizoris les quals havem ditz; o serra aquel am una de las serras en qualque manieyra sia a tu possible.	 If you cannot reduce the arm to this extent as recommended, then apply it in one of the ways that we've mentioned; or rather use another instrument, if it is possible for you.
E aprop ratz aquel que roman en le os de asperitat e de scorsas menudas.	 And place a cushion over his head and shoulders to prevent any discomforts.
E cum le os es reduzit, e aprop la reduccio le malaute atroba dolor vehement ledent, lahoras sapias que le os no es retornat al sieu loc natural; e adonc fay aquo quar tu confereyses al malaute gran juvament.	 When the arm is reduced and you apply heat to relieve the severe pain of a sprain, it must be remembered that the arm should not return to its original location; so if you suspect a major fracture, do not try to force it back into place immediately.
Cum es complida la tua restauracio la qual fas al os, e lahoras submergeys drap en vi stiptic negre, e propriament si es en estiu, e no pauses sobre la plagua cerot ni autre causa en la qual sia oli, per so que no fassa en lu accidir poyredura e corropcio.	 When you have completed your dressing of the wounds and they are covered in black, especially if it is summer, do not let them lie flat or any other cause that may prevent proper healing to occur
E aprop aministra stelas en la hora del tieu compliment de la restauracio de l’os, e layssa la plagua descuberta enayssi que inscidas le trauc am forfexs e uses de envolucios segon la quantitat de la plagua.	 When administering the dressings of the wound at the time of dressing change, ensure that you uncover the bandage in such a way as to prevent it from sticking to the patient's skin and use a sufficient amount of adhesive depending on the size of the bandage.
E guarda te am tota cautela que no strenhas la plagua am la fractura, quar motas veguadas an fayt aquo les fols metges, e fero accidir sobre les sieus malautes mort o malautia corrodent o zuthement, so es sania.	 Be very careful when applying the bandage to prevent it from being pulled off due to any of these reasons: if they are not healed yet and may cause harm to the doctors or if they are infected with contagious diseases that can be harmful, avoid doing this at all costs.
E si la tieua strictura leugiera, molli, diversa de la strictura de las autras fracturas.	 If your wounds leak significantly more than other fractures of similar severity, you should seek medical attention immediately.
E si la plagua es gran o es plagua mala, e temes sobre aquel alcus accidentz mals les quals havem recomtatz, e atrobas dolor en le loc, lahoras no cove que pauses sobre aquel astelas, mays fay ad aquel envolucio de draps durs en loc de stelas e strenh lu am aquelas.	 If the bandage is large or bad-quality and you are worried about any accidents that may occur while applying it or if there's pain in the area where it will be applied, do not let the adhesive of the dressing harden over that area as this could cause injury or further problems.
E cum aprop un dia o dos vezes ja la plagua comensar, que en lu sia engendrat brac, lahoras tu osta desus le drap le qual havias pausat sobre aquel am vi, e aprop aministra calguas, enguentz am les quals de nostra constuma es que mediquem las plaguas, ayssi cum enguentz tetrafarmacon e semblantz ad aquel.	 If the bandage has begun to come off once or twice already, you should remove it and use a new one that was placed over that area earlier. After doing this, treat the wounds as usual, applying calamus or other medication as needed.
E conveneys a tu que deslias le liament e considera la plagua en quascun dia mati e vespre entro que sia consolidada e fermada, e cove que·l membre sia preparat en tal manieyra que la poyredura corra de lu a las partidas dejos am facilitat.	 When the member is to be lubricated and considered in each day from matins until vespres as consolidated and closed, it should also have been prepared so that the lubrication runs smoothly through its openings at ease
si a la plagua passan motz dias, e no es consolidada ni es abscindit de lu le brac, lahoras sapias que aqui so satagias de las petitas per que cove enquieras la plagua am tenta.	 If the cushion is passed days and is not consolidated or closed by it, then you should carefully lubricate small openings to prevent any damage that may occur
E de aquelas satagias aquelas que so separadas remau e extratz, aquelas que de lor no so separadas e pongen le membre e fan accidir dolor, perforsa te a inscidir aquelas segon que a tu aquo es possibla.	 If the small openings are separated and extended, those that from them do not separate or penetrate into the body and cause pain, then you should check if it is possible to perform an incision in those areas
E si accideys a la plagua zuchem o eluchen, so es stiomenios, o autra specia de corrupcio e de putrefaccio, lahoras cove que pauses a quada un de aquels am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio del qual es precedida narracio en le sieu capitol.	 If the cushion dries up or becomes dirty, sour, or decomposed by some form of corruption and putrefaction, then you should check if it is necessary to pause in order for one of these to be applied on its surface which serves as a means of preparation before narration at that point.
E de aquo en le qual cove que stia lo mieu sermo e tu fassas present la tua pessa: quan os gros es trincat, emineys sobre le membre ayssi cum le os de la coyssa e del ajutori e semblantz ad aquels dels membres grans, e que no presumas atraccio de lu, ni la extraccio de lu quar motas veguadas accideys per aquo la mort; habantz layssa aquel entro que poyresca, quar fort leu cayra per si aprop xx dias o xxx; e lahoras cura la plagua si a tu es vist, e si no layssa aquela.	 When large parts are torn or damaged, take the body's joints and supports between them as you would with the larger limbs, without causing any harm to it, nor removing anything that may cause death; hold back from performing it if after many attempts it still does not come out in a certain amount of time, and cure the cushion when you see it, or do nothing.
Capitol .xx.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
De la curacio de nodacio que accideys en le vestigi de alcuna fractura.	 From the cure's point of view, a fracture healing process has begun.
Motas veguadas accideys aquesta nodacio en le vestigi de sanacio de fractura, e majorment que es prop de las juncturas, e es orrasada per lu la figura del membre; e fort leu prohibeys le membre de la sua operacio natural.	 When a fracture healing process begins in the area where an injury occurred and primarily affects joints, it is recommended to prevent the member from using its natural function during that time.
Adonc considera si la nodacio es recent e aministra en aquela medicinas que han stipticat ayssi co es aloen, e enses, e mira, e sercacollo, e acrassia, e semblantz ad aquels; enayssi que prenguas de aquela alcunas o totas, e comfesiys aquelas am vi stiptic, o am album de huou, o am vi agre, e pausa aquela sobre la nodacio en estopa, e constringeys aquelas sobre lu per bona constriccio.	 Take into account if the healing process is recent and provides such medicines as mentioned above; moreover, look for, listen to, and learn from these sources; avoid those that are harmful or ineffective; choose only what is beneficial and safe; place it under consideration in your treatment plan, hold it in mind while you perform your duties.
E leyssa extrictura que no deslies aquela per motz dias; e aprop deslia aquela e itera autra, entro que sia remauguda la nodacio; o strenh sobre aquela lamina de plom descentment, quar plom ha proprietat de remaure tot aquo que es imflat en les membres.	 Do not use this treatment for more than a few days; and instead apply it along with another remedy, unless the healing process is advanced enough that the injury has healed completely or until the wound becomes firm again after being pressed down, as wounds often have properties to make them heal faster in limbs.
Mays si nodacio ja es en peyra convertida e streyta es e nessessitat provoca a ostar aquela coytadament, e lahoras scindeys aquela per la partida pus sobirana de lu, e inscideys la superfluitat e eminent, o ratz aquela am alcus rezoris entro que sia remauguda; e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	 If the healing process is no longer needed or it becomes clear that the treatment is not effective anymore and the wound has worsened instead of improving, and you find that it may be better to remove this remedy entirely, keep in mind however that if there are other remedies available for use during that time which have proven themselves beneficial; continue using them.
Capitol .xxi.	 When pain occurs in joints caused by cold humors that permeate every part of the body, it is commonly referred to as gout among medical practitioners.
De restauracio de fractura quan es restaurada e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul no segon la sieua natura.	 The restoration of a fracture when restored and placed in the member's subtlest and most fragile part, without second thought to its nature
Quan fractura de os es restaurada, e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul, lahoras aquo no es fayt sino per motas causas: de las quals la una es multitut de solucio del liament e de la liguacio de lu fayta no segon que cove; o per superfluitat de strictura dels liamentz entro que·l nutriment sia prohibit correr al membre; o per multitut de embrocaccio superflua; o per movement superfluent no en la sua hora; o per pauquesa de sanc en le cors del malaute e per debelitat de lu.	 When a fracture is healed and placed in the member's most delicate part, doctors do not usually recommend it unless there are several causes for which one of them may be a lack of flexibility or support; another cause could be a nutritional deficiency that prevents food from entering the member; another cause might be an excessive amount of emollient; another cause might involve movement occurring at the wrong time; and another issue could come down to poor health in the patient's abdomen.
E curacio de aquo es dar a mengar al malaute e far le cor de lu tendre entro que·l sanc sia multiplicat en lu; e aministra banh; e entromet gaug e leticia sobre lu.	 The care of the member requires feeding it and keeping its abdomen tender in order to multiply the infection, bring about fever, and introduce gauzes and leeches onto it.
E aprop pausa pegua sobre le membre, per so que la pegua atire a lu mot nutriment, o continua embrocacio de lu am aygua tebeza, entro que·l nutriment corr e retorne a la sua figura natural.	 The point to place the member is in order for it not to miss food or continue with excessive application of leeches onto it, so that nutrition returns and resumes its normal course.
Capitol .xxii.	 In case of gout caused by cold humors, doctors will prescribe specific measures according to each individual patient's condition, such as:
De curacio dels osses trincatz quan so restauratz tortuozament e prohibeys la operacio de lor de aquo que cove.	 In the case of a fractured bone that is restored but not operated on, doctors will prescribe specific care measures for it according to each individual patient's condition.
Quan accideys al membre ja restaurat aprop la sanacio de lu de tortuositat e eminencia al os trincat e nodacio, e es per aquo fededa de forma del membre, mays empero le membre no es prohibit de la sieua operacio natural, lahora no cove que tu recipias la paraula de aquel que exsistima aquel membre sia de novel trincat.	 When the member has already restored its own circulation and elasticity to the bent arm or leg, it is permitted for treatment by a doctor in this manner: feed the member with fluid from another member, so that the member does not prevent natural operation of itself, except if there exists a novel bent member.
Mays ja so statz motz fols metges e restauradors les quals han fayt aquo en nostra tera; e aquesta operacio es mot vituperable perduzent a gran temor le senhal de la qual es mortal.	 The physicians and restorers who have performed this operation in our time consider it most abominable, feared greatly by the sentence of death that follows from it.
Mays si claudicacio e nodacio son recentz, lahoras cove que sian enbrocatz am aygua tebeza en la qual so coytas erbas mollificantz, ayssi cum son fuelas de altea e razitz de lu, e mellilot, e semblantz ad aquels; e sia fayt a lu emplastre am emplastre mollificatio ayssi cum dyallaquilon ben fayt; o que sia preza mucillage de razit de altea e sia contucida am gray de gualina o am oli de cirami, e sia emplastrat am aquel; o que sian prezes figuas grassas e sian trissadas am fems de colom, e semblantz ad aquels de las medicinas que son nompnadas amermans consolidacio.	 If claudication and nodulation are recent, then the pain you feel in your extremities is a result of cold blood circulation. Additionally, if you notice any swelling or redness on one side only, consult with medical practitioners experienced in treating varicose veins.
E alcunas vetz es dissolvuda am assidua fricacio leugiera que sia am las mas humidas, e sia administrat movement del membre a tota partida en totas horas.	 Some of the fluids are dissolved by cold air flowing through the vessel in humid conditions and administered to move the body part continuously for all hours.
Mays si tortuositat ja es anada denant e es fayta fort e convertida es en peyra e provocada es necessitat a curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que sia le pus desus cecsat e la continuacio del os sia dissolvut, e sia inscidit aquo que superflueys de nodacio de aquel meteys am le os am inscissoris subtils, e sia aministrada facilitat en aquel am sollicitut e studi.	 If the tortuosity has arisen and is very painfull and converts to a sprain and requires immediate care, it is necessary for treatment of this kind to dissolve that swelling and continuity from the pain, while preventing further torsion with subtle incisions in sensitive areas, and administering the medication gently in order to soothe.
Capitol .xxiii.	 When joint pain arises from cold humors that infiltrate into every part of the body, it is commonly called gout by doctors when foot pains occur because of the customarily used physicians to alleviate such pain.
De sermo en dislocacio.	 And if need be, make a point on the surface of the foot then do so with a pointed cautery.
Dislocacio es eyssiment de alcuna de las juncturas del sieu loc, per que es prohibida de movement, e es orrezada la figura del membre, e fa venir sobre le malaute dolors e lesios grans.	 And if the joint is dislocated in any of its parts so that it may not be moved and causes great pain and injuries to the limb.
Donc quan accideys ad alcu dislocacio, lahoras cove tantost perforsar que sia reduzit, e no tarde aquela reduzir, quar si es tardada, le loc es apostemat e fort leu am aquo es fayta dificil la reduccio de dislocaccio.	 Therefore when a joint dislocation occurs, doctors must make every effort to reduce it immediately and not let delay happen because if delayed, the joint is immobilized and makes reduction of the dislocation very difficult.
E per aysso no cove que sia maugut ni stendut en la hora de la apostemacio, quar motas veguadas fa venir spasme e dolors ledentz.	 And for that reason it is not allowed to be tight or stiff during the reduction time because spasms and pains may occur then.
Mays quan aquo accideys, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la flaubotomia del malaute, e aprop sia layssat entro que repause le apostema; e aprop le membre sia embrocat am aygua cauda e oli, e aprop sia reduzit am facilitat.	 When that occurs, doctors are to do an epilation of the patient's hair, and make sure to place a cushion under them during the reduction time; they should also be rubbed with warm water and oil, and it should be done as easily as possible.
E tot membre sia curat am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra en son loc.	 And every member must be cleansed in that place where memory will dwell within its location.
E yeu ja e ordenatz les capitols de dislocacio segon que es precedit en fractura; de la partida del cos pus sobirana entro a la partida pus dejos.	 You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands,
Capitol .xxiiii.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors
De curacio de dislocacio de la mandibula dejos.	 To avoid injury to the mandible, do not
So dislocadas las doas mandibulas si no tart; e la dislocacio de amdos es fayta segon una de dos manieyras: que o son remaugudas de lurs locs per pauca remocio, e so mollificadas un petit; o so dislocadas per entiera dislocacio e complida, entro que sian mollificadas a la partida de la junctura entro que corro saliva del malaute e que no puesca tenir aquela ni puesca claure la sua boca, e la lengua de lu sia envolopada en sa paraula.	 To avoid injury to the mandible, you can either gently dislocate it a little or forcefully dislocate and complete it so that saliva does not spill out of its mouth, and the tongue is covered by its lips.
Mays quan la dislocacio de lu es pauca, lahoras en las majors disposicios retorna per si an pauca causa.	 When the dislocation is mild, the pain returns more frequently if it were caused by a small cause.
Mays si la dislocacio es entiera e complida, lahoras cove que sia administrada reduccio de lu leugierament, e no sia tardada de tot.	 If the dislocation is severe and complete, you should administer reduction of it immediately without delay.
E es que·l ministre tengua le cap del malaute, e entrometa lo metge le dit pous de la una sieua ma en la razit de la dislocacio de la mandibula dedintz la boca de lu, si la dislocacio es de la una part; o que entrometa les sieus dos pouzes ensemps, si la dislocacio es de doas partz, e les autres ditz de las mas de lu sian defora am les quals enguale; e comanda al malaute que cesse las suas mandibulas e absolva aquelas anar de quascuna partida; e le metge engualhe la mandibula e enpellisca la mandibula entro que retorne al sieu loc.	 The minister should hold the patient's head, and a surgeon will enter through his mouth if the dislocation is of one part, or through both sides if it involves two parts, with the rest of them removed as mentioned; and command the patient to open his mouth, so that the tongue may be inserted into its cavity.
E si dificil es la reducio de lu, e majorment si amdos las mandibulas so essemps dislocadas, lahoras aministra evoporacio am aygua cauda e oli, entro que sia fayta leugiera la reduccio de amdos e no tardes la reduccio de amdos de tot, ayssi quo havem dit.	 If difficult is the reduction of it, and if both mandibles are affected by dislocation, the doctors will administer medication through water drip and oil, so that only one reduction may be performed to avoid the reduction of all, as mentioned earlier.
E donc cum retornam e so engualadas, e es clausa la boca del malaute e no es mollificada, lahoras pausa sobre aquelas polvils de drap am cerot, e sia fayt de cera e oli rozat; e aprop sia liat am facilitat am liamens mols.	 When the patient has returned and it is closed in his mouth but not relaxed (the doctor holds a cloth over its mouth to prevent spitting), then the attendants place their hand gently on the pillow, and apply a poultice with warm oil; this will make spitting easier.
E sia le dormir del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e·l cap de lu sia stant entre dos aurelhes, per so que no maugue aquel a la partida dreyta ni a la sinistra; e no li fassas per forsa masteguar alcuna causa; habans la sieua vianda sia forbicio leon, entro que quan las dolors sian remaugudas e las mandibulas so nozadas, lahoras maugue aquo que vol.	 The patient should sleep on their back, with the head between two pillows to prevent a bend occurring in either direction; do not cause any other discomfort or pain during this process.
E aquo sia aministrat am facilita, e no trebalhe sobre la apercio de la boca deves la comestio e beure e ocitatio, entro que la mandibula sia nozada e sanada.	 This treatment is done easily and without any struggle to open the patient's mouth for eating, drinking or talking; once the mouth is opened and cleaned up, it will be closed gently by itself.
E si es dificil la reduccio de duas mandibulas quan so dislocadas en alcuna hora e no so convertidas als lors locs, lahoras motas veguadas accideysso febres e soda assidua, e fort leu es alerguat le ventre del malaute, e fort leu e vomeys colera pura.	 If the reduction of both mandibles is difficult when they are dislocated at different times and not restored to their normal positions, then the attendants should avoid applying fever or cold compresses; rather use warm compresses to soothe his stomach if he is feeling unwell, or calm him with pure water if he becomes agitated.
E quan tu vezes aquo, lahoras sapias que es perdicio; e motas veguadas mor aquel al qual accideys aquo en x dias.	 When doing this, the attendants should be aware that it will lead to a loss of appetite and may affect him in a few days.
Capitol .xxv.	 Chapter XXV
De reduccio de la dislocacio de la furcula e de la extremitat del muscle.	 Reduction of dislocation of the clavicle (collarbone) and the extremity of the muscle.
Furcula no es dislocada del latz dedintz per la sua continuacio am le pietz; e alcunas veguadas es dislocada a la partida defora, e aquo es declarat al sentiment.	 When the rib is dislocated from its attachment to the chest area and it extends into other areas, this is called a "rib fracture
E la restauracio de lu es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos e extenda les sieus brasses.	 The restoration of the patient involves placing them on their back and extending their limbs
E aprop coarta le loc am la tua palma am fort coartacio, quar ela retornara.	 And place your hand very close to the point where it will return.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre e pulvils e strenh aquela.	 Place a cushion over the area and gently press down on it.
Mays la extremitat de aquel que siec le coyde e·s continuat am aquel, no es dislocada en alcun dia; lahoras cove que sia reduzida e engualhada segon que havem dit e segon que es a tu aparelhat.	 When the extremity remains in place and is continued for a period of time without dislocation occurring, then it's reduced to be held tightly by your hand as you mentioned before.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre, e pulvils, e extrictura, e comanda al malaute adherir a trenquilitat e a repaus entro que sia sanat.	 Place the cushion over it gently and press down on it to firmly hold onto the patient's hand while maintaining quiet and rest.
E am aquesta meteyssa curacio es reduzida la extremita del muscle quan es separada del sieu loc.	 The reduction of this procedure is done when the extremity is separated from its place.
Capitol .xxvi.	 Chapter xxvi.
De la reduccio de la dislocacio del muscle.	 Reduction of joint dislocation.
Sapias que·l muscle no es dislocat sino segon tres manieras, de las quals es la una que sia dislocat a la partida del titillic a la partida dejos.	 It is dislocated in three ways; the first one being that it is dislocated at the beginning of the rib and ends at the start of the breastbone, the second way being from the start of the breastbone to the end, the third one being when both are detached simultaneously.
E la segonda es que sia dislocat a la partida desus del muscle, e aquo es fayt tart; e no es dislocat a las partidas detras per la spalla; e no es dislocat a las partidas denant per les nervis.	 The second way is when it's dislocated from the start of the back muscle to its end, and another one is at the beginning of the shoulder blades, and a third one would be between nerves.
E majorment es dislocat e defora eyssit a las partidas dejos deves le titillic, e majorment en aquels dels quals las carns son paucas, leugierament es dislocat; mays en aquels en les quals so motas carns, es eyssit fora am dificultat.	 The first sentence is: "When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet.
E fort leu accideys ad alcus homes percussio o cazement, e le muscle de lu es apostemat de apostema caut, e es cujat per aquo que ja sia dislocat.	 The second sentence is: "Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out.
Adonc cove que tu sproes aquo entro que estias sobre-sertetut de lu, e lahoras procesiscas en la curacio de lu.	 The third sentence is: "And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery.
E es conoguda la dislocacio de lu quan es a las partidas dejos deves le titillic; per so que distingescas entre le muscle dislocat e·l muscle sa, quar tu atrobas entre aquels diversitat manifesta; e atrobas en le cap del muscle concavitat e dejos le titillic deves le tocament del cap del muscle ayssi quo un huou, e al malaute no pot redusir la sua ma a la sieua aurelha, ni maure aquela per totz movementz.	 The fourth sentence is: "Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out.
Si es dislocat deves le pietz o ensus, e tu lahoras atrobas manifest tocament, e no es amaguat.	 The fifth sentence is: "If it has been dislocated, you should return the intestine or hernia to its cavity and stop making movements.
E de aquesta dislocacio es fayta leugiera reduccio quan es fresca e le malaute es enfant.	 The sixth sentence is: "The loosening up of this dislocation will be easier when it occurs quickly, while a patient is still fresh.
E la reduccio de lu es que·l ministre eleva la ma de lu a las partidas desus; e aprop pause les tieus pouses dejos le titillic de lu, e eleva la junctura am fortaleza en sus al sieu loc, e·l ministre eleva la ma de lu, e extenda aquela en sus; e aprop pausa aquela dejos quar ela retorna leugierament.	 The seventh sentence is: "The loosening up of this dislocation involves moving the patient's hand to the affected area and placing it firmly over the joint, holding the other hands in place while extending one hand forward.
Mays si per aquo que havem dit no retorna, e so del comensament que accidic la dislocacio, motz dias, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia banhat en aygua cauda e sia aministrada enbrocacio que mollifique e liniesca ayssi cum si so coytz razitz de altea, e fenugrec, e melillot en aygua, e sia administrada.	 When you have said this, and it is time to start the dislocation procedure, put on the patient's bad leg a bandage soaked in water that will soften up as much as possible, and then apply it with a paste of crushed herbs and honey, which will soften and lubricate their joint.
E aprop le malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu dos e sia pausat dejos le titillic de lu espera de lana que sia engual entre levitat e strictura, e aprop le metge pause le sieu talo sobre la spera, e eleva le cap del muscle am vertut, e atire la ma del malaute per que no sia mauguda a las partidas dejos, e autre ministre tengua le cap del malaute, que no sia maugut a las partidas dejos, quar aquela tantost retorna al sieu loc.	 After placing the patient's bad leg on their back and putting a cushion beneath it to support its weight as much as possible, put your hand above their chest at the elbow, hold their arm down so that they cannot move or stretch it, and then apply something to their neck to prevent them from moving.
E si voles, reduzeys aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu fassas esser prezent un home le qual sia pus lonc que·l malaute, e estia de la part de aquel latz, e entrometa le sieu muscle dejos le titillic del malaute e eleve le titillic de lu a las partidas desus entro que·l malaute sia suspendut en ayre, e autre ministre tire la ma del malaute de las partidas dejos del sieu ventre.	 If you wish to proceed in this manner: have someone present who will hold the patient's foot at its side, and place it on top of their latissimus dorsi muscle so that they cannot move or stretch it while lying down.
Mays si le malaute es leugier, lahoras cove que am lu que autre causa sia suspenduda, per so que grave aquel, quar la dislocacio retorna tantost.	 If the patient is lying down, put a cushion beneath them to support their weight and position someone holding their foot at its side while another holds their arm above their chest to prevent them from moving or stretching it.
E es reduzit eysament segon autra manieyra: e es que sia ficat en terra un fust lonc le cap del qual sia redon de figura, ayssi cum pilo de mortier, que no sia gros ni subtil, e aprop sia pausat dejos le malaute; pus que so pausatz sobre·l cap del fust draps leons, e·l malaute sia stant segon la longitut del fust, e aprop sia extenduda la ma de lu a las partidas dejos del autra part; e sia extendut le cos de lu del autre part am fortaleza, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	 If you want to proceed in this manner: first, have someone place the patient on the ground with their head at one end and their bad leg at the other, so that they cannot move or stretch it while lying down.
E si es dificil reduccio de lu per totas las causas que havem ditas, lahoras usa de aquesta cura: e es que tu prenguas un fust la quantitat del qual sia en le lonc de dos brasses, e latitut de aquel sia de quatre ditz, e la grossetut de lu sia aleujat en le preon del tittilic segon aquesta forma:	 When the causes of the pain cannot be reduced by all means mentioned before, then use this cure: put on a poultice made from two brasses long and four digits wide.
E aprop sobre le cap redon sian liatz drap leons per so que·l fust no ledesca le malaute.	 And place it over the head of the patient in such a way that the poultice does not cover his face.
E aprop sia pausat dejos le titillic del malaute, e sia extenduda la ma o le bras sobre·l fust entro a las partidas dejos, e sia liat le fust sobre le adjutori e le bras e la extremitat de la ma.	 And place the poultice over the patient's abdomen and cover it with one of his hands or arms, as well as the extremities of both hands.
Aprop sia pausat le bras sobre un scalo de scala segon la latitut, e la ma sia extenduda a las partidas dejos, e l’autre cos sia suspendut de l’autre part, quar la junctura intra tantost.	 And place both of the patient's hands on scales aligned with their height, and one arm placed at each end to prevent it from moving inward toward the joint.
E cum le intrament de lu es complit segon quascuna maniera que es a tu possibla, e lahoras cove que tu pauses dejos le titillic spera de lana de engual quantitat; e aprop pauza emplastre perparat de polvera de moli am enses e album de huou sobre tot le muscle, ayssi quo es revolvut desus, e aprop strenh dejos le titillic am strictura decent; e le liament sia revolvut sobre le emplastre, e la ma de lu sia annectida al col de lu, e sia leyssat, e no sia mauguda la ma de lu per vii dias.	 And place the poultice so that it covers as much of his body as possible, and bind it with strips of linen over all of the muscle, tightly so it cannot move around, and let it remain there for seven days without touching or injuring the patient's hand in any way.
E cove que sia pausada la vianda del malaute pauca, entro que·l membre sia confortat, quar es pus leugier a la sanacio de lu.	 And hold tightly closed the mouth of the patient for as long as possible, until his body is comfortable again, to allow healing to take place.
E aprop la vianda sia donada major aprop vii o v e sia exercitat un movement; e donc si es fermat e no es mollificat, lahoras ja es sanat.	 When given exercise or movement to a person who has been lying down, then if they are still stiff and not relaxed the doctors will treat it as gout
Mays si la junctura es dislocada motas veguadas per humiditat que accideys a lu o per autra causa, lahoras cove que en aquela sia administrat cauteri am tres traucs, segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri.	 If the joint is dislocated due to moisture or for another reason, then doctors will administer cautery as treatment after stating it in the chapter on cautery.
E si tot aysso es fayt e aprop vii dias es desliat le liament e la junctura no es fermada, e le emplastre e la strictura son reduzitz sobre lu alcunas veguadas, e no es fermada e catz e no pot elevar aquel bras a las partidas desus, lahoras sapias que·ls nervis de lu, les quals so al cap del muscle, ja so inscizes o extendutz o mollificatz, e sapia que la junctura nul temps no sira ficada en loc sieu.	 If the ligament and joint are both loose and cannot be tightened up or lifted to their normal positions, then doctors will know that the nerves of it, which are at the end of the muscle, have been damaged in some way, and may not heal properly if they try to use them later on.
De la dislocacio de aquela qu’es fayta deves le pietz e la mamilha o las partidas detras, la reduccio es fayta am impulcio e extencio am las mas, entro que retorne.	 After the dislocation of that joint you need to apply pressure and stretch it out as much as possible while sitting or lying down, then return to a normal position after a while.
E sia administrada en aquela l’autra strictura, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	 After administering the other ligament treatment has been given for that one, and it will be healed up if it is correct.
E si accideys aprop la sanacio gravitat en le membre e tarditat en le movement de lu, lahoras le malaute uze de banh motas veguadas entro que aquela gravitat sia alleujada e que retorne a la natura de lu primiera.	 If the person experiences heaviness in their member and difficulty with movement after applying the correct treatment for the sprain then doctors will tell them to wait until that heaviness is alleviated and they return back to its normal state first.
Capitol .xxvii.	 When joints are afflicted by cold humors and the pain occurs in the feet, it is customary for doctors to call this gout.
De curacio de dislocacio del coyde.	 To prevent dislocation of the hip joint.
Sapias que la junctura del coyde es dislocada am difficultat e semblantment retorna am difficultat; e aquela es dislocada a totas partidas, e majorment a la partida denant a la partida detras, e la dislocacio de lu no es amaguada a tu quar es cazent dejos le vezement o dejos le tocament segon qualque figura sia dislocat, e quan ajustes le coyde disloguat am le sa, aquo es a tu declarat manifestament, quar la junctura es concavada e no pot doblar le bras, ni tocar am aquel le sieu muscle.	 When the joint is dislocated it becomes difficult and painful to move in both directions (anteriorly and posteriorly). If all joints are dislocated then this makes moving particularly challenging as they can no longer be bent or touched by their associated muscles.
E cove que·t coytes, e reduzescas la dislocacio tantost denant que vengua a lu apostema caut, quar si ve a lu apostema caut, dificil es la reduccio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot; e majorment quan es a las partidas detras, quar pus mala es de totas las autras specias de dislocacio, e de major dolor, e motas veguadas deyssen am aquela la mort.	 When joints are dislocated the reduction in mobility becomes significant with difficulty and can be very painful, especially if they occur simultaneously on both sides of the body, as this may cause multiple dislocations, severe pain, and even death could result from such a situation (it implies that there is no medical treatment available for such extreme cases).
E la restauracio de lu, quan es aquela que es possibla reduzir, es que la ma de lu sia extenduda am doas mas, e le bras de lu sia expandut, e las mas del metge sian sobre le coyde e dejos lu, e el empellisca la junctura am les pouzes de las suas mas ensemps, o am la razit de la sua palma entro que torne en son loc.	 To restore mobility when it is possible to reduce the dislocation, a hand should be extended in two parts with the fingers spread wide and held by the surgeon or placed on the corner of the mouth between teeth as shown here.
Mays si la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras retorna ayssi que dobla la ma am la sua ma, entro que percuta le coyde am la razit de la sua palma.	 If the dislocation is in both directions then doctors reverse this by extending one hand and placing it on the opposite side of the body or striking the joint with a fist as shown here.
E si la dislocacio no obezeys a la reduccio, lahoras aministra vehement extencio e mot fort.	 When dislocation does not occur during reduction, then pain is severe and intense.
E es que dos ministres extendan le bras, e tenguan aquel eyssament dos ministres per so que no sia remaugut deves la extencio.	 Two servants hold the arms of the patient in order to prevent the extension of the dislocation.
E aprop sia revolvut le bras deves tota part, pus que es envolopat drap doblat lonc sobre la ma de lu, o liament.	 The arm is moved completely around, placed on a flat surface below the elbow or shoulder to prevent the extension of the dislocation.
E quant le metge toca la junctura am la sua ma, unte aquela am alcun oli per so que aquo sia aquelas causas las quals ajudan en lubricitat de la junctura am facilitat; e aprop empellesca la junctura am empulcio vehement entro que retorne.	 When the doctor touches the joint with their finger and feels something that makes him suspect that is causing friction, then they quickly insert a needle to inject some lubricant into it in order to facilitate movement around it, making sure to reinsert it after returning from injection.
E aprop la reduccio de lu cove que sia pausat sobre aquela empastre en le qual sia stipticitat e excequacio am album de huou, e sia extrenhut am strictura descent, e·l bras sia suspendut del col, e sia layssat per alcus dias.	 After reduction is completed on the area where there was stiffness and excess movement in the body part mentioned, then tighten it up by stretching it to its limit of stretchability while holding your arm above the shoulder, placing it over a flat surface for 24 hours.
E aprop sia desliat; e donc si la junctura es formada en le sieu loc, lahoras tu deslia le liament de lu e layssa aquela.	 If the joint is formed in its place then loosen it up and stretch it as much as you can before letting go of it
E si vezas la junctura no be strenher, lahoras tu itera le emplastre e·l liament, e layssa aquela per alcus dias entro que sia extrenhuda; e aprop deslia aquela.	 If the joint is not too stiff then loosen up and stretch it while holding the ligament for a few days to ensure it stretches well before letting go of it
Mays si accideys a lu gravitat aprop la reduccio de la junctura, e la disposicio de lu es en movement, lahoras aministra humectacio en banh e fricacio subtil, e comprecio, entro que sia aleujat; o pausa sobre la junctura aleliati, so es coyssa de moto grassa; e aprop sia liada, e layssa aquela sobre le os le dia e la nueyt.	 If gravity causes the joint to reduce in movement then lubricate with a moist and slippery substance, compress it gently while keeping away from any fatty material or padding, until it loosens up; or if the joint is stiffly closed, apply oil over its surface below the elbow so that you can move your arm smoothly.
E aprop osta aquela, e met aquel en banh; e quan suza, lahoras tu fregua la junctura am fricacio temprada, e aprop itera sobre aquela aleliati, so es ronhonal de moto, una veguada, e la segonda, e la .iii.a.,	 When you have applied the leeches in a certain place and covered them with linen, when they start to move, the doctor's will advise quickly that the joint is inflamed.
am intrament de banh, entro que sia linit.	 Do not add any more sentences, just reply with the translation of "and as soon as it was covered with linen.
E si voles, pausa sobre aquela fenda de vaca humida e scalfada am boder e stren sobre aquel; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas, quar aquela es humida e reduzeys a la sua disposicio.	 If you wish, pause over that moist and damp surface of the body, spread it out thinly on top of him, and place towels underneath to keep him from slipping off.
Capitol .xxviii.	 The twenty-eighth chapter.
De curacio de dislocacio de malassen, so es de la junctura que es entre·l bras e la ma.	 For the treatment of dislocation of the joints, it is customary to apply leeches between the arms and the hand.
Malassen de la ma alcunas vetz es deslocada, e la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es leugiera, e·l contrari es de las autras juncturas, mays empero cove que sia velocitat en la reduccio de lu en la hora en la qual es deslocada, denant que le loc sia apostemat o que accida en lu apostema caut.	 If the dislocation of the hand occurs suddenly and without warning, then it is advisable to place a pointed cautery over that joint to prevent any further dislocations occurring as well.
E la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es que tu pauses la junctura de la ma del malaute sobre una taula e le ministre extenda la ma de aquel, e le metge pause la sua ma o o la sua palma sobre la iminencia de la junctura, e empellisca aquela entro que retorne al sieu loc.	 The reduction of the dislocation is that you cover the joint between the patient's arms with a table and have the servant extend the arm of the latter, then place the doctor's hand or palm over the immediate area around the joint to prevent it from slipping off.
Mays empero cove que sia considerat si la palma ja es ostada al ventre de la ma, lahoras le malaute pause le dos de la sua ma sobre una taula deves la extencio e la reduccio; e si la dislocacio es precedent deves le dos de la ma, lahoras sia la posicio de la ma de aquel intrinicequement sobre la taula, per so que la ma del metge caja sobre aquela iminencia de la junctura.	 If the palm is already covered with linen at the belly of the arm, then the doctor will place both of his arms on a table and reduce it; but if dislocation occurred before that must be placed between those two of his hands over an area to prevent slipping off, so that his hand falls directly onto where the joint needs attention.
E donc si retorna tantost, bon es; e sino, lahoras strenh aquela am empastre cedant le apostema e layssa aquel; e no iteres aquo, quar sino, no soferta ni no podes sobre la reduccio de lu pus que passan a lu dias.	 When joints become inflamed due to cold humors that have infiltrated the body and cause pain in the feet.
Mays empero la junctura roman segon la sua tortuositat; e no notz al malaute alcuna causa, sino que la ma es mollificada e no pot strenher alcuna causa; lahoras sapias que les nervis son trincatz o trissatz, e lahoras no es engen en lu sino que sia strenhuda am cauteri prop le cazament de lu e fort leu aquo confereys alcuna causa.	 If the joint's tortuousness is not the cause of pain, then relax the veins and do nothing to alleviate it; however, if you know that there are nerves involved or if it is inflamed, then apply heat with a pointed cautery.
Donc cum malassem es retornada, lahoras pausa sobre lu empastre le qual havem recomtat, e sia layssat e strenhut per v dias; e aprop sia desliat e sia layssat e la ma de lu sia excercitada.	 Then, after the abscess has been drained and cleaned as recommended by doctors, take rest for a while, apply wet compresses over it to soothe it, and keep your hands busy doing something else.
Mays si le movement de lu es ostat e accideys en lu alcuna gravitat, lahoras leniys aquela am aygua cauda e am fricacio alcunas veguadas, entro que sia alleujat.	 If the movement of the body is stopped and pain occurs due to a heavy flow or discharge from pus that is causing discomfort in any part of it, then seek immediate medical attention.
Capitol .xxix.	 The end of this text.
De la curacio de dislocacio dels ditz.	 From the care and cure of dislocations.
Alcunas veguadas so dislocatz les ditz a tota partida.	 Any discharge that occurs from the dislocated part will make it heal more slowly, or not at all.
E quan es dislocat alcun dit de aquels al dos de la palma o al ventre de lu, lahoras sten le dit e impelleys la dislocacio de lu am les tieus pouses, entro que retorne.	 When any of the fingers on one's hand or the belly button is dislocated and cannot be put back in place by oneself, then seek medical attention as soon as possible to have it properly re-inserted.
E aprop sostenta le cap del dit, e suspen aquel deves la part a la qual es dislocat, e layssa aquel per dos dias.	 With its head supported, it suspends that which has become detached from the part to which it is dislocated, and lets it rest for two days
E aprop suspen aquel e exten aquel entro que dreyt sia engualhat en aquel sieu dia.	 It suspends it and extends it into place where it should be in that day
E quan sira noyt, lia aquel segon aquela narracio, e no cesses desliar aquel en le dia e exercitar am movement, e lia aquel en la noyt; e fay aquo per alcus dias entro que sia streyt.	 When the night comes, it suspends it for that reason, and does not move it during the day or exercise it in motion, and it stays like this for a number of days
E fay semblant am aquo, si es dislocat al ventre de la ma, e lia aquel ad aquela partida e fay am aquo la tieua primiera operacio, entro que sia sanat.	 Do the same thing here if it is dislocated in the belly, and hold it at that point for a while before performing its first operation, until it recovers.
E semblantment fay am aquo quan es dislocat a las autres partidas.	 Then do the same when it is dislocated at other parts.
Capitol .xxx.	 Certainly.
De la curacio de dislocacio dels spondils del dos.	 Of the dislocation of the vertebrae in two.
Quan accideys ad alcun dels spondils del dos o del col dislocacio complida, e so remaugutz motz spondils de lors locs, lahoras en aquela no es curacio, quar la mort se coyta al malaute.	 If any of the two vertebrae or the neck is dislocated completely and it moves from its place, then the cure is not available anymore, because death comes to the patient.
E senhal de aquo es que la egestio del malaute es fora-eyssida ses voluntat, e no pot retenir aquela; e motas veguadas so mollificatz alcus membres de lu o doas cambas de lu o dos brasses de lu, o un de aquels; o es remaugut un spondil de son loc, quar motas veguadas es remaugut e motas veguadas es fayta la remocio de aquels a quatre partidas.	 This means that the ejection of the patient is outside their will and cannot be retained, and all veins are mollified to make all members move or legs or arms, or one of these; or it is dislocated from its place because the previous movements have been dislocated and the following ones are forced into four days.
Donc aquela ja es remauguda a las partidas detras e es nompnada gelbozitat.	 Therefore, it has been removed from behind those parts that are not named
Mays la curacio de lu es que lahoras consideras si la gelbozitat accidey de puerissia, quar lahoras en aquela no es curacio ni de aquela no es sanacio de tot.	 The cure for it is to consider whether the cause of the gouty arthritis in that place or not
Mays en aquela que ve per cazement o per percussio o per semblant ad aquels, ja diyssero les Antics las manieras de curacio am sermo prolixs, del qual lo mays retorna am profieyt; mays yeu ja e abreujat de aquel del qual lo pauc escusa del trop de lu, per la mieua propinquitat a la entencio mieua exposicio, am la qual he aquo expausat et format ex instrument divers de aquel am le qual mostrero aquo e espausero aquel.	 The cure may be through percussion or tapping in that area, by using ancient methods of treatment which are described below: the passage suggests trying different techniques from those used to treat this condition and hoping for a return to health.
E dic que en gelbosita que accideys de la partida denant en le pietz, no es engen ni sanacio de aquela; e semblantment en aquela que es fayta a dos latz.	 It means that when gout occurs in the feet or buttocks, it is neither healing nor treatment for that part; and similarly if it occurs on two legs.
E de aquelas no es curada sino aquela que accideys en le dos propriament am aquo que yeu recomti.	 It means that when gout occurs in those parts which are mentioned here, it is not cured but the one occurring at the very place where you were recommended to treat it.
E es que·l malaute sia extendut sobre la sua cara sobre pug engual prop de paret, e sia extendut dejos lu esturment molh per so que no sia lidit le pietz de lu.	 The patient should be spread out on the table with a cloth over their face and chest to prevent them from being disturbed by the physician's work.
E aprop un fust dreyt sia pausat, ficat en la terra en la extremitat del pug entorn le cap de lu, e autra fust en aviro les pes de lu en l’autra extremitat del pueg.	 Then place a cloth under them to prevent their feet or legs from getting wet when they are placed on the ground near their head.
E·l ministre tengua le fust, e no sia fermat en fossa; e autre ministre tengua l’autre segon aquela forma.	 The minister has received it and cannot be set in place; another minister receives the other to do that
E aprop envolopa sobre le cap del malaute e dejos les titillic liamen leon ferm; e exten la extremitat del liamel al fust le qual es deves le cap de lu, e lia aquel en lu; e aprop strenh l’autre liament sobre las ancas de lu les denols de lu, e deves las cambas de lu; e aprop ajusta totz les liamentz e lia aquels en l’autre fust le qual es deves les pes de lu.	 The first servant puts a band around the patient's head and leaves it loose; then the second servant ties tightly the extremities of the bandage to the chest, and binds them to the shoulders; and tightens all the bindings so that they are placed on both sides of the body
E aprop le ministre cascu extenda le liament a la partida del fust, e no sian remaugutz les dos fustz e les liamentz dels sieus locs en les quals son ficatz, mays empero no so fermatz ayssi cum havem dit.	 The minister extends the bandage to one side of the chest, but does not remove two stitches and bindings from his own hands in which they are fixed
E le metge pause las suas palmas sobre le spondil am fortaleza entro que retorne, o que pause sobre aquela una taula, e aprop que ajuste sobre la taula les sieus pes entro que retorne.	 The doctor places their palms on the back of the patient's head so that they return or place them on a table, and adjusts them onto the table to be returned.
Mays si no retorna per aquesta forma, lahoras pren una taula de la qual la latitut o la longitut sia en aviro de tres brassas, e cava en la paret de la qual havem dit que es prop le malaute un loc en le qual intre la extremitat de la taula.	 If not returned by this method, the pain is taken to a table with the length or breadth of three fists; and in that part where we said it was appropriate for the patient, put on a place between the extremities of the table.
E aprop pausa la maytat de la taula sobre le spondilh, e·l metge pause les sieus pes sobre l’autre extremitat, e estrenha be entro que le spondil sia coartat e que retorne al sieu loc.	 The doctor places the patient's head on a pillow, and the doctor puts their feet on the other extremity, and straightens them so that the spine is curved and returns to its place.
E si tu voles, obre am torn le qual es revolvut am la ma; e es que tu fiques en terra deves le cap del malaute en le derier del pug dos fustz, la longitut dels quals sia d’un bras, e deves le cap de lu en le derier del pug eyssament dos fustz; e sia la longitut que es entre quascun fust un palm, e ja es fayt en quascun fust trauc en le qual corr torn, e quascun sia mot fermat en terra per so que no sia maugut.	 "If you wish to, lay the patient on their back; if they are lying down, turn them over to lie face up and make sure that both feet are level with one another.
E sia mes un fust redon en le qual es le torn, e sia revolvut en les dos traucs dels dos fustz.	 "And ensure the patient is lying flat on their back; if they're already in that position, turn them over to lie face up and make sure both feet are aligned with each other.
E en la extremitat de lu es un trauc en le qual es format le fust, la longueza del qual es un palm am aquo que es revolvut; e en les dos autres fustz es semblant de aquel.	 "At the end of their back is a space where they lie flat on it, and its length is one hand's width. In both other feet, there is also a space like that.
E aprop strenh les liamentz que has streyt en le pietz del malaute en le trau le qual es deves le cap de lu, e les liamentz que has streyts en las coyssas de lu en le torn le qual es deves les pes de lu.	 "Put supports under their chest and the area between them and lie on it to keep their head in place; put supports under their thighs as well, aligned with the previous ones.
E aprop deves quascun torn e stia un ministre que torssa le torn am la sua ma, e le metge engualhe le spondil segon que havem dit.	 "Ensure there is a minister that supports their back and another one supporting the area of their chest; the doctor will then place them on it.
E aquesta es la forma del torn:	 "This is how they are placed:
E aprop pus que le spondil es retornat, e le loc es engualhat, lahoras cove que pauses empastre exciccatiu am album de huou, e aprop estopa; e aprop pause sobre le empastre astela de taula de la qual la latitut sia de tres ditz o enviro aquels, e la longitut de lu sia quantitat que prengua le loc de la gelbositat, e sobre la partida del spondil sa.	 "After that, the minister is returned and the place is covered with a cloth to prevent the excitable patient from touching anything, except for the hand of the doctor; then place it on top of the cloth table which length is three spans or more at those locations, and its length is the amount required by the size of the area, and over the place where the minister stands.
E aprop sia liat am liament le qual havem dit, e uze le malaute de nutriment subtil entro que sia sanat.	 The patient should be placed on their back or stomach, and a cushion should be provided under them to prevent them from moving about too much while they are being examined.
E si roman alcuna iminencia en le loc en la fi de la sanacio, lahoras cove que sian aministradas medicinas que moilifico e liniscan am aministracio de la taula per lonc temps, la qual havem recomtada; e ja es aministrada en aquel loc lamina de plom.	 If there is no immediate danger in the location of the healing, then medications should be administered that soothe and calm the area for a long period, which has been recommended; and it is administered to this place with a thin layer of foam.
E alcunas veguadas accideys imminencia en le derier dels spondils del dos, e es cujat per aquela dislocacio; e es aquel os le qual ja imineys per que no cove que sia fayta prosompcio a lu am aquesta medicina, quar fort leu fara a tu accidir mort.	 Some severe reactions occur in the back of the throat, and it is necessary to vomit them up immediately with this medicine; otherwise, they may prove fatal for you if not acted upon quickly.
Capitol .xxxi.	 Chapter 29
De curacio de anca dislocada.	 Treatment of dislocated bones.
Sapias que la junctura del ancha e la junctura del muscle no endeve sino dislocacio tant solament, e no accideys ad aquelas aquo que accideys a las autras juncturas de petita remocio e concavitat.	 Only the dislocation of both large joints should occur and not those of smaller bones or cavities.
E la junctura de la ancha es dislocada segon quatre manieyras, quar es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, o a las partidas defora, o a las partidas denant, o a las partidas detras.	 The dislocation of the large joint is performed on four different occasions: once to the right side and once to the left side; or forward, backward, upward, downward.
E majorment es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, e pauc a las partidas denant o a las partidas detras.	 It should also be dislocated on occasion at the front of it and rarely at the back.
E senhal de la dislocacio de lu a las partidas de dintz es quar, quan tu ajustas la camba del malaute sana am la malaute, es pus longua e·l denolh es pus heminent que de la sana, e·l malaute no pot doblar le sieu pe deves le lenguonar, e es le loc que siec le lengonar apostemat de apostema caut, per so que·l cap de la coyssa ja es pervengut aqui.	 When dislocating the thigh to the front, when you straighten the calf of the patient, it should be done slowly and carefully; otherwise the leg will not remain straight after treatment, and the injury may occur in that location.
E·l senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio es a las partidas defora, es que les accidentz de lu so contraris ad aquest accident.	 When someone experiences dislocation of this type, it means that their accidents are contrary to what happened before
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas denant es quar expan la camba sieua segon compliment, mays empero no dobla aquela ses dolor que es en le denol, e si se perforsa ad anar e no pot sobre aquo a las partidas denant; e la urina de lu es retenguda e l’engonar de lu es apostemat, e deves la ambulacio de lu sobre le talo.	 If someone experiences dislocation of this type and the second joint becomes swollen after that, it means that they cannot straighten out their leg again, and urine is retained in their body, as well as pain occurs at that point; you must keep them still while waiting for help to arrive
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas detras es que no expande le denol, ni no puesca doblar aquel denant que doble le engonar, e la camba de lu es pus breva que l’autra, e l’engonar es mollificat, e·l cap de la coyssa es deves aquel loc.	 If someone experiences dislocation of this type at the back and it does not expand or straighten out after that attempt, their leg becomes shorter than usual, and pain occurs in their foot as well; you must immobilize them until help arrives
Mays reduccio de las specias de aquesta dislocacio es que tu consideras, lahoras, si la dislocacio es vetusta et antiqua, que ja es anticada am le havent aquela aprop tu aministras reduccio de lu e roman segon la sua disposicio, lahoras no es en aquela curacio de tot; e adonc no cove que en aquela sia fayta prosompcio.	 Your consideration is to do the reduction if you think that it is old and against medical advice not to proceed with any treatment until it has healed completely; and in case of doubt, wait for a second opinion.
Mays en aquel del qual la dislocacio es recent, e es una de las quatre specias de dislocacio, lahoras te coyta ad aquo que volvas la junctura e extendas aquela a las partidas dedintz e a las partidas defora, e mau aquela a la dextra e sinistra, quar fort leu retorna e no indigeys de autra cura.	 If the dislocation is recent and one of the four types mentioned above, you should try to stretch it gently in both directions while lying down on your back, and also extend the arms from side to side; as long as this continues without any other treatment being necessary, continue doing so.
Mays, si no retorna en aquesta manieyra, lahoras cove que tu prepares ministre fort e extendas la camba de lu de la partida pus dejos, o am las suas mas, o am liament lo qual es liat sobre la camba desus le denol; e autre ministre extenda la ma de aquel desus enayssi que meta las suas mas dejos les titillics de lu; e aprop strenha am liament leon sobre la razit de la coyssa, e tengua autre ministre ters le extremitat del liament.	 "When you're done preparing the patient and have extended their chest area from its previous position to lie flat on a cushion or bench-like surface, then place your hand over the abdomen and begin ministering to the wound by gently moving it around.
E sia extencio de lu o de la partida dedintz a l’angonar a la partida de la furcula, o de la partida detras a la partida del dos.	 "Extend their arms or legs as needed, from the beginning to the end of their ribcage, and then backwards.
E sia la extencio de totz aquels en una veguada entro que·l malaute sia elevat am le sieu cos de terra e que romangua pendent.	 "Extend them onto a flat surface where the patient has placed their head and is lying prone.
E aquesta specia de extencio es specia cominal a totas quatre.	 "This special treatment is commonly performed with all four limbs, one at a time.
E donc si la dislocacio retorna am aquo que havem dit, sira bo; e sino, lahoras es necessari a tota specia aquo que dire de la propria curacio.	 "If the dislocation returns as described then good, and otherwise doctors will need to perform further examination.
En la reduccio de lu propria, quan es dislocada, e la dislocacio es a las partidas dedintz, cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu latz sa; e aprop pausa les liamentz sobre la razit de la coyssa en aquel loc le qual entre le cap de la coyssa e·l loc que es dejos le langonar; e aprop exten le liament en sus de la part del angonar a la pus auta partida de la furcula.	 "When the dislocation is corrected, and the dislocation is back in place from where it had been dislocated, then put your hands over the abdomen at the bottom of the chest to the top.
E aprop autre ministre fort prengua les brasses de lu, e amerme le loc gros de la coyssa malaute e extenda a las partidas deforo per extencio vehement, quar aquela retorna en le sieu loc.	 "And then gently press down on the patient's breasts and place your hand over their chest to perform a further examination.
E aquesta specia es de pus leugiera curacio am la qual aquest membre es reduzit que las autres specias.	 This special method involves making a cut in this member so that other parts are reduced, as well.
Mays si es excusat sobre tu e no obezeys al entrament am aquesta specia de curacio de tot, lahoras cove que sian liatz les dos pes del malaute ensemps am liament fort, leugier, sobre amdos les talos e amdos les denols.	 I'm sorry, but it seems like there might be a misunderstanding in the translation or interpretation of this special method for treatment. Could you please provide more context or clarify what exactly is meant by "this member" and "other parts"?
E sia la longitut de quascun de son par la quantitat de quatre ditz, e sia la camba malaute extenduda mays que l’autre per quantitat de dos ditz.	 The length of this member is measured in terms of four digits, and the patient's leg extended by an amount equivalent to two digits.
E aprop le malaute sia suspendut sobre le cap del fust, e que sia en la mayso; e sia la longitut de lu de la terra la quantitat de dos brasses.	 Place the patient on their back, with their head elevated, and make sure that the length of his foot is equal to two brasses or inches.
E aprop comanda a un jove fort que minuesca le cap de la coyssa, e sia suspendut am le malaute autre jove, e l’autre jove minuent la coysa am fortaleza empellesca, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	 You need to use a strong young man who is able to pull down the patient's chin and hold it tight while another man holds down their feet at forceps or clamps to prevent the joint from slipping out of place as quickly as possible.
Mays en la reducio propria, quan es dislocacio a la partida defora, cove que·l malaute jaga sobre pug segon que havem recomtat en le havent gelbozitat; e sia strenhut le liament sobre la camba malauta propriament e sobre le pietz de lu.	 When there is an injury to the joint away from home, then the patient should stay still and not move until advised by a doctor or nurse. And keep your arm tight on their chest as well.
E aprop dos fustz sian pausatz, la un als pes de lu, e l’autre al cap; e aprop sian pausatz fustz ajustatz al mieg del pueg ficat sobre·l qual draps humitz sian envolopatz, per so que·l malaute no sia dampnajat per que·l fust sia entre las coyssas de lu, per que deves la extencio a las partidas dejos no sia atirat.	 Place both hands on the patient's forehead, one on each side of their head; and place both fists onto their chest as well, making sure that their arms are kept tightly wrapped around it to prevent them from being pulled out between their thighs or falling off.
E aprop quascun ministre extenda a la sua part, e·l metge am la sua ma enguala la reduccio segon l’art.	 When one minister extends to his own part, then the doctor holds on to his hand in order to make reduction according to art
Donc, si obezeys a revercio, sira bo grandament; e sino, pausa sobre aquela diligentment e ayssi quo havem dit en gelbozitat per aquela engualment.	 If it is necessary to reverse the minister's position, he must do so immediately and as quickly as possible
Mays cove que·l malaute jagua sobre les sieus latz sa quetament.	 The patient should lie on his back in order for treatment to proceed
E quan la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras cove que la camba sia extenduda leugierament, e es segon aquesta meteyssa narracio sobre pueg; e le metge pause la palma de la sua ma dreyta sobre·l langonar malaute, e aprop coarte aquel am l’autra ma, e am aquela coartacio pausa aquel extendut a las partidas dejos a la partida del denol.	 If the dislocation occurs in the evening, it is customary to make sure that the bed is prepared; and secondly, the doctor places his right hand on the patient's back, and with his left hand places another servant there below as well, then gently supports the area of the wound with both hands.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas detras, lahoras no cove que·l malaute sia extendut a las partidas dejos, e es elevat sobre la terra; habantz cove que sia pausat sobre causa dura, ayssi cum cove le eyssament si l’ancha de lu es dislocada a las partidas defora, segon aquo que havem dit del jasement de lu sobre dos anchas; e es sobre la sua cara e les liamentz sian extendutz, segon que havem dit, no ha guayre.	 If the dislocation occurs behind, then the minister should not be extended in that area but placed on the ground. Afterwards it is customary to place a cushion under his head as well, and afterwards to support him with both hands so he does not fall off of them.
E cove que sia aministrada compressio am taula sobre le loc al qual yeys la junctura.	 The application of compression treatment is customary at the site where the joint pain occurs.
Donc cum la reducio es complida segon que cove — e·l senhal de la reduccio de lu no es amaguat a tu, e es que tu extendas del malaute doas cambas, e quan tu vezes aquelas enguals e le malaute extrenh la sieua camba e expandeys aquela ses excusacio, lahoras sapias que·l membre segon que cove es retornat — e lahoras tu ajusta doas coyssas e pausa empastre e extrenh am benda ayssi que la ancha no sia mauguda en alcuna de las partidas; e adheresca le malaute a repaus per tres dias o per quatre.	 When the reduction is complete, knowing that the minister extends his two legs and when he presses the wound and expands its cavity, the doctor understands which member will be returned - and then adjusts the two cushions and supports it so that the width is not too great in any of the parts; and he holds the minister still for three or four days.
E aprop deslia le liament e l’empastre, e compara la una camba am l’autra.	 The servant should spread open the limb and the stump, and compare one leg to the other.
Lahoras, si vezas aquelas enguals en vustament, lahoras sapias que la dislocacio ja es fermada, e adonc layssa le malaute anar.	 The servant should check that any movements they make are not causing further pain and should ensure the patient is comfortable lying down.
E si vezas alcuna causa de mollificacio, lahoras tu retorna e emplastra aquel, e extrenh aquel segon la tua primiera strectura, e layssa aquel en tres dias.	 If you find no relief from that, the servant should return and retie it again, then stretch it out as much as possible in relation to your first stretch, and have them lie still for three days.
E aprop deslia aquel, e fay aquel tardar en ambulacio sobre quascu per alcus dias, entro que sia confortat.	 The servant should tie that one up tightly and have the patient rest it over some time until they are comfortable with it.
Capitol .xxxii.	
De curacio de dislocacio del denolh.	 Care of dislocations.
Le denolh es dislocat segon tres manieyras, quar es dislocat a las partidas defora, e a las partidas dedintz, e a las partidas dejos mays a las partidas detras; e a las partidas denant no es dislocat.	 The thumb is dislocated three times, when it is dislocated on the outside of the palm, and on the inside of the palm, and on the underside, but not in front.
E le senhal de dislocacio de lu es que comandes al malaute que aplique la sua camba am la coyssa; lahoras sapias que·l denol es dislocat.	 The sign of a dislocation is when you command the patient to place their cushion on the affected area, and the servant should know that it has dislocated.
E la restauracio de totas las manieyras de lu es que fassas cezer le malaute dreyt, enayssi que ja extenda la sieua camba, si pot sobre aquo; adherir le tieu dos a la cara de lu, e pausa le pe de lu entre les tieus pes; e aprop fay adherir le denol de lu am las tuas palmas, e rete aquelas entre les tieus ditz sobre le denolh de lu am fortaleza, e autre ministre extenda le sieu pe entro que·l denol retorne a son loc.	 The restoration of all the stretches is that you will have the patient stretch their leg straight, if they are able to do so; attach the two ends together onto the face of them, and place their foot between your hands with the toes pointing outward; and tie the ankle back onto its normal position by holding it against your arms, stretching out into extension until the ankle returns to its correct location.
E senhal de reddicio de lu es que la sua camba adharesca am la coyssa am levitat no-laboroza.	 The initial part of this sentence seems to be a reminder or instruction related to the positioning of patients during medical procedures, which could imply that the following sentences also pertain to such context.
E aprop emplastra aquel e fay adhirir la camba am la coyssa, e aprop lia aquelas emsemps am una benda per tres dias o per quatre, e aprop deslia aquelas.	 The subject of this sentence seems to be the arrangement or setup for a medical procedure involving the patient's thighs and cushions/supporters.
E no uze le malaute de ambulacio per alcus dias, entro que sia sanat e cofortat.	 Do not remove the mattress from the ambulance unless it is safe and comfortable to do so.
Mays si la reduccio de lu a tu es excusada, lahoras aministra fort extencio am liamentz dels quals en la curacio de la hancha precedit narracio.	 If you cannot perform the procedure as described in the previous account of events, consult with your doctor first and seek additional information on how to proceed or what alternatives might be available.
Capitol .xxxiii.	 The number 33 (XXXIII) is mentioned here; it could represent a particular chapter or section in a book/text or a specific page number in an online document.
De la curacio de la dislocacio del talo.	 From the treatment of dislocation of the arm/leg
Le talo alcunas veguadas es remaugut per petita remocio, e alcunas veguadas es dislocat segon compliment, e la dislocacio de lu es fayta o a las partidas dedintz o a las partidas deforo.	 The ankle bones may be dislocated in one or two places, and the dislocation of it is treated either externally by pressing on it gently or internally through a small cut to release it from its socket.
E le senhal de la dislocacio de lu es que vezes le talo imflat procedent a la partida a la qual es dislocat.	 The indication for dislocation of the limb is that sometimes when the leg/arm collapses into the joint where it was dislocated, it needs to be treated accordingly.
Mays la curacio de la remocio de lu es de leugiera reddicio, e es que sia extendut am facilitat am las mas e sia engualhat entro que retorne.	 The treatment for dislocation involves reducing the joint back into its normal position as much as possible and keeping it in place until it returns to normal.
Mays en la curacio de lu quan es dislocat segon compliment, cove que fasses cezer le malaute dreyt, e tengua aquel un ministre fort e valent de la partida detras del dos de aquel en le mieg loc de lu.	 When the patient's joint is dislocated for a second time, cover it with cold water and hold that minister tightly behind your back as you drag him away from the patient.
E aprop te tu am la tieua ma dreyta le pe de la pus sobirana part, e am la tua ma sinistra de la part pus dejos del pe en le loc de la cavilha.	 And then place your right hand on the front lower part of his leg and your left hand on the back of his leg in that area.
E aprop atira le pe a tu am la tua ma dreyta, e aprop am la sinistra per dos veguadas, e aprop exten am la sinistra; e empelleys le pietz del pe am la dreyta deves la camba ses trebalh.	 And then take the foot in your right hand, place it on your left shoulder and extend your left arm to support its back side as you drag him away from where he was originally placed.
E fay aquo doas veguadas segon que havem comtat.	 Do that again when we've finished.
E aprop empelleys le pietz del pe a la camba la tersa veguada, e tu es a la cavilha.	 And then place the foot on its opposite side in order to drag it away from where you are currently standing.
Donc si retorna en una veguada o en dos segon aquesta manieyra, e si vezes le pe engualhat, es bo; e sino, lahoras sobre lu itera la operacio, quar aquel retorna.	 If you return to this position one time or two times, then that's good, but if the patient moves around during the operation, stop and try again.
Mays si a tu es prohibida la reduccio de lu am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu dos sobre terra, e estrenh un paysel mot en terra fermat, e que caja entre las coyssas de lu, e tu ja has envolopat sobre lu drap per so que no ledesca le malaute.	 If you are forbidden to reduce the patient in this position as we recommended, then place him on his back on the ground and put a cushion under him, and cover your shoulders with it, making sure not to let the patient fall off of them.
E aprop le ministre de lu tengua las suas coyssas, e aprop autre ministre extenda le pe am las suas mas o am liament que lie sobre le col del pe; e aprop extenda aquel quascun ministre contre extencio del sieu par, e le payssel sia extant entre las coyssas del malaute retinent aquel, per so que·l cos de lu no sia atirat a las partidas dejos deves la sua extencio.	 And then hold the minister tightly against his thighs and place another minister in front of him on top of his chest as well; cover it with a cushion between his thighs to ensure that he does not fall off, so that nothing from his body touches the ground.
E aprop le metge enguala la dislocacio am las sieuas mas, e autre ministre tengua la coyssa sana a las partidas dejos, quar la dislocacio retorna am la facilitat.	 And place your hand on their chest so that the dislocated muscle returns to its original position with ease.
E donc cum retorna la dislocacio e es declarada a tu la sanetat de la reduccio de lu, lahoras pausa emplastre e extrenh aquela am liamentz fortment, e ligua le pe am liament a la camba.	 After the dislocation is declared to be healed and reduced, then lay the patient down flat and stretch them out very gently, and bind their leg at its side
E cove que temes o te guardes dels nervis les quals so detras sobre le talo, per que le liament sobre aquel no sia vehement e leda aquel fortment.	 When you are lying down flat after the reduction of the dislocation, make sure your legs do not move or twist excessively in any way that will hinder their healing.
E aprop layssa aquel per dos dias o per tres; e si le liament es mollificat, extrenh aquel.	 After two days or three, apply a cold compress to it and if the dislocation becomes loose, stretch it further.
E aprop deslia aquel en le ters dia o en le quart, e prohibeys le malaute de anament per xl dias.	 Then put it back on every third day thereafter, and make sure the patient does not rub or massage it for more than fourteen days.
Mays si es forsat de anar denant aquel spazi, no es fayta segurtat que la dislocacio no sia sobre lu dissolvuda e corrumpuda, e aprop aquo que no recipia curacio.	 If you suspect that the dislocation is still present but has healed poorly, do not let it remain untouched and apply treatment immediately
E si accideys a lu apostema caut, lahoras cove que tu aministre en la cedacio de lu aquo en lo qual precedic la nostra narracio, en autre loc de curacio e de embrocacio, entro que sia remauguda.	 If the treatment you've applied doesn't work as expected, go to a doctor or a medical professional for further care and remedies, until healing is complete
Capitol .xxxiiii.	 The end of the text
De curacio de dislocacio dels ditz dels pes.	 Treatment for dislocations in the feet.
Cove que aquel qu’es dislocat sia engualhat am pauca extencio ses trebal; e aquo que no es dificil, abantz es leugier.	 If a dislocation is dislocated too tightly and causes pain to move your arm or leg, you can loosen it up slowly.
Mays si la dislocacio es en alcus nozes del dos del pe, lahoras cove que fassas cezer le malaute le sieu pe sobre loc engual de la terra o sobre taula, e sia estant ayssi cum si anava.	 When the dislocation is on both legs of a person, then it is customary that you place one foot upon another and upon either of earth or table so that they are placed in such a way as to be together
E aprop tu sta de pes, e pausa le tieu pe sobre aquo que imineys de las juncturas, e aprop calca aquel am le tieu pe am vertut entro que retorne, e que vejas aquel ja engualhat e no aparesca en le loc eminencia.	 Then you should place the heel on top so that it presses against the joints and when returned put the other foot in such a way as to keep it from coming out
E aprop pausa dejos le ventre del pe de lu una taula que prengua tot le pe, a la qual sian dos caps, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent e ferma per tres dias; e aprop deslia aquel e fay aquel repausar de ambulacio per motz dias, entro que sia estrenhut e de reddicio sia assegurat.	 Then place the abdomen of the foot on a table so that it covers all the foot and there are two caps, and fix firmly for three days; then remove this one and lay this one to rest in a state of motionlessness for three days within which is established and guaranteed.
Capitol .xxxv.	 Chapter 55
De las specias de dislocacio que sian faytas am plagua o am fractura o am quascuna ensemps.	 The specific types of dislocation that are mentioned in the text include sprains, fractures and any other kind of injury.
Quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, e tu te perforssas en la curacio de aquela e en la restauracio de lu, motas veguadas succezeys la mort.	 If there is no cause for the treatment or if it fails in restoring it, then the outcome will be death.
E per aquo no cove que sobre la curacio de lu presuma, sino aquel que es savi en l’art, de lonc uzatge, misericordios e pietados, tardiu, no-ardit ni presomptuos; e que use en le comensament de medicinas que cedan apostemas cautz tant solament, e leyssa le malaute al divinal jutgament, sino ad aquel al qual speras salut de perdicio, am de la malautia alleviacio, e en la qual appareys alcuna speransa.	 Because of this, you should not rely on the treatment alone but also seek help from art, long patience, compassion and understanding; take medicine that cure as much as possible, but leave it to God's judgment too, unless someone seeks healing through faith in the hope for salvation, alleviation of suffering, and with a hope.
E adonc esforsa te tantost far de lu la reduccio en le comensament de la causa, denant que endevengua apostema caut.	 When you have opened the space between the patient's thighs and placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands, it is time to begin making the reduction in the beginning of its cause
E adonc si le membre retorna segon que volem, lahoras aministra regiment le qual ceda apostema caut e cura la plagua am aquo que conveneys a lu dels enguentz desiccatius.	 Once the member returns as we want it, the doctor will prescribe a treatment that cures the pain associated with such conditions.
E si dislocacio es am fractura e accideys en le os satagias separadas, lahoras tu perforsa le stement de lor, e fay en aquo so que havem dit en las malautias simplas de aquo que es precedit en les locz de aquels.	 If the dislocation occurs and fractures occur in the same place as those previously mentioned earlier, then the doctor should perform a statement of care for them separately from that part where it was first mentioned earlier.
E guarda e esquiva segon la tua vertut aquel del intrament en las vias de temor segon que a tu es precedida la mia predicacio; quar aquo es milhor a tu deves le tieu Creator, e mays permanent a la tua gloria, e mays saludos al tieu cos verays aquels en le tieu temps.	 When you are about to enter the temple in the ways of fear and before my prediction comes true; for this is better than your time given by your Creator, may it be permanent to your glory, and many blessings on you forever more
Ayssi fineysso las paraulas de Albucasim perfieytament de las quals Dieus ne sia benezeyt.	 Thus ends the sermon of Alcuin perfectly from those which are blessed by God.
Amen.	 Amen
