Ayssi comensan las paraulas de Albucasim .	 When joints are afflicted by cold humors, each part of the body will be affected.
O, filhs, pus yeu he a vos complit aquest libre, le qual es le derier de la sciencia de medicina, per le compliment de lu so consequit la fi en lu, e per las exposicios de lu, e per las declaracios de lu, es a mi vist que yeu complesca aquel a vos am aquest tractat, le qual es partida de la operacio am ma, so es cyrurgia.	 O brothers, please complete this free book, which is the last of science in medicine, for its completion and to be completed with it; and by its explanations, declarations, and promises, I ask you to read through that tract, as surgery may be done
Quar la operacio am ma es prostrada en nostre regio e en nostre temps de tot privada, entro que fort leu peric la sciencia de lu, e le vistigi de lu es ostat; e no romasero de lu sino alcunas petitas descripcios en les libres dels Antics, les quals mudero las mas e endevenc ad aquels error e heyssitacio entro que son clausas las entencios de lu e es elonguada la forsa de lu e l’art.	 The operation is considered to be closed within our region and time of all private things, except that it is very cold in science; and the sight of it remains with us. And do not mention anything but a few descriptions in the ancient writings, which will make those errors disappear and their truth become apparent through these reasons for its duration and use
E es vist a mi que yeu vivifique aquela am ordenacio de aquest tractat en aquela segon la via de exposicio e de declaracio e de abreviacio; e per que vengua am las formas dels ferramentz de cautheri e dels autres instrumentz de la obra cum sia per addicio de la declaracio, e per preparacio de lu, la qual causa es necessaria.	 I ask you to make the interpretation of that tract in its second way by exposition and declaration and summary; and so on the forms of cautery tools and other instruments for the work may be added with a statement, and for preparation, which is necessary.
Mays la causa per la qual no es atrobat bo artifex am la sieua ma en aquest nostre temps, es quar la art de medicina es longua, e que cove le sieu actor denant aquo esser excercitat en la sciencia de anotomia la qual recontec Gualia entro que sapia les juvament dels membres e las formas de aquels, e la conjunctio e la separacio de lor; e haia la conoyssensa dels osses, dels nervis e dels lacertz, e·l nombre de aquels, e la egrecio de lor; e de las venas pulsatils e de las quietas, e dels locs del eyssiment de lor.	 The cause for which it is difficult to find a good artist in our times is that the art of medicine has become long and that because its practitioners know so little about anatomy compared to what they are taught; and have also been studied on the bones, nerves, and vessels, their number, and the excisions or separations between them.
E per aquo ditz Ypocras que am u nom es mot, mays en l’obra petit, e majorment en la art de la ma.	 This first sentence seems to be a medical instruction regarding how to administer a specific remedy or treatment for someone with gout. Here's my best guess at the translation: "By means of this procedure known as Ypocras, which in essence is gentle but also in the art of medicine.
Mays nos ja avem dit de aquel en l’introit de aquest libre; quar qui no es scient aquo que li avem dit de anotomia, no es evacuat que no caia en error per la qual siran mortz les homes, ayssi cum yeu he vist trops de aquels, quar alscus son formatz en esta sciencia e gettan se de aquela ses sciencia e ses experiment.	 This sentence seems to be a continuation of the previous one and provides further details about using Ypocras for treatment. Here's my best translation: "Firstly, we must enter into this free space; who does not know anatomy is excluded from being treated, lest they fall into error with which men will die, as has often been seen by those of whom science in this matter and its experiments are made.
Quar yeu vi un metge folh e enperit aver incidit un apostema escrophilos en le colh de una femna, e incidic alcunas arterias del colh per que fluic gran sanc entro que la femna cazec morta entre las mas de lu.	 This sentence seems to be a warning or caution about using Ypocras improperly in the context of medical treatment for gout. Here's my best translation: "A doctor, when he has inserted an esophilium into the vagina of a woman and finds some arteries within it that are flowing with great force towards her death between many.
E vi un autre metge que pres que el traguera una peyra d’un home le qual avia procesit en sa etat, e la peyra era gran, e venguet a lu e trayssec aquela peyra am un tros de la vesiqua, per que aquel home al tertz dia es mort.	 This sentence seems to be the continuation of previous instructions regarding using Ypocras for treatment and its consequences if used improperly or excessively. Here's my best translation: "Another doctor ordered a poultice from a man who had been in his condition, but it was great, and applied it on him, and covered it with some of the bladder, so that this man on the third day died.
E yeu ja apelat fuy a estrayre aquela, e vi que per la grandesa de la peyra e per la disposicio del malaute conogui subre lu que morira.	 This sentence seems to be further instruction regarding using Ypocras excessively and the consequence of doing so. Here's my best translation: "You have already called for fear, and you saw that because of the greatness of the poultice and the disposition of the patient who would die.
E vi un autre metge le qual prenia stipendic de un duc de nostra terra per cyrurgia, e endeven a un crastrat negre le qual era deves lu fractura en la coyssa de lu; e perparec le metge am la sua ignorancia, estrayssec la fractura, sobre la plagua, am pulvinas e astelas am forta strectura, e no layssec a la plagua espiracio.	 When another doctor was consulted by the patient's brother-in-law from our land for surgery and he also consulted with black knight who had already fractured his arm in that area; and after having examined the fracture the doctor blamed ignorance of the patient, caused the fracture to remain open, over the wounds on the chest, back, belly and abdomen, without healing it.
E aprop le desliet segons los sieus desiriers, e aprop le relieg, e aprop le leyssec per alcus jorns e comandec que nos deslies le liament; e estec ayssi entro que la coyssa e·l pe foro apostematz, e pervenguet a perdicio.	 According to their desires, I will follow your commands, and every day I'll visit them both until the fracture heals completely and they are cured of pain.
E yeu fuy apelat a lu, e aparelhegui a desliar le liament, e conseguida es tranquilitat e enayssi amermet de sas dolors.	 He appealed to you, I will follow your commands, and by following the treatment given to me I was able to achieve tranquility and eliminate their pain completely.
Mays empero ja corrupcio era confermada en le membre, per que no pogui refrenar aquela, e no cessec perambular la corrupcio en le membre entro que·l malaute peric.	 Although the corruption had been confirmed in that member and could not be prevented from continuing with it, they still tried to remove the corruption from the member until the patient was cured.
E vi un autre metge le qual perforec un apostema cancros, e fo ulcerat aprop alscus dias, entro que foc magnificada la malicia de lu am lo senhor de lu.	 When another doctor examined him and found an ulcer that had been there for many days, he blamed the malice of the patient's lord on this illness
La qual causa es quar le cranc caut es pur de humor melencolic, lahoras no cove que pervengua a lu am ferr de tot, sino que sia an membre le qual suffertes que de tot fos hostat.	 The cause for the gout is the melancholic humors, and although it hurts all parts of their body except one that suffered from everything becoming inflamed.
E per aquo, filhs, necessari es a vos que la operacio am ma sia devisada en dos devesios: so es en operacio a lu qual es associada salut, e en obra am la qual es perilh en las majors disposicios.	 For this, ladies and gentlemen, it is necessary for you to perform the operation in two stages: one where healing is expected, and another where there are risks of major consequences
E yeu ja he exsitat aquo en tot loc de aquest libre en le qual venc opperacio en la qual es error e temor; per que necessari es a vos que guardetz aquo e layssetz aquel, per que les folhs no atrobo via a parlar e a vos desonestar.	 You must now enter the location of that free space where the operation occurs which has errors and fear, so that you should preserve it and save that one, in order for people not to stumble upon the way they speak and you are distressed.
E donc prenetz las vostras armas am sollicitut e am proteccio de Dieu , e les vostres malautes am falicitat e am fermetat.	 Then please take your weapons of solicitation, protection from God, and your sins that have been spoken and committed.
E usatz de la milhor via per la gracia de Dieu perdusent a salut e a lausabla successio, e laysatz las malautias terriblas de difficil sanacio, e ostatz las vostras armas de aquo que vos fa temer, per so que ysitatio en vostra fe e en le vostre nom no vos evasisca: quar mays es remanent a la vostra gloria, e pus aut en le mon e en derier a las vostras sanctitatz.	 Then proceed by the grace of God to heal and achieve success, take on terrible sins that are difficult to cure, hold your weapons here so you do not tremble; in faith and in His name may it never fail: for how much remains to your glory?
Gualia ja diyssec en alcunas sieuas monicios:	 And please excuse any of your shortcomings.
“No mediquetz malautia mala, per so que mals metges no siatz nompnatz”.	 "I will not bring evil to my patients.
E yeu ja he devesit aquest libre segontz tres capitols.	 It is necessary that you enter this free space in three parts.
Comensa la divisio del libre, e primier de la primieyra partida.	 Begin the division of the free area by the first part of the first stage.
Le primier capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, en las formas dels instrumentz e en les ferrementz dels cauteris, e de aquo que necessari es en la opperacio.	 The first stage is organized in terms of instruments and procedures to be carried out by the doctors for this operation.
La divisio de la segonda partida.	 The second division
Le segon capitol, de siccio e perforacio, e de ventosas, e de plaguas, e de extractio de sagetas e de semblantz ad aquelas, tot capitolat e ordenat de las formas dels instrumentz.	 The second chapter of surgery and incision, extraction, and excision; it is ordered to show the forms of instruments used in this field
Divisio de la tersa partida.	 The third division
Le tertz capitol, de restauracio e de dislocacio, e de curacio de torcio e de semblantz ad aquels; capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, e de las formas dels instrumentz.	 The third chapter of restoration and dislocation, and treatment for the sick or injured; it is ordered from top to bottom, and shows the forms of instruments used in this field
De cauteri am foc e am medicina aguda e rememoracio de la opperacio.	 This chapter includes medical treatments and surgical interventions, and their memorization of operations.
Am aquel comensa le tractat de tot le libre.	 This treatise is the beginning to deal with everything free.
Cove que yeu digua la qualitat dels juvamentz de aquel cauteri e dels noccumentz de lu, e en qual compleccio sia prohibit cauteri.	 Consider the quality of youth and old age in cautery; and what complications may arise as a result.
Donc dic que·l sermo de la qualitat del juvament de cauteri e del noccument de lu es sermo lonc e prolixs, e subtil per sciensa, e secret amaguat; e ja de lu a parlat gran multitut de savis, e de lu se son desacordatz, et a mi abasta un petit dels sermons de lor, temen perlonguacio.	 The youth of cautery and age are long and complex, subtle to understand, and secret; many secrets there are, and disagreements arise, so that the sermon on them is long.
E donc dic que cauteri comfereys a tota compleccio universalment la qual es am materia o ses materia, exceptat dos compleccios, las quals son compleccios caudas ses materia .	 Cautery interferes with all universally relevant material, except two complications: adhesions and scars of the body.
En la compleccio cauda e secca am materia se desecordero; quar alcus dyssero que cauteri es juvatiu ad aquela, e les autres dyssero le contrari de aquel, que cauteri no es convenient en malautia la qual es per qualiditat e per siccitat, quar natura del foc es qualiditat e siccitat, e enconvenient es que malautia cauda e secca am aquo que es caut e sec sia sanada.	 In the adhesion and scar complication of cautery, healing occurs; it is convenient for cauterized wounds that are dry to be cured, as dryness is characteristic of fire, and inconvenientness arises when dry wounds occur with wet cauterization.
E diysec aquel que ditz le contrari de aquel, que per cauteri es fayt juvament en tota malautia cauda e secca que ve en les cors dels homes, quar quan tu comparas le cors de home e las humiditatz de lu a la compleccio del foc, atrobas le cors de home freg.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
E yeu dic per le sermo de aquel, que esperiment aquo ja a mi alscunas vetz a descubert.	 You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
Mays empero no cove que vengua sobre aquo aquel que ja es exproat e excersitat en le capitol de cauteri per derier exercici, e a conogut la diversitat de la compleccio dels homes e la disposicio de las malautias en lor meteyssas, e las causas de aquelas, e·ls accidentz de lor, e l’espasi del temps de aquelas.	 However, you should also note that practicing caution and exercise in the practice of cautery is important to avoid accidents, injuries from these practices, as well as the time limit for each.
Mays en las autras compleccios, no es sobre vos temor, e majorment en las malautias fregas e humidas, quar ja totz les metges se son acordatz sobre aquels, e no so desecordatz en le juvament am cauteri en aquelas.	 It is advisable to consult with doctors about these complications as well, and avoid practicing cautery in haste, especially when dealing with wet or moist conditions that all doctors agree are best avoided.
E sapiatz, filhs, que del secret de curacio per cauteri am foc e de la bontat de lu, so sobre cauteri am medicina comburent, es quar le foc es simple, la accio del qual no perven sino al membre le qual es cauterizat e no notz al autre membre am lu ajustat sino am petit nocument.	 Lastly, it is important to note that the secret of cure for cautery burns and its effects on the body are known best in cautery as medicine compared to simple cauteries where only the part which has been cauterized feels pain and not the other member at the same time but instead a short while later.
Mays la accio de medicina comburent perven ad aquel en les membres le qual de lu alunhat, e fort leu fa venir en le membre malautia de dificil sanacio e fort leu ausit.	 Medicine practiced on the affected member will cause pain in another part of the body that is difficult to heal and be very painful.
Mays le foc, per la sua sublimitat e de la sua substancia bontat, no fa aquo sino que superfluisca E ja es a nos conogut per experiment e per longitut de servitut de studi am l’art sobre le veritat de las causas; e per aquo yeu so excusat de la longitut del sermo E si no fos que no es legut al mieu libre en aquest pausero a vos secret amaguat am le foc, e la qualitat de la operacio de lu en les cors e de la sieua expulcio per la qual expellis las malautias, am sermo philosophic demostratiu, le qual siria acuit en las vostras pessas.	 In the presence of a great amount of warmth and goodness in its nature, it does not do anything other than to harm
E sapiatz, filhs, que els se desacordan del temps en le qual es convenient far cauteri e pausan le milhor temps de primaveyra.	 You should be aware that the sentences have become disordered due to the passage of time and are no longer grammatically correct.
E yeu dic que cauteri es convenient en tot temps, per so que le nocument per le temps accident es submergit en le juvament de aquo que am le cauteri es atirat, e majorment si le cauteri es per dolors o de dolors necessaries, fortz e fistinas, las quals no suffertan tarditat per so que es temut de aquelas que vengua malicia, que es major que petit nocument entrant per lo temps.	 You are suggesting that cauterization is convenient in all situations, except when time runs out or when the need for treatment becomes urgent, and especially if it's for necessary pain like those caused by injury, burns, or other types of pain that can't be treated with delay as fear of causing harm may outweigh the potential benefits.
E aysso no catz en vostras pessas, o, filhs, aquo no estiman sino le poble vulguar e les fols metges, so es que ad aquela malautia que es sanada per cauteri no es redicio tot temps, e pausan aquel consequen.	 This means that in your cases or if medical professionals believe otherwise, when treating a condition that can only be cured with cauterization it is not convenient all the time and should be done during times of urgency to avoid any potential consequences.
E la causa no es ges ayssi quo els cuydan per aquo, quar cauteri no es sino en loc de medicina la qual altera la compleccio e esicca las humiditatz las quals son causa per que veno las dolors.	 The cause is that the treatment for this ailment occurs instead of medicine which changes the complexion and dries up the fluids causing the pain.
Mays empero cauteri superflueys sobre la medicina per volicitat de la sua valitut e vertut de la sua operacio e grandesa del sieu senhor.	 The first sentence of the text translates to "I am about to explain the importance of using a pointed cautery for relieving pain in gout".
E es possible que la sua malautia retorne en alcuna hora del temps, segon la compleccio del malaute e la locacio de la sua malautia, e la vertut de lu, e aquo que es preparat en le cors de lu de la agreguacio de las superfluitatz en lu, e aquo que es pervengut a lu en la sua acquisicio en viandas e semblantz de aquelas causas; sino que la malautia en la qual sia aministrat cauteri sia malautia subtil en membre de paucas superfluitatz e humiditatz, ayssi cum cauteri de dent per dolor e semblantz ad aquel, possible es que en lu no retorne aquela dolor, mays aquo se fa en petitz.	 The second sentence translates to "It is also possible that the gout will return at some point in time, after completing the treatment and placement of the device, as well as its completion within one's body, and due to the causes mentioned above; unless the ailment is treated with a pointed cautery, which could alleviate or prevent pain from occurring again. In other words, if precautions are not taken.
E mays sermo vulgar es que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, e es sermo dreyturier, no ad aquo que els entendo en lu, quar els crezo que no es curacio que aprofieyta am medicina ni am autra causa aprop cauteri.	 The final sentence translates to "Therefore, the most common remedy is pointed cautery, and it is straightforward; unless one understands in what way these are applied by the physician, who thinks that they do not cure or prevent pain.
E la causa es en contrari de aquo; e la entencio que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina no es sino quan administram las manieyras de curacio en alcunas malautias, e aquelas medicinas no conferieysso, e aprop en la fi de la causa aministra hom cauteri, e aprofieyta ad aquela.	 The cause of this is contrary to the above; and the reason that pointed cautery is the most common remedy for medicine is only when administering the methods of healing in certain ailments, those medicines don't confer it, and at the end of the cause, a physician administers a pointed cautery and applies it.
E lahoras de aqui cat16 que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, no segon la entencio la qual entendo les vulgars e trops dels fols metges.	 The conclusion of the text translates to "The pains here refer to the common use of pointed cautery in medicine that is different from what doctors used earlier.
E diyssero les antics que cauteri am aur es milhor que cauteri am ferr, e no diyssero aquo sino per la equalitat del aur e sublimitat de la sua sustancia.	 When the first course of cautery is done more than necessary, it should not be done by itself but for the equality and sublimity of its substance.
E diyssero que le loc de cauteri no fa brac, cum aquo no sia absolutament vertat, quar yeu ja he aquo proat e he atrobat que aquel no fa aquo sino en alcus cors ses les autres, e cauteri am aquel es bo e milhor que am ferr ayssi quo els diyssero; mays empero quan tu fas cauteri am foc am de aur, no es a tu declarat, quar es egnit segon la quantitat que tu vols per la rugor de l’aur, e quar prepara a recebre freg; e si ajustas sobre lu ignicio se fon l’aur per le foc, e caso en le foc alcunas laminas per que le artifex catz per la occupacio de aquel.	 When cautery is done on the body but not on the eyes, it should be made in every other part of the body except for the eyes; and cautery to that area is better and more effective than doing so with fire alone, as there will be fewer burns; also if you adjust the intensity setting when cauterizing over the eye, then the heat may cause the cautery implement to stick to it.
E per aquo es fayt cauteri am ferr deves nos pus leugerament e pus propdanament a rectitut de operacio.	 In order for cautery to be done properly and completely, you must gently and carefully regulate the operation procedure.
E yeu ja he ordenat aquest capitol en le cauteri segon capitols, et he ordenat aquels del cap entro les pes, per so que aleugo le demandant aquo que vol de lu.	 You have already ordered this chapter on cautery after the previous chapters, and you have arranged it in the order that the patient wants it.
De cauteri de dolor de cap per frigiditat e humiditat.	 For gout caused by coldness or dampness
Le capitol primier.	 The first chapter.
Aquesta cauterizacio confereys a la humiditat e frigiditat sobre le servel accident de la qual so doas causas, so es causa de soda e multitut de flux raumatic, apelat corissa, del cap a las partidas dels huelhs e de las aurelhas fluent, e multitut de dormir, e de dolor de dentz e del guolayro, e universalment de tota malautia que ve per fregiditat, ayssi cum paraliticament, sodo e apoplexio, e semblantz en aquelas malautias.	 This cauterization covers all the accidents caused by coldness and dampness, from head to toe of the limbs including ears and eyelids, causing excessive sleep disturbances, toothaches and jaw pain, as well as universal body pain generally caused by coldness or dampness with paralysis and apoplexy like in those ailments.
La forma de aquesta cauterizacio es aquesta, que primieyrament comandes al malaute que sia evacuat am medicina lacsativa le cap mondificant, per tres o per quatre nueytz, segon que exhigeys la vertut del malaute e la edat de lu e la sua costuma.	 "The form of this cauterization is as follows: First command the patient to empty their bowels with a laxative, either three or four times, then examine the rectum and age of them, and their usual habit.
E aprop comanda li que raza le sieu cap am razor, e aprop fay aquel sezer entre las tuas mas sobre una banca cayrada e que pause las suas mas sobre le pietz sieu.	 "Then command him to raise his head with a sharp pain and place something soft between your thighs in order to prevent the stool from coming out.
E aprop pausa la razit de la tua palma aprop le pous sobre la razit del nas entre les huels sieus.	 "Then gently remove the bandage on her hand, place a soft towel over her nose between her lips.
Mays empero, cum le tieu dit del mieg loc es pervengut, signa aquel loc am tenta, e aprop igneys le cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma:	 "But if the location mentioned above has been found, signal that location and proceed with the olive oil cautery which is as follows:
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le loc senhat am tenta, a manieyra que descent, am la qual la tieua ma sia constrengida petit a petit, e tu revolveys aquel.	 "Then gently remove that over the location you mentioned, and move it slightly towards where your hand is, at which point your hand will be tight gradually, and then rotate that.
E aprop leva la tua ma leugerament e reguarda le loc, e si veses ja del os esser descubert alcuna quantitat del cap, ayssi cum la quantitat de gra de errs, lahoras eleva la tua ma, e si no torno la tua ma am aquel ferr, am autre de aquel, si es enfrigidat, entro que sia vist del os aquo que yeu he dit a tu.	 "Then gently lift your hand and look at the location, if you see any amount of the head uncovered, then count how many grains of sand there are, the doctors will raise their hands, and if not return your hand to that place, otherwise do that.
E aprop pren un petit de sal e disolveys aquel sobre le loc e leyssa aquel per tres jorns.	 "Then take a little salt and dissolve it over the location and let it stay there for three days.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto enbegut en boder e leyssa aquel sobre lu entro que sia destrusida la scara del foc.	 And then place a cushion beneath their buttocks, and put one over the opening of their body to prevent injury from the firelight.
E aprop cura le loc am anguent tetrafarmacon entro que sia sanat.	 Then apply cold water to the affected area to help cool it down
E ja diyssero que quant la plagua roman uberta, tant mielhs geta le brac, per que es milhor e mays juvatiu.	 It is customary that when a man gains weight, he will get fat arms, so as not to be ashamed and look young.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia cauterizada la codena entro al os, e sia tengut le cauteri entro que sia adhurida alcuna partida de la specitut del os.	 And it is customary that if the cautery is done to the nose, no more bleeding will occur from any other part of the body.
E aprop sia ras aquo que es adhust del os, e aprop sia curat.	 Then return to where you came from and start again.
E diyssero autres que am lo cauteri pervengua al derier, entro que enprema en le os forta enprecio entro que le os caga, e aquesta es la forma de alphecati petit:	 And it is customary that the cautery should be done on the right side of the body first. Then put your hand over the opening to prevent the nose from falling out, and this is how the little animals do
E estiman de aquel loc expiran la vapors del cap.	 It is customary for them to get rid of the cold humors in their head.
E sia tenguda la plagua uberta per lonc temps, e aprop sia curada entro que sia consolidada.	 And then hold onto the excess fat for a long time, and apply it when it's solid.
Mays a mi no so vistas aquestas doas specias de cauteri de tot, sino en alcus homes segon via de temor; e layssa aquel, deves mi, milhor es am salut, quan es; quar le cap es develitat per solucio de continuitat de lu ayssi cum havem testificat en les autres membres, e majorment quan le cap del malaute es de freul natura.	 It is customary that when they ask about cauteries of all kinds, and you are afraid to answer them directly; but rather, tell them the reason for it in a roundabout way, and if necessary make excuses for your silence by saying, "As I was explaining to my previous questioners...
E la specia de cauteri primieyra es mays salva e milhor deves mi; e de aquela husi e am aquela obra am salut.	 When joint pain arises from cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, it is customarily called gout by doctors
Capitol segon.	 And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery.
Del cauteri del cap.	 The head cautery.
Quan en tot le cap accideys dolor cronica e longua e aquo es en le malaute prolonguat, e usa de gerras e de cochias e de capipurges e de emplaustres e de guatz e de cadels e de gualinas e de semblantz, e majorment si ja es cauterizat am un cautere le qual recontam e no aprofieyta a lu deguna de aquelas causas, lahoras considera quar si le cap del malaute es de fort creacio en la sua natura; e no es freul et atroba mot gran freg, lahoras aquel cauterisa am autra cauteri dejos aquel un pauc.	 When chronic and prolonged pain occurs in the head of a patient who has been previously cauterized with a certain type of cautery due to those causes, doctors consider whether the nature of the patient's head is very dry or extremely moist (or "grast"), believing that this could be related to the dryness of the head.
E aprop cauterisa aquel sobre le corn del sieu cap am cauteri entro que la codena es partida.	 And if the cautery above the patient's forehead is removed, then the pain will cease.
Incisa la codena e sia descuberta del os la quantitat la qual havem recontat e cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en la partida deriera del cap en le loc le qual es apelat vas, — e es aquel loc en le qual es pausada ventosa.	 Remove the bandage and discover how much of it was removed and cauterize that part with a cautery as if it were called "the space" (i.e., the location where pain has been experienced).
Et alleuja la tua ma en aysso, e no descobras le os, quar le malaute per aquo atroba mot gran dolor diversa de la dolor de totz les autres cauteris del cap.	 And wash your hands so that you do not see the wound where the patient has suffered extreme pain from other cauteries on their head.
E yeu diyre aquest cauteri en son loc, quar cove que·l cauteri am le qual so cauterisatz les corns del cap e le occiput es pus subtil cauteri que aquel am le qual es cauterisat le mieg loc del cap; e aquesta es la forma de lu.	 You will apply this cautery to that location, which is a subtle type of cautery used when the other cauteries on the head have been removed, and it is how they are applied in practice.
Capitol ters.	 The patient is being prepared for an operation that involves making incisions in the thighs, placing cushions under them, serving on their legs, chest, holding their hands, to prevent the intestine from coming out when there's pain in the feet.
De cauterisacio de emigranea no-antiqua.	 The cautery must not be too hot or cold.
Quan endeve en la partida del cap dolor sodo, o es stenduda dolor entro al uelh, sia evacuat am medicinas le cap mondificantz, e sia aministrada l’autra curacio, la qual yeu he dita en las devesios de las malautias; e tot no aprofieyta, lahoras cauterisacio en lu es en dos manieyras: o cauterisacio am medicina acuta comburent, o am ferr.	 When the pain in a part of the head is so severe that it cannot be relieved by other means and must be treated with a hot cautery, or when the pain occurs within an ulcer, the cautery should be used to treat it; otherwise, use another cure for pains only if necessary.
Mays cauteri am medicina comburent es que tu prenguas una dolsa de alh, e escorgas aquela e abcindas las extremitatz de lu de amdos les caps.	 If the cautery is used to treat a severe headache and the ulcers are treated at the same time with other remedies for pain in the extremities of the patient's body.
E aprop incideys le loc de la dolor en la templa am una lanceta lada entro que sia en lu feyt loc dejos la codena, entro que sia occultada.	 Place a bandage over the area where the pain is in the temple to prevent it from coming out through the forehead, or place a covering so that you do not see it.
E aprop strenh sobre lu am stopada per descent constreccio, e layssa aquel per le spazi de tres horas; e aprop deslia le e tratz le alh, e laysa la plagua per dos o per tres jorn, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto submergit en boder entro que le loc fassa brac.	 And then apply a tight bandage for one hour to prevent swelling of the chest area and place it under three hours; and apply lotion on both or three days, and rest over the chest area so that the location does not come out by force.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	 And then cure him with a remedy when he is healthy.
E si tu voys, fe aquo am alcunas medicinas comburentz las quals yeu he scriutas en le douse tractat de medicinas comburentz.	 If you use remedies that are in the same book of medicines used above.
Mays la cauterisacio am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: igneys per cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	 The second cautery procedure should be performed in this way:
e es apelat claus clavilhs, quar le cap de lu es ayssi cum forma de clavel en le qual es alcuna curvitat, e·n le mieg loc de lu es eminensia petita.	 It is recommended that the head of the cautery should be in a form similar to an anvil so as to prevent any bending or twist when applied to the patient's body part.
E aprop pausa sobre loc de la dolor, e rete la tua ma — per que no sia adhurida la arceria la qual es dejos — e revol le ferr petit a petit am velocitat.	 Then place your hand over that area of pain, keeping it steady so as not to cause injury and gradually reduce its size at a slow pace.
E si la quantitat de lu que es adhurida per la specitut de la codena ayssi quo la maytat de lu, e elava la tua ma per so que la arteria no sia adhurida la qual es dejos, per so que no vengua flux de sanc.	 If the amount of blood flowing through that vein is such that it might be causing pain during palpation, then place your hand gently to prevent injury and take extra caution to ensure there's no bleeding from any veins or arteries nearby.
E aprop enbibeys coto en aygua de sal e pausa aquel sobre le loc, e layssa aquel per tres dias; e aprop pausa coto mulhat am boder, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	 Then apply a poultice of salt and water to the affected area, covering it with cloth for three days; also, apply ointment on the wound, ensuring cleanliness.
E si voys, cauterisa am la extremitat del cutellari segon cauteri, e guarda te de incisio de arteria en aquesta emigranea propriament no-antiqua.	 If any arterial incision is made during the cautery procedure on the arm, it should be carefully inspected to ensure that it was not an antique one.
Capitol quart.	 The fourth cap.
De cauterizacio d’emigranea antiqua.	 The cautery for the antique artery.
Quan tu curas emigranea am aquo que havem dit de la curacio precedent, e aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias, e no aprofieyta la curacio, e vezes per la malautia que no abasta a lu aquo que havem dit del primier cauteri am medicina o del cauteri am foc, lahoras cove que tu igniscas le cauteri cutellar entro que sia albificat, pus que significas sobre le loc de la dolor am linha de longuesa de la qual sia la maytat del dit, o quays aquel; e depausa la tua ma per una veguada e strenh aquela entro incidiscas la arceria e pervengua entro al os.	 When you perform cautery on the artery mentioned earlier in previous care or in divisions of wounds and miss out on taking it, causing pain to the area around that location as well; pause your hand gently and hold tightly to prevent any injury during incision while also covering its mouth with a gauze pad.
Empero necessari es a tu que guardes de la continuacio de la mandibula, la qual es mauguda deves la masticacio, e que le lacert no sia adhurit e le nervi le qual mau aquela, e que no s’endevengua espasme.	 However, it is necessary for you to guard against the continuation of the jaw, which may make swallowing difficult, and that no nerve should be injured, nor any spasms occur.
E si es sobre la custodia e cautela de flux de sanc de l’arteria que es abciza, quar en la abcizio de lu es temor, e majorment ad aquel le qual ignora aquo que fa e no es studios e esproat; e layssa la operacio en lu al comensament.	 If you are to be cautious and careful in the flow of blood from an artery that is blocked, for fear of a blockage occurring elsewhere as well, let us proceed with caution and care at the outset.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio del regiment de flux de sanc accident de la arceria segon la sieua manieyra, en le sieu loc de aquest libre.	 And remember to apply a poultice of warm damp cloth on the affected area for 20 minutes every hour as needed.
E si veses de aquesta malautia que no abaste aquest cauteri e veses le cors del malaute tollerable, cauteriza aquel en le mieg loc del cap ayssi cum havem recontat, e cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	 If you find that the patient's discomfort is intolerable due to this caution and excessive care of their body parts, burn it with a pointed cautery in the affected area as described previously, and treat the wound as soon as possible to ensure it heals well.
E si voys, aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le capitol de streccio de arceria am cauteri havent dos cotels, e es milhor cauterizacio aquesta e mays conferent.	 If you find that the cautery we described earlier in the chapter on arterial cauteries is not sufficient or more intense, this is the preferred method and may be superior.
Capitol .v.	 Capitulation.
De cauterisacio de las dolors de aurelhas.	 Cauterization of joints pain.
Quan en la aurelha ve dolor per freg e es curat am causas lacsativas e am l’autra curacio la qual he dita en la divisio, e no es remauguda la dolor, lahoras igneys le cauteri, e es aquest le qual ha nom puncta, del qual aquesta es la forma:	 When the joint pains occur due to cold humors and are treated as described above in section B of this chapter with the exception that we do not burn away the pain but rather cauterize it. The point of this procedure is called a puncture and is used for:
E aprop puncta aprop la ignicio, e sia menat al enviro de tota la aurelha ayssi cum roda es revolguda, o en le circuit de quascuna essemps si la dolor es en quascuna.	 The first sentence translates to "now open and make ready the opening", suggesting that a patient is being prepared for an operation of some sort in their groin area, where pain has been experienced by the patient.
Alonga te am le cauteri de la razit de la aurelha pauc a pauc pus que aias senhat le loc am tenta.	 "Then take the cautery from your hand and place it gently on the small of her back, holding tight to prevent slipping.
E si le cauteri de detz puntz en tota aurelha, e quays aquela, e aprop cura les locz entro que sian sanatz.	 "If you find a wound in the area where the cautery was applied, and if that place is contaminated or infected, then apply another cautery.
Capitol .vi.	 "May it be well done
De cauterizacio de turtura.	 "The cauterization of the wound.
Turtura la qual es curada e am cauterizacio no es sino de las specias las quals veno per flecma, segon que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias.	 "The treatment is only necessary for those cases where pain occurs from a specific reason as we mentioned earlier in the sections of diseases.
Esquiva cauterizacio de la specia que endeve per siccacio o per spasme del nervi.	 The cauterization of that particular area is done when there's dryness or spasm of a nerve, because it was mentioned earlier in the section on diseases.
Quan tu curas aquela specia de turtura am jerras e capipurgi e guarguarismes, e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas le malaute am tres cauteris: la i deves la razit de la aurelha, e·l segon un petit dejos le sieu templar, e le ters deves la conjunccio de doas labias.	 When you treat that particular area of the wound make sure to also cleanse and disinfect your hands before starting treatment. Also keep in mind while treating, if necessary to cauterize another place near it as well, one will cauterize the area between two thighs (pubic area), a second one on the breastbone, or all three depending on what is needed.
E pausa lo tieu cauteri per le contrari de la partida malauta, quar mollificacio no ve sino en la partida que apar sana.	 "Place your hand carefully away from the patient's body to avoid any harm.
E la forma de cauterisacio es que cauterizas aquel am le cauteri en le dreyt de la extremitat de la aurelha pus sobirana un petit sobre le corn del cap, e en le templar autre, la longuesa del qual sia segon la longitut del dit pous, e depausa la tua ma am cauteri entro que sia comburida la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena.	 "The method of cauterization is to burn a small part of the tip of the ear, and also in another place on the temple; from which length it is second after the length of the thumb, and pause your hand from burning until enough of its surface has been burned off.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri, e es specia del cutellari, la forma del qual es denant mesa.	 "This is the way to perform a cautery, specifically for surgeons, and it is called 'mesa' in Spanish.
Mays empero pus subtil es que aquel un pauc ayssi co vesas; e cove que cotel en lu de superflua groceza un pauc.	 "However, please remember that a small amount of excess fat should be removed beforehand.
E aprop cura le loc am aquo que es denant procezit entro que sia sanat.	 "Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity and proceed as if nothing has happened.
Capitol .vii.	 I apologize for any inconvenience, but my knowledge of this specific medieval text is incomplete. Could you please provide more context or additional information about what this text refers to?
De cauterizacio de apoplextia antiqua.	 "The method of cauterization used in ancient apoplexy.
Quan apoplextia es antiquada e curas aquela am aquo que havem dit e no confereys la tua medicacio e le malaute no ha febre, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris: sobre totz les corn del sieu cap; e am cauteri e le mieg loc del cap, ayssi cum havem dit; e am cauteri en le coguot.	 "When ancient apoplexy is cured and the patient does not have fever, the doctors cauterize that part with four cauteries: on all the ears of his head; and also on the ear lobe; and also in the corner.
E la manieyra del cauteri es fayta segon que es desus dit.	 "The method of cautery is to be done second after that part has been mentioned.
E ja es cauterizat sobre la boca del estomac; e es mays derier; e aprop sia curat am aquo que procezeys.	 "Now the stomach has been cauterized, and there is another method to be applied; proceed as if nothing happened.
Capitol .viii.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors
De cauterizacio de obblivio fayta per flacma.	 Cautery to relieve pain.
Cove que sian donatz al malaute en le comensament jerras grans e pilulas le servel mondificantz.	 Insert the patient between two sheets of linen and apply hot towels, first covering their head with a large one, then gradually reducing the size as they are cooled down.
E aprop ras le cap tot del malaute e pausa sus le coguot de lu emplaustre de cetre descrit en le tractat dels emplastres.	 Place the patient's head on a flat surface, and put their hands under their chest to prevent it from moving around too much as described in the chapter on plastering.
E pausa aquel alcunas veguadas, quar aquel es manieyra de cauteri.	 Remove those covered with gauze that are being used for cautery.
E fay aquo segon aquel meteys orde le qual ja he dit.	 Do what I've already said.
E donc si per aqueles sanat bo es; e sino, lahoras fay a lu tres cauteris en la deriera partida de sieu cap, les quals sian deysendentz de la partida pus sobirana del cap entro a la partida pus dejos del col.	 Do what is necessary for those who are sick; and if not, apply three hot cauteries at the bottom of their head starting from the top down to the back of the neck.
E pausa entre quascun cauteri la grossetut del dit, e aprop cura lo cauteri am aquo que es procedit.	 Place between each cautery a towel soaked in vinegar and water as described earlier.
Mays si tu vos addicio e le malaute es aquo tollerant, lahoras fay a lu cauteri en le mieg loc; e si voys major addicio, lahora cauteriza aquel sobre les dos corns.	 Do what is necessary to improve tolerance and prevent further attacks: apply the cautery at the site of the attack if slight; but if greater addition occurs, apply it over two areas on each leg.
Aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat; e sia le cauteri olivar segon la forma denant donat.	 Apply this between those who are sick and those that have had attacks: olive oil instead of water in the cautery as described earlier.
Capitol .ix.	 "A physician's duty arises when joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, especially in the feet.
De cauterisacio de parazili e de mollificacio de tot le cors.	 "The cautery application across all over the body and its cooling effect.
Cove que tu procesiscas en mondificacio del cap am jerras e am aquo que havem dit; e aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap, e am cauteri sobre totz les corns del cap, e am cauteri sobre la deriera partida de lu, e am tres cauteris sobre les spondils del col.	 "After making the points on the top of the head and above where you mentioned; and then go to the top of the patient's buttocks, apply the cautery there as well, over all the ears, under each ear, below the forehead, beneath each cheek, and lastly, over both shoulders.
E si es necessari en la malautia de mollificacio del cors de trops aquel e les malautes tollerantz e la malautia es fort, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e dererament am cauteri entro que sia comborit de la codena mot de lu, e aleva la tieua ma.	 "If necessary in the patient's illness of cooling the body and especially if there are multiple ailments and the illness is severe, then the doctor cautorizes that over both shoulders as well.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat, e aquest sia cauteri olivar.	 "Then they take a warm compress to cover it up with.
Capitol .x.	 "A physician's duty arises when joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body and especially in the feet.
De cauterisacio de epilemcia.	 "The application of cautery to the whole body, including its cooling effect.
No es cauterizat le epilemtic sino aquella epilemcia es per flecma.	 "They do not cautorize the intestinal area, but rather the thigh muscles.
E donc cove que mondifiques le cervel de lu al comensament de lu am yeras e am l’autra curacio la qual havem dicta en la divisio quan le malaute es gran e es tollerant la exceperacio de las medicinas.	 "After making the points on the top of the head and above where you mentioned; then go to the top of the patient's buttocks, apply the cautery there as well.
E si es enfant le qual no sufferte las medicinas, lahoras aministra guarguarissmes e mastiguatoris le servel mondifican, denant aquo per motz dias, am bonifficacio de las viandas.	 When a person does not feel the medications alleviating their joint pain, then doctors prescribe an enema and massage the patient's back to facilitate digestion of food, in order that it may bring good fortune
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en le mieg loc del cap segon la manieyra precedent, e am autre cauteri en le occiput de lu, e sobre quascun corn del cap sieu cauterisa.	 Then place a pointed cautery on the top of their head and another one beneath the previous hand, and another one on the forehead above, and over each of their ears as well.
E si le malaute es fort e es tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteris les quals he ditz, en havent paraliticament e mollificacio del cors sobre les spondils del col e les spondils del dos.	 If the patient is strong and tolerant, then doctors apply pointed cauteries to those that we have mentioned before, preventing paralysis and causing relaxation of the spine and legs.
E sia cauteri olivar segon qu’es precedit.	 Then place another pointed cautery above the previous one.
Mays si le malaute es enfant, lahoras pausa cauteri subtil segon aquesta manieyra.	 If a person is young, doctors will pause after this one and apply another mild pointed cautery.
Capitol .xi.	 Chapter eleven.
De cauterizacio de melencolia.	 Treatment of melancholia.
Quan las causas de melencolia so humiditatz corrompudas e flacma gros, lahoras cauteriza aquel am les cauteris les quals havem ditz en le havent paralisi.	 When the causes for melancholia are corrupted and flabby, doctors apply pointed cauteries to those that we mentioned before in order to prevent paralysis.
E si la causa de melencolia es superfluitat declinant a melencolia, e le cors del malaute es humit, lahoras da ha beure aquo que mundifica le cervel de lu segon aquo que ha precedut en la divisio.	 If the cause of melancholia is declining to melancholia and the patient's body is wet, then doctors prescribe a treatment that moistens the skull beneath what we have mentioned before in order to prevent it from worsening or spreading.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop fay tortora decentment fayta de li sobre le cercle, e aprop depausa aquela en le mieg loc del cap.	 When you have opened the space between the patient's thighs, place a cushion on top of them and another servant to hold their head at an angle slightly forward, and another person to support his head from behind gently.
E le malaute sia sesent cayrat, e sia tengut de tota partida.	 The patient is lying down, so that all treatment can be performed on the whole body.
E aprop pausa liniment; et es pus digne de boder antic de ovelhas.	 Apply a hot compress to both thighs and legs.
E escalfa aquel sobre le foc per calefaccio temprada per mesura, le qual le dit sufferta quan es mes en lu.	 Place that over the face to warm it up quickly by touching it gently.
E aprop vuo’ aquel en le mieg loc del cap de lu en le cercle, e leysa lu entro que sia enfregidat.	 Hold the cushion at an angle in front of their head and gently squeeze it so that it is warm.
E fay aquo am le malaute en tota semmana una veguada, am le autre regiment de lu bo entro que sia sanat; o si vols, cauteriza aquel fazen petitz puntz segon lo mays de lu, sino que tenguas la ma am un cauteri ayssi ordenat: aquesta es specia de cauteri la qual humecta le cervel am equalitat.	 Give the patient this medication for a week in addition to their regular treatment, or if you wish, burn it at specific points second time as directed; otherwise keep using your hand as recommended: this is special cautery which moistens the skin equally.
E aprop pausa aquel coto enbegut en boder o en grays de gualina.	 Place that on their body or in front of their head gently.
Capitol .xii.	 Chapter 12
De cauterisacio de aygua descendent en le huel.	 The water cautery will decrease the pain.
Quan a tu es declarat le comensament de aygua en le huel per les senhals les quals yeu he ditz en la divisio, lahoras comensa e dona en beure al malaute aquo que mondifique le cap de lu, e guarda aquel de totas humiditatz.	 When you start giving the water to drink by the mouth from which portion it was given and told him to hold his head with that water, and keep applying wet dressings on all the wounds.
E fay aquel suzar en banh en degu per alcus jorns.	 On each day
E aprop comanda a lu que raza le sieu cap, e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap; e aprop cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre dos templas si es le comensament de ysement de aygua en dos huels, o de la un latz si es comensamen de l’aygua en un huel.	 Firstly, make a small cut at the top of the head with a cautery; secondly, burn a second cautery on both temples if it is the onset of gout in two hands, or one if it is an onset of gout in one hand.
Incideys am cauteri totas las venas e arcerias las quals so dejos la codena; e sian les cauteris en aquela lonh en la latitut de las templas.	 Burn the veins and arteries that are leading to the fingertips, leaving only a small opening in each temple area.
E guarda te de fluxs de sanc quan es cauterizat; e si veses de lu fluxs de sanc, osta le am alcuna medicina, la qual es a tu possible.	 After cautery is done, guard the sores from further bleeding and if you see any more open sores, then apply some medicine that could be available to you.
E yeu vindre am savieza la qual es en extraccio de arcerias e am abscizio de aquelas e cautela de fluxs de sanc.	 You will remove the cautery and incisions made of these and caution against further bleeding sores.
E alcunas vetz es cauterizat en le cervitz dejos dos osses am dos cauteris dererament produzitz.	 Some veins were cauterized between two bones, causing it to produce further pain in the future.
Capitol .xiii.	 This is the thirteenth chapter of the text.
De cauterizacio de lacrimas antiquas.	 Cautery on old tears.
Quan lacrimas dels huels so antiquas assuduament e per las venas e arterias las quals so en le loc manifest del cap defora e es verificat que aquo es superfluitatz frejas flecmatiquas, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri le qual havem recontat en le capitol de comensament de aygua cazent en les huels, e am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos templas, e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos osses.	 When old tears are very old and have infiltrated the veins and arteries in the forehead area, it is found that this type of gout occurs frequently, so doctors burn a cautery on one of those areas to stop further inflammation.
E si indigeyses de addicio, lahoras cauteriza aquel en tot latz de la coa del huel sobre la extremitat del sobrecilh am petit cauteri.	 When it comes to adding a dressing, then burn that dressing on all sides of the part of the body located in the small intestine with a very sharp cautery.
Capitol .xiiii.	 This sentence appears to be incomplete or incorrect as "Capitol" is not a recognized word and there are no accompanying punctuation marks to provide context for the missing information. Could you please rephrase this, or give me more details?
De cauterizacio de fetor de nas.	 Cautery on nose discharge
Quan tu medicas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no aprofieyta la tua medicacio, lahoras tu aparelha e dona en beure al malaute las cochias per tres noytz; e aprop ras le cap de lu, e cauteriza le am cauteri migier am cauteri olivar.	 When you treat that in the division and do not choose to stop your treatment, the doctor will apply a poultice on it, wet with three cloths, and have him drink three times of wine; put a bandage over its head, and burn the middle part and the outer part with a cautery.
E aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri clavelh am dos cauteris sobre les dos sobrecilhs dejos les cabels un petit.	 Burn that on the lower half of both calves over the two corresponding areas, bind them together with little bandages.
E guarda te de la arceria que no incindas aquela.	 Keep away from the fire that you do not ignite it.
E del cauteri clavilh aquesta es la forma.	 And this burning of the calf is the custom
Capitol .xv.	 This sentence appears to be incomplete or incorrect as "Capitol" is not a recognized word and there are no accompanying punctuation marks to provide context for the missing information. Could you please rephrase this, or give me more details?
De cauteri de mollificacio de palpebras dels huels.	 Cautery on nose discharge
Quan la palpebra del huel es mollificada per malautia o per humiditat, lahoras cauteriza aquela palpebre1 am un cauteri am aquest cauteri lunar; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	 When the eyelid of the eye is mollified due to mistreatment or from humidity, then burn that eyelid with a cautery similar to this one. This is how it's done.
E si vos, cauteriza aquel sobre les dos sobrecils un petit am dos cauteris en tota partida, e sian elonguatz de las timporas.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la quantitat del sobrecil.	 The length of each cautery shall be proportional to the size of the cushion.
E no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri, mays segon la quantitat que la tersa partida de la palpebre sia adhurida.	 Do not apply too much pressure with your hand over the cautery, as you will need to adjust the size of the cushion accordingly.
Capitol .xvi.	 Chapter 16.
De cauteri de la palpebre del huel quan les pels so convertitz a las partidas dedintz e punho le huel.	 Cautery on the eyelid when the hairs become inflamed and pus comes out.
Quan les pels del huel son convertitz a las partidas dedintz ayssi que pungo le huel, cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, quar cauteri o es am fer o es am medicina comburent.	 If the hairs of the eyelid are inflamed and pus comes out, then you should apply cautery to those parts as well, choosing between two methods: either cautery or medical treatment.
Si am cauteri de lu am foc, comanda al malaute denant aquo que leyse les sieus pels ayssi cum aquels les quals les mundan, entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz; e si punho aquel deves le lor naysement, lahoras tu strenh les huels de lu am una benda per so que no sia maugut entro que·ls pels sian nascutz.	 If cautery is done on the forehead, command the patient to keep their hair trimmed as well, extending and applying ointment; or if you must remove it, then apply oil onto their scalp in order to prevent itching of the hairs being cut off.
Donc cum siran nascutz e engualhatz, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop senha sobre la palpebre dels huels de lu am tenta, am senhal le qual sia segon la figura de fulha de merta, e sia le comensament del senhal prop dels pels.	 And when cuts and sutures are made, pause the healing of the patient's head in the meantime, and apply oil over the hairs on their forehead to start with, as you should aim for the length of a leaf blade, while also starting from the beginning that way.
E aprop pausa coto enbegut en album de huou o en mucillatge de ptilli sobre le huel.	 On each breast there shall be placed a cushion for support, so that they may rest their hands on them in comfort,
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu.	 And the pointed cautery which this is its form
E aprop cauteriza sobre la figura la qual as senhada, petit a petit, em motas veguadas, entro que sia comburida la superficia de la codena la qual es ayssi cum fuelha de mirta, tota aparent propriament.	 And the pointed cautery shall be applied to the figure gradually, until it burns through and destroys the surface of that part, appearing as if by magic.
E senhal de sanetat de la tieua obra es que tu vegus la palpebre de l’huel ja esser contrayta e·ls pels de lu esser elevatz deves la punctura del huel.	 The remedy of the eye will be that you shall wipe away the blood from it, and put a poultice on it to draw out the poison.
E donc eleva la tua ma e laysa aquel per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eredicada la scara.	 Then elevate your bed and place something soft under him for three days, until it is healed.
E aprop cura aquela am enguent entro que sia sanat.	 And then cure that with an ointment which will heal it.
Mays si retorna per les pels alcuna causa aprop lor naysement e la palpebra es mollificada, lahoras fay autra vetz le cauteri sobre aquel tot ayssi cum avias fayt primieyrament.	 If there is no cause for it, then do not apply the pointed cautery over that part as you did before.
Mays si les pels so en la palpebra dejos, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que sia elevada al sieu loc natural e sia engualhat e que les pels no punhan le huelh.	 If the eyes are inflamed in that way, then cure it by elevating them to their normal place and holding tight so they do not touch each other.
Mays le cauteri am medicina comburent aquest es que comandes al malaute que leyse les pels entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz, e aprop sia fayta de carta de drap la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	 The pointed cautery by the burning medicine is to command the patient to lie on it for as long as possible and hold tightly so they do not move. And afterwards apply a piece of cloth in that manner.
E aprop pren de sabo conogut e de caus viva ana unc. i, o quays aquo, e aprop mescle3 aquelas causas be, e fay aquo am festinacio per so que no sia enfregidat; e aprop expandeys de aquo sobre la carta la qual es fayta ayssi cum forma de fulha de mirtra, e pausa aquel sobre la un huel od amdos; e pausa dejos le huel coto enbegut en album de huou, e el cap del malaute sia en le tieu se.	 "Bring the patient to a comfortable position and remove all obstacles from their way.
E pausa le dit sobre le medicina e prem aquela un petit e no la mauguas entro que lo malaute senta la mordicacio de la medicina, quar mordicacio es en lu ayssi cum de foc.	 "Prepare the patient and hold them still while administering a small dose of medicine that will numb their mouth so they cannot feel its effect.
E donc cum percevera aquo que el atrobo mordicacio, lahoras leyssa la medicina e mau aquela am le tieu dit; donc cum cessa la mordicacio, lahoras remau la medicina he lava le huel am aygua; e lahoras considera si vezes la palpebra ja es levada ayssi cum es lavada deves la costriccio am foc o am incisio, quar lahoras esta be; e si no torna sobre aquela de la medicina sobre le loc en le qual no ha empremut la medicina e no se denigra entro que sia engualhada la tua operacio e sia contrayt le huel.	 "When the numbing effect wears off, give them water to wash away the taste of the medicine and consider whether their eyes are still closed as they were at the time it was applied or not, if so continue with your operation and administer another dose.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eradicada la codena de la adhustio, e aprop cura aquel am enguent deafinicon o am autre entro que sia sanat.	 "After removing the adhesive strip that causes the pain and curing any wounds or injuries, proceed to the next step.
E es necessari a tu, deves la tua operacio que guardes am pervigil diligencia que en le huel no caia re de la medicina, e si la palpebre aprop alscus dias es mollificada e alcuna causa dels pels punh en le huel, lahoras itera la tua medicina sobre aquel loc le qual de la palpebre es mollificat, e propriamen ayssi quo as fayt al comensament, e aprop enaviro lu entro que sia sanat.	 "You must be vigilant to ensure that the medicine does not go away from their eyes, if it was previously closed and has been made open in any way, continue with your operation.
E aquesta es la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	 This is how the ointment should be applied
E sapias que les huels dels homes son diversificatz segon la magnitut e la parvitat, e donc segon aquo es fayta la tua contraccio.	 The palms of men vary in size and shape, so when it's time to apply the ointment, you should make sure your grip is comfortable.
E no sira amaguada la via de rectetut ad aquel al qual es studi en aquesta art.	 Do not confuse the way to approach with the one used in this field of study.
Capitol .xvii.	 The seventeenth chapter.
De cauterizacio de fistula que es en le lacrimal de l’huel.	 Cautery on a tear in the eyelid.
Quan tu curas fistula am aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquela segon aquesta manieyra: comanda al malaute que pause le cap sieu en le tieu se, e tengua le cap de lu alcun ministre entre las tieuas mas en tal manieyra que no sia maugut ni agitat am le sieu cap.	 When curing a fistula in that area where we mentioned the sections of illnesses and do not confuse your cure, you must cauterize it with this manner: tell the patient to place their head down towards the thighs, and have his/her head between them so firmly that no hair is pulled or moved from its position.
E aprop pausa coto enfus en album de huou o en mucellage de ptilli sobre le huel de lu.	 Then, in case of hemorrhoid, apply a poultice on the hemorrhoidal area either in the form of a poultice made from crushed leaves or in the form of poultice made from crushed millet over the affected part.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	 And do this with the cautery as follows:
le qual sia conquau, ayssi cum es forma de cana o de pena de voltor, de la una extremitat am la qual es fayta lo cauteri.	 The one that is used here should be either a curved one or a simple straight one; use it on the part of the body where you are applying the cautery.
E si voys, sia penetrant entro a la autra extremitat.	 If so, apply it to another part.
E si vols sia sort ayssi cum tenta.	 And if you want to try that way as well.
Mays empero aquel que es concau es milhor a la tieua obra.	 "May it please you who has most of its work.
E aprop prem la fistula si es uberta, e tra de lu sania et exsicca aquela.	 And place the fistulas if they are opened, and remove from it the saliva and excrement that were there
E si no es uberta, lahoras obre aquela e extratz la poyredura de lu.	 If not opened, then leave it alone and extract its blood content.
E aprop pausa sobre lu le cauteri le qual sia be ignit, e te am aquel la tieua ma un petit deves le cauteri del huel a la partida del nas, per so que no erre la tua ma o le malaute sia enquietat, e lahoras pausa le cauteri en le grays del huel e corrompas aquel.	 If the cautery is burning, then take care to cover your mouth with a little cloth to prevent burns from occurring in it, and place the cautery on top of the nose, so that no harm comes to your face or to the patient's nostrils, and pause the cautery at the edge of the flame and extinguish it.
E donc si al comensament del tieu cauteri perve entro al os, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera le cauteri una veguada o dos, si mestiers era; e layssa aquel ayssi per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre aquel coto am boder e enviro lu am enguent exsiccatiu entro que sia sanat.	 Then if the first cautery enters through the nose without issue, it's okay; but otherwise, repeat one or two more times depending on how much is needed; and leave it for three days, placing a pad over its mouth to prevent dryness as it heals.
Mays si eran passatz xi dias e no es sanat, lahoras pausa sobre lu medicina aguda corrosiva entro que l’os sia descubert e sia ras segon que conveneys en le sieu capitol.	 May if after 10 days and it is not healed, then pause over the strong corrosive medicine to be placed in its cavity so that the nose is uncovered and removed from its source.
E es autra manieyra de cauteri de fistula la qual alscus primiers diysero: enten al loc de la fistula e fen aquela e aprop pausa en aquela fissura camaen subtil del qual es la forma de lu: E fon en aquela la quantitat de i unc de plom fundut; e te la tua ma am camaem am bona retencio, e no sia maugut le malaute per so que le plom fundut no pervengua al huel de aquel; e cove que pausas sobre le huel del malaute coto enfus en album de huou o en aygua, quar plom adhureys le loc de la fistula e sana aquela per sanacio meravilhora.	 Another method for cautery of the fistulas was: insert into the location of the fistulas and then place it and pause in that small opening which is its form; and put over there a quantity of about one drop of lead, and keep your hand covered up to prevent it from coming out on you.
E si la fistula es sanada am aquo que havem dit del cauteri e de la curacio, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari aministrar trauc del nas e reduzir la fistula al cors del nas segon que vindra en son loc propri.	 When the fistula has been cured by cautery and care, yes it is; otherwise, it is necessary to administer a poultice of salt and reduce the fistula to the nasal cavity when it comes out in its proper location.
Capitol .xviii.	 The eighteenth chapter of the work begins with an apology for any inconvenience caused by the unusual terminology used throughout the text, as well as an explanation that the chapter will be devoted entirely to a discussion on the art and practice of surgery.
De cauterizacio de la fendedura des potz.	 The cautery shall operate on the affected parts
Motas veguadas accideysso fissuras en las labias, e majorment en las labias dels enfantz.	 The veins and arteries will often burst in the thighs, but also frequently in those of infants.
Donc cum tu curas aquelas fissuras am aquo que nos havem dit en las divisios e no aprofieyta la tua cura, lahoras igneys le cauteri petit cutellar segon aquesta forma que s’ensiec:	 If you do not care for the wounds as instructed in the divisions and miss this opportunity to apply the cautery, then I suggest using a smaller one with these instructions.
E sia la conquavitat de lu segon la subtilitat de cotella.	 And if it is necessary to make incisions into the body cavity, do so with great care and small tools.
Aprop pausa aquel init cuytadament en aquelas fissuras entro que·l cauteri pervengua al preon de las fissuras.	 Be cautious when applying the cautery closely between the wounds to prevent any injury from the cauterized parts.
E aprop cura aquel am cerotz entro que sia sanat.	 And carefully apply it, being careful not to burn yourself with it.
Capitol .xix.	 The nineteenth chapter of this work discusses the art and practice of surgery in detail, explaining various procedures that may be performed by a surgeon.
De cauterizacio de fistula en la boca.	 The cautery shall operate on the fistula in the mouth.
Quan en la razit de uvula o en le paladar o en las razitz de las dentz endeve apostema e aprop fa brac, e aprop es rompuda, e aprop es antiquada, e corr brac e es fayta fistula, e aprop tu curas aquela e no aprofieyta a curacio, lahoras cove que tu igniscas cauteri segon la quantitat que sia receubuda en la fistula, e aprop met aquel ignit en le trauc de la fistola, e te la tua ma entro que pervengua le ferr ignit al preon de lu, e al derier de lu fazen aysso una veguada o dos; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que nos havem dit de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	 When it is necessary to cauterize the fistula in the uvula or palate, apply gently with your hand and remove when done as well as burn yourself during application of this cautery. If you do not properly cure that fistula or miss this opportunity for treatment by a doctor, then I suggest using another type of cautery based on its size received from the fistula; also place it at the very top of the fistula, so that any fire from it will not harm either the front or back of him. Do apply that cautery as instructed in the passage regarding curing.
E donc si la sania es abscindita e es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari de descubrir le loc e hostar le os corrumput segon que vindra en son capitol.	 When the disease is suspected to be absent or cured, it's good; otherwise, a doctor should seek out and examine his patients in order for them to be treated promptly.
Capitol .xx.	 To prevent the intestine from coming out
De cauterisacio de las dentz e de mollificacio de las angivas.	 Cautery of the teeth and mollification of the arteries.
Quan las angivas son mollificadas per humiditat e las dentz son maugudas, e curas aquelas am medicinas e no confereys, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra aprop aysso, enayssi que tu pauses la quanula sobre la dent e entromet en aquela le cauteri ignit festinantment, e te la tieua ma un petit entro que·l malaute cente la calor del foc a la razit de la dent esser pervenguda.	 When the arteries are mollified by humidity and the teeth are inflamed but do not heal when medicines are used, then pause at the head of the patient in that manner so as to prevent it from coming out suddenly; and you should insert a small entry into which the heat of fire is brought upon the edge of the tooth, causing it to be inflamed.
E aprop leva la tua ma, e aprop itera le cauteri alcunas veguadas segon que vols.	 Then lift your hand with both fingers and place them next to each other for the cautery.
E aprop le malaute huompla la sua boca de aygua de sal e tengua aquela per una hora, e pueys stupa aquela, quar la dent mauguda es fermada e la gengiva mollificada es strenguda e la humiditat corrompuda es exsiccada.	 And place the patient's mouth under a cold shower for an hour and half to cool down the toothache; if it remains painful after that, then the inflamed gum is strengthened and the moisture is corrupted.
Capitol .xxi.	 To prevent gout.
De cauterisacio de dolor de dent.	 Cautery of tooth pain.
Quan dolor de dent es per fregiditat, o en lu es freg o verm, o no comfereys la curacio am medicina, lahoras cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am boder de vacas, o cauteri am foc.	 When tooth pain is caused by frostbite or cold that has entered the tooth root and cannot be cured with medicine, then a doctor should perform cautery in two ways; either cautery of the veins or cautery of fire.
Cauteri am boder es que tu prenguas boder de vacas e bulhas aquel en culhe de ferr , e aprop pren coto e envolopa le sobre la extremitat de la tenta, e aprop enmergeys aquel am boder bulhit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolorosa festinantment entro que sia enfregidat.	 When the cautery is applied to the body of the patient and blisters occur at that time, place it on the tip of the finger and let it merge into the body part, and when it is placed over a painful tooth keep it in position until the pain disappears.
E aprop itera aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la vertut del foc pervengua a la razit de la dentz.	 And place the instrument between teeth where the wisdom of the fire arrives at the root of the tooth.
E si voys, submergeys lana o coto en le boder desus dit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolent, e pausa sobre aquel ferr ignit entro que·l ferr pervengua al preon de la conquavitat de la dent.	 If you see a blister or lesion on the body of someone else's tooth, place it between their teeth and keep it in position until the fire goes out because of the presence of pain from that cavity on the tooth.
Mays empero la cauterizacio am foc es que tu atendas a la quannula de eram o de ferr, e sia en le cor de lu alcuna grocesa e la acuitat del foc no pervengua a la boca del malaute.	 The cautery on the face is that you attend to any burn or pain, and it should not penetrate into the mouth of the patient because of their sensitivity to fire.
E aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra, e pausa aquel sobre la dent e te la tua ma entro que·l cauteri sia enfregidat; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas quar la dolor sira remauguda o en aquel dia o en l’autre dia.	 Place the cautery in its correct form and let it stay over the tooth, and do this on both days until the pain is relieved or on another day.
E cove que per empressio de aquel cauteri que·l malaute umpla la sieua boca de bon boder e tengua aquel per una hora e aprop scupa le; e aquesta es la forma del cauteri.	 And cover the mouth of the patient with a soft cloth and let it stay there for one hour, this is the correct form of the cautery.
E cauteriza am qual que tu voys extremittat segon que a tu es possible.	 Cauterize at whatever point you think to be most effective.
E aquesta es la forma de la cannula:	 This is how a syringe works
Capitol .xxii.	 This is the second chapter of the book "The Capitularies.
De cauterizacio de extrophulos.	 Cautery for external hemorrhoids.
Quan extrophulos so de flecma e de humors fregas e no so hobedientz a digistio per medicinas e tu voys la digistio de aquelas leugerament, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri conquau la forma del qual es aquesta seguen, havent dos extremitatz hubertas per que yesca le fum deves le cauteri per l’autra extremitat, e pausa aquel ignit sobre aquel apostema una veguada, e autre si indigeyses de aquel, entro que pervengua al preon del apostema.	 When external hemorrhoids are inflamed and cause pain but not treated promptly, doctors prescribe cautery in the form of a hemostat to apply it to one extremity; if necessary, pause that over another extremity; then light on the first finger until the other hand is free from smoke
E si l’apostema es pauca, lahoras pausa le cauteri segon la quantitat del apostema, e aprop leyssa le per tres jorns e pausa sobre lu coto enfus en boder entro que sia remaugut aquo que·l foc ha comburit.	 If the finger is small, doctors prescribe the cautery for three days and then stop on the third day unless the pain persists after this treatment.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent e tentas e draps entro que sia sanat.	 And if necessary cure that with hot compresses every so often until he is healed.
E la forma de la cannula o deu cauteri a tal es comveyter.	 The form of the hemostat or cautery to be used here is as follows.
Capitol .xxiii.	 This is the third chapter of the book "The Capitularies.
De cauterizacio de rauquiera de votz e de constriccio de ale.	 Cautery for hemorrhoids, both internal and external.
Quan las humiditatz veno sobre le quanal del pulmo, e majorment quan aquo es am fregiditat de compleccio, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia evacuat al comensament am medicinas laxativas, e aprop cauteriza aquel deves la razit del golayro en le loc depremegut.	 When the humidity is applied to the anal canal of the lung and especially when this is inflamed with a severe complication, doctors advise that the patient evacuate stool at first by laxatives; afterwards, cautery should be performed in the area just mentioned.
E guarda te que no pervenguas am le cauteri al golayro ni no comburas de la codena de lu sino un pauc.	 "Keep in mind that you should not touch the pointed instrument to the groin or push it towards the head of the patient, but only move it gently.
E cauteriza aquel am autra cauteri deves la junctura del col en le derier espondil de lu.	 "Burn that second cautery near the joint of the thigh on the right side of the body.
E·l cauteri de lu sia clavilh sego la maniera precedent.	 "The cautery should be placed in a manner similar to what was done previously.
E aprop cura aquel am aquo que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	 "Incorrect the second sentence as it is incorrect and needs correction.
Capitol .xxiiii.	 "Chapter XXIV
De cauterizacio de malautia del pulmo e de tos.	 "The treatment of pneumonia and coughing.
Quan tos e malautia de pulmo so de humiditatz fregas e le malaute no ha febre ni tisic e es malautia antiqua, lahoras cauterisa aquel am dos cauteris sobre la furcula en les locz depremegutz leontz e buoytz; e am autra cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz entre dos mamillos; e sia le cauteri clavilh segon la forma precedent.	 When pneumonia and lung inflammation occur due to cold humors, doctors apply two cauteries: one on the neck between the ribs and below it, another on the chest area between two breasts; both cauteries should be placed in a manner similar to what was done previously.
E si vols, sia la tua cauterizacio punctan am le cauteri que es apelat puncta, la forma del qual precedeys en la ponctacio de dolor de aurelhas.	 If you want, the application of the cautery can be made in a manner similar to how it was applied for joint pain treatment.
E sian puntz entro cays ad aquels; e aprop cura aquel am aquo meteys que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	 The points should be placed near those, and the second cautery as shown previously that is considered to be healthy.
E ya sia le cauteri haventz tres ramps quar cauterizacio es am aquel: am una veguada podes far tres cauteris segon aquesta forma:	 "The cauteries should have three steps when performing a treatment like this, first apply the first cautery as shown previously.
Capitol .xxv.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
De cauterizacio de titillic que es le cap del ajutori.	 Cautery should be applied to the top of the patient's hand.
Quan le cap del ajutori es dislocat per causa de humiditatz lubricas e no es fermat en la hora del sieu retornament deves la sua dislocacio entro que sia a lu aquo costuma de retornar, e aprop per un petit movement es deslocat ayssi que s’endeve, ayssi cum nos havem testificat, lahoras cove que primieyrament redusiscas la dislocacio, e aprop le malaute sia reversat sobre le sieu dos o sobre le latz sa; e aprop eleva la codena la qual es en la partida dedintz del citillic a las partidas desus am les ditz de la tua ma sinistra, si la junctura es dislocada a las partidas dedintz.	 The patient's hand should be repositioned gently and securely back into place as soon as possible to avoid dislocation, unless the dislocation occurs during the return of their arm or leg. In that case, have them reverse onto their affected side (arm or leg) and elevate their elbow or knee so they can rest on it.
E aprop igneys le cauteri havent dos caps; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	 Apply the cautery to two fingers at a time, in this manner:
E aprop cauteriza la codena entro que penetre aquela entro al autre latz; e vindra la figura de cauterizacio lahoras de iv caps cauteris.	 Cautery should be applied to the fingertips of both hands one at a time, in this manner:
e so aquel subtils segon la quantitat de tenta; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	 Do it as carefully and slowly as possible, paying attention to each individual attempt. This is how it should be done:
E alcunas veguadas es ajustat segon aquest comte i per que son les cauteris .viii.	 The cushions should be adjusted after this manner and for the reason that they are the eighth.
E aprop pausa sobre le cauteri porys cuytz am sal, e aprop fay adherir le malaute a trenquilitat, e lo membre no sia maugut per alcun temps entro que sia confortat.	 Then pause on applying the cautery and have them remain still to avoid excessive heat or pain in their limbs as long as they are comfortable.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas desus e tart es fayt aquo, lahoras cauteriza sobre le muscle am cauteri clavilh o am motz cauteris puntan, quar la junctura es confermada e la humiditat es romauguda e le malaute es sanat.	 When a dislocation is caused by cold humors in the extremities and it's confirmed that the moisture has been increased and the patient is improving
Capitol .xxvi.	 Chapter 26
De cauterizacio del stomac.	 Cautery on the stomach
Quan veno en l’estomac freg e motas humiditatz entro que aquel extrazo de la sua compleccio e so multiplicatz raumases a lu, e si tu continuas las manieyras de curacio e no confereyso, lahoras cove que le malaute sia sobre le sieu dos ressupinat, e extenda las suas mas e las suas coysas, e aprop cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris: an un cauteri dejos le pietz per la quantitat d’un dit am cauteri clavilh, e am dos cauteris dejos del dos costatz del cauteri, entro que vengua la figura de cauteri triangulada; e elonga entre els que no sian ajustatz que faran poyredura.	 Cauterize on the stomach when pain occurs inside it and excessive moisture increases the swelling of the abdomen, continue with care and do not confirm, put a cushion beneath his shoulders and extend them, also place cushions under both arms as well for support; additionally, cautorize three points: one on the chest corresponding to the amount of a finger-tip cautery on each arm, two on the two ribs corresponding to the cautery points.
E si la profunditat del cauteri la quantitat de les dos terses de la grocesa de la codena.	 If the depth of the cautery corresponds to the size of two fingertips
E sia la figura del cauteri segon aquesta forma ses addicio, E si vols, cauteriza am gran cauteri en le mieg loc del estomac segon aquesta forma; et aquest sia un cauteri segon la forma de cercle segon aquesta forma:	 If you wish to do so, also cautorize a large cautery in the middle of the stomach according to this form; and if you want it can be a cauterization as round in shape.
E sia cauterizat l’estomac punctan ad aquel que de aquest cauteri es spaventat: e es que tu senhes sobre l’estomac punt segon la quantitat que voles am tenta, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en les puntz; e aprop cura aquel am la curacio qu’es precedita entro que sia sanat.	 After cautorizing the stomach punctures as mentioned earlier and if you wish to do so on the stomach according to the quantity desired attempt, also cautorize a point corresponding to that.
Capitol .xxvii.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
De cauterizacio del fietge fret.	 The cautery should be used to treat gout
Quan endeve en le fietge dolor per fregiditat o per humiditat o per grossa ventositat entro que de la sieua normal compleccio sia getat per egressio superflua, e es curat le malaute am aquo que havem dit e no comfereys, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e senhes am tenta tres cauteris segon aquesta forma et aquesta quantitat meteyssa sobre le fietge dejos dels ipocondres, la hon perve le decubit de home.	 If the pain in the feet is excessive and not relieved by cold or moist or large drafts entering through which part of the body normal function has been disturbed due to an excess escaping from that point, it is recommended that a doctor should be consulted as soon as possible; furthermore, he will try three cauteries on different parts of the foot.
E sia l’espazi le qual es entre quascun cauteri segon la grossetut del dit, e sia le cauteri segon la longitut del cors dreyta.	 The space between each Cautery should be proportionate to its size and also in relation to the length of the body part it is being applied to.
E no compremas la tua am le cauteri mot.	 Don't exceed the recommended dosage of Cauteries.
E si la quantitat de aquo que es adhurit la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena, e no y sia pus ajustat; e si le malaute stant sobre les pes de lu; e si no es estant, lahoras sia jassent, le qual ja ha extendudas las suas coysas, e eleve les sieus brasses.	 If the quantity of this medicine is not adjusted according to the size and shape of the patient's foot, or if they are lying on their back; in any case, let them lie still as recommended, and elevate their legs.
E es aquesta la forma del cauteri:	 This is how Cauteries should be applied.
E a tu es possible que cauterizes aquestz cauteris am cauteri cutellar, quan es am tu subtilitat e prudencia en l’art.	 It may be advisable to apply Cauteries on the skin if you are skilled in subtlety and caution.
E guarda te que trop no procesiscas en la cauterizacio, e sia adhurida la specitut de tota la codena per que sia adhurit tot le cors e pervengua entro als budels, quar la codena aqui es subtil; e sapias aquo.	 If you exceed the Cauteries in the application and it is applied evenly throughout the body as well as the intestines coming out from there, this may indicate subtlety; but if not, consult a doctor
Capitol .xxviii.	 "The thirty-eighth chapter.
De perforacio de apostema del fietge am cauteri.	 Cautery of a fistula in the abdomen
Quan endeve excitura o apostema en le fietge e voles saber si aquel apostema es en le carn del fietge o en la tunica de lu, lahoras si es en la carn del fietge, le malaute atrobo gravitat e dolor ses acuitat.	 When the fistula or abscess in the abdomen is being opened and you want to know if that abscess is within the body of the abdomen or in its lining, pain occurs inside as well.
E si es en la tunica del fietge, am la dolor es acuitat gran e vezes que ja afatiguatz les metges la cura de lu.	 If it's within the abdomen's lining, then the pain is great and often times doctors lose patience when curing it.
Donc cove que·l malaute sia enversat sobre la sieua cervit; e aprop senha le loc de l’apostema am tenta; e aprop igneys le cauteri le quel es asemblat a rag, la forma del qual a precedit en l’autra pagina.	 Then cover the abscess with gauze and try to apply cautery as shown in another page.
E cauteriza am aquel i cauteri entro que tota la codena sia comborida, entro que pervengua al ciphac, entro qu’en yesca sania.	 Cauterize over the abscess with a pointed cautery to stop bleeding within or outside of the abscess if it starts to bleed
E aprop cura aquel per curacio dels autres apostemas entro que sia sanat.	 Then cure that one by treating the other fistulas so they heal well.
E no cove que de aquesta forma de cauteri use sino aquel del qual le estudi en l’art de medicina es prolonguat, e en las mas del qual motas malautias an conogut; mays aquest am esperiment alcunas veguadas sia ardit sobre aquesta operacio, mays empero leyssa aquela deves nos, e es miels.	 Do not use this method of cautery unless you have studied the one whose length and breadth are great in medical arts known as malautias; also do not perform it if there is no need for that operation, or should any harm come to you, then stay away from it and ask forgiveness.
Capitol .xxix.	 "The thirty-ninth chapter.
De cauterizacio de plauresi.	 Cautery of pleurisy
Diyssero les antics cauteri de las razitz de aristologia a plauresi frega segon aquesta manieyra esser fazedor, e es aquest que tu prenguas de las razitz de aristologia longa secca una razit pun longua que es trobada, e sia de la grossetut del dit.	 When the joints ache due to cold humors that infiltrate every part of the body and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors
E aprop submergeys aquela en oli e eysen aquela al foc, e aprop cauteriza per un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre la continuacio de la furcula am le col; e am dos cauteris petitz dejos guidazi, un pauc declinans a la partida que es dejus la barba, e am dos cauteris en aquo que es declinant entre la quinta costa e la cizena, declinant un pauc a las partidas detras; e am autre cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz; et am autre sobre l’estomac, et am tres cauteris de las partidas detras; et am un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre las dos spallas, e am dos cauteris dels dos latz del pietz, dejos le cauteri le qual es entre doas spallas.	 The first sentence translates to "Here comes the first cautery of the aristology area, please apply it with this method...
E no cove que compremas la tua ma am le cauteri, ans sia en le manifest de la codena en obra.	 You must not hold your hand tightly while applying the cautery, and keep in mind that there is a needle involved during the process.
E ja diyssero alscus antics que so alscus dels homes les quals uson de cauteri de ferr semblant a ray e igneysso aquel, e meto aquel en aquel loc le qual es entre las costas, entro que pervenguam am aquel ad aquel apostema e sia foragetada sania, ayssi cum havem dit en l’apostema del fietge.	 You should apply the cautery to those places where they use them in order to perform such an operation, and place it at that location between the ribs, ensuring that the needle is properly placed as well.
Mays en aquesta perforacio am cauteri no es ses temor, quar hu mor tantost ho accideys en le loc fistula a la qual no es sanacio.	 The surgery with the cautery should not be feared because it rarely happens at places that are not healing like an abscess or fistula which is not sanitary.
Capitol .xxx.	 May I know what you meant by "Capitol .xxx."?
De la cauterizacio de la melsa.	 The opening of the fistula
Quan tu curas la malautia de la melsa am aquo que havem dit de la curacio en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cauteri en lu es segon tres manieras, las quals totas son dreyturieras, de las quals la una es que fassas tres cauteris o quatre linhan segon la longitut de la melsa segon la figura dels cauteris del fietge, la figura dels quals ha precedit.	 When you have cured the fistula mentioned earlier and do not confirm your cure, the doctors will apply cautery in it as a second step, which is right-handed or left-handed depending on the length of the fistula and the figure of the cautery, whose shape has just been described.
E sia entre quascun cauteri la grossetut d’un dit o un pauc mes, e la manieyra del cauteri sia la manieyra la qual havem dita en le cauteri del fietge engualment.	 Between each Cautery the size of a finger or less, and the hand motion of Cautery is the same as that used in the previous Cautery.
E no compremas la tua ma am le cauteri; e le malaute sia eves sobre lo sieu dos.	 Do not touch your own hand while applying Cautery; instead, have another servant hold it steady on its two sides.
E es autra manieyra de cauterizar, so es que tu igniscas le cauteri haventz dos vertimentz, la qual causa havem dita en le capitol de dislocacio del muscle, e elava la codena la qual es en le endreyt de la melsa la hon perve le jazer del malaute sinistre.	 Another method is to apply Cautery while holding a cushion on its two sides; this causes the skin of the muscle to tear slightly, which closes the opening that leads to the abscess from the unhealthy vein.
E sia la tua elevacio am la qual elevas la codena segon la longuesa del cors, per que sian faytz cauteris segon la latitut del cos.	 The elevation you mentioned is one where you lift up your leg as much as possible to stretch the opening into it; this requires Cautery further down its length.
E aprop entromet les dos vernimentz, ignitz mot, en aquel entro que am aquels penetres la codena de la autra part.	 Insert a cushion between the two fingers and place your other hand on top of it in that area.
E aprop extrayt le cauteri; e donc son faytz quatre cauteris.	 Apply Cautery after that, do four Cauteries.
E si voys, cauteriza am cauteri havent tres vernimentz.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
E aprop tu cura le cauteri pus que aia laysat de getar brac per trops jorns, quar mays es comferent que las autras causas precedentz en la curacio.	 And if necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery.
Capitol .xxxi.	 Then come back when you have finished translating everything else.
De cauterizacio de ydropici.	 Cautery of the intestines.
Cauteri no catz en ydropici sino en alcinte3 propriament.	 No cautery should be performed in the rectum, but only in the abdomen proper.
Quan tu curas le ydropic am las manieyras de curacio las quals havem ditas en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que aquel cauterizes am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic e am un cauteri sobre l’estomac, e am autre cauteri sobre le fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa, e am dos cauteris entre les spondils del dos, e un cauteri en lo dreyt del pietz, e am autre cauteri sobre l’estomac.	 When you perform the cautery of the intestine, make sure that all these cauteries are in place and do not interfere with your procedure; then cauterize it into the abdomen, another one over the stomach, one over the liver, one over the spleen, two between the ribs on each side, a cautery in the right lower part of the chest, and another over the stomach.
E la quantitat de la profunditat del cauteri sia propdana a la spicitut de la codena.	 The depth of the cautery should be proportional to its specificity.
E aprop layssa le cauteri ubert per so que gete brac per lonc temps.	 Place the cautery beneath in order for your hand to remain there for a long time.
E no evacuas le malaute de curacio aprop le cauteri am aquo que cove per que sian agreguadas a lu doas entencios, e sira festinada a lu am ajutori sanacio.	 And do not evacuate the intestine in order to keep it attached and allow for healing to occur.
La forma del cauteri am lo qual es cauterizat lo ventre sia clavilh segon que la forma de aquel es desus precedent, e es aquel am le qual es cauterizat le dos sia olivar segon qu’es precedent a la sua forma.	 The form of the cautery which is used to cauterize the abdomen should be slightly different than that which was previously used and shall be similar in shape only when it was previously used on the other side of the body.
Capitol .xxxii.	 When joint pain arises from cold humors that permeate every part of the body, especially in the feet, doctors customarily call it gout.
De cauterizacio de pes e de las coyssas.	 Cautery on the legs and thighs.
Quan les pes so apostematz en ydropitz e so repletz de aygua sitrina, cove que cauterisas les pes sobre le dos del pe in nocrati aquo que es entre le auricular e le anular, e eleva la tua ma am le cauteri e no torses aquel; e aprop eleva la tua ma, e no retornes aquela de tot, quar l’aygua satrina rezuda.	 When the feet are inflamed and putrid, you should apply cautery on both sides of the foot between the earlobe and the thumb, elevating your hand to the cautery and not retracting it; then elevate your hand and do not return that which is used for water removal.
Es le cauteri segon aquesta forma: E aprop fay sobre las doas coyssas dos cauteris, e en quascuna coysa sia feyt cauteri am la extremitat del cauteri cutellar.	 The cautery should be applied in this way: Apply two cauteries to each thigh, one on the outer edge of the cautery cut below the knee joint for each leg.
E sia le cauteri segon la longitut de la coyssa: i dejos le denolh e l’autre jos le mieg loc de la coyssa; e sobre quascuna coyssa dos cauteris.	 The cauteries should be applied in this way: On the length of each thigh, put one on the front and another behind the calf joint for each leg, with two cauteries to each thigh.
E layssa la plagua uberta ses curacio per lonc temps per so que alcuna aygua resuda de lu.	 Make sure the poultice is kept moist during this period of time so that no water remains in it.
E aprop cura le am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas.	 After applying the cauteries to these causes as described,
Capitol .xxxiii.	 Here is the next sentence to translate: Do not add any comments like "here is the translation", just reply with the guessed translation and nothing else:
De cauterizacio de cos de ventre.	 Cautery on the abdomen.
Quan cos de ventre es per freg e per humiditat entro que debelice las vertutz, so es la vertut digestiva e retentiva, las quals so en l’estomac e en les budels, e es curat aquo am las manieyras de curacio e no confereys, e vezes le malaute suffertan cauteri de vertut exhiberant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am gran cauteri sobre le sieu stomac segon que a precedit en la cauterizacio del estomac, am le cauteri del cercle e am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic subtils, am cauteri clavilh subtil; e am cauteri sobre le alcatin sobre alozis gran, o am dos cauteris.	 When the abdomen is inflamed and humid, you should first address the digestive and retentive ulcers in the stomach and intestines, after which you should apply a large cautery to the patient's stomach as described before on the stomach cautery, with the circle cautery along with four small cauteries within its circumference for the subtle border of the incision. Then, place another cautery above the sternum or two cauteries if desired.
E si vezes las humiditatz exhuberants e le malaute aquo tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le pentenilh e sobre les budels, e fort leu ajustant dos cauteris sobre l’estomac e prop dels inguonas, quar es curacio perficent de juvament de la qual no erras.	 When the excessive moistness of the patient causes intolerable pain, then the doctor cauterizes that part and cauteries on their belly and intestines to stop it from happening again in a short time
Capitol .xxxiv.	 Chapter forty-four
De cauterizacio de emorroydas antiquas.	 About the ancient cautery
Quan so en la natura derier emorroydas antiquas o una de humors grossas fregas o de humiditatz corrompudas, e son curadas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no confereys la tieua curacio, lahoras cauterisa am tres cauteris sobre le pus dejos spondilh del dos petit e petit triangular, e am cauteri desus le ombelic cays per dos ditz.	 When there are ancient hemorrhoids or a great quantity of cold humors or corrupted moistness in the nature, and it is necessary to cure them as described earlier but no longer confers its effect, then the doctor cauterizes three points on either side of the anus with two small triangles, also cauteries for each umbilicus point.
E si doptas que l’estomac de lu sia enfregidat e la vianda de lu no sia degerida, e la cara de lu vezes apostemada, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre l’estomac am gran cauteri segon que es precedit; e am un cauteri sobre fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa de lu am cauteri clavilh, e leyssa le cauteri per alcun temps ubert, e aprop cura lu entro que sia sanat.	 If the stomach is enflamed and the veins of him are blocked, and his face becomes swollen, then the doctor cauterizes that on the stomach as described earlier; also an ulcer over the abdomen, a cautery over the small intestine, another one over the great vein, and lastly a cautery through the chest to cure it in some time.
Capitol .xxxv.	 Chapter fifty
De cauterizacio de atheyl aprop la abscizio de lor.	 About the cauteries of the abdomen
Quan tu abscindes atheyl, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri que es asemblat a ray.	 When you remove the abdominal viscera, then the doctor severs the cautery that was attached to it.
Aprop entremet aquel ignit en aquel atheyl abscis, e ultima la tieua ma entro que pervengua le cauteri al orifici de la vena de la qual ve la sanc.	 When the heat is ignited in that vein, it causes a severe burning sensation to the cautery of that vein where one feels the pain.
E fay aquo una vetz o doas, quar si achieyl son trops, lahoras cauteriza quascun de lor segon que havem recontat, e aprop cura aquels am aquo que confereys a lor dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	 Then apply the remedy that is recommended by doctors and place it in contact with those wounds where pain occurs so they can be healed
E si cauterizas am gran cauteri sobre alquatin, es mays derier en juvament.	 If you cauterize a large cautery on it, there will be more danger to young people.
Capitol .xxxvi.	 Chapter 60 of the Capitularies (a series of legal texts).
De cauterizacio de fistolas que son faytas en la natura derie en las partidas de lu.	 Cautery for fingers that are affected by nature or in cases where injury has occurred.
Quan la natura no obeziys a la obra la qual havem recomtada en son loc, e·l pacient es espaventat per aquo, sia sanat am cauteri.	 When nature doesn't follow the remedy recommended for that location, and instead patient is troubled by it, they use cautery as treatment.
Donc quan ad alcun ve fistola en la natura derier, e es antiquada, corro sania de lu e humiditatz corrompudas, e donc aquo que es pus digne que cove es que proes aquela am tenta subtil, e aprop conoys la quantitat de la profunditat de lu am la devant dita tenta.	 Therefore when a finger is affected by nature and it is already infected with moisture or corruption, do not apply cautery directly as one would for an open wound; instead apply the cautery gently on the depth of that particular place.
Aprop igneys le cauteri que es semblant a ray.	 Put the cautery where it resembles a ray.
E aprop met aquel cauteri ignit en aquesta fistula, e segon la quantitat en la qual intrec la tenta.	 After igniting that cautery on the fistula and considering its quantity by which one will penetrate into it.
E itera sobre aquela le cauteri entro que sian comburitz aquels cors corrumputz tost una veguada o dos o tres, segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	 Repeat this process with other cauteries depending on the quantity of need that you have.
E guarda te de combustio de nervi e de vena; o si fistula va al cors de la vesica o al cors del budel, lahoras guarda te de totz aquels locz; e no fassas aquo sino quan la fistula es en loc carnos e cogitas que no es penetrant.	 When a nerve or vein is burned off and the fistula goes to the bladder or bowel area, then hold it in that place; do not do this unless you see that it's necessary.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	 Then clean the affected area as needed.
E si le loc es sigillat, e so abscindidas de lu las materias, e roman ayssi per lonc temps, lahoras sapias que ja es curat entierament.	 If the location is sealed up and all the materials have been removed for a long time, then it has already been completely cured.
E si las materias no so de lu ostadas, lahoras sapias que es penetrant o en le preon de lu os corromput, o cays aquo de aquelas causas de las quals vindra rememoracio en son loc.	 If the materials are not out of that location or if there is corruption in them which has led to memory loss in that area, then come back and remember it later.
Capitol .xxxvii.	 Chapter 77
De cauterizacio dels ronhos.	 Cautery of the nose.
Quan en les ronhos endeve dolor per freg o per grossa ventozitat, e per aysso le coyt del malaute es amermat, lahoras cove que cauterizes aquel sobre les ronhos am cauteri sobre quascun ronho am cauteri clavilh del qual precesic la rememoracio.	 When the nose is inflamed with pain or swelling and a physician wants to do bloodletting on that area, then cauterize that part of the body with a pointed cautery device which remembers the location.
E fort leu cauterizam am le segon un petit dejos, per que vindran tres cauteris liniatz, e donc siran mays deriers en juvament.	 After performing it on the second and removing a small one from it so that three will remain lined up in order for them to be useful later.
Capitol .xxxviii.	 Chapter 58
De cauterizacio de la vesica.	 Cautery of the bladder.
Quan accideys en la vesica debelitat e mollificacio per freg e per humiditatz ayssi que·l malaute la urina no retengua, lahoras cauteriza aquel en la partida pus dejos sobre la vesiqua, la hon comensan les pels del pentenilh, e cauteriza am un cauteri en la partida dreyta, e am autre en la senestra de lu.	 When the bladder burns and softens from friction or humidity so that urine is retained in it, then cauterize its outer surface by removing a small one beneath the bladder and placing another on top of the bladder as well as one near the right part and one near the left part.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la cantitat dels not del pous; e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en la partida pus bassa del dos, o am dos cauteris si es necessitat.	 When a pointed cautery is placed on the surface of each foot to treat pain caused by cold humors that have infiltrated into all parts of the body, it may be necessary to make two cauteries in locations that are lower than the first.
E sia cauteri clavilh segon que es procesit.	 The second cautery is placed after the process has begun.
Capitol .xxxix.	 This is a line from Virgil's work 'The Aeneid'.
De cauterizacio de la mayra.	 Cautery on the artery.
Quan veno en la mayra freg e humiditatz, e per aysso es prohibida enpreignacio, e son corrompudas las mestruas de lu, e es tardada la provocacio de lor, e accideys dolor deves le haveniment de lor, lahoras cove que·l loc sia cauterizat am tres cauteris en le circuit del ombelic, ayssi cum havem dit en le cauteri de la vesica; e am cauteri sobre le loc pus dejos del dos, o am dos cauteris, e sia le cauteri clavilh.	 If the artery is infiltrated and humidified, it is forbidden to perform any incisions nearby, and corrupts the organs of the body, delays their production, and causes pain that spreads throughout the body, therefore, doctors say that when this occurs the artery should be cauterized with three cauteries in its circuit as mentioned for the vesica's cautery; or two cauteries, whichever is necessary.
Capitol .xl.	 This is a line from Virgil's work 'The Aeneid'.
De cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua.	 Cautery on the dislocation of the artery.
Quan humiditatz moucozas so efundudas a la partida de la anqua, e so faytas causas del yssiment del sieu loc, e senhal de lu es que la coyssa es prolonguada sobre l’autre quan so comparadas entre lor.	 When the artery is infiltrated and humidified to one side of the artery's cavity, it causes pain in that area and makes it seem as if a fistula has developed there; therefore, it is customary for doctors to treat with cautery extended on the other side to compare them, hoping to determine which side it originated from.
E le loc de la dislocacio es atrobat en lu quays boyt.	 The location of the dislocation is above mentioned in this line.
Adonc cove que cauterizas le malaute sobre la partida de la anqua de lu am cauteri a sercle semblant, pus que tu auras senhat am tenta en le cercuit de la partida ayssi cum es revolguda, e per so que la partida caia el mieg loc del cercle.	 When you have opened the patient's legs and placed cushions beneath them, another servant must go between their thighs to hold them down as they writhe around in pain; at that point where the part is most inflamed should be cauterized, so that it will stop bleeding from the inside of the circle.
E sia le cauteri del qual precedit la forma en la cauterizacio del estomac.	 And if you wish to cauterize any other parts, such as the stomach
E si aquest cauteri no es a tu present, lahoras cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris am cauteri olivar gran.	 If that isn't available then the doctor will cauterize another part of the patient's body.
E sia fayt le cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de tota la codena; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	 The second cautery should be done according to the amount of heat applied across the entire incision, and with care that it heals properly.
Capitol .xli.	 I am sorry but there is no conclusion in your message after this line. Could you please provide me more context?
De cauterizacio de la vena sciatica.	 Cauterize the sciatic vein.
Quan dolor ve en la partida de anqua, e so causa de lu freg et humiditatz, le malaute es curat am aquo que havem dit e no confereys, e aquo es antiquat, lahoras cove que tu lacses le malaute de humors grosses am pillulas fetidas o am pillulas artificials o semblantz; e aprop cauteriza aquel.	 When pain occurs in the inflamed part of the body and it is humid and moist, the patient should be treated with hot compresses or artificial pills, but if that doesn't work then you must cauterize the gouty vein.
E la manieyra del cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am medicinas comburentz, o cauteri am foc.	 The second part of cautery is to either cauterize with medicinal treatments or fire.
Sira segon dos manieyras scientas, de las quals es la una que cauterizes aquel sobre la partida de l’ancha de lu am tres cauteris triangulatz segon aquesta forma; e fay am aquels bona profunditat.	 The second part of cautery is to either cauterize with medicinal treatments or fire through a third vein, which should go into the deepest part of it.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre cascun cauteri la quantitat de la grossitut del dit e si le cauteri olivar o gran.	 When there's a space between two legs of equal size, place it between them as if to support or hold them together
Mays alcunas veguadas sia le cauteri sobre le mieg loc sobre le cap de l’anquan per que son quatre cauteris.	 Place four points on each side of the head towards the front so that they are at an angle across in front of one another
E si vols, cauteriza am le cercle del qual es precesida la forma en la cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua, la i que sia cercle continent e comburey la ispicitut de tota la codena.	 If you wish to, cauterize around the circle that has been traced out in the cautery of the dislocation, and it should be a continuous circle covering the whole circumference.
E aquesta es la manieyra de cauteri in ciatiqua quan dolor es adherent al anqua e no es estenduda entro a la coyssa.	 That is how to cauterize when pain adheres to the angle and does not spread into the cavity.
Mays si es estenduda entro a la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre la coyssa sobre le loc al qual envireys le malaute que es la dolor; e am un cauteri sobre la cavilha per quatre ditz un pauc deves la part cilvestra.	 If pain spreads into the cavity, then apply two cauteries over the area of the body where it hurts and one cautery on each side at the bottom just above the foot to prevent the spread from further down the leg.
E si le cauteri cutellar, e sia la profunditat del cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de la codena.	 If the cutaneous cautery is used and its depth proportional to the extent of the pain.
E si le malaute envireys que la dolor es estenduda entro al loc prop les ditz des pes, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui on envireys am cauteri per tres puntz o quatre o mays si indigeys de aquel.	 If the patient insists that the pain extends into the location below their toes then they apply the cautery here between three or four points depending on how much it needs to be applied.
E si le malaute envireys dolor esser dejos le donolh ves la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui am un cauteri cutellar.	 If the patient insists that pain will not spread into the cavity then they apply a cutaneous cautery here.
E guarda te en tota cauterizacio que no ultimes am le cauteri en tant que comburas nervi o gran arceria, e que per aquo a tu es sobre le malaute mal noccument o contraccio.	 "When performing any cautery procedure, do not apply the last cautery until you have cooled it and your hands are numb to prevent burns or frostbite.
E yeu ja e vist un e autre de aquels les quals cauterizero sobre la cavilha e ultimero en la cauterizacio, e la cama foc inflada entro que la tumor aconseguit lo pe, e foc perforat e corromput tot le pe.	 "You have already performed a cautery on the thigh and later in another place of it, but if the cautery is applied to the foot, the vein may become inflamed, leading to damage or perforation.
E aprop accidic fort solucio de ventre, e aprop aquo la mort.	 "In order to give a quick solution for belly problems and save life.
E si la dolor es en dos partidas ensemps cauteriza quascuna segon aquesta manieyra.	 "If pain occurs in two or more consecutive attacks, cauterize each one separately after this fashion.
E diysero les savis alcus en la cauterizacio de anqua cauteri del qual aquesta es la manieyra: fay semblant a cercle de ferr del qual le cercuit sia la maytat de un palm; e sia deves le sieu orrifici segon la grossesa de un os de datil o mens un pauc.	 "The wise ones say in the cautery of this fashion, make it like a circle where the center is half the size of an index finger and each radius should be slightly less than that.
E dedintz aquel cercle sia un autre tertz; e sia le spazi le qual es entre lor la quantitat del notz del pous; e sian aquels cercles ubertz de dos partidas; e sia la longitut de aquels cays un notz o dos notz, e fay en aquels margue de ferr decentment apparelhat en les cercles; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	 "Draw that circle and another third. And make the space between their quantity of notes in proportion to each other. And put these circles next to each other with equal distance, so they are touching at a point.
Aprop sia ignit en le foc entro que s’enrogesisca e gete scintillas, e aprop sia pausat sobre la partida del anqua, le malaute colcat sobre le latz sa.	 "Then light it on fire until you see sparks, and after that pause over the first part of it, holding the affected area with your hand.
E donc cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris redontz en una veguada.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, it is customary to call gout when there is pain in the feet
E aprop layssa aquel per tres jorns; aprop emplastre aquel am boder e layssa la plagua uberta per trops dias; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	 Then, apply it three times with a damp cloth, then place the poultice on the body and leave it for several days, and care for it if it becomes healthy.
Diys Albucasis : o, filhs, de aquesta specia de cauteri pauc havem usat per la terror del reguardament de lu, e per aquo que paucs havem trobatz les quals reguardan sobre lu.	 Oh, sons, of this kind of cautery that we are used to by the fear of cutting off life, and for which many people turn away in disgust.
Mays dels bos cauteris a lu qui les sufferta, et atroba am aquel le loc de lu.	 The bad cauteries on him who suffers, and hold tight onto it with that spot of his.
Mays cauteri am medicinas adhurentz es que tu fassas dos cercles haventz armula perforada en la qual deyssen le guaffo de la porta de ferr; sia la longuitut de la paretz en la nauteza de lor sian dos nozes o quays aquels.	 The cauteries of the medicine are that you should make two circles with a perforated hoop, through which the frog's mouth is opened in order to let it go out; and long duration and newness must be maintained for as many times or until they say so.
E si le spazi le qual es entre quascu la quantitat de la grossitut del dit; e sian ubertz dejos e desus, e sian que contenguan se entre lor segon aquesta forma:	 If the space is between which there is a measurement of the thickness of that thing, and it goes in, its surface will be increased by them. And if they are inserted into this form
E aprop pausa sobre la partida de la anqua le malaut jasent sobre le latz sa, e comprem la tua ma sobre la partida de la anqua; e aprop pren de aygua cauda e fon la entre dos cercles, e la qualiditat de aquela sia am le foc petit a petit, e te aquela per la quantitat de una hora, e sufferta le malaute la mordicacio e la adhustio de lu — quar aquel atrobo mordicacio ayssi cum de foc — entro que cesse la mordicacio.	 And then place your hand on the opening of the anus, and cover it with a cloth; and pour water drop by drop into two circles, its quality being made little by little, you do this for one hour, and suffer from the pain in the anus and the adhesion of it - which is as if they were fire - until they cease.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am le instrument et abstergeys l’aygua cauda de tota la anqua am aygua dousa.	 To raise your hand to the instrument and remove any excess water from all over the area you are working on.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres jorns e pausa sobre aquel boder entro que sia la negror de la adhustio remauguda, e leyssa aquo per alcus jorns, e correra de lu poyredura; aquest es derier en juvament.	 To allow it to rest for three days and place a bandage over the body part that is inflamed, and leave it there for another few days, and then apply some poultice; this is done in young people.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	 To cure someone who has fallen ill.
E si la dolor es extenduda entro la coyssa o la camba, fay a lu estatua en lu que contengua aygua segon que es feyt en la anqua engualment.	 If the pain extends into the chest or abdomen, lay it flat on something that contains water to prevent it from swelling further.
E aquesta es la manieyra de aygua cauda, e yeu ja he scrit aquela en le tractat de la rectificacio de medicinas.	 This is the way of removing excess water, and you have already seen it in the treatment on the correction of medicines.
Recipe de alcali e de caus no extinta de amdos ana partida una, e trissa les e pausa en una ola nova de la qual la partida dejos sia perforada per un petit trauc, segon la quantitat que intre en lu ray.	 A recipe for a paste of alkali and mustard that does not completely cover the burn or abrasion but leaves enough to penetrate through slightly; in proportion to what enters it way
E pausa dejos le fons de la ola autra ola enveyriada, e gete sobre aquel alcali e caus viva de aygua doussa la qual cobra aquels per un dit, e pus que tu compremes aquels am la tieua ma per bona compressio, e leyssa la hola que deyssenda de lu aygua aguda en la partida dejos a la ola enveyriada.	 The bottom of the blister or abrasion should be covered with another wet cloth and put on top of it some alkali and mustard paste that absorbs water in such a way that when you apply them to your hand for good compression, it will keep the burned area moist
E aprop ajusta tota aquela aygua, e geta la sobre autra caus viva e autre alcali renovelatz, quar aquela lahoras sira de mot forta acuitat, la qual es aministrada en motas operacios de medicina e en cauterizacio dels autres membres, quar operacio fa de foc.	 To adjust all that water, put on top another live mustard and another alkali paste, which will increase the pain relief, which is administered in surgical procedures of medicine and in cauterization of other parts, which operation does burn.
E so de las medicinas alcunas am las quals es cauterizat ancha, ayssi cum tezizic e mel anacrat e caus am sabo enayssi que sian mesclatz.	 When it is necessary to use wide cauteries for medicines that are to be applied externally and internally at the same time, then apply them gently with a warm cloth or napkin soaked in medicine
E Gualia recontet de un home dels antics la operacio e la curacio am la qual es curada dolor de anqua e de vena sciatica, e magnifiquet mot be esser de aquel, e diys que no hac necessitat de autra curacio, e quar es sanat per una veguada ayssi cum recomtec, quar fort leu aquel intrec en banh e eysic ja sa d’aquel.	 The surgery and treatment for the cure of ancient pain in joints (ancient gout) and sciatica veins is to be performed by a skilled and experienced surgeon who will make all necessary precautions, ensuring that no other treatments are required unless otherwise specified, and if so, to use them gently as prescribed, taking great care not to let them touch anything else.
Et es que sia pres de certarragi vert, e si no es atrobat vert, sia presa figua recent; e mot sia trissada am un pauc de grays e sia pausat sus la anqua en la qual es la dolor, o en la coyssa, o en la camba, e sia liat.	 The surgeon is to make sure that the treatment is done smoothly and without a hitch; if not smooth, then it should be tried again recently; and after making this effort, place them gently in the part of the body where the pain occurs, or under one leg, or on both legs, depending on which.
E sia layssat per la cantitat de tres horas o per la quantitat que·l malaute centa cedacio de la adhustio.	 The surgeon is to place them for three hours or the amount of time the patient takes to get accustomed to the application, depending on which.
E aprop met aquel en banh e donc quan le cors de lu sia enrozat, entromet aquel en le sol, quar la dolor cessa e es sanat.	 The surgeon is then to introduce them into their body and when the chest is completely closed, introducing them into the ground, as this will cause pain to cease and be cured.
E sapias que no cove que alcu use de cauteri am aquestas medicinas sino aprop la evacuacio del cors.	 You know that you are not to apply those medicines using a cautery, but rather the evacuation of the bowels.
Mays ja Escorides diysec que quan am fenda de cabra la vena stretica es cauterizada, aprofieyra a lu mo be; e sia le cauteri am lu segon aquesta manieyra: sia presa lana e sia enbeguda en oli antic, e sia pausat entre le pous del pe e entre le fossil.	 The surgeon should place the second cautery when a varicose vein is to be cauterized and hold it in between both these ways: first put one of them into hot oil; then place one over the foot and another between the toes, depending on which.
E aprop pren fenda de cabra secca e emflasma aquela am foc entro que sia fayta carbo; e aprop pausa lu sobre la lana e leysa la entro que sia estengida.	 And fasten a bandage tightly to the wound, and place it so that it lies flat
E aprop itera aquo, e no cessas far aquo entro que·l scintiment de la mordicacio pervengua entro al anqua e repausa la dolor.	 And apply this remedy, without ceasing to do it until the itching sensation goes away and relieves the pain.
Et aquesta manieyra de cauteri es apelat cauteri de vaquas.	 This cautery method is called caustic cautery.
Capitol .xlii.	 Chapter 42
De cauterizacio de dolor de dos.	 Treatment of joint pain
Alcunas veguadas dolor es en le dos per tropas causas, cum per cazement o per percucio o per superflua evacuacio, e per causas ad aquelas semblantz, per infusio de materia frega e humida.	 Joint pains are caused by cold and damp influences, due to excess bleeding or excessive urination, or from causes related to them, like infiltration of wet and humid matter.
E cauteri no catz sino en aquesta sola specia la qual es fayta per efusio de materia frega.	 Cautery should not be used except in this specific case where it is caused by the emission of damp matter.
Donc cove, aprop evacuacio del malaute am pillulas fitidas e am semblant a lor, que sian faytas sobre·l dos en le qual es la dolor tres linhas segon la latitut de lu, pus que senhas am tentha en quascuna linha v cauteris o mays, segon la quantitat que ve de la tolleransa del malaute e de la vertut de lu.	 Therefore, place the tablets in such a way that they cover the pain as much as possible along each line of the body, and if you wish to apply it on any line separately from the others, based on how much space is available for the tolerance of the patient and their condition.
E sia fayta cauterizacio am cauteri de punt.	 And that cautery should be applied punctually.
E si vols, cauteriza am tres cauteris o am quatre am cauteri clavilh medial segon aquesta forma:	 If you wish, apply three cauteries or four cauteries on the medial collateral ligament as follows:
Capitol .xliii.	 Chapter 43
De cauterizacio al comensament de gilbositat.	 The opening of a bloodletting.
Motas veguadas endeve aquesta malautia als petitz enfantz; e senhal del comensament de lu en les enfantz es que accideys sobre lor estrectura en le ale eves la elevacio e·l movement.	 The beginning of the illness in children is marked by redness and swelling around the genitals, which causes discomfort when touching them.
E atrobas en le derier espondil del dos e dels notz de lu que ja comensa a sobremontar sobre les autres spondils.	 The thighs and buttocks of the patient begin to swell as well as other joints affected by gout.
E donc quan tu vezes aquo e voles prohibir, lahoras cauterisa aquel am cauteri que sia cercle segon aquesta forma:	 When you want to prevent it, apply a cautery in this way:
que prengua le cauteri sobre tota partida del spondilh engualment.	 Cauterize all parts of the joint simultaneously.
E si vols, cauteriza en le circuit del spondilh am le cauteri de punt dos linhas o tres.	 If you wish, cauterize a line or two lines in the course of the joint with the cautery.
E sian les puntz propdas entre lor.	 Place them evenly between them.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat am aquo que havem dit.	 Apply it carefully in such a way that you can say what has been said.
Mays guarda que cauteri no sia administrat en gelbositat que sia fayta per spasme de nervi.	 Do not apply the cautery if you are also having a stroke or spasm of nerves.
Capitol .xliv.	 The end of this medical treatise.
De cauterizacio de podagra e de dolor de juncturas.	 Closing of gout and joint pain treatment.
Quan dolor de juncturas son faytas per humors fregas les quals so enfundutz a quascun membre del cors, lahoras quan veno dolors en los pes, de costuma dels metges es que aquo apelen podragua propriament.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
E donc cum es curada podagra de causa frega am manieyra de cura e no so remaugudas las dolors, lahoras las remau cauteri.	 Then cure the cause of gout and prevent further pain, apply a cautery to soothe it.
E es que tu cauterizas aquel aprop evacuacio en le circuit de la junctura del pe am motz cauteris.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
E sia cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	 The method you describe sounds like a procedure used to treat gout, where a pointed tool (cautery) is applied directly to the affected joint, causing pain and inflammation in order to stimulate healing.
E si es necessitat que puntz sia fayt sobre la fassia del pe, lahoras fay am cauteri de punt.	 If it's necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed tool or cautery.
E si las dolors pujan entro als denolhs o a las autras juncturas, e aquo motas vetz s’endeve, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre quascun donolh am tres cauteris o quatre de tota partida am aquest cauteri olivar.	 If the pain occurs in both hands or feet and it's necessary to apply points with a cautery tool on all of them, then apply that tool on each of them separately.
E si motz cauteris que aquestz cauteris sian a tu necessaris, lahoras cauteriza aquel e no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri abans, sia tant solament enviro la specitut de la codena.	 If the cautery is necessary for this treatment, then apply it only on the affected joint and not beforehand, just cover the area with a bandage.
E si las dolors pugan entro al donolh e·l dos, lahoras aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le sieu capitol.	 If pain occurs in both hands or feet, then apply the cautery as you described earlier.
E si las dolors so en las mas tant solament, e es apelada suagra, lahoras puncta en le circuit dels focils ayssi cum se revolvo, puncta en aquels dos linhas.	 If the pain is only in one or both of these parts mentioned earlier, it's customary to apply a cautery on that part and those two lines.
E si reman de las dolors en les ditz, lahoras puncta en le cercuit dels focils sobre quascun notz e sobre la pinche de la ma.	 If the pain persists in these parts mentioned earlier, then apply a cautery on each of them separately and over your hand as well.
E si las dolors pugan aprop alscus jorns als coydes o als muscles, lahoras cauteriza les quascus de tota part dels ajutoris.	 When joint pain occurs in joints or muscles, then doctors apply a cure to all parts of the body.
E no evacuas le malaute de bon regiment e de recepcio de medicinas, quar si es fayt bon regiment e flacma es evacuada am aquest cauteri sira sanat, Dieus ajudan.	 Do not evacuate the patient without proper medication and follow-up care if the cure is applied incorrectly it may cause harm to the patient
Capitol .xlv.	 This text seems to be a continuation of another medical treatise or passage, but its meaning has been lost over time. It could be related to the use of cautery for healing purposes.
De cauterizacio de rompeduras.	 Cautery on wounds.
Quan endeve rompedura en les angonars e diysendo les budels denant l’atela al genetiu, e aquo es comensan de aprop, lahoras cove que tu mandas al malaute layssar la sua comestio en le sieu dia e que use de causas leniens per so que la fenda deyssenda del sieu ventre.	 When a hernia is located in the groin and intestines are protruding from it, then that should be treated as an emergency; doctors recommend that you feed the patient their normal diet on the day following the operation to ensure they recover properly and use gentle causes to prevent any opening of the wound in their abdomen.
E aprop segua le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e comanda a lu que tengua le sieu ale entro que sia foro getat o aparesca l’atela o·l budels.	 Continue to hold the patient between their thighs with both hands over the area so that they cannot touch the wound or intestines.
E aprop retorna aquel am les tieus ditz e senha am tenta la ruptura sobre le os del pentenilh am senhal la extremitat del qual sia semblant a la maytat de cercle a las subiranas partidas del cors.	 Then return to the position you were in before, and try to hold onto it so that the rupture does not happen near or on your fingers which are similar to an average circle at the base of the hand.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	 Then apply the cure by which this is done, namely the cautery
entro que sia mot rog e gete cintilhas.	 into or out of your hands
E aprop reduzeys le budel o l’atela a la sua conquavitat, e aprop pause la sua ma sobre le loc per so que le budel no yesqua.	 Return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out.
E tu ja has ubert entre las coyssas del malaute e dejos lu as pausat un coyssi, et autre servent sia sus las cambas de lu, e autre sus le pietz de lu, le qual tengua las suas mas.	 You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
E aprop pausa le cauteri sobre aquel senhal am la tua ma am cauteri stan dreyt, e te aquel entro que am lu consieguas le os del pentenilh entro al mieg del duiduni; e itera am aquel autra veguada si a tu aquel no has conseguit en la primieyra veguada entro al os.	 Prepare the cautery to apply over that part of the body, and enter into an interval where you can make incisions on both sides at once; if there is not enough time for this in one interval, then do it sequentially with two intervals.
E observa saviament del ysiment del budel en la hora de la tua cauterizacio, que no comburas aquel budel per so que sobre le malaute no vengua in mort o autre gran malicia.	 Observe the condition of the intestine during your cautery process to prevent it from escaping through a hole and causing harm or great injury.
E sapias que quan tu am le cauteri no atenhas le os, no confereys la tua operacio.	 You know that when you perform the cautery without incisions, don't do the operation.
E cove que·l cauteri dels enfants sia subtil segon le gran e la mesura de lor.	 The cautery for children should be milder than for adults and adjusted to their size.
E aprop cura le loc del cauteri per tres dias am boder entro que sia remauguda la scara del foc.	 Prepare the area for three days before it is healed from the fire's scar.
E aprop cura aquel am les autres enguentz entro que sia sanat.	 Do this with respect to other people you encounter so that they may be healthy as well.
E le malaute sia jasent sobre le sieu dos per xl dias entro que sia sigillat le loc e la plagua.	 The patient should sleep on their side for eleven days, ensuring the area is covered and protected from external contamination.
E cove que pauses le nutriment de lu segon la longitut del temps de la curacio de lu le qual le linesca le ventre de lu, e que le budel no yesca fora deves le esforsament de guerir.	 "The patient's bowels should be examined thoroughly in relation to the length of time that has passed since their last bowel movement; otherwise, they may not have been emptied properly.
E aprop quan se vol levar aprop xl dias, lahoras aministra liament decentment fayt, e tengua aquel per autres xl jorns.	 "When you want to get rid of it in the next few days, the doctor will provide a treatment that is gentle and may take up to another few days.
E sia mermat de trebalh e de replecio de vianda e de beure, e de votz vehementz, quar quan usa de aquest regiment de sanacio entiera sira sanat.	 "The food regimen includes avoiding meat and alcohol as well as being very thirsty; when following this regimen of health care, illness will certainly not occur.
E yeu diyre la curacio de las rupturas en las autras partidas del ventre, e so al comensament, e vols que no treguan, lahoras cauterisa la ruptura d’aquel am cauteri redon segon la quantitat de lu, e sia aquo que es exhurit de la codena ayssi cum la tersa partida de lu; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit, e no es ajustat.	 "The doctor will cauterize the rupture in another part of the abdomen and start with it, so that they are not delayed, the doctor cautorizes the rupture through a pointed cautery according to its size; and when treating this way as we have said, do not adjust.
E ja diyssero alcus primiers que ruptura sia cauterizada am cauteri triangular segon aquesta forma, pus que es senhada am tenta:	 "The first rupture would be cautorized through a triangular pointed cautery according to this form; and when trying it out, hold tightly.
e es pausada linha que eys per la latitut en le latz pus sobira de la ruptura, e autra linha al desus; e depausa la tua ma am un cauteri clavilh, mays le primier cauteri es pus leugier e milhor.	 "Stop the bleeding with a tourniquet applied to the area of the rupture, and place another hand on top of it; then remove your first tourniquet as soon as possible.
Capitol .xlvi.	 ".66
De cauterizacio de torcio.	 "Cautorizing the wound.
Quan endeve en alscus membres per cazement o per percussio dolor e persevera aquela dolor per lonc temps e no comfereys al u curacio am medicinas, lahoras cove que cauterizes am cauteri de punt.	 When the pain occurs in multiple joints or continues for a long time and does not subside despite medical care, then apply cautery punctures
E sia le cauteri de tot membre segon la magnitut e la parvitat de lu, e vertut e develitat de lu, e locacio de torcio e dolor de lu.	 And if the cauteries are applied to all parts of the body in proportion and variety, and location and pain, do so.
Donc si·s sanat per le primier cauteri, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera sobre lu le cauteri; quar de costuma de aquelas dolors es que sian punctatz de membre ad aquel membre le qual apropinque al u, per que cove que consieguas aquels am cauteri entro que·l malaute sia sanat.	 Then if the cautery is applied to the first joint, it's done; otherwise, repeat on that part with another cautery until the pain subsides at that location.
Capitol .xlvii.	 Chapter 57
De cauterizacio de lepra.	 The cautery for Leprosy.
Les lebros alcunas veguadas am cauteri per mot gran juvament, e magerment si la specia de lepra que es fayta per putrefaccio de flacma e de melencolia.	 Cauteries are applied to the affected areas in young people and even when there is a specific type of leprosy due to putrefaction of flesh and melancholy.
E donc cum tu vols cauterizar aquel, considera si la lepra es comussan e as aquela curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no deysen, ni esta, e temes sobre le malaute que la corrupcio comprehenda tot le cors de lu e tota la compleccio de lu, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le cap am v cauteris: am un en le mieg loc del cap, e am le segon pus dejos de lu, eves le front a la fi dels cabels; e amdos sobre dos corns; e am un detras, sobre la nuca o servitz.	 When you want to cauterize that affected area, consider if leprosy is common and whether the treatment has been done in division or not, nor this one, and be afraid lest the corruption penetrates all over the body of him and all his completeness, then cauterize it on top with cautery points: at one spot near the head, at another point from him, shave off the hair at the end; at both ears; and at last behind, in the nape or feathers.
E ultima la tua ma am le cauteri un pauc entro que emprema en le os una petita empressio, e de lu sian deslocadas las scorsas, per so que la expiracio de grossas vapors sia alleujada de lu; e cauteriza sobre la melsa segon que es precesit.	 When the pain is unbearable from large vapors, then make a small incision in their mouth and cut through the nerves to alleviate the choking of the vapors. And if it is necessary, burn with a pointed cautery over the middle
E si la lepra es ja expanduda sobre le malaute e apar manifestament, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquel am aquels cauteris les quals havem ditz en le cap; e am cauteri sobre la extremitat del nas, e am dos cauteris sobre las doas maysselas, e am dos cauteris sobre dos spondils del col, e am vi cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e am un gran sobre les spondils prop de la coeta, e un sobre la cotea , e am dos sobre las anquas, e am un sobre quascuna anqua, e am dos sobre les donols e un sobre quascun donolh, e am dos sobre les coydes, e am dos sobre les muscles, e am dos las teneretutz del sieu pietz; e cauteriza aquel sobre totas las juncturas dels ditz de las mas e dels pes, e sobre quascun talon dels sieus pes, e sobre les foscils de las suas mas.	 If the leprosy has spread across the patient and is very evident, then you should burn those cauteries that we have mentioned earlier on his head; also above the nose, two over each of their shoulders, two over both elbows, one over each ankle, two over both hips, one over the chest, a second over the back, two over the arms, one over each arm, two over the thighs and one over each thigh. Burn these cauteries on all joints of his limbs, as well as those below their feet and at the bottom of their feet
E guarda te dels nervis les quals so sobre le talo que no comburas aquels.	 Keep from burning any nerves that are above this line to prevent them being damaged.
E alcunas veguadas es cauterizat am un cauteri sobre le os del pentenilh e am autre sobre la boca del stomac, e autre sobre le fietge.	 Some veins should be burned with a single cautery over the throat and another over the stomach, as well as one above the intestines.
E sapias que quant mays ajustas cauteris, tant es mays juvatiu e mays conferent; e sapias que le malaute no ha en le cauteri dolor, ayssi cum han les sas, per so quar le cors de lu ja es stupefayt.	 You know that for as many joints you burn cauteries, the more severe and frequent they are; also know that if a patient is not experiencing pain from those cauteries, then this means their chest has already been burned in such a way that it becomes inflamed.
E cove que les cauteris sian grans o paucs segon les membres e las juncturas segon que es precedit de las specias dels ferramentz.	 When joint pain occurs due to cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and foot pain arises, it is commonly called gout by doctors.
E aprop cura le cauteri am farina de errs coyta am mel e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	 Then gently rub with coarse powder
Capitol .xlviii.	 48th book of the Capitula
De cauterizacio de stupor.	 Cautery on gout.
Quan alcun membre es stabozit o adormit e es curat am medicinas, olis e emplastres, e no es sanat, lahoras tu cauteriza aquel membre stabozit am cauteris segon que merita la grandesa del membre o la parvitat de lu.	 When any member is stony or stiff and it's being treated with medicine, if the numbness does not subside, then you should cauterize that member using the pointed cautery after determining whether its size is great or small.
E sia lo tieu cauteri intrant la ispicitut de la codena un pauc.	 Then let him open a vein with very little blood pressure.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	 Then gently rub that member with coarse powder until the numbness subsides.
E alscunas veguadas es cauterizada alcuna stupor le qual endeve a las mas e als pes, e als spondils del dos e ves le eysiment dels nervis les quals mavon aquel membre, e es remauguda la stupor.	 All the veins of that member are cauterized to prevent numbness in the hands and feet, and it releases the tension from the nerves associated with that member, thereby eliminating the numbness.
Mays no prusuma sobre aquo sino aquel que es savi en la anotomia dels membre e de la egressio dels nervis tot le cors moventz.	 Do not worry about this unless you are also examining the anatomy of the member and its exit from the nerves throughout the moving body.
Capitol .xlix.	 49th book of the Capitula
De cauterizacio de albaras que es morfea.	 Cautery on gouty fever.
Quan albaras es antiqua e no comfereys a lu alcu dels enguentz de medicina, lahoras tu cauteriza sobre aquela am cauteri preon un pauc segon la quantitat de la specitut de la codena entro que sia remauguda la blancor e la color de lu, e la color de lu sia mudada.	 When the gout is acute and does not respond to the intake of medicine, you should cauterize over that member with a pointed cautery after determining its quantity in relation to the size of its cavity, so that it becomes white and red again, then changes color.
E aprop cura aquel am farina de errs e de lentilhas am oli rozat e am folhas de arnagrosa, e am sanc de colomba o am sanc de yronda, da cascuna sia una partida e totas sian mescladas, e aprop sia linit un drap e sus le loc sia pausat entro que sia sanat.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body and causes pain in the feet, it is customary to call it gout among doctors.
Capitol .l.	 And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery.
De cauterizacio de cranc.	 Cautery for wounds.
Quan canser es comensan e vols aquel ostar, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri de cercle en le circuit de lu ayssi cum es revolgut.	 When a tumor is suspected and you want to remove it, the doctor will make incisions around its circumference as needed in order to remove it completely.
E diysero les savis que sia cauterizat am lo derier cauteri en le mieg loc; mays a mi no es vist aquo, quar temi que sia ulcerat, e yeu ja e vist aquo alcunas veguadas.	 The healers warned that the incision should be made with utmost care in order to avoid complications and prevent infection.
E es pus dreyturier que sia cauterizat en le circuit de lu am cercle ayssi cum avem dit, o am motz cauteris.	 It is recommended that the cautery incision follow the tumor's circumference as closely as possible, or it may be necessary to make multiple incisions.
Capitol .li.	 And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery.
De cauterizacio de adubilati.	 Cautery for ulcers.
Quan alcun adubilati es tardat en maturacio, e aysso es per la superfluitat fazen aquela, o per etat del malaute, quar es vielh en decrepitat, de pauc sanc, o per le temps, e tu vols festinar en la maturacio de adubilati; lahoras cauteriza en le circuit de lu am motz cauteris petitz punctan; e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela fastinara en maturacio.	 When any ulcer is suspected and treated with cautery, whether it's for excessive wetness or the state of the patient, which causes decay in a few weeks, or due to old age, you want to heal the ulcer through cautery; the doctor will make incisions around its circumference as needed.
Mays si tu vols la perforacio de lu am cauteri, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: e depausa aquel en le mieg loc de adubilati entro que penetre la codena.	 When you want to perform a cautery incision, first make sure the cautery is ready and pause it in this place so that it doesn't penetrate further into the body.
E si le cauteri en aquel loc que es pus dejos, per so que le cors del brac sia alleujat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	 If the cautery is already at that location and has caused harm to the arm, then apply a bandage over it to prevent further damage.
Capitol .lii.	 "This text seems incomplete or possibly incorrect.
De cauterizacio de corrodent.	 Cautery incision
Corrodent es corrupcio ambulant en le membre, la qual corrodeys aquel ayssi cum a foc comedent lenha secca.	 Corrosive material causing damage to the member, which causes it to rot and dry out when exposed to heat
Donc si vezes aquel corrodent en loc le qual sufferte cauteri am foc, lahoras tu igneys cauteris clavils motz paucs, e grans segon que es convenent en aquel loc en le qual es corrodent.	 Then if corrosive material occurs in the location where a cautery was applied with heat, then doctors usually apply cauteries sparingly and cautiously in that specific location.
E aprop cauteriza aquel de tota partida entro que erradiques tota la corrosio e no romangua alcuna causa de lu.	 Then if you cauterize the entire surface to prevent all corrosion without causing any harm to it.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres dias, e pausa sobre les locs cauterizats solpre trissat am oli mesclat entro que las scaras sian totas eradicadas e tota la corrupcio.	 Then apply it for three days and pause on the cauterized locations so that all scabs are removed and all corrosion is prevented.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz carn engendrantz.	 Then apply it to regenerating flesh (tissue).
Mays si aprop tres dias vezes que la carn nasca sana en la qual no es corrupcio, bo es; mays sino, lahoras itera le cauteri sobre aquo que es romas en les locs corrumputz.	 Then repeat the cautery on that which is rotted in the locations of corrosion if healthy skin does not appear or regenerate.
E corrodent es medicat alcunas vetz am medicina aguda, quar aquela es meza en loc de cauteri.	 When a patient has acute medicine, which should be used in place of cautery
Mays empero cauteri am foc es de pus leugier juvament.	 Cautery may not be used if the patient is young
E yeu ja e dit la curacio de lu am medicina aguda en la divisio, e donc pren aquela quan de lu auras endegencia.	 If a patient has acute medicine in their division, then remove it when they have need of cautery.
Capitol .liii.	 .
De cauterizacio de claus e dels autres semblants.	 Cauterization of the closure and other similar ones.
Motas veguadas endeve a las partidas dejos del pe malautia que s’apela clau, e es causa grossa, fentrada, la qual ladeys le pe; e cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, so es cauteri am foc e cauteri am aygua cauda.	 Gout attacks the foot and is caused by excess fluids, which are excreted through urine. It is customary to use cautery in such cases on the second day of the attack; that is, cautery for warmth and cautery with cold water.
Mays cauteri am foc es que igniscas le cauteri concau semblant a pena de voltor, le qual sia feyt de ferr segon la quantitat la qual contengua le clau de tota partida, e sia de subtils marguas.	 Cautery with fire should not be used in conjunction with similar remedies that could cause an excessive loss of fluids, which would indicate a second attack is imminent. The severity of the loss should be taken into account when deciding on the use of such cautery.
E aprop pausa aquel ignit sobre le clau, e aprop revolveys la tua ma am le cauteri en le circuit del clau entro que·l cauteri pervengua a la profunditat del clau.	 Then place your hand over it and move the hand towards the cautery in the path of the gout until the cautery reaches the bottom of the gout.
E leyssa aquel per tres dias entro que comense getar brac.	 The attack will last for three days once it begins.
E aprop emplastre aquel am malvas salvatges trissadas am sal, e leyssa le emplastre sobre aquel per una nuoyt, quar aquel sira eradicat de las suas razitz.	 Then place a poultice of salt on top and leave it for one night to help draw out the toxins.
E aprop cura le loc am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanat.	 The first line translates as "Then return the intestine or hernia back into its cavity.
E si so no-convertitz, e motas veguadas accideysso en la superficia del cors, majorment en las mas e les pes, lahoras cove que tu aministres en aquels cauteri am aygua, e es que prenguas una quannula de eram o de ferr o de pena de voltor, e pausa aquela sobre le clau; e aprop geta en la quanula de aygua cauda pauca cantitat, e rete la tua ma, e tu revolveys aquela am compressio de la tua ma de tot, e sia enpremut le marge de la canula en la razit del clau, e atrobara la aygua cauda via al preon de la razit del cau; e espera le malaute un pauc la mordicacio de l’aygua cauda per una hora, e aprop remau aquela, quar le clau am las suas razitz sira erredicat.	 "Then return the intestine or hernia back into its cavity.
E ayssi fe am aquels la i aprop l’autre entro que venguas sobre totz les quals de lor so en le cors.	 Then take them to those who will administer them on all of their parts in the body.
E aprop cura aquels pus que las razitz dels claus so erradicadas am aquo dels enguentz les quals la carn ve engenran.	 "Then return the intestine or hernia back into its cavity.
Capitol .liiii.	 The end of the text.
De cauterizacio de tremor.	 Cautery for tremors.
Quan endeve ad alcu tremor per freg en le nervi o per febre de causa frega, o per autra causa semblant, lahoras cove que tu cauterises aquel am quatre cauteris o am v sobre les spondils del dos, entre quascun spondilh am un cauteri; e am cauteri en le pietz de lu, e sobre l‘estomac de lu, am cauteri olivar.	 When you want to cautery for tremors in the nerve or because of fever caused by cold humors, or any other cause like that, doctors do this: they cauterize it with four points, and between each spine there's a cautery; also on the chest of them, and on their stomach.
E la tremor de lu se repausa e festina la sanetat de la malautia frega.	 The tremor of him shall cease and bring about recovery in his illness.
Capitol .lv.	 When joints are affected by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, pain occurs in the feet; it's traditionally called gout.
De cauterizacio de albati accidentz al cors.	 Cautery on the abdomen
Quan en le cors so espellitz albati, e so pustulas fendas las quals so feytas de materias grossas corruptas; donc cove al comensament cum apareyso, que sia cauterizat sobre tot cap de la fistola am cauteri subtil am fustz de mirt, la extremitat del qual es estenduda am foc; o am razitz de erestologia longua; o am cauteri lentecular.	 Cautery on the abdomen, and pustules form in those parts filled with corrupt materials; so that at the beginning of it, a cautery is applied over all part of the fistula by a subtle cautery, extending to its end; or by a long cautery; or by a lenticular cautery.
E alscunas veguadas es cauteri ademamil al comensament de la sua expulcio segon aquesta manieyra; e no so cregudas, e es disrumpuda la superfluitat fazens aquels, et sana de aquels.	 Cautery on the abdomen at the beginning of its expulsion following this manner, and do not cauterize superfluous veins that are causing it, but cure them instead.
Mays empero cove que aquo sia fayt aprop evacuacio am fleubotomia.	 However, I want to mention that this is a form of phlebotomy.
Capitol lvi.	 When joints are affected by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, pain occurs in the feet; it's traditionally called gout.
De cauterizacio de fluex de sanc accident per incisio de arceria.	 Cautery on the abdomen incision of artery
Tropas veguadas endeve fluex de arceria que es inciza deves la plagua la qual endeve deforo, o deves la incizio de apostemas o cauteri del membre, e alor semblantz, e es dificil remaura aquel.	 Superfluous veins that end in the artery may be cauterized to seal off the gap or to cauterize the member itself; and if it is difficult to restore them, they will have to go away.
Donc cum accideys ad alcu aquo, lahoras tu·t coyta am la tua ma a l’orrifici de la arceria, e pausa sobre aquel le tieu dit endic estrenh aquel motas veguadas entro que sia ostat le fluex del sanc dejos le tieu dit, e que non yesqua.	 Therefore, when such occurances happen to the artery of yours, you must touch with a pointed cautery on the orifice of the artery, and place your hand over it so that no superfluous vein comes out;
E aprop pausa en le foc les cauteris olivars paucs e grantz, per nombre motz, e exsuffla sobre aquels entro que sian mot ignitz.	 And then place a cushion on top of the heated cauteries slowly, gradually, one by one, and exhale over those to be extinguished.
E aprop pren de aquels un petit o un gran segon le loc e la plagua en la qual es rompuda la arteria, sobre aquela vena festinantment pus que auras remaugut le tieu dit, e te le cauteri entro que sia abcindit e restreyt aquel sanc.	 And then gently place a cushion on the small or large artery where it is broken in such a way that you can see the vein very clearly, and put in the cautery to be extinguished and tightened that artery.
E si le sanc es expellit de l’orrifici de la arteria quan tu remaues le tieu dit e extringeys le cauteri, lahoras pren la un autre cauteri coytadament dels cauteris les quals en le foc son preparatz, e donc no cesses fer aquo un aprop autre entro que le sanc sia restrengit.	 If the artery is pulled out when you remove the artery tie and extinguish the cautery, then apply another cautery quickly from the ones that are prepared in the fire, so do not stop doing this until the artery is tightened again.
E guarda te que no comburas le nervi que aqui es, e que vengua sobre le malaute autra malicia.	 And remember to not touch the nerve here unless there's another harm in it as well.
E sapias que quan de l’arteria flueys sanc, lahoras no es possible en aquels restrenge la sanc, e majorment quan l’arteria es gran, si no am una de quatre manieyras: o am cauteri ayssi quo dit havem, o am extraccio quan no es extrayta, quar quan es extrayta las extremitatz de lu miels son comburidas e es restreyt le sanc, o que sia liat am fiel o am liament per fort strectura, o que sian pausadas sobre lu medicinas de las quals la vertut es restringir la sanc; e sian strengudas am pulvinar am costriccio decent.	 You know that when the artery breaks, it is impossible to tighten it in such cases except for four possibilities: burn cautery like this one, extract if not extracted or tightened by force stretching of the limbs are inflamed and restricted, be faithful or firm constriction, or have pauses on medications that limit blood flow, which should be strict.
Mays aquel que aministra restriccio decent de lu am liament e am strictura am draps o per posicio de causas comburentz e de semblantz, no comfereys sino tart.	 He who administers excessive restriction of the limb and tightening on the dressings or by positioning that causes inflammation and contusion, it is not advisable but harmful.
Mays si aquo endeve ad alcu e no sia le metge present ni medicina, lahoras obre am pausament del dit indic sobre le orrifici de aquela vena ayssi cum havem dit, e entenda a la gran costreccio de lu entro que le sanc sia ostat de la sobirana partida de la plagua, e sobre la arceria le dit no sia remaugut; e de sobre la arceria sia aspergit am aygua frega de mot gran fregiditat entro que·l sanc sia congilat e engrossat; e mays cossire en que ha de cauteri o de medicina necessitat.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customary to call it gout by doctors. And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery. Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out. You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
Comensa la segonda partida.	 Here comes the second sentence to translate: "You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them...
De incisio e perforacio e ventozas e de fleubotomia e de plaguas e de lor semblants.	 incision, perforation, and ventilation; for abscess, pleurisy, and similar things
Aquestas son paraulas de Albucazis.	 These are the phrases of Albucasis.
Ja havem dit en le primier capitol tota malautia en la qual cauteri am foc es convenient e am medicina comburent, e las occasios e las causas de lu, e les instrumentz en aquels necessaris am las formas dels cauteris; e he ordenatz les capitols de la subiranetat del cap entro als pes.	 In the first chapter of a medical treatise, there are discussions on cauterization and its use in medicine as well as the causes and methods for performing cauterization procedures; also order the chapters from the top to the bottom of the body.
E yeu procesire en aquest capitol per aquela meteysa guisa, per que sia alliujat lo querent aquo, lahoras sobre aquo que aura demandat.	 You will proceed in this chapter according to that method so that it may be understood by those who request it.
E denant que yeu comense aquo, cove, fils, que aprenguatz que en aquest capitol es per terror aquo que es en le capitol primier de cauterizacio.	 And when you start doing this, father, son, learn that in this chapter we discuss the procedures of cauterization.
E per aquo que cove que sia en lu gran cautela, quar en la operacio la qual es en aquest capitol motas veguadas catz evacuacio la qual es am sanc am le qual esta la vida deves la aspersio de la vena o incisio sobre l’apostema o apercio de exsitura o puracio de la plagua o extraccio de sageta o incizio de peyra e a lor semblantz.	 When great care is taken in the operation of this sort, as during which kind of operation it is necessary to use caution?
E de totz aquels so acompanhatz temor e tremor e en le mas de lor catz la mort.	 During which type of operations are there often fear and trembling, and in the worst cases can lead to death?
E yeu amonesti vos que sobre vos no caia aquo en le qual es esitacio, quar alcunas veguadas cazo deves vos manieyras de homes am manieyras motas de malautias.	 Are you saying that during some operations people may go crazy?
E de lor es alcu que s’irays am la sua malautia e es leugiera deves lu la mort, e aysso per la vehemensia de aquo que troba de sa malautia, e per longuesa de la malautia de lu, e am la malautia es paor la qual significa mort.	 Are you referring to the fear of death that comes with learning about one's illness?
E de aquels es le qual dona a tu son aver e ditta, tu esperant am aquel sanetat, e la sieua malautia es perniciosa.	 Do these refer to illnesses which are fatal and deadly?
E donc no cove que tu consentas en aquel que ve a vos del qual es aquesta manieyra; e la vostra cautela sia major que covesitat e la vostra rapacitat; e no presumatz alcuna causa sobre aquo sino aprop sciencia certa la qual virifica aquo deves vos, e al qual perve successio lausabla.	 Do not agree to anything that seems suspicious or doubtful. And show great caution and patience while learning about it.
E usatz en la curacio de totz vostres malautes de pronosticacio e indicacio de lu al qual es salut convertida, quar en aquel es a vos ajutori sobre adquisicio de fama e de memoria, de lausor e de gloria.	 Use the knowledge of all your illnesses to predict and indicate what will lead you to health, so that you may have wisdom and glory.
O, filhs, Dieus en vos spire le sieu entendement e no oste a vos direccio e proteccio, quar aquo es en la sua ma.	 Oh, sons of God, send your understanding now, not your direction or protection; for in this manner alone is wisdom given to you.
E yeu e ordenat aquest capitol distingent per capitols segon que precedit en le capitol de cauteris, de la cura del cap entro als pes, per que sia a vos alleujat aquo que demandatz de aquo e del qual havetz necessitat.	 When the pain of joints is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body and pain occurs in the feet, it is customary to call gout by doctors
Capitol primier.	 The first sentence translated means: "The purpose of this chapter is to explain how to treat gout as a disease involving the joints.
De la curacio de aygua la qual es contenguda en le cap dels enfantz.	 Of the treatment for water, which is contained in the first part of the chapter,
Sapias que aquesta malautia motas veguadas endeve als enfantz deves le enfantament e quan la noyrissa estrenh le cap del enfant ses livitat.	 "You can use this medication to treat gout and you should take it before meals to prevent the liver from becoming inflamed.
E alcunas veguadas endeve per causa amaguada la qual no es saubuda.	 These treatments are used in case of an unexpected condition that is not known or described, but could potentially cause pain and inflammation.
Mays yeu no vi aquesta malautia sino en les enfantz; e a totz aquels les quals yeu vi se coytec la mort, e per ayssi es a mi vist layssada obra en aquels.	 You should not use this medication in children unless you also have seen death and so it is advisable to consult with the doctor immediately.
E yeu e vist que un enfant le cap del qual era d’aygua omplit, e·l cap de lu era totjorn ayssi magnificat entro que ceser no podia sobre si meteys per la grandesa del sieu cap, e mays que la humiditat fe aucmentada entro que foc mort.	 If a child has water-filled ears that are extremely large and the child is about to die due to the severity of their condition, it may be necessary to pierce through the skull bone in order to release the water from the ear canal as quickly as possible to prevent death.
E aquesta humiditat o es agreguada entre la codena e l’os, o es agreguada dejos le os sobre le ciphac.	 This humidity may be between the jawbone and the skull bone or around the scalp.
Quar la operacio en aquel si la humiditat es entre la codena e l’os e le apostema es pauc, lahoras cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am una fissura en la latitut, e sia la longitut de la fissura cays dos notz entro que corra la humiditat, e aquesta es la forma del spatum:	 If the humidity is between the jawbone and the skull bone but small, then it's advisable to make a small incision at the latitude of the skull bone. The length of this incision should be such that if you cut through the moisture there will only be skin exposed, so as not to expose any underlying tissues.
E donc si la humiditat es mays augmentada e l’apostema es major, lahoras son aqui dos fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	 When humidity increases and the apostle is larger, joints become affected by gout in this way.
E si la humiditat es dejos le os, senhal de lu es que tu vezes la comissuras del cap ubertas de tota partida e l’aygua es spremuda quan tu compremes aquela am la tieua ma a las partidas dedintz e no es aquo a tu amaguat.	 If the humidity is removed, then it means that you times remove the capillaries from all parts of your head and water spurts when you come into contact with them
Cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am tres fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	 You will find three openings in the place where your hair touches, in this way.
e aprop la inscizio extratz ne tota la humiditat; e aprop strenh las fissuras am draps e plumassols; e aprop enbroca aquo de sobre am vi e oli entro al quint dia, e aprop deslia le liament e cura la plagua am tentas e enguentz, e strenh le cap am equalitat; e mange le malaute am vianda secca de pauca humiditat entro que·l membre sia confortat e sanat.	 After removing all humidity, you need to repair the breaches in the fabric and linings of garments as well as mend any holes that may appear on the ground or in the water; it is necessary also to attend to cleanliness by washing thoroughly at least once every five days, if moisture content is not satisfactory.
E es autra manieyra de incisio, que consideras hon apar la magnitut del apostema e la colleccio de l’aygua, quar alcunas veguadas es mays en le occipicii, o en la partida denant, o en la destra, o en la sinistra; e donc aten am la incizio on appar le apostema e la replecio de l’aygua, e fen aquo segon que a tu es miels possible.	 Another way to prevent this is by considering the size of the apostle and collection of water, because some vessels may be enlarged in the occiput or lateral areas, on the right or left side; it is necessary then to attend to where the apostle and water are seen, and do so whenever possible.
Et observa que no inscindas la arteria e endevengua flueys de sanc e mora le malaute per aquel flux de sanc am evacuacio de humiditat.	 Note that it is necessary to avoid cutting the artery in order not to harm or kill the gout by removing moisture from this source of moisture removal.
Capitol .ii.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet
De inscisio de las arterias las quals so aprop las aurelhas, apeladas hilasseysse.	 To stop bleeding from arteries, which are called head wounds.
Capitol segon.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
Quan endeveno ad alcu catars o raumas als huelhs o al pietz, e es antiquat aquo, e no confereys en aquo la curacio de las medicinas, lahoras la deriera curacio en aquest es incizio de aquelas dos arterias.	 When endowing the arteries or veins of the head or chest, and it is customary to do so, and not rely on these medications for treatment in this case, healing will begin from these two arteries.
E donc cove quan tu vols inscidir aquelas que le malaute raza lo sieu cap, e aprop fregua le loc am drap aspre per so que aparan las arcerias, e aprop sia strengut le col del malaute am alcu drap; e aprop considera on polsa la vena; e les locs de quascuna sobre les locs les quals so aprop las aurelhas depremutz, e tant se occultan sino en alcus homes.	 When you want to insert those that the patient wants into his head, and make sure there is a very tight grip so that the arteries open up and tighten around it; then take care of where the vein lies below it, and hide all the rest from above
E aprop senha sobre la arceria am tenta, e aprop inscideys quascuna am le spatum de quascuna partida agut am inscizio pervenient entro al os, e sia aquo per la latitut del cap.	 Then place the artery tip on the skin and insert it gently into each part of the head individually towards the mouth, as this is for the latitude of the head.
E si vols, entromet le spatum dejos la arteria e trenqua aquala a las inciden a las partidas desus.	 If you want to enter the artery and withdraw it from the places mentioned above.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio cays dos ditz ajustatz, quar quan alcuna vena es inscizida le sanc es eyssit am egressio pulsatil, le qual saut deforo per saut frequent.	 The length of the incision should be adjusted to two digits, so that when a vein is inserted there will be a pulsatile flow out which indicates an artery, preventing it from being used frequently.
Mays si la arceria no apareys al cintiment, lahoras cove que tu mesures de la aurelha la quantitat del spazi de tres ditz, e aprop senha am tenta, e fen entro al os.	 When you find yourself in a situation where the artery is not seen on examination, it indicates that there are three centimeters of space between the artery and the skin, so you should try to reduce this gap as much as possible, and finally approach the patient.
E aquo que cove getar del sanc es quantitat de vi unc., e fort leu ne geta de lu mays o mens, e tot aquo es segon la quantitat la qual appareys de la vertut del malaute e de la replecio de la arceria de lu.	 This is the quantity of vein that you need to get rid of completely and quickly, as well as all other quantities which appear from the surface of the patient and the artery's opening on them.
E aprop considera la plagua, e donc si reman sobre le os alcuna causa del ciphac, lahoras inscindys aquo per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	 Consider using a bandage instead, and if the cause of the infection is not seen on examination, then apply this to ensure that it does not spread any more
E aprop strenh la plagua am plumassols e am liamentz de drap de li, e aprop cura aquela am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	 Then stretch out the bandage tightly around the patient's arm and legs as well, and place it so that its surface is towards their face.
Capitol .iii.	 This is the third paragraph of a document.
De extraccio de las arcerias las quals so en las templas.	 Extract all arteries from those parts.
Quan ad alcu accideys emigranea antiqua o catertz agutz, per humiditatz agrimonials e per qualiditat en les lacertz des templas, o sodo antiqua vehement e semblantz ad aquels, e es medicat am las manieyras de curacio de medicina e aquo no comfereys, lahoras nos hem sproatz en aquestas malautias extraccio de las arcerias en les templas, o cauterizacio de aquelas ayssi cum havem mostrat.	 When an old or hardened artery occurs in the temples, which is painful to touch and has a thick consistency like iron, it should be treated with caution and not confused with any other ailments; if this happens, we will extract all arteries from these parts either by cauterization as shown or by medicine.
E la manieyra de la operacio e extracio de aquelas es que·l malaute raza les pels les quals son en les templas; e entenda a la arceria apparent en le templar quar ela es a tu mostrada per le sieu pols, e·s occultada sino en paucs homes per vehemencia de freg.	 The procedure and extraction of these arteries is to shave the patient's head for those in the temples; and understand that the artery is hidden unless it is pressed firmly by its own pulse, as it is covered with a thick layer of fat.
E si a tu es occultada, lahoras le col del malaute sia strengut am alcun drap; e aprop fregua le loc am un drap aspre o evapora le loc am aygua cauda entro que aparesca a tu la arceria manifestament.	 When the patient is covered up, pain in the thighs shall be tightly bound with a band or cloth; and when it is placed in an area where evaporation occurs, you should cover it immediately to prevent exposure of the wound clearly.
E lahoras tu pren le spatum del qual aquesta es la forma:	 The phrase "the manner" refers to how the treatment is applied or performed on a patient.
E aprop tu scorja la codena am aquel am facilitat entro que pervenguas a la arceria; e aprop geta en lu onti e extratz aquela a las partidas sobiranas entro que extraguas aquela de la codena e descobras aquela de las tunicas las quals so dejos aquela, de tota partida.	 You should tighten it (the band or cloth binding the pain) as much as possible until the area is completely covered to prevent exposure of the wound clearly.
Mays si la arteria es subtil, lahoras envolveys aquela am la extremitat del oncii, e aprop inscindeys de aquela una partida segon la quantitat per la qual sian alonguadas las extremitatz de lu e sian contraytas, e no endevindra flux de sanc, quar si no so inscididas no pujara le sanc de tot.	 If the artery is subtle, wrap it around both of those areas tightly; when cutting into that, ensure you make cuts at equal intervals along the length of your arms and legs to prevent damage to nerves as well, unless otherwise indicated by a doctor
E aprop evacua del sanc de vi unc. entro a tres.	 And then pull away from the wound after three.
E si la arceria es gran, lahoras cove que tu lies aquela en dos locs am fiel dopble fort de ceda o am cordas a lonc, e no coyte a lu putrefaccio denant la consolidacio de la plagua e endevengua flux de sanc.	 If the area is large, wrap it around two separate points firmly but not tightly, and do not cause the flesh to rot while maintaining integrity of the bandage and prevent damage to nerves.
E aprop incideys la superfluitat la qual es entre dos liamentz; e fay aquo en aquela hora o aprop autra ora.	 Then cut off any excess that is between two threads, or if necessary do it at another time.
E si vols, cauteriza aquela am cauteri entro al os am cauteri cutellar entro que sian incididas las extramitatz de lu, e stara en loc de aquela meteyssa obra.	 If desired, cautery the area with cautery applied to the skin around the incision site as necessary cuts are made outside of that location.
E es milhor obra sino que·l malaute aia febre o es de escalfada compleccio; quar cauteri es de aquelas causas que ajudan a las humiditatz finidoras, e donc es milhor en juvament.	 When the patient has fever or severe heat, it is customary for the cautery to be used in these causes that aid in final dryness, and therefore it is most beneficial at this time.
E cove aprop la extraccio de las arcerias que huomplas le loc de coto antic, e sian pausatz sobre lu polvils decentement fayt, e aprop sia curat am medicinas seccas fazen naysser la carn e am calguas entro que sia sanat.	 It is important to properly apply the poultice on the external parts of the body, so that it adheres well to the anti-contraction area and is placed gently over the patient's belly; furthermore, the doctors of gentle care are to prevent harm from injury or burns by applying warm cloths in order for healing to be successful.
E si mentre obres autra veguada endeventa flux de sanc de la arceria, lahora tu te coyta a restrenger aquel sanc, o am cauteri, o que omplas le loc de coto, e strenh la tua ma entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	 When performing any other medical procedure on the abdomen area, you should ensure to restrict that particular artery, or cautery, by placing your hand over it, and then squeeze tightly to prevent bleeding from occurring.
E si deguna causa de aquelas no es a tu present, lahoras pausa le tieu dit sobre le loc entro que·l sanc sia congilat, e enbroca le loc am aygua de vehement fregiditat entro que la acuitat repausa, e sia strengut segon que cove.	 If there is no specific cause for the bleeding at that time, it is customary to place a damp cloth over the area in order to cool and control the bleeding, and tighten tightly thereafter as well.
E aquo que es pus leugier en extraccio de arceria es que tu cauterizes la vena am aquest cauteri haventz dos cotels, pus que tu has senhat les dos locs am tenta, e depausa quascus, mot ignitz, entro que pervenguan al os e inscindan la vena en dos locs, per so que sia elonguat aquo que es entre las extremitatz de lu, quar no son consolidadas de tot am aquest cauteri.	 When cauterizing the vein through two needles, make sure to place both of your hands on that area in order to hold it down and prevent it from moving around or coming out of the body's extremities where they are not consolidated with this cautery
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri:	 The method of treatment
E sia la acuitat dels dos cotels esemps.	 And the sharpness of two needles is necessary.
Mays empero si so mendres acuitat que dos cotels es milhor, quar si so agudas cum dos cotels propera a quascuna freg, e no enscideysso la carn am velocitat.	 However, if the sharpness of two needles is too much, you should pierce each one separately and not rush into the skin at high speed.
Donc cum en aquels es alcuna grossitut, es tenguda la calor del foc en aquels e la carn es abscindida leugierament.	 So, when there is no excess heat in those areas and the flesh is removed completely.
E aquesta obra es milhor en tota obra e pus leugiera.	 This method is best for all cases and most simple.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre dos cotels la quantitat de la grossesa del dit.	 And the space between two needles should be a measure of its thickness.
Capitol quart.	 The fourth part.
De la cura de cors de lagremas agudas e aciduas dels huels.	 Of the treatment for the burns on the hands and feet.
Quan so lagremas aciduas, e es le cors de aquelas venas las quals so sobre le test del cap deforo, e no comfereys en aquo alcuna causa de la curacio de medicina, e vezes la cara del malaute ja enrogesir e sent en le sieu front deambulacio ayssi cum si era deambulacio de formiguas, e·ls huels de aquel so extenuatz, humitz enayssi que ja les pels de lor son conodutz, e las parpelas so scalfadas per la acuitat de las lacrimas, les antics agro mesties en la curacio de aquelas de aquesta operacio, e nompnero aquela curacio am spassa.	 When burns are on the face and veins that are above the head, which can interfere with healing in this situation there is no medical cause for treatment except to apply ointment over them, making sure not to touch any other parts of the body while doing so because the pain from applying the ointment will be severe.
E es que tu comandas al malaute rayre les pels les quals son en le sieu front, e aprop inscideys en le front tres fissuras engualment distans segon la longitut del front.	 And you command to the patient remove the hairs on their forehead, and then cut three slits at an equal distance apart along the length of their forehead.
E si’ la longitut de la fissura cays dos ditz: la una fissura sia engualment distant a la longitut del nas en le mieg loc del front, e la segonda segon la longitut un petit del movement dels lacertz les quals so en le lacrimal, e la tersa del autre part.	 When the length of the fissure is as follows: The first fissure is exactly at the same distance from the nose to the end of the lower lip in front and the second one by a little less than movement of the eyelashes which are located on the other side
E guarda te de la incizio de las arcerias las quals so en dos latz, e elongua la tua ma de la continuacio de amdos las mandibulas.	 Keep your hands at an angle and continue to press down on both temples as you move your jaw downward
E si’ l’espazi de quascuna inscizio la quantitat de tres ditz ajustatz.	 Adjust the space of each incision by three times.
E si’ a tu una pessa d’espongua apparelhada o draps seccatz motz am les quals exsiccas le sanc.	 Apply wet dressings or damp cloths to the affected parts where you want to dry them up.
E aprop entremet le spatum de dos agudas extremitatz, del qual aquesta es la forma de la inscisio de lu:	 Place two sharp instruments between which form this incision as follows:
que es de la partida des templas entro a la segonda inscizio.	 It's from the beginning of the temples to the second incision.
Exxcorja am aquel tota la codena la qual es entre dos incizios am le ciphac le qual es sobre le os, e aprop fay aquo de la inscizio migera entro a la segonda inscisio.	 Exclude it from the code between two incisions of which one is above the nose and another at the beginning of the second incision.
E aprop stratz ne aquest spatum e entromet en la primieyra inscizio autra vetz un autre instrument le qual es apelat cutellar, agut de una part e del autre no agut.	 Apply it to this dressing and insert another one called a scalpel into the first incision from both sides separately but not together.
E pausa le latz de aquel agut deves la carn annexa deves la codena, e le latz de lu leon dintz le os, e empelley aquel entro que pervengua a la fissura migera, e abscindeys am aquel totz les vaysels que descendo del cap als huels.	 Pause the stitches from adding flesh and leave space in the skin along the lines of incision, leaving space for the stitches to go through as they pass towards the fissure, and remove all the veins descending from the head down towards the toes.
Mays que sia continuada la inscizio ad aquo appar de la codena, e aprop fay aquo en la fissura migana entro al autra fissura.	 The first sentence suggests that a professional should continue to apply pressure on this specific location until the abscess drains or comes out through another opening in the skin.
E pus que corr del sanc quantitat engual, exprem les locs de las pessas del sanc congilat.	 This sentence suggests that when applying pressure for a prolonged period of time to an abscess, you should alternate between pressing on different areas of the patient's leg.
E aprop pausa en quascuna fissura calgua de coto vielh, e pausa sobre aquels polvils enbegutz en vi e oli e vi agre, e vegas que no endevengua apostema caut.	 This sentence indicates that you should take breaks from pressing on each opening in order to avoid numbness or tingling of the fingers and toes, with the understanding that any pressure applied at an angle may cause this sensation as well.
E en le tertz dia deslia le liament e aministra gran enfusio de aygua cauda o tebeza, e aprop cura aquo am enguent bazilicon am oli rozat e autres entro que las plaguas sian sanadas.	 The third sentence suggests that on the third day you should apply a poultice of warm water and honey or tea to treat the sores, as well as encouraging others into doing so in order for the wounds to heal.
Capitol .v.	 This is not a complete question or statement. It appears to be an abbreviation that means "End of the matter.
De la cura de lagramas per catartz e als huels descendentz de las partidas dedintz del cap.	 This sentence suggests that treatment for headaches and falling blood pressure are among the things that should decrease as one moves from a higher to a lower level.
Quan ad alcu veno catartz agutz e continuantz, e vezes les huels del malaute extenuatz petitz, e ja le reguardament de lor es debelitat, e las palpebras ulceradas e de lor cazo les pels, e en le preon del cap es dolor aguda ledent e extrenutacio consequent, lahoras sapias per aquestz accidentz que las materias e catartz no veno sino de motas venas de las partidas dedintz procedent.	 The sentence suggests that as pressure is applied and continued on the patient's head, they will begin to feel an immediate relief of pain from headaches and other conditions related to blood circulation, but if any veins are ruptured by applying too much pressure or in the wrong location, it could cause further complications.
E la milhor curacio en aquels es aquesta: que comandes al malaute que raza lo sieu front, e aprop inscideys en aquel una fissura al mieg loc del front, un petit per la latitut (e comensa am la fissura del templar senestre entro al dextre templar; e sia inscisio entro al os; e eslongua la tua ma dels lacertz del templas lesquals son maugutz deves la mastigacio), entro que sia le os descubert.	 "The first thing you should do is to tell the patient to raise their head, and then make a small cut in that part of the forehead, slightly towards the temple (and if it's on the left temple, go from front to back). Then, incise an incision into the skin of the nose, extending downwards.
Exsicca tot le sanc am espongua o am drap secc e aprop repleys entre las doas labias de la fissura am coto vielh o am draps de li.	 "Dry out any remaining blood or fluids and then close the wound with two strips of adhesive tape.
E aprop estrenh desus am polvils enbegutz en vi e oli per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	 "Then, take a needle and thread, put it through both holes in the bandage, making sure not to pull too tight.
E quan deslias aquo e veses que l’apostema ja es diminuit, lahoras cove que fregua le os entro que comensa en lu nayser carn, e aprop cura aquel am regiment exsiccatiu le qual fassa neysser la carn, ayssi cum si tu prenes de farina de froment dos partidas e de colofania quatre partidas e mescla o, e de lor sia fayt emplastre e sia aministrat en aquestas plaguas a de la carn nativitat.	 "When you've made the incision and it is clear that the abscess has diminished, cover the wound with some ointment containing flour from wheat two parts, and colophonium four parts mixed in water, then apply this mixture to these wounds as they are native.
Capitol .vi.	 "Capitol VI
De la cura de aquo que catz en las aurelhas.	 "Take care of the cure like that.
Tota causa que catz en las aurelhas es una de quatre specias, quar o es peyra mineral o causa semblant a peyra, ayssi cum ferr e veyre, o es de planta ayssi cum ceze o fava, o es causa fluxtibla ayssi cum aygua e vi agre e a lor semblantz, o alcuna bestia.	 "All the causes for which you take care of those ulcers are four kinds: whether it is one kind of mineral cause or effect; whether it's plant based, such as garlic or beans; whether it is fluctitious, such as water and urine; or any other kind.
E donc quan peyra catz en l’aurelha o autra causa semblant de aquelas causas que no ajustan ne creysso en l’aurelha, e pausa la aurelha al solelh, e si vezes la peyra, lahoras distilla en aquela alcuna causa de oli violat o sizami, e aprop aministra la extraccio de lu, e fay le stornudar am condizi, e oppila las nars deve le aveniment de stornutacio.	 When the cause seems similar to one of those causes that do not fit or agree with the patient's case and pause the treatment, if necessary, administer an extract from a remedy.
E aprop pausa en le circuit de la aurelha alscunas pessas de drap o lana, e dextendas la aurelha a las partidas desus, quar motas veguadas es foro-getada am aquestas causas.	 To remove any obstructions in the patient's body and to start the treatment again if necessary, loosen the thread or yarn surrounding the affected area and apply it gently over the parts of the body as needed, because these causes are often associated with certain treatments.
E si no n’es getada, lahoras aministra extraccio de lu am le instrument apelat gesti epicicarios subtil del qual aquesta es la forma:	 If not removed already, administer an extract of the remedy in a subtle manner using the instrument known as 'the feather and silk' which is used like this.
E si es foro-getada am gesti, bo es; e sino, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am onci subtil de pauca duplicacio.	 If already removed, then it is done successfully, or if not yet removed the doctor administers an extract of the remedy in a subtle manner with little repetition.
E donc si no es foro-getada per aquo, lahoras fay una canula de aram e entromet la extremitat de la canula en le trauc de la aurelha e claus a l’enviro de la canula am cera e am oli mollificada per so que no sia ubert sino la canula.	 If not yet removed, the doctor inserts a needle with hot oil and threads it into the vein on one side of the patient's arm and clamps off the other end to prevent the needle from being withdrawn, ensuring that there is no obstruction in the vein.
E aprop extratz am le tieu vent am fort atraccio, quar tropas veguadas cum aquo que havem recontat.	 To prepare it for injection and ensure that you do not miss any veins because of its strong pull back
Mays si no es foro-getada en aquesta manieyra, lahoras pren de halka alumbat o de vecz aparelhat am le qual son preses les ausels una patita quantitat, e pausa aquel en la extremitat de ray, e aprop envolopa sobre aquel coto decentment pausat.	 If not already removed in this manner the doctor takes an elastic band or ribbon of suitable size and attaches it to a nearby point on one side, then ties another end to prevent the bandage from being drawn back
E aprop entromet aquel en le trauc de la aurelha am facilitat, e aprop excicca la aurelha de la humiditat.	 The first sentence translates to: "Place a cushion under their thighs and one on each leg, another on the chest, holding their hands.
E donc si no es foro-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recontadas, lahoras tu coyta a talhar aquela denant que endevengua apostema caut o espasme.	 "If there is not enough space to accommodate all the causes that you mentioned earlier, then it would be advisable to perform a pointed cautery or application of warmth.
E la manieyra de talhar aquela es que tu al comensament sancnes le malaute de la vena sephasica e extratz del sanc segon la mannieyra de la vertut de lu, e aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas e converteys l’aurelha a las partidas desus, e fen am petita fissura en la razit de la aurelha deves lo greys de lu en le loc be premegut de lu.	 "The manner in which to perform this procedure is that you should first make the patient lie flat on their back and stretch out their second leg, then apply pressure over the area of their chest, and place a cushion under them for support.
E sia la fissura de figura lunar entro que pervengua a la peyra, e, la peyra atrobada, osta aquela si podes am instrumentz apropriatz; e aprop cos la fissura en aquela hora am velocitat, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	 "If you find that the lunar figure rupture has occurred and the patient is unable to use their hands as instruments, then you should apply pressure with your own hands in order to stop it and care for the wound until it heals.
E si la causa cazent en la aurelha es un dels gras que creysso e so inflatz, lahoras aministra la curacio e la extraccio de lu; mays si no obezeys a tu ad eyssiment, lahoras tu pren spatum teune subtil segon aquesta forma:	 "If the cause for the hernia is one of those that you mentioned earlier and they are inflamed, then treat with care and extract them. However, if these symptoms do not subside over time, take a small amount of mild ointment in order to ease it.
e aministra am aquel la abscizio de aquel gra lo qual es cazut en l’aurelha.	 "Apply an incision over the area where they have occurred on their hernia.
E no fassas aquo quan cogitas que aquel ja es humectat per la vapor del aurelha, e pausa aquel en motas pessas, e prop extratz ne aquelas am les oncis o am gesti subtil, o ab inscizio ayssi co dit havem, quar es alleujada la extraccio de lu.	 "Do not do this if you think that the hernia has already been healed by the heat of their body or the moisture from it, and stop doing so when they are cold to avoid further injury.
Mays en l’aygua la qual es intrada en l’aurelha cove que·l malaute use de sternutacio am condizi al comensament, e omple la sieua aurelha am alcu coto vielh, e jagua sobre aquela aurelha en la qual es l’aygua, e si per aquo es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, lahoras pren tropas peyras teunas e leons segon la longitut del dit, e calfa aquelas en le foc un pauc, e le pacient entrometa una de aquelas en le trauc de la sua aurelha e saute sobre la un pe sieu de aquela partida e percussia am una autra peyra sobre la peyra la qual es dintz la aurelha.	 When the patient's abdomen is to be opened, first place a cushion under their thighs; another servant on their legs and one more on their chest holding their hands.
Donc no cesse aquo am peyra entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada.	 Then do not cease until the water is closed up, that it may be said to have been done properly
E ja l’aygua sira foro-getada enayssi que tu prenguas de papier o de gonc i, e met la una extremetat de lu en l’aurelha e estendas l’autre extremitat am foc entro que sia comburit le may de lu.	 Then place one end of it into the abdomen and stretch the other out towards a point where movement is restricted to prevent the intestine from coming out.
E prop met i autre gonc e fay aquo tantas veguadas entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada, e stratz aquel am canula ayssi co desus es dit de la peyra extrasadora.	 Then place the other end and do as described earlier until the water is closed up, stretching it with a pointed instrument to open it out of its cavity
Mays en la extraccio de bestia intrant en aquela aurelha, si es a petit cos, ayssi piussa e a lu semblant, cura aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio; mays si es de gran cos la qual causa apar al sen del vezement, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am gesti e oncis, e la causa de lu es pus leugiera de totas las autras causas que cazo en l’aurelha.	 Then place the beast's exit into that cavity; if it is a small one, stretch and hold it like in the division, but if it is large enough to cause damage from being pulled out, the doctors will simply cut off its head and causes of it are dealt with as other causes which may be found in the abdomen.
Mays en la extraccio de verm engendrat en la aurelha, quan tu curas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e en le tractat de distillacios e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu reguardes la aurelha al solelh.	 In the hollow of a newly generated ear lobe when you cure that ailment as mentioned in section and treatise on distillation there will be no confusion about your care, therefore ensure that you examine the ear lobe gently but thoroughly
E donc si apar aqui alcuna causa dels verms, lahoras extratz aquel am gesti o am onci subtils, mays si no apar deguna causa, lahoras pren una canula dejos streyta e desus ampla de la qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	 And if there is no cause for worms, the doctor will insert a long needle and draw out all of it.
E entromet la extremitat subtil en la aurelha segon la quantitat la qual suffertar puesca le malaute; e aprop sucgeys am aquela per succio fort, e fay aquo motas veguadas, entro que totz les verms sian foro-gitatz.	 Then introduce the needle gently into the ear lobe as much as it can reach without causing harm to the patient; and after that, do what is necessary with strong suction force, removing all the worms thoroughly.
Mays si no obezeysso a tu al ayssiment, lahoras tu opila e claus en le circuit de la canula am cera ayssi cum havem dit; lahoras aministre distillacios las quals han ja esproadas les antics en la curacio dels verms, e atrobaras aquo en le tractat de distillacios.	 If not all the worms are gone at this time, the doctor will pull and close off the circuit of the needle as instructed; then administer the distilled water that has already been used in the previous treatment for worms, holding tightly onto it to be used in the treatise on distillation.
E sia la tua efusio am la qual efundas les olis medicinas en la aurelha am aquest strument del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	 And that is how you finish off with the medical remedies given at this instrument, which is in fact a needle of that sort.
E fay aquela de argent o de eram, dejos streyt, en le qual sia un petit trauc, e am pla desus.	 And take what comes out and put it into another container slightly smaller than the first one.
E donc sia cum empellent a que es en la conquavitat de la canula de continent aqui on sira necessari.	 Then, when you are inserting the needle in the patient's abdomen to drain pus or other fluids, this will be necessary here.
E si vols, pren le ray e envolveys en la extremitat de lu decentment coto, e aprop gieta oli en la concavitat del auziment, o suc de alcuna herba, o aquo que vols de aquestas medicinas en la canula — e aquela es en la aurelha —, e aprop entromet le ray am coto desus e exprem am la tua ma aquel am compressio temprada de lu entro que l’oli sia expellit en la concavitat del auziment e le malaute senta le oli dedintz.	 "If you wish, take the tube and insert it gently into the patient's stomach, or into a cavity of no specific herb, or that which you want from these medicines in an artery - and this is at the wrist - and press against your palm to prevent rapid expulsion from the stomach and the patient feeling pain.
E aquo que sia enfundut en la aurelha sia ja scalfat am foc un petit.	 "And that which is inserted into the artery will also burn on contact with a small flame.
E guarda te que la causa la qual distillaras en l’aurelha no sia trop frega, quar las medicinas de aurelha no suffertan aquo.	 "Remember that if the cause which you are going to inject into the artery is too cold, then these medicines from the artery will not work.
Capitol .vii.	 "Goodbye.
De curacio de opilacio de aurelhas.	 "With care of injecting the artery.
Alcunas veguadas alcus enfantz yeysso dels ventres de lors mayres no-perforatz, e aquo ja accideys en alcus homes, opilacio en le meat de la aurelha per plagua o per carn nada en aquela; e aquesta opilacio alcunas veguadas es fayta en le preon del trau de la aurelha la qual no consiec le vezement, e alcunas veguadas es en las partidas defora.	 "Do not perforate the artery in addition to making a hole through the muscle or flesh; do this for punctures outside of your field only. And puncturing holes should be done on the back side of the artery so that it does not come out, and puncturing holes will have their own separate procedure.
E aquela que accideys en le preon de lu, la qual no comprehen le vezement, es en las majors disposicios de dificil sanacio.	 "And if this happens on the back side of it, which does not comprehend its meaning, is in major difficulties for treatment.
E en aquela en qual consegueys le vezement, cove que tu pauses la aurelha del malaute al solelh e reguarda en aquela.	 In that space where you place a cushion for the patient's thighs, put an additional cushion under their knees, watch over them closely.
E donc si vezes oppulacio apparent, obre aquela am espatum subtil del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	 And if there are times of extreme pain, then apply a more subtle poultice which is the form of it:
Si’ la extremitat de lu en la qual sia petita la latitut, del qual la una partida sia aguda e l’autra no; e le spatum sia de dos latz leon per so que no fassa lizio al aurelha.	 If the extremity of it where small in latitude, such that one part is acute and the other not, then apply a poultice with two layers to prevent injury to the cushion.
E donc si la opilacio es per carn nascuda en la aurelha o en le meat de lu, lahoras te aquela am oncis subtils e incidiys aquela vehement facilitat entro que sia ostada tota la carn.	 Then if application is to be made on naked skin of the thigh or buttocks, apply a poultice with the most delicate and incise the surface so that it penetrates throughout all the flesh.
E si opilacio es en le preon de la aurelha, lahoras pren ray subtil leon e escalfa aquel am foc un pauc, e aprop met aquel en le meat de l’aurelha.	 And if application is to be made on the underside of the thigh, place a very delicate poultice lightly and put it into the meat of the buttocks.
E donc si as scentit oppulacio am aquo que le malaute atroba am facilitat, per gravetat de ausir, esforsa la oppressio de lu am facilitat; e guarda te que no plagues les nervis del aurelha.	 And if the poultice application is so severe that it causes discomfort to the patient due to its severity, try to relieve pressure by ease and keep in mind not to press on the nerves of the thigh.
E aprop pausa en l’aurelha drap de li segon la quantitat del ample del trauc lo qual tu as envolvutz en l’enguent egipciac; e fay aquo per alcus jorns entro que sias segur de la consolidacio de la plagua; o que prenguas qualgua e enfon aquela en ayguaros e pulveriza sobre lu segi trissat e usa de lu; e si vezes la aurelha ja esser apostemada, lahoras cove que tu estraguas la qualgua e permutes aquela am autra qualgua la qual tu envoloparas en cerot que sia fayt am oli rozat, entro que sia le apostema caut cedat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	 And after applying the poultice to the thigh as described above, wait until you are sure of its consolidation and if necessary add a second poultice which will be placed on top of it in order to soften it, and then pulverize over it with a damp cloth or something similar so that it is moist. If the cushion has already been applied before and has not been removed, apply another poultice as well, being careful not to cause injury while applying them.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras submergeys esponga o drap en aygua frega e pausa sobre la aurelha, e usa del autra curacio la qual restrengeys le flux del sanc, la qual es dita en le tractat de distillacio.	 When the vein flow of blood is impeded, the pain surges up or droops down with fluid that drips and falls on the ear lobe, and another servant uses a certain caution to restrict the flow of blood in order to make it stop.
Capitol .viii.	 The eighth capital
De cura de athezil le qual endeveno a las palpebras.	 To cure the itch that comes from the eyes
Athezil les quals endeveno a las paupebras dels huels alcuna veguada so humitz, alscunas veguadas son secs.	 The itching of the eyelids caused by cold humidity is treated with soft cloths soaked in vinegar or other remedies that are dry.
Donc cove que tu tenguas aquels am tenhalhas o am onci, e inscindas aquels am espatum de las suas razitz, e aprop pausa sobre les locs segi trissat.	 And if you have already opened the space between the ribs and legs, then place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out.
Mays si dolor am flux de sanc veno, lahoras tu cauteriza aquels am cauteri lanticular subtil.	 When the vein flow of blood is impeded, the pain surges up or droops down with fluid that drips and falls on the ear lobe, and you use a certain caution to restrict the flow of blood in order to make it stop.
E la milhor cauterizacio es aprop las inscizios e tropas veguadas retornam quan reman alcuna causa de sas razitz; e quan so cauterizadas am foc, aquelas razitz son comburidas e no retornan.	 The best caution is to burn the inflamed and irritated areas when they remain without a cause of their inflammation; and once burned, those areas are calmed down and do not return.
Capitol .ix.	 The ninth capital
Cura de grandeyssa que veno a las palpebras dels huels.	 To cure the redness of the eyes
Motas veguadas endeve en las palpebras dels huels alcuna causa la qual es asemblada a grandissa en sa fortalicia e duricia, e per so grandissia es apelada.	 The itching and redness of the eyelids caused by large causes that assemble in their strength and harshness is called for greater care.
E es agreguacio de humiditat grossa en la palpebra dejos e desus.	 Earmuffs
Donc la opperacio en lor es que consideras lahoras si la grandissia es procedent en lu en aquo que apar de la palpebra e es mauguda a tota partida; e la causa de lu es leugiera.	 Therefore, the operation is that when the swelling occurs in this way on the eyelid and covers everything completely, then the cause of it must be liquid or mucus.
Donc fen sobre aquela am fissura per la latitut, e aprop escorga aquela de tota partida am facilitat entro que evasesca, e aprop suspen aquela am onci e abscindeys aquela.	 Then fasten up that tear in the latitude, and let it be as wide as possible so that you can easily remove it, then gently pull off that tear and remove it.
Mays si a tu no es apparelhada la incizio de lu si no pus que penetras la palpebra am inscizio pauc a pauc, lahoras aquo no notz en deguna causa.	 If you are accustomed to puncturing the eyelid at all times but penetrate it only slightly and occasionally, then pain in this case is due to no cause.
E si la figura es gran, lahoras tu l’ajusta am sutura; e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	 If the swelling is great, loosen your sutures and care for it until it heals.
E si es pauca, a tu no sobrevindra mal per aquela quar l’anguent de lu restaura aquela e encarna.	 If it is small then you will not find fault in that vein as long as the rest of its blood supply remains unchanged.
E si la grandissia es declinant a las partidas dedintz de la palpebra deves la superficia dedintz, lahoras evesa la palpebra e suspen la grandissia am onci, otra que tu indigescas de incizio, e prem aquela de tota part, e si la palpebra per inscizio es alonguada, aquo no notz en deguna causa.	 If the swelling is diminishing from all sides of the eyelid and you see it on its surface, then pain in this case is due to no cause.
E aprop la incizio, lava le huel am aygua salada; e cura le loc am aquo que encarna entro que sia sanat.	 Then fasten up the incision, let cool water run over it and care for the area until it heals.
Capitol .x.	 Conclusion.
De la cura axcirnah en la palpebra desus del huel.	 Of cure for this eye-ache in the eyelid of these
Axcirnath es grays le qual es engendrat en las tunicas de la palpebra desus, e majorment endeve als enfantz, agrava les huels de aquels et accideyso a lor catartz le mayti; e no podon reguardar la claror del solelh per aquo quar lagremas se coytan ad aquels.	 Of the cause of this eye-ache in the eyelid of these (people) born with a grey hue, and more prone to children than adults, makes their cheeks reddened and irritates them at sight; so that they may not look directly at those who have it
E per so tu vezes aquels jaser sobre les lors caras tot temps, e sobre les lors caras dormen; e so a las palpebras de lor dejos les sobrecils humidas, las quals ja ha cuberta imflacio, e iminencia de accernac apparent es en l’uelh; e que quant tu premes le loc am les tieus ditz, tu centes accernac entro aquels.	 So that they may sometimes shed tears over the faces of those with it at night and while sleeping; so that their eyelids are wet from the excess of dampness, which has been inflamed by it and is about to burst through its own accord; and when you press on their temples (foreheads), you will find evidence of it.
E alcuna manieyra de opperacio es en aquel que le malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop pausa drap de li e de lu fay calgua, e fay de lu cercle segon la quantitat la qual contena arthernach de tota partida, e aprop pausa aquel sobre aquela e prem am les tieus ditz de tota per que sia agreguat arcernac en le mieg del cercle, e aprop fen en le mieg de aquela humiditat am spatum inscident am fissura per la latitut, e la fissura no sia major que la fissura que es fayta en flaubotomia.	 No matter how many times they try to cover it up with bandage or cloth, the excess of dampness will always escape through a small hole in their forehead, and the small tear that is there will also burst; when you press on their temples (foreheads), you will find evidence of it.
Mays en le preon cove que tu fendas la codena tota entro que pervenguas ad arcernach, quar en las mays desposicios proceseys arcernach per fissura segon la forma de grayseza blanca.	 In the first place you should be sure to have looked through all that comes in contact with it from every direction, and especially for any gray-colored openings, as soon as there is a tear or hole made by this condition.
Donc extratz aquela am draps los quals tu as envolopatz entre les tieus ditz a las partidas deforo e revolv entre la ma dextra e sinistre entro que sia dispargut.	 Then remove that which you have wrapped around between the thighs, leaving it exposed and roll it up between your right hand and left hand until it is smooth.
E guarda te que no ajustes en la fissura per so que am le spatum no pervenguas al huel e ladescas aquel.	 Then cover it to prevent any damage from occurring on the scrotal skin, which could potentially cause injury or harm.
Mays si no apar a tu arternach en le comensament de la fissura, mays que tu ajustes en la fissura un petit am fecilitat entro que procesisca arternach; e aprop extratz aquela ayssi quo havem dit; e aprop submargeys draps de li en aygua e vi agre e pausa les sobre le loc e estrenh aquels am polvils.	 If not already applied, put it on the beginning of the tear to prevent any contact with the scrotal skin during this time, and then remove it afterwards; and proceed as follows:
E so alcus que trissan sal e pausan aquel en la conquavitat de la fissura per so que aquo que es remas de aquela humiditat.	 And do so that you apply some salt in the cavity of the tear to prevent any excess moisture from remaining there.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	 Then take care of it until it is healed.
Mays si accideys en le loc apostema caut, lahoras cura aquel am emplastres cedatils entro que sia sanat.	 If the cut happens to be deep, then apply pressure to help prevent excessive blood loss and take care of it until it is healed.
Capitol .xi.	 11th chapter
De manieyras de tactimi del huel.	 Various types of treatment for the foot.
Quan en las palpebras dels huels so natz pels ajustatz dejos les pels naturals e so antiquatz, lahoras aquels noso al huel e fan endevenir manieras de malautias ayssi cum lacrimas assiduas e mollificacio de palpebras e tela entro que aquo sia causa de destruccio del huel que s’apela tactinir del huel, e cura se en quatre manieyras: o per cauteri am foc; o am medicina acuta segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri; o es fayt atactini per inscizio e sutura; o per cannas segon que yeu diyre.	 When examining the hands of the patient, you must check for natural burns and artificial wounds, then apply ointments containing astringents to heal them and prevent further damage from occurring, or else it could lead to destruction of the hand which is called "hand necrosis", and there are four types of treatment: cautery with fire; treatment by an acute medicine as mentioned in the chapter on cautery; use of stitches for wounds; or use of bandages.
E donc cove que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se; aprop converteys la palpebra del uelh am la tua ma sinistra, e si es convertida, bo es; e sino, entromet agulha en aquela en la qual sia fiel de la partida pus dejos de la palpebra, e fay penetrar la agulha am fiel desus, e aquo sia — prop del marge de la palpebra en le qual naysso les pels — prop dels pels, e tira le fiel a las partidas desus am la palpebra, e converteys aquela am le ray.	 "You should remove the cap from the patient's head and tie his left hand to your own left hand.
E aprop fen en la partida dedintz de la palpebra dejos les pels ajustatz am spatum inscidentz del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal mendre; e aprop extratz le fiel e pausa dejos la palpebra polvilhs petitz de coto o de drap, e aprop senha sobre la palpebra am tenta, e sia ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirt.	 "Secure the eyelid in a fold and attach it to the lower lid, then gently remove the bandage or cloth from the eye, and place your hand over the eye.
Mays empero cove que sia la figura segon la quantitat de helevacio de la palpebra, quar aquo ja es diversificat en les homes, quar de aquels es le quals indigeys que sia inscidit de la palpebra gran quantitat segon la quantitat per la qual la palpebra es mollificada.	 "Please note that this step varies based on the amount of swelling around the eyelid, as it can vary in different individuals depending on how much swelling is present.
E aprop fen am le spatum sobre las doas linhas las quals has senhadas, e comensa del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal menor.	 "Take one hand and place it above the two lines you have just drawn, then bring your other hand from the lower lid to the upper.
E si’ la tua fissura prop dels pels naturals ayssi cum es la grossetut del rey.	 "If natural tears flow as strongly as those in this example, do not worry.
E aprop met le onci en un dels dos angles de la codena, e aprop excoria aquela tota, e aprop ajusta am la scitura las doas labias am gula o fiel de lana subtil, e abstergeys le sanc, e fay adherir aquo que superflueys dels fiels sobre dos sobrecils am alcunas causas enviscans, si voles far aquo, e sino, non cures.	 "Place the spoon in one of two corners of a piece of bread and spread it across, then arrange both ends into a loop on top of your thumb or index finger; if you wish to do so, otherwise do not.
E aprop leyssa la sutura dels fiels entro a tres dias o quatre, e aprop cura aquo.	 The wound of the field will be healed within three days or four
E si vols, layssa la plagua ses sutura, e cura aquela am aquo que exsicca e constrenh, quar la palpebra es alevada deves la sigillacio de la plagua e la agreguacio de lu; mays sutura es milor E donc aysso diysso les antics de taxanir.	 If you wish to heal the wound of the field quickly and efficiently, then remove all the moisture from it and stretch out its area as much as possible; may this healing be better than previous ones.
Mays empero en lu sia sollicitut sobre le malaute, e es de bona operacio, e no es en lu temor.	 And maybe in that way the patient will get well quickly and efficiently, without any fear.
E es autra manieyra en taxmir, e es que senhes sobre la palpebra figura ayssi cum fuelha de mirt, e aprop eleva la palpebra am tres uncis segreguatz e congreguatz segon aquesta forma:	 This other remedy in question is to apply it directly on the patient's eye as soon as possible, and after applying this way, elevate the patient's hand with three fingers spread out;
Mays si no es possible aquo, tener les uncis, e aquo no es engualhat, lahoras pren una agula en la qual haia fil e met aquela en le mieg de la figura, e entromet le autre fiel prop le lacrimal major, e·l fiel segon prop le lacrimal mendre, e ajusta entre les tieus ditz les fiels am equalitat, e aprop am aquels eleva la tua ma am elevacio engual, eleva tota la codena sobre la qual es senhat ayssi cum havem recomtat.	 If it is not possible to do this way then take a needle with which you can pierce the eye and put it on that spot; enter another finger near the upper tear duct, one further near the lower one, and adjust between those fingers so that they are equally distant from each other, and after applying this elevation, raise your hand high in elevation, elevating all the way up to where is recommended as such.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	 Then place both lips of the wound together and heal it into shape.
Mays si accideys apostema deves la tua inscizio o la tua fissura, seda aquel apostema am cerot e a lu semblantz, e am enguentz.	 If you cut your finger or hand off entirely, place that part of the body near and bind it to itself with twine; this is how you heal it.
E alcunas veguadas endeve a la palpebra que·ls sieus pels sian convertitz, adonc cove que tu uses en aquela de aquo que havem dit de inscizio; mays sutura en quascus es mays artificial.	 "The eye is being squeezed between the eyelids," meaning that someone has placed pressure on both eyelids to prevent blinking or closing of the eyes.
Ataxinir am cannas es segon aquesta forma:	 To perform this task, you will need a cannula and some anesthetic agent (or anaesthetic).
e es que tu convertas la palpebra e scindas la figura qu’es dedintz segon que he recontat; e aprop per art fay doas cannas o doas astelas subtils de las quals longitut sia segon la longitut de la palpebra e la latitut de lor sia mendra de la latitut del spatum.	 This means that you should stretch the eyelid and divide it into two parts as described in step 2, ensuring they are aligned in length (from top to bottom) and angle relative to your finger.
E tu ja has inscidit en las extremitatz de quascunas partidas, la on tenes les fils.	 You have injected into the extremities of both parts where you hold them.
Aprop agregua quascuna am subtilitat subre aquo que superflueys de la palpebra del huel, e constres las cannas de quascunas partidas am fort strictura, e layssa aquela per alcus jorns, quar la codena per la strictura morira e sira denegada e se poyrira entro que per si meteyssa cayra.	 Tighten the cannula of each part very gently so that it does not interfere with vision or cause any discomfort for extended periods.
Mays si es tardat, lahoras trenca la am las toroyras, e aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanat.	 If it's late and the wound is infected, then take care of the patient and treat the wound as necessary.
Donc cum es solidada, la palpebra es elevada e les pels no pungo.	 Once the procedure has been completed successfully (i.e., you have stretched and divided the eyelid into two equal parts), there will be no squeezing or pulling sensation felt by the patient.
E aquesta es la forma de doas cannas las quals faras segon aquesta forma:	 This is how to perform this task using both cannulas
e haia la quantitat de la longitut e de la latitut ni mays ni mens.	 There should be no minimum or maximum length and angle measurements for either part of the eyelid.
Capitol .xii.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
De elevacio de pels pungentz en le huel am agula quan le pel es dur.	 The physician makes a small incision into the flesh to relieve the pain.
Quan son pels no-naturals, durs e aspres e pungentz les huels, lahoras la operacio en lu es que tu prenguas agula subtil e pauses en aquela fiel de ceda subtil e leon, e aprop que tu ajustes las extremitatz de lu e nozes quascu en manieyra mot subtil.	 If the pain is not natural and harsh, but occurs in the joints themselves, then the procedure is to make a small incision into the flesh there; hold it with a sharp pointed instrument close enough so that you adjust both of its extremities gently without losing sight of the tiny hole.
E sia la longitut dels fiels de quantitat de una palma.	 The length of the incision should be about equal to the size of one palm.
E aprop tu compon2 autre fiel subtil dejos lu en breu, e nuza las extremitatz de aquel si tu·t vols.	 Then you put another small needle next to it and fix its position if you wish.
E aprop pause le malaute le sieu cap en le tieu se, e sia prop del solelh per que la tua obra sia declarada, quar es operacio subtil e menuda.	 Then hold the patient's head gently in place and secure it to prevent its movement during the subtle procedure.
E aprop intromet la agulha en la razit del pel ajustat la qual ha necessitat de engen, e fay aquela penetrar en la palpebra festinantment entro que extraguas aquela desus le pel natural.	 Then insert the needle into the flesh with its point adjusted to pierce through as needed; make sure it penetrates just beneath the natural skin layer so that you can extract any necessary tissue.
E aprop tire le pel entro desus e intromet aquel en alixati, e sian les pels un o dos o tres e no mays.	 Then take away the flesh between them and insert it into place; sew up one or two or three stitches to close the incision.
E aprop tira la tua ma am aquel entro que·l pel sia fora-gitat am alixolati en la palpebra am le pel natural.	 Then take away your hand from that part of the flesh and gently pull it out through the small hole in the skin, making sure not to pull it out too hard as you do this.
Mays si es atirat alixalati e non es gitat le pel, atiraras alixati a las partidas dejos am le fiel le qual tu has compost am aquela, entro qu’en sia gitat alixalati del trau sobira.	 When the joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
E vegas aquela am la visio del huel, quar lahoras tu gitaras alixati e lo fiel, e grotan quascu e clautz le huel, e laysse le claus per dos dias o tres, entro que·l pel adheresca al sieu loc e nasque sobre aquel bona carn.	 The physician will examine the affected area closely, making sure to feel around it and gently press on any tender spots, and lay a cloth over it for two or three days until the pain subsides from that place and arises no more at another location.
E si es mays breu le pel, lahoras tu ajusta un pel lonc dels pels naturals, e es elevat am aquel, o que·l leysses entro que sia alonguat aprop alcu spazi, e lehoras tu eleva aquel.	 If the joint pain is severe and pressing on the skin, the physician will use a gentle touch to apply an ointment of natural substances onto it, or if that doesn't alleviate the problem then they should gently lift up the affected part and hold it there until the pain subsides from that location only.
Capitol .xiii.	 Chapter 13.
De la cura de ehacratir la qual ve en la palpebra desus.	 Of curing an inflammation in the eyelid.
Quan ve en le huel ehacratir, e es contraccio de la palpebra quan es contrayta en sus, o a dextra o a sinistra partida, per mala consolidacio de plagua o de seccio o de cauteri, e es apelada leporina, e aquesta ahercrati o es natural o accidental, e es fayta per consolidacio de plagua o de seccios o de cauteri, o per semblantz a lor malcuratz.	 When an inflammation is present in the eyelid or if there's constriction of it on one side or the other part of the body due to poor circulation, edema, burns, and so forth, they call this "leporina," whether it be accidental or not, and it will either heal through natural means such as rest, proper diet, and use of ointments and compresses, or through similar actions.
May la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que tu fendas aquela consolidacio e que separes las labias de lu, e pauses en lu en aquo que es entre aquelas una meca de drap de li, e ligues aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	 When removing the bandage from the affected area make sure to separate any remaining tissues and place them in such a way that there is room for it between those bandages until they are healed.
E no cove que tu uses de curacio de lu de las causas las quals exsiccan, constrenho; quar si tu fas aquo retorna alixacratir pus mal que nulh temps no foc habantz.	 When you have opened a space between the patient's thighs and placed cushions under them, another servant goes to their legs, and one more to their chest, holding their hands
Usa en aquela de causas que mollifico ayssi cum es fenugrec, e embroca am la aygua en la qual son coytz altea e semensa de li, o enguent dyaquilon, le qual sia liquefayt am alcu dels olis, e submergeys en aquel la meca, e cura am aquel.	 In that case you should use something to cool down the cause of the illness, and then place another servant by their side
E lo tesaur de la tua curacio es que tu perforsses am tot engen que no sia consolidat segon la forma que foc al comensament.	 The purpose of your cure is that it should be performed continuously after the initial form has become solid
E aquesta operacio la qual havem dita, no es sino alcuna rectificacio de ehalixacrati que no retorna la forma del loc segon que foc denant.	 This operation, which we call a rectification of this shape-making substance that returns the form to its original state after it has been formed.
Capitol .xiiii.	 Capitoline Museums in Rome
De la cura de ehacrati le qual es fayt en la palpebra dejos.	 The cure for this substance is applied to the eyeball itself.
Aquesta alxacrati la qual es fayta en la palpebra dejos, la qual es nompnada vertadierament alxacrati; e es de lu alcuna natural, autra accidental.	 This substance used in the form of a paste is called vertaderly and applied to the eye itself; it is either a natural or an accident.
Mays accidental es fayta per plagua o per scissura o per cauteri o per autres semblantz.	 The accidental application can be made by splashing, cutting, cautery or any other way.
E la via de la operacio de lu es que tu prenguas una agula en la qual haga fil doble, e fiques aquela en la carn, e que la fassas passar del lacrimal de senestre entro al lacrimal dextre, entro que·l fil pervengua en las doas extremitatz de la carn.	 The method of the application is that you insert a needle which has two folds and fix it in the skin, and then pass it from the inner tear duct to the outer one through the thread, until it comes out at both ends of the body.
E aprop exten la carn a las partidas desus am la agula e cus aquela am la agula, e inscideys am spatum ample.	 When pain occurs in the feet
E donc si retorne la figura de la palpebre segon que cove, bo es; e sino, pren le ray e pausa aquel en la figura fenduda, e am aquel converteys la palpebra, e fen las doas fissuras en le latz de la palpebra dejos.	 And then return the fold of the eyelid when you say so, but otherwise, place a finger and pause in the folded position, and touch it to make the eyelid fold, and then make two cuts into the length of the eyelid edge.
E sian las extremitatz de las doas fissuras de dos angles de la inscizio, la qual has fayta entro que concurren, e sia de lor fayt angle entro que quan se congreguan sia fayta figura de lor.	 And the fingers of both cuts at two angles of the incision should be made as if they were in agreement, and also from their sides when they meet in a fold.
E aquesta figura es letra greca: la landa.	 The Greek letter for this is lambda (Λ).
E aprop osta la carn aquela per la quantitat que es le latz de lu agut dejos de lu, aquo que siec la palpebra.	 Then apply the flesh that way in order to make it stretch out the lobe of the ear as much as possible, then close the eyelid.
E aprop ajusta las partz seperadas e cos aquelas am le fil de lana; e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit de las medicinas mollificativas e de las calguas entro que sia sanat.	 Then adjust the separate parts and sew them to the thread of wool, and then cure those by using the emollient medicines and oils that are recommended for healing.
E si alxacrati endeve per fissura o sutura o cauteri, lahoras cove que tu fendas am fissura plana sobre les pels de la palpebra segon que es precedit.	 If you need to open or close a puncture wound with a cautery, the doctor will instruct you to make the incision flat on the eyelid before proceeding.
E aprop separa am la calgua entre doas labias segon que havem dit.	 Then separate the cloth between two lips as instructed.
En la suma del sermo de la cura de alxacrati quan es desus o dejos, que corra en lu operacio, segon que es preparat de la forma de alxacrati, e aquela es en forma de motas diversitatz.	 In the case of curing an injury when it is done or removed, and you are performing a surgery in preparation for cauterization, then that should be in the form of various cuts.
E le artifexs savi totz temps prepara engen en quascuna manieyra la qual es possibla a lu entro que fassa retornar la figura a la forma natural, o prop de aquela, e aquel malaute segon que a lu conveneys de la operacio e dels strumentz en las majors disposicios.	 "The surgeon must prepare the body thoroughly for each of these procedures that can be performed so as to restore the figure to its original shape or form, and in the case of a hernia, after removing it.
Capitol .xv.	 XV
De la adherencia de la palpebra am la conjunctiva o am la cornea.	 The adhesion between the eyelid and the conjunctiva or the cornea.
Quan accideys aquesta consolidacio a motz homes enayssi que sia solidada la palpebra pus desus am le album del huel, e sia prohibida de la facilitat del movement e de las suas obras naturals, donc cove que tu entrometas la extramitat del ray dejos la palpebra, e eleva en sus aquela, o exten aquela am le unci.	 If this adhesion is solid and the eyelid becomes stuck to the album of the eye, it is forbidden for its ease of movement and natural functions; therefore you should enter a small slit on the edge so that the eyelid can be released, and then lift or extend as necessary.
E aprop tu inscideys la adherencia am spatum subtil, le qual no sia am acuitat de las inscisios, habantz obtus un petit per so que·l malaute no sia inquietat deves la operacio, e remau le spatum que no ledesca le huel am la sua acuitat.	 If you suspect a small adhesion but not of the incisions themselves, then apply some oil to prevent it from causing discomfort during the operation and smooth over any roughness that doesn't interfere with the eye's surface.
E sia la tua inscizio quays excorjan aquela adherencia am facilitat entro que sia retornada la palpebra segon la sua forma natural e que sia sanada tota la adherencia.	 The incision must be made to facilitate its return to normal shape and cure the adhesion.
E aprop tu met en le huel aygua salada am la qual tu laves; o distilla en lu de zunia dissolvut en l’aygua.	 Either apply salty water, or distill it with a solution that dissolves in water.
E aprop separa entre la palpebra e l’huel am calgua de li, e pausa sobre le huel lana infuza en album de huou, e aprop le tertz jorn usa de causas consolidativas entro que sia sanat.	 To separate the eyelid from its surface and to prevent it from swelling into the eye, take a break in applying oil-based products, then use third-day treatments that are adhesive so as to heal them.
Capitol .xvi.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
De inscizio de ungla e de eminencia de carn dels lacrimals.	 The incision or elevation of the eyelids
Sapias que ungla es segon dos manieyras, quar o es nervosa, e es semblant a ciphac dur subtil; o es no-nervosa, semblant a humiditat blanca congilada, la qual quan ferr la toca, o es forsat aquela prendre am onci, es abscindida e le onci no es ficat en lu.	 When the eyelids are secondarily inflamed or excoriated, either due to nervous irritation (as might occur in an infected eye) or non-nervous due to a white and cold dew which when applied causes the eyelid to be closed over it, that is shut out of its place.
E amdos las specias no comensan sino del lacrimal major entro que va petit a petit que cobre la vista e prohibeys le lum e·l movement de huel.	 The latter tears do not respond in the same way as the tear ducts, which gradually cover the eye and prevent light from entering it.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en la inscizio de lu es que·l malaute pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop obre les huels de lu, e eleva la palpebra am la tua ma, e aprop colligeys la ungla am onci de pauca duplicacio e exten aquela a las partidas desus.	 The servant should close the patient's head in his lap, and place their hands over them, lift up the eyelid with your finger, gently press it back towards you to prevent its protrusion out, and repeat this several times until it is quiet.
E aprop pren una agula e entromet en aquela un pel de cavalh o de buou o de vaqua, o de semblantz, o de fiel fort, o duplica la extremitat de la agulha petit a petit e fica aquela en le mieg de la ungla, e penetra aquela am la agulha, e lia am fiel la ungla; e exten aquela a las partidas desus, e excorja am le pel le latz de la ungla lo qual siec la pupilla.	 Take a small needle and make it penetrate the white part of the eyelid or eyebrow, or forehead, or nose, etc., by doubling its extremity very gently and keeping it in the middle of the eye, and inserting into that, and hold fast to the eyelid; and extend this until all is quiet, and remove the thread from the lash which was the pupil.
E ayssi tu sieguas aquela am le pel entro al derier de lu.	 When the pain in joints is caused by cold humors that permeate every part of the body...
E aprop tu inscideys le romanent en la razitz del lacrimal am spatum subtil o am petitas forfexs, e leysa la carn del lacrimal natural per so que per inscizio de aquela no endevengua fluxs de lagremas continuabla.	 ...and pain occurs in the feet...
E alscunas vetz la ungla am le sol onci estenduda o am fiel, ayssi co havem dit, e aprop sia excurjat am spatum leon del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	 ...and if it is necessary to make points...
E guarda te que am le spatum no toques la tunica cornea e que avengua en lu ruptura, e que la pupilla sia perforada.	 ...then do so with a pointed cautery...
Aprop la inscizio geta en le huel un pauc de sal trissa o di cief fayt de siniar, e leyssa aquel entro al autre dia; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	 ...and return the intestine or hernia to its cavity...
E si la ungla no es nervoza e no podes metre la agulha, ni es ficada en aquela le onci, lahoras motas veguadas aquesta specia de ungla es curada am medicinas, e es sanada ayssi cum yeu e recomtat en la divisio.	 ...and place your hand over the area to prevent...
E si tu vols inscindir aquela, lahoras tu obre le huel del malaute e pren spatum subtil leon de freul acuitat segon aquesta forma:	 ...the intestine or hernia from coming out.
am subtilitat.	 I'm sorry, but I don't understand the last part of your question. Could you please rephrase it?
E si vezes que aquela es rarificada e es confugida e empren en aquela razit, lahoras distilla de la tua ora en le huel de cief fayt de siniar o am cief rog o am sal trissat, e opila le huel entro a l’autre dia.	 If the hernia is rarefied and confused, and you want to try something else...
E aprop itera sobre aquela la operacio entro que sia remaugut tot aquo que es de lu, sino que·l contrari apostema caut sia en le huel, quar lahoras tu leyssa aquela, e cura al comensament la apostema entro que sia sanat.	 ...you can try something else instead of the pointed cautery...
E aprop itera la tua operacio sobre aquela am razo entro que sia sanat.	 And then start your operation on that very spot where he is in good health.
La emenencia de la carn lacrimal, si notz en le huel per gran nocument, sia suspendut am onci; e inscideys aquela de aquela una partida, e no ultimes la inscizio per so que no inscidesqua fluxs de lagremas.	 The onset of tearing in the eye should be treated promptly if it is due to a large lump, suspending its action on one side; and afterwards remove that lump by incision so that it does not flow tears out.
E aprop distilla en le lacrimal cief rog e fayt de siniar entro que sia sanat.	 And then put the eye drops into the tear ducts gently, to ensure that they go directly to where he is healthy.
Capitol .xvii.	 The seventeenth chapter.
De inscizio de alguazardenic e de aquo que es nascut de carn ajustada en le huel.	 From incision of the gallbladder and this which is born from the liver adjusted in the eye.
Alcunas veguadas en les huels de alcus es nascuda carn roga, e es sobre-pausada entro que cobre la pupilla, o apropinqua o estrenh sobre las palpebras e fort leu comprem las palpebras a las partidas deforo e es assemblada a roza de balaustra.	 Some of the veins in the eyes are born with red hair and are over-padded around the pupil, or come close to it or press on both eyebrows heavily, making their eyelids tight together like the eyelid of an elephant.
Mays la operacio en lu es que·l malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se; e aprop obre les huels de aquel e colligeys tota aquela carn am oncis convenientz ad aquo, e te aquo am una forcep o am cesti; e aprop inscindiys la carn el comensament entro que tot sia finit am le encisori, e guarda te del huel que no ledescas aquel deves la tua operacio.	 The operation on him should pause his head in the tie so that he does not move around too much; and attach them to that part of the body as soon as convenient by using a pair of forceps or scissors; and begin incision into where everything is finished with a scalpel, and guard your hands from touching it unless you want to perform this operation.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscides aquelas o am espatum le qual nos havem recomtat en la inscizio de la ungla, o am petitas forfexs am las quals es colligit ascebel segon que vindra la forma de lu aprop aquest capitol.	 And it is your incision at the place that we recommended in the incision of the gallbladder or at the edges where you need to be careful when it comes time for this operation.
Donc cum es complida la tua inscizio e es remauguda tota aquela carn, lahoras omple le huel de sal trissa, o destilla en lu polvera roga e semblantz a lu de las medicinas corrossivas, e pausa sobre le huel deforo coto am album de huou entro que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	 When you have opened your incision and it is completely closed, the physician will sprinkle salt on it or distill oil of vitriol to cause blisters along with the healing ointments, and place a cushion over the painful part in order to prevent any further pain from coming through.
E si roman alcuna causa de alguardenici e es senhoragat sanc caut, e temes apostema caut, lahoras leyssa le huel e cura aquela apostema am aquo que ceda aquela apostema, e aprop itera sobre aquel am operacio entro que sia sanat, e semblantment fay en la carn ajustada la qual accideys en le huel de aquesta especia.	 If no further cause of infection is found and the patient has been treated with cauterization, then apply ointment to cover the ulcer and cure the ulcer in this way that it falls off by itself, and similarly put a bandage on the affected area so as not to let the ulcer's pus out.
Mays empero tu cove que alienes tota curacio del huel freul per via natural o per via accidental, obran am ferr, e no metas la tua ma en alcuna de aquestas operacios entro que veges que aquel membre sia suffertant aquela operacio.	 Even if the healing of the ulcer is done naturally or accidentally through any means you may use to treat it, do not apply your hand in any of these operations unless you see that this member has suffered from such an operation.
Capitol .xviii.	 The eighteenth chapter.
De colleccio de sabel en le huel.	 About the treatment of ulcers.
Sabel so venas rogas las quals son testudas sobre le huel e prohibeysso al vesement la sua operacio, e develican le huel am longitut de dias.	 The ulcer should be tested to find out its cause and prevented from being operated on immediately, and it is treated with ointments for a certain number of days.
Donc necessari es al comensament que tu consideres si le huel en le qual es sabel es fort e en lu no es autra malautia que sabel, lahoras tu colligeys aquel sabel.	 Therefore, it is necessary at the outset to consider whether or not the ulcer in which the cause has been found is severe and if so another treatment should be sought for this, then apply ointment to that ulcer.
E es que tu comandes al malaute que pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop suspen aquelas venas am un onci o am dos segon la tua prudencia; e sia aquel onci de subtil duplicacio segon aquesta forma:	 And it is that you command the patient to keep their head straight and upright, and support them with an arm on one side or another according to your discretion.
o so dos oncis gradantment en un cos segon aquesta forma:	 They will gradually be held in place on each side of the body like this.
E aprop sian colligidas aquelas venas am forses subtils, am subtilitat, e abstergeys le sanc hora aprop hora, entro que vegas aquelas venas esser remaugudas del huel e sian revolgudas.	 And arrange them carefully and gently with the small veins so that they can be removed when needed without damaging or tearing them away from their original position.
E guarda te que tu no ledes le huel am las extremitatz del spatum; e si’ la tua operacio en le miegjorn denant le solelh, e sias mot ferm en la tua operacio que no inscidas sino aquelas venas.	 Remember to not touch the extremities of your patient's foot with your hands; if you are performing surgery in an open area, and ensure that you do not inadvertently cut or damage those veins during your operation.
E quan tu auras complitz, lahoras tu distilla en le huel cief vert o rog per que am sa acuitat corrodesca aquo que es remaugut del sabel.	 When you have completed the procedure, remove from the body any remaining incisions or bruises so that they do not cause further harm to your patient's health.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible colligeys tot en aquela hora, e lahoras tu emplastra tot am aquo que cede la dolor de lu, e leyssa lu per alcus dias entro que sia sedada la dolor de lu e que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	 If this is not to your possible risk during that procedure, and you administer a painkiller for the duration of the days until the pain subsides and you ensure he is properly medicated.
E aprop itera sobre lu segon que la mateyssa manieyra entro que sia sanat.	 And then apply a bandage over them to keep clean as well.
E aquesta es la forma de las forfexs:	 This is how the forefingers should be used.
Capitol .xix.	 The text you provided seems to be an excerpt from a medieval medical treatise, and it discusses various treatments for various ailments or injuries, including joint pain caused by cold humors infiltrating each part of the body and causing pain in the feet (which is referred to as gout). It also includes instructions on how to support someone with open wounds and how to administer painkillers.
De reduccio de arizati al nas.	 The nasal passage is being opened up
Quan tu curas arisati am cauteri o am medicina aguda comburent segon que es precedida la narracio de lu e no es sanat, lahoras no es engen en lu sino que fendas sobre le apostema deves la maturitat de lu, e que extraguas tota la humiditat la qual es en lu e·l poyre entro que sia descubert le os.	 When you cure the abscess with a cautery or acute medicine, before applying it and if there is no healing, ulcers will not heal but rather they will open up into the aperture of the body, causing leakage from them, extracting all the moisture that exists in them through pores as well as revealing the orifice.
E donc cum es descubert le os e vezes en lu corrupcio o negror, lahoras tu ratz lu am un sturment del qual aquesta es la forma:	 And when it is revealed to him that he has been corrupted or blackened by sores, then the ulcers will treat his ulcer with a remedy of which kind?
E es nompnat de aspre cap, e sia feyt de fer indi, e sia le cap redon ayssi cum asir le qual sia fayt punctat per punctacio de lima o aliskalfati per punctacio subtil (ayssi cum es en la forma seguent).	 The remedy is applied in the form of a pointed tip, and its effect will come to pass either gradually or subtly through punctures with lime or some other substance.
E pausa aquel sobre le loc corrumput del os, e aprop revolveys aquel entre les tieus ditz, e prem la tua ma petit a petit entro que sapias que aquela corropcio es rasa.	 And when it is over the location of the ulcer on its part, you will arrange that between your fingers and press it gently bit by bit until you know that this corruption has been removed.
E aquo sia fayt alcunas veguadas, e aprop restaura le loc am causas exsiccativas e stipticas.	 And in such cases, the ulcers are treated with dry and strict remedies.
Donc si·l loc es consolidat e es en lu nascuda bona carn e es abscindit le cors de la sania e roman per xl dias, e no es renovat e no es apostemat e no accideys en lu accident, lahoras tu sapias que es sanat.	 If the location is healed and it is found to be good flesh and it was cut out of the body by a skilled surgeon for 10 days without infection or recurrence, you know that he has been cured.
E sino, lahoras no es en lu engen sino reduzir la fissura a la forma del nas, e segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu descuebras de segon os am ferr o am medicina acuta, e cum sira descubert le os, lahoras tu pren tribo segon aquesta forma:	 "If not, the pain is in the abdomen, and secondarily to reduce the rupture to its form of a nose, secondly this manner; it is customary for you to break open as if performing a quick surgery, or with medicine.
Sia la extramitat de lu ferr triangulada, e·l fust de lu sia prim extenuat entro a la extremitat ayssi cum vezes assi.	 "With the triangle of the abdomen, the fist of it should be extended to its extremity as well.
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le os, e sia aquel prop del lacrimal; e alongua la tua ma un pauc del huel, e aprop revol la tua ma am le tribo entro que penetre tot le os, e aquel sente le malaute per asso que atroba vent yssir per so quan te la sua ma.	 "And place your hand at the eye socket, and one below it; put your hand a little beneath the head, and return it to the mouth as you enter.
Donc lahoras restaura le loc am medicinas stipticas exsiccantz ayssi cum t’e eyssenhat.	 "After that, restore the location with immediate strictives as soon as possible.
Donc cum nays la carn e·l loc es endurazit, lahoras la materia la qual effundia a las partidas deforo retorna al nas, donc aquo es pus leugier sobre le malaute.	 "Therefore, after that the flesh and location are restored, the matter is returned to the nose; then you place it on the patient.
Capitol .xx.	 ".XX.
De reduccio de la eminencia del huel.	 "Reduction of the prominence of the heel.
Quan le huel emineys am la sua totalitat e no accideys en le vezement nocument ni diminuacio, lahoras cove que laxas le malaute, e aprop que·l segues, e aprop que pausas ventozas en le cervitz ses scarificacio e succa per bona succaccio; e aprop pausa sobre le huel liniment le qual sia fayt de acatra e aloe e enses e sarcocolla, e aprop strenh le emplaustre sobre le huel am motz polvils.	 "When the heel emerges completely without pain or reduction of size, then you will know that gout has occurred; and immediately apply pressure on it to prevent the appearance of swelling in the calf of the leg.
E la manieyra dels polvils es que prenguas draps de li leons motz, e quascun drap sia duplicat en quatre plecs; e fay de aquels motz.	 The sheets of sand are to be spread out for the patient, each sheet doubled in four places; and these sheets must be spread
E aprop pausa aquels la un sobre le autre segon la quantitat de la qual ha le huel necessitat.	 Place one on top of the other according to the quantity needed.
E aprop strenh sobre aquels am drap dur am fort strictura; e itera las ventosas am succio ses scarificacio; e aprop osta las ventosas e leyssa le huel streyt le dia e la nueyt.	 Stretch tightly over these sheets, also apply ointments to relieve the itching and scratching; and open your veins for the application of the day's ointment.
Mays si entretant le liguament es mollificat, lahoras cove que sia mot streyt.	 If the ligament is relaxed, then it should not be stretched further.
E aprop osta le liament aprop le dia e la nueyt ayssi cum havem dit.	 Stretch also the ligament and apply day's ointment as well.
E si vezes le huel ja esser redusit, bo es, e sino, lahoras itera le emplastre am les polvils e la strictura e las ventosas entro que sia sanat.	 If the pain has already subsided, then it is done; otherwise continue applying ointment to the thighs and stretch gently while being careful not to cause any harm.
Capitol .xxi.	 The end of the treatise.
De la inscizio de la eminencia de la tunica uvea.	 This is the beginning of a new section of the tunic.
Quan endeve disrupcio en la tunica uvea, e aprop es eminent e procezeys fora las palpebras ayssi cum un gra de rasim, e es orrazada la forma de home per aquo, e vols aquo inscidir, lahoras la operacio en lu es ayssi cum havem recomtat, que tu entrometas la agula en la razitz de la uvea de la partida dejos en la partida desus, e aprop met la agula autra en la qual sia fil doble de la part del lacrimal, e fay aquela penetrar e leyssa la primieyra agula segon la sua disposicio; e aprop inscideys le loc del fiel doble e leva am aquel la partida de la uvea en le circuit de la agula, e strenh aquela mot.	 When the disruption in the tunic occurs and it is urgent to perform an operation on that part of the body, approach with a grain of salt; enter into this procedure as you have recommended so far, insert your needle through the eyelid from below at its point of insertion, and place another needle on the opposite side.
E aprop extratz la agula e pausa sobre le huel lana infusa en album de huou e leyssa entro que cayha le fil am la uva.	 When pain occurs in the foot, apply a pointed cautery to make points on it.
E aprop cura le huel am aquo que conforte aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	 Then return the intestine or hernia back inside its cavity and prevent it from coming out.
E alcunas veguadas aduna de tota partida am cercle de drap entro le huel ajuste eminencia gran, e aprop sia perforat am le spatum subtil que vengua al preon del huel, e corra la humiditat albuginea, e descen le huel e intra tantost.	 Then wrap a bandage around the foot and adjust it snugly to prevent any further bleeding, apply ointment containing alum, and descend on him/her.
E aprop strenh entro que sia sanat.	 Then return to health.
Capitol .xxii.	 Chapter 22 of what?
De curacio de alconati.	 Of eye care.
Aquesta malautia que es apelada alconati no es sino sania la qual es ajustada en le huel semblant a aygua dessendent e no es aquela.	 The ailment commonly called ophthalmia is nothing more than a swelling in the foot that resembles an upward-growing water blister and isn't one.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en ela es que fasses le malaute sezer sobre la sela aparelada e dreyta, e aprop pren le cap sieu en las tuas mas de doas partz e mau aquel entro que veias la sania pervenir a las partidas dejos, e aprop sia siccada e no descenda, e sia ostat le lum, e·l malaute veia las causas ayssi cum vezia.	 In doing so make sure to put the patient on their back and straighten them out completely, and put your head between two of his/her feet as well, making it easy for you to see when the swelling comes up and prevents its descent, keeping light available and without descending or ascending, causing the ailment.
E si no descendra en jos, sapias que es aygua.	 If not in the foot, then it's a water blister.
Mays si no es preparat le descendement a la sania am aquo que havem dit, lahoras fay le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e aprop pren spatum subtil e fen am aquel sobre le pannicol cernent un petit deves la continuacio de la conjunctiva am la tunica cornea en la corona (entro al loc vuet), entro que sia fora-getada la sania.	 When the swelling descends to below the eyelid, place a small bandage at the corner of the eye and make sure that the swelling does not extend beyond it.
Donc cum es fora-getada, lahoras tu distilla en le huel aygua cauda en la qual has mesclat mel o aygua en la qual ja has bulit fenugrec e mel.	 "After being opened up, the doctor will pour hot water on it that is mixed with salt or other substances.
E aprop sia curat am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	 And after doing so, there are various causes for which the pain may arise.
Capitol .xxii.	 Chapter 22
De la curacio de la aygua descendent del huel.	 The doctor will pour water from a hot source into it.
Ja havem dit las specias de la aygua en la divisio e qual conveneys a perforar am sermo declarant, lahoras aquel segon la sanetat.	 Having poured the substance of the water into the cavity and declared which is to be perforated by being marked as a symptom indicating the illness.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre un cayrat e lia le sieu huel sa, lu mot stringent.	 The doctor will place it between your thighs on a heated plate and then seal its edges with wax to prevent leakage of the liquid inside.
E aprop pausa prop de la palpebra del sieu huel la tua ma senestra, si le huel en le qual es l’aygua es le huel senestra; o am la tua ma dreyta, si le huel es le dextre.	 Then place your hand over the surface of it and hold them in position so that they do not move around as much if the liquid inside is water or another substance.
E aprop am la tua ma dextra pren almagda, si le huel es senestre; o am la tua ma senestra, si le huel es de dreyt.	 Then place your left hand over it and hold them in position so that they do not move around as much if the liquid inside is on the left side of you.
E aprop pausa la extremitat de almagda prop de la corona per la grossesa del ray en le album del huel de part del mendre lacrimal, e aprop enpelleys almagda am vertut e revol la tua ma am aquel.	 Then place the eyelid above and hold it in position with your hand so that you do not accidentally scratch or touch your eye as a result of the liquid inside.
E aprop penetre en le album del huel e sentas que almagda ja es pervenguda a causa vueda.	 Then insert it into the eyelid and be cautious, for fear that its movement may provoke a tear as well.
E cove que sia la masura del cami de almagda al preon la mesura del spazi le qual es de la pupilla entro a la fi de la negror, e es la corona del huel; quar tu veyras am aquel pupilla am la visio de l’huel per la clartat de la tunica cornea.	 And the first sentence to translate is: "And the space between the patient's thighs should be measured and maintained at a certain width, which is that of a small pupil entering into the end of the iris, and is the size of a sclera.
E aprop pausa almagda entro al loc en le qual es l’aygua, e aprop tu la atira en jos una veguada aprop autra, e donc si la aygua descen tantost, lahoras vetz le malaute aquo sobre le qual huebre la sua vista tantost, e almagda en le sieu huel.	 "And the water should be kept in a certain location, and place your arm below it with another, then if the water descends too much, the doctor will come to treat them where they can see properly.
E aprop repausa se un pauc; donc si la aygua es descenduda, lahoras tu depausa aquela autre veguada abantz que almagda ne sia getada.	 "Then pause for a short time, and if the water is descending too much, do not remove the other arm from where it is placed.
E donc quan es sicada e no descen, lahoras tu extrat almagda am facilitat, e revol am aquel la tua ma pauc a pauc, e aprop dissolveys en l’aygua un petit de sal clara de gemma e am aquela lava le huel dedintz; e aprop pausa fora le huel coto o stopa o lana infusa en oli rozat e album de huou e ligua am aquo le huel sa.	 "And when it is so and does not descend, the doctor will extract the intestine gently, and roll around with his little finger for a short time, and place a small amount of clear salt solution over them; then wait until they are completely covered in hot oil that is fragrant and light, and lubricated as well.
Mays nos e aquels que so de nostre temps pause sobre aquel comi trissat am album de huou.	 "Now we come to those whose time has passed over the other kind of food (diet).
E si no obezeys a tu almagda al intrament de l’huel per la sua duricia — quar es alcu dels homes del qual le huel es dur mot —, lahoras cove que prenguas le spatum le qual es nompnat alberid del qual aquesta es la forma:	 "And if you cannot cure the intestine with gentle treatment - which is what men do when it becomes difficult for their bowels to function normally - then the doctor orders a purge.
E donc perfora am aquel aquela conjunctura, e no ultimes la tua ma en le trauc, e no es si no que fassas via ad almagda loc subtil.	 When a joint becomes inflamed from cold humors that affect every part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customary to call gout by doctors.
E aprop entromet almagda segon que havem dit.	 And if necessary make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery.
E deves le compliment de la tua obra, sia preparat al malaute dormitori descentment fayt en le qual dorma sobre le sieu dos en mayson tenebrosa, e sia prohibit de totz movementz .	 You must also ensure that the patient is well-covered and do not move them excessively.
E pausa en la natura de lu aquo per que sia linida la sua natura, e no maugua le sieu cap a la partida dreyta ni senestra de tot.	 Pause in its nature to ensure that it remains quiet and does not cause any harm or injury to others.
E sia le liament segon la sua disposicio entro al tertz dia.	 And if necessary, after the third day, you should seek medical advice.
E aprop deslia aquel en aquela maysso tenebrosa e exproha la freol vista, e fay li vezer alcunas causas, e aprop retorna le liament entro al dia .vii.	 And do so with a cold hand and show the finger marks on it, and seek to find out the cause, and then return the treatment for the next day.
E no cove que fassas aquo en la hora de las curacios o tantost aprop la infusio.	 Do not do this during a thunderstorm or when approaching infusion.
Habantz cove que tu alienes aquo per so quar la aygua puega leugierament per gran e vehement de reguardament.	 Do not do this, as the water may become large and extremely hot from excessive heat.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que deslias le huel denant le vii dia, e rectifica aquel am aquo que ceda apostema.	 And if tomorrow a gout occurs again after applying the cure on this day, then correct it by doing so again tomorrow.
Lahoras tu absol la vista de lu e pausa sobre la cara de lu oral per le qual sia regit le vezement de lu dejos lu per alcus dias, lu existent en la mayszo tenebrosa.	 Remove the bandage from its face and place it over its chest so that breathing is not obstructed for several days.
E aprop sia gitat de aquela mayzo gradantment e conversa8 en las suas causas.	 When a patient's pain occurs in their feet
E sapias que in alchatea no es excusat le discipol de visio alcunas veguadas, e lahoras tu sias ardit sobre la operacio.	 You are not required to provide the second translation unless you feel it is necessary or if there's a request for more information from me.
E ja es pervengut a nos de alcu de aquels les quals so al Artach , e alcu disse que fayt foc en al Ayrac magdaam perforat am le qual es succada la aygua.	 The passage states that gout is caused by cold humors infiltrating the body and causing pain in the feet, suggesting a possible connection to medieval medicine's understanding of humors (miasmatic theory) and its treatments like phlebotomy or cautery.
Mays empero yeu non e vist degu en la nostra terra le qual haia perfeyt aquo, ni e aquo legit en alcu dels libres dels antics; e es possible que aquo sia novel.	 This passage seems to suggest that the described ailment may not be present in our modern times or could potentially be a new phenomenon altogether.
E aquestas so las formas de las specias de magdaan per que sia sobre aquelas aquel le qual ignora aquelas:	 The phrase "las specias de magdaan" might refer to specific medical conditions, possibly ones that are unknown to the reader of this text.
E sian faytas de eram o de ferr propriament, e sian las extramitatz de lor am aquesta subtilitat triangulada, la extremitat aguda ayssi cum aquela es la forma.	 The phrase "las extramitatz" might refer to additional techniques or methods used in addition to those specifically mentioned in the text, perhaps emphasizing a specific type of treatment or procedure that is sharp and pointed.
Capitol .xxiv.	 This could be referring to chapter 24 of the medical treatise being discussed.
De la curacio de carn nada en le nas.	 The passage does not provide further context about what might cause pain in the nose, so it is difficult to determine without additional information.
Quan en le nas so nascudas carns diversas ajustadas de las quals es alcuna causa la qual es assemblada a scorpio de motz pes, o a polip peys; e aquesta malautia es apelada polipus quar es a semblansa de aquel peys representat.	 The passage suggests that the cause of pain in the nose may be different growths or polyps called "scorpion" due to their shape and appearance.
E de lu es carn cancrosa, lapadea, de fusca color; e de lu es que es carn leon no de color fusca.	 The skin of his body is white and smooth, but he has a red spot on it.
Donc en aquela que es en aquestas carns leon no fraudulenta ni cancroza, cove que fassas le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e posat al solelh, e huebre las nars de lu, e picoys le tieu onci en aquelas carns.	 When you are dealing with a patient who has cancer-free skin and no red spots, then place the gauze between your thighs and expose it to sunlight, apply pressure to their nipples, and gently press it in that area of the skin.
E aprop extrat aquela a las partidas deforo, e aprop inscindeys aquo que has comprehendut de aquelas am spatum agut subtil de la una partida entro que sapias que tota la carn ja es ostada; que si roman de lu deguna causa de la qual la abscisio es possibla, lahoras tu ratz aquo am la un dels estrumentz subtils am facilitat entro que de lu romangua denguna causa.	 Then take the fine instrument and apply it to that part of the body where you understand it is covered with a smooth and soft skin, which if removed would reveal that all the skin has already been healed; so if there are any causes for which excision can be done, then use this instrument gently.
Mays si senhoreja am sanc o accida apostema caut, lahoras tu pausa a lu aquo que cove; o es dels apostemas malignes, lahoras tu coyta e cauteriza aquel entro que sia abscindit sanc e sian ostadas las cavas totas.	 When you sense a small or sudden burn, put aside what you were doing and do this: or it is from malignant burns, cauterize that part where the wounds have been cut out so as to seal off all cavities.
E aprop sia getatz en le nas aprop la inscizio vi agre e aygua o vi.	 Then take a piece of cloth and wrap your face in it or wet it with water, put it on.
Mays si le nas es ubert e de lu procezeys humiditat entro al palat, lahoras sapias que ja es sanat.	 If the nose is inflamed and you wish to moisturize it into the palate, then you understand that already is healing.
Mays si la humiditat no penetra segon que cove, lahoras tu sapias que dedintz lu es carn nada en los pus sobiras osses de las nars als quals non es pervengut abscizio.	 If the moisture does not penetrate because of that, then you understand that putting it on will do no good to those areas where excision has already occurred and is sealed up tightly by the nipple pores.
Donc lahoras cove que entromitas fiel de li al qual sia alcuna grosseza, e nuza en lu motz nuzes, e pausa entre quascun nutz la quantitat del dit o mens, e engene le malaute e entromet una extremitat del fiel en le nars am lo ray o am autra causa la qual es a lu possibla.	 When the gout pain is caused by cold humors which infiltrated all parts of the body and when it occurs in the feet, then doctors call it gout.
E pus que aquo aura fayt, que atire le sieu odorament entro que pervengua a las canals de las nars, e sia eyssit sobre le sieu golayro, quar tropas veguadas le semblant ad aquesta accio fan les enfantz a las scolas, e es leugiera causa ad aquel que ho vol far.	 And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery.
E aprop pausa las dos extramitatz del fiel, una extremitat que iesca sobre le nas et l’autra que romangua en le nas, e aprop aministra serratura de carn am les nuzes que so en le fiel, e fay aquo entro que sapias que las carn ja so am les nuzes del fiel.	 Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent it from coming out.
E aprop extratz le fiel, e pausa en le nas aprop la abstraccio del sanc una calgua , e fay aquo per tres dias o mays entro que l’enguent corrodo tot aquo que es romas de las carns.	 You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs and placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
E aprop en la fi de la causa, pausa en le nas una canula de plom per alscus jorns entro que sia sanat.	 Then at the end of the cause, place a plumed cannula for three days to prevent it from getting infected.
Mays si endigeys de curacio que exsique, usa de aquela.	 If the healing process is complete, proceed as follows:
E aquesta es la forma del instrument a capipurge fazedor am le qual son distillatz olis e medicinas en le nars:	 This is the shape of the instrument to be applied in removing and medicating from the nose.
E fay aquo de argent o de eram, la qual sia semblant a una petita lampesa uberta, ayssi cum petita conqua, e le meat semblantment.	 And if it is gold or silver, which resembles a small pointed light, similarly curved and shaped like that one.
E si vols, fay una canula clausa ayssi cum cana, e la cancula del estrument a capipurge fazedor e sia plana, descuberta; a la qual sia manubre en lo derier de lu, am le qual tenguas aquela quan escaufas en lu oli o aquo que tu vols dels sucs e de las causas suctiblas.	 When you wish to insert a closed cannula into this instrument and remove it from its sheath, uncover; on which there is the hand of the doctor placed in order to extract them when they are inside or outside as desired by you for their removal
E aquestz capipurgi es precios: recipe de enforbi de castor, de balayra blanc, de giengiebre, e piletre de safra, de pebre lonc, de escafragia, de epetum de spic ana unc. vi cumfizeys am suc de bleda e de caul, e sian faytas pillulas, e sia destemprada una pillula am aygua tebeza, e sia gitat en las nars del malaute jasent envers.	 The purpose of this procedure is to remove the gallbladder by cutting it open and extracting its contents; you must use a sharp knife and make cuts in order to remove it completely
Capitol .xxv.	 This text appears to be a translation of Latin words into English, with some lines missing or fragmented due to damage caused by time.
De theyls natz en las extramitatz del nas.	 They are found in the external nasal cavity.
Motas veguadas es nat theyl en las extramitatz del nas, e es magnificat e omentat en alscus dias entro en que mot es leg le reguardament de lu.	 When the patient has consumed a large amount of food and is about to be examined by a doctor regarding digestion problems.
E per aquo cove que tu inscidas aquel en le comensament de la apparissio de lu, e erediques tot aquel.	 In this way you will introduce it into the appearance of the patient as well
E aprop pausa sobre le loc o cauteri o medicina comburent la qual estia en loc de lu.	 Then return to that place or application which was previously used for the treatment of wounds in that location.
Mays si es tardada la sua inscizio entro que sia magnificat, lahoras considera si es lapificat, dur, de fusca color e de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr quar es apostema crancos; quar motas veguadas ad aquel que inscideys aquesta apostema endeve per lu granda malicia sobre aquel le qual aquel havia.	 If the incision is delayed and appears infected, inflamed, or has an unpleasant smell, taste, color, or few symptoms of infection, do not apply that bandage on it anymore because it may be harmful to you for applying a large amount of poison from it which had caused harm thereto.
E si le apostema es de leon tocament e no es de fosca color, e vezes que inscizio es possibla en tot aquel, lahoras evacua le malaute e inscideys aquel senes temor, e cura le loc am aquo que exsique e costrenh entro que sia sanat.	 When the patient's anus is being examined and not covered with feces, and sometimes excision may be possible in that case, doctors remove the abscess and sew up around it to ensure healing occurs without pain or infection.
Capitol .xxvi.	 This sentence appears incomplete at the end of a chapter in a medieval medical treatise. It is likely part of a larger statement about the proper procedures for performing an examination on the anus, including when and how to cover it with feces before inspection.
De sutura del nas e de las labias e de la aurelha quan la continuitat es dissolvuda per plagua o per semblantz.	 Suture of the nose, lips, and ear when the continuity is disrupted by a tear or a blow.
Sapias que quan accideys solucio de continuitat en una de aquestas cartillages, pauc confereys en aquela operacio sino en alcus homes.	 It means that when you solve the continuity issue in one of these structures (nose, lips, or ear), it should be done on every patient except for those with a specific condition such as deafness.
Donc cove, quan endeve ad alcu alcuna causa de aquelas, que consideres si es plagua fresca am le sieu sanc, e lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	 Then cover it when you encounter a cause for these things, considering whether there's a recent wound to the same area and adjust the sutures of both lips over that, and then apply pressure to ensure healing without infection.
E si las labias de solucio de continuitat so ja separadas, e quascuna es fayta sana, lahoras cove que tu excorjes quascuna partida de la sua codena apparent entro que n’iesca sanc.	 If the lips have been separated and both are healthy, doctors will advise you to excise each one separately from their base until no infection occurs.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias am sutura e strenh aquelas, e sobre aquelas pulveriza sanc de drago e enses trissat, e pausa sobre la polvera una pessa de emplaustra diafinicon, o de alcu autre dels emplastres consolidatius, e leyssa aquel liat per dos jorns o per tres, e aprop deslia aquel e permuta aquel emplaustre e leyssa aquel entro que·ls fiels per si sian abscinditz, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	 Then adjust the two lips together and stretch them tightly, then apply a dressing of gauze soaked in disinfectant over that, and place that on top of another dressing or plaster, and let it remain for two days to three weeks, depending on how long they need to heal properly; afterwards remove that and replace with another dressing.
Mays la manieyra de la sutura es que tu agregues la solucio de continuitat o am agulhas ayssi cum havem recomtat en la sutura del ventre, o agregua la solucio de continuitat am fiel ayssi cum a tu e fayt saber.	 "The remedy for the pain of joints is to add the solution of continuity or use needles as recommended in the treatment of belly stitches.
Capitol .xxvii.	 Chapter xxvii
De extraccio de aquela causas que veno en las doas labias en las partidas dedintz.	 Extract the causes that come out through the ears into the face, the ears
Motas veguadas endeve a motz homes en las partidas dedintz de las suas labias alcus apostemas durs semblantz a gras de errs, e alscunas de lors son mendres e alcunas son majors.	 The maids will go out with their heads held high on the days of the festival, and they are dressed in their best clothing; some of them are maidens, others are older women.
Donc cove que tu convertas las labias e fendas quascuna de aquelas duricias de tota part, e aprop la abscizio umpliscas le loc de sagi trissat entro que·l sanc sia restrengut, e aprop sia lavat am vi agre e sia curat le loc am aquo que es stipticitat, entro que sia sanat.	 Therefore, you should fill in the gaps in each of those holes completely to prevent any leakage through that location, and place a cloth over it as well so there is no residue left, into which you put water mixed with bleach to disinfect it.
Capitol .xxviii.	 Chapter xxviii
De inscizio de la carn ajustada en las gengivas.	 Extraction of the properly adjusted skin on the cheeks
Granre de veguadas nays sobre la gengiva carn ajustada la qual les antics apelero albulus, adonc cove que tu suspendas aquela am onci o que tenguas aquela am las forfecs e inscidas aquela deves la sua razit, e leyssas la sania correr o le sanc.	 The maid will go up onto the properly adjusted skin of the cheekbones, and you should hang it from there or put it over your forehead so that people see it clearly; and let them wash off with soap or clean water.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc sagi trissat o autra polveras stipticas o excicativas.	 Then place a cloth to cover the location where the stitches were removed, or powder that is antiseptic or antiseptic.
E si aquela carn retorna, lahoras inscideys aquela segundariament, e cauterisa aquela, quar aprop le cauteri no retornara.	 When the intestine returns, the doctors will immediately treat it, and burn that part of it with a pointed cautery, as preventing the cautery from returning is not possible.
Capitol .xxix.	 This seems to be a continuation or continuation of the previous text in this treatise on medicine. It's hard to understand exactly what it means because some words and phrases are repeated. But I can try my best to make sense of it by interpreting individual sentences one at a time, while keeping track of any repetitive concepts mentioned earlier. Is there anything specific you would like me to focus on or any particular part of the text that seems unclear?
De razo de dentz am ferr.	 It is customary for doctors when joints are affected by gout and pain occurs in the feet, so it means that they will take a pointed cautery tool from their pocket.
Quan en la superficia de las dentz de las partidas dedintz e de las de foro e entre las gingivas so ajustadas escorsas aspras, legas, e alcunas veguadas son de nigradas e son faytas citrinas o vertz entro que a la gingiva ve per aquo corrupcio e son faytas las dentz legas.	 When the surface of the teeth between and on top of the gums is smooth, they will be tender or sore due to tartar, or inflammation in the gums caused by it infiltrates into the tooth cavity.
E donc cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas e pausar le cap de lu en le tieu se, e ratz las dents en las quals apareysso aquelas escorsas e causas semblantz arena entro que de lor no romangua deguna causa, e aquo fay de la negror e de la citrinitat e de las autras entro que sian mondificadas.	 So that you place the patient between your hands and cover their head with a cloth to protect them from any harm or damage while treating it, so that tartar or other causes will not spread from one tooth to another within this cavity, also known as dental caries.
Donc si es ostat aquo que es en aquelas del comensament de la razio, bo es; e sino, lahoras tu itera la razio sobre aquelas al autra dia e al segon e al tertz entro que vengua al derier stament en aquo que tu vols.	 If that is at the beginning of this procedure, proceed as described above. But if not, you will continue with the treatment on those teeth in a day and another two days from today until it has been done entirely
E sapias que las dentz han necessitat de motz rezoris de diversas formas e de motas figuras segon que es preparat a la tua operacio.	 'You know that when you need to make cuts in various ways and shapes while preparing for your operation.'
E per so quar le razori am le qual la dent es raza de la partida dedintz es autre del razori am le qual es ras entre las dentz segon autras formas, e aquestas formas de razoris sian deves tu preparadas las quals veyras tantost:	 'For those cuts that the teeth are of a single part and different from the cuts between the teeth in terms of forms, these forms for cuts must be prepared as follows:'
Capitol .xxx.	 'Capitol.'
D’eradicacio de dentz.	 'Removal of teeth.'
Cove que tu cures la dent de la sua dolor am tot engen e tardes en tota eradicacio de lu, quar no es denguna causa que suplisqua la veguada de lu quan es eradicada, quar es sustancia sublima entro que es excusacio en la eradicacio de lu.	 'When you cure the tooth with all care and diligence until it is completely removed, when there is no cause for concern that the substance sublimates into the excision during removal, which substance remains to be determined.'
Mays cove quan le malaute es forsat aquela dent eradicar, que fermament deves tu sia certificat quala es la dent dolent, quar motas veguadas la dolor descep le malaute e cuga que sia en dent sana, e tu eradicas aquela e aprop la dolor no cessa entro que la dent malauta e dolent sia eradicada, quar nos ja havem vist aquo per operacio dels barbies.	 'When a patient is being operated on to remove the tooth, you must be absolutely certain that it is indeed the infected tooth, as these measures will prevent pain from continuing after removal of the infected tooth, which we are now accustomed to in operations.'
Donc cum deves tu es sertificat qual es la dent dolent, e que o sabes be, lahoras cove que tu scarifiques en le circuit de la dent am spatum en le qual sia alcuna vertut, entro que sia dissolvut de la dent de la gingiva de tota partida, e aprop mau aquel am les tieus ditz, o am forfexs subtils al comensament petit a petit entro que aquela concucesquas.	 'To be certain that it is indeed the infected tooth, you should make sure to disinfect all areas connected to its surface in order for there not to be any germs left behind after removal of the gum tissue from beginning to end and apply ointment on those tiny cuts at first gently then progressively as needed until this occurs.'
E aprop alogua en lu fortz tenalhas grans per bona loquacio o estuptura fort, e pausa le cap del malaute entre les tieus denolhs que be le tengues que no·s maugua, e aprop tratz la dent segon rectitut en manieyra que no trenques aquela, ni al malaute major dolor no dones.	 When joints are affected by a severe cold humor or inflammation of the joint, and pain occurs in them, it is customary to call it gout by doctors.
E donc si no es foro-getat, lahoras pren un de aquels instrumentz, e met aquel dejos lu de tota part am facilitat e esforsa la remocio de lu ayssi que es feyt al comensament.	 If it is necessary to resort to such an instrument, doctors will take one of those and place it on all parts gently and apply pressure to relieve the pain as much as possible in order for it to be felt at the beginning.
Mays si la dent es trauquada o corrosa, lahoras cove que tu comples de drap aquel trauc e estrenguas aquel am la extremitat de ray subtil per so que no sia trinquada en la hora de la tua constriccio sobre aquela am tenalas.	 If the tooth is worn down or corroded, doctors will cover it with cloth and hold it gently at the end of a thin piece to prevent injury when taking it out for your inspection about that time.
E cove que tu obres exquesitament am scarificacio en le circuit de tota part de la gingiva e guarda mot la tua fortaleza que no trenques aquela e romangua partida de lu, e retorne sobre le malaute per la malicia que sia majo que la primieyra dolor de lu.	 And cover the entire surface of the gums and remember that you cannot go back to it, return about the patient for fear that it may be large enough to cause the first pain in them.
E guarda te que no fassas aquo que fan alscus ignorantz barbiers en lor fistinacio e audacia sobre la eradicacio de lor, ses que no aministran aquo que nos havem recomtat; quar motas veguadas fan venir sobre les homes malautias grans las quals son pus dificils que sian trinquadas, e las razitz de lor remaugudas totas, o alcunas de aquelas, o que extrayguas aquela am alcus osses de la mandigula ayssi cum motas veguadas havem testificat.	 And remember that you should not do anything that ignorant barbers might do in their first aid and audacity about the eradication of them, because they don't administer what we recommend; many who are trained come with difficult treatments to perform, or some of those, or extract this from the bones of the jaw so that as many as possible have testified.
E aprop la eradicacio de lu sia lavada la boca am vi caut o vi agre am sal.	 "Wash away the discharge from their mouth gently or wash it off quickly.
E si endeve fluxs de sanc per aysso, ayssi cum motas veguadas endeve, lahoras trissa alcuna quantitat de zegi e aspergeys sobre la plagua, e si no confereys aquel zegi, cauteriza.	 "If you encounter difficulties in cutting the discharge, first cleanse it gently or quickly wash it off.
La forma de las forceps e tenalas subtils am las quals es mauguda la dent al comensament sia de longua extramitat, de breu manubre e gros, per so que no sian doblatz quan am aquels deves obrar.	 "Use the forceps gently and make them small enough that they do not block when working in close proximity.
E sian ayssi cum vezes de gros manubre entro que quan estrenhas am aquelas no sian dobladas, sian breus extramitatz.	 "Be careful to ensure that the forceps are not too large and can be easily adjusted if needed.
E sian faytas de ferr de India descentment faytas de dreytas extramitatz, e en las extramitatz de aquelas sian dentz de las quals las unas intron en las autras e estrenhan per constriccio descent fort, e alscunas veguadas las extramitatz de aquelas sian la forma del bec d’un auzel le qual ha nom ciconia, so es guanta, e son de fort constriccio.	 "Use forceps for extractions of the ears that are to be made gently and with very thin blades; otherwise they can cause severe damage.
Capitol .xxxi.	 This is a Roman numeral indicating the end of the text.
De erradicacio de dentz e d‘estraccio dels osses de las mandibulas trincadas.	 "Cleansing and cutting of the bones in the mandible that have been broken.
Quan deves la eradicacio de dent le qual es trinquat roman alcuna causa, lahoras cove que tu pauses sobre le loc coto am boder per un jorn o per dos entro que·l loc sia mollificat; e aprop entromet algesti o tenalhas las extramitatz de las quals so asembladas al bec de un auzel apelat ciconia o guanta, la forma de las forceps:	 "When you encounter a broken tooth without any cause for it, the doctors advise that you gently touch and press on the spot where you feel pain to make the area moist. If you wish to use forceps, then select or take them from those whose shape resembles an owl's beak called 'ciconia', as shown in the image.
Las extramitatz de lor sian faytas dedintz ayssi cum lima o alfagi.	 When the extra parts are affected by cold humors, they cause pain as mentioned above or below.
E si no obediys a tu a eyssiment am aquestas forceps o tenalas, lahoras cove que tu caves sobre la razit e descrobas tota la carn e entrometas le instrument le qual ha nom atali, so es palanca petita del qual la forma es aquesta:	 If you do not obey the order of using these tweezers or handles, then doctors say that you should use a small spatula like this one for cutting through the skin and entering into the incision.
E sia de breu extremitat grossa un petit, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	 The smaller part of it is big enough to cut cleanly without tearing
Donc si per aquo la razit es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, ajuda te am aquestz autres instrument dels quals aquestas son las formas: la forma del primier instrument es de triangulada extramitat en la qual sia alcuna grossesa:	 If the incision is perfect in size then it is all right. However, if not, you should help with other instruments like these ones - they are forms of a first instrument that has an elongated triangular shape.
La forma del segon instrument es que sia de triangulada e de pus subtil extremitat.	 The second one is also triangular but the tip is more subtle.
E ja so ajudatz am aquest instrument havent dos ramps del qual aquesta es la forma aprop la seguent:	 And you should help with this two-pronged instrument, which has a shape like this next one:
e am autres instrumentz les quals precidero en rasura de dentz; quar juvament es fayt am aquest instrument le qual es asemblat a onci gran, e aquesta es la forma:	 And the other instruments used for cutting teeth - which you will have to make yourself from this one that is assembled into a larger form and has this shape.
de la triangulada extremitat torta o curta, la qual sia alcuna grossesa, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	 The tip should be triangular in length or short with an appropriate size that is not too small to tear.
E otra sapias que·ls instrumentz de las dentz motz so e semblantment les autres instruments.	 And the other dental instruments are also similar.
Mays le artifexs savi e subtil en l’art, atroba per si mateys segon aquo que a lu significa la operacio e las malautias diversas; quar son de las malautias a las quals les antics no diysero ni pausero propri instrument, per las formas de diversas specias.	 You should be skilled and subtle in art, knowing that it signifies the operation of diverse diseases, which are different from those for which old doctors did not know nor provide their own instruments due to the various types.
Mays si es trinquat l’os de la mandibula o dels autres osses de la boca, o si poyreys, lahoras sia pes curat sobre aquel en son loc am aquo que es a lu convenient dels instrumentz e de las forceps las quals havem dit en la extraccio de las razitz de las dentz, e ajuda te am gesti del qual aquesta es la forma:	 When the pain occurs in the jaw or any other bone of the mouth, then the physician should apply pressure to that spot as if it is there so that he can use his instruments and forceps which were mentioned in the extraction of teeth. And this is how the procedure must be done
E sia en lu alcuna grosseza petit a petit, e sia instringida o tenguda am la boca per que no evasesca o fuga entro que l’os de tot sia foro-getat; e aprop restaura le loc am medicinas convenientz ad aquo.	 The procedure should be done gradually and steadily, whether it is tight or loose in the mouth so that the bone of any part does not crack open; and after this place returns to a suitable location for the medical instruments
Mays si en l’os es petita poyredura, lahoras ratz aquel de aquela poyredura e de la sua negror, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	 If there is a small cut in the bone, they will sew it closed and cover it with something to protect from dirt.
Capitol .xxxii.	 Chapter XXXII
De la cura de las dentz eminentz sobre las autras.	 The care of teeth is more important than the other organs.
Quan las dentz so eminentz no segon lor cors natural per aquelas la forma es laga, e majorment quan endeve a las femnas, e majorment a las piuselas venerablas; donc cove que tu consideras: si dent es nada aprop autra dent, e no es possibla sarradura ni linament de lu, lahoras radica aquela; mays que no sia annexa am autra dent, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am aquest instrument del qual aquesta es la forma; e es semblant a morr de porc, e sia feyt de ferr de India de extramitat mot aguda.	 When the teeth are prominent and do not fit into their natural place, and especially when they cause pain to women or girls, then the doctor will remove them. However if another tooth is necessary for biting, and it cannot be removed without causing damage, the doctor will consider that tooth separately with this instrument which is used as such; and it's similar to cutting off a pig's tail, except that it must be done very carefully from India to prevent injury
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscideyses aquela en trops dias per la duricia de la dent, e que no sia comauguda autra de las dentz.	 When a toothache occurs in days of hardship, it is customary that one makes an incision with this to remove the tooth, and not to cause any other harm to the teeth
E si es dent eminent expausat a limadura, lahoras lima aquel am lima de ferr de India del qual aquesta es la forma:	 If it is necessary to extract a wisdom tooth, the doctor shall perform this incision in that manner from which follows.
E sia tot de ferr de India e·l margua eysament; e sia de motz menutz puntz ayssi cum lima am la qual son faytas agulhas, am la qual la dent sia limada pauc a pauc en motz dias am fecilitat, per so que no sia autra dent comauguda e caga.	 To extract the tooth with India ink; first make an incision, and then use a pointed instrument to remove it gently in days of weakness, for fear that another tooth does not come out or cause harm.
E aprop lineys aquela en la fi, e ratz aquela am alscus razoris.	 After the completion of this procedure, you will take care of any other injuries as well.
E si es dent del qual una partida es trinquada e lideys la lengua, lahoras cove que tu limescas aquel entro que l’aspretat de aquela fraccio sia ostada e engualhada, e sia aplenada per so que la lengua no ledesca ni la paraula no corrumpa.	 If a tooth is fractured and the tongue has been cut as well, do you ensure that it is sutured properly to prevent damage to the tongue or the speech.
Capitol .xxxiii.	 Chapter XXXIII.
De restauracio de dentz maugudas am fiel de aur o de argent.	 Restoration of teeth should be done with gold or silver.
Quan accideys a las dentz devant concussio e remossio per percussio o per cazament, e le malaute no pot strenher sobre aquo que manga, e tu has curat aquel am medicinas stipticas, e no ha valgut la tua curacio, lahoras per so que no cagan es engen en aquelas que sian strengudas am fiel de aur e no de argent, quar argent se fa vert e aprop se poyreys aprop alscus dias, mays aur nul temps no es mudat.	 If a tooth is broken and removed by striking or hitting it with force, the patient should seek medical treatment immediately because they cannot heal themselves without gold or silver; therefore if one has taken care of this matter according to medical advice and not followed their own cure method, then in those days without gold or silver, time does not pass.
E sia le fiel en tal subtilitat e grocesa segon la quantitat que puesca entrar entre las dentz; e la forma de la reccio es que prenguas le fiel e pren lo doble de lu entre doas dentz sanas, e aprop que cresques am doas tortuositatz del fiel entre doas maugudas, o si’ una o motas, entro que pervengua la tela a la dent sana del autra partida.	 "The faithful is to be inserted with great subtlety and strength into the space between teeth; its form should be that it penetrates both healthy teeth at once, or if one or more are missing, then it must pierce through the fabric of the other tooth.
E aprop itera le teyssiment entro a la partida de la qual comenciest, e strenh la tua ma am facilitat e savieza entro que no sia mauguda.	 "You should place it into the opening that you begin with, and stretch your hand as gently and smoothly as possible to ensure there is no roughness.
E sia la tua striccio am la qual strenhas le fiel deves las razitz de las dentz que no evasesca.	 "The shape of the hole should correspond exactly to that which you stretch out the faithful, or else it will miss.
E aprop inscindeys las extramitatz del fiel superfluens am las forceps o tosoyras, e agregua aquelas en quascun loc am gesti, e converteys aquelas e las occulta entre la dent sana e la dent mauguda, per so que no fassa lesio a la lengua.	 "Insert the additional forceps or tongs into an area where you can reach, and place them between the healthy tooth and the damaged one to prevent injury to the tongue.
E aprop leyssa aquela ayssi streyta cum roman.	 "And then stretch it out with Roman style.
Mays si es desliada o rumpuda, strenh aquela o aquelas am autra fiel en tal manieyra en tot son temps.	 "If you are in doubt or if the faithful is torn, stretch that one and any others at your other hand simultaneously.
E aquesta es la forma de las dentz e la figura de la rectacio de doas dentz sanas e de doas maugudas, ayssi cum vezes aquestas liadas:	 "This is the form of teeth and shape of alignment between two healthy teeth and two damaged ones. Thus:
E quan se fa que retorno una dent o doas aprop le cazement de quascuna en lors locs, e sian recrescutz ayssi cum havem recomtat, e que remauguan.	 "When you return one tooth or two of them to the cutting area in that location, they should be shaped as advised and cut off.
E no fa aquo sino bo artifexs e savi.	 And it doesn't hurt at all
E alcunas veguadas es aptat alcuna causa dels osses de vaca, e es fayt de lor ayssi cum forma de dent, e es pausada en loc en le qual defayl la dent, e es strengit ayssi cum havem dit, e reman e serveys am aquel per lonc temps.	 And some of the teeth should be removed for any cause, and it is done in this manner as described, and the space where they are pulled out becomes sealed up tightly, and then the pain stops gradually
Capitol .xxxiv.	 Chapter forty-four
De inscizio del liament le qual ve en la lengua e prohibeys loquela.	 This is a slit in the membrane of the tongue that prevents speaking.
Aquest liguament le qual ve dejos la lengua alcunas veguadas o es natural am le qual hom nays, o accidental e accideys per plagua la qual ja es consolidada.	 The membrane that covers the tongue may sometimes be cut accidentally and falls into place when it is already hardened.
E la operacio en lu es que huobres la boca del malaute, le sieu cap existent en le tieu se; e eleva la sieua lengua, e aprop inscideys aquel liament nervos segon la latitut entro que sia solvuda la lengua de la sua recencio.	 The operation on the patient is to open the mouth of the patient by its own head, which exists in the same way as a glove covers your hand; and lift his tongue, then cut through that nervous membrane towards the tip where it is resolved
Mays si en aquela es alcuna duricia o denodacio, e aquo es stat per consolidacio de plagua, lahoras tu gieta unci e scindeys aquel per la latitut entro que aias inscindit le liament e sia dissolvuda la nodacio.	 If there is no pain or discomfort, then place it in a place where the incision was made and dissolve the knot
E guarda te que no sia fayta fissura en le preon de la carn e que scindas aqui arceria e vengua flux de sanc.	 Also be sure that there is not a cut on the chest and do not tear it open and let blood flow out of it
E aprop sia lavat le vestigi de la inscisio am ayguaros o am vi agre o am aygua frega; e aprop pausa dejos la lengua licini; so es meca la qual tengua le malaute dejos la lengua en quascuna nuoyt per so que no sia consolidat autra veguada.	 Then cover the vestige of the incision with gauze or cloth, and place a tongue depressor to keep it down, as long as it is not another sore
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, pausa sobre le loc vetriol trissat; mays si le sanc ventz, lahoras cauteriza le loc am cauteri lantiginos le qual conveneys ad aquo.	 When a flow of poison occurs, place a cushion over the affected area; if the poison enters, pain will be inflicted with a pointed cautery.
E aprop aquel cura am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	 And make sure to address all the other causes that might cause illness/injury as well.
Capitol .xxxv.	 Fifty-five
De extraccio de ranula dejos la lengua.	 Cut off the tongue of a person.
Alcunas veguadas accideys dejos la lengua apostema asemblant a nomla petita prohibent la lengua de la sua operacio natural; e fort leu es magnificada entro que huempla la boca.	 When some veins collapse, causing the tongue to be pulled apart by the operation of nature itself, and when it is light, it may be magnified within the mouth.
E la operacio en lu es que huebras la boca del malaute sesent devant le solel e considera le apostema.	 The operation on him should leave a small opening in front of the sun, considering that the patient is already lying down.
E si tu le vezes de fusca color o de negra, dur, al qual le malaute no atroba sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel quar es cranc.	 If you see any swelling or blackness in him which does not indicate pain to the patient, do not touch it as that might be cancerous.
E si es declinat a blancor, en le qual es humiditat, lahoras tu met le onci en lu, e inscideys aquel am spatum subtil, e inscindeys le de tota partida; e si sanc te ventz en la hora de la tua operacio, lahoras tu pausa desus zegi trissat, so es vetriol, entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	 If white is the color in which he has moisture, apply ice to him, and insert a small sponge into it; if poison enters at the time of your operation, pain will be inflicted with a pointed cautery, as that is poison, to prevent its spread, tighten the poison.
E aprop retorna a la obra tua entro que lo haias trayt am compliment de lu, entro que sia lavat am vi agre e sal; e cura aquel am l’autra curacio ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	 After your work is done and you have tried everything else to get him well, put it in water with vinegar and salt; cure another ailment for that purpose as well.
Capitol .xxxvi.	 When pain arises in joints caused by cold humors infiltrating every part of the body, as well as when pains occur on feet
De extraccio de apostema de doas aurelhas e de aquel que es nada en le golayro e de las autras apostemas.	 To remove an abscess from a finger or toe you need to place it between two hot stones and wait until the stone is red hot.
Quan endeveno en le golayro godat, so son glandulas las quals son asembladas algodat, las quals accideysso deforas e son nompnadas doas aurelhas, las quals quan tu las curas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no es sanat, lahoras tu considera si le apostema es dur, de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr.	 When the abscess is removed from the foot or toe and the glands that were infected are completely gone but some of them still exist after treatment with heat as mentioned in section one it's necessary to consider if there was a problem with its color, firmness, or lack of feeling when doing so
E si es de roga color e la razic es grossa, lahoras no toques aquela am ferr per le flux del sanc; abantz layssa aquel entro sia madurat, e lahoras o tu trauqueras aquel, o sira romput per si.	 If the abscess is red and its firmness is poor then do not touch it with a heated instrument to prevent infection; remove that abscess if possible but otherwise consider removing all abscesses from that area.
E si es de blanqua color, radon, e la razit de lu es subtil, lahoras aquel es que cove esser inscidit.	 If the abscess is white and its firmness or feeling is subtle then it's necessary to be careful with that one.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras, denant la tua operacio, si ja ha repausat le apostema de lu caut am repaus complit o si es deminuit am alcuna deminucio; e lahoras fay sezer le malaute denant le soleyl, e·l cap de lu sia en le tieu se, e huebre la boca de lu, e le servidor prenent entre las suas mas prema la lengua de lu dejos am instrument mot noble del qual aquesta es la forma:	 When performing the operation you should consider whether or not it was necessary to remove all abscesses as a whole or if only part of them were removed; and always place a cushion on top, covering the chest, head, hands, feet, mouth, and have someone else hold your hand while making an incision.
E sia fayt de argent o de aram, e sia subtil cum cotel.	 "The patient will be treated with a mixture of gold and quicksilver.
Donc cum tu premes am aquel la lengua e es mostrat a tu la apostema, e catz sobre aquel le tieu vezement, lahoras pren onci e fica aquel en l’amenla, e tira aquel a las partidas defora tant quant podes.	 "Once you have placed the tongue and shown it to your patient, place a cushion under them (the legs), another over their chest, hold their hands.
Otra aquo que tiras alcuna causa de las tunicas, e aprop incideys aquela am instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	 "Do not cause any harm to the clothing and apply this device as indicated:
e es asemblat a forceps, empero las extramitatz de lu son corvadas, ayssi que l’orrifici de quascuna de aquelas es en le endreyt del autra, mot agudas, le qual sia de ferr indi enbegut.	 "Take the forceps and apply them carefully so that the incision is straight, not sharp, as they are to be used gently, it is necessary to make a small cut.
Mays si aquest instrument no es a tu present, lahoras inscideys aquel am spatum del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: E sia agut de la una part, no agut del autra part.	 "If this device is not at hand, the doctor will apply it to the surface as indicated:
E pus que has inscidit una mella, inscideys l’autra segon aquesta meteyssa manieyra de inscizio, e aprop la inscizio le malaute guarguarise de aygua frega	 "After applying the incision, have the servant guard the patient to prevent any leakage of water.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, guarguarise aygua de decoccio de scorsa de milgrana o de fuelha de mirtra e semblantz ad aquel de las causas stiptiquas entro que·l flux del sanc sia restreyt, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	 "If there is a fever that affects the liver or the spleen and stops the flow of blood, have them guard the patient to prevent any leakage:
E alcunas veguadas naysso en le guolayro autras apostemas otra aquelas doas aurelhas, e inscideys aquelas segon que yeu e dit en la inscizio de doas mellas engualment.	 "Apply both servants to the incision of both legs at once:
E yeu ja fu medicat una femna de apostema le qual era nat en le golayro de lu, le qual apostema tendia a color fusca, de pauc sentiment, le qual ja havia claus le golayro de lu, e la femna respirava am meat streyt, e ja havia prohibit a lu comestio e beure de aygua, e ja era pervenguda a la mort si mays agues stat per un dia o per dos.	 "The female patient was being treated with an ointment that was not in the groin of her, but on her chest, which itched and caused a burning sensation, she had previously closed off this area from further itching, and the woman was breathing heavily.
E l’apostema ja tant havia pugat que havia mezes dos ramps entro que eyssiro per dos traucs.	 "The ointment had been applied so much that it caused two blisters to appear within a short time span of 2 days.
Donc yeu me cuytegui fisturalment e fiquegui en un de lor onci, e tiregui aquel, e atirada es de lu gran porcio, e aprop yeu incidigui aquela de on comprendegui del autre trau, e aprop yeu obrigui la boca de lu, e compremegui la sua lengua, e aprop yeu fiquegui le onci en aquela apostema.	 "Then you gently squeezed it and took off the bandage, applying a new one from there to prevent any bleeding, place your hand over its mouth, compress her tongue, and apply another bandage.
E aprop yeu abscizi gran partida de lu, e no corria de lu sino un pauc de sanc.	 "Then you gently cut away the large piece of it, leaving only a small portion remaining.
Donc absolut es le guolayro de aquela femna, e comensec tantost beure aygua, e aprop presec vianda, donc yeu no cessegui inscidir de aquela apostema motas vetz per lonc temps, e succesia apostema en loc de aquel, le qual inscizia entro que es prolonguat aquel.	 "The situation was dire for that woman, and she continued to drink water, placing her hand over it all the time, as she feared any longer exposure might be dangerous.
Donc yeu engen agui e cauterizegui le guolayro de lu, donc astec de addicio; e aprop yeu perambulegui e no saubi que fec Dieus de aquela aprop mi.	 "Then you heated up and cautorized the groin of it, adding oil; after that, you wrapped around with a bandage to prevent any further leakage.
Capitol .xxxvii.	 When joints are affected by cold humors that penetrate each part of the body, causing pain in the feet, it's customary for doctors to call this gout.
De inscizio de huvela quan es apostemada.	 The incision has been made
Quan catarr deysen a la huvula, e es apostemada e es longa, lahoras ela es nompnada perpendicular; e si es en la partida dejos grossa e redonda, e lahoras ela es apelada buba.	 When the abscess is on the ulcer and it's long, doctors call it a perpendicular abscess; if it's in the great or round part of the body, they call it a bubonic abscess.
Mays quan es curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio, e no comfereys la tua curacio, e eyssament ja vezes que apostema caut ja es ostat de lu e es subtil, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquela que es agreguadas redonda; e si es ad aquela longitut, e es sanguina, de fusca color o de negre, e no es a lu centiment, lahoras cove que tu temtes la inscizio de lu, quar en aquela es temor sobre le malaute.	 When curing occurs in this division and does not affect your cure, and especially if you have already made a puncture with a sharp needle, doctors say that the abscess is cured by puncturing it gently; however, if it's long enough to be bloody or black and doesn't go out through the center of the body, doctors suggest making an incision into it to prevent its appearance.
E quan tu vezes aquela segon la manieyra que yeu he dita de la sua blancor e longuesa, que tu fassas sezer le malaute e premas la lengua de lu am instrument del qual procesic la sua forma e aprop fica le onci en la nuva, e tira aquela en jos e inscideys aquela am un de dos instrumentz les quals e ditz en la inscizio de dos mellas.	 When you see that the ulcer has become white and long enough to reach through it, then make an incision into its center by placing a sharp instrument in your hand; remove the tongue from it gently and insert this same instrument into the new incision made on the other side of the body, and take it out of there and make another incision with one or two instruments depending on which you want to use for making an opening.
E cove que no inscidas aquela sino aquo que es ajustat sobre le terme natural ses addicio, quar si tu inscides de lu mays, lediyras le sieu parlar.	 When puncturing it is not desirable or when you pierce the area right next to its normal addition, if you do make an incision into it, the result will be bleeding.
E aprop la inscizio, usa de aquo le qual havem recomtat en la inscizio de dos mellas, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	 The first sentence translates to: "Put a cushion under them [the patient's thighs], another on their legs and another on their chest while holding their hands.
Mays si era le malaute espaventat per la inscizio de lu, cove que use de engen en la cauterizacio de lu ses temor, e la manieyra del cauteri en lu no es sino am aygua aguda, e es que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop prem la lengua de lu am le instrument le qual havem dit, e aprop pren de l’aygua la qual havem dita en le capitol de cauterizacio, e comfeys am aquela caus viva, e pausa aquela no spessa ni subtil, e de aquela omple la concavitat de l’estrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	 When the patient is about to be operated upon for gout, you should use a pointed cautery instrument while holding your hand over their chest. Take water from the head of the cautery and squeeze it into the area where the operation is being performed, and continue until the skin has turned bright red without any pain or discomfort, then gently remove the tool to stop the bleeding.
Sia la extramitat de lu conquavitat en la qual sia pausada la medicina ayssi cum la conquavitat de culher de ray, e pausa le strument am la medicina sobre la vula, e·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu latz per so que corro saliva o musellage de la boca de aquel per la intrinscequa medicina, per so que no deyssenda de aquela deguna causa sobre le golayro de lu e que ledesca aquel.	 The additional area of the abdomen that has been closed by the surgical incision will be further treated with a separate treatment to prevent bleeding from any other cause or injury, and it is recommended to apply this specific treatment only once.
E aprop te la tua ma am la medicina, e exprem aquela sobre la uvula per l’espazi de miega hora entro que vegas aquela esser denegrada e sedada per la mordicacio de la medicina.	 After applying the medicine to your hand and placing it on the patient's throat in a space that will prevent it from being damaged or worn down by the application of the medicine, you should proceed with caution after ensuring there is no bleeding.
E si vols, prengues coto e envolopes aquel sobre la extremitat del ray, e submergeys le coto en la medicina, e entrometas le ray am le coto en una canula de sobre entro que·l coto adheresca en aquela canula, e fay aquo tantas vetz entro que consiegues aquo que vols de la cauterizacio de la uva, e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela se seccara e cayra aprop tres dias o quatre.	 If you wish to, place a strip of cloth over the affected limb and submerge it in the medicine, then apply it directly on the vein where the cloth adheres into that cannula, and do this as many times as necessary until your goal is achieved from performing the gout operation, and ensure that it does not dry out or cause irritation for at least three days.
E si indigeysses que iteras la medicina, itera aquela, e aprop la cauterizacio abstergeys en le circuit de la uva am coto enbegut en boder, e mondifica am aquel aquo que es en le circuit de lu de la medicina, e sia lavat am aygua frega, e sia curat deforo am embrocacio, e dedintz am guarguarismes entro que sia sanat.	 When you are going to practice medicine and prepare the cautery, approach it in a way that you cut off the circuit of veins with vinegar solution on its surface so as to stop bleeding from wounds, and make sure there is no infection.
E aquesta especia de curacio es pus salva que inscizio e pus long de temor.	 This specific form of treatment can be very dangerous if not done properly.
Alcunas veguadas es curada la uvuola am aquo que es pus subtil que cauteri e inscizio, quar es curat am subfumigacio en aquesta manieyra: recipe calament, ysop, origua, ruda, scicados arabic, camamilla, broyda e semblant ad aquels de las erbas, e ajusta totas aquelas causas, o alcunas de lor, en una ola, e sian submergidas am vi agre, e bulhan; e la ola sia be lutada am lut decentment, e sia en le mieg loc de la ola un trauc, sobre le qual sia pausat un instrument conquau de aram segon aquesta manieyra; sia fayt de argent o de aram.	 Some of these herbs are used in the treatment and can be dangerous if not used properly: you should carefully consider them, gather all of their causes or some of them in one group, then immerse them in vinegar solution, blend them well; place a pointed instrument on top of this mixture to prevent any of its parts from escaping.
E sia entromesa la extremitat en la boca del malaute entro que la vapor poge a la uvula sobre la quanula, entro que la uvula sia mot ofuscada.	 Insert the tube into the patient's mouth such that steam is applied to the uvula, ensuring it remains uncovered.
E aprop itera sobre aquela motas veguadas entro qu’es secca, e guarda te que no fassas aquesta curacio al comesament de l’aveniment de apostemas, quar trop ajustaria en le apostema, e no cove que tu fassas aquo, sino deves la declaracio de apostema de lu caut.	 Approach the treatment of those herbs when they are dried up and keep in mind not to perform this procedure at the time of administering the initial dose of medication, as it would interfere with absorption by the intestines, nor should you do that unless you declare a prior agreement with the patient.
Mays si no es a tu present aquest instrument, lahoras pren una cana e compon en la extramitat de lu un clos de huou, per so que la boca del malaute sia comborida, quar le closc del huou prohibeys la vapor comburir la boca.	 "If you do not have this instrument, then pain will occur in the abdomen and a close of humors will be placed on the exterior of the patient to prevent air from entering through the mouth.
E aquesta curacio es bona am salut.	 This procedure is good for health
Capitol .xxxviii.	 The [number]th capital letter.
De extraccio d’espinas e de aquo que adhereys en le golayro e de las autras causas.	 Extract the spines and apply it to the groin area, and place the other causes as well.
Motas veguadas adhereys en le guolayro o spina de peys o alcuna autra causa.	 The thorns will be placed in or near the groin area or spine, depending on which one is more suitable.
Adonc cove que tu extraguas aquo que de aquels es apparent, sobre le qual catz la vista, pus que tu premes la lengua am instrument denant solelh, per so que a tu sia declarat aquo que es en la guola.	 When you extract what is evident to the eye and whose shape suggests it should be seen when held up to the light, then pronounce that it is in the groin area.
E aquo que no apar e es a tu occultat en le guolayro, cove que tu fassas vomir le malaute denant que la vianda sia degerida en l’estomac, quar fort leu la causa annexsa le golayro sira foro-getada per vomit; o que deglusia le malaute una pessa de nap o de razit de laytuga o un boci de pa sec; o prengua una pessa de sponga marina sequa leon, e lia aquela fortment am fiel, e aprop le malaute transglussia aquela, quar cum perve al loc en le qual so spinas e es extrahuda, lahoras so foro-getatz.	 When you extract what is evident to the eye and it should be seen when held up to the light, then vomit if there's a cause of acidity in the stomach or heartburn; or use one teaspoon of baking soda dissolved in water, preferably warm, applied directly on the esophagus, which will help neutralize any excess acid present.
E mays pren una anguila e be am fiel liada, e sia dedintz mesa e soptament sia extrayta; o pren un porr e soptament le metas e soptament l’en tratz.	 You may take an olive oil and apply it gently or use a compress soaked in water and apply it gently to soothe the area.
Mays si no so foro-getatz am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas, lahoras husa de un instrument de plom segon aquesta forma:	 When causes are mentioned here that give reasons for the pain, there will follow an instrument of lead as such.
E sia pus gros que ray un petit, e en la extramitat de lu sia conquavitat la qual tu entrometas en la sua guola am facilitat.	 And if it is large or small in size, on the outside surface of his body where you insert it will be easy to enter into its cavity.
E el aga le sieu cap elevat en sus, e guarda te que·l tocament del sieu os de la gola, per so que endevengua a lu cos e am aquela que enpellesca le os o la spina, o que aquel le metge am la sua ma.	 And he places his head up there and holds the opening of the mouth with his hand to prevent it from getting into the nose or spine, or where the doctor puts his finger.
Mays empero que·l malaute aquel entrometa es miels, per la sua sciencia del loc de la causa annexa e enpellisca en jos, e tira la sua ma am le instrument en sus, tot aquo segon la quantitat la qual es a lu preparada entro que sia foro-getada.	 And may the patient enter into it on account of his knowledge and fill up, filling in where necessary according to what he has prepared beforehand so that everything is in order.
Capitol .xxxix.	 Capitulation.
De extraccio de sancguisugua annexsa al golayro.	 From the extract of the gall bladder it is taken for use at times.
Quan es medicada sanguisugua am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la curacio am medicinas e no comfereys, considera lahoras en le guolayro del malaute al solelh, pus que tu aias compremuda la lengua de lu am instrument le qual a tu havem recomtat.	 When the blood is taken from this which has been mentioned in the division of medical care and does not harm them consider placing it on the outside surface of the patient's body with a spoon that you have recommended.
Donc si tu vezes la sancguisugua, extratz aquela am onci petit o am gesti subtils decentment.	 Therefore if you extract the gall bladder often in small or subtle movements gently.
E si no es a tu possible estrayre am aquel, lahoras pren una canula concava e entromet aquela en lo guolayro del malaute, e aprop pausa en la concavitat de la canula un ferr ignit, e fay aquo tantas vetz (entro que la sancguisugua sia morta e se osta del guolayro) e abstengua se le malaute tot lo jorn de aygua.	 And if you are not able to extract it through the incision made in the gall bladder, then lay a concave needle and insert it into the outside surface of the patient's body, placing your hand over the opening to prevent it from coming out, or where the doctor will put his finger.
E aprop prengua una veyria plena de aygua frega, e obra la boca de lu en aquela, e lava la boca am aquela; e no trasglucia de aquela alcuna causa e maugua l’aygua una hora aprop autra am la sua ma, quar la sancguisugua tantost cum sent l’aygua catz.	 When a full bladder is present and the mouth is filled with water in that manner, wash the mouth in that way; do not let any cause or bad thing enter from there, whether it be water or anything else.
Mays si no es foro-getada am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras subfumigua le malaute am cimetz o am assafetida per le instrument le qual havem recomtat en la sufumiguacio de uvula.	 If that is not forbidden by what we recommended earlier, then wash the patient's anus or vagina with the instrument we recommended in the process of lubrication mentioned previously.
Fay aquo, so en quar cayra.	 In which case?
E es un’autra manieyra de operacio en sufumiguacio de aquela, es que tu prenguas una ola en la qual sian carbos ignitz e la ola sia cuberta am una cobertora en le mieg de la qual sia un trauc, e sia compausat en aquel trauc la extremitat del instrument; e aprop dega desus la subfumigacio; e pause le malaute la sua boca en la extremitat de la canula, e claugua la sua boca per que la subfumiguacio no sia foro-getada entro que sapias que la subfumigacio es pervenguda a la sancguisugua, quar la sancguisugua tantost cayra.	 This is another type of operation in the lubrication process mentioned earlier; you should put an oil on which there are incisions and the oil is covered by a coverlet in the area where the slit exists, and it must be maintained in that slit to prevent leakage from escaping out; and then apply the lubrication; and place your hand over the mouth of the patient at the point where the cannula enters his body, and wash his mouth with it so that the lubrication does not escape through any slit.
E si no catz, lahoras tu itera la subfumiguacio motas vetz, e abstengua le malaute de beure, e mange causas saladas e alhs, e no begua aygua, e ayssi necessari es que am aquest regiment sia fora-getada.	 If not, then you should interrupt the lubrication process, and make sure to keep him from drinking salty things or anything else, do not let him drink water, and thus it is necessary that this regimen be forbidden.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument am le qual es trayta sancguisugua del guolayro quan es vista; e es semblant a forceps ayssi cum vezes, sino quar es en lu alcuna curvitat:	 This is the form of the instrument used to extract the stone from the urethra when it is seen. It resembles forceps in this aspect and no other aspect.
le qual sia mesa al guolayro, e la extremitat de lu es semblant a bec de ciconia, que es guanta, en la qual es aspretat de lima, per so quar, quan comprem alcuna causa, aquela no leyssa.	 This is how the instrument should be positioned in relation to the urethra, and its end resembles a beak of a vulture that grasps, with which it picks up and carries away any cause (stone) for which ever it may be needed.
Capitol .xl.	 You're welcome!
En le qual es la suma del sermo en apercio de apostemas e en seccio de lor.	 In the sum of the sentence in question, there are two points: an opening and a closing punctuation mark.
Les apostemas so motas specias, de motas manieyras, segon que ve rememoracio de lor, de quascuna en aquest libre.	 The punctuation marks serve to enclose the special parts of words or phrases within them; if you forget this rule, each one separately.
E so diversas en perforacio e seccio de lor per doas manieyras, de las quals la una es per la specia de apostemas en si meteys; e per aquo que comprem de las humiditatz.	 They are different in the placement and separation of them for two reasons: one is to enclose special forms of punctuation within themselves (like quotes), while the other is related to humidity.
E la segonda manieyra es prop les locs en les quals accideys del cos, quar le apostema accident en le cap es autra de la apostema accident en le cul; e le apostema en le loc carnos accident es autra del apostema accident en junctura; e a quascun de lor es son juguament per operacio.	 The second reason is due to the places where accidents occur, such as when an apostrophe accidentally falls on the head or another place like the buttocks. And each one of them serve in their own way for operation.
E mays de apostemas so alcunas las quals cove que no sian perforadas sino aprop maturacio de la sania en aquels o compliment de lor.	 The punctuation marks are sometimes called "punctuation points" and not perforated ones but rather positioned by placing them at the end of words or phrases that complement them, as is done in these cases.
So autras apostemas les quals cove que sian traucatz quan son cruzes, e no son maturatz segon lor compliment, ayssi cum apostemas que son propdas a las juncturas, quar apostema quan ve prop junctura, lo esser de lu es prolonguat entro que·s poyreys aquo que es en le circuit de lu, e fort leu son corromputz les liamentz o les nervis de aquela junctura, per que es fayta causa de contraccio de aquel membre; o es apostema prop de membre principal, e si tu tardas la perforacio de lu entro sia madurat nosira al membre principal; o es prop le cul, donc perfora aque no-madurat; e no cove que·l perforas cru, de no-complida degestio, sino aquel que es prop del cul, per so que no poyresca le preon de lu e sia elonguat a las partidas dedintz del cul, e sia fayta fistula, o que sia fayt en le terme de lu que no sia sanat.	 "When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and if there's no relief from other causes such as medication or rest, then it is customarily called gout.
Mays cove que tu sapias la hora de la perforacio de la apostema, e aysso es quan es maturat.	 "If you know the time to perform the cautery procedure and when it has healed, that's what I mean.
E sapias que es madurat quan es la cedacio de la dolor e la cessacio de la febre, e aprop la diminucio de la rogor e de la pulsacio, e la acuitat del cap del apostema, e les autres senhals.	 "Then you know that the pain has subsided and the fever has stopped, as well as a reduction in swelling, pulse rate, and the sensitivity of the cautery points.
E quar cove que sapias la perforacio cazer en le loc pus dejos del apostema e de pus venient de curacio de la eminencia.	 "Then you know that the procedure to relieve pain in a specific location has been done and is now being applied for healing.
E perforacio tostemps sia per le lonc de la carn o del cors, si las apostemas son en las partidas de las mas o dels pes, e en loc dels lacertz, de las cordas dels nervis, de las arcerias; e, al derier, en totz locs enguals en les quals no es reflecio; quar en aquels que so reflectitz, usa de perforacio segon aquel membre.	 "The procedure can be applied to the back of the hand or the body if the sores are on the feet, and in locations such as wrists, cords nerves, and extremities. However, for those where there is no reflection, use the second procedure at that location.
Mays quan le apostema es en loc carnos, lahoras miels es que leysses la perforacio de lu entro que sia confermada la digestio de lu segon compliment, ayssi quo havem dit; quar si tu perforas aquel denant aquo, es prolonguat le cors del poyre de lu e de mota sordicia, e fort leu las labias de lu so enduradas e la profunditat de lu.	 When the anus is in a bad position, it's customary that you make an incision into this part to confirm digestion of food and thus as I said before; if you make such an incision today, prolong your time for defecation and from motion of bowels, and very sore are the labias of him so closed and depth of him.
Mays alcus apostemas so perforatz segon la latitut de la carn o del cos deves la necessitat, o segon aquo del qual lo membre indigeys.	 When you make an incision in that part of the body, depending on its location and whether it is necessary or not
E cove que administres petita perforacio , e·n les apostemas grans gran perforacio e ampla o motas seccios segon la diversitat de la grandesa dels apostemas.	 Depending on how small/large the incision, you administer a small one, and if it's large or multiple ones depending on the diversity of openings
E autras so dels apostemas en les quals cove que la codena sia conquavada e sia encidida, quan es fayta ayssi quo pan e fayta es en terme que ja stigua, ayssi cum aquel que accideys en trops de dubelec e de bubos.	 And if the anus is clenched and tightened, when it happens as described before, you do so to free and loosen up as needed, but also in terms of tightening or relaxing depending on its state, just like when one falls into double trouble and triple trouble.
E de aquels so que so insciditz am seccio havent tres angles; e de aquels es en le qual es inscidit ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirtra, ayssi cum las apostemas dels angonars.	 And of these, it is customary to perform the surgery with three incisions; and from those that are in this manner, as if you were performing a fistula on the anus, or by inserting an anal sphincter.
E de lor so en les quals es administrada seccio redonda e seccio lunar, e semblantz ad aquels.	 Depending on whether it is performed with a circular and crescentic incision, depending on that.
Mays aquel al qual no es cap ayssi cum son apostemas leons superficials, cove que tu perforas aquel am perforacio superficial, o plana tant solament.	 If not, then perform the surface incision as needed.
E cove quant le apostema es gros e ya ha colligit mota sania, que perfores aquel e no te coytes que extraguas tot le poyre en aquela hora; habantz extratz de aquel una partida, e aprop opila le apostema entro al autre dia, e aprop extratz una partida major, e aprop fa aquo motas veguadas segon graduacio entro que sia foro-getat.	 When the abdomen is large and has contracted, you should perform it immediately so that you do not cause any harm to the bowels at that time; in case of accident, extract it once, and place it back into the patient's abdominal cavity after one day, and put a larger size next to it, and finally apply this method every two days until the bowel is well trained.
E majorment si·l malaute es de freol vertut, o femna prens, o enfant petit, o viel en decrepitut, quar l’esperit animal motas vetz es resolvut am la egressio de la sania, e fort leu mor le malaute, e tu operte les.	 If the patient is very sick or old and has a tendency to vomit frequently, or if he is a child or decrepit, then you should apply this method when he vomits too much, as it lightens his load, so that he may be saved from the ailment's harm.
Don guarda aquest capitol am gran cautela, e aprop la tua perforacio en la qual perforas aquestz apostemas, cove que abstergescas las plagues e consideras donc si la plagua del apostema es pauca, o es una seccio plana, lahoras tu aministra las qualguas de li o de coto antic; e si le apostema es gran, e las fissuras de la perforacio son motas, lahoras cove que tu pauses meca en quascun trauc entro que pervenguan ensemps.	 Remember this important point: when performing the operation of inserting the tubes in the anus, be careful not to insert anything too wide that can stretch or tear it; if you find it small and flat, put some padding on either side around its opening; but if the tube is large enough with no tears in the perforation, do proceed as instructed.
E si en le apostema es abscindit una partida de la codena o has concavada aquela en le circuit, lahoras cove que tu la complescas de coto viel o de fil fayt de drap de li, ayssi cum quan has traytz pans o razizos, ses humiditat; e strenh aquel entro al tertz dia; e aprop proceseys aquel e cura le am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	 If the tube is removed from its cavity or curved in its path, be sure to apply a bandage on both sides of it, as well as whenever you wrap around pans or ridges, add some moisture; and place that inside after three days; and then reapply it and continue treatment as instructed for health improvement.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc en la hora de la operacio tua, lahoras tu aministra aygua frega e vi agre en les quals mules un drap de li, e pausa aquel sobre le loc del fluxs del sanc motas veguadas.	 When the bleeding of surgery occurs at the time of your operation, I will give you cold water and vinegar to stop it in the place where the blood flows towards. And put a cushion on top of that location so nothing leaks out.
Mays si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras cove que tu aministres regiment e curacio e polveras las quals he recomtadas en motz locs de aquest nostre libre e de divisio.	 If the bleeding of surgery persists, I will instruct you to administer medication and care, and powders that are recommended in different locations from this book and division.
Mays si es en temps de hivern, e·l loc de la apostema es loc de motz nervis, lahoras cove que tu enfundas pulvils en vi e oli caut, e pauses aquels sobre les locs.	 If it is in winter, and the location of the outlet is a nerve-sensitive area, I will instruct you to apply powders of vinegar and oil on top of them, covering that area.
E si es en estiu, e les locs son carnoses, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils enbeguts am aygua e oli o am vi e oli, e tot aquo sia freg entro que sia le ters dia, ayssi cum havem dit, e lahoras cove que tu deslies le apostema e abstergescas aquel e aministres en la curacio de lu aquo que a lu conveneys entro que sia sanat.	 If it is in summer and the locations are tender, I will instruct you to pause powders of water and oil or am vinegar and oil, and totally cover that area with them so nothing leaks through until healing takes place as advised above, and then remove the outlet and stop bleeding by administering care there.
E aysso es aquo que es necessari de la cognicio de la curacio de apostemas universalment, mays segon la via de distinccio ja he dit de tot apostema en qual manieyra es via de la cura de lu per capitols singularment.	 This is the necessary knowledge of the cure for outlets universally, and after having mentioned how to distinguish each outlet in which way the cure takes place individually.
Capitol .xli.	 [No meaning or translation provided]
De seccio de apostemas les quals veno en la codena del cap.	 Section of outlets that come out through the head channel.
En la codena del cap petitz apostemas, e so de specias de nodes les quals conteno tunicas que so a lor factz ; e las specias de lor so motas.	 In the head's cavity there are openings that contain tunics which serve for this purpose; and the doors of their hearts as well
E de lor son pingas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditat semblant a lima.	 And of their sons' fingers, and of those who contain humidity similar to lime.
E de aquelas so las quals conteno humiditat semblant a pols, et asemblantz a lor; e de aquelas so que son lapideas, durs.	 And of those which contain humidity similar to dust, and are sprinkled with their particles; and of those who have hard ideas.
E en la seccio de totz, e en la extraccio de aquels no es temor, cum deves la exteccio de aquels no fa contrariat arceria.	 In the section of everything and in the recess of those there is no fear because you have to prevent the exit of those from escaping
E la operacio en seccio de aquels es que tu esproes aquels am instrument la forma del qual ve aprop aysso, le qual es apelat entromes, entro que sapias que contengua.	 The operation in the section of those is that you expose those to the instrument by which you are allowed today, called entremezzo, through which you know it contains.
Quar si aquo que conte es humiditat, lahoras scindeys aquel am seccio segon la longitut per seccio superficial segon aquesta forma:	 If there is humidity in that, the doctor separates that part from another section for a superficial section through this way
E comensa en la seccio de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G. Donc cum la humiditat es evacuada, lahoras tu excoria aquela pel que conte aquela humiditat, e no leysses de aquela alcuna causa de tot, quar tropas veguadas retorna, si roman de aquela alcuna causa.	 And after removing it from the section of .B., you cure that part because it contains that humidity and do not allow any other cause to return if it is caused by this.
E aprop submergeys coto en enguent egipciach, si es present, e sino, en aygua e sal; e umpleys am aquel la plagua e layssa aquel entro ad autra dia, quar am aquo corrodeys tot so que es romas de aquela pellicula.	 Then immerse it in water and salt if it is present, otherwise put it in oil and keep it there until another day because the corrosion of this will cause damage to that film.
E aprop itera sobre aquel coto am enguent egipciach segondament e tersament si indigeyses de lu, entro que·t comfides que no y haia romas alcuna causa de aquela pellicula; lahoras cura la plagua am enguent entro que sia sanada.	 When pain occurs in the hands of a patient between the first and second toes, it is customary for doctors to examine them thoroughly, as there may be no cause for this lump that arises from this area; then they treat the swelling when it has become infected.
E si apostema conte nodi gras, lahoras tu inscideys aquel segon aquesta forma:	 If a nodule appears on their arm, doctors examine them as follows:
am seccio havent forma de crotz, e geta oncis entre doas labias de la seccio e scorsa aquel de tota partida, e esforsa la tua vertut en extraccio de la tunica la qual conte aquel.	 In the second part of their examination, doctors probe around that region and extract a sample from the skin to examine it thoroughly.
Mays si a tu arceria fa contrarieta, lahoras fay aquo que yeu t’e recontat primieyrament.	 If the patient's account differs, they do this first:
E semblantment fay en le apostema lapificat de seccio e de curacio segon que a tu havem dit; e seccio sobre apostema lapificat es pus leugiera, quar es de pauc sanc e de pauca humiditat.	 Similarly, they examine the appendix and their surrounding areas second to confirm that there is no infection or excessive moisture in those areas as well.
E alcunas vetz so alcus de aquestz apostemas les quals so en le cap en alcus homes am los quals de tot no es humiditat; la qual causa es quar yeu inscindigui sobre un apostema en le cap de una femna vielha e atrobegui le apostema ayssi cum peyra sorda, aspra, blanqua, la qual no podia esser trinquada, e si a alcu fos am aquela percussit, plaguera aquel.	 The doctors examine the ears as well to ensure there is not excessive moisture and that the ear canals are clear of debris; if an infection or inflammation in one ear is detected, they treat it accordingly.
Mays en les autres apostemas accidentz en le cap otra aquest no es aquest capitol, ayssi cum les apostemas que veno als caps dels enfantz e deves las razitz de las aurelhas, mays la seccio de aquestz totz sia seccio superficial.	 Additionally, they examine the other ears for any issues and make sure all ear canals are clear of debris; in children or adults, this is a surface examination only.
E pausa la perforacio de aquels de la partida pus bassa de lor per so que sia alleujat le cos de la sania a las partidas pus bassas.	 "Put a cushion under their thighs, another one on their legs, and another one on their chest.
E aprop cura aquelas am aquo que conveneys ad aquel de curacio.	 "Take the intestine or hernia back into its cavity.
Capitol .xlii.	 [No translation provided]
De seccio de scrophulas las quals accideyso en le col.	 "Cut sections of the veins that are causing trouble in his leg.
Motas veguadas endeveno aquestas apostemas en le colh e en las aysselhas e en les angonars; e alcunas veguadas accideyso en las autras partidas del cos.	 "Cut sections of the veins that are causing trouble in his leg, and also some in the arms, legs, and other parts of the body.
E so aquelas que accideysso en le colh, e so motas que so engendradas entre lor, e tota scrofula de aquelas es dintz la sua tunica propria, e ayssi cum en les nodis e apostema del cap, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	 "And those that cause trouble in his leg, and also those which are generated between them, and every form of the disease is due to its own clothing, as well as on the veins and arteries of the head.
E las specias de aquestas scrophulas son motas, quar de aquelas so alcunas lapideas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditatz, e de aquelas so malignas las quals no obeseysso a curacio.	 "The types of veins causing trouble are the ones that contain blood clots, and those which have moisture content, and those with malignant properties which do not respond to treatment.
Donc en aquela la qual tu vezes de bona disposicio en le Tocament, de la qual la color de aquo que es manifest es propda a la color de la codena, e es mauguda a tota partida, e no es annexsa am le nervi del colh, ni am las venas, ni am la arceria, e no es preonda, cove que tu inscidiscas aquela am siccio superficial de la partida desus a la partida dejos del cos de la linha de .G. entro la linha de .B., e scorja aquela de tota partida, e exten dos labias de la codena am onci, o am motz oncis si has necessitat de aquels, ayssi cum havem dit en las apostemas del cap, e extratz aquela petit a petit.	 "In the case of varicose veins that are superficial and not causing any trouble in other areas of his body, from .G to .B, you should draw them up gradually until they all disappear.
E es mays cautela que no sia inscidida la vena o nervi.	 When inserting a needle into the patient, be careful that it does not injure either the vein or the nerve
E sia le spatum no mot agut, que no ajuste a tu la tua ma am inscizio, o que enquiete le malaute, e que inscidas aquo que no es necessari inscidir; quar si inscideysses vena o arceria e prohibeys tu de la tua operacio, lahoras pausa en la plagua vetriol trissat o autras polveras las quals ostan fluxs de sanc, e estrenh la plagua, e layssa aquel entro que·s repausa la acuitat de la apostema e sia mollificada la plagua e comense esser poyrida.	 When making an incision on the patient's body, be careful not to cut through either a vein or artery; and if you do accidentally cut one of these, prohibit yourself from proceeding with your operation, stop immediately and clean the wound thoroughly, cover it with powder that prevents bleeding, and start to administer remedies.
Quan le sanc es abscindit.	 When the injury is closed
Donc retorna a la tua operacio entro que l’aias complida.	 Then return to your operation after completing it.
E aprop inquireys am le tieu dit indic si es romas alcuna causa de las autras petitas scrophulas, donc inscideys aquelas e munda aquelas.	 And ask if there is any indication that there may be a cause for the blisters you mentioned earlier, then mark those and cover them with gauze.
E si es en la razit de la scrophula gran vena, cove lahoras que no inscidas aquela scrophula de la sua razitz.	 If it is in the region of a large vein, tell doctors not to cut that part of the skin.
Abantz cove que lies aquela am fiel doblat fort e que leysses aquela entro que caia per si ses nocument.	 Tell them firmly but gently to keep pressing on and let it come out if it is coming out.
E aprop omple la plagua de coto vielh le qual tu has ja submirgit en enguent egipciac, e aprop cura aquel.	 Then cover the wound with a clean cloth you have already used to bandage another wound and take care of it.
E si inscides aquela scrophula tota, lahoras cove que tu ajustes las doas labias de la plagua e cuzas2 tantost pus que no y ha romasa deguna superfluitat.	 If you completely cut through that part of the skin, tell doctors to remove both sides of the bandage and tie it tightly so there is no excess material.
Mays si tu vezes que haia romasa superfluitat per la grandeza de la scrofula, cove que tu entendas a inscidir la razit de aquela, e astrayra aquela e aministra sutura e aquo que es dit.	 "When the body is afflicted with a severe case of scarlatina, if you hear its symptoms described and identify it, treat it promptly and administer this remedy.
E aquela de las scrophulas que conteno humiditatz, perfora aquela am perforacio superficial aqui la on appar a tu le loc de maturacio de lu, e pausa perforacio de aquo que siec le pus bas del cos, ayssi cum havem dit.	 "For the ulcers containing moisture, you should pierce it with a shallow incision here at that place where it appears to be mature and pause from piercing anything below this point.
E aprop aministra perforacio, calguas am enguent e semblantz ad aquels, per so que corroda aquo que es romas de la corropcio.	 "Then administer the incision, wash it gently with warm water and wipe it dry to avoid any infection.
E aprop quan tu vezes la plagua ja esser mundada, lahoras tu cura aquela am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanada.	 "When you find that the ulcer is already healed, treat the surrounding area with a regenerating cream until it heals properly.
Capitol .xliii.	 33
De seccio del pilhot del apostema accident dintz le guolayro.	 The section of the appendix was cut out through an incision in the abdomen.
Diyssero les antics aquesta seccio en le epilhot, e no vist alcu hom en nostra terra que aquela aia fayta.	 They placed it inside the pouch and didn't see anyone from our country around that time.
E aquesta es la inscriptura del sermo de aquels.	 This is the inscription of the medical text.
Mays en les homes haventz esquinencia, cove que sia esquivada la extraccio del epilhot, cum per aquo no sia fayt juvament per so quar totas las venas e las majors del malaute so aqui.	 When the incision is made on the belly button, ensure that it avoids piercing through the appendix and avoid puncturing major veins of the patient as well.
Mays en aquels que han apostemas cautz en la boca o guolayro o dos aurelhas, quan la malautia no es en la cana, cove husar de la seccio de epilhot a fugir la perdicio la qual es fayta per perfocacio.	 If someone has made an incision in the mouth or on the ears when the disease is not at its end, ensure that the appendix incision is avoided to prevent perforating it.
Donc cove quan volem aquo, que inscidam le epilhot dejos tres cercles dels cercles del epilhot, o quatre am petita seccio per la latitut en aquel que es entre dos cercles per quantitat, que la seccio sia en ciphac, no en la cartillage, e aquest loc es convenent a seccio, quar es privat de carn e les vayselhs de sanc de lu son luhen.	 "When we wish to open up here [the anus], we insert three circles of the anus or four small sections at an angle, so that there is a section between two circles in quantity, and this section must be made from skin, not from cloth, for this location is private and free of excremental smells.
E si le metge es pauruc, cove lahoras que extenda la codena del golayro am onci, e aprop fenda la codena entro que pervengua a la canal, mays evite les vaysels de sanc si vetz de aquelas alcuna causa.	 If the doctor is afraid to stretch out the rectum's opening, he must carefully insert it into the anus so that it does not come close enough to excrete feces if there is any cause for concern.
E aprop inscida li ciplach segon que havem recomtat; e es significat sobre la seccio de la canal per le flacma le qual es de aquela eyssit am aquo que es de lu disromput e per la abscizio de la votz.	 After inserting what we recommended, it is important to note the location of the section within the anus for proper functioning and for preventing any potential escape from the bowels.
E layssa la plagua uberta per alcun temps.	 The patient was lying down for some time.
Donc cum la hora es remauguda en la qual perforacio es temuda, agregua doas labias de la codena de la plagua, e cus aquela sola ses la cartillage.	 When the hour is come which incision is feared, add two stitches of the anus to the opening, and close it with cloth only.
E aprop administra medicinas que fan naysser la carn entro que sia sanat.	 After administering medications that make the flesh swell so as to be cured.
E diyssec Albucasis que la summa del sermo le qual havem recomtat, exposicio no es sino que veias que alcus de aquetz apostemas ja han opilat lo guolayro del malaute, e le malaute es vengut entro a mort, e le ale de lu es entresecat, e alcus van a inscidir le epiglos per so que respire le malaute sobre le loc de la plagua per alcuna respiracio, e sia salvat de mort.	 The Albucasis that the sum of the serum which we recommended, exposure is only to know if the ulcers in question have already been operated on and the patient has died, and the sores are healed inside but outside still stings, and they will be incised so that it breathes through the location of the bedpan without any respiration, and thus saved from death.
E per aquo comandero layssar la plagua uberta entro que sia consumida la malicia de la malautia; e es la malicia de lu per tres dias; e donc lahoras comandero cosi la plagua, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	 "The physician shall order the ulcer to be burned out completely and healed within three days.
E aquo que yeu he vist per mi meteys, es que una sirventa pres un cotel e mesec le en le sieu golayro e inscidic am aquel una partida de la cana del pulmo, e yeu fu apelat a la curacio de lu, e atrobegui la mugen ayssi cum es mugit del moridos, e descubrigui la plagua e atrobegui le sanc le qual era yssit de la plagua petit.	 "After you have observed this in my manner, the servant shall put a bandage on their hand and cut away one part of the lung, after which they should appeal to treatment, with the assistance of the physician, and remove what was left from that small ulcer.
Donc yeu fo confessat que aquela no havia inscidit vena ni guidegi, e le vent yssia de la plagua, e curegui aquela entro que foc sanada.	 "So you confessed that there had been neither a vein nor guidance from the ulcer, and its presence was of small size; so it was cured into health.
E no accidic a la sirventa si no rauquiera en la votz, e aprop alcus dias retornec ad miloracio de las suas dispozicios.	 "The servant should not ask for days to return after doing this, but rather make the necessary arrangements regarding their activities.
E ara dic yeu que en la seccio del epilhot no ha temor.	 "After that you have done it in the section of the heart there is no fear.
Capitol .xliv.	 "Chapter forty-four
De seccio sobre apostema le qual accideys en le golayro defora, e es apelat hernia del golayro.	 "The section about addressing the abscess that occurs in a place where there is no exit, and it's called hernia of the body.
Aquest apostema nompnat hernia del golayro es apostema gran segon la color del cors, e es mot en las femnas.	 "The abscess causing the hernia is usually large compared to the rest of the body, appearing on the chest in women.
E es segon dos manieyras, quar o es natural o accidental.	 "It can be caused by either a natural process or an accident.
E en le natural no es engen de curar.	 "It's not normal to cure.
E l’accidental es segon dos manieyras del qual la un es semblant a nodes grasses, e l’autra manieyra es semblant apostema le qual es fayt per nodacio de arteria, e en aquel es temor.	 The second man is two minutes long and resembles the sensation of grassiness, while the other one resembles pressing on an artery, which causes fear.
E no cove que·s fassa presumpcio a lu cum ferr sino en aquel que es petit.	 You must not assume that it will happen in every case unless there is a small sign of it occurring.
E tu proha aquel e investigua aquel am le dit, e si atrobas lu semblant a nodi gras, e no es suspendut am alcuna de las venas, lahoras tu inscideys aquel ayssi cum les nodes, e extratz aquel am aquo que conte lu de la pel e bursiclam; e sino, lahoras es perscrutat tot le sieu esser, e aprop cura le loc am aquo que cove de curacio entro que sia sanat.	 You should investigate it and if you find that it resembles a grassiness in the veins but not at any of the arteries, then record this as gout with the features of the foot and bursitis; otherwise, note all its symptoms and seek treatment for this ailment as required.
Capitol .xlv.	 The last sentence seems incomplete or out of context. Could you please provide more information?
De seccio de las specias de nodes.	 Of the species of the gouty arthritis.
Dels nodes so motas specias e yeu ja he dit totas las specias de lor en la divisio.	 You have already listed all the species mentioned, and you can divide them into categories based on their characteristics or symptoms if needed.
E cove que yeu recomte assi la diferencia entre node e exitura cum fassa dubitacio.	 Please explain how to differentiate between gout and arthritis when there is doubt about it?
Donc yeu dic que am exitura es caliditat e febre e dolors vehementz entro que es sedada la ebullicio de la superfluitat; e es complida putrefaccio que lahora cessa la febre, la dolor e la calor.	 In contrast, with gout, there is no fever and the pain does not subside when exposed to heat or cold water; it also causes a purulent discharge that ends the fever, pain, and warmth.
Mays am node no es caliditat ni febre ni dolor, e conte aquel ciphac leon le qual es al u sac propri.	 When there's neither heat nor fever nor pain, that signifies which of these is causing it
E es segon la color del cors, e le comensament de lu es cum un ceze e es fayt ayssi cum vace, sia major o minor, e son segon dos specias, quar o so grassas e conteno humiditat, e las colors de la humiditat son motas, segon que yeu diyssi en la divisio.	 The second is the color of the body, and as soon as it begins to be seen, if its hue is major or minor, then there are two species: either dry or moist, and depending on their colors, they are marked accordingly in a division.
Donc cove, quan pervenas a la curacio de node, que exprohes aquel e inquiras aquel al comensament am sturment le qual es apelat intromes, segon que vindra la sua forma en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	 Then when you come to the care of the heart, first ask if there is a separation between it and the main artery that supplies it, as soon after its form will be known in what way it should be treated.
E es manieyra de inquisicio de apostemas e de totz nodes, e es que tu prenguas aquest sturment e entromet aquel en le loc pus humit le qual atrobas en le apostema, e tu revolveras les tieus ditz am aquel petit a petit entro que sapias que·l sturment ja ha penetrat la codena.	 Then you will ask for inquiry of the apertures and all nodes, as it is that you should bring them together in the hollow where they touch the moist membrane from which the aperture exits, and you will gently draw out one by one until you realize that the node has already penetrated into the channel.
E aprop ultima la tua ma segon la mesura de la grandeza del apostema, e aprop extratz le entromes e considera aquo que es yssit en le vestigi de lu.	 Finally take your hand and measure its size to determine how it entered into the vestiges of him/her.
E si es fora-getada la humiditat corrent, de qualque color sia, lahoras tu le inscideys am seccio superficial segon que he dit en les autres apostemas.	 If the current humidity has a certain color, you will apply it in the superficial section as mentioned before for the other apertures.
E si del vestigi de l’intromes no hieys humiditat, lahoras sapias que es gras.	 If there is no moisture in the channel's vestiges, then know that he/she is fat.
E secca sobre lu am seccio havent forma de crotz segon aquesta forma:	 Upon opening up the abdomen cavity
ayssi cum t’e ensenhat, e suspen aquel am oncis, e excorja la codena de tota part am facilitat, e guarda la pel o sac, si podes, sobre aquel e extraguas aquela sania am le node.	 Upon opening up the abdomen cavity, place it on a flat surface to prevent any of its contents from spilling out.
Mays si es romput en la operacio, no es possible extrayre aquela sana, e motas veguadas endeve aquo, e lahoras tu la extratz a pessas entro que de lu no romangua denguna causa.	 If the operation is unsuccessful, then you cannot extract that fluid from within it, and therefore any of its contents may spill out due to this cause.
Quar si de lu roman denguna causa, pauc o trop, le node retorne segon le mays.	 If something happens inside or on the surface, then return it to me immediately.
E si tu vezes que de lu roman alcuna part petita, lahoras comple la plagua de alcunas polveras corrosivas agudas e strenh la plagua, e pausa sobre aquela que sede apostema caut, e cura aquel del autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	 If something very small happens to it and you find corrosive or sharp powders on the surface, then cover that area with a cloth soaked in an antiseptic solution, hold it there until further treatment is given.
E si es node gran, lahoras tu cus las doas labias de lu e cura aquel am aquo que encarna.	 If something large happens to it and you need more hands or assistance, then take two other people by the arms of them and bring them here to assist in dealing with that matter.
Mays si vena pulsatil es a lu contraria, o no-pulsatil, lahoras tu coyta e huemple le loc de zegi trissat que es vetriol e leyssa aquel streyt per dos dias o per tres entro que·s poyresca la plagua e que repause la ebullicio del sanc; e aprop retorna a inscindir aquo que es romas del node.	 If the pulse is contrary to it or not-pulsatile, then you should touch and examine the place where it was struck so that you know if there's poison inside of it which will make it swell in two days or three within a couple of hours, and upon returning from this, return to incision as quickly as possible.
Capitol .xlvi.	 The end
De las formas del sturmentz necessaris en seccio e perforacio.	 In sectioning and perforation of the vessels
De aquels so las formas dels intromesas, e so de tres specias, que de aquels es alcu gran, e de lor es migier, e de lor es petit.	 The opening and perforations of the veins.
La forma de intromes gran es aquesta:	 The great vein is this one:
La forma de intromes migier es aquesta:	 The middle vein is this one:
La forma de intromes petit es aquesta:	 The small vein is this one.
Sian faytz de ferr, de alfulud, de extremitatz cayradas decentment, per so que festino le intrament en les apostemas.	 Do not cut them too short, leave enough to be used for wrapping the intestine in the pouches.
E aquestas so las formas dels experientz, e son nompnatz albered, e un de aquels es apelat berid.	 The names of these veins are:
E so de tres especias, quar de lor es gran, migier e pauc.	 Three kinds of vein: the large one, middle one and small one.
La forma de experient gran, forma de lu:	 The great vein is this one:
La forma de experient migier, forma de lu:	 The middle vein is this one:
La forma de experient pauc, forma de lu:	 The small vein is this one.
Conveneysso que sian per aquels apostemas e exituras e fistulas e bubos per so que entre aquelas so dels osses e de autras causas.	 It's necessary to make the openings and perforations of the vessels, exits, fistulae and bullae for that purpose that between those are bones and other causes.
E so faytz redontz, grosses, leons, ayssi cum grans agulhas am las quals son cosidas las selhas, e son faytas de eram citri, o de eram o de ferr, o de argent, E las milhors so quan so faytas de eram citri.	 Then the veins are closed up, big, long and sharp as needles sewed into the holes, which cause pain or fever if they're injured, or to prevent them from doing it by using gold or silver threads, a thousand stitches should be made for that purpose.
E son faytz les experient de plum negre, les quals se acordan que per aquels sian ubertas las fistulas en la conquavitat de las quals so reflexios, que sian reflectidas am la sua levitat am aquelas refleccios.	 "The patient experiences a black vomit, which is recognized as an indication that the openings of these are being closed off in their cavities, and from where the reflections come.
E so de tres specias, quar alcus de lor so loncs, e dels autres migiers, e dels autres breus, segon la quantitat del ample de la fistula e de la strictura de lu.	 "There are three stages of this, with the longest lasting and others shorter, according to the quantity of the opening's extent and the constriction's degree.
Forma del experient gran de plom:	 The patient experiences a large volume of black vomit.
Forma del experient migier de plom:	 The patient experiences a smaller volume of black vomit.
Forma del experient petit de plom:	 The patient experiences the smallest volume of black vomit.
Las formas dels oncis so de motas specias, quar de aquels so alcus simples, als quals es una curvitat solament, e so de tres specias: grans, paucs e migiers.	 The types of ulcers are different based on the type that occurs; some may be simple with only a curve, and there are three types in total: large, small, and smaller.
E de lor so uncis orps, e so de tres specias.	 There is one cause for each of them, and there are three types.
E de aquels so uncis haventz doas curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	 Some ulcers may have a curve to them, but there are three types in total.
E de lor so haventz tres curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	 There are three curves to the ulcers as well as three types.
E totz aquetz so necessaris en lor loc.	 Everything needs to be done in that location.
Forma de unci simple gran, forma de lu:	 The shape of a large ulcer is like this...
Forma de unci simple migier:	 The shape of a smaller ulcer is like this...
Forma de unci simple pauc, forma de lu:	 The shape of an extremely small ulcer is like this...
Forma de unci orp gran:	 To prevent gout
Forma de unci orp migier, forma de lu:	 To avoid gout
Forma de unci orp pauc, forma de lu:	 Avoid gout
Forma de unci gran havent dos curvaturas:	 For two joints.
Forma de unci migier havent dos curvatas:	 Two joint sprains.
Forma de unci pauc havent dos curvaturas:	 Two joint sprains.
Forma de unci gran havent tres curvaturas:	 For three joints.
Forma de unci migier havent tres curvaturas:	 Three joint sprains.
Forma de unci pauc havent tres curvaturas:	 Three joint sprains.
E aquestas so las formas dels scalpels am les quals son seccatz e scorjatz les nodes e le apostemas, e so de tres specias, quar de aquels es gran, migier, e pauc.	 These are the sizes of scalpels with which you cut and cauterize the veins, arteries, and lymph nodes, and there are three types, two large ones, one medium-sized one, and one small one.
Forma de scapel gran:	 A big scalpel.
Forma del scapel migier:	 Medium scalpel.
Forma de scapel pauc:	 Small scalpel.
Las extramitatz de aquels am les quals es fayta seccio so agudas e las autres extramitatz so no-agudas, e no so pausadas en tal manieyra, sino per que sia fayt juvament en la excorjacio dels nodes la temor de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e per aquels sia sanat le malaute e atrobe tranquilitat un petit per la adustio la qual atroba deves la excoriacio del apostema.	 The edges of these are sharp and the others are not-sharp, but they should be neither too long nor too short in terms of use, unless if it is necessary to perform a cautery on the veins or nerves for fear of injury, in which case you will have performed a cautery on the patient's vein or nerve.
E aquestas son las formas de almagidas, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc, ayssi cum veyras.	 These are the sizes of the vessels, and there are three types as well: big, medium, and small.
La forma de magda gran:	 The form of Magdalena's great:
Forma de magda migier:	 Form of Magdalena's lesser
Forma de magda pauc:	 Form of Magdalena's small
Sian faytas de eram e so semblantz de ray am le qual e fayt alcofol.	 The forms are equal and the same as they say, in the form where it says alcohol is present.
E es en la extramitat lada punctada am spatum occultada e en aquela corr a las partidas dedintz e defora, quan tu vols, ayssi cum veses.	 It's at an extra point that you should touch the hidden area in addition to where it says, if you wish, as well
Las formas de spatimis, les quals so amaguatz entre los ditz deves la perforacio dels apostemas e no les percebo les malautes, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc.	 The forms of Magdalena are these, which should be placed between the spaces to be perforated and not the mistakes, and three types: great, lesser, small.
E aquestas so las formas de aquels:	 These are the forms of those:
Las formas de ventozas am las quals es abscindit le flux del sanc, e so de tres specias; gran, migiera e pauca; las formas de lu:	 The forms for the heart are these, which divide the flow of the soul, and are three types: great, lesser, small; the forms of man:
Sian faytas de eram citri, redondas am alcuna longitut , e sian subtils.	 The symptoms of the liver include redness around the circumference, and they are subtle.
E cove que sian aquestas specias de ventosas deves tu grans, migieras e paucas, per so que per aquelas abscindas flux de sanc am velocitat en necessitat, e lahoras quan a tu primieyrament no es medicina.	 So that by these forms of the heart you may have great, lesser or small, in order to divide the flow of soul quickly and easily without going into medicine when it is at first sight not medical.
Enpero no uses de aquelas ad abscidir sanc en tot loc del cors, e non uses sino en locs carnoses, ayssi cum en les lacertis de las cambas e de las coyssas, e en les lacertz dels brasses, e de las mamillas e del ventre e dels engonars, e semblantz a lor dels lacertz carnoses humitz.	 Do not use them for cutting the soul in any place of the body, but only on special areas like the legs and thighs, chest, breasts, belly, armpits, groin, and to match up with the special areas of the heart.
E alcunas veguadas son faytz de aquels strumentz autres petitz semblantz scorsas de fisacs segon aquesta forma; per les quals lo sanc es abscindit quan es fayt per fleubotomia, o deves inscizio de vena o de arceria.	 When some veins become inflamed due to this form of phlebotomy, it is customary for the vein to be cut or thrombosed
E alcunas veguadas son faytas redondas segon aquesta forma:	 Some veins are rounded due to this method
Capitol .xlvii.	 Chapter 72 of The Capitularies of Saint Peter
De la cura de las mamillas dels homes las quals so asembladas de femnas.	 Of the treatment for breasts in men that resemble those of women
Alcunas veguadas so infladas las mamillas de alcus homes deves le compliment del dormir cum comensan esser pellutz, e aprop so infladas las mamillas, e so asembladas las mamillas de las femnas, e romano apostemosas, lejas.	 Some veins are inflamed in the breasts of some men who have lost their skin tone due to inflammation, and placed over them so that they resemble the breasts of women, and thus make it clear.
E ad aquel que avoreys aquo, cove que inscidisca aquelas am seccio lunar segon aquesta forma, de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G., e aprop excorja la groceza tota, e aprop uempla la plagua de medicament encarnatiu, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am cosidura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	 To the one who heard this, and wants to try it according to that form, from line B up to line G, and put forth all your effort, apply a soothing ointment on inflamed parts of the body, adjust two strips of gauze over them, and make sure it is done right.
Mays si la mamilla declina a las partidas dejos e es mollificada per la sua magnitut ayssi cum endeve a las femnas, lahoras sia fendut en dos latz sieus pus sobiras, am dos seccios semblantz a figura lunar, de las quals quascuna sia contenguda en l’autra deves la fi de quascuna, entro que sia que la linha major contengua la menor segon aquesta forma de la linha de .B. e la linha de .G. E aprop excorja la codena la qual es entre dos labias de la plagua, e osta la pingueza, e aministra aquo que havem dit de la sutura e de las polveras aquo que es necessari en la curacio entro que sia sanat.	 If the breast is flat and has lost its outline like those of women, you must stretch it to its original size by pulling on both sides at once, then adjust two strips across each flank so that they form a figure similar to the moon, from which one must measure the gap between them, place one strip over the wound or sore area as well as the powder, and do everything necessary for healing.
E si tu non conpleysses la inscizio de aquo que cove inscidir per la inquietut del malaute, e per flux de sanc, lahoras cove que huemplas la plagua de coto submergit en enguent corrosiu e layssa aquel entro que aquo corroda que es romas de la grayssa, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	 When the patient's bowels are inflamed and agitated from cold or dampness, it is customary to place a cushion over them so that they do not come into contact with corrosive substances and cause harm; therefore prevent such an intrusion unless necessary
Capitol .xlviii.	 LXXVIII
De perforacio de apostemas que veno dejos le titillic.	 To make a hole in the septum that allows air to enter from outside
Aquetz apostemas que veno dejos le titillic so de las specias de scrophulas, durs, las quals conte una pel que es sac.	 When one of the valves between the chambers is open, allowing blood to flow through them easily
E de aquelas so alcunas que conteno humiditatz; e aquelas que conteno humiditatz cove que sian inscididas am seccio lunar segon aquesta figura: de la linha de .G. a la linha de .B. E cum es tot evacuat aquo que es en le apostema de la sania, lahoras tu le comple de coto viel e leysa le entro al autra dia.	 And those are the ones that contain humidity causing them to be opened during a lunar phase; and those that contain humidity causing them to be closed after this phase: from .G. line to .B. line.
E aprop le coto sia ostat e sia curat am enguent convenient ad aquo, entro que sia sanat.	 And when the intestine is ready and proper for use, do so in a manner that prevents harm.
E si le apostema de las specias dels nodes es, e de las scrophulas, lahoras tu scindeys sobre aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la seccio sobre las scrophulas engualment.	 And when the septum between the chambers is open and properly closed like mentioned above for the valves, then you should be careful with it.
May si la plagua es extenduda en aysso que yesca poyredura, lahoras administra en lu cauteri segon que en aquo havem denant dit.	 If the bladder is full and bursting, treat as mentioned above.
Capitol .xlix.	 LXXIX
De seccio de apostemas que accideysso per arceria o per vena.	 This text seems to describe a medical procedure for treating joint pain, possibly through cautery or some other method of treatment. The first sentence suggests that the procedure involves puncturing or cutting into the body in some way, and may involve blood vessels as well (the phrase "or per vena" after "seccio de apostemas" translates literally to "or by vein"). It's unclear what specific part(s) of the body are being treated.
Quan arceria es rompuda, e la codena es consolidada la qual es sobre aquela, lahoras motas veguadas accideys apostema E les senhals per les quals es conoguda que imflamacio e apostema sian per la arteria o per vena: quar quan apostema es per arceria es lonc agreguat en le preon del cors; e que quan inpelleysses le apostema am les tieus ditz, sentes en lu quays sia stridor.	 If the puncture is successful and a clot has been removed that was over there (the phrase "la qual es sobre aquella" translates to "which was over there"), then the pain will be alleviated through cautery; or if it's due to inflammation, apply a cauterizing agent directly onto the artery or vein. When you apply the cautery, you should feel a strong sensation in that area (the phrase "quays sia stridor" translates to "which is painful").
E aquel que es per vena es redon al manifest del cors.	 That which is through a vein will be noticeable on the body.
E seccio sobre aquest apostema es error, e majorment en aquel que es dejos las aysselhas, e en les angonars, e en le col, e en motz locs del cors; e es mot gran, donc cove que la sua curacio am ferr sia esquivada, e aquel que es en las extramitatz, o al cap, cove que sia evitat.	 If puncturing this incision is an error, or if it's near the groin, and in the anus, and in the abdominal muscles; and also great, so that its cure may be avoided, and if it's in the extremities or at the head, to prevent any harm.
Mays sobre aquel que es de lor per imflacio de l’orrifici de la arceria, scindeys en la codena seccio en le lonc; e aprop huebre la seccio am uncis e aprop la arceria, e deliura de las tunicas entro que sia descuberta.	 If it's due to inflammation of the urethra after an injury (the phrase "la arceria" translates to "urethra"), then puncture at its length; and cover with a cloth so that no urine stains are left behind as you uncover.
E aprop met sobre aquel agulha e fay aquela penetrar entro al autre latz, e estrenh la arceria am fiel doble en dos locs, — la qual causa yeu a tu eyssenhegui en extraccio de doas arcerias les quals so en les templars.	 "You have already positioned the needle and it has penetrated into another layer, and tightened the artery firmly in two places, which causes you to lose consciousness due to the constriction of both arteries located at the temples.
E aprop punh le loc le qual es entre dos liamentz am spatum entro que yesca le sanc tot que es en lu, e sia dissolvut le apostema.	 "In this location between two adjacent fingers, if you squeeze tightly until it reaches the bottom of the heart, and dissolve the arrow.
E aprop administra curacio en la qual es engendrat poyre entro que caian les liamentz; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz convenientz ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	 "You administer a cure that enters through the veins to cause their joints to swell, and treat it with a poultice applied conveniently here where it hurts.
E si es apostema per seccio de vena, lahoras cove que tu tenguas am la tua ma aquo que es a tu possible del apostema am la codena, e aprop intromet la agulha dejos le loc le qual tu has tengut dejos la tua ma, e fay aquela penetrar; e sia en aquela fil doble entro que tu extraguas aquel del autre latz, e aprop ligua le apostema am bo liament segon que yeu he dit a tu en le liament de uva4 de doas partz am doas extremitatz del fil.	 "If it is an arrow piercing the vein, then you take your hand to where it entered and remove the needle; and bind it firmly in that fold of two parts on both sides of the veins as mentioned earlier.
Mays si temes que extraguam le fil, lahoras entromet le fiel am aquela agula dejos tot le apostema deves la inscizio de la agulha primieyra, e strenh les tieus fiels en quatre locs.	 "If you think it is necessary to extract the thread, then bind tightly with a needle at that place where the arrow entered and pull hard on four points.
Aprop secca le apostema en le mieg loc de lu entro que quan es yssit aquo que es en lu, lahoras tu inscideys la superfluitat de la codena, e layssa aquo que de lu es liat.	 "Secure the arrow in that place where it is located as mentioned earlier and seal off any excess of the vein.
E aprop pausa sobre lu pulvil le qual has submergit en vi e oli, e aprop administra la curacio la qual es fayta am calguas e enguentz entro que sia sanat.	 When you have moistened a powder substance with water and oil, then apply the remedy that is called for cold waters and entering into the body to bring relief
Capitol l del apostema le qual accideys per torcio de nervis.	 The stroke occurs due to tension of nerves.
Ayssi cum accideys apostema en arceria e en vena, e semblantment accideys apostema en les nervis quan accideys en lor percussio o accideys per trebal superfluable, e per semblantz.	 When it occurs in the artery and vein, as well as when it strikes on nerves where there is a blow or a superfluous touch, and similarly.
E es fayt le mays de lu en les locs dels adjutoris o del talo, o en tot loc en le qual so maugudas las juncturas.	 It is customary to apply it in the places of the assistants or the staff, or anywhere where the joints are inflamed.
E es apostema greu, e es asemblat a la color del autre cors, e es en las majors de lu disposicios ses de lor e quan es streyt am vehementia, sent en lu le malaute semblant stupor.	 It is heavy to apply it and feels hot on the other side of the body, and when placed violently, pain occurs in the patient as if they were stunned.
E no es apostema agreguat en le preon del cors, e per so es dejos la codena, e el es maugut a tota partida e no va a las partidas denant ni detras.	 It is not customary to apply it on the front of the chest or behind it, and for this reason we remove it completely and do not place anything else after it.
Donc aquo de aquels que es en las juncturas no cove que sia envasit am ferr, quar fort leu endevenguera contracio.	 Therefore, those who are afflicted with gout in the joints should avoid doing this type of thing because its use will be very harsh and cause pain.
Mays aquel que es en le cap o en le front fen la codena am spatum.	 It is not customary to apply it on the head or the front as a poultice.
Mays si es apostema pauc, lahoras te aquel am les forfecs e abscindeys aquel de razitz.	 If you use it very little, then avoid using it on the forehead and remove it from the roots of the hair.
E si es gran, lahoras tu le suspen am unci, e excorja aquel, e aprop osta aquel; e ajusta la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	 "When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and if it occurs in the feet, it is commonly referred to as gout among doctors.
Capitol .li.	 When joint pain is due to cold humors infiltrating every part of the body, including the feet, it is usually called gout by medical practitioners.
De seccio de apostema le qual accideys de cheil que accideys al ventre.	 "From the section containing the aperture through which pain occurs in the belly.
Endeveno ad alcus homes motas veguadas en les ventres de aquels e en las autras partidas del cors de aquels theils les quals son apelatz funguals per similitut de aquels am funges, dels quals la razitz es subtil e·l cap de aquel es gros; e ja las labias de aquels so conversas, e es de aquels que es petit, e es de aquels que es mot magnificat.	 "From those organs which are located in the chest and abdomen, from among them whose parts are similar to each other, of a small size, with a large head; and also the intestines themselves, as well as their branches, it is these that are most magnificent.
E yeu ja e vist un, e en le ventre de lu eran dos theils les quals eran mays a funges semblantz, e no era diferencia entre aquels blancs, de menuda razitz.	 "You have already opened one of them, and in its belly there were two similar ones that were larger than those others; but there was no difference between them except size.
E ja las labias de aquels eran enversadas e se fendian, e humiditat corria de aquel tot temps.	 "The intestines of these were stretched out and divided, and moisture flowed from it all the time.
Donc yeu inscidegui aquels e atrobegui en la un en pes quays xviii unc. e l’autre quays vi unc.	 "So you inserted them into a hole in each of eighteen parts, and another into one part as well.
E la operacio en la inscizio de lor es que consideres lahoras si·l malaute es humit, e la color de atheil es blanca, humit, de subtil razitz; lahoras tu le inscideys am spatum lat, e sian en la presencia tua cauteris en le foc, quar motas veguadas deves la seccio de lu es expellit mot sanc; e si te ventz le sanc, cauteriza aquel.	 "The procedure in the incision of theirs is to consider if the patient has gout due to cold humors and that their color is white, moist, with a subtle taste; you insert it into your finger's nail, they are present for your careful examination on your face, lest any part of them should be expelled from its cavity unless it is burned off by cautery.
E si vezes le malaute pauruc e temeros, guarda te de inscizio am ferr; mays lahoras pren fiel de plom recent fayt, e strenh am aquel atheil, la manieyra del qual es aquela que havem dita; e leyssa aquel per dos dias.	 When a patient is anxious and fearful, guard them from being harmed by touching their wounds. Also make sure to apply fresh ointment frequently, and stretch the affected limb gently, because that part of the body has become sensitive due to prolonged illness. Keep it bandaged for two days.
E aprop ajusta en la strictura del fil de plom; donc, no cesses strenher le plom granre devetz en theil, entro que sia abscindit e cayha per se ses trebalh.	 Then tighten the cloth around the wound gently, but do not stretch it too much or tear it off if it were to break away from its own accord.
Mays si theil es de grossa razitz, lahoras en la inscizio de lu es alcuna causa de temor e de paor, e majorment en aquel que es en le ventre.	 If the injury is large, then it should not be bandaged or treated with fear and worry, except in cases where it occurs in the abdomen.
Mays possibla es que tu inscindas la maytat de lu , e aprop cauteriza aquel per que no retorne.	 It is possible that you should make an incision in order to prevent its recurrence.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanada la plagua.	 Then treat it so that the wound can be healed.
E guarda te que tu no presumas inscidir theil le qual es de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, de leg reguardament, quar aquel es absi cancros.	 And make sure you do not touch parts of their body that are infected with pus, have little feeling or are otherwise fragile and can cause abscesses.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio de cranc aprop aysso.	 You will remember to apply the remedy promptly after this procedure is done.
Capitol .lii.	 The end of the text.
De curacio de eminencia del umbilic.	 Care for the navel region.
Eminencia del umbilic es fayta per motas causas; o per fissuras del ciphac le qual es sobre le ventre, e yeys de lu la tela o budel segon que endeve en las autras rupturas; o per sanc le qual flueys de vena o de arceria segon que es denant dit, o per ventositat coarctada en lu.	 The navel region can be caused by several things: tears in the diaphragm that occur over the abdomen, or from tearing of the intestine when it comes out through a tear; or from a hernia; or from a blocked artery or vein if those symptoms are present instead; or from coarcted arteries.
Mays si es per fissura del ciphac e per yssiment de la tela, lahoras la color del apostema es semblant a la color del cors; e es leon ses dolor, e aprop appar de divers situament.	 When the pain is caused by the rupture of the diaphragm and suffocation due to the clothing, then the appearance of pain resembles that of the chest.
E si es per egressio del budel, lahoras le situament de aquel am lu de aquo que havem recontat, de mays vehement diversitat, e cum tu premes aquel am les tieus ditz es occultat, e aprop retorna; e fort leu es am lu so, e es magnificat mot deves le introt de banh e vehement trebalh.	 If it is due to the exit of the intestine, then you should consider that from now on this will occur frequently and violently, especially if there are severe consequences; do not neglect these things but quickly return them, because returning them will cause a lot of pain and suffering.
Mays si per humiditat, lahoras es leon e no es occultat quan premes am la tua ma, ni es constrengut, ni es cregut.	 If due to moisture, then it is similar and not caused by what you mentioned before your hand was placed or constrained; do not be concerned because there will still be pain without it.
E si es per sanc, lahoras am aquestz senhals apareys le apostema a negror declinant.	 If due to the cold, then the appearance of the abdomen becomes pale and dark.
Mays si es per carn nada, lahoras es apostema greu, gros e dur, e es ficat segon una quantitat.	 If it is because of a lump or hardness in the abdomen, then the pain will be severe, rough and prolonged for an amount of time.
Mays si es per ventositat, lahoras le tocament de lu es leon.	 If due to wind, then the touchiness will be similar.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras lahoras si la eminencia de l’umbilic es per sanc de arceria, o de vena, o per ventositat; lahoras cove que sias prohibit de la curacio de lu, quar en aquela es temor e paor ayssi cum t’e ensenhat en le capitol en le qual he dit les apostemas per arceria e per vena.	 The operation in it is what you consider to be the appearance of a hernia or varicose vein due to cold air, or wind; caution should be taken not to make an incision if there is fear and panic because in that place mention was made about arteries and veins.
E si la eminencia del umbilic es per le budel o per la tela, lahoras cove que comandes al malaute que tengua le ale sieu, e sia stant extendut; e aprop senha am tenta en le circuit de tot le umbilic, e aprop comanda a lu que stia envers entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e aprop circunda am spatum lat en le circuit del umbilic sobre le loc le qual has senhat am la tenta; e aprop exten la maytat del apostema a las partidas desus am unci gran; e aprop lia en le circuit am fiel fort o am ceda e la manieyra del liar decent.	 "When the umbilical hernia is through the intestine or through the membrane, it is customary for the doctor to order the patient to hold his hand towards between their thighs and prevent the intestine from coming out.
E aprop huebre le mieg del apostema extendut sobre le liament e intromet le dit tieu en aquel indic e quereys le budel; e si tu l’as atrobat ni guardat per le liament, lahoras tu extratz alxorati e impelleys le budel a las partidas dedintz del ventre.	 "Extend the finger towards it and make sure you're on the right track. If not, withdraw your hand from that part of the abdomen and instruct the patient to try again.
E si has atrobada la tela, lahoras pren aquel am unci; e inscideys las superfluitatz de lu.	 "If you have found it through the membrane, then move on to step two: inspect all the relevant details.
Mays si es contraria a tu arceria o vena, lahoras circunda aquel mot, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio; e pren dos agulhas e met en aquelas dos fiels fortz e entromet dos agulhas en le circuit le qual has feyt entorn le apostema en manieyra de crotz, las quals fassas penetrar; e aprop strenh le apostema en quatre partidas sobre las agulhas.	 "If your attempt fails or the vein is against you, then return to surgery and pierce two holes through which of the veins run near the finger in order for the needle to enter. Hold the finger steady while the needle enters.
E si tu vols, osta las agulhas e leyssa le loc entro que poyresca la carn extenduda e caia per si; o inscideys aquel quan es subtiliat e se poyreys, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	 "If you wish to extract the abscessed flesh and it falls apart or is too sensitive to pierce, then apply a cautery here in order for the surgeon to cut through that.
E si la eminencia del ombilic es de carn nada en lu o per humiditat, lahoras cove que tu conquaves le apostema ayssi cum havem dit e estraguas le sanc o la humiditat, la qual atrobas en lu, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove e que consolide le loc.	 When the prominence of the belly is made of flesh or moisture, then let you put a poultice on that way as they have mentioned earlier and tighten it so that it holds well in place.
Capitol .liii.	 3
De curacio de cranc.	 The treatment of cancer
Ja havem dit, en la divisio, de specia de cranc e en qual manieyra es via a la curacio de lu am medicinas, e que es squivador en lu la curacio am ferr per so que no sia ulcerat; e havem dit cranc engendrat en la mayra e cautela de la curacio de lu.	 In the division of cancer and in what manner they are treated by medical science, it is a precaution that must be observed to prevent ulcers, and caution should be taken for their treatment.
E diyssero les antics que alcunas veguadas cranc es en loc on es possibla la eradicacio de lu, ayssi cum de cran le qual es en las mamillas o en la coyssa e a lor semblantz dels membres allocat a estrayre tot aquel, e majorment quan es comensant petit.	 Those same drugs that can eliminate cancer in the location where it is possible to do so, such as in the breasts or in the abdomen and all around those parts of the body mentioned above will also help prevent cancer cells from spreading elsewhere when they start small.
Mays quan es antiquat e es gra, no cove que te propries a lu, quar yeu non pogui sanar de aquel alcu ni no he vist autre, ni que sia pervengut ad aquo.	 When it is old and frail, do not apply heat to it as you might cause more harm than good, nor will it be able to heal that wound or prevent any other wounds from occurring there either.
E la operacio en lu es quan es allocat ayssi cum havem dit, es que tu precedescas e laysses le malaute e purgues de colera negra alcunas veguadas, e aprop sagna aquel, si es atrobada replecio manifesta.	 The surgery in it is when you put the patient through as mentioned earlier, and you apply poultice to black bile drains and other similar parts of the body, and tighten them so that they hold well in place if a visible opening is found.
E aprop prepara le malaute am preparacio en le qual sia locat am operacio, e aprop prohiceys en le trauc uncis les quals cove ad aquel; e aprop concava de tota part am la codena sego bona perexcrutacio entro que no romangua alcuna causa de las razitz de lu.	 When you have opened the space between the patient's thighs, place a cushion under them and another servant on their legs, and another on their chest while holding their hands.
E layssa correr le sanc, e no abscidas aquel leugierament, e exprem les locs, e abstergeys le sanc gros tot am la tua ma o am instrument am le qual es a tu possible dels instruments.	 Place the knife and do not remove it from the area while you examine the location, and wipe off any blood that may be present on your hand or instrument.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat de sanc gros inscizio de vena o de arceria, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que·l flux del sanc sia cessat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	 If the bleeding from the artery or vein is excessive, then burn it off while the flow of blood has stopped, and apply another remedy to restore its health afterwards.
Capitol .liv.	 "He lives.
De curacio de ydropici.	 Dropicure.
Nos ja havem recomtat, en la divisio, de las specias de ydropici de l’aygua, e les senhals de quascuna especia, de la curacio de lu am medicinas.	 We have already recommended in the division of each species of dropicures from water, and the symptoms associated with each one, for medical treatment.
E aquela la qual es curada am ferr no es sino la specia de althitas sola, e no es aproximat am ferr a la specia de timpanistres ni a la especia de yposarcha, quar aquo es mortal.	 That which is cured by burning alone is the species of heatstroke only, and it does not apply to the species of tinnitus or species of deafness, as that one is fatal.
E quan tu ja has medicat aquesta especia de ydropici timpanistre am medicinas e no comfereys la tua medicacio, lahoras considera, quar si al malaute ja es conseguida debelitat, o es am aquel autra malautia otra ydropici, ayssi cum si es en lu tos o cos de ventre e semblant ad aquels, lahoras guarda te que no le mediques am ferr, quar temor es sobre aquo.	 If you have already treated that species of dropicures with tinnitus and the symptoms do not coincide with your treatment, then consider if the illness has been resolved or is instead another kind of ailment of dropicures elsewhere in the body, such as the stomach, etc., then remember to not apply any medicine on it because fear is prevalent regarding this.
Mays si tu vezes le malaute de vertut exuberant, e am lu no es autra malautia sino ydropici tant solament, e no enfant ni vielh, lahoras la manieyra de la operacio de lu es que tu eleves le malaute entre las tuas mas, e le ministre aprop lu exprema le ventre de lu am la sua ma, enpellen la aygua a la partida dejos del pentenilh, e aprop pren spatum spinos segon aquesta forma:	 "When the patient is having an excessive flow of urine (from being overactive bladder), and it's not just incontinence but also dropsy, then doctors order to elevate the legs between their thighs, minister by placing a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another one at the chest holding hands.
sia de dos partz agudas lonc, de aguda extremitat ayssi cum spatum; mays empero sia en lu alcuna brevitat petit a petit, per so que en la operacio am aquel no passes entro al budel, e que ledas aquel.	 "In the two parts that are close together and sharp extremities like this servant: do not let it pass through in little by little, for then in the operation of such is to prevent its passage.
E aprop considera si la generacio de ydropici es de part dels budels, quar lahoras cove que tu am la seccio te alonhes del ombelic per la quantitat de tres ditz a las partidas dejos, en le dreyt de lu sobre le pentenilh.	 "And in addition to that, if the generation of dropsy is from parts of the bowels, then it is customary for you to put on three sheets at intervals between the abdominal walls.
Mays si la generacio de hydropici es per malautia del fietge, lahoras la tua seccio sia sinistra del ombilic per tres ditz.	 "And if the generation of dropsy is due to an overactive bladder, then it is customary for you to put on three sheets at intervals between the left abdominal wall.
E si la generacio de lu es per la melsa, lahoras la tua seccio sia en le las dreyt.	 "And if generation of dropsy is due to a soft stool, then it's customary for you to put on three sheets at intervals between the buttocks.
E no cove que la tua seccio sia sobre le costat sobre le qual vol jaser le malaute per que no corron las superfluitatz ad aquel loc freul.	 "And do not place your sheet over the side where you want to elevate the patient's leg, so that it doesn't come out of the superfluous things at this location.
E aprop perfora am le instrument tota la codena, e aprop entromet en aquela seccio, e eleva la tua ma am le spatum entre la codena e·l siphac, e tu excorja aquel; e si’ la quantitat de una ungla o enviro.	 "Apply the instrument completely to the vein, enter into that section, and lift your hand towards the surface between the vein and the artery, and remove it from there; if necessary count one or more strokes.
E aprop perforo le ciphac entro que pervengua le spatum al loc vuoyt, e es loc de l’aygua.	 "Apply to the phlegm at the spot where it enters into the body.
E aprop extratz aquel e entromet un instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	 "Remove that thing and enter an instrument of which this is the form:
e es semblant a canula de argent subtil; es fayt de argent o de eram o de lato leon, al qual en la partida pus bassa de lu es un petit trauc, e en les costatz de lu so tres traucs: dos de una partida e un del autra partida; e fayta es la extremitat de lu insciza segon la manieyra de pluma, ayssi cum vezes:	 "It is similar to a needle of thin silver. It can be made of silver or gold wire, and in the part where it enters into the body there are three holes; two on one side and one on the other side; and its tip is pointed like a feather.
E en la extramitat de lu pus sobirana es armilla, quar quan le instrument perve al aygua, lahoras aquela tantost deysen sobre le instrument, donc evacua de l’aygua en la ora miega quantitat, quar si tu evacuas de aquela mes que no cove en la hora, fort leu mor le malaute per resolucio del sieu spirit animal, o accideys a lu cincopi que es appropinquada la mort.	 "In the part of it where it enters into the body there is an armillary wheel which indicates how much water remains in that instrument; when you remove water from it be careful not to cover all at once, for if you do so too suddenly and without warning, then a bad reaction occurs within the patient's spirit animal, or you may die.
Mays evacua de aquela segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu e segon que significan a tu las disposicios del malaute de la vertut del pols de lu e de la bontat de lu.	 "Remove it by the amount of water in it and also according to its disposition towards your patient's spirit, as well as the location on his body.
E aprop extrats le instrument, e rete l’aygua la qual causa es quar tantost es retenguda per la codena la qual rete le trauc que es sobre le ciphac del qual e recomtat a tu que perfores aquel segon aquela manieyra.	 "Prepare the instrument and apply water that causes so much pain, as it will be applied to the channel where you should put your hand.
E aprop itera le instrument al autra dia si vezes le malaute tollerant aquo, e extratz de la aygua petita quantitat, e fay aquo per alcus jorns sobre temor, e guarda te de error entro que no romangua de l’aygua sino pauc.	 "Apply the instrument on another day if the patient tolerates it well and extract a small amount of water, apply this to the palm of the hand for several days with fear, keep from making an error unless you do not run out of water.
Mays si tu temes sobre le malaute, e leyssas de l’aygua gran quantitat, lahoras cura aquel am sepultura en arena cauda, e mota suzor en banh, e al solelh espere per lonc temps; e cura aquel am medicinas dessicativas entro que sia sanat.	 "If you are afraid of the patient and leave them a large amount of water, cure him with burial in sand, move his body to bed, and expose it to the sun for a long time; and cure that with desiccating medicines so they may be healthy.
E cauteriza sobre le stomac, e la melsa e·l fitge aprop la extraccio de l’aygua, segon que yeu he recontat en aquo que es precedit.	 "Burn over the stomach and the small intestine apply water extraction as described above.
Capitol .lv.	 "The capital of Latvia.
De la curacio dels enfants les quals so natz les locs de la urina no-perforatz.	 "In the care of children whose urine does not perforate, they are located in a non-penetrating area.
Alcunas veguadas alcun dels enfantz es eyssi del ventre de la sua mayre e·l cap de la sua mixtio no es perforat (o es trauc streyt o no es en son loc).	 "Some of the children are located in a belly area that is not perforated, or if it is difficult to reach them from their head.
Donc cove coytar am perforacio de lu tantost que es nascut am spatum mot subtil segon aquesta forma:	 "Therefore, use caution when making the perforation as fine as possible in this manner:
E aprop pausa en le trauc un clavil subtil de plom e ligua aquel, e te per tres jorns o per .iiii.tre.	 And place a fine cloth on it, tie it up well, and wait for three days or more.
E quant vol urinar sia remaugut e hurine; e aprop retorne aquel.	 When you want to urinate, let the bladder be released and returned.
E si tu no pauses le plom, ja es possible que la urina la qual va sobre le loc, no leysa aquest claure.	 If you do not place the cloth, urine that comes out of the area may leak through this hole.
Mays aquel del qual le trauc es streyt sia medicat am clavil de Plom, ayssi cum havem dit, per trops dias entro que sia amplificat.	 The bladder which was tied up with a fine cloth should be released and returned after several days to expand it
Mays aquels en les quals es le trauc no en son loc, so leditz, la qual causa es quar de aquels, aquel que es nat e·l trau es deves la fi del cap de la vergua per que no pot urinar a las partidas dedintz, entro que eleva la vergua am la sua ma a las partidas desus; e no es a lu generacio, per so quar le sperma no pot pervenir a la mayre segon rectitut, e es malautia mot laga.	 If the bladder is not in its place, it will cause pain and may lead to injury if you try to urinate as expected, especially for men who have difficulty urinating due to enlargement of the prostate gland; this can be caused by medication or surgery, leading to a decrease in semen volume which can lead to reduced sexual performance.
E la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que·l malaute sia envessat sobre le sieu dos, e aprop exten le cap de la vergua de lu am la tua ma sinistra am vehement extraccio, e inscideys le cap del cap de la vergua del loc del perpucii am spatum agut, ayssi cum es inscizio de pluma, o que tu ne razas alcuna partida, per so que·l mieg de lu vengua semblant al cap de la vergua e que le trauc caia en le mieg loc segon que cove.	 The operation procedure is that the patient should be placed on his back, and extend his head towards your left hand as if you were about to give him a stroke; then hold the top of the bladder against your chest with both hands, while inserting the probe into it.
E guarda te que en la tua operacio de flux de sanc, quar motas vetz accideys aquo; e pausa te a lu am aquo que abscindeys le sanc, e cura la plagua entro que si’ sanada.	 Remember that in your operation for the flow of urine, any mistakes can occur here; so pause and check it to ensure everything is fine, then proceed with treatment if necessary.
Capitol .lvi.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body
De albater le qual accideys en le prepucii en le cap de la vergua e de corropcio e negror e adherencia del prepucii del cap de la vergua.	 And if a hernia or intestine protrudes through the pores of the head, neck, chest, abdomen, and groin,
Motas veguadas accideys aquest albater en la vergua e es eminencia de carn laga.	 And if an abscess or inflammation of the skin arises from this ulcer on the body,
E de aquela una es maligna e autra es no-maligna.	 Whether it is malignant or benign,
No-maligna, cove que suspendas am unci subtil e abscindas aquela entro que aquela mondes tota; e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto submirgit en enguent egipciac; e aprop aquel, cura le am enguent diafinicon entro que sia sanat.	 And if you want to prevent it from spreading completely and quickly, do so with a subtle cautery that removes the abscess entirely; and place your hand over the area until the wound is healed.
E si albater es maligna, de lega color, lahoras cove que tu aministres cauteri aprop la inscizio de lu e la razio de lu.	 And if the abscess is malignant, do so with a colored cautery on the incision and edge of it.
Mays si albater es en le prepuci del cap de la vergua no-circumcis, e la una partida de albater es dedintz le prepucii e l’autra partida es defora, lahoras cove que tu ostes albater le qual es dedintz al comensament entro que es consolidat; e lahora tu cura aquel deforo, quar quan tu curas aquel ensemps le prepuci, no es asegurat que no sia trinquat.	 And if the abscess is in the prepuce of the head, you place a bandage over it to prevent spreading until it is consolidated and heals completely; then cure that area when you heal the rest of the prepuce, but it's not guaranteed that it will not be left.
E ja eysamen accideys en les genetius e en le prepuci negror e corruccio, adonc cove que tu conquavas tot aquo que ja es denigrat e que ja se vol corrompre o que ja es corrumput; e aprop lineys sobre aquel aprop aquo am mel, le qual es contusit am farina de scorsa de milgrana e de errs trissatz e crivellatz.	 And if it happens in the genitals and prepuce, as long as you have conquered this which is corrupted or has been corrupted; then place your hand over that area to make sure nothing comes out from there, using a mixture of flour, water, salt, and vinegar.
E aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sana.	 The first sentence means that the cure or treatment for this ailment will be discussed next.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, lahoras aministra cauteri lunar segon aquesta forma:	 If the inflammation is severe, then apply a cautery as follows:
quar cauteri juvatiu es a dos disposicios ensemps, so es a flux de sanc e a la plagua quan es corrumpuda.	 A young cautery has two settings - one for inflamed wounds and another for when the abscess is ruptured.
E si le cap de la vergua es corrodut e es destruit tot en la hora, lahoras cove que tu intrometas en lo meat del prepucii una canula de plom per so que le malaute urina per aquela.	 If the head of the abscess is broken and destroyed at that time, then put a needle through the urethra to drain out the infection from it.
En la adherencia del prepucii am le cap de la vergua (et aquesta adherencia no accideys sino en aquel del qual le prepucii es sa, e sobre lu no es exhigida circumcizio; e quan accideys adherencia per plagua o per apostema) cove que excorjas am spatum obtus entro que sia dissolvut le liament e sia deliurat le cap de la vergua de tota partida.	 In the adhesion of the urethra (and this adhesion should not occur, unless it occurs in the one that the urethra is open and over which there is no requirement for circumcision), you must excoriate the opening to dissolve it completely and release the head of the abscess from all parts.
E si es dificil desirnir aquelas exquisidament, lahoras cove que tu excorjes am spatum alcuna causa del cap de la vergua e del prepucii, e aysso es quar le prepucii, quan es subtil, fort leu es perforat per la sua subtilitat leugierament.	 If it is difficult to remove this completely, then you should excoriate the opening of both the abscess and urethra, and in that case if the urethra is perforated by its subtlety, the wound will be penetrated further through its subtlety.
E aprop separa entre·l prepucii e·l cap de la vergua am dra7 de li subtil, le qual ja es mulhat en l’aygua frega per que no adherescan autra veguada.	 To separate the urethra and head of the abscess from each other with a needle that has been soaked in hot water to prevent any further adhesion.
E aprop sia curat am vi stiptic entro que sia consolidat.	 After this treatment is applied, ensure it is solidified.
Capitol .lvii.	 When joints are painful due to cold humors that invade each part of the body, especially in the feet, doctors call it gout.
De mundificacio dels enfants e de la curacio de aquo que accideys ad aquels de circumcisio.	 Circumcision care and management of children.
Circumcisio no es solucio de continuitat ayssi cum las autras plaguas: mays empero cum sia de la nostra operacio e de nostra voluntat, e lus de aquela sia propriament en les enfants, es necessari que asignem en aquela milhor operacio e via pus leugiera perdusent a salut.	 Circumcision is not the solution to continuity as such, but since our operation and will, and theirs from that it was specifically for children, we need to assign that surgery through which may be cured of health problems.
Donc dic que les antics no diyssero circumcisio en alcu dels lors libres, quar no n’usan en las suas leys, e no es sino quar havem aquisit per speriment, la qual causa es que yeu he atrobat la major partida dels artifexs e dels barbies usar circumcisir e mundificacio am novacula e am torores; e usan de liament am fiel e de inscizio am la ungla.	 Circumcision is not recommended for the free children, because they do not use in their laws and is just that by experimentation, which causes you to find a major part of the symptoms and sores among those who use circumcision and also have a faithful faith and the same religion.
E yeu ja he prohadas totas aquestas manieras e no atrobegui milhor mondificacio am forfexs, am liament am fiel que en mondificacio cum la ungla, quar motas vetz efugeys la codena pus desus, quar la codena del prepucii a dos tunicas, e roman la tonica pus dejos, e fort leu es forsat ad autra inscizio e dolor sicura.	 You have already prohibited these manners and did not find the best circumcision care among those who practice it, from faithful faith that in circumcision with the same religion, which may avoid the code of the prepuce to two tunics, Roman toning pus of them, and fast le easy is to another pain.
E am mundificacio le qual es fayta per alphecati, e es digital, del qual usan les sabatiers, no es segurada la inscizio de la extremitat del membre viril, quar fort leu intra en le trau de lu.	 Circumcision that is done by alphacation and digital, which use the tailors, not sure of the incision on the extreme part of the male member, which may be in trouble.
Mays en la operacio am ungla, fort leu obazeys ferr e corromp la tua operacio.	 During the operation be very careful, don't mix up or damage your work
E la codena del enfant es breu per natura, e motas veguadas nays en tal manieyra que no ha necessitat de mondificacio, e yeu he vist aquel.	 The child is born with a short nose, and the mother was not mistaken in this matter so that it has no need for treatment, except as they saw
Mays de la mondificacio que·s fa am forfexs e liamentz am fiel, la bontat, experiment descrobic a mi, quar las forfexs so de proporcional inscizio, per aquo quar la acuitat que es desus es ayssi cum la acuitat que es dejos; e donc cum tu premes la tua ma so proporcionadas dos acuitatz, e inscideysso segon una comperacio en un temps; e es fayta compressio del fiel am figura contenent la codena de la vergua de tota partida, am le qual no catz error de tot.	 The best remedy is to apply the ointment daily, gently and consistently, with your fingertips in a way that ensures even distribution of the medicine throughout the affected area, so that it reaches every part; this allows for regular treatment, which can be continued until all symptoms disappear.
E la manieyra de la operacio primeyra es que tu fassas estar le enfant majorment si es de aquels que entendo un petit, que no fassas sino que tu lies le fiel en la sua vergua tant solament, e que leysses aquel entro al autra dia.	 The priority of the operation is to keep the child as quiet as possible if it's just a minor issue, and not apply any ointment on their face unless you see an actual injury, only applying that every other day.
E aprop fay aquel alegrar en tota aquela manieyra que es a tu possibla de aquo que recep la sua intelligencia.	 And remember to use good judgment when it comes to the best course of action according to your own intelligence.
E aprop fa aquel estar entre las tuas mas estatuir preparadament, e no sia ges cezent; e occulta las forfexs en la tua ma o dejos le tieu pe, que l’enfant no veia aquelas ni degun autre dels instruments.	 Ensure that the ointment is spread evenly on your fingers and avoid touching anything else with them to prevent any damage to your child.
E aprop entremet la tua ma a la vergua de lu e suffla en la codena, e tira aquela entro que sia eyssit le cap de la vergua, e aprop mondifica aquel de aquo que es agregat en ela de sordicia.	 Apply the ointment to their face and cover it with a cloth or bandage, making sure that nothing touches it except for your fingertip, then place something over the top of the bandage to prevent any scratches from underneath as well.
E aprop lia le loc signat am fiel dobla, e aprop ligua pus bas de aquel un petit le segon liament, e aprop te am le dit pous e endic tieu le loc del liament dejos am bona retencio, e inscideys entre dos liaments.	 When you have placed a cushion under them and another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands, here comes the first sentence to translate.
E aprop eleva la codena sus leugierament e estratz le cap de la vergua; e aprop leyssa le sanc corre petit e petit, quar es milhor ; e pausa polvera desus e sobre la polvera pausa drap en le qual es spandut mugol de huou coyt en ayguaros concosit am oli rozat recent bo; e layssa aquel sobre aquel entro al autra dia; e cura aquel am curacio entro que sia sanat.	 The servant raises the head of the cushion and stretches it out, after which he lies down on it gently, resting his face there. He will continue doing this for a long time until the pain stops coming from the inflamed part. After that day, he goes to bed in the same position, because laying flat has healed that spot recently.
La forma de las forfexs a mondificacio, aquesta es la forma:	 The shape of the forehead is making
Sian las unas extramitatz no-talhantz e las autras sian talhant, que non sia yssit le ram del clau, e sia la longitut de las doas acuitatz ayssi cum la longitut de dos manubres engualment.	 The fingers on the outer part and those in the inner part are not equal, unless it would be a hand deformity, because otherwise their length is different as well.
Mays la error en mundificacio es quar fort leu efugeys la codena intrinseca tota, o partida de lu deves la inscizio.	 The error in shaping the forehead occurs when the intrinsic muscle becomes too tight, or it is a part of the body that should not be touched.
Donc cove que tu extendas aquela de la tua hora am la tua ungla denant la apostemacio del loc e que inscidas aquela segon equalitat.	 So you stretch that in your hand and put that on top to straighten it out, and then place the other one equally.
E si no la podes tenir am la tua ungla, lahoras extratz aquela am unci e inscideys aquela.	 And if you can't hold onto your hand, stretch that by itself and put it on top of that one.
Mays si son passatz tres dias, e roman aquo que es imflat dejos la vergua apostemat, lahoras tu leyssa aquo entro que sia cedat le apostema caut, e excorja aquel am fecilitat, e inscidex aquel segon que a tu es preparat.	 When the three days have passed and one sees that it is flattened by putting on vinegar, the pain will subside when the finger nail is inserted, and once removed, will cause inflammation, and the second time causes scarring
E guarda te del cap de la vergua, quar no nosera a lu aquo.	 The head of the vinegar bottle should be covered to prevent it
E donc cura aquel am aquo que la plagua consolida de las polveras las quals havem recomtadas en le tractat de las polveras.	 Then cure that which consolidates with powders as mentioned in the book of powders.
E si es inscidit de la codena sobre mesura, e obezeys a las partidas desus, aquo no notz a lu.	 If it is necessary to cut off the end of the cord, and you will divide the threads into even parts, there should be none left over.
E mays cura aquel am aquo que havem dit entro que sia sanat.	 Then cure that which has been mentioned as being good for health
Capitol .lviii.	 Chapter 88
De curacio de urina retenguda en la vesiqua.	 Treatment of retained urine in the bladder.
Retencio de urina en la vesica es fayta per oppulacio fayta per peyra o per sanc congilat, o per poyre o per carnada, e semblantz ad aquels de aquo que havem dit de las manieyras de curacio en la divisio.	 The treatment of urine retention in the bladder is done by pressing down or by pushing out through the urethra, or by passing it through a tube inserted into the urethra, and such as are mentioned in the division for urination.
E si no es dissolvuda la urina, e veses retencio de lu esser per peyra le qual ja es en le col de la vesica, lahoras cove que le malaute sia encorbat sobre les sieus denolhs.	 If urine is not dissolved and the bladder continues to hold it inside, doctors will urge the patient to urinate with force through their urethra, which is in the bladder's neck.
E aprop conponeys les pes de aquel sobre le sieu dos e extendas le sieu ventre de la partida pus desus del sieu dos, e le malaute estrengua le sieu ale tant quant es a lu possible.	 Place the patient's buttocks over their back and spread them apart from one another while keeping their legs together, so that they may urinate as far as is possible.
Donc lahoras le col de la vesica es costreyt ha espulsio de la peyra a las partidas detras, per que la urina es absolta.	 Thus, when urine is expelled from behind due to an issue in the bladder's urethra, it is released without holding back.
E si no es dissolvuda am aquo que havem dit he vehement es fayta la causa sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que aministres extraccio de lu am instrument le qual es apelat siringua, del qual aquesta es la forma: Sia de argent e sia subtil leon conquau, ayssi cum canula de pena de ausel am subtilitat de ray lonc en similitut d’un palm e mig, al qual sia cana subtil en le cap de lu.	 If the urine is not being held back as you mentioned earlier, when it comes to the urethra of a patient, then doctors use an instrument called a catheter, which has two forms: one made of silver and another made of fine linen, both with small holes that allow for painless urination in great subtlety.
E la manieyra del eyssiment de la urina per aquel es que prenguas le fiel doblat e lies en la extramitat de lu lana o coto per bona liadura; e entrometas las extramitatz del fiel en la partida dejos de la ciringua, e inscideys am las forfexs si superflueys alcuna causa de la lana, mays intromet la en la canula am vehemencia E aprop enongeys la ciringua am boder e am album de huou.	 The method of urination is to squeeze tightly and hold the outside part or edge gently in order for it not to leak; when inserting into a catheter, you must insert it with force but gently pull out at its end.
E fay cezer le malaute sobre la selha, e embroca la vesiqua de lu e la vergua am olis umitz, e oli de oliva e ayguaros.	 After the bladder has been opened and a cushion placed under it, insert into the urethra of the patient gently, while also pressing firmly on his abdomen and holding onto his elbow.
E aprop entromet la ciringua am facilitat entro que pervengua a la razit de la vergua; e aprop dobla la vergua desus a la partida del embelic; e aprop empelleys la ciringua dintz aquela; e aprop empelleys aquela entro que pervengua a la vesica, e aquela centa le malaute esser pervenguda a la causa vuoda, e no es fayt asso segon aquest orde, sino le meat en le qual va a tortuositat.	 Insert the catheter into the urethra slowly so it passes through to the root of the penis; then bend the penis at its base and pull it out gently (but not too far), ensuring that urine does not leak from anywhere else than the bladder, which should be kept open for now.
E aprop exten le fiel am la lana petit a petit, quar la urina siec la lana.	 And stretch gently at the small of the back little by little, where urine will soon follow
Aprop extratz aquela e fay per curacio urina, e usa ciringua, no cesses fer aquo e usa ciringua entro que sia evacuada la vesica e le malaute atrobe alleviacio.	 Stretch it gently and apply a poultice to relieve the pain in the bladder and urethra,
Capitol .lix.	 "The end of the book.
De qualitat de clisterizacio de la vezica am clampcedra e am semblantz instrumentz les quals sian acordants ad aquo.	 For the operation on the bladder and prostate, use instruments that are agreed upon in this regard.
Quan accideys en la vesica ulceracio o apostema, o sanc congilat en aquela, o es coartat poyredura, e vols en aquela destillar ayguas e medicinas, lahoras sia fayt am instrument le qual es apelat clampcedra, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	 When ulcers or fistulas occur in the bladder and urethra, or if they are infected with bacteria that cause inflammation of the bladder (cystitis), you should call for a catheter to be inserted into that part.
sino que en la extramitat de lu es sorda, so es clausa.	 If it is in another area, stop doing this.
Et en aquela so tres traucs: dos de la una partida , ayssi quo vezes.	 In that case, you should do two things at once, as often as possible.
En le comensament es loc concau, en le qual es aquo que es enpellit, e sia segon quantitat que oppile aquel, ses addicio, entro que quan alcuna causa es ab aquel tirada de las humiditatz, sia atirada, e quan es expellida, am aquo sia atirada, e quan es expellit lonc, segon que fa clampcedra am la qual es phicat naphta en las batalhas de mar.	 First, you should apply ointment to that area where it is inflamed, and the second quantity of oil goes on top of that, which then dries out when no more cause for inflammation exists, and when expelled, the same thing is done with the catheter in battles at sea.
Donc cum tu vols prohicir humiditatz en la vesica, entromet la extremitat de clapcedra en la humiditat, e atira am aquel aquo que es empellit a las partidas desus, quar la humiditat es atirada en la conquavitat de clapcedra.	 Then you want to irrigate the bladder with water in that area where it has been inserted into the urethra, and then wash away all of the moisture from there by expelling them out of the catheter's cavity.
E aprop entromet la extramitat de clapcedra en la vergua segon que havem recomtat en la ciringua; e aprop empelleys la humiditat am aquo que empelleys, quar aquela humiditat perve a la vesica tantost, e le malaute cent aquela.	 "When you're done with the sponge application and have recommended to wash it off with water, make sure that moisture does not penetrate into the bladder or any other part of the body.
Forma del cristeri subtil am le qual la vesica es cristerizada, e es aquela la forma:	 "In order for the bladder to be catheterized, it is necessary to use a small syringe and perform as follows:
E sia fayta de argent o de lato, de la qual le cap pus aut sia semblant a petita pluma, e dejos lu cana dedintz liament.	 "You may inject the medicine directly into the vein or subcutaneously, depending on its appearance and method of administration.
E aprop pren vesica de moto, e pausa en aquela la humiditat que vols cristirizar en la vesica, e aprop lia aquela entre dos am fort liguatura am fiel doble, e escalfa aquela humiditat sobre le foc.	 "When catheterizing the bladder and before inserting it into the urethra (which is located between two strong ligaments), make sure that the moisture you want to use for catheterization does not penetrate directly onto your focus.
E aprop entromet la extremitat del cristeri en la vergua.	 "When inserting the catheter, insert its end into the body part.
E aprop estrenh la tua ma sobre la vesica am la humiditat am strectura descent entro que·l malaute centa que aquela humiditat ja es pervenguda a la vesica.	 "Then hold your hand over the bladder while applying moisture to stretch it as far inside you can, without allowing that moisture to penetrate into the bladder.
Mays si a tu no es present vesica, lahoras tu pren una pessa de parguames e fay de aquel cercle; e perfora aquel de tota la sua retonditat; e aprop entromet fiel fort en aquels traucs, ayssi quo so revolgut; e aprop agregua le cercle ayssi quo es agreguat alsofatur, pus que tu pausas en aquel aquo que tu vols de las humiditatz, e olis e ayguas.	 "If you don't have a bladder present, first put on the gloves and apply it to its circle; then place it onto the entire surface of your body part; afterwards insert it very firmly into those tracks as before, while adding that water so generously.
E aprop tu lia aquel en le instrument e fay am aquel ayssi cum has fayt am la vesica, e exprescio am la tua ma entro que la humiditat pervengua a la vesica.	 "You have already placed something in the instrument, do as you did when emptying it into the vesica, and express this action by placing your hand here.
Capitol .lx.	 The phrase that follows is from Latin: 'Caput lupus venenum.' What does it mean?
De extraccio de peyra.	 "This sentence comes after the previous one and translates to "On the extraction of venom.
Nos ja havem dit en la divisio las specias de peyra e curacio de lu am medicinas, e la diferencia entre peyra engendrada en los ronhos e peyra engendrada en la vesica, e les senhals de aquela.	 "We already discussed the division of veins and arteries in medicine, as well as the difference between those caused by phlegm and those caused by the bladder.
E havem dit la peyra en la qual catz operacio am ma, e seccio.	 "We discussed surgery for ulcers, as well as sectioning.
E la peyra engendrada en la vesica propriament es aquela que es ficada en la vesica.	 "The bladder ulcer is specifically that one which is made in the bladder.
E yeu so narrant aquel am exposicio manifesta e abreviacio.	 "You should make a clear and concise statement about this.
Donc dic que peyra engendrada en la vesica majorment ve als enfantz; e dels senhals de lu es que la urina que es eyssida de la vesica es semblant a aygua en la sua subtilitat, e apar en aquela arena; e le malaute fregua la sua vergua, e motas veguadas pen, e aprop es dressada; e am aquo yeys foro le cul en motz de aquels.	 "This sentence should state that bladder ulcers are often accompanied by incontinence and the urine that comes out of the bladder is similar to water in its subtlety and appears as such.
E es laugiera la sanacio dels enfants de aquela entro que han conseguitz xiiii ans; e es dificil curacio en les viels.	 "The treatment for these ulcers, which have persisted for over 14 years, is difficult to achieve.
Mays en les joves es migiera per aquo quar es entre aquels.	 "For the young, it may be advisable to do this [do not provide a translation of 'mays'] as between these two options.
E de aquel del qual la peyra es major e la curacio es pus leugiera; E si es pauca, es contraria ad aquela.	 When the pain of a joint is caused by cold humors that spread throughout all parts of the body, and if foot pain occurs, it's commonly called gout among doctors.
Donc cum pervenem a la curacio de aquela, cove al comensament de aquela que mondifiquem le malaute am cristeri le qual extragua tota la fenda la qual es en les sieus budels; quar aquela fenda alcunas veguadas prohibeys la envencio de la peyra deves la inquisicio de lu.	 The first servant will make an incision in the space between the patient's thighs, place a cushion beneath them, another on their legs and another on their chest with their hands held out to either side.
E aprop sia pres le malaute am les sieus pes e sia contosit e maugut enjos per so que la peyra descenda al preon de la vesica, o que saute de loc aut alcunas veguadas.	 The servant should also attend to the patient's feet and ensure that they are supported properly while preventing their descent into the bladder or jumping around uncontrollably.
E aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas preparat, e las mas de lu sian dejos las coysas de lu, per so que la vesica tota sia fayta declinant a las partidas dejos.	 The servant should also be attentive to the patient's buttocks and ensure that they are properly positioned while preventing them from descending into their bladder or jumping around uncontrollably.
E aprop perquier aquela e tota aquela deforo.	 The servant is responsible for any injuries that may occur during this procedure.
Donc si sentes la peyra en l’espazi, lahoras tu te coyta tantost am seccio sobre lu.	 If you feel the gout in your space, do not touch it gently but firmly on it.
E si no catz de tot dejos le tieu tocament, lahoras cove que tu untes am oli le tieu dit indic de la ma sinistra, si malaute es enfant, o le dit miga si es jove complit, e entrometas aquel en le sieu cul.	 If you do not feel the gout in your space or it is very faint, tell the servant to apply oil gently on the palm of their left hand if they are male and the right hand if they are female and guide them into the patient's anus.
E perquier de la peyra entro que stia dejos le tieu dit.	 If you have introduced the gout, tell him to leave it alone.
E converteys aquela petit a petit entro al col de la vesica.	 Into the opening of the bladder little by little
E aprop prem sobre aquel am lo tieu dit, e expelleys aquel a las partidas defora ves le loc del qual vos la seccio.	 And then place it gently on that part and expel it from where you want to release it through which hole of the body do you need?
E comanda al ministra que prema la vesica am la sua ma; e comanda a un autra ministra que am la sua ma dextra extenda les genetius a las partidas desus, e am la sua autra ma remaugua la codena la qual es dejos les genetius, en partida del loc en le qual se fa la seccio.	 The minister commands the bladder to place its hand on yours; and he commands another minister to extend his right hand with fingers spread at the openings of the veins, and to retract the left hand from where the veins come out in order for them to make a cut there so that they can release it.
E aprop entromet espatum be inscident del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	 And then you will place it between your fingers, as this is its form of entry into the body:
e scindeys en lu aquo que es entre·l cul e·ls genetius, no en le mieg loc, abantz al latz de la coyssa sinistra; e sia la seccio sobre aquela peyra e·l tieu dit sia en le cul, e sia fayta seccio transversa, per que la seccio defora sia ampla e dedintz streyta segon la quantitat que egrecio de la peyra sia a lu possibla, e no major, quar fort leu comprem le tieu dit le qual es en le cul la peyra deves la seccio, e es foro-getada ses defacultat.	 Then you will place it between the thigh and the veins, not within that part of the body, remove your left hand from under the left arm; and make a cut there as well, both vertical and horizontal cuts to ensure they are wide enough to allow for releasing without damage, unless too tight, at which point release them gently.
E sapias que de la peyra es alcuna a la qual so angle e margers, per que le eyssiment de lu es fayt deficil per aquo.	 It is known that the urethra has no sharp edges or corners to prevent injury in this manner.
E de aquela aquo es leon semblant a glan, e es redonda, e es fayt de lu leugier eyssiment.	 And from there it is similar to the glans, and it is round, making urination easy.
Donc si es aquela al qual so angles e marger, ajusta en la fissura.	 When the joints are affected by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
E si no es ayssi foro-getada, lahoras cove que tu engenes sobre aquel, o que strenguas sobre aquel am gesti decentment, la extremitat del qual sia ayssi cum lima am le qual strenguas sobre la peyra, e no evasesca de lu; o que entrometas dejos lu instrument subtil de curvada extremitat.	 If it is not gout that causes the pain, then doctors recommend applying something to that part of the body or gently pressing on it with your fingers, or using a small curved tool.
Mays si tu no podes sobre aquel, lahoras tu amplifica le trauc un petit, e si tu veus flux de sanc, abscindeys en strenh aquel am vitriol trissat.	 If you cannot find relief from that part of the body, then doctors recommend applying a small curved instrument or pressing on it with your fingers, and if you see pus flowing, cut off circulation to that area.
Mays si la peyra es mays de una, lahoras al comensament tu impelleys la ma a la boca de la vesica, e aprop inscideys sobre lu; e aprop impelleys un petit aprop aquo; e semblantment fay si son motas mays de doas.	 If the foot is small and rounded like an egg, then at first you will apply your finger to its mouth, place it there, and similarly if two of them are painful.
E si es peyra mot gran, lahoras ignorancia es que tu inscidas aquel am gran seccio, quar accideys al malaute una de doas causas: o que mora o que endevengua a lu destillacio de urina continuabla, per aquo quar le loc no es de tot consolidat.	 If the foot is large, then doctors recommend ignoring that part of it and instead focus on one or both of its causes: either urine outflow obstruction causing continuous leakage, making the area not consolidated.
Mays aministra expulcio de lu entro que sia fora-getada, o engenia en la fractura de lu am las forfexs entro que extragua aquela en pessas.	 If the outlet is blocked or if there are fractures in the foot such that urine cannot escape from it, then doctors recommend administering an expulsion of its contents.
Donc cum tu auras cumplit la tua opperacio, lahoras omple la plagua de enses de aloe e de sanc de drago, e strenh aquel.	 Once you have completed your treatment, make sure to apply the plaster on both sides of the wound and press down gently on it.
E pausa sobre aquel drap enfus en oli e vi, o en oli rozat e aygua frega, per so que apostema caut sia cedat.	 When the body has a cold humidity that infiltrates each part of it
E aprop resupina le malaute sobre le sieu col, e no deslias le liament entro al tertz dia.	 And you place them on their chest and do not let them slip into third day.
E cum aquel auras desliat, embroca le loc am aygua e mot oli, e aprop cura aquel am enguent diafinicon e am enguent diabazilicon entro que sia sanat.	 When the body has been moistened with cold water and oil, you apply a salve that is both warming and moisturizing to keep it from becoming infected.
Mays si en la plagua accideys apostema caut, adhust e corrosiu, e de aquel semblantz ayssi cum si le sanc es en la vesica congelat, e per lu es la hurina prohibida (e aquo es conogut per la egressio del sanc am urina), a donc entromet lo tieu dit en la plagua e extratz aquel sanc, quar si roman provoca la vesica a corropcio de la vesica e de lu putrefaccio.	 If a point occurs in the bladder (and this is to be guarded against by not letting urine out) and if the bladder becomes frozen from cold water and oil, then it is forbidden, as this would lead to the decomposition of the bladder and its contents.
E aprop lava la plagua am vi agre, aygua e sal, e am opposicio a tota specia, am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	 And you heat it with warm water and salt, in order to keep the bladder in good condition so that nothing bad occurs
E cove en las horas de tota la curacio que tu lies amdos las coyssas e ajustes las medicinas las quals so pausadas sobre le loc.	 And you take care of every patient's leg and adjust their medicines, which are paused in this location
E si la peyra es petita e es en le meat de la vergua, e es ficat en lu, e eyssement de urina es prohibit, lahoras cura aquel am aquo que yeu recomti denant que pervenguas a seccio, quar tropas veguadas per aquesta curacio yest acusat de seccio; e ja yeu e esproat aquo, e es que tu prenguas un perforador de ferr alfelut, del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	 And if the urethra is small and it's located in the meat of the vulva (where urine cannot come out), then cure this with something that you recommend from a doctor to prevent damage as such treatments are often considered harmful.
de triangulada extramitat, agut, ficat en fust.	 The body part in question has become inflamed
E aprop pren fiel, e lia am aquel la vergua dejos la peyra per so que no retorne a la vesica.	 They are using a pointed instrument to treat the area
E aprop entromet le ferr en la vergua, perforant am fecilitat entro que·l perforador vengua ad aquela peyra.	 The instrument is penetrating the inflamed area, causing an injury that requires attention from another physician
E revolveys le perforador am la tua ma en aquela peyra petit a petit, e tu perforsa la perforacio de lu entro que fassas aquel del autra part penetrar; quar la urina tantost es absolta.	 The doctor is slowly moving the instrument into the inflamed area and performing the incision carefully to prevent it from penetrating another part of the body, as urine should be kept inside
E aprop prem la tua ma sobre aquo que es romas de la peyra de la partida deforo de la vergua, quar aquela es trinquada, e es foro-getada am la urina, e le malaute es sanat.	 The doctor has placed their hand on the inflamed area to protect it from further injury and urine leakage, as this is a dangerous procedure
Mays si aquesta curacio no es a tu aparelhada per alcuna causa la qual prohibeys de aquela, lahoras lia un fiel dejos la peyra, e autra fiel desus la peyra.	 If the procedure should not be performed for any reason that prohibits it, then they will use another instrument to treat the area.
E aprop encideys sobre la peyra en aquela vergua entre doas liaduras.	 The doctor places their hand on the inflamed area between two fingers.
E aprop extratz aquela.	 The procedure is now complete.
E aprop deslia le liament e mondifica le sanc congilat, le qual es fayt en la plagua.	 They apply a bandage and cover the inflamed area with gauze, covering it over all the incision.
E no es necessari liament de fiel dejos la peyra, sino per que no retorne a la vesica, e l’autre liament desus sino, quar quan es desliat le fiel aprop la egrecio de la peyra, la codena retorna a son loc e cobra la plagua.	 It is not necessary to place another bandage on the area itself, but rather to prevent it from leaking and to cover the bandage with gauze, which when placed over covers up the incision.
E per aquo es a tu necessari quan lias le fiel desus, que tu eleves la codena a las partidas desus, o que retorne deves le tieu compliment, e cobra la plagua ayssi co havem dit.	 When the fingers are opened to remove the stone or gravel from the patient's bladder, you should elevate their legs and place them on a pillow for comfort
Capitol .lxi.	 The first sentence translates to: "When the fingers are opened to remove stones or gravel from the patient's bladder, raise their legs and put them on a pillow for comfort.
De extraccio de peyra de las femnas.	 Extraction of pus from women
Peyra en las femnas pauc es engendrada.	 The extraction of pus in the vagina is a delicate matter
Mays si ve peyra ad alcuna de aquelas, lahoras dificil es la curacio de lu, e es prohibida per tropas manieyras.	 If you want to administer it through one or more of those methods mentioned above, then the treatment will be difficult and is forbidden for men
La una de lor es quar la femna fort leu es verges.	 One method among them is vaginal insertion which can be very painful for women.
E la segonda es quar tu no trobas femna be scient que descroba si meteyssa al metge quan es casta, o es de las femnas haventz maritz.	 The second method among them is anal administration which cannot be performed by the patient as they do not know how to insert it into a doctor's anus or in women's vaginas.
La tersa es quar tu no hatrobas femna be sabent aquesta art, majorment la operacio am ma.	 The third method among them is surgery which has the risk of scarring and may require anesthesia.
E la quarta es que·l loc de la seccio sobre peyra en las femnas es longinc del loc de la peyra, per que indigeys de seccio preonda, e en aquela es temor.	 The fourth method among them is cutting the pus from women's vaginas, which risks infection and requires extensive cleaning afterwards, causing fear.
Mays si necessitat provoca a tu ad aquo, lahoras cove que tu prenguas una femna metga be scient, e pauc es atrobada.	 If it is necessary to do so, the doctor will advise you on how to perform vaginal catheterization with precision, and many attempts are needed to achieve it.
Mays si tu es privat de aquela, lahoras cerca metga quast e subtil, o presenta una femna matrona be esenhada en le feyt de las femnas, o femna que en aquesta art ennueys partida del art.	 If you are unwilling to do that, the doctor may recommend using a catheter with a nurse present in order to perform it gently and discreetly, or if there is no suitable female nurse available, they will ask for another woman who has experience performing this procedure in women's vaginas.
Donc fay aquela present, e comanda a lu que fassa tot aquo que tu li mandaras, de la enquisicio sobre la peyra al comensament; la qual causa es que reguarde si la femna es verges, lahoras cove que meta lo sieu dit en le cul de lu e quiera la peyra.	 "Therefore begin by placing it in the vagina to inquire about its nature from the beginning.
Donc si atroba aquela, coarte aquela dejos le sieu dit, e lahoras comanda a lu que inscida sobre aquela.	 Therefore if you find that, cut off that, and command him to insert it into that place instead.
Mays si no es verge, lahoras comanda a la matrona que entrometa lo sieu dit en le conh de la malauta e enquiera sobre la peyra, pus que pausa la sua ma sinistra sobre la vesica, e comprem aquela am bona comprecio.	 If it's not a woman, command the midwife to insert it into her vagina and inquire about its nature, pressing down on her bladder with your left hand while doing so.
Donc si atroba aquela, lahoras cove que gradantment maugua aquela de l’orrifici de la vesica a las partidas dejos am somman de la sua vertut entro que pervengua am aquel a la razit de la coyssa.	 Therefore if you find that, cut it off immediately and have the woman urinate into her bladder as much as possible while pressing down on the urinary sphincter to prevent any urine from escaping through the vagina.
E aprop inscida sobre aquela apposicio de la maytat del conh deves la razit de la coyssa de qualque part sia a lu parada e cent la peyra en aquela partida, e·l dit de lu no sia remaugut de la peyra coartan dejos lu.	 Then insert it into the cavity of her bladder in that place where you placed it and hold its tip in there to prevent it from being pulled out by the vagina while pressing down on the urinary sphincter.
E la seccio sia pauca al comensament; e aprop entrometa lo ray sobre aquela seccio, e si sent la peyra, lahoras ajuste en seccio segon la quantitat la qual sap que la peyra sira getada de aquela.	 The incision should be as small at the beginning; and insert it into that opening, if you feel it, adjust the opening to the amount you know is necessary for its removal from there.
E sapias que las specias de peyra son motas: quar de aquelas es pauca e gran, e leon e aspra, e longua e redonda, e havent ramps.	 You understand that the types of gout are diverse: some are small and large, red and yellow, long and round, with or without spines.
Donc tu sapias quantas specias so de lu per aquo que tu signifiques sobre aquo que vols.	 Therefore, you know how many species are there for this purpose on which you signify what you want to do?
E si tu veus flux de sanc, ajusta en le loc vetriol trissat e te aquela per una hora entro que sia abscindit le sanc, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	 If you see a fistula forming, adjust it to the affected location and keep it covered for an hour until the fistula is closed, and then return to your operation.
E fay que prepares am tu dels instrumentz les quals e ditz en la extraccio de peyra en les homes, per so que sias ajudat per aquels en la tua operacio.	 And note that you need tools of the kind used in removing warts from humans to help with your operation.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, e sabes que la expulcio del sanc es de la arceria que es insciza, lahoras tu pausa polvera sobre le loc e estrenh aquel am pulvils e strictura descent, e no iteras aquo; e layssa la peyra e no extraguas aquela, quar fort leu morira la malauta.	 If you see a fistula forming and know that its expulsion requires surgery as indicated by the doctor, then stop applying pressure to the area and instead dust and strip away any debris and scarring, not tearing it; leave the fistula alone and do not extract it, for fear of further damaging the patient's health.
E aprop cura la plagua.	 And prepare the bandage
Donc cum es cedada la acuitat del sanc aprop alcus jorns, e·l loc se poyreys, lahoras tu retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	 Therefore, when the strength of the fistula is fading away and its appearance fades, then you return to your operation until the fistula has been closed.
Capitol lxii.	 The twelfth capital letter L
De seccio sobre ernia acoza.	 And sectioning on hernia occurs.
Hernia ayguoza no es sino agregacio de humiditat en le ciphac blanc lo qual es dejos la codena dels genetius contenent le huou, e es nompnat ciphac.	 A hernia is nothing more than an accumulation of moisture in the small hollow of the diaphragm that contains the bowel, and it is called a diaphragmatic hernia.
E alcunas veguadas es en le propri pannicol le qual a lu preparec natura en la partida del huou, entro que sia cuyat que ja es autre huou; e es la codena del genetiu entre le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, e no es aquo sino tart.	 Some of the vegetables are in the hollow of the diaphragm that was prepared by nature from birth to the beginning of the bowel, until it is fully developed and closed; this is the code for the intestine between the white cavity which we mentioned, not this but rather a hernia.
E la generacio de aquest hernia es per debelitat la qual accideys als genetius, per que ad aquels es efundunda aquesta materia, e alcunas vetz accideys per percuscio fayta sobre les genetius.	 "The cause of this hernia is weakness which affects the genitals; because it is found in these areas, and some veins are torn as a result of its passage through them.
E aquesta humiditat es havent motas colors, quar la color de lu o es declinant a citrina o a sanguinent, o rog, o es negra feculenta, o es ayguosa blanqua, e es aquo que es mays.	 "This moisture has different colors; either it is becoming pale or turning into something like blood, or gray, or black and fetid, or white and frothy, depending on its degree.
E les senhals per les quals es saubut on es aquesta agreguacio de aygua so aquestz: quar si es en le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, lahoras le apostema es redon declinant un pauc a longitut ayssi cum figura de huou, e appar le genetiu, quar la humiditat conte aquel de tota part.	 "The necks through which this gathering of water occurs are: either if it is in the white vein mentioned above and we have spoken of it, then the pain will gradually decrease over a certain length as with an image of heart attack, or appear on the genitals where the moisture finds its way to every part.
E si la humiditat es en le propri pannicol, lahoras le apostema es redon am partida del huou e per aysso hom estima que es autre huou.	 "If the moisture is in the pubic vein, then the pain will suddenly increase to its full extent and it seems as though another vein has joined.
E si la humiditat es entre la codena dels genetius e·l ciphac blanc, lahoras catz dejos le centiment.	 "If the moisture is between the veins of the genitals and the white vein mentioned above, then it spreads quickly.
E cum tu vols la cognicio de la color de la humiditat, lahoras tu esproa la color de la humiditat en le apostema am entromes cayrat del qual la forma es precedida; e segon aquo que es eyssit en le vestigi del entromes, jutga de aquo que es dedintz lu.	 "To know the nature of the color of the moisture, then examine its appearance in relation to the vein through which it passes and secondly as regards the vestige of that passage, judge according to that.
Donc quan nos vinem a la curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que comandem al malaute que sia fleubotomat si aquo es a tu possibla, e vezes le cos de lu ple.	 When we came to the treatment of this patient, it was ordered by the doctor that if possible he should be given garlic
E aprop sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos sobre alcuna causa un pauc auta, e pausa dejos lu motz draps.	 It is customary for you to put a cushion on their back in case of any cause, and place a damp cloth over them as well.
E aprop setz tu sobre la part sinistra de lu, e comanda al ministra que segua a la dextra de lu, le qual extenda la sua vergua a hun de dos latz a la codena dels genetius e a la partida del mirac del ventre.	 You put the cushion on the left side of him and order your servant to follow the right side as well, extend his body from the navel to the groin area.
E aprop pren spatum lat e scindeys la codena dels genetius del mieg loc per la longitut entro prop le pentenilh.	 It is customary for you to spread your servant's foot from the navel to the thigh length, towards the back.
E sia fayta la seccio segon rectetut engualment distant de la linha que deveseys la pel dels genetius, entro que pervengua al ciphac blanc comprehendent.	 It is customary for you to cut off both ends of the line equally far from where your servant's groin begins, towards the belly button.
E excorja aquel, e observa, e guarda te per aysso que tu no inscidas aquel; e la tua excoriacio am la qual aquel excorjas per partida jassia que sia suspenduda am le huou mays e subtilment escruta am la excoriacio segon la quantitat a tu possibla.	 Cut him off, and observe it closely, and keep track of the time that you do not scratch his wound; your excision must be such that if he is scratched during this time, its severity should be held in check by holding back with utmost caution until you have measured the extent to which you are able.
E aprop perfora le ciphac ple de aygua am perforacio ampla, e extratz tota l’aygua.	 It is customary for you to make a hole in his navel deep enough for water to drain through completely.
E aprop separa entre doas labias de la seccio am uncis, e exten le ciphac a las partidas desus; e no toques la codena les genetius comprehendent, e inscideys le ciphac en aquela manieyra que es a tu possible.	 It is customary to cut between two flaps of skin on the incision, extending it down from the navel until its bottom edge reaches below them; and do not touch the groin area or any other part of his body with this incision, but extend it so that you can reach as far as possible.
E inscideys aquel am la sua totalitat o en pessas, e majorment le sieu latz subtil, quar si tu no perscrutas exquisidament la inscizio de lu, no es fayta segurtat que la aygua no retorne.	 When the whole body or in part is affected by cold humors and especially if they are very subtle, then you must make sure to apply the cautery very carefully, otherwise it will not be safe for water to return.
Mays si le huou procezeys de aquela defora de la sua codena en la ora de la tua operacio, lahoras quan tu auras complida la seccio del ciphac, retorna dedintz aquel, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la codena dels genetius am sutura, e aprop cura aquel ayssi cum las autras plagua, entro que sia sanat.	 If you want to sew a stitch in the course of an operation, after completing the incision and cautery process, return it back into place, then apply two needles on either side of the stitches from the genitals to the skin sutures, gently press them down so that they are safe.
E si atrobas le huou corromput per autra malautia, lahoras cove que tu lies les vayssels les quals so sore le suspensori, e extrat le huou, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit.	 If the blood vessels are burst due to another illness, make sure you seal off the veins which need sealing, extract it and then press it in the place where we mentioned earlier.
Mays si l’aygua es agreguada en doas partidas esemps, lahoras sapias que doas son las ernias; donc inscideys aquela partida segon que has feyt en l’autra engualment; e si es a tu vist que sia una opera, lahoras tu la fay.	 If water is added to two parts of different shapes, then the two are containers: so if you see that it's an operation, do as we have mentioned earlier.
E aprop tu abstergiys le sanc, e entramet en las seccios lana submersa en oli o en oli rozat; e pausa deforo autra lana la qual tu as submersa en vi e oli, e expandeys aquela sobre dos genetius e·l mirac del ventre; e pausa desobre draps doblatz e pulvils, e lia aquels desobre am liament le qual es segon aquesta forma:	 Then take the sand and submerge it in oil or melted fat, then spread this over both buttocks as a miracle ointment for the belly, and put a cloth to cover the powder and dust on top of that.
e aprop sian preses dos draps e sian humplitz de lana carmenada segon aquesta semblansa; e sian faytas las extremitatz am les quals es premut de coto o de lana humida, e sian agreguatz am strectura en le braguier de las braguas, e la una de las extremitatz prengua del cul entro al dos, e la segonda prengua a la partida del pantenilh, e dos extramitatz sobre dos coyssas dejos e dos extramitatz autras sobre dos angonars, e tota extrictura sia ajustada en le braguier de las braguas.	 "Prepare two drapes and remove the damp ones next to this view; take care of the parts that are wet or have mud on them, and arrange the stretchers in the corners of the stretcher area, one at each corner inside and another at both ends of it, so that all sections are well-adjusted.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta hernia es medicada artificialment am cauteri en loc de seccio am ferr; e es que tu prenguas cauteri cutellar subtil e que inscidas am aquel la codena dels ginitius, e es ignit segon que havem recomtat entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc contenent la aygua, e lahoras tu pren cauteri segon aquesta forma:	 "The artificial hernia is treated with a cautery in the place of surgery; be sure to use a subtle cutaneous cautery and insert it into this hole containing water. Then apply the cautery as follows:
e es asemblat a letra greca.	 "Place the stretcher on its side.
E aprop perfora am aquel ciphac, e es ignit entro que tota la humiditat sia fora-gitada.	 "Once you have placed the stretcher onto its side, make sure to remove all moisture from it.
E aprop exten le ciphac am uncis, e excorja am uncis, e excorja am cauteri subtil ignit; e inscideys aquel segon que es a tu possible entro que eradiques tot lu; e guarda te del huou que·l foc no·l toque.	 "Remove the stretcher from its side and remove it, then carefully remove the subtle cautery inserted into it; make sure to do this when you are ready to completely remove everything.
E sapias que aquesta operacio es pus salva e pus longinqua de flux de sanc, e milhor que operacio am seccio.	 "You know that this surgery is quite lengthy and has a high risk of bleeding; therefore the surgeon should make sure to perform it carefully.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat apostema caut en la hora de seccio o en hora de cauteri, o flux de sanc, lahoras cove que tu cures qual contrarietat fa a tu per aquo, am curacio la qual conveneys a lu segon que es dit.	 When pain arises from cold humors that infiltrate the body's joints at the time of dissection or cautery, or due to bleeding, doctors should apply remedies to counteract these pains as is customary in this case.
Mays si le malaute es pauruc, e no spera la segonda operacio per la sua horribilitat, lahoras administra perforacio segon que yeu recomti aquo; e es quan es certificat deves tu, per aquo que havem dit de las significacios, que aquela hernia es ayguosa.	 If the patient is fearful of undergoing a second operation due to their terrible affliction, doctors should administer a perforator as recommended here; and it is when you are certified for this reason that I have mentioned above that the hernia will be corrected.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute sobre alcuna cezelha elevada, aprop perfora le apostema en la partida pus bassa de lu am spatum lat, e pausa la perforacio segon la longitut del cos.	 Doctors should make the patient stand with their feet together and then perform a perforator at the highest point of the abdomen; place it on low points below the waist, and pause after passing through the body's length.
E sia la apercio ampla entro que corro tota l‘aygua.	 After making an incision that runs through all the water
E aprop pausa sobre le loc coto e lia aquel e layssa aquel, per so que corro le romanent de l’aygua.	 And then pause over this location and lay it on there to ensure a smooth flow of water
E aprop cura aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	 Then take care that the wound is healed.
Mays si contrarietat es a la egrecio de l’aygua en aquela hora tu perforas aquela: e aquo no es fayt sino per aquo quar le pannicol blanc en le orrifici de la plagua fa contrarietat e prohibeys le eyssiment de l’aygua, lahoras cove que tu metas en la plagua pena o instrument am la qual es extrayta l’aygua dels ydropitz, la forma del qual es precedida; o ajusta en la opprecio de la plagua un petit.	 If the contradiction is due to a leakage of water at that time you perforate it: and this is not done unless there are two things, one being to prevent the outflow of water from the drops which may come out in the shape of an excrescence; or adjust on the edge of the wound with a small instrument.
E sapias que l’aygua retorna, e es agueguada aprop vi meses o enaviro aquels; e cum es agreguada, lahoras sia perforat segon aquela meteyssa manieyra, quar le malaute ayssi passara les sieus dias.	 When the liquid returns and it is poured into these, then immediately after that, pain is caused by gout in those days
Capitol .lxiii.	 Forty-three
De seccio sobre hernia carnosa e la curacio de lu.	 Treatment of a strangulated hernia and its cure.
Sapias que en la seccio sobre aquesta hernia es temor perdusent a pernicia en las majors disposicios; per que a mi es vista la dimissio de lu e esser salvat per aquela milhor.	 You know that in the section on this hernia, there is fear of loss due to damage in important areas; so I see an opportunity for its dismissal and be saved by that remedy.
E yeu so rememorant la operacio en aquela e las specias dels apostemas.	 Remember the operation and details of the stitches.
Donc, dic que l‘apostemas natz en les cos dels quals les genetius so conponutz e es fayt aquo per motas causas: o per superfluitat aguda agra, la qual es efundida als genetius, o per percuscio.	 So then I tell you that the stitches are in the parts where tendons cause contraction and it occurs due to causes such as acute excess fluid, which is expelled from the tendons, or injury.
E es la color de la apostema segon la color del cos, e no es atrobat en lu dolor, e es apostema greu.	 The color of the stitches is that of the body, and it does not cause pain, but rather a heavy stitch.
E fort leu es apostema lapificada, del qual la color es fosca, e no es centiment a lu.	 If the light colored stitch was tightened, from which the color became dark and did not move.
E alcunas veguadas es fayt per nodacio de las arcerias, e per imflacio de aquelas ayssi quo ja es perceubut la rememoracio de lu, o per imflacio de venas.	 Some veins are squeezed by the application of pressure, and for the remembrance of this, or for the inflation of veins.
Mays aquo que es per imflacio de arcerias es conogut per la dispercio de la apostema quan compremas aquela am les tieus ditz; e no cove que aquel toques.	 Then maybe it is by inflation of arteries that you are aware when pressing on those veins, but not the other way around.
Mays aquel que es fayt per imflacio de vena no es dispergut de lu alcuna causa deves la compressio am les ditz.	 When joint pain is caused by swelling of a vein, it's not necessary to apply compression here
E ja es possible que sobre aquesta specia sia fayta seccio e sobre les autres carns; e es que tu inscida la codena dels genetius, e aprop esten le huou a las partidas desus, e extratz aquel del ciphac blanc, e deliura le suspensori dels vaysels, e ligua les, e inscideys le suspensori pus que tu deliuras aquel de tota partida de las partidas del huou.	 It is possible to perform a section on the other bones as well; and you should isolate the nerves, stretch out the ventricles of the heart, straighten the spinal cord, and apply pressure at the points mentioned above.
Donc si l’huou ja es am aquelas carnadas consolida, lahoras cove que tu extraguas le huou e inscidas aquel.	 If the body is already inflamed in those areas, then you should remove it and isolate that part.
E si es adherencia entro alcuna causa del ciphac, o entre aquo que es entre les bayssels, lahoras cove que tu deliures tota aquela adherencia e inscidas aquela per inscizio redonda.	 If there is no reason for inflammation between the ventricles or around the heart itself, then remove it and isolate that part as well.
Mays si es nativitat de carn en le loc de la adherencia la qual es detras, lahoras cove que tu inscidas tot aquo que es de lu, e extraguas le huou ayssi cum havem dit.	 If there is a natural adhesion in the location of inflammation that is behind it, then you should isolate everything related to this as well and remove the part itself as mentioned earlier.
Donc cum es complida la tua operacio, lahoras omple la plagua de lana imfuza en oli rozat e vi; e aprop cura aquela am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	 After you have completed your operation, apply a poultice of hot oil and vinegar to the wounds as well, and take care of any additional injuries that may occur.
Capitol .lxiv.	 "Chapter 14.
De la curacio de hernia que es de vitz.	 Of hernia treatment.
Vit es apostema envolut per alcuna envolucio semblant a broto am mollificacio dels testiculs, e es fayt dificil movement exercitiu e deambulacio sobre le malaute.	 The swelling is wrapped around the testicles in a way similar to a knot on the groin, making it difficult for movement and walking due to its location.
E en la curacio de aquesta malautia es per temor per aquo del qual es precedida rememoracio.	 In preparation for this ailment there is a remembrance of something that preceded it
Empero cove que diguam opperacio en aquela segon que fero les primiers.	 However, you should say nothing until the first ones are taken care
E dic que cove que fassas sezer le malaute sobre una cezelha elevada; e aprop enpelleys le suspensori dels testiculs a las partidas dejos; e aprop te la codena dels genetius am les tieus ditz am les baysels que so probdas a la vergua; e tengua aquels autre ministre que tu, e extenda aquels am extencio vehement.	 And you should tell her to make the patient lie on an elevated bench and put a pillow under their buttocks to support them; and let the codena of the genitals be placed at the entrance to the bed so that they can easily enter; extend these ministers who are to do this vigorously,
E aprop inscideys am spatum lat agut per seccio traversa en le dreyt dels vaysels entro que sian les vayssels descubertz.	 And approach the back of her legs by making a small incision through that part of her body towards the right side, so as to expose those veins which are on the right side.
E aprop excorja de tota partida ayssi quo a tu havem dit en extraccio de arceria las quals so en las templas.	 And approach from every part of the body as you mentioned in your previous explanation, towards the temples.
E aprop fica en aquelas un’agulha en la qual sia fiel doble, e lia aquel en le primier del locs en les quals accideys vit, e lia aquel autra veguada en le derier de lor.	 And approach to an incision which is firm and double in that part of the body where you mentioned it first, and put another one at the very last place where you may see a vein, and another one towards the right side.
E aprop inscideys aquels en le mieg loc per seccio dreyta segon la longuesa del cos, e extratz aquo que es agreguat de las humiditatz fetulentas e corruptas.	 Approach those in the middle part of the body towards the right side along the length of the body, and remove that which is added from the filthy and corrupt fluids.
E aprop cura la plagua am curacio de las autras plaguas en las quals vols sania esser engendrada per so que caian les vaysels les quals noyreysso un de dos genetius, quar no es mal per aquo.	 Approach the placenta during the preparation of those other placenta which you want to be generated in such a way that it contains veins from both orifices of one or two genitals respectively, as long as there is no harm done by this.
Mays si accideys vit a totz les bayssels, lahoras cove que·ls testicols sian extragutz o que les testicols per aquo se cequo am les vayssels, per que sia privat de tot nutriment per la inscizio dels vayssels, e que sian estaborits, o que cequo per so que no sia juvament am aquels.	 When the heart is affected by all the veins (arteries), it is customary for the veins to be squeezed out or come through this way so that they may nourish the vital parts, unless otherwise stated
Capitol .lxv.	 Chapter 55
De la cura de hernia entestinal.	 Treatment of intestinal hernia
Le adveniment de aquesta hernia es per seccio que endeve en le ciphac extendut sobre le ventre de part dels angunars del mirac del ventre, per que deysendo les budels de aquela ruptura ad alcu dels budels.	 The arrival of this hernia is by cutting through the abdominal incision from one side to another so that it removes all the intestines out.
E aquesta ruptura es o del ciphac o de excencio de lu, e accideysso aquestas doas specias per motas causas: o percussio, o per sautz, o per clamor, o per elevacio de alcuna causa greu, o per semblantz.	 This rupture is either from the diaphragm or of excision of it, and so these two ways are used in this manner: either by percussion, or by suction, or by outcry, or by raising any heavy object, or by resembling.
E·l senhal de aquo, quan es per extencio del ciphac, es que accideys pauc a pauc en lonc temps, e no accideys soptament, e es apostema engual entro ves le preon per so quar le ciphac comprem le budel.	 The end of this, when the excision is from the diaphragm, it happens rapidly and not suddenly, and the bowels come out one by one through the opening.
E le senhal de lu es quan es per seccio del ciphac, quar al comensament fa accidir dolor vehement sobtament; e es apostema divers aparent dejos la codena propdana aparent, e aquo es per eyssiment del budel, e·l cos de lu a las partidas deforo del ciphac.	 The end of it is when the excision is from the diaphragm, because at first there is violent pain suddenly; and this is by the way out of the bowels, and then through the body parts towards the rupture of the diaphragm.
E alcunas veguadas es fora-getat am le budel la tela, e es apelada aquesta hernia entestinal zirbal.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
E alcunas veguadas es fayta am ventositat, e alcunas veguadas corr en le budel fenda, e aqui es retenguda, e es am aquo gran pernitia3 del malaute, e alcunas veguadas fa endevenir dolor malvada e majorment quan es premut.	 The cushion is placed between the patient's thighs to prevent it from coming out through that space.
E en la curacio de las especias de aquesta malautia am ferr es temor, per que cove que sia esquivat le cazament en aquela.	 To perform the operation of removing a hernia in this manner is risky because one might miss the chance to remove it completely.
E la manieyra de la operacio de aquela es que comandes al malaute que redugua le budel am la sua ma a las partidas dedintz de la sua conquavitat si obezeys al sieu retornament, e aprop sia envessat sobre le sieu col entre las tuas mas, e eleva las cambas de lu.	 The trick of the operation is to instruct the patient to lower their intestines back into place and hold them in between your hands while you lift up their legs.
E aprop sten la codena la qual siec la codena dels testicols a las partidas desus, e inscideys la codena dels testicols tota per le lonc; e aprop fiqua en doas labias de la seccio uncis segon que indigeysses a hubrir la seccio am aquels.	 In order to open the space between the patient's thighs, you first clamp their legs and then proceed by opening them from side to side until they are sufficiently opened.
E si’ la seccio segon la quantitat que a tu sia possible que de aquela le huou sia foro-getat.	 Once the space is sufficiently opened, it may be necessary for further action that you have not described yet.
E aprop excorja aquela ciphaqueth les quals so dejos la codena dels testicols, entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc dur de quascuna partida.	 After opening the space between their legs as much as possible, you then proceed to open up each thigh separately until you reveal a white membrane in each of them.
Lahoras tu entromet le tieu dit en aquo que siec le testicol, en aquo que es entre ciphac blanc, le qual es dejos la codena del huou, e entre le ciphac segon, e absolve am aquel’adherencia que es en la partida detras del huou.	 The pains are described in the passage as occurring from each thigh down to where there is a white membrane and then to between it on both sides, which is what you should remove adhesions from behind the bowel after opening up the thighs.
E aprop mau am la ma la codena dels testicols a las partidas deforo, e am aysso exten le ciphac blanc en sus am la ma sinestra, e eleva le huou am le ciphac a la partida de la seccio; e comanda al ministre que extenda le huou ensus e tu dissolveys la adherencia que es detras am solucio complida.	 "The patient should have their legs spread open with cushions placed underneath, and another servant on each leg to hold them in place while a third servant places one cushion under the chest of the patient.
E cerqua am les tieus ditz que lay no sia alcuna causa del budel envelopat en le ciphac blanc dur.	 "The physician inquired if there was not any cause for the intestine being held in the blank space.
Mays si tu atrobas de lu alcuna causa, lahoras tu enpelleys aquel al ventre dejos.	 "If no reason is found, remove it from that area and place it back into their stomach.
E aprop tu pren una agulha en la qual sia fiel gros fayt de x fiels, e entromet aquel deves le derier del ciphac, le qual es jos la codena dels testicols, la qual siec seccio; e aprop inscideys las extremitatz las quals emineysso del fiel entro que sian quatre fiels, e aprop compausa alcus de lor sobre alcuna figura en manieyra de crotz; e lia am aquel le ciphac del qual havem dit que es dejos la codena dels testicols am fort liament de dos partz.	 "Take a needle with a very fine point, and insert it into the rectum in such a way that its tip touches the hole where the intestine comes out; then make cuts on both sides of the finger holding the instrument to prevent it from coming out completely. Then remove this needle as quickly as possible.
E aprop envolveys las extremitatz dels fiels e lia aquelas am liament vehement entro que alcu dels vayssels que noyrrisso aquels no puscan trametre alcuna causa per so que de aqui no accida apostema caut.	 "Wrap the fingers tightly and place them in such a way that they are held firmly inside, preventing any possible escape through these channels.
E pausa autra veguada liament segon foro le primier liament, lonh de lu mens tres ditz; e aprop aquestz dos liaments layssa del ciphac le qual es dejos la codena dels testicols la quantitat de la grandeza del dit, e inscideys tot le romanent segon redondeza, e osta de lu le huou.	 "Then remove the first needle and replace it with another larger one, inserting both of them into the intestine where they remove the blockage.
E aprop inscideys en la partida dejos de la codena dels testicols per seccio de la qual corra sanc e sania ayssi cum havem recomtat en aquo que havem dit.	 "The servant is to make an incision in the palm of the patient's hand at a right angle, as we recommend here.
E aprop aministra lana submersa en oli, e pausa en la plagua; e aministra le liament le qual havem recomtat (e alcunas veguadas le ciphac blanc es cauterizat, le qual havem dit aprop la inscizio de lu temen de flux de sanc, quar motas veguadas accideys aquels) e leyssa le liament entro que per si caia.	 "The servant is to immerse the instrument in oil and place it on a plate; then apply the heated cautery that we recommend (and some bandages soaked in cold water are cauterized, as we mentioned earlier in this regard), and let the instrument enter through which opening so that it may come out.
Mays si le cazement de lu es tardat, lahoras de aygua cauda sia embrocat, e pausa sobre aquel entro que caia segon que havem dit.	 "If the cautery of his hand takes too long to heal, soak his finger in water and place it back after following our recommendation.
E aprop cura la plagua am l’autra curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanat.	 "The servant is to care for both wounds separately according to their needs.
Capitol .lxvi.	 "This is the end of our translation. I hope it was useful!
De hernia ventosa.	 "With a ventral hernia.
En aquesta hernia no e vist alcu que sia estat ardit sus la curacio de lu am ferr.	 "In this type of hernia, we do not see that the treatment was carried out by him to perform it.
E les primiers diyssero que es fayta ayssi cum havem recomtat en la hernia que es am vi; la qual es que tu lies les vayssels aprop la seccio sobre aquela am fecilitat de lu; e aprop secca en le mieg loc en enviro le apostema am aquo que obro aquel, entro que caian les vayssels.	 "The first servants would say that it should be done as we recommended in the hernia that is being treated; namely to place the veins properly on that part of his body which was weakened.
E cura la plagua segon que havem dit entro que sia sanada.	 "Care for the wounds according to what has been said until they are healed.
Capitol .lxvii.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet
De la disropcio que es fayta en les anguonars.	 And if it's necessary to make points on the surface of the foot.
Alcunas veguadas endeve ruptura en les angonars ayssi cum havem dit, e emineys le loc.	 Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out.
E no deyssen als genetius alcuna causa dels budels al genetius; e si deyssen, aquo es pauc; e retorna s’en en totas horas.	 And if there's no other cause of the hernia to the groin, and if so, it is small; return them in every hour.
Mays si es prolonguat le temps am aquo, es ajustada fissura en le ciphac entro que deysenda le budel en le ciphac; e accideys aquo per la extencio del ciphac le qual es en le angonars ayssi cum havem dit, la qual causa es quar le ciphac es estendut, e aprop es mollificat e·l loc es apostemat e emineys.	 If the time has passed that, make a small incision in the diaphragm to let out the hernia; and do this by pushing it through the opening of the abdomen as before, which causes it to extend, and place your hand over the area to prevent its coming out.
E la cura de lu es am cauteri ayssi quo es precedida la narracio de lu.	 The cure for it is with cautery just like that mentioned in preceding lines.
E alcunas veguadas es curada am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: e es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos entre las tuas mas, e aprop secca le loc de la ruptura dels apostemas emineys am seccio per la latitut segon la quantitat de tres ditz.	 Some wounds are to be treated with a second method: the patient should lie on their back between two pillows, and place the hand over the area for preventing the wound from spreading apart in sections proportional to its length as three inches.
E aprop strenh le ciphac blanc que es jos la codena entro que sia descubert.	 And tighten the diaphragm white that is inside so it may not be revealed.
E aprop pren le ray e pausa aquel sobre le loc eminent del ciphac, e prem aquel al preon del ventre.	 And place your hand over the prominent part of the diaphragm and press upon it from the belly.
E aprop cus le dos locs eminentz sobre la extremitat del ray del ciphac, e ajusta am la sutura un de aquels am l’autre.	 Place a cushion over the extremities of the patient's chest area, adjust it with stitches on one side and then on the other
E aprop extratz la extremitat del ray, e no inscidas del ciphac de tot, ni no extenda le huou, ni autra causa ayssi cum yeu te fi saber en la curacio de hernia entestinal.	 Place a cushion over the extremities of the patient's chest area, do not cover his abdomen from top to bottom, nor extend it further in any direction, but only adjust it for hernia treatment.
E aprop cura aquela am la curacio de las plaguas, e cum inscideyses les fiels, mundifica aquela e restaura la plagua entro que sia consolidada; quar le ciphac es contrayt e no es ajustada la eminencia de ruptura.	 Adjust the cushion for hernia treatment as follows: first, mark the field with stitches to prevent it from collapsing or bursting during treatment, and then restore its place once consolidated, ensuring that the chest area is not stretched too much but only adjusted in its center of rupture.
E cauteri es milhor en aquest loc, quar es pus propda a salut.	 The most important thing at this location, where it should be done to heal.
Capitol .lxviii.	 Chapter Fifty-eight.
De mollificacio de la codena dels testiculs.	 Treatment of the testicles.
Motas veguadas la codena dels testiculs en alcus homes es mollificada per aysso quar las carns que so entre aquela son mollificadas, e es fedat le reguardament de lu.	 Treat the testicles as follows in those who have it mollified to avoid any injury to the scrotum and maintain its health:
Adonc necessari es ad aquel que es preguat en la curacio de lu que fassa jazer le malaute segon le sieu dos, e enscida tota la codena la qual es mollificada sobre la codena natural; e aprop que ajuste doas labias am la sutura.	 If necessary when treating it make sure to put the testicles back in their place after being mollified over the natural scrotum and adjust both sides with stitches.
E si vols, cus en le comensament la superfluitat de la codena mollificada am tres cozeduras o quatre e am ferma sutura.	 If you wish to put it back in place at first after being mollified over the natural scrotum, make a knot every three or four stitches and secure them with a firm stitch.
E aprop inscideys entre las suturas; e aprop cura per curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat e caian les fiels.	 "Apply pressure between the sutures; apply a cure for curing of the bruises that may arise from it.
Capitol .lxix.	 Chapter Ninety-Nine
De castracio.	 Castration
Sapias que castratio en nostre ley es excomengada, mays per causa es legut a mi que·m remembre de lu en aquest libre; e no es necessaria la rememoracio de lu sino per doas manieyras, de las quals es la una per so que aquo sia en la sciensa del metge quan es enterroguat de aquela, que sapia la curacio de lu al qual accideys; e l’autra manieyra es que nos motas vetz havem necessitat de castracio de autras bestias per les juvamentz nostres per aquelas, ayssi cum de motos, e de bocs, e de porcs, e de semblantz a las bestias.	 It is known that castration in our law is forbidden, except when it is necessary to remember it in this free, and it is not necessary to remember it unless for two reasons: one so that the doctor understands it during interrogation about that, knowing how to cure it; another reason is that the animals of ours need to be castrated at a certain age, especially cows, bulls, pigs, and monkeys.
E donc dic que castracio es fayta en dos manieyras: o per atrissio, o per fissura a seccio.	 And therefore it is said that castration must be performed in two ways: either by pulling out or making an incision.
Mays en aquela que es fayta per atrissio, la via de la opera es que nos fassam cezer la bestia en aygua cauda entro que·ls genetius de lu sian mollificatz e sian linhitz e que pendan.	 When castration is done by pulling out, the way of doing it is to cut off its testicles and hang them until their death
E aprop pren aquels am la tua ma entro que sian resols e no apparescan dejos le tocament.	 And then place your hand there without touching it.
Mays en castracio fayta per fissura e seccio, cove que tu tenguas la bestia e premas la codena dels testicols de lu am la ma senestra.	 When castration is done by making an incision and cutting off the section, you should hold the animal's testicles in your left hand while holding its chest with the other hand.
E aprop lia le suspensori, e inscideys sobre quascun huou am una seccio entro que dos huous proceseysso.	 When it has been put between two bodies that are joined together, it should be cut off inside.
E aprop inscideys aquels pus que auras quascu excorjat.	 It is important to ensure they are properly attached
E no leysses sobre aquels del ciphac alcuna causa, sino le ciphac subtil le qual es sobre les vazes.	 Do not let the cause of the abscess be unnoticed, but rather apply a substance that is gentle on the veins.
E aquesta manieyra de castracio es milhor la qual es fayta per atrissio, quar atrissio fort leu layssa alcuna causa dels testicols per que la bestia desira coyt.	 This castration method is preferable to one that is done with scissors, as it leaves no cause for the beast to scratch.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	 Cure the pouch so it can be healed.
Capitol .lxx.	 [No translation provided]
De la cura de hermafrodozia.	 From the treatment of hernia
Hermafrodozia en les homes es segon dos manieyras: la una es quar o appar en aquo que siec l’espazi en la codena de testiculs, en aquel que es entre dos testiculs figura quar cunh de femna en la qual so pels.	 Hernia in humans can manifest in two ways: one is when there is a gap between the testicles themselves, or when it is between two testicles figures where the gap could be closed with a finger
E alcunas veguadas de aquel corr urina le qual es en la codena dels testiculs.	 Some veins that carry urine from that part of the body can be blocked.
Mays en las femnas es una specia: e es que·l conh de la femna sobre le pentenilh es ayssi cum dos testiculs de home un pauc de tot yminiheys a la partida deforo ayssi cum le perpucii de home e dos testicols.	 In women there is another variant: when the vagina narrows so much that only two testicles from one man can fit inside, and even then with difficulty.
E la curacio es de tres specias: de dos dels homes e de una specia de las femnas.	 The treatment consists of three types: for two men, or for a woman.
E es que cove que tu inscidas aquelas carns ajustadas entro que efuga la emprecio de aquela, e aprop que cures aquelas am curacio de las autras plaguas.	 The first sentence translates to "When the joints hurt due to cold humors," which suggests that gout is a type of joint pain caused by an imbalance in body fluids or 'humors'.
E en la segonda specia dels homes de la qual yeys urina la qual es en la codena dels testiculs, no es curacio ni opperacio en lu.	 The second sentence translates to "in the second section of the chapter on urine, which is in the code of laws," meaning that it discusses rules or regulations related to urination and its control, but without any curative action being mentioned for gout specifically.
Capitol .xxi.	 This could be a continuation of another text where you are interpreting specific chapters (XXI) relating to some topic such as law, government, or constitutional rights.
De lentinge e de carn eminent per causas de las femnas.	 "From the cause of women's infertility.
Lentige fort leu es ajustada sobre causas naturals entro que es etressat e es fayt leg le reguardament; e alcunas veguadas es magnificada en alcunas femnas en tant entro que es spandit ayssi cum en les homes e perve entro al coito.	 "A pointed cautery is applied in cases of natural causes, to ensure the issue is resolved and it's prevented from spreading; and certain veins are magnified in certain women as well, for example in men during intercourse.
Adonc cove que tu tenguas la superfluitat de lentinge am la tua ma o am unci e inscidas.	 "When you have excessive bleeding from a pointed cautery or other injuries,
E no ultimes en inscizio, majorment en le preon de la razit, per so que no endevengua flux de sanc.	 "Finally, after the incision is made, it should be kept clean to prevent any infection from arising.
E aprop cura aquela am curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanada.	 "Then apply a treatment for curing the pain,
Mays carn nascuda es carn que nays en le horrifici de la mayre entro que umple aquel, e fort leu es eyssit a las partidas deforo segon semblansa de coa (e per aquo alscus primiers appelero aquo “malautia caudada”); donc cove que nos inscidam ayssi cum inscidem lentinge, e curem aquela entro que sia sanada.	 "May new wounds should be treated with a cautery and then applied as needed for curing the pain; also it is customary to say 'curse of the gout' when referring to this particular condition.
Capitol .lxxii.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet
De curacio de alratica.	 And if it's necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery.
Alratica es que le conh de la femna no sia perforat, o sia le trauc petit.	 Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out.
E es o natural o accidental.	 You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
Accidental es per malautia la qual ha precedit, e aquela es fayta o per carn nada ajustada o per ciphac subtil o espes.	 Accidental refers to injuries caused by a previous illness or injury, as opposed to those that are accidental but not due to any prior condition.
E es fayt o en le preon de la mayre, o en les costatz de lu, o en le pus sobira de lu, o en le pus bas de lu, e prohibeys de cuoyt e de enprenguacio e de enfantament, e fort leu prohibeys las mestruas.	 You must do this procedure in the major joints of the body, such as the hips, elbows, knees, or chest, but avoid touching the buttocks and genitals unless necessary for treatment.
E la cognicio de aquela es fayta per reguardament de la metrona, si la oppilacio es apparent, propdana; mays si no es apparent, lahoras tu cerqua aquela am les tieus ditz o am le ray.	 The cause of such a pain is usually cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, but it can also be caused by other factors depending on the context.
Mays si oppilacio es per ciphac subtil, e es propda a las doas labias, lahoras tu coyta e disromp aquela.	 If there is no apparent cause, you should investigate further and examine closely for any signs of such an issue.
E es que pauses sobre las doas labias pulvils, e aprop pausa les tieus ditz indicz de amdoas las mas encemps.	 Place a cushion under the patient's thighs, another servant on their legs, and another one on their chest to hold their hands.
E la femna sia sobre le sieu dos, las sieuas coyssas extendudas, e aprop exten las doas labias am forsa entro que aquel ciphac subtil sia romput e la oppilacio sia uberta.	 The woman should lie on her back with her legs spread wide open, and the attendant is supposed to gently stretch both legs so that this subtle trickery becomes visible, and the doctor's examination becomes easier
E aprop pren lana e enbeu le4 en oli e pausa aquela sobre·l loc, e jagua am home le dia per so que·l loc inscis no sia consolidat.	 The attendant is to gently stretch her leg and knee up towards the chest, with a pause in between, in order that this motion does not cause stiffness
Mays si le ciphac es gros e espes, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel am spatum lat o am fuelha de mirta.	 If the trickery becomes large and noticeable, doctors advise you to stretch your back or thigh muscles slightly towards it
Mays si la oppilacio es per carnada, lahoras suspen aquela am unci, e inscideys aquela.	 If the examination is painful, suspend that motion temporarily, and perform it later on
E sian am tu las medicinas que fan cessar flux de sanc ses mordicacio, ayssi cum ahacatia, e sanc de drago, e enses, ajustat am album de huou.	 If the medicines causing this pain are not to be found or cannot be purchased elsewhere, then take that remedy from its original source.
E aprop aministra una canulha de plom ampla per so que la plagua no sia consolidada leugierament.	 The attendant is supposed to provide a wide-bore needle in order for the blood flow not to be obstructed.
E tengua aquela per alcus jorns e aministra calgua de li sec.	 Use that remedy from time to time, and supply water as well.
E aprop sia curada am l’autra curacio de consolidacio entro que sia sanada.	 The attendant is supposed to clean the other cavity and ensure it is not blocked.
E alcunas vetz accideys en la mayre nativitat de autres carns, e lahoras cove que inscidas segon aquesta manieyra.	 Some vessels are more sensitive in the extremities of others bones, so be careful with this maneuver.
Mays si aysso es per apostema crancos, a l’apostema crancos le qual es en la mayre no sia fayta contrarietat am ferr en deguna manieyra.	 If you are doing that in the region where another cavity is located and it should not be tampered with on any other occasion, do so carefully.
Capitol .lxxiii.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, then it is customarily called gout by doctors
De la cura de emorroydas e de tayl e de botor roja que accideysso en le conh de las femnas.	 And from curing hemorrhoids and tailbone redness which occurs so in the legs of women.
Emorroydas so apprecio dels orificis de motas venas entro que de aquelas corro mot sanc continuadament; e cum so antiquadas emorroydas e son fayts theyls.	 Hemorrhoids are a common problem in the veins, especially those that occur continuously; and as for old hemorrhoids, it is customary to treat them with cautery.
E ja yeu he dit en la divisio las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e diyre ayssi aquelas que recebo curacio e aquelas que no recebo curacio.	 And you should look in the division of those and the necks of those, and direct to those that receive care and those that do not receive care.
Donc dic que emorroydas e theyls quan so en le preon de la mayre e no apparo al sentiment, lahoras en aquelas no sia fayta curacio am ferr.	 Therefore, hemorrhoids are treated when it is necessary for a greater relief and not just by appearance, the treatment of those that do not heal must be postponed.
Mays aquelas las quals so en le orrifici de la mayre sobre las quals catz sentiment, so aquelas que so curadas.	 Those who are in the orifice of the greater over which a sensation occurs, and those that are cured.
E cove que tu metas la femna en mayso frega e aprop exten atheyl am les forfexs, o am drap aspre, e inscideys aquelas am las razitz.	 And ensure the woman has a comfortable position, and extend her arms to hold onto something firm, or on a soft surface; indicate those with scars.
E aprop pulveriza sobre aquelas deves le fluxs del sanc de una de las polveras insciscivas ses mordicacio, ayssi cum acassia e semblant ad aquels.	 And apply powder to those who have sores from the flow of the blood of a specific powder that has healing properties, as well as aloe and similar additives to these.
E aprop enpellesca les sieus pes per una hora, e aprop pausa aquela en aygua freja.	 And place their feet in water for an hour, and put it on ice water.
E si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras fay aquela sezer en decoccio de sumat e de scorsas de milgranas e de gualas e de semblantz.	 When veins are constricted, pain occurs in the feet
E aprop pren farina de ordi e comfiys aquela am miel e vi agre e fay emplastre am aquo sobre le dos de lu.	 Spread a fine flour over their body and gently massage it with honey and vinegar, spreading it all over their thighs
E si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, fay adherir am dos ventozas, e a las mamilhas ses escarificatio.	 If the veins are obstructed, then stick to applying pressure on both arms and massaging the breasts
E aprop pren lana e submergeys aquela am suc de coliandre o am suc de arnagloza o am suc de guarravier am vi pentit e fay adherir al loc; e aprop cura le loc am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	 Spread a mixture of colander water or apple cider vinegar on the area and gently rub it into the skin, sticking to that spot until healed.
Mays athyl rog le qual es de aspre reguardament, cove que tu inscidas aquo que a tu appar de aquel segon que he dit en theyl engualment.	 When you come across someone who says something like this "I am sorry for the inconvenience" or "please ignore that", just reply with what follows:
E cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	 Correct it so that it is healed.
Capitol .lxxiv.	 The 44th chapter of Capulet
De perforacio de eyssedura accident en la mayre.	 Perforation of the esophagus due to an accident in the major artery.
Motas specias de apostemas accideysso en la mayre, ayssi cum cranc e apostema lapident e ulceracios e adhubelat e erpetromens e fistulas emorroyas e raguarrias e thyl e autres apostemas.	 There are various complications resulting from the major artery being perforated and closed off by a clot: perforation of the esophagus, ulcers, abscesses, fistulas, and other complications related to arteries.
E yeu ja he dit aquestas malautias e las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e las curacios de lor en la divisio.	 And you already mentioned these injuries and the symptoms of them, as well as their consequences in this division.
E cove que yeu digua en aquest tractat de apostema caut le qual ve en la mayre quan es dels apostemas que collegeysso sania, e si vols saber en qual manieyra se fa la opperacio de lu am ferr.	 When the patient is to be prepared for a certain operation that involves a needle, you should know in which manner it shall be done,
Adonc cove que tu consideres si la dolor de la apostema en le sieu comensament es aguda am percussio e flecma e febre, e vezes aquel enrogezir e si catz sobre aquel le sentiment, lahoras no·t coytes am perforacio de lu, e cura aquel am aquo que ajuda sobre la maturacio entro que cesse la acuitat dels accidentz.	 If the pain from the needle is at first severe with bruising and fever, sometimes accompanied by redness or swelling of the area, doctors will not make an incision to it, but instead may apply something that helps reduce inflammation as they wait for the pain to subside.
E lahoras cove que tu fassas cezer la femna sobre una cezelha que aia doas cezelhas; e recline sobre le sieu dos e ajusta les sieus pes a la partida pus dejos del ventre, e las sieus coyssas sian expandudas, e pausa les sieus brasses dejos les sieus denols, e lia quascus am liament ad aquo convenient.	 After the patient has been prepared with gauze on a board and laid back on their back while adjusting their feet to be at an angle, their thighs are spread apart, and their arms are relaxed by holding their hands, they will then apply something that suits this purpose for reducing inflammation as needed.
E aprop la matrona segua del latz dreyt e aministre le instrument am le qual es ubert le orrifici de la mayre, la forma del qual vindra en aquelas causas que·s faran aprop.	 After the needle is used to pierce through the thicker part of the skin and then into the muscle underneath (the cause), it will be guided by its shape in such cases that are performed accordingly.
E cove quan vols ministrar aquest instrument que tu fiques am lo ray le preon de la mayre de la femna, e aquo que del instrument es intrat en la mayre no sia mays que·l preon de la mayre e leda le malaute.	 When administering this instrument through the larger part of the skin, make sure it does not go into the muscle itself and instead should enter just a bit deeper than the patient's skin.
Mays si l’estrument es major que·l preon de la mayre, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils sobre la textura del preon de la mayre per sso que sia prohibit l’intrament de tot instrument en le preon de la mayre.	 If the instrument is larger than the patient's skin, doctors will ensure it does not enter the muscle itself and instead should only go a small amount deeper into the skin to prevent any other instruments from entering through that part of the skin.
E cove que tu pauses le vertitge que corr en le strument del latz pus desus e que le ministre tengua le strument e revolva le vertitge entro que sia ubert le orrifici de la mayre.	 The first sentence translates to: "You should place the instrument of the priest on top of it and let the minister hold the instrument and move it around until the orifice is open.
E cum appar la excitura, e es tocada am la ma e es leon e molh, lahoras cove que tu secces aquela deves le cap de lu am spatum lat.	 After you have done this, let's take care of the matter and remove it from her head
E cum la sania es evacuada, lahoras cove que tu pauses en la plagua una meca submersa en oli rozat o oli vert en le qual sia alcuna stiptisitat; e pausa la calca7 en la seccio en le preon de la mayre.	 After the sick person has been washed, let's take them to a place covered with soft and clean oil or fat in which there is no standing water; then wash their back from head to foot in warm oil or fat.
E pause deforo la mayre e sobre le pentenilh lana munda submersa en aygua en la qual sian bulidas malvas.	 After drying her body, put a soft and clean cloth soaked in warm water on her head.
E aprop sia curada aprop dos dias am enguent le qual conveneys ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	 The treatment is to be given after two days from the time that it was used as medicine.
E alcunas veguadas es lavada la mayre e la plagua enayssi que es cristerisat am aygua e mel, e aprop am aygua en la qual es bulhida razit de liri o de aristologia longua, e aprop retorna al enguent.	 The sheets are washed as clean as possible with warm water and placed in a bath of lukewarm water mixed with salt; the person is then rinsed thoroughly to remove any remaining dirt or oil, and they should be returned to their bed.
E si la plagua es dedintz en la mayre ameguada, lahoras cove que tu sias prohibit de la curacio de lu am ferr, habantz cura aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio.	 If the cloth has been soiled by the patient, let's make sure you are prohibited from further treatment of that area; instead apply this to where it was previously applied in section B.
Capitol .lxxv.	 Chapter 75
A ensenhar las matronas en qual manieyre les enbrios bius sian medicatz quan yeysso segon figura no-natural.	 When physicians are summoned to attend second unnatural figures of the body, they show the breasts as well.
Necessaria causa es que la matrona conogua en le comensament la figura del enfantament natural per senhals de lu, e es que quan tu vezas la femna expremar a las partidas dejos e desira odorar le ayre, e sobre aquo es enleujada per aquo que sobre ela es del part, e festina le eyssiment del enbrio, lahoras sapias que aquest part es segon figura natural, e es l’eyssiment de lu sobre le sieu cap, e la segondina am aquel o suspensa o pendent del ombelic.	 The nurse must first determine the nature of the breast to be presented and what is desired in regard to its removal. If it is wished that the nipple be removed, then it should be made clear whether or not this part is a second natural figure and if so, the incision for it will be made at the top, suspending from the abdomen.
Donc cum tu vezes aquels senhals, lahoras cove que·l ventre de lu sia compremut per so que l’embrio deysenda leugerament quar quan deyssen sobre le sieu cap, deysen a lu la segondina, e es mondada de aquelas superfluitatz am bona mondificacio.	 Once the breasts have been presented to them, they understand that the belly of him should be opened so that the embryo may descend more easily when it is wished over his head, then cut open the second one and remove any superfluous parts in a good manner.
Mays aquel que es otra aquest part es no-natural e no-lausable, quar quan le enbrio es eyssit sobre sos pes e·l cos de lu es eyssit devant le cap de lu e·ls pes de lu, e la ma de lu una, o al pe de lu i, o es eyssit le cap de lu e la ma de lu, o al ventre de lu, e fort leu es convertit sobre le sieu col, e semblant de las figuras de lu no-lausablas.	 If this part is another unnatural one and useless, when the embryo is being extracted from his body and head emerges first, or if it is removed from his head and belly comes out, then the hand of him should be placed on his head or stomach, in such a way as to make all figures unnatural.
Don necessaria causa es a la matrona que sia savia e subtil en totas aquelas causas, e que·s guarde de error e de decepcio.	 The nurse must be knowledgeable and discreet in every matter she handles, guarding against errors and disappointment.
E yeu so mostrant tota figura de aquelas, e qual engen es en aquelas per so que sia significat per aquo e sia stat sobre aquo.	 The first sentence means "Now pay attention to this figure.
Quan le feyt es eyssit sobre le sieu cap per egrecio natural, e aquel es vehement sobre la femna e es fayt a lu part dificil, e vezes la vertut de lu ja debelitada, lahoras fay aquela sezer , o que las femnas tenguan lu, e evapora le conh de lu am fenugrec coyt e am olis humitz.	 When the fever is over and it affects the head in a natural way, then it is very severe on women and makes them feel difficult to breathe. The pain they suffer from that already become unbearable, as do the pains of women tend towards being more severe. And when the cold air penetrates into their bodies, women's chests begin to suffer from this phenomenon.
E aprop entrometa la metrona entre les sieus ditz espatum petit e fenda am aquel la segondina, o secce aquela am la sua ungla entro que corro aquo que es en ela de humiditat.	 Then the servant takes a small measure and pours it into the second container, where this is poured in order to saturate it with humidity.
E preme le ventre de la femna entro que deyssenda le fet.	 The servant enters the belly of the woman from which they must extract
Mays si no deyssen, lahoras cove que la femna sia cristirizada de mucellage de ptilli e mucellage de fenugrec am cizami.	 If this is not necessary, then call for a physician who specializes in the treatment of ulcers and ulcers of the intestines.
E aprop comanda a lu, aprop le cristeri, que sia compremuda e fay aquela stornudar am condisi; e te la boca de lu e·l nas de lu per huna hora, quar le fet sira foro-getat tantost.	 The servant orders him to begin, and the physician places his face in front of it while he is speaking, putting his mouth and nose near for one hour so that the air can be inhaled as much as possible.
E si las doas mas del fet so foro-getadas al comensament, lahoras cove que tu redusiscas aquelas am fecilitat petit a petit.	 If two of them are initially very difficult to remove from the beginning, then call for someone who is weak in order to gradually reduce those until they are gone.
Mays si no obezeys al intrament, lahoras pausa la femna sobre una cezelha e leva les pes de lu sus, e aprop concuceys la cezelha sobre la terra; e la femna sia tenguda que no caia deves la concussio.	 If it is not necessary to be done immediately, then the woman lies down on a mat and has her feet lowered, and they place a cushion over it so that she will not feel the impact.
E si las mas no son dedintz tornadas e morr le fet, lahoras inscideys aquelas e extratz le romament del fet o lia le cors a la ma de lu am drap e extratz aquel am equalitat, quar aquel sira foro-getat.	 When the body's major veins are torn asunder and death ensues, doctors prescribe those remedies that relieve the pain of the limbs or heart
De eyssiment del embrio sobre les sieus pes.	 From the moment of conception until birth
Quan le fet yeys sobre les sieus pes, lahoras cove que tu impelliscas aquels en sus, e aprop convertas le fet petit, e aprop que engualhes aquel, e aprop que prenguas un pe de lu e extendas aquels petit a petit.	 When the child is born and enters into contact with your hands, you should immediately wet them gently as quickly as possible, then cradle the baby in both arms, hold it tightly, and gradually remove one foot at a time
Mays cum son eyssit entro a las coyssas, lahoras tu comanda a lu que se exprema, e fay aquela extornudar am condizi, quar sira foro-getat si Deus lo vol.	 If the child defecates into the thighs, you should command them to wipe it off immediately, and after wiping that area should be dried quickly because if God wills it may occur again
E si no es foro-getat am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras tu retorna le fet petit a petit entro que pauses aquel segon figura natural, quar aquel sira lahoras foro-getat am leugier eyssiment.	 If you do not wish for this to occur again, after returning the child gradually to its original position until it is in accordance with that second normal figure, because then there may be another instance of defecation.
E si es prohibit am tot aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras pren de musellage de altea e de goma dissolvuda, e percuteys tot en le mortier per bona percussio, e aprop linieys am aquo le conh de la femna, el pus bas del ventre de lu.	 If you prohibit all of that which I have recommended, then apply a paste made from old wine and sugar dissolved in water to the wound, then wash it thoroughly with clean sand or mud, and place the gauze over the area where the female's finger is located, covering the bottom of the belly.
E aprop fay aquela cezer en aygua tebeza, entro que consegua les ypocondias.	 Then you should apply a cold compress soaked in water until it reaches its maximum extent and coolness.
E cum vezes que las partidas dejos de lu so lenificadas, lahoras fay a lu subfumiguacio de mirta e sub-pausa aquela a lu.	 When joints are affected by cold humors that permeate every part of the body, including pain in the feet, it is commonly known as gout among doctors.
E quan te la sub-fumiguacio per una hora, lahoras tu la fay sezer sobre una cezelha, e aprop fay aquela stornudar e extrenh la boca de lu, e levas de aquela, e prem la partida pus bassa del ventre de lu am leugiera compressio, quar le fet sira tantost foro-getat.	 After a period of numbness lasting for one hour, the physician will then apply a sharp cautery to open sores and extract any discharge from the mouth, after which they press down on the belly button in order to prevent it from bursting forth with great force.
Eyssiment del fet sobre les sieus denols e las suas mas.	 Inspect the abdomen for swellings or masses.
Quan le fet eyssira segon aquesta forma, lahoras tu engenies en entrometen las suas mas petit a petit; e aprop la femna stia evessada sobre le sieu col, e les pes de lu pengo en jos, e aquelas sia jasent sobre le lieyt, e complegua las suas mas.	 If the above method is unsuccessful, apply gentle compression to the belly with small pieces of cloth placed one after another over the top and holding the person down as much as possible; then put pressure on their chest in order to prevent blood from coming out through it.
E aprop prem sobre le ventre de lu petit a petit, e aprop extratz aquo que es dejos les pes de lu de las aurelhas entro que sia preparada en la partida pus dejos.	 Then apply gentle compression on the belly in small pieces, and extend it so that all the patient's weight is placed there until they are ready for the incision to be made from below.
E si le fet no es fora-getat, lahoras pren les pes de lu e mau aquels am movement vehement, e aprop prem aquo que es sobre les ypocondres petit a petit entro que le fet puege a las partidas desus.	 If the abdomen is not distended, then remove their weight and place it gently on top of each other in small pieces until the patient can be prepared for incision at the bottom.
E aprop entrometa las suas mas e engualhe le fet petit a petit, e comanda a la femna que se exprema entro que le fet sia foro-getat.	 Then put them one after another with gentle compression and command that they stretch until the abdomen is distended.
Eyssiment del fet latutidinalment pendent una de las suas mas.	 The patient should lie down flat on their back with one of their legs elevated.
Sia engeniat en reduccio de la ma de lu, mays si no podes aquela reduzir, lahoras eleva la femna e fe aquela anar.	 Put a cushion under the patient's head to elevate it if they are not able to raise one of their legs by themselves.
E si anar no pot, lahoras fay la jazer sobre le lieyt, e concuteys las coyssas de lu am concussio vehement, e aprop aministra liamentz les quals yeu e recomtatz de mucillages.	 If they are unable to do so themselves, the doctor should place a cushion under their head and apply firm pressure on both thighs simultaneously, in order to prevent them from coming out of position.
E si es vengut le enfantament, lahoras fay aquela sezer sobre cezelha, e aprop studia sobre la reduccio de la ma, e enguala le fet segon figura natural, e fay stornudar la femna e comanda a lu que comprema a si entro que sia foro-getat.	 If the child is vomiting, the doctor should place it on its side and support their head while supporting their leg in a second natural position to prevent them from coming out of position.
Eyssiment del fet sobre·l col expandudas las suas mas e la fassia de lu es al dos de la sua mayre.	 The patient should lie flat on their back with their feet and body aligned, as the doctor is now giving a second assessment to check for any other issues.
Cove que la matrona tengua la ma del fet e aprop revolva aquel petit a petit, e eque aquel am facilitat.	 The mother should hold onto her child's foot and gently pull it back slowly as she is checking if the procedure was easy to perform.
E cum es e quant so es engualhat, e lahoras pausa sobre le conh de lu aquo que havem recomtat de oli e de mucellages.	 When you are done and after performing any recommended oil and mucus treatments, the doctor will now assess how easy it was to perform the procedure.
E aprop comandas a lu que·s maugua petit a petit, e quan auras feyt aquo, lahoras fay aquela cezer sobre una cezelha e comanda li que sia inclinada sobre le latz dreyt, e aprop comanda a lu que sia compremuda; e fay aquela stornudar am condizi.	 The doctor should then gently pull it back slowly and place the child on their side while holding them tightly to ensure they stay put.
Exitus foetus praeparati super latus.	 "The fetus falls upon the back.
Quan deyssen a horrifici de la mayre segon aquesta manieyra, considera, e lahoras tu inscideys la segondina am la tua ungla entro que sia evacuada de la humiditat.	 When dealing with a horrible situation of this kind, consider that the pain will subside if you remove some of the excess moisture.
E si le fet es suspendut sobre la cara e·l col de lu, lahoras tu inscideys aquela del embelic, per so que no sia retengut e mora.	 If a fetus is suspended over the face and the neck of another person, you should remove that part to prevent suffocation or drowning.
E aprop empelleys le fet a las partidas dedintz entro que pauses aquel segon que cove, e manda a la femna que comprema a si alcunas veguadas, e el sira fora-getat am eyssiment leugier, si Dieus o vol.	 The person should try to move the fetus away from where it was previously located and ask if there are any injuries that they need medical attention for, unless otherwise indicated by a doctor.
Exitus geminorum aut foetuum multorum.	 "The death of twins or many fetuses.
Sapias que gemels motas veguadas so natz, e alcunas vetz naysso tres o quatre , mays aquo es estranh e tart s’endeve; mays v so causas foro natura, e no vivo.	 If twins are separated prematurely and some of them die from three or four months on, it is strange and terrible to happen; but this may be the result of nature's causes, not caused by living beings.
E conte aquelas, ja sia que sian montiplicatz, una segondina, e son seperatz per ciphac, distingen aquels enter le liguament en l’ombilic de cascun de aquels E alcunas veguadas so foro-getatz ayssi cum es un fet per eyssiment natural leugier, e so eysitz alcunas veguadas per eyssiment no-lausabla ayssi cum havem recomtat.	 If twins are separated at once or separately after birth and some die from the same cause as a fetus due to natural causes, such deaths would be considered as one death for accounting purposes; but if they died because of medical reasons that were recommended by doctors, it should be recorded separately.
E si son dificils alcus de lor deves le enfantament e perveno ad aquo que havem dit de las figuras no-naturals, lahoras tu cura aquels ayssi cum havem recontat.	 If there were any unnatural figures and you have confirmed that it is not due to any illness or injury of the child, then record these as deaths from other causes.
E si’ la matrona subtil e fassa aquo que fa am facilitat e subtilitat, e am tarditat, e sia ingeniat segon tota figura segon que es a lu preparat de l’engen amenant a salut.	 "When the female patient is very delicate and requires ease, subtlety, and patience, then let the physician proceed with great caution and gentleness as he prepares for health.
Rememoratio eius quod formatur in matrice ex embrionibus et Abortiuntur.	 The remembrance of this can only be made from the embryo or abortion
Alcunas veguadas son formatz en la mayre un, e dos, e tres, e quatre, e v, e vi, e vii, e mays x, e ja es deves mi verificat que una femna abortem ne getet vi, e una autra x totz formatz, la qual causa fo fayta per mensuracio dels glorios savis.	 The number of women who have abortions is seven: one and two, three, four, five, six, seven
E tot aysso cove que sia en la sciencia de la matrona quar fort leu ad aquela parve semblant de aquo, e donc opause se ad aquo am so que cove.	 And as such the science of the female patient is very important for this purpose, and therefore pause to do as with that
Capitol .lxxvi.	 The 66th chapter of a book.
De extraccio del fet quan es mort.	 From the extraction of the dead body when it is deceased.
Quan tu curas le fet mort am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la medicacio e no es defora eyssit, e tu yest forsat usar de opperacio am ma, lahoras cove que consideras si la femna es de sana vertut e no es am alcu dels accidentz per les quals sobre ela es temuda perdicio.	 When you cure the dead body as mentioned in the chapter of medicine and it is not fatal use a surgical operation if the woman is healthy and does not have any accidents that may cause her to lose life.
Lahoras cove que la femna sia envessada sobre le lieyt sobre le sieu dos, e sia le cap de lu enclinat enjos e las coyssas de lu sian elevadas.	 The doctor will place the woman's head downward and elevate her hips
E·l ministre tengua aquela de doas partz o sia liada en le lieyt per so que·l cos de lu no se extenda deves la extraccio del fet.	 The minister should be placed on one side or supported by the other, in order that his body does not extend beyond the extraction of the dead body.
E aprop tu humecta la boca de la mayre de lu am olis humitz e am mucellage de altea e de fenugrec e de semensa de li.	 Place a wet cloth in her mouth to cool her down, place ice on the back of his neck and forehead, and put an ice pack on his stomach and chest
E aprop unte la matrona la sua ma am aquels olis e mucellages, e aprop entrometa la sua ma am fecilitat en la mayre, e aprop cerque am la ma loc en le qual fique les uncis en le fet.	 Place a cloth on her hand to cool it down and place ice on the back of her neck in order to prevent any injuries occurring in that area.
E locs convenient en aquo: adonc tu considera si le fet es preparat que deysenda sobre le sieu cap, e lahoras tu fique les uncis en les huels de lu, o en le col, o en la boca, o en le palat, o dejos la barba, o en la furcula de lu, o en les locs propdas de las costas, o dejos les ypocondres.	 In this situation: if you think the body is prepared to do so, then you should put ice on his head, or his chest, or his neck, or his beard, or in the furcula area of his throat, or in the places where his shoulders meet, or in any other areas that are convenient.
Mays si le deysendiment es sobre les pes de lu, lahoras en le pentenilh, o en le mieg de las costas.	 If you decide to do this on the foot of him, then ice should be placed in his heel or in the side of his back
E cove que tengua le unci am la ma dreyta, e pausa la curvitat de lu en aquel loc le qual es entre les ditz de la ma senestra, e entrometa la ma am facilitat e fique le unci en alcu de aquels locs les quals havem ditz, entro que pervengua a la causa boyda.	 Put ice on his elbow to cool it down and make sure that the curve of him is in the correct place where there's an area between your left hand and arm
E aprop pause e fique en la apposicio de lu un autre unci, o le tertz si es necessitat, per so que sia atraccio engual, e no sia extencio segon la sua rectetut tant solament.	 Place another ice pack in the appropriate area of his body if necessary, so that it can stay on for a longer duration without causing any discomfort only as long as is needed.
Ans sia maugut a tota partida, per so que l’eyssiment de lu sia alleujat ayssi cum es fayt en dent deves la eradicacio de lu.	 The first sentence translates to "The illness of this patient is now entirely clear.
E cove en lu aquo que es entre lor que la extencio sia mollificada; e si alcuna partida de lu es retenguda, lahoras cove que la matrona unte alcus sieus ditz am oli e entrometa aquels espertament e revolva am aquels aquo que es retengut.	 "The condition of this patient has improved greatly, and if any part is still held back, the doctors are ordering that it be loosened more.
Donc si la partida del fet es fora-getada, lahoras les uncis sian permudatz entra loc le qual sia pus aut; e fay aysso entro que tot le fet sia fora-getat.	 "If the part of the child is already detached, then loosen it gently and carefully in that place where it was originally tightened.
Mays si la ma es eyssida denant l’autra, e no es possible reduzir aquela per la coartacio de lu, lahoras cove que drap sia envolopat sobre aquela; e aprop extratz aquela entro que tota sia fora-getada, e inscideys aquela o en la junctura de la ma o en le coyde.	 "If the hand is being held by something else and cannot be reduced through the patient's own strength, then cover it with a cloth.
E ayssi cove que fassas en l’autra ma e en les dos pes.	 "Do this to both hands as well.
Mays si le cap del fet es gran, o accideys a lu coartacio en le eyssiment, o es en le cap de lu aygua ajustada, lahoras cove que entrometa entre les ditz espatum spinos e fenda le cap e extragua la aygua, o que discroba aquel am un instrument le qual es nompnat “alundat”, la forma del qual vindra am las formas dels autres instruments en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	 "If the head of the patient is large or the obstruction occurs in its cavity, then enter between the spigots and spread open the opening, or that which resembles a tool known as 'alundat', shape of which will come to resemble those of other instruments used on such parts.
E semblantment fassa si·l fet es de gran cap per natura: e lahoras cove que inscida aquel am algematu, o que prengua aquel am alunda ayssi cum havem dit; e aprop extra les osses am les forceps.	 "Do the same thing if the patient's head is naturally large, and cover it with something to prevent injury, or that which resembles a tool known as 'alundat', used shape of which will come to resemble those of other instruments used on such parts.
E si le cap es eyssit e es coartat deves la furcula, lahoras sia fendut entro que la humiditat la qual es en le pietz sia efunduda.	 When a person's heart is outside their chest, then pain occurs in the area where moisture has accumulated
Mays si no es complicat, ni obezeys a eyssiment, lahoras tu inscideys le cap tantost segon que a tu sira possible.	 If it's not complicated or excessive, I will consider it as the next sentence to translate
E si le dejos del ventre es apostemat o es en lu ydropici, lahoras cove que tu perfores aquel entro que corro la humiditat que es en lu.	 If you find it necessary to place a cushion or put something under their belly button, then do so to prevent moisture from accumulating there.
Mays si le fet es sobre les sieus pes, lahoras la atraccio de lu es leugiera e la direccio de lu a la boca de la mayre es leugiera.	 If the task is about their feet, then place them on the floor and direct them to put it in front of the greater opening in the mouth.
Mays si es coartat deves le ventre e·l pietz, lahoras cove que tu extraguas aquel am drap le qual auras envolopat sobre la tua ma, e que fendes le ventre e·l pietz entro que corra aquo que es en aquels.	 If you need to remove the belly and buttocks, then take that piece of cloth and cover your hand with it, and place them between the legs so that moisture runs through those areas.
Mays si les autres membres so ostatz e torna le cap, lahoras la metrona entrometa la ma senestra; mays si la boca de la mayre es huberta, lahoras intrometa la ma en le preon de layre, e cerque am aquela le cap, e atira aquel am les ditz entro a la boca de la mayre, e aprop entrometa en lu un unci, o dos uncis, e atire lu am aquels.	 If the other members are to be opened and come out of the head, then place your hand gently between their legs; if the greater opening is closed, then place your hand in front of it, or two inches away from it, and pull that piece into its mouth, and put it there.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada per apostema caut le qual accideys a l’u, lahoras cove que no sia trebelhat sobre lu; abantz cove lahoras aministrar efusio de causas humidas grassas.	 If the greater opening is blocked by a cushion that prevents it from being moistened properly, then do not put anything there, and instead you should administer fluids to counteract the effects of wet heat.
E aministre emplastres; e segua le pacient en ayguas que mollifican e humectan.	 The physician applies compresses containing cooling and moistening agents
E si le fet es sobre le sieu costat, lahoras si possible es, sia agulat: e sia aministrat aquo que havem dit en le fet viu.	 If the foot is on its side, doctors may possibly apply this compress to it as well: and when applying to live tissue
E si aquo no es possible, lahoras sia inscidit en pessas, e sia extrayt.	 And if that's not possible, then the doctor will put them aside and move on.
E cove que non layssas alcuna causa dedintz de la segondina.	 Do not insert any other causes between those two sentences.
E cum tu auras complida tota la tua opperacio, lahoras aministra aquo que havem dit de la curacio en les apostemas cautz les quals accideysso de la mayre.	 After completing all your work, the doctor will apply this compress to any part of the body that is affected by pain.
E si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras deyssendas en ayguas stipticas e aministra l’autra curacio.	 If you find flow from blood, then doctors should administer a further compress
E yeu ja e vist una femna en le ventre de la qual era fet mort, e aprop sobre aquel foc autra veguada emprenhada, e aprop foc mort es le fet autre.	 You have seen a woman in her belly who was dead and brought it on another stretcher, and when the other person died,
Accidit al u aprop lonc temps apostema en le sieu embelic; e inflat es entro que foc ubert, e comensec a getar brac.	 The moment you arrive at the patient's side, inflate the air-filled compress, and begin to dress their wounds.
E yeu fu appelhat a la cura de lu, e medicat a lu per lonc temps, e la plagua no es consolidada.	 The cure was applied to her for a long time, but the wound did not heal.
Adonc yeu pausegui sobre lu de alscunas causas emplastra de forta atraccio, e eyssic de lu un os, e aprop passero alcus jorns, e eyssic un autre os; e yeu fu trop meravilhat, cum en le ventre no sia os.	 When you put aside all other causes that attract strongly and remove one arm, and after passing through many days, and remove the second arm; and you were too tired to move around in her belly.
E adonc yeu cogitegui que eran dels osses del fet mort.	 The bones of a dead man
Donc yeu enguisigui la plagua, e extrayssi de lu motz osses , la femna existent en las sieuas milhos disposicios, e ja visquec en tal manieyra per lonc temps, correc de lu un petit de brac.	 And then you should remove the bandage and carefully inspect the bones of the deceased, looking for any damage that may have occurred over time.
E yeu no afermegui asso esser stranh, sino quar en aquo es sciensa e ajutori ad aquo que le metge artifec am la ma per curacio aministra.	 You should not be surprised if the cause is unknown and the doctor performs further tests to determine the reason for treatment.
De las formas dels instrumentz que so necessaris a extrayre le fet.	 Of the instruments that are necessary in order to extract the body.
Forma de vertitge am la qual es uberta la mayre:	 The form of validity on which it is based:
Aquesta es la forma de strenhedor en le qual so engualhatz les libres, al qual engualhament sian dos virtitges en doas extremitatz de dos futz.	 This is the form of strength in which two people are equalized at their extremities.
May empero aquesta virtitge cove que sia pus subtil de strictori, e sia fayt o de eba o de fust de boys.	 However this form may be more subtle and flexible than others, allowing for greater variation in the way that it is used.
E sia la latitut de quascun fust quays dos ditz e le marge de quascu amdos quays un dit, e la longitut de quascu es un palm e mig; e en le mieg loc de dos fustz so dos ajustaments de aquel meteys fustz les quals ja son fermatz, dels quals la longitut es la maytat de un palm e un pauc mes, e la latitut de quascu es quay dos ditz, o un pauc mes.	 And its length is the distance between two fingers and a thumb; it measures about five centimeters or less. Its width varies with each digit, being greater than that of one finger by a few millimeters.
E aquestz dos additamentz sian entromeses en la boca de la mayre per que sia uberta am aquels quan tu revolves las doas prescriptas virtigges.	 These two are inserted into the mouth of the greater when you rotate both prescribed virtues.
Forma autra semblant de aquela pus subtil e pus leugiera:	 Another way of doing this was as subtle and quick
Sia fayta de fustz de eba o de boys segon la semblansa de forceps.	 And if you use a forceps to do it,
Mays empero en la extremitat de lu so dos additament ayssi cum vezes, e la longitut de aquels additament es quays un palm, e la latitut de quascu es dos ditz.	 And remember that the distance in length is equal to the width of a palm, and the latitude of each one is two thumbs
E cum tu vols am aquels ubrir la mayre, lahoras tu fay cezer la femna sobre le lieyt les pes pendentz, ubert aquo que es entre las coyssas de lu.	 And if you want to stretch the foot more, then put your hand underneath it and lift it so that the toes are spread out.
E aprop obre la tua ma am le instrument ayssi cum fas am forfexs engualment segon la quantitat que vols de la aprecio de la boca de la mayre entro que la metrona fassa so que vols.	 And make sure your hand is placed on the tool just as firmly as you would with a pair of tweezers, following the amount of pressure you want from the opening into which the measurement must be taken so that it will do what you want.
La forma de vertitge la qual diysero les antics:	 The way that was customary among ancients:
Forma de impellent am le qual es empellit le fet:	 The way in which the deed is executed
Forma de amisidat2 am le qual es conterit le cap gran	 The way to perform a coup de grace
E es asemblat a forceps al qual so dentz en la extremitat, ayssi cum vezes, e alcunas veguadas es fayt lonc ayssi cum forceps segon aquesta forma, ayssi cum vezes, al qual so dentz ayssi cum dentz de ressegua am le qual es inscidit e conterit.	 And hold the forceps in the extremity, similarly, and sometimes the handle is held that way with tweezers, similarly to this one, which holds the other end tightly and firmly.
Forma de amesidat pauc:	 The way of performing a coup de grace quickly
Forma de unci havent una spina:	 The way in which you gently remove a spine:
Forma de unci havent doas spinas:	 "The form of pain that stings.
Forma de forceps a la qual so dentz de cerra am le qual le cap del fet sia conterit:	 The use of forceps to hold the head in place.
Forma de spatum havent dos extremitatz am le qual le cap es abscindit:	 The form of pain that has caused the feet to be separated.
Forma de dos espatums latz:	 Two servants placed on either side.
Totz aquels instrumentz so excersitatz, e quan mes so multiplicadas las specias de aquel e so preparadas deves le artifexs, quant es pus leugier a la sua opperacio e pus aut deves les homes per la sua quantitat.	 These instruments are used in their exercise when the species of them are multiplied and prepared for use; and when it is necessary to employ many of these instruments, according to its nature and what is required by art or skill, let them be applied by the persons who have been trained for this purpose.
E no obres de aquels instrumentz ja sia qua sia deves tu aparalhat, quar la necessitat de aquels no es excusabla.	 Do not use these instruments unless there is a necessity to do so and it cannot be excused.
De extraccio de la segondina.	 The second exercise of the day.
Quan la segondina es retenguda deves le enfantament, lahoras cove que tu comandes a la malautae que retengua le sieu ale, e aprop fay aquela stornudar am condizi, e strenh la tua ma sobre la boca de lu e sobre las nars de lu, e si per aysso es defora eyssit, bo es.	 When the second exercise is finished you should command your attendant to hold it in place and then gently remove any straps that may be holding it down tight; stretch out your hand over its mouth and nostrils if necessary, and if this is not done properly, do as needed.
E sino, lahoras tu pren una ola e perfora en la cuberta un trauc e pausa en aquela erbas ubrent la boca de la mayre, ayssi cum calament e ruda e anet e camamilla e scicados arabic e cassia lignea e santaurea.	 Otherwise, you should take a cloth and wipe away any cold sweat that might have entered your mouth; then gently blow your nose with paper or the back of your hand in order to calm yourself down and remove the phlegm from your throat as smoothly and quickly as possible.
Totas aquestas erbas o alcunas de lor sian submersas en aygua en la ola, e pausa aquela sobre le foc.	 When herbs or some of these are submerged in water on a stove, and put it over fire.
E aprop pausa una canula de canaviera en la boca de la mayre, e tengua aquela entro que la evapor vengua a la concavitat de la mayre.	 Then place the cannula into the mouth of the patient, and keep in mind that it should evaporate to the cavity of the chest.
E aprop fay aquela stornudar ayssi cum havem dit, e la segondina sira fora-getada am velocitat.	 Then open up your second nostril as quickly as possible.
Mays si roman aprop aquesta curacio e no es eyssida, lahoras tu comanda a la matrona que submerge la sua ma sinistra en oli sizami o en micellage de altea, e aprop entrometa aquela en le conh e queresca am aquela la segondina, e cum aquela auras trobada, lahoras pren la e exten aquela pauc a pauc Mays si es annexsa en le preon de la mayre, lahoras entrometa la sua ma segon que havem recomtat, e quan aura trobat la segondina, extragua aquela petit a petit segon rectetut per so que la mayre no caja deves la atraccio vehement.	 Then apply this treatment and if it does not work, ask the nurse to submerge your left arm in olive oil or micellar water for about 10 minutes, then put that into the chest cavity with a cannula as soon as possible.
Abantz cove que sia permudada als costatz dreyt e sinestre am facilitat.	 Then adjust it to both right and left sides easily.
E aprop sia ajustat en la quantitat de atraccio, quar ela obedira e evasira de adhirencia.	 Then adjust the amount of traction as needed so that it responds appropriately.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada, nos ja havem recomtat la curacio am sturnutacio e am medicacio de la ola am erbas.	 If the mouth of the patient is obstructed, we recommend using a suction and medical treatment with herbs.
Mays si no es fora-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recomtadas, lahoras guarda te que no fetigues sobre aquela en iteracio de abstracio, mays empero cove que aquo que es eyssit de lu a la boca de la mayre lies a la coyssa de la femna, e aprop cristeriza aquela am enguent e tetrafarmacon; quar aquel fara poyrir aquela aprop alcus dias e sira dissolvuda e sira fora-getada.	 If the causes of all that we have recommended are not resolved, please keep in mind to avoid discussing it further and instead focus on this issue alone: if there is a blockage at the mouth of the patient, then put the needle into his nose as quickly as possible.
Mays quan se poyreys, es de lu elevada mala audor al cap, e al estomac, e aquo ledeys la malauta; e adonc cove que sian aministradas sub-fumiguacios e convenientz ad aquo.	 When the pain arises, elevate his head and abdomen, and let this medicine be given to him as he pleases.
Mays alcus dels Antics ja so esproatz sub-fumigacio de nazitort e de figuas seccas.	 The ancient remedy is a mixture of warm water and fresh figs.
Forma de instrument am le qual la femna es sub-fumiguada deves la retentio de mestruas e de la segondina:	 Form of the instrument through which the woman will be subjected to the retention of menstrual periods and the second one:
Sia fayta de veyre o de eram.	 It may happen that it is seen or heard.
E sia pausada la extremitat subtil en le conh e la extremitat ampla sobre le foc, e la sub-fumiguacio sia pausada sobre las brazas del foc.	 The subtle extremity of the hand and broad extremity over the flame, and the cauterization is stopped over the fingers' fire.
E tengua aquela entro que sia consumida aquela sub-fumiguacio e itera·n autra.	 It will be necessary to consume that which is subjected to that cauterization, or try another one.
De curacio del cul del enfant no-perforat.	 The child's anus was not perforated.
Motz enfantz naysso e les culs de lu no so perforatz, les quals ya ciphac subtil e opilat.	 If the child does not have a hole in his anus and the cheeks are not perforated, which will be done delicately and carefully.
Adonc cove a la matrona que perfore am le sieu dit aquel ciphac; e sino, perfora aquel am spatum agut, e guarda se que no toque le lacert.	 And if the woman has not given birth to that child yet, perform it through her vagina and if she does not allow it, perforate it carefully in front of her mouth, while being careful to avoid touching her breast.
E aprop pause sobre aquel lana enfusa en vi e oli; e aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia senat.	 And when you place the enfused thread on his eyes and eyebrows, be sure that it is well done in terms of size.
Mays si temes que sia opilat, lahoras pausa en le trauc una canula per motz dias, e osta la quan le enfant voldra degerir.	 If you think he may vomit, put a spoon in his mouth to stop him from vomiting, and hold it until the child wants to eat again.
E ja accideys oppilacio del cul per consolidacio de plagua o de apostema; adonc cove que aquela consolidacio sia inscidida, e aprop sia curada am aquo que avem dit de la curacio e del plom.	 The first sentence translates to "The anal sphincter becomes tightened due to constipation or from hemorrhoids. If this tightening is not cured, it will be treated with the same care that has been given for constipation and piles.
De curacio de las fistulas que endeveno dejos.	 "Treatment of fistulas that have developed.
Las fistulas que endeveno en la partida dejos pus bassa so nodacio e grossetut las quals endeveno prop del cul defora o en l’espazi de la una partida.	 Fistulas that develop in the anal canal or between different parts of it are treated with care and good treatment options provided by doctors.
E es una fistula o motas.	 "It is a fistula.
E cum aquela nodacio es antiquada e corr de la humiditat aygosa blanca o poyridura subtil, e alcunas veguadas so de aquestas fistulas alcunas penetrantz.	 If the node has been long standing and covered with white or reddish fine spots, and some of these fistulas penetrate others.
E aquelas penetrantz so conogudas per aquo que es eyssit de aquelas per la egressio e per ventosetat; e alcunas vetz use le malaute de egressio, e fort leu es eyssit de aquelas verm.	 These penetrators are known for exiting and opening up wounds; some veins are used to prevent the exit of these veins from escaping.
E so de aquelas fistulas alcunas veguadas en l’espazi penetrantz entro a la vesica, e entro al meat de la vergua; e so de aquelas penetrantz entro la junctura de la coyssa e entro al notz de la coeta.	 These fistulas grow into the bladder space and into the rectum of the vagina; they also penetrate between the muscles of the thigh, or between the veins of the leg.
E aquo en que es conoguda fistula penetrant entro al cul e no-penetrant, es que tu metas le tieu dit endic en le cul, e entrometas tenta subtil de eram o de ferr en la fistula quan no y es turtuositat.	 When a fistulas penetrates into the anus and not to penetrate it is necessary for doctors to examine it carefully or try to pierce it gently when this would be possible without causing harm.
Mays si en aquela es turtuositat, lahoras entromet en aquela tenta subtil de plom o de pels de caval entro que tu sentas la tenta o le pel en le tieu dit.	 When that happens, the doctor will examine it gently or probe around for any signs of an abscess in order to determine if a puncture should be made without causing harm.
E si no sentas aquela de tot ni no procezeys del trauc alcuna causa de egestio ni verm ni ventositat, ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras sapias que es no-penetrant, e lahoras coyta te a la curacio.	 When there is no obstruction in the urethra and no discharge of semen or urine, as you have said, then pain arises from the bladder, doctors call it cystitis.
E quan la fistula es penetrant entro a la vesica o entro al meat de la vergua, lahoras la significacio de lu es eyssiment de urina de aquela e prohibicio de lu ad aysso que·l loc am medicina sia consolidat.	 When the fistula is penetrating into the bladder or into the vein of the groin, then the meaning of it is to be discharged from urine and prevention of its further progress necessitates medical treatment being taken.
Mays si es penetrant entro la junctura de la coyssa o entro al os e envencio de dolor en le circuit, lahoras senhal de lu es que la tenta perve entro aqui si en lu no es turtuositat entro al os, e envencio de dolor en le circuit de la partida; e que de lu yeys poyredura tostemps; e que no val en aquela medicacio, ni es consolidada am enguent.	 When the fistula is penetrating into a joint or into the ear and causes pain in its path, then the sign of it is that one tries to penetrate it here if it is not torn through the ear, and causes pain in its path from the start; and when it fails, there will be no further attempts at treatment.
E en totas aquelas fistulas penetrant no es curacio de tot, e la curacio de aquelas es trebalh e vanetat dels folyls metges sobre·l qual so fermatz.	 In all of those fistulas that are penetrating there is no cure for them and the treatment varies greatly from doctor to doctor as it remains a mystery.
Mays en aquela que no es penetrant e no antiqua, sanacio am ferr es sperada segon que yeu a tu recomtare, e aquo que ja yeu e proat.	 When it is not penetrating and does not cause any harm, then treatment should be sought as recommended by your doctor, and once you have done so, proceed with caution.
E es que le malaute jagua entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos e eleva las cambas de lu entro sus, las coyssas sian enclinadas al ventre de lu, e aprop entromet tenta de plom, o de eram si es en la fistula turtuositat, entro que sapias le loc on perve la tenta.	 It is that the patient lies between your thighs and raises their legs into a position where they are inclined towards them belly, and the cushion will be placed at the bottom of the bed to prevent the attempt from penetrating if you know the fistula is torn through.
E si aquela sent le malaute entorn le cuol, lahora cove que tu entrometas le tieu dit endic en le cuol.	 When a patient's thighs are opened up between them, it is customary for someone to enter that opening and put their hand inside the cavity.
E si sentas en le tieu dit la tenta ja per si meteyssa descuberta penetrar, otra aquo que sentas entre le tieu dit e aquela siphac o carn, lahoras sapias certanament que aquela es penetrant; e adonc no trebalhes en aquela, quar no es en aquela sanacio, ayssi cum havem dit.	 If you see that the attempt to insert something has been discovered as an intrusion or penetration, then it is customary for someone else to interpose themselves between the thighs and that opening in order to prevent further intrusion; if not, because there was no injury, they would say so as well.
Mays empero diyssero alcus que es sana en alcus homes tart.	 However, these are just opinions of others who think they know better.
E de la medicacio per la qual es sperat juvament en lu es que tu ignes cauteri subtil segon le ample de la fistula, ayssi cum es precedit, e intrometas aquel ignit en la fistula entro que pervengua entorn le cuol; e aprop itera aquel doas o tres vetz entro que sapias que ja son adhustas totas aquelas carns ajustadas fistuladas que so semblantz a cana de pluma de ausel.	 For the medical treatment that is supposed to be done with the first attempt, you should make an incision into the fistula itself, and then insert it into the cavity; if it fails in the fistula opening or comes out of another part of the body, do so three times until all those affected parts are adjusted fistulas that resemble a quill.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder entro que en yescan totas aquelas carns que so adhustas, e aprop cura aquela am medicinas la carn engendrantz e consolidantz, e si es sanada, bo es; e sino, lahoras no es sana en degun temps per autra curacio.	 Then cure the affected parts with bandages wrapped around it to stop them from coming out and heal wounds that occur when not cured promptly; if healed, good is so; otherwise, you will not be able to heal any part of it another way.
E si la tenta intra, e no penetra entro·l tieu dit le qual es en le cul, e entre aquel e la tenta que es velament spes de carn o de ciphac, e vezes la fistula en aquo que siec la superficia de la codena, lahoras secca la codena del comensament de la fistula, e tu ve seccan am la tenta, e sia en la fistula entro que la seccio pervengua al loc en le qual perve la extremitat de la tenta, e per la tenta es liberat e catz.	 If the attempt to enter through that opening does not penetrate or penetrates only slightly and then comes out on the skin around it, then you will seal off that opening from the beginning of the fistula; once you've sealed it, make sure to also seal off any other openings, even if they occur at a later time by the same part. Then release the attempt through the sealed hole so that it can come out and heal.
E aprop mundifiqua aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so asembladas a canula de pena de ausel e no romangua de aquelas alcuna causa.	 When fistulas have formed in those parts that are assembled into a needle, they cannot heal themselves from any cause.
Mays si flux de sanc vezes que vengua entre tu e la tua opperacio quan ensideysses aquelas carns, lahoras le milh que sia e del pus leugier instrument es cauterizar am foc o am medicina acuta, quar cauteri am foc ajusta bonas doas habitutz: so es adhustio de aquelas carns ajustadas, e abscizio del sanc exseccacio de las humiditatz.	 If a fistula frequently occurs between you and your partner when cleaning those parts, it is customary for the surgeon to cauterize them using either a heated cautery or an acute instrument like a needle.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder o en caus trissat entro que·l loc geta brac, e aprop lahoras cura la plagua am enguentz carn dura engendran e consolidan.	 When the cold abscesses are located on either side of a joint or corner of the body part, it is customary to cure them by applying hot oil and burning the tough flesh with fire until it has been burned through and consolidated.
E so medicinas en las quals so stipticitat e exseccio; quan lahoras es restaurada ja es sanada e no temes iteracio.	 Those medicines in which there is strictness or dryness - when the treatment has already been restored and healed without recurrence.
Mays si la fistula ja perve entro al preon del cul e es elonguada de lu superficia del cos, lahoras entromet le tieu dit en le cul e inquireys am aquel.	 If a fistula has entered the anus of the body part and is elongated on its surface, they will insert it into the anal canal and examine it there.
E donc si centes la tenta e entre tu e ela es velament de ciphac o de carn, e es propda a la penetracio, lahora no es operacio en lu sino segon via di fiducia e de speransa.	 If the attempt is accompanied by swelling of the diaphragm or flesh and there are pains to penetrate it, then they will not operate on that but with faith in trust alone.
La qual causa es aministrar en lu una de tres manieyras: o que cauterize aquela ayssi cum havem dit; o que secces aquela entro que consieguas la conquavitat de lu per que sia a tu possible entrometre las qualcas e la curacio propdana; e no procesiscas mot am seccio per so que no inscidas le lacert contenent le cuol, e que accidisque sobre le malaute eyssiment de la egistio ses voluntat; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit quar fort leu sira sanat; o que elongues aquel velament e mondes aquel pus que seccas aquel entro prop le cul, ayssi cum havem dit, o am tenta o am autre instrument de aguda extremitat, e aprop mondifique aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so en la seccio entro la on podes am percrustacio; e aprop esforsa te a far la restauracio de tota la plagua am seccio, e si le orrifici pus desus no es consolidat, e romangua la fistula uberta en la partida del cul, e sira pus leugier per le malaute.	 There are three ways to administer it: they either cauterize that into trust; or they will perform surgery to cure the hernia by inserting a finger up its possible entrance and performing treatment in accordance with faith alone; and do not operate through any other way so as not to cause the intestines to come out, and hold your hand over their body part; and prepare it for them according to whether that much pus is light or heavy.
E alscunas veguadas la fistula es finida segon aquesta manieyra: es quan tu entrometas la tenta en la fistula, e es en le latz del cul entorn la superficia del cos am la codena e en le marge del cul, lahoras pren tenta de perforada extremitat, que es ayssi cum agulha de preparantz les coers segon aquesta forma:	 When the attempt to enter into the fistula has been completed and it's inside the body in the region of the anus near its surface area on the buttocks or around the edge of the anus. The pain will then begin to take effect immediately.
e entromet en aquela fiel envolopat de v fiels o entorn aquels; e aprop entromet tenta am fiel en la fistula entro que consiegua la conquavitat de lu.	 When inserting into that tight, sealed opening of the anus or surrounding area around it, approach insertion by being very careful to enter through the fistula once you are inside.
Mays si es penetrant en le marge del cul prop dedintz, lahoras tu extratz le fiel de aquel trauc ayssi que tu intrometas le tieu dit en le cul; e extraguas la extremitat del fiel e ajustes las duas extremitatz essemps, e estrenh cascuna, e leyssa aquo per un dia o per dos, e quan mays inscideys le fiel en la carn, estrenh be aquel entro que aquelas carns sian inscididas las quals so entre doas extremitatz del fiel e que cajan.	 If you are penetrating the edge of the anus intentionally, then when inserting into that flesh gently insert it into the anus; and withdraw your hand with both hands trying to put them as close together as possible, try again, and if after a day or two, and when the penis is inserted in the flesh, then gently remove it while avoiding causing those parts of skin to become broken.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia consolidada e sanada.	 And carefully apply the plaster over that which has solidified and healed.
Mays si le orrifici de la fistula no es penetrant, lahoras fay aquel penetrar, en qualque manieyre sia a tu preparat, sino que sia mot en le preon, quar no es a tu que fassas aquo per que no inscidas le lacert; e aprop fay am aquela entro que sia sanada.	 If the orifice of the fistula is not being penetrated, then let that be avoided when preparing yourself for it, or simply do not attempt to penetrate there at all, and instead put some care over that which has healed.
La forma de spatum spinos am lo qual es fenduda la fistula: la curvitat del qual es mot aguda e l’autra partida es no-aguda, per so que no inscidas aquo que no es necessari, ayssi cum vezes.	 The shape of the sheath to which the fistula is severed can be quite acute and another part may not be as acute, in such a case it's not necessary to insert into that, similarly.
De sutura de emorroydas en las quals corra sanc en la inscizio de aquelas.	 In those cases where blood runs in between the incision and the skin of them
Emorroydas so segon dos manieyras, quar o so entre le cul semblantz aysi que es de carbos, o quays aquelas sian cum a gras de rasim.	 Those cases are second to third degree burns, either between the buttocks or above them where fatty tissues are affected
E de aquelas so petitas e grans, e que le sanc corr de aquelas tostemps e es una, e so motas, e so fora·l cul, e en las extremitatz de lu.	 Those are small and large burns that cover the palms of the hands and feet as well as the buttocks
Mays empero aquelas que so foro le cul so segon las mes de pauca humiditat, de las quals corr aygua citrina o un petit de sanc am cos continuabla, e so segon la color del cos.	 Those cases may be due to a lack of moisture or the presence of irritant water that causes a small burn area to gradually worsen and is second to the color of the skin.
E la curacio de aquela que es dedintz le cuol es que comandes al malaute que se assela e que se exprema entro que le cuol yesca e las emoroydas apparescan a tu.	 The cure for that ailment is to command the patient to lie down and express themselves, between which time their burn disappears and the inflammation of the joints appears.
Adonc tu te coyte e suspen am uncis o que tenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, e aprop incideys aquelas deves las suas razitz.	 When you cover them with a cloth or bandage and place them in water at your own risk, it is advisable to remove those sores from the skin.
Mays si les uncis no so tengutz en aquelas per la humiditat de lor e mollificacio de aquelas, lahoras pren aquelas am drap aspre o am coto o am flassada de lana, e extratz aquelas am les tieus ditz, e aprop inscideys aquelas e polveriza sobre lor alcunas polveras caudas aprop la inscizio, per que sian ad aquelas en loc de cauteri; o cauteriza aquelas segon que es precedit en le capitol de cauterizar.	 If the cloth is not sufficient to keep them wet and moisturize them, cover them with a coarse or flannel material, remove them from their ties, place them on some powder that has been prepared for this purpose in the incision area, so that they may be applied there instead of cautery; or apply cautery if the matter is described elsewhere.
E aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	 The physician then applies a cure to both of them so they may be healed.
E si le cul no obezeys a egressio, lahoras cristerisa le malaute am cristeri en le qual sia mordicacio petita, e sia lavat am aquel aquo que es en le cuol e que obezesca a egressio leugierament quan le malaute s’esprem.	 If the rectum has become obstructed with excrement and pain occurs due to this obstruction, then gently massage the area of the buttocks next to it so that the feces may be expelled gently from there without causing further injury.
Mays si las emorroydas so defora le cul, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiera, e es que tu prenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, o que prenguas aquelas am unci, e inscidas aquelas, e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit entro que sian sanadas.	 If the hemorrhoids are causing pain and itches there around the anus, then apply a cure to them all so they may be healed.
E aquel que avoreys inscizio, cove que aministres sutura de lor segon aquesta manieyra: pren fiel envolopat e entromet aquel en agulha e aprop extratz las emorroydas a las partidas dessus, e fay aquel penetrar am la agulha en la razit del autra part, e envolveys las doas extramitatz del fiel en la partida pus dejos de la agulha, e so latitudinalment; e estrenh la emorroyda am strectura fort, e aprop noza le fiel e extratz la agulha.	 Then, in case you want to apply a cure on the same day as the previous one: use a fine bandage and insert it into an arrow so that it can penetrate the anus gently but deeply; afterwards wrap it around both sides of the finger from where it was taken out, and remove the bandage from the needle. Stretch the hemorrhoid in firmness, then firmly press down on the finger and extract the arrow.
E fay aquo a totas, e layssa de aquelas una e no la cozes, per so que la superfluitat del sanc corra de aquela.	 Apply it to all of them, leaving out one or two, in order that the excess fluid may drain from there.
E aprop pausa sobre le cul drap enfus en oli rozat o en cerot; e pausa aquel sobre·l cuol e comanda al malaute que·s repause.	 Then apply it over the buttocks with hot oil or cream, and place a cushion under them so that they may rest.
E aprop layssa aquela entro que caja; e quan es casuda, cura aquelas am enguentz o am autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	 When you enter the room, first attend to that box over there, when it is full, care for those inside of it or another cure in order for them to be healthy
De curacio de fistulas.	 Fistula treatment
Motas veguadas accideys per exseccacio de fenda o per costriccio de natura.	 Vessels become obstructed either through drying out or constriction of nature.
E cum so antiquadas e no val en aquela medicina, lahoras cove que tu razas aquelas am la puncta de spatum o am la tua ungla entro que sian faytas humidas e sia hostada de aquelas la escorsa pus desus, la qual prohibeys aquelas de consolidacio; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian consolidadas.	 If the method is ancient and does not work in that case, doctors will advise you to pierce them or tear off with your finger into which they become moist and hostile to those who want to consolidate consolidation. And if it's consolidated then it should be cured
Lahoras tu osta aquelas am razio pus vehement que la primieyra entro que mot sancno e sian excoriadas; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	 Doctors will tell you to first get rid of the most superficial ones which have become inflamed, and then cure those that are healed.
De curacio de almesamir, so es clau.	 The treatment for edema is crucial.
Sapias que alamermar, so es clau, e no es si no notz redon segon la color del cors semblant a cap de claviel, e es fayt en tot le cors e majorment en las partidas dejos les pes e als ditz, e endeve per aquels dolor deves le anament.	 You should know that swelling is crucial and it will appear in all over the body especially on the feet and hands, and you must take care of it to prevent such pain occurs.
E adonc cove que sia inscidit aquo que es en le circuit del clau, e sia tengut am les forfexs o am unci, e sia eradicat de la sua razit; e aprop cura aquel.	 You should know that if it infiltrates in the pathway of cold, and is located on your hands or feet, and is eliminated from its way; then cure that one.
E si vols, cauteriza le segont que es precedit en le sieu capitol.	 If you wish, cautery as mentioned earlier in the passage.
Mays de veruca es eminencia petita aspre fistulada redonda sobre la superficia del cos, e motas veguadas veno en las mas dels enfantz.	 The small round belly button on top of the body is very itchy.
E curacio de lu es que estendas e inscidas aquela, o que estrenhas aquela am fiel o am pel entro que caja.	 It's important to stretch and scratch that area gently or carefully so as not to break it.
E si vols, cauteriza aquo, segon que havem dit, am foc o am medicina acuta.	 If you wish, burn it with fire or medicine immediately after we said.
E ja so eradicadas enversas e no-enversas am le instrument le qual yeu diyre.	 And let the instrument that you use for removal be clean and free from anything else.
Mays formica es eminencia petita feutrada o fistulada grossa sobre la superficia del cos anant mot en le preon, e quan le freg atroba aquela es centit en lu semblant de mordificacio de formigua, e es fayta entorn le cos.	 The small round belly button on top of the body is very itchy and when it becomes very sore and painful to touch or squeeze, itching spreads around the skin.
E curacio de lu es que prenguas una canula de pena de auca o de pena de voltor, e sia fort, e pausa aquela sobre la formigua entro que la contengua le cercle de la canula de las partidas de lu; e aprop revolveys la tua ma am la canula entro que inscidas aquo que es en le circuit de la formigua, e pauses aquela en le preon de la carn, e que eradiques la formigua de la sua razit.	 It is important to gently pierce it with a needle of pain or burn, and hold that over the itchy area until it contains the circle of the needle's edge; then remove it from inside the skin, and cleanse the itch.
E si vols, fay aquo am canula de eram o de ferr segon aquesta forma:	 If you wish to burn it with a burning stick or any other way like this
Sia la partida desus de la canulha trahent a subtilitat, sorda (so es no-perforada), envolopada per so que sobre le dit la aprencio de lu sia ablaviada e la revolucio de aquela.	 The edge of the needle should be gentle and smooth to avoid perforation or cutting; surrounded in such a way that it can remove the itching sensation and its movement.
E si vols cauteriza la formiga segon que es denant dit en la cauterizacio de atheyl en le capitol de cauteri.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
De forma dels instrumentz que so aministratz a dar cristeri.	 Do you mean "the instruments used to administer the cautery"?
Alcunas veguadas es fayt cristeri de argent o de lato o de eram fondut o malleat; e alcunas veguadas es fayt de aquels instrumentz petit e gran segon aquels als quals so aministratz, quar aquel que es aministrat en la curacio dels petitz enfants sia petit; e de aquel dels quals los culs son freuls o doloyrozes, les cristeris de aquels sian petitz.	 Some cauteries are made of gold or silver or iron; some cauteries are made from small and large instruments depending on the ones used to administer them; for example, that which was used in the treatment of children is smaller; and those that cause pain or injury are small.
La forma de cristeri gran e pauc:	 The larger and smaller cauteries
Le cap de la canula de lu desus en le qual es liada la borsa sia ampla segon aquesta manieyra; e sia a lu distinacio la on la borsa es liada ayssi cum vezes.	 The end of the cannula through which it is inserted into the body should be wide enough to accommodate that manner, and also at where it is inserted there should be as many times.
E la extremitat de lu pus dejus, la qual es entromesa en le cul, sia sorda (so es no-uberta) mot leon, atrasent a subtilita; e en la un del latz de lu sian dos traucs, e en l’autre costat un trauc, e sia la amplesa del trauc segon la groseza dels rays e pus gros un petit.	 The end of the body through which it is inserted into the anus should be blunt (not pointed), and after that there are two passages on one side, and one passage on the other side, so that both ends may accommodate different sizes of arrows or bolts.
E sia la borsa en la qual sian pausadas las medicinas de vesica de bestia o de pel de ovelha, e la razit de lu sia un palm.	 And there is a pouch into which the medicines for bladder stones or liver bile are placed, and its lining is one palm (flat).
E sia perforada per motz traucs ayssi cum es revolvuda; e si l’espazi le qual es entre les traucs la grossetut del dit.	 It has openings through which it can be rolled up, and the space between those passages is determined by its size (width).
E aprop entromet en aquels traucs fiel fort de fiel cru le qual sia de detz fiels, o enviro aquels; e ajusta am aquel la borsa; e quan es pausada en lu la borsa, sia streyt en le cap del cristeri entre dos distingentz am fort costriccio, e aprop cristeriza am aquel quascun trauc: Mays la qualitat de cristerizar am aquel es que tu omples la borsa de la medicina, que sia escalfada segon la quantitat de la tolleransa del malaute; e guarda te que no sia trop cauda ni trop freja.	 "Insert the needle in this small and tight space, ensuring it is of the right size or width; adjust as necessary when the cushion stops holding the intestines, tightening to prevent any leakage through the chest opening between two distinct ribs.
E aprop le malaute sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos, e eleva las suas cambas en sus e pausa dejos lu un cuer sobre le qual ja so les homes o un lansol; e aprop unta la extramitat del cauteri am oli o am album de huou o am mucellage de fenugrec o de semblantz; e aprop entromet aquel en le cul am facilitat, e aprop le ministre prengua la borsa e exprema aquel am doas mas e essemps am vehemencia entro que sia evacuat en le budelh tot aquo que es en le cristeri; e aprop extra le cristeri e le malaute leva las suas cambas a la paret.	 "Insert the needle gently and slowly into the patient's anus, ensuring it is of the right size or width; raise their legs above them with cushions on either side and place one cushion at the head to prevent the intestines from coming out; then insert it into the rectum as far as possible without causing any leakage through the chest opening between two distinct ribs; finally remove both the intestines and the patient, placing their legs against a wall.
E si la medicina forsa aquel a eyssiment, tengua le tant quant poyra; e si dorm am aquel per tota una nueyt, es mays derier en juvament.	 "If medicine forces them to expel it completely, give as much time as necessary; and if not at all, the quicker they are.
Mays si tu cristerizas aquel en las malautias de solucio de ventre e l’eyssiment de lu le coyta, lahoras tu itera le cauteri entro que sia sanat.	 "If you have successfully inserted a needle into the patient's anus for evacuation of their bowels and expulsion of any other items they may possess, then attend to tightening up the cautery until it is fully constricted.
E si en le cul so emorroydas o apostemas ledens, lahoras sia le cristeri mot subtil e leon, dels cristeris am les quals les enfantz so criterisatz.	 "If the needle has entered too deeply or has caused bleeding from the anus, then tighten up the cautery slowly and carefully; only use the methods of constriction that children practice.
De curacio de las plaguas.	 "With regard to the sores.
Yeu ja e dit en la divisio de la curacio de las plaguas aquo que convenia al libre, e yeu dic assi la curacio de aquelas am ma e am medicinas segon le conpliment.	 You have already mentioned in the division of care for ulcers that it was necessary to do so, and you should continue doing this with the same care given to physicians second time around.
Donc dic que las plaguas son diversificadas segon aquo en que son faytas las plaguas e segon le loc sobre le qual cazo las plaquas.	 Therefore, ulcers are divided into two types depending on whether they are caused by cold humors or the location of where they occur.
E las causas per que motas vetz son faytas las plaguas so ayssi cum getament de peyra, o inscisio d’espaza o de cotel, o percussio am lansa, o am fustz, o am sageta, o semblantz ad aquels de motas causas.	 The causes of the pain that you feel are due to cold humors or to a sprain in your arm or leg, or to striking the body with blows or kicks, or to stabbing it with knives and daggers, or from being suffocated by a press on top of you.
Mays las plaguas que so en les locz del cos so ayssi cum plagua la qual catz sobre le cap, o·l col, o·l pietz, o·l ventre, o·l fitge, e semblantz ad aquels dels membres.	 The ulcers that occur in the parts of your body are due to a blow or a kick on top of your head, ears, chest, stomach and belly button, as well as all the members of your body.
E yeu so recomtant la curacio de alcunas plaguas per que pauses aquela ratiocinacio e regla sobre las autras plaguas.	 You are recommending that the care for some ulcers should follow this reasoning and rule over others.
E yeu comensare de las plaguas del cap simplas, quar la rememoracio de las compostas vindra al comensament del tertz capitol.	 You start with ulcers on the head, remembering that it is the first to occur from the beginning of this chapter.
Donc dic que quan accideys en le cap plagua simpla e no es fractura, lahoras considera: si es per getament de peyra o de semblant, e ja ha trinquada la codena tant solament e es gran plagla e temes sobre aquel malaute havinement de apostema caut, lahoras tu te coyta e fleubotoma la cephalica tantost, e no tardas aquo; e extrats ad aquel del sanc segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu si no mes alcuna causa prohibent de fleubotomia, majorment si·l sanc que es eyssit de la plagua es pauc.	 When you have a simple ulcer on the head and it is not broken, doctors consider: if it's due to injury or trauma, that one is considered very serious and should be treated quickly with caution, and otherwise go for the second option, unless there are prohibitive causes of bleeding, in which case do nothing.
E sia la flaubotomia del contrari de la partida plaguada; e guardase le malaute de replecio e de vi e de viandas grossas.	 The first sentence translates to: "The flapotomy of the contrary part is plagued.
Mays si de la minuicio prohibeys alcuna causa, lahoras sia aminorat de la vianda e no apropinque a carn ni a vi.	 If there was no cause for concern, it means that you should massage the vein and not apply any pain on skin or tissue.
E pausa sobre la plagua, si a lu accideys apostema caut, coto enfus en oli rozat solet o en vi en le qual es stipticat.	 After removing the bandage if it comes off easily and without leaving any residue on oil or skin then it is recommended to strip it completely.
Mays si est segur de apostema caut, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua, si es recent am le sieu sanc e le ayre no ha mudat aquela la polvera la qual yeu recomtare aprop petit.	 If you are sure that the cautery has been applied properly, after removing the bandage if it is recently washed and the area has not changed then it is recommended to apply a small amount of lotion or cream on top of the bandage as needed.
E si le ayre ja ha mudada aquela, lahoras pausa sobre alscus enguentz entro que sia sanada.	 If the area had been recently washed, pause and cover it with clean cloth until it is healed.
Mays si la plagua es gran o es per inscizio d’espaza e de semblantz, e no so ajustadas las labias de lu per puvils, lahoras ajusta aquelas am sutura segon que yeu recomtare de la sutura de lor.	 If the bandage is large or covers a significant portion of the skin and your lips are not wide enough to cover it without difficulty, adjust those around the wound according to what you recommend from the surgeon.
Mays si la plagua ja es discuberta del os e pen, e no es retencio de lu sino un petit suspensori, lahoras inscideys aquela e aprop cura la plagua am medicinas e restaura la carn aprop en loc de codena, e comanda al malaute que sia pescut de viandas en las quals es groceza: caps e formen coyt e semblantz a lor, entro que sia compost.	 If the bandage had been accidentally torn off from its base and only a small strip is left, then apply medical grade adhesive to cover it up again and restore skin appropriately in place of the cloth, and command the patient that their wounds should be dressed with gauze caps and forms fittingly across them until they are healed.
E si atrobas en la codena putrefaccio e no adhereys al os, lahoras tu inscideys tot aquo poyrit e geta aquo, e aprop cura aquo.	 When gangrene is found in the thigh, you must immediately cut away all this flesh and get to it quickly, and apply something for it.
Mays si en aquestas plaguas es arteria o vena de la qual fluxs de sanc pot evenir, e no es abscindida per medicinas, lahoras tu inquier sobre la arteria, e si atrobas aquela no-inscidida, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am spatum, o lia aquela; e si necessitat te provoca que aquo que havem dit no comfereys, lahoras tu cauteriza entro que·l sanc sia abscidit.	 If the artery or vein from which blood flow may still occur is not closed by medical means, you should inquire about the artery itself and if gangrene is found in that, remove it immediately; or if necessary, cautery on to where the clot was removed
E si aquestas plaguas son simplas e petitas, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiere; enayssi que tu polverizas sobre aquelas aquesta polvera, quar consolidada aquela denant que l’ayre mude aquelas.	 If the wounds are simple and small, you can easily cause their healing by applying this powder that consolidates it when applied over those areas
E la manieyra de la polvera es aquesta: recipe oli de enses partida una, de sanc de drago partida doas, de caus no-extincta partidas tres; sia tot mot trissat e crivellat, e de lu sia la plagua omplida, e sia constrengida per bona constriccio entro que be sobre aquela aderesca, e sia coagulada am le sanc.	 The purpose of the powder is to: first, stop bleeding from dragon wounds; second, cause no-extinct wounds to heal by three days; third, to treat all cuts and bruises, filling them up completely; fourth, to constrict and coagulate the wound so that it heals well over time.
E aprop strengeys aquela desus am pulvils e leyssa aquela, e no la deslias mentre esta ayssi que no es apostemada, quar no es eredicada de lu la medicina entro que sia sanada.	 Then mix the powder with water and apply it, making sure to do this only when it is not applied elsewhere that could harm you, as medicine cannot be administered if one's health worsens.
E alcuna vetz fa aquo sola cautz, quan no es a tu en present enses e sanc de drago.	 This does not work alone on wounds that also have dragon sickness.
E ja fa aquesta meteyssa operacio en las grans plaguas quan conveneys que sia pausada sobre aquelas e sian streytas, e so plaguas recentz am le lor sanc, las quals le ayre no ha alteradas.	 The operation is performed on the large veins when it's necessary to be supported by those and their arms, and the recent cuts are located there where the artery has not been altered
E si le ayre las ha alteradas, e majorment quan es en temps d’estiu, lahoras no es entencio a la posicio de aquesta polvera, mays adonc cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit, enayssi que tu pauses sobre aquelas alcus enguents degistius, o que pauses sobre aquelas pols de la farina del ordi am aygua e mel entro que getan poyredura; e aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	 If the artery has been altered and is located on a limb during warm weather, then do not place the poultice at that location but instead cover those arms with gentle compresses of water and honey if you are able to find them; otherwise, cover their limbs with fine sand or meal mixed together until they heal.
Mays si accideys am la plagua fractura en os, e es petita, lahoras tu extratz aquo am gesti.	 If the vein fracture occurs in an eye, then you remove that from sight.
E yeu diyre la cura de las fracturas del cap en aquo que es envenidor.	 Cure fractures of the skull by applying a poultice here where it is swollen.
De las plaguas del col.	 The veins of the neck.
Mays si la plagua accideys en le col, lahoras no es en lu differencia en medicacio, e entre la plagua del cap quan es simpla.	 If the vein occurs in the neck, then doctors do not differentiate it from other veins when they are simple.
Mays si ja le nervi del col es inscis o arteria, lahoras si es nervi, no es en lu engen sino que sia evitada curacio de lu am aquo que fa vehement stipticitat, ayssi cum ziniar e zegi que es vetriol e semblantz a lor quar nozo als nervis e contrazo aquel.	 If the nerve of the neck is internal or artery, then it's necessary to avoid its cure in this way, as when you sting and cut that with vinegar and iron, so that it becomes acid and harms the nerves around it; therefore, avoid that.
E no pauses sobre la plagua alcuna causa de tot freja, quar la sustancia dels nervis es freja e la continuacio de lu es am le cervel, le qual es le pus aut de totz les membres.	 Do not place the poultice on any vein that causes it to freeze, as the substance of the nerves is frozen and its continuation is at risk for the whole body; therefore, do not use this treatment on all members.
E si’ aquo am que es curat de medicinas leugieras, ayssi cum es caus lavada am aygua dousa, alcuna veguada enfusa en oli rozat o no-rozat, e thucia quan es lavada am aygua dousa e las autras peyras minarantz segon aquesta manieyra, e enguentz humitz.	 When the urine becomes cold and this chills permeate through all veins of the body or only a few, it is customary that doctors call it rheumatism
Mays si la plagua es gran, lahoras aministra sutura, o coarta las labias de lu, e aprop cura aquela am pulvils entro que sia sanada.	 If the disease becomes large and spreads to cover many parts of the body or just a few, then doctors administer sutures as an incision on the thighs is made, and they take care that it heals without becoming infected.
Mays si a la plagua es profunditat o accideys en lu a la pus bassa partida poyredura, lahoras perfora aquela en le loc mays depremegut.	 If the disease is deep or occurs only on one small part of the body, doctors perforate it in that location as quickly as possible.
Mays si en la plagua ja es inscisa arteria e es conseguit flux de sanc, lahoras separa o secca aquela, o lia aquela, o cauteriza aquela si necessitat te provoca ad aquo.	 If the disease has already infiltrated an artery and causes bleeding, doctors may separate or remove it, or they may cauterize it if necessary to prevent further damage.
Mays si ja ha insciditz les spondils del golayro o tot, e so salvadas las venas del col, lahoras tu ajusta las labias de la codena am sutura sobre la cana del golayro e no toques aquel; abantz egala aquel e reduzeys aquel sobre la sua figura natural, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent, e leyssa aquela per alcus jorns; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz en les quals es stipticitat e excitacio entro que sia sanat.	 If the disease has already infiltrated the spine and all of it, but saves the veins in the belly, doctors attach a strap to the thigh on which they make an incision above the groin, do not touch that, except for removing or cauterizing that if necessary; straighten that so as to restore its natural position, and place it at rest, and treat it with respect for several days; and prepare it with such care that when it is infected and inflamed inside it will be healed.
Mays si la plagua ja en le os a fayta enprecio, lahoras percuireys aquela, e lahoras si en lu ha fragmentz de hos, extratz totz aquels que podes de lor; e aquo que a tu no es apparelhat, leyssa aquo entro que la plagua se poyrisca, e sia separat e la egrecio de lu sia alleujada.	 If the disease is already in the esophagus and painful to swallow, doctors will try to remove it or cut out all of it if possible; otherwise they will treat that as if it were the beginning of a new outbreak, and separate and remove it from its location.
E si la plagua es recent lahoras polveriza sobre aquela polvera la qual t’e recomtada.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, it is customary for doctors to call this gout.
Mays si en la plagua es fayta fistula, lahoras cura aquela am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra aprop en le sieu capitol.	 If the fistulas are closed, then the ulcers should be treated as follows in its capital.
De las plaguas del col o de semblantz quan fayta entre las spallas e es fayta am spaza o am cotel o am lansa o am semblantz.	 Between the hemorrhoids or between the buttocks when a fistula is formed between the sheets and it's from the anus, the rectum, the vagina or the scrotum.
Si es percussio de lansa o de cotel, e vezes de lu la profunditat, lahoras considera mays si de la plagua yeys ventositat quan le malaute elena; lahoras sapias que la plagua es mortal.	 If it is a fistula of the anus or scrotum and sometimes from inside as well, doctors should consider that if the patient enters one, then the fistula is fatal.
E si en lu no es profunditat e la plagua es recent am le sieu sanc, lahoras tu pauses en lu de la primieyra horo polvera, e no strenhas aquel per que no sia le sanc retengut en la profunditat de lu e que retorne al cor e que aucigua le malaute, mays pausa en lu enguent atractiu, e deslia aquela doas veguadas le dia.	 If there is not deep penetration and the fistula has recently occurred on its surface then doctors should pause it to prevent this from occurring again in that place of depth inside, returning towards the heart, and causing the patient discomfort.
E si l’enguent no es a tu present, lahoras tu pausa en le orrifici de la plagua coto viel per que sucque aquo que yeys de las humiditatz; e fay que le malaute dorma sobre la plagua per que corra aquo que es en lu ajustat.	 If the fistula is not recently caused by an outside factor, then doctors should pause in treating it with humidity to prevent moisture from reaching that place of depth inside. They also put the patient into bed over it so that movement can be prevented and the treatment continues.
Mays si ja de la plagua son passatz tres dias o mays e no accideys al malaute spasme ni tremor de cor mal ni strictura de ale, e vezes las autras dispozicios bonas de lu, lahoras sapias que plagua es salva; e adonc cura aquela am calguas e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanada.	 If the fistula has been open for three days or more and does not cause any of those complications such as heart trouble, narrowing of the artery, tremor in the body, or a stricture on the urethra then doctors should consider that it is saved, they also cure its external sores and other treatments until it is healed.
Mays si la sanacio de lu es excusada, e ja tot temps es uberta, lahoras sapias que ja es fayta fistula; cura donc aquela per le sieu capitol.	 When a patient's illness is excused, you should give them rest, and then the doctors will know that they have been cured: treat it according to its type
E si la plagua es per inscisio de spaza o de cotel, e es simpla en la superficia del pietz o del dos, lahoras cura aquela am aquo que es precedit de sutura, si es gran, o am polvera, si es petita.	 If the abscess is caused by a small incision or a scratch on the surface of the chest or arm, then cure it as previously described in stitching if large, otherwise with a poultice if small.
Mays si ja ha fayta enprecio en le os, e so ja de lu inscizas pessas, lahoras tu torqua la plagua e coyta ad extrayre aquelas pessas, si so separadas.	 If you have already given a poultice on the ear or nose and it has not helped, then tear away those pustules if they are separated from each other.
Mays si no so separadas, lahoras leyssa las entro que se poyresca la plagua, que la extraccio de lor es alleujada.	 If the pustules are not separate, then let them be pierced with a needle to extract their contents which is easy.
E de las autras plaguas accidentz en les autres membres le juvament en curacio es le juvament de aquo que havem dit.	 And the other abscesses will come out of those members in the same way that we've said
De las plaguas del ventre.	 The abdominal ones
L’indisposicio la qual accideys en le ventre es o gran, o pauc, o migiera.	 The situation which occurs in the abdomen is either large or small or medium-sized.
De la gran alcunas veguadas yeys le budel o nervi del budel, per que es fayta intromissio de lor e la sutura de lor esser pus vehement e pus subtil.	 If the abscess is located in the intestine or nerve of the bowel, then you must make an incision to extract it and suture it with great or subtle force
E disrupcio petita es fayta dificil per autra manieyra, e siec se que la reduccio de lor es pus dificil, si no te coytes de la intromissio de lor al sieu loc tantost, quar se ubre e es engrossat per que le intrament de lu es fayt difficil.	 If the abscess is small and it is difficult to reach with another means, then do not make an incision unless you are certain that extracting it from its place would be too much, for if this were difficult, because of the nature of what was just mentioned earlier, the way in which it is done may become difficult.
E donc la milhor disrupcio es migiera, quar en aquela no es dificil la reduccio del budel, ayssi cum es dificil en las doas specias denant ditas.	 And there you have it, the first sentence translated into English.
E sapias que sutura del ventre es segon quatre manieyras, mays doas suturas son comunas que conveneysso en suturas de las autras plaguas del cors.	 You know that the belly stitches are second after four weeks, many of them heal up in the same way as the other incisions on the chest
E duas autras suturas proprias comunican a las autras plaguas, mays empero so mays proprias en la sutura del ventre.	 Two different sutures may have similarities with the other ones, but they may also be similar to the belly stitches
E yeu recomti a tu quascuna am exposicio e declaracio.	 Recommend each one in its own exposure and declaration
Donc dic que quan la plagua es petita e es eyssit alcuna causa del budel per aquela, e es fayt dificil a reduzir aquel, lahoras aquo es en una de doas manieyras: o per parvitat de la disrupcio ayssi cum havem dit, o quan al budel es venguda inflacio per la frigiditat de l’ayre.	 When the hernia is small and no other cause for it can be found, then in one of two ways it may heal: either by reducing the tension on that part as mentioned earlier or when the hernia has been inflated with cold air.
E donc quan aquo es ayssi, lahora cove que tu scalfes aquel enayssi que tu submerges una sponga ho drap humit en aygua tebeza sola, o que coguas en aygua squinant, e cyperum, e spic, e embroques am aquela le budel entro que la imflacio sia resolvuda.	 When that is so, do you submerge a sponge in hot water or cold water? You can heat it up and squeeze out the air, or cool it down and try to blow through it.
E alcunas veguadas fa aquo vi en le qual ha stipticitat, e es milhor que la aygua sola en resolucio de la imflacio.	 Some ways that might help in this case are: a hot water bath alone can resolve it.
E donc cum tu vezes la imflacio esser resolvuda, lahoras tu humecta le budel am aygua en la qual es coyta altea e malvas, quar per aquo es alleujat le intrament de lu am pauca causa.	 When you want to try and resolve the swelling of the hernia by wetting it with lukewarm water, as that is gentle on it compared to cold or hot water.
Mays si es escusat le intrament de lu aprop aquesta curacio, lahoras scindeys la disrupcio un petit am strument am le qual so inscididas emorroydas.	 When you have opened up this space and are ready for the operation, the pains will cease as a small instrument is inserted.
E la curacio primieyra es milhor, quan es propriada que no es seccio, e no sia occupacio a seccar aprop necessitat e defaliment.	 The first operation requires a lot of preparation, when it's completed, and nothing more remains to be done in terms of care and feeding.
Del instrument, sec se la forma de lu:	 From the instrument itself
La una partida de lu torta aguda, e l’autra partida no-acuta, e la extremitat subtil, e no sia am la subtilitat de spatum, abantz sia obtusa un pauc.	 The first part is acute, and the other non-acute; subtle extremity, not having the subtlety of a feather, has its own subtlety
E donc cum la plagua es amplificada e yeys fora le budel, lahoras cove que la sua reduccio sia segon la forma de lu natural, en le sieu loc propri, si es possible sobre aquo, quar milhor es.	 And then, after the fluid has been amplified and removed from the body, doctors will make sure that the reduction is as close to its natural form in its own place, if possible, as much as possible.
Mays quan la disrupcio es ampla, e es en la partida pu bassa del ventre, lahoras cove que tu fassas jazer le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa las suas cambas pus autas que·l sieu cap; e si es en la partida pus desus del ventre, lahoras tu pause le cap de lu e·l pietz pus autz que las partidas dejos.	 When the disruption is wide and at the base of the abdomen occurs, doctors will advise you to place your head on its back, rest their legs as well; and if it's at the base of the abdomen that the pains occur, doctors will tell you to put your head down and chest up.
E semblantment si la disrupcio es en una de las doas partz del ventre, lahoras pausa la tua entencio e la tua consideracio tostemps en aysso per que la partida en la qual es la plagua sia pus auta que l’autra.	 Similarly if the disruption is in one of the two parts of the abdomen, doctors will tell you to rest your head and chest side by side so that the pain in the part where the fluid was located may be more intense than the other one.
E ayssi cove que tu aministres aquo en las plaguas grans e en las plaguas migieras.	 When you are treating a large area or small area
E en las plaguas petitas, pausa aquo que es a tu preparat, e aprop fay que·l ministre sia entre las tuas mas pyatados, le qual tengua la disrupcio tota am la sua ma e ajusta las labias de lu, e aprop descuebre de aquela ad aquel que siec la sutura alcuna causa aprop autra.	 In the smaller areas pause to make a test of it and then apply this treatment between your thighs as shown below
E aquesta es la manieyra de sutura comuna: una que prenguas la agula, o comte de agula segon la cantitat de la amplitut de la plagua; e aprop layssa de la extremitat de la disrupcio del dit anular, e strenh la agula una, otre que tu no metas fiel en las doas extremitatz de la codena, am doas extremitatz del ciphac que es dejos la codena de las partidas dedintz, entro que fassas aquela penetrar de aquela partida; e tu ja has agreguadas doas extremitatz de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, e so faytas quatre ordes.	 The common procedure for suturing: one that approaches the edge of the incision or use a longer needle depending on the size of the wound; and push the needle in as far as it can go without going through both ends of the incision, unless you are making an internal incision, then make sure to keep the needle inside until the end.
E aprop strenh am fiel doble en le circuit de la agula, e alcunas veguadas de doas partz ensemps, e aprop agregua las doas labias e la plagua per agreguacio decent; e aprop layssa la grossitut del dit e fiqua una autra agulha en aquela, e aprop lia aquela am fiel ayssi cum fiest am la primieyra agulha; e no cesses far aquo si es necessitat am las agulhas entro que ajas complida tota la contriccio de la plagua.	 After pushing the needle in as much as possible, take two stitches and sew them together to close the wound, leaving some extra length of thread; then take another needle and pass it through the hole you made with your first stitch, tying off the end tightly so that no suture will be visible from outside.
E sian las agulhas migieras entre groceza e subtilitat, quar las agulhas subtils mot leugierament insciden la carn; e las grossas so de dificil intrament en la codena, e donc per aquo cove que sian migieras en subtilitat e grosseza.	 If the needles are small between delicacy and subtlety, they will easily penetrate the flesh; but if they are thick then it is difficult to do this as fine threads may not fit through the skin well enough.
E no cove que la agulha sia ficada en doas extremitatz de la codena propdana mot, per so que la carn no sia inscidida leugierament e que la plagua se huebra devant la sua consolidacio.	 When the needle is inserted into both of his extremities at once and in such a manner that flesh does not touch the ground or be damaged and it gets stuck to its place, then
E no sian prolonguadas de sutura per que la plagua no sia prohibida de consolidacio.	 Do not prolong the sutures so that the bandage is forbidden from consolidation
E aprop inscideys las extremitatz de las agulhas per so que no ledescan le malaute deves le sieu dormier; e pausaras sobre la sutura pulvils expanduts de tota partida, les quals tenguan las extremitatz de las agulhas; e layssa aquelas entro que sapias que la plagua ja es consolidada.	 Then place the fragile sutures into both of his extremities so that he does not move or get out of bed, and cover it with an expanding dust flap, which should be made to fit over both of them, and let him know when it is already consolidated.
E aquestas specias de sutura am agulhas en cal manieyra es pus convenient en las plaguas petitas, quar habasta en la sutura de lor una agulha o doas o entorn aquelas.	 These specific sutures are suitable for small bandages as it is convenient to use one or two needles through the sutures; however, if there are more than that many should be placed within them.
Mays la segonda sutura es cominal: e es que tu aministres am sutura las quatre extremitatz, de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, en una veguada, am agulha en la qual sia fiel envolopat engual en subtilitat e grosseza.	 The second suture is as follows: and you should administer the four sutures from the thigh to both of his lower extremities in a row, using one needle that is tightly wrapped around its length with fine and large thread.
E aprop quan am la agulha auras penetrat aquestas quatre extremitatz, reduzeys la agulha de aquela meteyssa partida de la qual comensest, per so que le fiel retrayt caja de la pus subirana partida a la plagua, per so que la sutura sia segon sutura de drap am la qual les draps so strengutz.	 Then pull out the needle from that thread-parted point to start it, in order for its faithful retention to hold tightly and firmly onto the bandage as the second suture of wrapping around them is being made.
E pausa entre quascuna sutura la quantitat del gros del dit mendre.	 The distance between each of the fingers should be measured by the thickness of this man's thumb.
E aquesta sutura sabo les homes.	 This finger understands the men.
E am tal sutura yeu cozegui la plagua la qual era accidida a un home en le sieu ventre le qual era stat plaguat am un cotel, e era la disrrumpcio de la plagua major de un palm, e era eyssit dels budels entorn dos palms del budel del mieg loc e era la disrupcio en le mieg del membre; e adonc yeu reduzegui aquel depus que le budel havia stat foro la plagua per xxiiii horas.	 This finger understands the men, and it caused pain to a man in his belly who was lying on his back, which was the rupture of the larger vein of one palm, and it occurred around two palms of the foot, and it was the rupture in the leg of the member; and you should reduce that deposit so that the intestine had been out for xxiv hours.
E la plagua fo consolidada en le spazi de xv dias o entorn, e curegui aquel e es sanat; e aprop aquo visquec per motz ans, e es conversat en las suas disposicios.	 The vein was consolidated in the space of fifteen days or more, and you should cure it by using ointments and apply to that place with gentle motions, and converse with its remedies.
E les autres metges havian jutgat que no fora sanat; e per miracle foc, quar yeu no curegui aquel am enguent, quar era en loc en le qual enguent no era atrobat ni deguna medicina, mays pausegui sobre la plagua coto viel dos veguadas lo dia e ablucio assiduo am aygua de mel entro que foc sanat.	 The other doctors had already given up on it not being cured; and because you did not cure it quickly, which was in a place where no remedy was available or effective, we placed a cushion over the vein two days later with assiduous application of cold water until it healed.
Mays yeu diyre dos specias de sutura proprias segon narracio de Paraula.	 May you give me two special recipes for sutures in case something like that happens again?
E es que tu comenses am sutura de la codena, e entrometas agulha de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz.	 It is customary to use thread from the back of the hand to make an incision in the front part as described.
E donc cum la agulha penetra en la codena e en aquel meteys lacertz segon rectetut e en longetut de tot le cos, e layssa la extremita del ciphac en le qual has entromesa la agulha; e fay penetrar en la autra extremitat la agulha de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo en l’autra extremitat del mihat.	 When the needle penetrates through the bone and reaches the second joint of the limb, it should proceed further into the body; however, if it enters another joint at that point, it must withdraw from the first joint and move to the other.
E don cum tu auras fayta aquela penetrar, lahoras tu fay aquela penetrar autra veguada en aquela meteyssa extremitat del mihat de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz; e leyssa la extramitat del ciphac que es en aquest latz, e fay penetrar la agulha en l’autra extremitat de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo.	 When the needle penetrates and reaches another joint of the limb, it should then proceed to penetrate into that other joint instead; if in both joints at once, return to the first joint and move on to the next one.
E fay penetrar am aquela la tua penetracio am la qual fas aquela penetrar en le ciphac en la extremitat del mirat la qual es en la partida de lu entro que tot aquel penetre.	 When penetrating, if you reach that joint which causes penetration into the limb in front of it to penetrate simultaneously; otherwise, proceed as before.
E aprop comensa de aquest meteys costat e cus aquel am la extremitat que es del ciphac en l’autra latz, e extratz la agulha de la codena la qual penetrec, e aprop redutz aquela en aquela codena e cos la extremitat del ciphac que es en l’autra costat am aquesta extramitat del mirat; e extratz aquela de la codena la qual es de part de lu.	 As you enter the space between that bone and the limb, place the needle on the side of the joint which causes penetration into the limb in front of it to penetrate simultaneously; otherwise, continue as before. Then remove the previous needle from its cavity and put a new one at that bone's opposite side within this area of the body, where the limb is located; then place the new needle in the first cavity mentioned earlier.
E fay aquo una veguada e autra, e fay aquo una veguada aprop autre veguada entro que tu cozes tot aquo que es deforo segon aquel eysemple.	 After that, proceed to perform a second procedure on the other side of the body and another side in the area mentioned earlier; do everything as before with this one also.
E la suma de aquesta manieyra de sutura es que tu cozes am sutura de pellicies am la qual cozo las pels, enayssi que tu cozes le ciphac una veguada de la part de la extremitat de la codena, e que leysses aquela autra veguada entro que la ajas complida.	 When the stitches are opened on the skin of a patient, you must wash your hands with soap and water before touching them again
Mays la segonda specia de sutura propria la qual dieys eyssament Gualia , e aquest es de sermo de lu e per lu recomtat, es que tu cozas aquela segon semilitut am la qual alcus medicantz cozo aquela, enayssi que agreguan tota partida a la sua compar partida a lu convenient per natura; e aplican la extremitat de autre de lu e la extremitat del mirat al autra extremitat de lu, e aquo es fayt segon que yeu a tu recomti.	 The second type of stitches is used to close wounds and is recommended by doctors as it provides the best possible outcome for the patient. It involves taking another part of the body (arm or leg) to apply pressure on the wound in addition to the first, ensuring that all parts are kept pressed together naturally through a process called "natural compression dressing".
Cove que tu fiques la agulha en la extremitat del mirat a tu propdana de la partida deforo, e fassas aquela penetrar a la partida dedintz en aquel sol, e leysses dos extremitatz del ciphac; e aprop revolveys la agulha e fay aquela penetrar de foro a la dedintz en dos extremitatz del ciphac.	 Insert the needle in one part of the wound (usually the thigh), and then go through to the other part, ensuring that all parts are pressed together tightly with two compressions applied on each side by placing hands over the area, thereby preventing any movement or leakage from the wound site.
E aprop revolveys aquelas cascunas, e fay penetrar quascunas de la partida dededintz entro a la partida deforo en dos extremitatz del mirat autras que so en le latz contrari.	 Then remove those bandages and insert one bandage through the wound into the other part of the body on each side, making sure to compress both wounds while also keeping them separated as far as possible from external pressure.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura es milhor de la sutura comuna leugiera, e es sutura de la qual precedic rememoracio.	 This type of stitching is superior to the usual one and is recommended for use in critical cases where immediate closure is necessary.
Aquest es le sermo de Gualia	 This is the sermon of Gaul
E mays le diyssero alcus, sutura del ventre es rectificada am dos agulhas, so es que tu entrometas en aquestas a quascunas un fiel, e comensa am intromiccio de agulha de aquo que es deves tu, e fay aquela penetrar entro al autra latz segon sutura de aquels les quals cozo les cuers engualment.	 And afterwards, put the needle in carefully and go slowly through it to avoid any harm to your own body, as you must do with the previous wounds that you have made close together.
E sapias que quan disrupcio es en le mieg loc del ventre, lahoras la sutura de lu es pus difficil que dels autres locs del ventre.	 It is more difficult to suture in the region of the belly than it is in other parts of the abdomen.
Mays le juguament de medicacio de plagua es jutgament de las autras plaguas.	 The game of healing from wounds becomes a trial for another wound.
La qual causa es quar quan tu consieguas la plagua recent am le sieu sanc denant que l’ayre altera aquela, e reduses le budel e cozes aquela e aptas aquela decentment, lahoras pausa sobre aquela polvera encarnativa.	 When you have already dealt with the recently inflicted wound and it has been healed and dressed up well, then the doctor will rest on that spot for a while.
E si le ayre ja ha alterada la plagua, lahoras pausa sobre aquela alcus enguentz les quals so a tu presens entro que fassan peyra dura e cajan les fiels, e sian consolidatz ciphac e mirat; e aprop cura aquela ayssi cum es la curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat.	 If the wound has already been treated, then the doctor will rest on it while you attend to other wounds that require urgent attention and care.
Mays si a tu no so presens las medicinas, lahoras pausa sobre aquela tantost, pus que comensa a getar brac, coto viel, e permuta aquel dos veguadas le dia, ayssi cum a tu e ensenhat, entro que sia sanat, quar tu no indigeysses de autra medicacio en motas disposicios quan las plaguas so simplas.	 If you are not present for the medicines, then the doctor will rest on it while you attend to other wounds, care for your hands and feet, place a bandage over that and wait until tomorrow when you need more attention as long as the wounds are simple.
Mays si tu temes que la plagua comunique en lesio als membres principals, lahoras cove que tu submergas lana leon en oli de trempada qualiditat, o en oli rozat, e pausa aquela en le circuit dels locs que so entre les angonas e dejos las aysselas.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate the main parts of the body and cause pain in the hands or feet, it is customary to apply a poultice made from fresh laurel leaves on those areas where the pain occurs, holding them down with pressure until they turn into a blistery substance.
E si sent dolor o putrefaccio en les sieus budels, quar motas veguadas aquo s’endeve, lahoras cristeriza aquel am vi stiptic negre tebe, e majorment si la poyredura es pervenguda en le budel e es fayta exitura penetrant entro la conquavitat de lu.	 If there is pain or putrefaction in the bowels themselves (i.e., constipation), it should be treated immediately by a physician, and if a hernia protrudes into its cavity then that must also be treated.
E sapias que aquela que es del budel gros es de pus leugiera sanacio que aquela que es en les budels subtils.	 You know that the abscess in the large intestine is treated with more urgency than one in the small bowels.
E es de dificil sanacio quar le budel le qual es apelat “gegunu” no recep sanacio de plagua que caja en lu de tot; e aquo es per la gran multitut de venas que so en lu e per la magnitut de lu que so en aquelas, e per subtilitat del cos de aquel, e per propinquitat de aquel a natura de nervis.	 The treatment for an abscess in the "gugunu" bowel is difficult to treat and cannot be treated by poultice alone; this is because of the great number of veins that are present in it and its size which makes it quite different from others, as well as its proximity to the nervous system.
Mays si aquo que procezeys de la plagua es la tela, e conseguas aquela recent, redutz aquela segon la tua rectetut am la qual reduzes les budels engualment.	 If you want to treat a poultice on the body part that causes it and make it effective quickly then press down on the area where the poultice is placed so as to compress both bowels equally.
Mays si es passat a lu spazi e ja es feyt vert o negre, lahoras que tu strenguas aquela am fiel sobre le loc que es denigrat de lu, per so que vengua fluxs de sanc, quar en la tela so venas e arterias.	 If the space has already been opened and it is either black or white, then put that poultice very close to the affected area so as to prevent bleeding from veins and arteries.
E aprop inscideys aquo que es otra aquel liament, e pausa dos extremitatz del fiel pendentz de la partida dejos de la plagua foro lu, per que sobre tu sia alleujada la atraccio de lu deves le cazement de la tela e emissio del brac de la plagua.	 "Open the space between their thighs and put a cushion underneath them, then place another servant on their legs as well, also one on their chest holding their hands so that they may not come out through the opening.
Rememoracio de las plaguas quan accideysso en le budel.	 "Recall of hernias when they occur in the intestine.
Quan accideys disrupcio en le budel e es petita, lahoras es possibla que sia resteurada en alcus homes, per aysso quar yeu vi aquel le qual era stat plaguat en le sieu ventre am percussio de lansa et era la plagua de la part dreyta del stomac, e la plagua era antiquada e fayta fistula, e eyssic de lu gestio e ventositat.	 "When disruption occurs in the intestine and is small, it can be restored with stitches from underneath of the abdomen, which used to patch over a previous hernia on the right side of the stomach, an old one that was torn open and became a fistula, causing constant discharge and swelling.
Adonc yeu pansegui la curacio de lu ja sia que no era confizat en la sanacio de lu, mays cessegui subtiliar aquel entro que foc sanat e le loc es consolidat.	 "If you were unable to follow the care procedure and it was not performed correctly, may cease any attempt on making it happen as the area has healed.
E yeu pus que vi le loc ja consolidat, timegui sobre le malaute que endevengues sobre lu accident de mal en le sieu ventre; e no endevenc alcu per aquo mal accident e romas en las suas milhos disposicios mangant e bevent, e aprop entrec en banh e es exercitat en sos ditz.	 "If the area has healed but you are concerned about an injury to your abdomen, then avoid any attempt on making it happen as well, prevent it from coming out through these methods.
E ja diysero alcus experimentados que quan endeve plagua en le budel, e es petita, lahoras cove que sia liada segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas fromiguas de grans caps; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua e pausa una fromigua de aquelas que aja la boca uberta sobre las doas labias de la plagua; donc quan pren sobre aquelas e strenh la sua boca, abscindeys le cap de lu, quar adhereys e no es dissolvut.	 "And if you have had a hernia in the intestine and it is small, then recall this method: hold two strips of cloth tightly together, tie them to both ends of the opening, and when you put your mouth over those strips and pull on them very hard, close your lips against one another so that no part comes out.
E aprop pausa autra formigua prop la primieyra, e no cesses aquo a far am formiguas una aprop autra segon la quantitat de tota la plagua.	 The first sentence translates to "Place another cushion under their thighs...
E aprop reduzeys aquela e cos la plagua; e romanguan aquels caps annexces en le budel entro que·l budel sia sanat; e no accideys al malaute degun nocument.	 "... and return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, not allowing it to protrude outside...
E ja es possible que·l budel sia liat am fiel subtil lo qual es fayt del budel de bestia annexs am lu, pus que es mes en agulha; e es que tu prenguas la extremitat de aquestz fiels de budel, e sia mot descarnat, e aprop lia la extremitat de lu am fiel de li, envolopat, e aprop entromet aquel fiel en agulhas e cos am aquel le budel, e areduzeys aquel en la disrupcio.	 "... and if the intestine is too small for that purpose, then you should remove it completely...
E aquesta manieyra de sutura am formiguas no es sino segon via de fiducia e d’esperansa.	 "That's just another way of faith and hope.
Mays si la plagua es gran e ampla, majorment si es en un dels budels subtils, quar lahoras no es engen sino subtiliacio, e no es sanacio de lu de tot.	 "And if the space is too large or wide, especially in a narrow intestine...
De curacio de zuchem e fistula.	 "Use caution when applying heat and pressure.
Sapias que tota plagua e apostema quan se envilheseys e se Antiqua, e es fayt ulcus, e no es consolidat e geta braç tot temps e no es abscindit, lahoras, en qualque membre sia, universalment es nompnada fistula e nos la apelam aquela azukem.	 "Be aware that any ulcer or abscess that occurs when applying heat and pressure is called a fistula.
E fistula segon veritat es nodacio feutrada, dura, blanqua am la qual no es dolor e a la qual es conquavitat ayssi cum es conquavitat de pena de ausel; e per aysso nompnat aquela alcus rizatz, id est pena.	 "A fistula is actually an abscess that bleeds when it's pressed on.
E es en alcus homes humida, la qual geta brac; e fort leu la humiditat es abscidida en alcunas horas.	 "The abscess can become moist, and if the moisture is removed quickly enough...
E alcunas veguadas aquesta humiditat es mota, e es pauca, e es grossa, e es subtil.	 This humidity is moist, scarce, thick, and subtle.
E yeu ja he denant dit en la divisio, lahoras cum yeu diyssi las plaguas, que tot ulcus que no es sanat ni no es en lu nuda carn, no es aquo sino per una de ix causas: de las quals la una es o per pauquesa de sanc en le cos; o per malicia de lu; o quar entre lu e las labias es carn dura prohibent nativitat de carn; o quar es de mota legesa; o quar aquel ulcus en si meteys es poyrit e la materia que es a lu tramesa es de mala qualitat; o quar la medicina es enconvenient en la curacio de lu; o quan corrupcio catz en la regio, e es pestilencia; o per proprietat de regio ayssi cum endeve a Saragossa , en la qual es fayta difficil degestio de las malautias, e es tardada en aquela sanacio de apostema per natura; o quar en lu es os un, o motz osses.	 There are several possible causes for this ulcer that may not heal on its own and require medical attention: lack of nutrients in the body, malice or harshness between the skin and the ulcer, hardness of the surrounding tissue preventing healing, prolonged duration of the ulceration itself, being overweight, or underlying infections.
Ja e mostrat totas aquelas causas, e·ls senhals de aquelas e la curacio de lor am medicinas en la divisio.	 The doctor has described all those causes and their methods to heal in this section of the book on medicine.
E cove assi que yeu fassa a tu saber la curacio de fistula la qual es fayta per via de operacio am ma.	 You should know how to perform surgery to treat fistulas, as that is one way it can be treated surgically.
E sapias que fistula accideys en totz les membres del cos; quar de aquelas son fistulas que perveno a las venas grantz e arterias, o als nervis, o al ciphac, o al budel, o a la vesica, o ad alcuna de las costas, o ad alcu dels spondils del dos, o ad alcuna de las juncturas compostas per composicio ayssi quo de la ma e del pe; e de aquelas so que dan a lu propinquitat del membre principal e de semblantz.	 Fistulas can occur anywhere in the body and may be caused by issues with veins or arteries, nerves, the brain, bowels, bladder, kidneys, chest ribs, spinal ligaments, or any combination of joints, being close to the main limb or similar.
E donc aquela de aquestas fistulas que es segon aquesta manieyra es de las malautias de dificil sanacio, e no recep curacio, e occupacio am aquela es trebalh e ignorancia.	 When there is a fistula caused by difficult surgery wounds that cannot be cured or treated, and ignorance occurs in this condition, then the finger should remain motionless and inactive
E si es de las fistulas alcuna la profunditat de la qual no perve ad aquestz locs que e dit, e esperas e confizas en la curacio de lu, e vols pervenir a cognicio de lu, lahoras pren tenta de eram o de ferr, e si la fistula va segon rectetut, e perquireys aquela am lu.	 If there is a fistula of any depth that penetrates into this location and causes pain, and you hope for the cure to occur, but cannot prevent it from going further down inside your body, then the finger will try to stop or hold it in place
Mays si la fistula es tortuissitat, lahoras investigua aquela am tenta de plom subtil, quar plom am la levitat del sieu cors es alleujat e curvat deves la tortuositat.	 If the fistula is bent or twisted, then the finger will try to gently push it away from your body as this will lessen and curve its course so that you can find a cure for it
E si la fistula es havent motz horrificis, no es a tu possible que signifiques sobre lu am tenta.	 If the fistula is extremely painful then there may be nothing you can do to stop or treat it.
Adonc cristeriza le orrifici per sos orrificis, quar la humiditat per la qual clisterizas aquela va deves las autras orrificis e corr de lor.	 Once the fingers are placed where they should be, then you will gradually wet the area until all of it is covered in moisture to soften and loosen any existing adhesions and scar tissue
E aprop inquier exquisitament, segon qual manieyra a tu es possible que conoguas si aqui has os o nervi, e es la conquavitat de la fistula longinqua o propdana, o es una fistula a la qual so motz orrificis e esta sobre aquo tot am la suma de la tua fortaleza, am la tua enterroguacio, am la qual enterroguas le malaute, e la invencio de la dolor deves la tua compressio am la ma sobre le loc, e semblantz de las significacios e de las causas accidentz al apostema.	 Carefully place the fingers in the appropriate location so that you know if it is a long or short fistula and whether there are any existing adhesions at its base or it is just one of many that have been formed over time, then continue to apply gentle pressure with your hand on top of this area while also considering the possible causes of the pain and what the medical term for it might be.
E cum tu auras stat sobre totas aquelas causas am stacio veraya, lahoras ve a la curacio segon confidencia: e es que tu consideras lahoras si es fistula apparent propinqua o en loc sal, longinqua de junctura, o de nervi, o de arteria, o de vena, o de un dels locs les quals yeu a tu e ditz.	 When you have positioned yourself over all those causes of the pain that is causing it to show up clearly and in its right place or part, then you consider if it's a gouty attack near by or elsewhere related to joints, nerves, arteries, veins, or any other location from which you know it came.
Lahoras tu secca la fistula segon que denant es dit de la naracio de lu, e osta aquo que es en aquela filtracio e de carns corrumpudas, e aquo que es nascut en le orrifici de la carn, o de theil e de semblantz, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	 You then seal it off as soon as you learn from which artery of his body it arose, and this is in such a filtration that has caused corruption in the blood vessels, and also to find its origin in the roots or tendons, and cure whatever was inside
Mays si la fistula es de longinqua profunditat, e es segon rectetut, lahoras cove que inscidas aquela en le preon atant quant a tu sira possible, e aprop mondifica aquela de totas las suas carns corrompudas; e aprop administra calguas envolopadas en medicinas acutas, e intromet aquelas entro a la conquavitat de la fistula, la qual has conprenduda am ferr.	 If the attack is deep in nature and you know it's second-degree, then cauterize that area as much as possible, making sure to cover all the corrupted blood vessels; also administer wrapped bandages of acute medicines into its cavity, which we have put under control
E fay aquo am aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la medicina acuta corroda tot aquo que es romas en la conquavitat de la fistula de la corrupcio.	 And then seal it off with this wrapped bandage of acute medicine, which will slowly dissolve all the corruption in its cavity.
E aprop restaura aquela am enguentz les quals engendran carn sana entro que sia sanada.	 And afterwards you restore that by means of healthy flesh regeneration into what has been corrupted.
Mays si no es sanada per aquo, lahoras tu cauteriza aquela segon que havem recomtat.	 If it is not cured through this method, then you seal off the area as instructed previously.
Mays si la causa de fistula es os e es deves tu certificat aquo, lahoras tu inquireys aquela e secca aquela segon que havem recomtat, si tu no prohibeys alcuna causa de vena o de nervi o de membre principal ayssi cum havem dit.	 "The cause of the fistula is unknown and should you certify this, then ask for an inquiry or order a second one to confirm it if you don't forbid any vein, nerve, or main member as we have said.
Mays si le os es a tu descubert e es en lu alcuna corrupcio e negror, lahoras tu ratz aquel entro que la corrupcio sia hostada tota; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que lu encarne entro que sia sanat.	 "If the abscess is opened and there is no corruption or decay within it, then treat that part as we have said; but if corruption has been found in it, apply a treatment to cure it.
E si no es sana e gieta brac ayssi cum fazia, lahoras sapias que tu no est pervengut a la eradicacio tota de la corrupcio; e adonc tu descuebre sobre lu segondanament e exquisitament fay la razio de lu e la mundificacio de lu am la deriera fortalasa tieua, e aprop restaura aquel.	 "If not healthy and the abscess is as before, then you must know that you have not eradicated completely all corruption; so if you find out about it in a second time with great care and precision do reason for its cause and cure of it to strengthen your arm.
E donc si es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras sapias que aquela corrupcio es en la profunditat longinqua del cors, la qual no ha conseguida, e adonc a tu en aquel no es engen sino laysar aquela.	 "Then if it is healthy, so be it; but if not, then you must know that this corruption has infiltrated deeply into the body and could not have been eradicated completely.
E si le os corromput es petit, o es a tu possible atirar aquel, lahora tu le atira am forceps subtils las quals conveno ad aquo.	 "If the abscess is small or it might be possible to remove that part with subtle forceps as they are suitable for this.
E si so motz osses, lahoras exquisitament fay la extraccio de totz aquels, e de aquels no laysses denguna causa am la tua fortaleza.	 "If all of your limbs, then carefully remove everything and leave none to the strength of yours.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat alcuna causa de las humiditatz, e en lor inscizio no ha temor ni error, lahoras inscideys aquelas liaments o carns si so aqui, e deliura les osses.	 "If there is not any cause for the wetness or it has been proven false and in all respects, then consider the limbs or nerves if they are present here, and remove the bones.
Mays si a tu no es preparacio de ostar les osses de la tua hora, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua aquo que poyresca la plagua aquela, e layssa aquela entro que aquo es al enviro de aquels osses de carns e de liamentz, e guarda la plagua que no sia consolidada, e sia constrengida la seccio la qual tu has inscidida en la tua operacio.	 When you have made the incision to open up your bones for this operation, lay the skin flap over here so it can cover that area and prevent any of them from coming out, and keep the skin flap tight while preventing any movement inside the wound.
Habantz, si temes, pausa sobre lu coto submers en sopre trissat am oli, o coto submers en anguent egipciac, o en alcu dels enguentz vertz, quar quan poyriran aquelas liaments, e les osses son de lor seperatz la ablacio, e de aquels atraccio es alleujada.	 If you are afraid of it, place a bandage soaked in alcohol on top to prevent the incision from becoming infected or from soaking through the cloth, and keep the flap tightly over that area until they separate the bones and take away their traction.
Mays si es un gran os ayssi cum le os de camba o de coyssa o semblantz ad aquels, e aquo que de lu es corromput es la facia de lu tant solament, lahoras ratz aquela am resio tant solament derriera entro que sia ostada aquela negror e corrupcio, e aprop restaura la plagua.	 If it is a large wound on the leg or groin area then use that as well for the other parts of the body where this has become infected only, and then cover it back up with skin flap.
Mays si aquo que de lu es corrumpyt es gran partida, e la corrupcio ja ha conseguida la medulla del os, lahoras es causa necessaria cerrar aquel e aquel tot inscidir entro al loc on es pervenguda la corrupcio, e lahoras cura aquel entro que sia consolidada.	 If that is a large infected part of the body and the infection has reached its nerve endings then it is necessary to close that and all inside where the infection has spread, and then cover it up with skin flap once it is healed.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc ad un home en la sua coyssa per que pausez aquela a eyssempli e adjutori sobre la tua operacio.	 I recommend you to take your patient in the operation theatre so that they are simply and simply assist over your surgery.
Foc un home jove per etat entorn xxx ans, al qual accideys dolor en la sua cueyssa, e de las partidas dedintz mauguda es sobre la materia dedintz le cors entro que la materia es pervenguda a la cueyssa, e es materia de apostema am gran apostema, e no foc a lu causa extrinseca.	 "A young man about 20 years old, who has pain in his chest area, and who the doctors suspect might have a heart attack.
E adonc foc extendut le temps am aquela per la error dels metges entro que l’apostema es hubert, e acorrero de lu materias motas, e la sua curacio foc aprop pausada entro que la camba foc fistulada, e faytz son en lu motz orrificis les quals totz getavan poyredura e las humiditatz del cos.	 "The doctors' mistake was in assuming the pain was caused by a heart attack and not checking for other possible causes like gout.
E adonc le curec multitut de metges entorn dos ans, e no foc en aquels savia ma en la art, entro que yeu fu appelat.	 "The multiple doctors checked within two days but couldn't find the cause in that area and called for an expert.
E vi la camba de lu e las materias que corrian de lu aquels orrificis per gran cors; e ja le cos de aquel home era tot stabozit e la color de lu era citrina.	 "The body of that man was swollen and had a very red color.
E adonc yeu intromesi la tenta ad un de aquels orrificis e pervenguec la tenta al os.	 "They tried to find out what caused it by looking at the swelling, but couldn't identify the cause.
E aprop yeu e perscrutat tostz les orrificis e trobegui aquels pervenir a lor de totas partidas de la camba.	 "Then they tried to look for any other parts of his body that might be affected, but couldn't find anything.
E adonc yeu me coytegui e inscidegui sobre un dels orrificis aquels entro que descrobegui una partida del os, e atrobegui aquel corromput, e ja era terros e corrumput e denigrat; e era ja corrumpuda una partida de la camba entro que havia penetrat entro a la mezola.	 "They tried to examine one of the affected areas but couldn't find any signs or symptoms in that area, and they found something abnormal in another part.
E adon yeu serregui aquo que a mi era discubert e preparat del os descubert.	 When you have opened the space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands
E yeu cujegui que no fos en le os sino aquela corrupcio la qual abscidigui e serregui, e yeu ja havia derraziguada.	 You have already prepared the opening between the patient's thighs and placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
E aprop pausegui la restauracio de la plagua am medicina consolidativas per lonc temps, e no es consolidada.	 You now apply the restoration of the bladder with conservative medicine for a longer period, but it is not yet cured.
E aprop yeu iteregui e descubregui sobre le os segondament sobre le descubriment primier, e atrobegui continua corrupcio am le os.	 Now you gently spread and open the second part of the opening on top of the first one, and continue the corruption to both parts of the body.
E serregui aquo que a mi apares de aquela corrupcio, e aprop yeu fo perforsat fayre la curacio de lu e restauracio, e no es restaurat.	 You have already treated that infection and prepared for its cure and restoration, but it is not yet restored.
E adonc yeu descubri sobre lu autra veguada e no cessegui inscidir le os petit a petit particuladament e perforsa la restauracio de lu, e no es restaurat entro que inscidigui entorn un palm de lu, e aquel extraxi am la medula sua, e aprop restauregui aquel am medicinas, e es consolidat leugierament e sanat.	 Now you gently spread and open the second part of the opening carefully one by one especially to perform its restoration, but it is not yet restored when you insert a finger in it, causing extra damage to its cord and nerves, and it will return medical care for that, returning it back into the cavity and performed another restoration.
E no es necessaria iteracio en la operacio de lu e seccio de lu sino per la disposicio de la freulesa de lu e per la paucitat de la tollerancia de lu e paor de lu de mort, quar a lu accidia en totas horas per superfluitat de evacuacio sincopi mala.	 You do not need to continue the operation and sectioning but for the disposition of the disease and its scarcity tolerance fear of death that it causes in all hours through excessive evacuation without interruption bad.
E donc sanat es per sanacio entiera, e nada es en loc de os carn dura; e es fayta bona la disposicio de lu en le sieu cors e retornec la vertut de lu; e es conversat en las suas disposicios e no fec a lu contrarietat en ambulacio ni nocument en denguna causa.	 When he is sick and nothing else is available, then do the following: place it in his chest as well as returning to its rightness and goodness; then talk with him about what you can do for him so that there may be no harm done by any cause
Mays si es os eminent en loc del cors ja trauquat, lahoras cove que tu secces aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas liament e strenh aquel en la extremitat de aquel os eminent, e comanda ad alcu que extenda aquel en sus; e pausa aquel liament de lana pus gros del primier liament; e aprop lia aquel sobre la carn que es dejos le os, e exten la extramitat de lu per que atires la carn a las partidas dejos, e tu descuebras la carn sobre le loc le qual voles serrar per que la serra no leda la carn.	 If the first remedy is not available or effective in that location of the chest: then proceed with the following method. Stretch it out to its full extent using both hands, and make sure you have extended your arm as far as possible; pause for a moment, taking care not to let the skin tear from applying too much pressure, and cut away any excess flesh that does not need to be saved so that the cut will not harm what you want to be done.
E pausa fust o taula dejos le os decentment, quar quan tu fas aquo no es prohibida la serra que no secce la carn corrumpuda.	 Pause for a moment and make sure when doing this there is no prohibition on making the cut that does not harm spoiled meat.
E cove que sia la serradura sobre le loc corrumput petit a petit, quar si es en la concavitat del os corrupcio e no appar en la sua apparicio al sentiment, e forssa a serratura de lu autra veguada.	 Cut the incision carefully one part at a time, as if you are in the cavity of corruption and not on its surface; force to make sure that there is enough space between your fingers so that when you cut it will be done neatly.
E si le os es corrumput e no-eminent, abantz es la una partida continuada am la autra, e la corrupcio es al mieg loc o en partida de lu, lahoras tu descuebre la carn de totas partz tota; e aprop pausa fust dejos, e aprop serra aquel de la primiera partida la on es la corrupcio entro que sia continuada la serratura del autra partida.	 If the meat is spoiled and not eminent, then make a continuous incision along it all the way through to where corruption enters or begins at its surface; pause for a moment, taking care that you do not cut yourself in the process; proceed with the cutting of the second part as well but only if corruption continues.
E sia la serradura segon le loc de la corrupcio un petit, segon que havem dit.	 E it's a small lesion in the area of corruption after we said
E si la corrupcio es en la junctura, inscideys aquela junctura corrumpuda, e serra le os la on es continuat del autra part.	 And if corruption occurs at the joint, then attack that corrupted joint and strike out where it continues from another part
E si de la corrupcio es en la continuacio de doas juncturas, lahoras no es en lu razio sino engen.	 If corruption occurs in the continuation of two joints, then doctors are not looking for gout but rather inflammation.
E si la corrupcio es en le pecte de la ma o del pe, es mot dificil; empero cove que tu inquieras la corrupcio en qual manieyra appareys a tu, e que abradas aquela, e mondes aquela segon quascuna disposicio la qual es a tu possibla, e am cascum engen sia rectificat a tu, quan no fa a tu contrarietat vena o nervi.	 If the corruption occurs in the hand or foot, it is difficult; but if you want to find out where the corruption lies and open that part, then address that part, and take advantage of any available opportunity to correct it, even though it may conflict with a vein or nerve.
E sapias qual es inscididors e las serras a inscidir aquestz osses son motz segon le situament dels osses, e la preparacio de aquels, e la grosseza de aquels, e la subtilitat e la grandeza e la parvitat de aquels, e la duricia e la lor raritat; per que cove que tu prepares a tota specia de operacio estrument convenient ad aquela opperacio.	 The surgeons know which parts to attack and how to cut them, the preparation of those parts, their size, subtlety, grandeur, rarity of those parts, severity and rarity, in order that they may prepare all kinds of surgical equipment necessary for that operation.
E sapias que aquela operacio significa a tu sobre la specia del strument del qual indigeysses; quan am tu es gran studi e lonc e conoyssensa de las manieyras de aquesta art, e testimoni de manieyras de malautias, quar lahoras ja tu las avias per tu meteys aquo que es convenient a lu dels sturmentz a tota malautia.	 The surgeons know what that operation means for the kind of instrument it requires; if you are great and long in your study and experience with instruments of this art, and witness the sufferings of maladies, then they may have given to you, by your request at this point where it is convenient for all instruments used for any malady.
E yeu so a tu formant en la fi de aquest capitol le nombre dels instrumentz les quals pausaras cum eyssimples am les quals proceziras a la tua prohibicio la qual experimentaras sobre las autras.	 "And in this final part of the chapter, you will list the instruments which you will use to execute these prohibitions and experiments on them.
Forma de serra:	 "The form should be such:
Forma de autra serra:	 "Another form is as follows:
Forma de autra serra:	 "Here's another form for you:
Forma de autra serra gran:	 "Finally, here's a very long and complicated form:
Forma de ray:	 "The first sentence to translate is as follows. Do not add any comments like 'here is the translation', just reply with the guessed translation and nothing else:
Sia le cap de aquest ray segon la forma de cap de clau stellat, e les puntz de lu sian segon la forma dels puntz alstefegi.	 "The second sentence to translate from that paragraph is as follows. Do not add any comments like 'here is the translation', just reply with the guessed translation and nothing else:
E no conveneys sino que am aquel sian confricadatz les caps de las juncturas quan so corrumpudas, o es la boca gran ampla.	 "The second sentence to translate from that paragraph is as follows. Do not add any comments like 'here is the translation', just reply with the guessed translation and nothing else:
Forma de razori major dels autres:	 "Finally, here's a very long form for you:
Forma de razori menor:	 "The following sentence to translate is as follows. Do not add any comments like 'here is the translation', just reply with the guessed translation and nothing else:
Forma de razori lat:	 "Here's a very long form for you:
Forma de serra autra decentment fayta: sia fayt arc de lu pus sobira e la acuitat de lu de ferr, e le membre de lu de boys punhal descentment fayt.	 The following sentence to translate is as follows. Do not add any comments like 'here is the translation', just reply with the guessed translation and nothing else:
Forma de lu:	 "Here's a very long form for you:
Forma de razori en la qual ha concavitat:	 The following sentence to translate is as follows. Do not add any comments like 'here is the translation', just reply with the guessed translation and nothing else:
Forma de razori autra subtil:	 Another method of treatment
Forma de autra razori de curvada extremitat:	 Another method for straightening an arm.
Forma de rasori petit semblant a tenta:	 Another way to cauterize (burn) a small area.
Forma de incisori am le qual so inscidit les osses:	 To incise the bones of which incision is it?
Forma de inscisori autra minor:	 Another smaller incision
Forma de un autra inscissori; aquest semblant a ray, e la extremitat de lu es cum serra, e es exhibit en motz locs en la razio dels osses:	 Another incision to make, like this one but on the other limb.  The cut is made so it lies flat and exhibits in different locations along the bone.
Forma de ray lo qual conveneys a rasio de aquel que es perforat dels osses:	 To slit that which fits into the ratio of that which is perforated through the bones.
E la extremitat de lu es triangulada e de aguda extremitat.	 The limb cut to be triangular and sharp edged.
E es fayt de ferr de India , e semblantment cove que totas las causas que havem ditas de rasoris e de inscissoris e de serras.	 It is customarily done with a pointed instrument, similar to all other incisions and burns.
De inscizio extremitatz e de la serratura dels osses.	 The incision of the limb and the burning of the bones.
Las extremitatz se poyresso o per causa intrinseca o per causa extrinseca, o cum tu auras medicat aquela corrupcio per curacio de aquelas medicinas e la curacio no comfereys, o vezes la corrupcio anar deves le membre la qual no percuteys denguna causa, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel membre entro aquo la hon acossec la corrupcio, per que le malaute evasesca per aquo de mort o de malicia que es major defeliment del membre.	 The extremities may be caused internally or externally, or depending on whether you want to heal that corruption with those medicines and the healing does not coincide, sometimes it means that there is a member which was not burned due to any cause, the doctor commands you to cut off that member into this manner so as to burn off the corruption in order for it to leave more damage to the body.
E le senhal de aquel al qual accideys, es que·l membre es fayt negre entro que sia cujat que foc la ja comburit, o se poyreys aprop la negror entro que la poyredura aquela ane entro aquel membre que siec lu e que prengua tot le cors; e donc coyta te am inscizio de aquel.	 The only option is to cut it off completely when it has already been burned, or you may choose to burn the black part and leave the rest of that member which has burnt as if it were not there at all, therefore choose one method for incision
E semblantment si es causa de la corrupcio percussio de alcunas causas venenosas ayssi cum de scorpio mari o de vupera o de rutela e de semblantz.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and foot pain occurs, it is customarily called gout by doctors
E si la corrupcio o la percussio es en la extremitat del dit, lahoras tu inscideys le dit e no dones spazi a la corrupcio per que ane entro a la ma.	 If the corruption or strike occurs in the hand's extremity, then you should not spread it across and prevent contact with the mouth so that it does not enter into the body.
E semblantment si accedeys a la ma, lahoras tu inscideys aquela de la razit del focil, e no dones spazi a la corrupcio entro que prengua en le focil del bras.	 If you come to the mouth, then avoid spreading it across and prevent contact with the eyes so that it does not enter into the eye of the arm.
E si envezeys aquel, lahoras inscideys le bras entro al coyde en la junctura.	 If you come to him/her, then cover the arms in the joint area.
E si passa otra la corrupcio e la vezes enviro le coyde, lahoras en aquel es la mort del malaute; e aministrar autra causa otra aquo en curacio es quantitat de vertut.	 If another corruption enters and kills the patient, then in that case it is death for the patient, and to administer another cause here would be futile.
E semblantment fay del pe quan corrupcio envezeys le dit del pe, lahoras tu inscideys aquel entro ad un dels nozes.	 When corruption enters into the foot's digit, then you should cover it with a finger of one hand.
E si pren en la pente del pe, lahoras tu inscideys tot le pe.	 If you come upon poison in the foot, then you cover all of the foot.
Mays si pueja entro al denol, lahoras tu inscideys la camba entro a la junctura del denol.	 When it comes to entering into the nostril, then you should cover the leg in the joint area of the nose.
E si la corrupcio ja es pervenguda sobre le denol, lahoras en lu no es engen sino dimissio, e layssar le malaute a la mort.	 If corruption has already entered into the nose, then that is death for the patient, and it should be reported to the doctors immediately.
E la manieyra de inscidir le membre o de serrar lu es que tu strenhas le liament en la partida pus dejos la qual voles inscidir, e strenh autre liament sobre le loc; e extenda le ministre un liament a las partidas dejos, e extenda le ministra autra liament en sus; e tu separa la carn la qual es entre dos liamentz ain spatum lat entro que sia descuberta tota la carn; e aprop sia inscidit o serrat.	 "The servant is about to make a cut on the body part or sever it, as you stretch out the ligament at that location and another one over there; then extend a minister of linen at both ends so they are evenly spread across where the flesh has been opened up completely.
E cove que sia pausat drap de li de totas partidas per so que no toque le loc sa, e que vengua al malaute lesio ajustada e apostema caut.	 "After placing the cushion and minister of linen as described previously, you should prevent further contact with that location to avoid any further injury or pain.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc quan obras, lahoras tu cauteriza le loc coytadament, o pausa sus lu alcunas polveras restrenhentz le sanc; e aprop retorna a la tua medicacio entro que sia complida.	 "If an abscess occurs and you perform cautery on the affected area promptly or wait for some powders to harden it first? And after that, return to your medical treatment.
E aprop lia le membre plaguat am liament al u convenient, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	 "Place a bandage over the damaged limb when necessary and treat it as soon as possible.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc a un home en le sieu pe, aquest meteys accident le qual yeu e a tu recomtat, le qual es quar accidic a lu negror en le sieu pe am adustio que era asemblada a combustio de foc.	 "I recommend you to extinguish the fire in that area where the accident occurred and is causing trouble for you.
E aquela corrupcio accidic primierament en le sieu dit entro que tendec tot le pe.	 "The corruption was first addressed by treating all of the body part.
E adonc aquel home preparec per si meteys pus que vic la curacio anar al membre am la vehemencia de lu que atrobec de dolor e de adustrio de lu, e el inscidic aquel pe entro a la junctura, e foc sanat.	 "The man prepared himself to undergo medical treatment as quickly as possible for the pain and discomfort in that limb, and after cutting it open he treated it.
Lonc temps accidic a lu aquela meteyssa corrupcio en le dit de la ma indic.	 In those times, there was corruption in that particular matter of which I am speaking.
E adonc venc a mi, e so me perforsat repercutir aquela superfluitat am aquo que pausegui sobre la ma de las medicinas, aprop la mundificacio del cos de lu; e no es repercussa la superfluitat e comensec anar al autra dit entro que comensec en la ma.	 In order to mitigate that excess, I recommend spreading it over the surface of the body like a sort of ointment or cream, and also to control its spread through the matter by which you may already be familiar; if not, please specify another matter.
E el apelec me a inscidir la ma de lu, e yeu no volgui far aquo sperant sobre la repercussio de aquela superfluitat, e mays que temegui deves la inscizio de la ma de lu mort, quar la vertut del malaute era sobre cazement.	 I recommend applying a poultice to the matter of which you are already familiar; however, if not, please specify another matter in order to prevent any further complications from that excess, as it seems there was an injury to one of its parts.
E pus que el se desperec de mi, es retornat en la sua terra e pervenguec a mi que aquel home preparec e inscidic la sua ma tota, e es sanat.	 I have recommended that the excess be spread over the matter in which you are already familiar; however, if not, please specify another matter so as to prevent any further complications from that excess, as it seems there was an injury to one of its parts and it has been treated accordingly.
E no he adhuzida aquesta narracio sino per que sia adjutori sobre aquo que catz de aquesta malautia, e que sia significacio per la qual sia significada e segon la qual sia obrat.	 I did not include this story for the sake of assisting you with that matter of which you are already familiar, and its significance as well as in order to understand it further than what is already mentioned.
De cura sinuum et qualitate clisterizationis cum medicinis.	 To cure your health issues, we recommend the use of medical remedies.
Quan accideys apostema en alcus membres carnozes e·l spazi de l’apostema es prolonguat entro que fa colleccio de sania, e aprop es romput e perforat, e es eyssida de lu la sania, e roman le loc vuoyt quays cum si era vayssel, e la codena que es desobre lu ayssi cum drap subtiliat, e no es pervengut a deriera corrupcio, e no inprimeys en le os o en nervi ni en liament, es apelat sinu, e no es nompnat fistula.	 When the abscess occurs on any part of the body except for the anus itself, it is treated as follows: first, heat is applied to the area where the abscess develops in order to cause constriction and then incision is made around it in a circular motion with a thin blade, after which pus is removed and the abscess is broken up; finally, place your hand over it while applying a gentle pressure, so that you do not come into contact with any corruption or nerve tissue.
Mays empero si le spazi es prolonguat entro que la corrupcio enprema en alcun membre, lahoras es appelada fistula e no zukem.	 Fistula.
E la cura de lu es que inscidas aquela codena tota ayssi cum es revolvut, e majorment quan es subtiliada e es fayta cum drap, e comfizas que no adhereys al loc per la sua corrupcio.	 The treatment for it is to insert a dressing that completely covers the fistula whenever it becomes swollen and more significantly when it is being treated with drops, making sure not to adhere to the location of the fistula's corruption.
Mays si tu speras que la codena adheresca e que aquela corrupcio no aja conseguit per deriera consecucio, e en la codena ha spassitut de cara, lahoras tu cura aquel am clisteri.	 If you suspect that the dressing is adhering and that the fistula cannot be achieved due to any other reason, then the cure for it may be a clip.
E es que consideras al sinu, e lahoras si es gran, e·l brac que yeys es de fetent odor, lahoras clisteriza aquel am medicament egipciac le qual es de oli e vi agre e ziniar recebent partidas enguals, e sian ajustadas en un vayssel, e sian coytas sobre le foc entro que’l medicament se fassa rog e pervengua a specitut de mel.	 The physician will consider it and if it is large, they may suggest a clip that can be applied to the dressing, which contains oil and vinegar ingredients that can neutralize any potential irritation or inflammation of the area around where the medication should be applied.
E aprop tu pren de lu aquo que es necessari e dissolveys lu am aygua e mel; e clisteriza am aquel le sinu, e strenh le orrifici de lu, e layssa la medicina en lu per la quantitat de doas horas.	 The physician will take it and mix the dressing with water and vinegar; then apply the dressing to the fistula, and squeeze out any excess fluid from it, and leave the medicine in for a duration of two hours.
E aprop extratz aquela am sprecio; e fay aquo per tantz dias entro que sia mundificat le sinu e sia remauguda la pudor.	 Then remove that dressing after those days until it has become clear to the skin and relieved the odor.
E alcunas veguadas es clisterizat am aygua de cendre, quan no es a tu prezent aquest medicament; e es que tu prenguas la cendra de vitz, e met sobre lu aygua; e aprop cola aquela e clisteriza aquel am ela entro que te confizes que·l sinu lahoras es ostat.	 Some dressings may contain water to help cleanse the area when you are not using this medication; and place them over it with water, then apply that dressing so as to make sure that your skin heals properly.
E si le malaute no ha tollerancia sobre le medicament egipciac ni l’aygua de la cendre, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aygua e mel e quays sia mesclat ziniar trissat, e clisteriza aquel am vi e mel mesclat, quar de proprietat de mel es que mondifique e lave, e le vi fa adherir le sinu, e majorment quan en le vi ha superfluitat de stipticitat e de siccitat.	 When the patient is not tolerant of Egyptian medicine or water, ulcers will be healed by giving him vinegar and honey mixture, so that his stomach may be moistened with it, adhering to it more than when there is too much stickiness and dryness in it.
E cum tu fas aquo alcunas veguadas e te comfizes que·l sinu ja es remaugut, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aquo que fa naysser la carn en lu.	 And when you have done that and you feel its wounds are healed, the ulcers will be healed by applying water which is sweet to his skin.
E es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e dissolveys aquel am oli rozat e vi stiptic; o que clisterizas aquel am alcunas medicinas e enguentz autres que hajan las proprietatz les quals ja he yeu scritz en le tractat dels enguents.	 It is necessary to add finely chopped, sweet and sticky oil mixed with vinegar or other medicines that have been mentioned in the book on digestion tracts.
E si le orrifici del sinu es streyt en le qual no es recebuda la canula del clisteri, lahoras tu le amplifique aquel am ferr petit a petit, e pausa en lu calgua envolopada en enguent egipciac o en enguent basilicon entro que sia amplificat.	 If the vein of his arm is blocked and cannot be opened with the catheter, then it must be opened slowly step by step, and a pause should be made in which a bandaged tourniquet containing Egyptian or basilicon solution may be used to amplify its effect.
E semblantment si le orrifici es ample, lahoras tu agregua las labias de lu am sutura e layssa de lu quantitat en la qual intre le clisteri ses addicio.	 Similarly if the vein is large enough, you should increase the amount of the solution by adding layers and adjusting its quantity in such a way that the effect on the catheter increases.
E si le orrifici de lu del qual corr le brac es elevat a las partidas desus, lahoras secca aquel en le pus bas loc que es en lu per que le brac corra entro dejos, quar quan le brac es coartat en la preondeza de sinu la carn esser en lu engendrada.	 If the vein of his arm has been raised to a level where it is easy for him to move and no longer in contact with the skin surface, then you should seal that opening so he cannot get into trouble when his arm gets caught on something because if the arm becomes entangled during your use the flesh will be injured.
E si no es a tu possible seccar le sinu entro al enviro del os pus bas segon que voles, lahoras te perforssa que prepares le membre am preparacio per la qual corr de lu le brac leugierament segon que es a tu apparelhat e que no sia en lu retengut alcuna causa del brac.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customary to call gout.
E pren medicinas consolidativas que sian pausadas sobre le sinu convenientz ad aquo que vols exxten aquelas sobre drap de li.	 In order to prevent the intestine from coming out through a hernia or protrusion into its cavity, you should first close any gaps between them and apply pressure over that area using your hand.
E le drap sia de tan gran quantitat cum fa la comunicacio de tot le sinu; e aprop inscidey am las forfexs en le dreyt del orrifici del sinu un trauc pus ample un pauc que l’orrifici del sinu; e aprop exten sobre autre drap de li dels enguentz leons segon la quantitat del trauc, e pausa le sobre aquel per posicio longinqua del orrifici del sinu per que sia aleujat le eyssiment del brac de lu e no ostes le drap gran sino aprop alcus dyas una veguada.	 When you have closed the spaces between them and applied pressure over that area, gently stretch other drapes further away from the orifice of your body by a small amount, and place another drape near it to increase its position's length so as not to obstruct it with too much material, but rather keep some distance.
Mays aquel que es sobre le orrifici del sinu, le qual remauguas en tota hora per so que yesca aquo que es ajust en lu del brac.	 When you have placed another drape near the orifice of your body to increase its position's length while keeping some distance between them and applying pressure over that area, gradually stretch it further away from your body at a slower pace until it reaches its desired length.
E per que sapias si aquo que corr de lu del brac es mot o pauc, o es digest, o es no-digest.	 To determine if what happens to the intestine or hernia is mild or severe, you can try to pass gas and see if it causes pain in your feet.
E am aysso tu considera le loc de aquel sinu, si en lu sent le pacient dolor o no, e si es en lu apostema.	 After placing another drape near the orifice of your body while applying pressure over that area and gradually stretching it further away from your body at a slower pace until it reaches its desired length, you should consider if there is pain in the patient's location where they are sitting or not, as well as any discomfort.
E cum la tua medicacio es prolonguada en la tal manieyra, e vesas la matiera que es gitada sobre le orrifici del sinu ja adhereys, o se apropria adherencia, lahoras le mayti tu le deslia o le tertz dia, e quan deslias la plagua, lahoras muda le drap per autre e renova le enguent.	 When your treatment is prolonged in this manner, and you apply it to the abdomen as previously mentioned, or if you prefer a more thorough application, after removing the bandage, remove the third dressing and wash the area gently with water
Mays si del sinu aprop lon spazi yeys virus subtil, lahoras no te desperes de la adherencia de li, quar la sanacio de lu se apropria, quar so alcus homes en les quals tarda generacio de carn en las lors plaguas, e de aquels so en les quals es fayt le contrari de lu.	 If the virus is very subtle, do not remove the adhesive of it, as its health care requires it, as those who have undergone this treatment report swelling and redness in their wounds, which may be contrary to your situation
E si del sinu aprop motz dias es yssit brac indigest, lahoras sapias que·l sinu no adhereys; e si es tardada la adherencia del sinu e es la causa prolonguada, lahoras tu ajusta en exsiccacio de las medicinas, e si las medicinas so humidas en lor substancia e en la sua vertut, son seccas ayssi cum enguent dyafinicon, quan es en lu ajustada superfluitat de addicio de zegi.	 If the adhesive is not working days after application, and if it's prolonged use that caused this situation, apply a solution of dried medicinal substances to it; as these medicines are dry in their substance and in their virtue, they will be effective when applied sparingly with drying power, once you have adjusted for excessive additions.
E le mays derier am le qual es curat, es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e sia dissout en oli rozat, e sia sobre lu vojat vi antic engual en la sua substancia, e aprop comfeys aquel am lu, e usa de aquel.	 This may be the case when you apply it carefully and it becomes dry on its own, or if applied over a wet area, as well as applying to itself in its substance, use that one, and use it.
E ja fa semblant en aquela accio, quan no y a brac, enguent dyafinicon, mel quan es coyt entro que sia engrossat, e usa de lu; o que prenguas mirra e aloen e enses, e trissa tot e polveriza sobre le mel quan es sus le foc, e aprop lineys aquo sobre drap e strenh aquel sobre le sinu; e lineys aquel am le mel le qual has cuoyt entro que es engrossat, e polveriza sobre drap e strenh aquel.	 This may be the case when you are applying it and there is no adhesive on your hand, after removing it as soon as it becomes too thick, use that one; or if you prefer to try different ones and others, apply them all over the body where swelling occurs, and place a cloth soaked in something over the face, and put it on top of the affected area, and put that onto the affected part.
E alcunas veguadas so administratz am lu aristologia longua e razitz de lili celesti (e es lili celesti) e farina de errs e centaurea, e usa de aquels simples o ajustatz, trissa aquels e cribela e polveriza sobre le mel le qual he recomtat; e husa de lu.	 When you have opened the space between the patient's thighs and placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest holding their hands, here comes the first sentence to translate: You should apply these simple remedies, beat them thoroughly and powder them over the meal which I have recommended; and mix with it.
E si es prolonguat le sinu, e no es sanat per aquesta curacio, lahoras sapias que la corrupcio es en le preon de lu, e ja fa enquisicio en les osses o en les autres membres durs o als liaments; lahoras tu le cura am curacio fistular, ayssi cum desus es dit.	 If the pain lasts or does not improve with this treatment, it means that inflammation is occurring in the preon of the body, and you should inquire about any bones or other hard parts of the body as well; the doctors call such pain fistular.
De curacio de panarici et unguis attritae et incisione digiti additi et sectione.	 For treatment of hemorrhoids, apply these remedies to the anus and genitals separately using a sharp instrument for incision, sections, or cuts.
Panarici es apostema le qual nays dejos la ungla del dit pous de la ma o del pe, e fort leu nays en les autres ditz, e cum es prolonguat e la sua curacio es mens prezada, o es apostemat de apostema caut, o es corrumput, e gieta brac entro que corrodeys la razitz de la ungla, e fort leu corromp aquela tota, e fort leu perve la sua corrupcio al os entro que es a lu odor fetent, e es fayta la extremitat del dit lada, e la color de lu es fayta fusca.	 Hemorrhoids are a condition in which the anus is inflamed or sore, often causing pain to the fingers as well as other parts of the body; if it continues and its treatment is not improving, or becomes worse over time, you should seek medical attention immediately, or apply cautery to stop the inflammation.
E donc quan tu auras aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas am ferr tota la superfluitat que es romasa de la ungla e aprop cauteriza la plagla aprop aquo, quar cauteri mot es juvatiu en aysso.	 And once you have divided the area and do not see improvement in your treatment, doctors recommend that you insert all of the excess fluid from the anus into a tube, which is heated with cautery to burn away the affected parts quickly.
Mays si le os es sa e la ungla es sana, e las addicios de la ungla vuoydas ja compremen las carns a las partidas dedintz, e comensan lu punger e ledeysso aquela, lahoras cove que tu pauses ray subtil dejos le angle de la ungla que pungeys la carn, e impelleys aquela sus e inscideys aquela carn am facilitat, e pausa sobre aquo que roman de la carn de las medicinas comburentz corrosivas entro que sia tot remaugut; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	 When the urine is healthy and clear, the kidneys will be good, preventing kidney stones from forming, and when there are pains in them, the doctors usually use corrosive medicines to help it out.
Mays si la corrupcio ja enprem en le os, lahoras cove que tu inscidas le os aquel e le extraguas, car nul temps no es sanat que sia en lu le os corrumput.	 When the urethra becomes infected, the doctors will usually prescribe antibiotics to treat it and relieve it as soon as possible.
E si vezes la corrozio e la corupcio anar en le dit, lahoras tu inscideys aquel en un dels nozes segons que es premesa la sua rememoracio, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	 If the corruption and inflammation occur in one of the nerves according to their memory, then the doctors will usually prescribe treatment for that nerve as soon as possible.
Mays si a la ungla endeve percussio o atricio, e endeve en aquela dolor vehement, lahoras cove que tu al comensament fleubotomes le malaute, e aprop secca la ungla am spatum agut am seccio transversa desus en jus, e guarda te que la seccio no pervengua entro a la carn que es dejos la ungla, quar tu faras accidir al malaute dolor vehement, e sira causa a nativitat de la carn ajustada superflua en le loc; e aprop cura aquel loc am aquo que ceda dolor.	 If the urethra is perforated or injured and it causes severe pain, then at first apply a warm compress to the area, and if that doesn't work, place an ice pack over it to reduce swelling.
Mays dit ajustat, le qual es nat en las mas de alcus homes, fort leu es carnos tot, e fort leu so en lu osses, o fort leu es en lu ungla.	 When the patient is very weak and cannot get out of bed or move their limbs, they are in a critical condition.
E alcus de lu son natz en la razit de la junctura, o es la nativitat de lu en alcus nozes dels ditz.	 The cause may be an inflammation of the joint itself or from external injuries to the nerves.
Mays aquel que es nat en alcus nozes del dit no se mau, e aquest que es nat en las juncturas fort leu es maugut.	 When one of these is not in his bones (joints), he may suffer from gout.
E de aquels que son natz carnoses, la seccio es leugiera, e es que tu inscidas aquel deves la sua razitz am spatum lat.	 For those who have cold humors entering the body, loosen up your joints and make them free to move around
Mays de aquel que es nat en la razitz de la junctura, la curacio es dificil; e donc guarda te de la abscizio de lu.	 If one of these is not in its place (joints), curing will be difficult; therefore guard them from being outside their place
Mays en aquel que es nat en dit deves les nozes, cove que tu inscidas al comensament la carn de lu am inscizio redonda entro al os, e aprop serra am una de aquelas serras convenientz ad aquo, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	 If one of these is not in the right place (joints), loosen up its muscles and try to get it back into its correct position
Mays consolidacio la qual accideys als ditz entre lor motas veguadas o per nativitat del home que nays enayssi, o per consolidacio de plagua o per combustio de foc, o per semblantz, adonc cove que secces aquela consolidacio entro que les ditz retorno a la sua forma natural.	 If the cause of this is between the muscles themselves or due to external factors like burns, combustion, or friction, try to bring it back into its normal position
E aprop pausa entre lor draps de li enfuzes en oli rozat per que no sian consolidatz leugierament, e separa entre aquels, o pausa entre aquels una lamina de plom subtil entro que sia consolidat segon que cove.	 If the heat is too intense or excessive between these two strips of oil that may not be possible to consolidate them at once; separate them instead, or pause among them a thin layer of gauze until it has consolidated properly.
E semblantment si accideys consolidacio en alcus ditz am la palma, lahoras tu secca aquela consolidacio segon que es preparada e conveneys a la figura del membre.	 If consolidation is needed in the hand's joint, loosen up that joint and wait until it is prepared and comfortable with the body part's figure.
De inscizio de vices, so son varicas.	 They are veins.
Vices so son varicas, e so venas envolutas grossas plenas de superfluitatz melencolicas las quals veno en motz dels membres del cors, e le major adveniment de lor en las cambas, e majorment en las cambas dels itinerantz e dels laborantz e dels portantz.	 When veins become clogged with dark colored fluids causing pain in the limbs of the body, and particularly in the legs, and most commonly on the calves, and often in the thighs and forearms and hands
Adonc cove que tu administres purguacio del cors de colera negra alcunas veguadas am expulcio fort, e aprop sangna le pacient de la vena basilica.	 When administering purgative made of black bile to someone experiencing a severe headache, apply the patient's blood to the basilic vein.
Mays la curacio de lor am ferr es segon dos manieyras: la una es que sia inscizas e sia atirat aquel sanc negre, e l’autra manieyra es que sia elevada la vena e sia extrayta tota.	 The first method of treatment is to apply a compress soaked in cold water and black bile, while the second way is to elevate the patient's feet above his head and empty them completely.
La seccio de lu es segon aquesta manieyra: embroca al comensament la camba am aygua cauda mot entro que le sanc gros sia resolvut, que es feculent de la camba, e aprop strenh la camba del malaute a la partida pus sobirana de la coyssa entro a la partida dejos del denol am una benda, e aprop secca la vena en un loc, o en dos, o en tres am seccio ampla, e aprop eleva le sanc negra am la tieua ma de la partida dejos de la camba entro en sus, e desus en jus, entro que del sanc sia yssida la quantitat que voles e que vezes habastar, e la qual tollera la vertut del malaute.	 The second method of treatment is to place the patient's feet above their head and empty them completely until the large vein becomes full again with feces. Then, tightly wrap it around their body in a certain location or multiple locations depending on how much you want to remove it from them each time they feel it, after which you can then lift it up high into the air while holding onto one end of it so that any excess fluid is removed and the vein's integrity is maintained.
E aprop lia aquela, e comanda a lu que abstengua de las viandas colera negra engendrantz.	 And after this, command them to avoid consuming black bile inducing foods.
E itera la curacio per fleubotomia quan las venas so umplidas e aquo notz al malaute.	 Repeat the treatment for phlebotomy when veins are already full and therefore causing pain in the patient.
Mays la elevacio de lor es segon aquesta manieyra: tu que razas la camba del malaute, si en lu so motz pels, e aprop met le en banh e embroca la camba de lu am aygua cauda entro que s’enrogesesca e las venas sian exuberadas; o que sia exercitat per exercici fort, si banh no es a tu present, entro que·l membre sia scalfat.	 "When the veins of the leg are swollen and inflamed from sitting for a long time, or if the limb is overworked due to strenuous exercise
E aprop secsa la codena en le dreyt de la vena per seccio en le lonc o en le derier de lu deves le denol, o en le pus bas de lu deves lo talo.	 "If you want to remove the clot from the right or left side of the leg, you can either apply heat or cold.
E aprop uobre la codena am uncis e excorja la vena de tota part entro que appara al sentiment, e es deves la appericio de lu que vezes aquela roga declinant a negror.	 "You should try to apply pressure to the clot and keep it still to prevent further spread.
E donc cum evazeys e de la codena tu vezes aquela blanca quays sia corda.	 "When you feel that white, be careful; it may indicate an abscess or blood clot formation.
E aprop tu met dejos aquela le ray entro que sia elevada e sia gitada de la codena, e sospen aquela am onci orp leon.	 "Apply pressure to the vein in such a way that both ends are elevated and applied simultaneously.
E aprop secsa autra seccio aprop aquela seccio per tres ditz, e aprop excorja la codena de la partida desus de la vena entro que apparia.	 "Apply pressure to the clot at three points: on top of it, below it and near your hand.
E aprop eleva aquela e inscideys aquela en deriera seccio deves le talo, e aprop extratz aquela e eleva aquela entro que sia yssida per la seccio segonda, e aprop extratz aquela de la seccio que es sobre aquela.	 "Apply pressure to the clot at two points: below and above it.
E fay aquo entro que extraguas aquela de la seccio que es pus sobirana o pus auta de totas las seccios, entro que tota es yssida; e lahoras inscideys aquela.	 "Place all of them in such a way that they are above or below the clot depending on which side it is.
E si no obezeys a tu ad extrayre e elevar, lahoras intromet una agulha am fiel fort doble e ligua aquela e extratz la, o intromet dejos lu le ray e revolveys la tua ma a tota part entro qu’en sia getada.	 "When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
E guarda te que no sia inscidida; quar si es trencada, es fayt a tu dificil elevar aquela mot e es vengut sobre le malaute per aquela nocument.	 "And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery.
E cum aquela tota auras fora-gitada, lahoras pausa sobre le loc de la plagua lana submerssa en vi e oli rozat e oli no-rozat, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	 "Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out.
E si la vit es contrayta havent tortuositat a la qual sia envolucio a las partidas, e no es segon rectitut segon que havem dit, lahoras cove que tu fendas sobre aquela a tota partida de tortuositat de lu e als locs de envolucio de lu, e aprop suspen aquela am uncis entro que eleves aquela tota.	 "You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
E guarda te deves la tua seccio que no inscidas la vena e que no plagues aquela, quar dificil sira a tu elevar aquela; e serva la tua prudencia en aquela.	 "And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery.
Forma del inscident am le qual es seccada vit:	 "When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
Forma de unci orp:	 "And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery.
No es a lu accuitat ayssi cum als uncis ni es de aguda extremitat per so que no plague la vena; e es de grossa flexibilitat leon, quar si era subtil, inscidira la vena per la sua subtilitat; habantz es en lu superflua grosseza ayssi cum havem dit.	 "And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery.
De extraccio venae cruris.	 The beginning of an incision in the groin
Aquesta vena es engendrada en las cambas en terras caudas ayssi cum al- Ategi en terra de Arabics e en las terras de India caudas e aridas de pauca teneritat e en las quals no nays erba ni aybre.	 This vein is created in the thighs on both sides, as well as in the Arabic and Indian lands, where there is very little vegetation and sparse foliage.
E fort leu es engendrada en autres locs del cors otra las cambas.	 And further more it is made on other parts of the body besides the thighs
E la gestacio de lu es de putrefaccio que ve dejos la codena ayssi cum venen dedintz le cors serpentz e vermps e scarides e verms engendrantz entre la codena e la carn.	 The action of it is to putrefaction, which causes serpents and worms and ulcers and worms to sprout between the incision and the flesh.
E senhal de la suscepcio de l’adveniment de lu es de aquesta vena que accideys en la camba enflammacio vehement; e aprop le loc es vesicat; e aprop comensa la vena yssir del loc de aquela vesicacio quays sembla razit de planta.	 The anticipation of its appearance is that the vein will suddenly become inflamed, and it is necessary to cover over it, then cauterize it with a pointed cautery to prevent it from coming out like a plant shoot.
E adonc cum appar de lu la extremitat, lahoras cove que tu envolvas sobre aquela una pessa de plom del qual sia le pes de una drac. entro a ii drac., e noza aquela e layssa le plom suspendut de la camba.	 As soon as it appears, make sure to cover it with a patch of lead which weighs about one drachma, until you catch it and remove the lead patch from the thigh.
E tantas veguadas cum yeys de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, envolveys aquo em plom e noza aquel.	 And whenever there is any cause to be done elsewhere on the body, wrap it in lead and catch that one.
E si mot es prolonguat, lahoras tu inscideys una partida de lu e envolopa le romanent; e no inscidas aquela de razit entro que sia fora yssida, quar si inscideys aquela es contrayta e intra en la carn e fa accidir apostema e poyredura en le loc e ulceracio mala.	 If it prolongates then you should cut out one part of the vein and wrap around its circumference; but if there is no other place where to go, just wrap that one tightly into the flesh and cause blisters and sores in the area and bad ulcers.
Per que cove que sia tractada suaument e sia extrayta petit a petit, entro que sia fora-gitada del derier de lu e no remangua de lu alcuna causa en le cors.	 For when the treatment is being applied smoothly with gentle pressure, so that it does not come off from the fingers of the practitioner and falls on nothing in the body
E de aquesta vena es yssit en alcus homes que es en la sua longitut de v palms e de detz e ja es pervengut a mi que yssic un de xx palms.	 And that vein, as it enters into the hollow of the palm of the hand and the thumb, has also been applied to me where I have felt one of them.
E si es inscidida en la hora de la sua medicacio, lahoras intromet lo ray en le trauc de lu e perfora aquela am lonc trauc am le cors, entro que sia evacuat tot aquo que es en la materia, e administra putrefaccio del loc per alcus dias am medicinas; e aprop cura aquela per la curacio de apostemas.	 If the treatment is done in a timely manner during its application, it will enter through his veins and perforate that vein to come out of the body into the matter, so as long as this occurs, do not administer putrefaction for days on medication; and then cure it with the care of stitches.
E aquesta vena alcunas veguadas ha motz ramps, e majorment quan apar a la junctura del pe o en le pe, e veno a lu motz orrificis, e es yssit de quascu orrifici ram.	 That vein of the hollows is very small and often causes harm when it approaches the junction of the foot or leg, and comes out from it ruthlessly, so that you can identify which vein it is
E donc cura aquela ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio e am aquo que es desus dit.	 Then cure this in such a way as to divide into the division mentioned above.
De sectione super vermes generatos sub cute et dicitur aegritudo bovina.	 From under the cow's buttocks and is called bovine itch.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en alcuna terra deves nos malautia bovina per so quar motas veguadas endeve als bious e es verm pauc un le qual es nat entre la codena e la carn, e va en tot le cos pujan e devalan, e es mostrat al sentiment deves le sieu anament de membre en membre entro que disromp la codena e yeys fora.	 This disease is called bovine itch when it occurs in any country and does not occur with the cattle fever that appears between the bone and the flesh, it spreads throughout the body itches and scabs, and is displayed by the feeling of itching on every member to member until he breaks down the bones and falls.
E la generacio de lu es per putrefaccio de alcunas humors ayssi cum accideysso verms e serpentz e lombrics e ascaridas en le ventre.	 The generation of this occurs due to putrefaction of certain humors, which also causes worms and lice in the belly
E es temut per la malicia de lu, quar quan el va en le cors e es elevat al cap, e es pervengut al huel, lahoras fort leu uebre en lu e intra e destruzeys le huel, e aquo endeve motas veguadas.	 It is feared for the malice of this, because when he enters the body and is raised to his head, and then gets lost in it, the sores are inflamed by him and inside and destroyed, which eventually leads to death.
E donc quan tu voles curar aquel e extraire lu, lahoras no se fa si no deves la sieua ambulacio e apparacio de lu al sentiment, e adonc cove que tu strenhas aquo que es sobre lu e aquo que es dejos lu am liament e constriccio fort, e aprop secca sobre lu e extratz aquel.	 When you want to heal him and remove it, then doctors cannot be done without the help of a surgeon's assistant and appearance in front of him, so that you can hold onto what is on top of him and what is below him firmly, and make sure about him and get rid of it.
E si es preondat en la carn e no le atrobes, lahoras tu pausa cauteri am foc sobre le loc entro que mora, e la major causa que es temuda es corrupcio de lu am la qual corrump le loc ayssi cum havem dit.	 If it is stuck in the flesh and you can't find it, then doctors take a cautery with fire on the location where it is located, which is one of the major causes that are feared to be corruption of the place, as well as the corruption causing its spread.
May si tu vezes aquel esser pervengut al cap prop del huel, lahoras strenh sobre le sobrecil am fort strictura, e aprop secsa sobre lu, e extratz aquel; e cove que·l malaute use de mondificacio del sieu cors am medicinas evacuantz humors putridas malas, e guarda se de viandas generantz putrefaccio.	 If it ever gets stuck in the head due to its location near the heat, then doctors tighten over the upper lip firmly and make sure about him, and get rid of it; also use medicine to eliminate bad humors causing illness from his body, and keep an eye on the generation of putrefaction.
De sectione super aegritudinem nafir.	 The patient should lie flat.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en nostra terra nafir, e es dolor la qual ve en alcus membres, e aprop es permudada de membre en membre.	 This illness is not common in our land, and the pain which occurs in all members of the body, and it spreads from one member to another.
E yeu ja e vista aquela segon que yeu te recomtare.	 I see that you want recommendations for a second time.
Yeu fu apelat a una femna malauta ad una vila, e descubric le sieu bras e vi una imflacio petita en la vena funis del bras, e pus que fu romas per una hora, vi aquela imflacio anar ayssi cum va verm pujan ad aquest, mays pus leugierament que esser por, ayssi cum si fos argent viu quan corr de loc en loc.	 I recommended a female patient to a town, and after checking her arm vein for swelling, it turned out that she had one on the wrist as well.
E adonc anet s’en la dolor de aquel loc e fiquet se en le muscle, e aprop aqui stec per una hora.	 And since then, there was pain in this location and a swelling developed in the muscle, so I applied heat for one hour.
E aprop correc en l’autre cors entro que pervenc al autre bras.	 Then I checked her other arm to see if it had swollen as well.
E aprop recomtec a mi que revolvia se per tot le cors sieu segon que yeu vi; e fo trop meravelat de la permutacio de lu e de la velocitat de membre en membre.	 I recommended moving her body in all directions except for the arm that was swollen, to prevent further swelling and rapid spreading from one part of the body to another.
E yeu ja havia vist denant aquo en les mieus huels segon aquela manieyra, empero yeu he vistz motz les quals atroban dolor esser permutada de membra a membre.	 You have already seen that when it comes to changing the position of this body part, you must be careful not to move other parts quickly from one to another.
Mays no vi aquo am les huels ayssi cum en la femna.	 I saw her in this condition as well.
E yeu no cogiti esser aquo sino que es per aquo quar la femna era de viela, on so de secs cors e de venas descubertas, e en aquesta apparec al sentiment aquela ventositat permutada.	 I didn't think of that until after finding out the female patient had swelling in both legs and veins exposed as well, which showed a spreading sensation to be possible.
E es necessari que no apparesca segon aquesta retro-curacio en aquels que son delicioses e am cors humitz de venas ameguadas.	 It's important to prevent re-curvature in those who have a delicious and agreeable curvature of the veins, such as hemorrhoids.
E cum tu voles la curacio de lu, e le pacient sent aquela dolor, lahoras no es a tu aparent al huel ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras tu strenh sobre aquel e dejos lu leugierament e secse sobre aquel entro que sia yssida aquela ventositat coartada, e cauterize le loc.	 If you want to perform an incision on the patient in order to correct their curvature and alleviate their pain, then do not make it look like this as I have described; rather, stay focused on that area and apply heat there until the contracted part is relaxed, and cauterize the affected area.
Mays si tu no la vezes am los tieus huels, alhoras tu cura aquel am excussio del cors e am aquo que expelleys ventositatz, e carmina aquelas am pillulas fetidas e am pillulas de serapi e semblantz.	 If you are not able to perform the procedure at home, then you should go to a doctor and ask for tablets that can expel intestinal worms or pills of serpents, as well as other such remedies.
De extraccio de sagetas.	 Extract from hemorrhoids
Sagetas son diversificadas segon las specias, e segon les locs dels cors en les quals cazo, quar la lor diversitat es que de aquellas so que han grans puntas, e petitas, e concavas, e sordas, so es solidas; e de lor so que han tres angles, e de aquelas a las quals so que han lenguas; e de aquelas a las quals so astelas.	 Hemorrhoids are diverse depending on the location and type, for example those that have large points or small ones, thick ones or thin ones, or concave ones or flat ones, they are solid; similarly those with three angles or those who have lips, and those which have stars.
E aquela que es segon les membres e las pessas en las quals cazo es segon dos manieyras: quar les membres o so membres principals concaus, ayssi cum le cervel, le cor, e·l fitge, e le pulmo, e les ronhos, e les budels, e la vezica, e a lor semblantz; e donc quan catz en alcu de aquestz membres e aparo a tu senhals de mort, la qual causa yeu recomtare aprop, lahoras cove que tu evites extraccio de aquela sageta en aquels quar la mort siec aquel en le qual en las majors disposicios, e quan a tu no appareysso aquestz mals senhals, e la sageta no es amaguada en la profunditat del membre, lahoras tu extratz aquela e cura la plagua.	 The second category is for the legs and buttocks in which hemorrhoids can occur; specifically those with the main arteries, such as the aorta, lungs, kidneys, bladder, and anus, or those that are not deep within the leg, then you extract it and treat the sore.
E dels senhals del servel es quan catz en lu sageta, e trespassa le os, e es yssit del cyphac le qual es sobre le cervel, quar accideys per lu soda vehement, e scotomia, e vertige, e rogor en les huels, e imflamacio e rogor de la lengua, e spasme e permixtio de entendament e vomi de colera, e fort leu es abscindida la paraula e es destruida la votz, e es yssit del loc de la plagua humiditat blanca semblant a pols, e yeys de lu semblant ad aquositat de la carn.	 When the snake enters the body and bites the eye, it causes swelling of the eyelid, vision loss, dizziness, and burning in the hands, mouth, throat, and stomach; numbness, confusion, and vomiting from thoughtlessness occur as well.
E donc si appareyso a tu aquestz senhals, lahoras tu abste de la curacio e de la extraccio de la sageta, si non es fora.	 If you find this snake, then get rid of its venom and remove the source if necessary
Mays les senhals de la sageta quan catz en le cor, so que ela es prop de la mamila senestra, e sent am aquela quays sia ficada en causa dura, e no es causa vueda; e fort leu le movement de la sageta es semblant a movement del pols, e corr de la plagua sanc negra, e siec aquel fregiditat de las extremitatz, e suzor freja, e sincopi; e donc sapias que la mort descen ses tot dopte.	 When the snake enters the body and goes to the breast, it is a cause of severe pain that does not subside; the sudden tightening of the muscles of the limb resembles that of a stroke, and death may follow shortly thereafter.
E les senhals quan la sageta ha plaglat le pulmo so eyssiment de sanc spumos de la plagua, e les vayssels que so prop del col so apostematz, e es mudada la color del malaute, e expira sperit gran aut, e demanda atraccio de ayre freg.	 When the snake enters the lungs it causes frothy sputum to come from the throat, and the veins of the chest are filled with blood; the face becomes reddened and painful breathing is greatly obstructed
E si catz la sageta en le velament le qual es en le pietz, e la dolor lahoras es prop de las costas petitas, e es fayt le ale gran am vehement dolor e am sospir, e no so maugutz totz les membres dels muscles.	 If the snake enters the small intestine near the chest, and pain occurs in the small ribs, then severe burning pain and heavy breathing occur; the muscles of all limbs become paralyzed.
E si catz la sageta en le stomac, lahoras fort leu yeys de la plagua vianda alcuna indigesta.	 When a stomachache occurs in an empty stomach, pains from undigested food are customary
E si catz la sageta en le ventre, e es ficada en lu, yeys alcuna fenda de la plagua, o la tela, o budel le qual es disromput, e no es speransa en la curacio de lu extraccio de la sageta.	 If the stomach is empty and it is placed on the abdomen, then there will be no opening of the intestine or hernia, nor any tearing of the tissue, unless a pointed cautery is made to open up the stomach
E si la sageta catz en la vesica, e es yssida defora urina, e procesesca de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, e fort leu es dolor sobre le malaute, lahoras sapias que es mortal.	 If the bladder is empty and there is no outlet for urine, then severe pain occurs over the abdomen, and it is customary to call this colic by doctors.
Mays les autres membres ayssi cum es la cara, le col, e·l golayro, e las spallas e le adjutori, e les spondils del dos, e la furcula, e la coysa, e la camba e a lor semblantz dels membres, son salvatz segon las majors disposicios quan la sageta no atroba vena ni arteria e no es sageta venenosa.	 The other members of the body are as follows: face, neck, groin, legs and buttocks, spine, ribs, sacrum, and iliac bones, which serve as secondaries when the stomach does not open into a vein or artery, nor is it venomous.
E yeu recomtare aquo a tu que he vist del esser de aquestas sagetas, per que signifiques per aquo sobre la curacio tieua.	 In summary, if you have read this carefully and understand the instructions here given, then indicate your agreement with that statement.
La qual causa es, quar en un home cazec sageta en le lacrimal del huel de lu en la razitz del nas, e yeu extrayssi aquela a lu del autra partida, dejos le grays de l’aurelha de lu, e es sanat, e no accidic en le huel de lu nocument.	 The cause of which is, when there is stomach acid in the lacrimal duct of the nose and it reaches that other part of the body, then it escapes from its own outlet, tears come out of the eyes of the patient, but not through the nose.
E extrayssi autra sageta a un Juzeu la qual cazec en lu en lo grays del sieu huel, dejos la palpebra pus dejos, e la sageta ja era occultada e no so conseguit de aquela sino una petita extremitat am la qual adhereys al sieu fust, e era gran sageta de las sagetas agudas dels Turcs , am ferr leon en la qual no havia aurelhas.	 When the ulcer is in the gray of his eye, do not let it protrude beyond that point; cover it with a small cushion so that only part of it adheres to its fold and is covered by a large cushion made up of sharp cushions from the Turks
E senat es le Juzieu , e no accidic en le sieu huel mal accident.	 After that, do not rub or scratch in any way
E extrayssi una autra sageta a un home Crestia la qual era cazuta en le golayro, e era sageta arabica, e es aquela a la qual so aurelhas; e adonc yeu inscidegui sobre aquela entre doas guidegi, e ja era submersa en le golayro de lu; e adonc yeu so subtiliat am aquela, e aprop extraxi aquela, e es sanat le Crestia .	 After that, apply a small cushion over it to cover the ulcer and prevent further irritation.
E extraxi autra sageta a un home la qual era cazuta en le sieu ventre, e cogitegui que moris per aquela; e donc, pus que foro passatz xxx dias e no es mudat sobre lu alcuna causa de las suas disposicios, inscidegui sobre la sageta e engenagui sobre aquela, e es sanat, e no accidic a lu accident mal.	 After removing the cushion from over it, ensure that nothing is rubbed or scratched on it, and do not scratch accidentally as well.
E vi mays un home en le qual cazec una sageta en le dos de lu, e consolidada es la plagua sobre lu, e pus que foc aprop set ans, yssic la sageta en la razitz de la coyssa.	 After removing the cushion from over it and ensuring nothing is rubbed or scratched on it, apply a bandage over it to secure it in place and prevent any further irritation.
E vi una femna a la qual cazec sageta en le sieu ventre, e la plagua es consolidada dedintz lu, e no es mudada en las suas disposicios en re, e la femna no atrobec nocument en alcunas de las suas opperacios naturals.	 After removing the cushion from over it and ensuring nothing is rubbed or scratched on it, apply a bandage to secure it in place while preventing any further irritation due to natural body functions.
E vi un autre home al qual cazec sageta en la sua cara e consolidada es la plagua e romas la sageta, no atrobant aqui mota dolor, e motz semblantz ad aquestz.	 There is another man who, when he puts his face and settles on it, the flesh and blood run out of him without pain, and it's similar to this one.
E extrayssi la sageta del home dels princeps del rey que era cazuda en le mieg loc del nas sieu e ja havia declinat a la partida dreyta un petit, e occultada era tota la sageta.	 The face of the man who was captured in his own place near the nose had already declined to the right side for a little while and was now completely hidden by it.
E yeu fu appelat a la curacio de lu aprop le cazement de la sageta entro a tres dias.	 They called on him for three days of care in order to remove the flesh from his face.
E adonc yeu atrobegui la plagua de la sageta mot streyta; e adonc yeu inquirigui aquela am tenta subtil, e no sentigui aquela; mays el la sentia puncio dejos la aurelha dreyta, e adonc speregui que aquela punccio era per la extremitat de la sageta.	 And when they tried to remove the flesh from his face but couldn't, and when they inquired into that gently, without feeling it, maybe it was on the right side of the forehead; or perhaps there was another pain in the area near the ear.
E amplastregui le loc am emplaustre en le qual es vertut atrectiva e digestiva, confizant de mi que·l loc se apostemes per que appares a mi le loc de la sageta, per que secces sobre aquela.	 They opened the place in which there is truth and digestion, making sure that this place matches with where it happens on his face, to prevent any mistakes or false ideas about its location.
E no accidic en le loc accident significant que la sageta hagues conseguit aquel loc; e yeu continuegui am le emplaustre sobre lu per motz dias e no accidic accident; e consolidada es la plagua entretant, e romas le malaute de la extreccio de lu per spazi de motz dias entro que un jorn sentic la sageta dintz le sieu nas e recontec aquo a mi.	 They didn't accuse the place of causing the pain to his face; they continued to put their hand on it for several days and not accused any accident, but carefully placed the flesh covering between them as well.
E adonc yeu pausegui sobre la plagua medicina acuta corrosiva per motz dias entro que foc ubert, e am la tenta yeu assagegui aquel, e atrobegui la extremitat de la sageta subtil, la qual adhereys al fust.	 When there is an acute corrosive medicine applied to the wound in days to come and after which it burns, also put on a bandage of a subtle kind that adheres firmly
E aprop yeu ajustegui en la apersio de la plagua per aquela medicina acuta entro que apparec a mi visiblament la extremitat de la sageta, e passec a mi temps am aquo per le spazi de temps entro quatre meses.	 Put on the bandage tightly in the area of the wound where the corrosive medicine is applied and after that period has passed cover with times to prevent the area from getting infected for four months.
E aprop pus que la plagua foc amplificada, e foc a mi possible entrometre las forfexs en lu, e remaure aquela, e no obezic ad eyssiment, lahoras yeu no cessegui subtiliar e ingeniar sobre aquela am manieyras de engen, entro que comensegui un dia sobre aquela am manieyras de engens pendre lu am forceps descentment faytas, segon que vindra la forma de aquelas en la fi del capitol, entro que extraxi aquela; e aprop restauregui aquela plagua.	 Put on the burn with increased fire and cover it with gauze, remove that and do not leave any excess, keep applying a thin bandage gently and carefully in that manner until you reach the end of your treatment days, at which point you will remove that bandage.
E alcus metges jutgavan que la cartillage del nas no es restaurada, e yeu restauregui aquela e la plagua es consolidada, e sanat es le malaute per sanetat entiera, e no noguec en lu en deguna causa.	 Doctors judge that the nose cartilage is not restored and you will restore it along with the burn scar and ensure their health is maintained and do nothing else in any way.
E yeu recomti a tu la qualitat de extraccio de alcunas sagetas per que pauses aquo regla e significacio sobre aquo que no he dit, quar las partidas de aquesta art e las difinicios de aquela no so conprehendudas am narracio ni no comprehen aquelas le libre.	 I recommend to you the quality of extracting some bones in order that it may stop this rule and significance as is stated here that was not said, for the parts of this art and definitions of that are not comprehended by narration or do not comprehend those from free
E le artifexs savi compara am pauc sobre mot; e am aquo que es present sobre aquo que es absent; e atroba operacio novela e instrument novel deves le descendement de las causas extranhas del art quan accideysso.	 Compare the arts that are few in number with those that exist, and the one that is absent compared to the one that is present, and remove any external causes of the art when it occurs.
E donc yeu dic que sagetas no son fora-gitadas dels membres en les quals son ficadas sino segon dos manieyras: o per atraccio del loc en le qual intrec; o per le contrari de la autra partida.	 When joints are afflicted with gout, then the pain occurs in two places: either due to a restriction of movement at that location or by the opposite side.
E aquela que es gitada per le loc don es intrada, o es sageta procedent en loc carnos, e es atirada e fora-gitada.	 The one that happens on the side where it was restricted will be painful and swollen; or if there is another pain occurring in a different location as well
E si no obezeys a eyssiment de la hora en la qual catz, lahoras cove que tu la laysses per alcus dias entro que poyresca la carn que es al enviro de lu, e sia alleujada l‘atraccio de lu e la sua egressio.	 If it is not urgent to have the pain resolved within a certain timeframe that may cause tissue damage or if there is no more space for the organ to expand its area (e.g., in the abdomen), then the physician will suggest waiting and observing the situation, with the aim of allowing the organ to adapt itself to the new location as much as possible.
E semblantment si es ficada en os e no obezeys a tu a eyssiment, lahoras layssa aquela per alcus dias e itera aquela am atraccio e mocio en quascun dia, e ja es fora-gitada.	 In such cases, if the pain is in the legs and there is not urgent need for immediate intervention, doctors will suggest allowing time to pass while keeping an eye on the situation, so that the organ can adapt itself as much as possible to the new location over a certain period of days; but ultimately it may become swollen.
E si no obezeys a tu eyssiment aprop alcus dias, lahoras cove que tu perforas en le circuit de la sageta en aquel os de tota partida am taravel subtil entro que·l loc sia amplificat de la sageta, e aprop extratz aquela.	 If the pain is not urgent and doctors have determined that it may take some time for the organ to adapt itself to its new location while the size of the organ grows gradually over a certain period of days, then they will suggest performing tests in order to follow how the organ's behavior changes as it adapts.
E si la sageta es ficada en le os del cap e ja ha procezit en un dels ventres del cervel, e apparo en le malaute alcus de aquels accidentz les quals yeu e ditz, lahoras abste de la extraccio de la sageta e layssa aquela entro que·l sieu esser sia equat aprop alcus dias; quar si la sageta perve al ciphac, lahoras la mort no es a lu prolonguada.	 If the pain is in the head and started from one of the cavities behind the ear, it is customarily called meningitis by doctors, they will advise to avoid touching or pressing on those areas as much as possible for fear that further trauma may occur; but if the pain moves towards the spine (cephalgia), then the physician will warn of a prolonged death.
E si la sageta no es ficada sino en le cors del os tant solament e no passa entro al ciphac, e roman le malaute per alcus dias, e no accideys a lu denguna causa de aquels accidentz, lahoras tu engenia en la atraccio de la sageta e en la atraccio de lu.	 When the sack is not fixed securely around the arm only and does not extend down to the elbow joint, but rather stops at the armpit, doctors turn their attention to that area
Mays si es mot ficada e no obezeys a tu a extraccio, lahoras tu aministra taravels en le circuit de la sageta ayssi cum havem recomtat, e aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	 If it is not fixed tightly and extends only to the armpit area, doctors will inspect that part of the sack carefully.
Mays si la sageta ja es amaguada en le loc del cors, e es amaguada del sentiment, lahoras tu inquireys aquela am tenta, e si tu sentas aquela, lahoras atira aquela am alcus sturmentz les quals so convenientz a la atraccio de lu.	 If the sack is already fixed in that location of the body and also on the feelings area, doctors will examine it thoroughly, and if you feel it there, they will consider removing it from where it is inconvenient for its attachment to the body part.
E si no podes sobre lu per la constriccio de la plagua e per la longitut del preon, e aqui no es os ni nervi ni vena, lahoras tu fen sobre la plagua entro que sia amplificada e que sia possible extrayre la sageta.	 If you cannot stretch the ligament or the length of the protrusion and there is no nerve nor vein present in it, doctors will seek to expand it and remove the sack if that's possible.
E si so a lu aurelhas am las quals sia tenguda, lahoras tu deliura la carn en la qual es ficada de tota partida am tot le engen que poyras far; e ingenia sobre aquo, si no podes sobre la evasio de la carn en la fractura de las aurelhas e en torssio de aquelas entro que obezesca.	 If the sack is completely fixed on all the parts that you want to stretch, doctors will remove the skin from those areas and consider surgery if stretching it isn't possible because of fractures or twists in those parts where it overlaps.
E quan tu administras la extraccio de la sageta en quascun loc on sia, lahoras tu usa am torcio de la tua ma am forceps a totas partidas entro que fassa aquela obezir; e subtilia am deriera subtilitat que la sageta no sia trencada e que sia fayta a tu dificil atraccio de lu e de aquela extraccio.	 When you remove the sack in any location, doctors will use sharp forceps to cut all parts into which it is necessary and delicately handle them so that the sack does not get torn or broken and can be easily removed from its attachment area.
E si no podes sobre aquela de la tua hora, lahoras tu layssa per alcus dias entro que se poyrescan las partidas que so en le circuit de lu, e aprop itera aquela quar lahoras es alleujada.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat flux de sanc, lahoras tu administra aquo que havem dit de curacio en le sieu capitol.	 If there is an external blockage causing discomfort, the doctor recommends applying pressure in the affected area to alleviate it.
E guarda la tua vertut de inscizio de vena o de nervi, o de corda, e aministra engen en tota manieyra a tu possibla de la evasio de la sageta; e fay aquo am facilitat e tranquillitat e tarditat e fermetat ayssi cum yeu e a tu recomtat.	 If the discomfort is due to a blocked vein or nerve, or from the heart itself, apply gentle pressure on any point around it as recommended by doctors to promote relief and comfort.
E donc que fassas contrayre la sageta per so que·l malaute sia segon la figura segon la qual foc deves le cazement de la sageta en lu, quar es mays juvatiu.	 Once you have located the blockage, follow the instructions to ensure that the patient remains comfortable and safe while allowing medical personnel to take control of the situation as soon as possible.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible, lahoras tu aministra aquo que es a tu possible per las figuras.	 If this is not applicable, please proceed with steps indicated for that particular case.
Mays las sagetas que son fora-gitadas per le contrari del autra partida, o que ja de lu procezeys alcuna partida a las partidas de fora, o fa gilbositat la extramitat de la sageta per sentiment de la partida pus desus de la codena propdana e vezes aquela eminent; adonc tu secsa sobre aquela; e sia la seccio segon la quantitat en la qual prenguan las forceps; e aprop atira aquela, quar ela es fayta leugiera a eyssiment.	 If the pain is caused by an external blockage that affects another part of the body or if you suspect there may be internal damage causing pain, proceed with caution and ensure all necessary precautions are taken to protect the patient from further harm while taking care not to cause any additional injury.
Mays si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu tortz lama segon contrarietat entro que la sageta enprema en le os, e amplifique a si meteys, e aprop extratz aquela.	 If the pain is caused by a swelling in the mouth that prevents it from closing properly or if you suspect there may be internal damage causing pain, apply pressure to stop the bleeding and increase circulation while keeping an eye on the patient for any other issues.
E sino, layssa aquela per alcus dias, e aprop itera aquela entro qu’en yesca.	 And unless
E si le fust de la sageta es en aquela, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am lu.	 And if the fist of the patient is in that
Mays si le fust es cazut e voles aministrar inpulsio, lahoras tu intromet e aquela, si es sorda, sturment concau per so que intre la concavitat de lu en la coa de la sageta e aprop impelleys aquela am lu.	 And if the fist is cut and you want to administer resuscitation, then hold that in your hand until the cavity of the body aligns with the chest and apply it
Mays si la sageta es concava, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am sturment fort intrant en aquela, quar la sageta es alleujada per aquela.	 And if the chest is concave, then hold that in your hand tightly until the cavity matches up with it, so the chest has been widened by it.
E si la sageta es entoxiguada, lahoras cove que tu concaves tota la carn en la qual es le vere, si es a tu possible aquo, e aprop cura aquela am aquo que si conveneys.	 And if the chest is expanded, then you should fill up all of the skin in that area as much as possible while still being within your limits, and place it where it can be used to further expand it.
E si la sageta catz en le pietz, o en le ventre, o en la vesica, o en le costat, e es propinqua per so que tu tocas aquela am la tenta, e es a tu possible secsar sobre aquela, lahoras secsa sobre aquela e guarda te de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e extratz aquela, e aprop cos la plagua si indigeys, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	 And if the chest is in your stomach, or in your belly, or in your bladder, or on one of its sides, and it is close to where you touch it, then remove that from there and save it for later use, put a bandage over that and guard against any vein or nerve damage, stretch it out, and apply it onto the injury.
Forma de forceps am las quals so atiradas las sagetas:	 Use of the type of forceps indicated here to remove the chest.
Sian las extremitatz de lor cum a bec de ausel que son faytas cum serra quan prendon sobre la sageta per so que no la layssen.	 And when holding onto one side of it, do not let go until you feel that it is secure and fixed to the chest.
E de aquelas son faytas motas specias, grans, paucas e migieras, segon la quantitat de la grandeza de la sageta e de la sieua pauqueza, e de la amplitud de la plagua, e de la constriccio de lu.	 When the humors of cold are many and large, after the quantity of its greatness and its smallness, and the width of its channel, and the limitation of it.
Forma de impellent concau de aquesta extremitat conquava ayssi cum pena de ausel per so que sia alleujat le intrament de la sageta en lu, e impulcio de aquela sorda:	 This way will cause a constriction in that extremity to make it painful for the sake of making its interior more relaxed and stimulating.
Forma de impellent de sorda extremitat:	 It will cause a constriction in that extremity, which may result in pain as mentioned earlier.
ayssi cum ray per so que sia alleujat le intrament de lu en la sageta concava e es impellida am aquel.	 This way will make the interior of its cavity more relaxed and stimulate it to constrict that extremity.
De fleubotomia de las venas.	 Vein stripping procedure.
Las venas de fleubotomia de las quals corr costuma de fleubotomar so xxx, de las quals so en le cap xvi, so es doas venas pulsatils las quals so aprop las aurelhas, dic alhasisain; doas herbas que so en les dos templars apparentz; e doas venas que so en dos lacrimals de dos huels que son appeladas aspicientz; e la vena preparada en le mieg loc del front, e la vena que es en la extremitat del nas; e doas guidegi que so al col; e doas venas que so en la labia desus; e doas venas que so en la labia dejos; e — aquestas so las venas que so appeladas algelic —; e so doas venas que so dejos la lengua.	 The veins of phlebotomy to be used for vein stripping should come from the sixth intercostal space, and these are usually located on both temples at the base of the nose. They also enter into the eyelids as small vessels that are called aspicientz; a larger vessel is prepared in front, one at the top of the nose, another below, and they go to the chin, inside the mouth, inside the lower lip, inside the upper lip, and there are two veins located on either side of the tongue.
Mays las venas que so fleubotomadas en les brasses so v; quar de aquelas es una cephalica, e es deves le latz silvestre; e le poble appela “la vena del cap”, e sorda, e es vena migiera, e es composta de un ram de la basilica, e de autre ram de la cephalica; e nomna aquela le poble “vena de tot le cors”, e basilica es vena la qual es pausada en le latz domestic, e es nomnada “citillar”, e nompnan aquela les vulguars “vena del ventre”; e funis del bras, e es pausada sobre le focil, e es aquela en la qual es fleubotomat, e es aquela que appar sobre le poutz per apparicio manifesta; e salvatella, e es la vena que es entre lo dit auricular e·l pus petit dit, e so en lu dos ramps.	 The veins used for phlebotomy should come from the forehead region (cephalica), and are composed of a branch from the basilica and another from the cephalica; it is called "the great vein" or "main artery," which is obstructed in domestic veins as indicated earlier, so it is known by its name "fistular"; and there are other smaller branches that enter into the fistula region near the ear.
E en le pe e la camba so tres venas; la una de aquelas es que es dejos la curvatura del denolh del latz silvestre; e la segonda es sophena, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz domestic; e la vena sciatica, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz silvestre; e en la camba son autras venas semblantz ad aquelas.	 The first vein in the thigh is called the femoral vein and is responsible for bending the knee of wild animals; the second one is saphenous, its location being between the domestic veins that run from it to the sciatic nerve on the back of the leg.
Le juvament de las venas que so aprop las aurelhas es a cataris antics e emigranea e sahafati e ulceracios del cap malas antiquas.	 The youthful veins are most likely varicose veins that come with age and become more pronounced over time, accompanied by pain in the head area or old ulcers.
E la qualitat de sagnar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: es que sia ras le cap del malaute, e sia freguat le cap del malaute en le occipiti en le loc de amdoas las venas am drap ample am bona fricacio; aprop strenha le malaute le sieu col am una benda entro que apparan las doas e les locs de lor so aprop las aurelhas en dos locs depremegutz del cap; e quereys aquela am le tieu dit, e si tu sentes le pols de aquelas am le dit tieu, aqui senha am tenta.	 The quality of the pain suggests that these are probably migraines, which often cause the veins on top of the head to become engorged with blood and swell up; you should lie down in a darkened room or try putting your feet up for example.
Aprop tu pren la lancea cutellar, e es aquela que es inscident, e aprop tu intromet aquel dejos la vena en la codena entro que·l fleubotomi vengua al os.	 To perform an abdominoplasty, the surgeon will make a small incision in the lower abdomen and remove excess skin and fat from there to eliminate bulges or rolls of fat that protrude through the belly button.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am la vena e la codena a las partidas desus e inscideys la vena am inscizio inscident.	 To elevate your hand and the arm above the vein and elbow, make an incision for surgery near where you want it to happen (in this case at the upper arm).
E sia la longitut de la inscizio la quantitat de dos ditz ajustatz o entorn de aquo; e fay yssir del sanc atant quant voles.	 The length of the incision is adjusted according to how much skin and fat you want removed, or near where you wish it would happen (in this case, upper arm).
E aprop strenh am pulvils e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	 When you have put a cushion beneath their thighs, place another servant on their legs, and one more on their chest while holding their hands.
E ja e precedit en le comensament del libre la inscizio de aquelas e de lor la cauterizacio.	 And then proceed to make the incision of those and apply the cautery.
Mays de las doas venas arterias que so als templars le juvament de la fleubotomia es a emigranea antiqua e sode malvada e obtalmia assidua e cors de superfluitatz acutas effusas als huels.	 The arteries that come to the surface of the veins, are called superficial veins and are commonly related to the formation of varicose ulcers or chronic swelling on the limbs.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: constrengua le malaute le sieu col mot entro que apparan las doas venas al sentiment per appericio manifesta e sia demonstrat le pols de lor dejos le tieu dit; e lahoras tu senha am tenta.	 The quality of phlebotomizing those is to recommend it, as you must constrain the patient's arm so that they can feel both arms moving and demonstrate their own.
E aprop tu eleva la codena desobre la vena a las partidas desus am le tieu dit indic, e intromet le fleubotomi inscident dejos, e eleva la vena en sus; e inscidey aquela ayssi cum has fayt en las doas venas autras; e fay correr del sanc segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	 You elevate the cannula above the vein and place it in your hand as indicated, insert it into the phlebotomy incision on their arm, and lift the vein up to them. If you want to access both veins simultaneously, do so by making a point over each of the veins separately; and make sure not to rush while ensuring safety is maintained during this process.
E aprop deslia la coartacio del malaute, e pausa le tieu dit sobre la vena per una hora, e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto e pulvils e strenh aquela desus am fort constriccio, e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	 After restraining the patient's arm and placing a cushion beneath their thighs for one hour, then place a cushion under both buttocks and tighten that to restrict blood flow as much as possible, ensuring it is secure before making an incision in between them.
E ja es precedida la rememoracio de lor, e de aquelas la inscizio, e la atraccio en le comensament del libre.	 After recalling their name and the location of those, make a cut into that area as soon as possible.
E donc le juvament de fleubotomia de la vena del front es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a las malautias antiquas de la cara e a emigranea e rogor e ulceracios fetidas.	 "The first aid for the bleeding from the forehead is to apply pressure, and then move it over to the bleeding coming out of the nose.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es segon que yeu recomti a tu; so es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col am una benda entro que apparesca la vena; e aprop pren le insturment le qual es nompnat fossori del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	 The quality of the bleeding is to recommend another thing, this is that the patient should hold something into which the blood can flow. And please provide me with the instrument's name for which this method is called: a tourniquet
Pausa la puncta eminent la qual es al cap del fossori sobre aquela vena e percuteys sobre lu am penche o am autre causa en la manieyra de lu, e layssa lo sanc correr segon la quantitat la qual voles; e aprop deslia la perforacio del malaute e strenh aquela entro que sia sanada.	 Stop the tourniquet at a point just above the bleeding area on that vein and tighten it in such a way as to slow or stop the bleeding, allowing enough time for medical assistance if needed; and then apply pressure over the wound until the patient is attended by medical personnel.
E alcunas veguadas es uberta am fleubotomi lat, empero no cove que·l fleubotomi sia de acuta extremitat ayssi cum les autres fleubotomis, abantz sia de lada extremitat, e fleubotoma aquela segon le tranvers, quar le os es propda e fort leu trencaria en lu le fleubotomi quan es subtil.	 Some cauterization is done at the bleeding point itself, but not every cauterization should be like that of an acute extremity, as it would damage the tissue and may cause necrosis in the area if not done carefully.
Mays le juvament de las duas venas que so als lacrimals de dos huels per scabia del huels per rogor e sebol en les huels, e a las malautias de la cara.	 Put pressure on both tear ducts to stop the bleeding and then apply it over the face wounds.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia es que·l malaute strenha le col sieu am una benda, e aprop fleubotoma aquelas, e tu sias stant sobre le cap de lu.	 The quality of bleeding is that the patient should hold something into which the blood can flow and then apply pressure over it.
E sia fayta la fleubotomia segon le transvers a longitut un pauc am fleubotomi pauc, quar en le loc no es carn; e si le fleubotomi es subtil, fort leu la extremitat de lu es trencada.	 When the incision is made at an angle and only a few millimeters in length, it occurs near the location where skin does not exist; if the phlebotomy is subtle, very lightly touch your fingertips may be severed.
E aprop fay correr del sanc atant quant es a tu necessari, e pausa sobre aquelas coto, e strenh aquelas per una nueyt, e aprop deslia aquelas.	 When it's necessary to do so, pause on those things and stretch them gently; afterwards, you may remove the bandage.
Mays le fleubotomi de la vena del nas es conferent a febre acuta e a soda vehement, e a las malautias de la cara e emigranea e rogor que accideys en la cara, e majorment quan es antiqua.	 The phlebotomy of the nasal vein is accompanied by an acute fever and chills, and also affects the face and scalp more frequently; it is commonly called "facial" when it occurs suddenly.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col e aprop te le sieu nas am la tua ma sinistra, e pren le fleubotomi subtil lonc e fica aquela en le mieg loc del cap del nas segon rectitut, quar la vena no appar al sentiment aqui, e quar le sanc comensa a fluir tantost.	 The quality of the phlebotomy is that the patient feels pain in their chest and wants to have their nose held by their left hand; then gently perform it near the nasal septum where the vein cannot be felt here, but as soon as possible so that it starts flowing rapidly.
Cove que tu ultimes la tua ma am le fleubotomi petit a petit e fassas correr del sanc segon la tua necessitat; e aprop lia aquela per una nuoyt, quar aquela es restaurada leugierament.	 After having performed the phlebotomy gently and as needed, you should place it back in its original position to restore circulation immediately.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de las doas guidegui a constriccio de ale e a comensament de lepra e a motas malautias e inpetige e malas ulceracios corrosivas ayssi cum herpotromeno.	 The phlebotomy of the veins can cause constriction, leprosy (Hansen's disease), and other diseases such as ergotism or ulcers from corrosive substances like mercury.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que el malaute strenha dejos quascuna en le sieu col am liament; e estia le artifexs sobre le cap del malaute, e le malaute sia sezent sobre una sezela.	 The quality of the phlebotomy on those is that the patient feels pain in their chest and also causes severe swelling over their head and a sensation as if it were around one's neck.
E aprop fleubotoma la vena al lonc am fleubotomi ample petit a petit; e aprop extratz de sanc segon temprada quantitat o segon aquo que vezes de necessitat que es ad aquo; e aprop fay semblant del autra vena.	 This is an instruction for performing an operation on the patient, specifically on their legs or chest. The surgeon will use a cushion to elevate the leg (or chest) and perform each incision gradually starting from one side of the body towards the other.
E aprop deslia le liament e strenh las doas venas am strictura migiera per so que·l malaute no sia prefocat, e laysa entro al mati quar la plagua es sanada.	 The surgeon is to apply a ligature (tie) around the limb or chest and tighten it to prevent blood from flowing out of the incision while the wound heals.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de las venas algerich, comfereys a petitas apostemas e pustulas de la boca e corrupcio de las gengivas e malas ulceracios e fissuras, e a malas ulceracios que so en le nas e en le circuit de lu.	 The surgeon is to perform an operation on the veins of the groin as well, including the application of small sutures and pustules in the mouth, corruption of the gums, bad ulcers and fissures, and also those that occur in the nose or throat area
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que fases cezer le malaute denant tu, e strenh le col de lu am una benda, e aprop revolveys las labias de lu e reguarda a doas venas de las quals la una es de la dextra de la labia e la segonda de la senestra; e la demonstracio de quascuna es per la negror de quascuna de amdos, e aquo mays es quar en le circuit de aquelas so venas menudas negras; e adonc inscideys cascuna per inscizio inscident.	 The quality of the operation required is that it will cause pain to the patient while tightening the knot and pulling on the arm, and make sure you tie a ligature around each vein separately - one from the right side of the labia and another from the left side; and show this by cutting through both sides at once.
Mays si dubitacio es dejos tu, e no sabes qual es de aquelas, lahoras tu enten a inscisio de la major de aquelas, e de la pus manifesta de aquelas.	 If you are unsure which vein it is or cannot find the one that should be cut through, then proceed to make an incision into the largest of those veins and the most prominent one.
E fay le semblant de las doas venas que so en las labias desus.	 When you are performing a surgical procedure on someone who has an abdominal hernia, make sure to put something soft between their thighs in order to prevent any injury.
Mays costuma corr mays a inscidir las doas venas que so en la labia dejos.	 It is customary for the surgeon to indicate the two veins that are located in the patient's vulva/labia majora
Mays de doas venas que so dejos la lengua le juvament es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a prefocacios que so en le guolayro, a la malautia de la uvula, e a malautias de la boca.	 The surgeon should indicate the two veins that are located in the vestibule of the vulva/labia major, as well as those found at the lower part of the nose, larynx, and mouth.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es que segue le malaute entre las tuas mas denant le solel, e eleva la lengua de lu, e reguarda dejos la lengua, de la un latz de lu vena e del autre latz vena, e la color de quascuna es declinant a negror.	 The quality of phlebotomy is to follow the vein closely between your fingers and lift up on it, while watching the other veins as well, noting which one has become darker in color.
E adonc fleubotoma quascuna; e guarda te que no ultimes la tua ma en fleubotoman aquelas, quar dejos aquelas so arterias.	 Once you have phlebotomized each of them and keep track that none of the veins you used are arteries.
E las tuas venas que so fleubotomadas en le coyde so en las quals corr costuma en totz les homes, e la fleubotomia de lor es fayta segon dos manieyras, o pongen am le fleubotomi mirtilat o olivar a subtilitat declinant; o secsar am fleubotomi cutellar, e apelha si alnessil, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	 The veins you have phlebotomized in the wrist are located on those of most people and the phlebotomy procedure is repeated every two months or at intervals that may vary slightly depending on individual needs. You may choose to perform superficial phlebotomy using a needle with a small gauge, or if necessary, cuttlebone phlebotomy by removing some skin tissue.
E aquest alnessil es que conveneys a seccio e de aquels so specias latz e subtils segon la amplitut de las venas e segon la strictura de aquelas.	 The choice is to section off and remove those small thin sections depending on the size of the veins and their constriction.
Forma de fleubotomi mirti:	 The surgeon makes an incision in the groin area
sia le latz de lu ayssi cum vezes, e conveneys a obrir las venas concavas plenas procedentz apparentz grossas, e ad aquelas que conteno sanc gros torbat.	 The veins are opened once more, and those that contain large obstructions are separated
E aquesta es la forma de fleubotomi olivar:	 The olive oil phlebotomy procedure is as follows:
E aquest fleubotomi es de menor latitut e de pus subtil extremitat, e conveneys a fleubotomia de venas subtils que conteno sanc subtil citri.	 This phlebotomy procedure is of lesser latitude and more subtle extremity, and it involves the phlebotomy of veins that contain subtle citric substances.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena basilica la qual es una de tres venas: quar extratz le sanc de las malautias que so dejos le guolayro e·l col, e de aquo que siec le pietz e·l ventre.	 The phlebotomy procedure is carried out on the vein called the basilica vein, which is one of three veins: four extremities have a blockage that causes leg swelling and pain in the abdomen
E conveneys al fleubotomador, quan fleubotomia aquela, que guarde be aquela e sia sobre-temor en aquela, quar dejos lu ha arteria, e si erra e ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi, inscidira aquela arteria e accidira fluxs de sanc, per so que cove que no fleubotomes aquela am fleubotomi pungent, abantz sia sectant cum alnessil.	 The phlebotomist, upon performing the phlebotomy of that vein, should ensure it is straight and adjust it according to puncturing technique to prevent bleeding and arterial injury, so as not to harm the vein's flow and cause pain.
E si no appar la basilica per apparicio manifesta, lahoras cove que tu laysses aquela e que tu mudes a la autre, o que cerques alcun ram sieu; o que fleubotomes en loc de lu finis del bras, quar aquela es manifesta; e secsa aquela am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit.	 If the basilica is not visible for puncturing inspection, then you should move to another vein or seek help from someone else; if puncturing at that location causes pain, then proceed with the procedure on a different vein as requested.
Mays si tu voles la fleubotomia de lu meteyssa, lahoras cove denant la strictura del bras que toques le loc entro que conogues le loc dels pols, e aprop senha sobre lu am tencha; e aprop lia le bras e secsa la vena am seccio concava am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit; e guarda te que caja la percussio per alcu spazi del loc de la arteria.	 If you want to perform the phlebotomy on that arm, hold the hand flat and place it as directed; adjust its position so that the artery is pressed in the area for phlebotomy procedure as requested; and ensure that the blow does not hit any of the artery's spaces.
E quan tu vezes, cum strenhes le liament, imflacio en le loc que has senhat am tencha, lahoras aquela inflacio es inflacio de la arteria, e donc squiva aquela.	 When you inflate the bladder with strong air pressure, it causes an inflammation in the area where you have inserted the tube, causing a pain there
E si vezes le sanc fluir en la fleubotomia ayssi cum aurina de enfant, e·l sanc es subtil rog, lahoras sapias que es del sanc de la arteria; e lahoras tu coyta e pausa le tieu dit sobre aquel per lonc spazi; e aprop osta le tieu dit, e si lo sanc es abscindit, quar motas veguadas es abscindit, lahoras tu strenh le bras e layssa aquel.	 If you perform a phlebotomy with air from an infant and the needle is too small, the pain will be felt in the artery; do not worry about that as long as it does not cause bleeding, hold tight the band around that to prevent it from coming out; otherwise, squeeze tightly the other hand
E guardes le malaute de la moccio de lu, e sia sobre-temor de lu e no maugua aquel per alcus dias entro que sia sanat.	 Hold the patient's mouth open and hold their head so that they do not move; otherwise, they might vomit during those days when they are sick.
Mays si le sanc no es abscindit, e vezes que deves tu no es present medicina ad aquo, lahoras tu inscideys la arteria, si appar a tu; quar la extremitat de lu es contrayta, e es abscindit le sanc; o que prenguas scorsa de fistic, e fen aquela, e pren la una maytat e strenh aquela sobre le loc de la vena am strictura descent am liament e am pulvils entro al autra dia.	 If the artery is not blocked and you need to inject medicine into it, take note of where it is; if your extremity is closed up or the artery is blocked, squeeze tightly that hand around the vein in order to prevent bleeding; otherwise, place a tourniquet on that arm or leg immediately.
E lahoras si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, lahoras cura aquel am aquo del qual es precedit a la rememoracio del loc de las polveras abscindentz flux de sanc.	 If the artery is blocked, be it; otherwise, remember where that was mentioned previously for the purpose of remembering where to apply pressure in case of bleeding.
E la abscizio del sanc de lu es dificil en motas disposicios per le loc petit de la plagua e la possibilitat del liament del bras.	 It is difficult to perform a phlebotomy on small extremities and the possibility of damaging your hand.
Mays de la vena fusca la fleubotomia es juvament que extratz lo sanc de la partida subirana del cap e a la partida dejos del cors; per aquo quar es composta de ram de la basilica e de ram de cephalica, ayssi cum havem dit.	 The veins swelling up the face is usually caused by the removal of the sac from the top and bottom of the head, as well as from the heart.
E cove al fleubotomant aquela que sia sobre-temor en la fleubotomia de lu, quar dejos aquela es un nervi; e adonc si ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi e atroba le nervi, accidira a lu stupor, e es difficil la sanacio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot, E aquest nervi motas veguadas apar al sentiment; e si es ocultat ad alcus homes e es subtil e no es monstrat, lahoras cove que tu pauses le fleubotomi am le qual tu fleubotomas am seccio de alnessil, e evita le nervi am la tua fortalesa.	 The vein swelling on the face is often caused by a temporary fever in the vein removal, which makes it one of the nerves; and once you have cut into the vein, it will cause paralysis or numbness if not done properly, making it difficult to recover, and in some cases may even be fatal.
E si la vena es entre dos nervis, lahoras tu fen la vena en la longitut.	 If a vein is between two nerves, you should cut the vein at its length.
Le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena cephalica es que atratz le sanc del cap e comfereys a las malautias dels huels.	 The beginning of the process is to remove the sac from the top and bottom of the head, as well as from the heart, in order to treat swelling veins on the face.
E cove en aquest propriament, si vols que la fleubotomes pungen am fleubotomi olivar o am fleubotomi mirti; quar es la pus salva de totas las venas, quar no es dejos lu arteria ni nervi.	 In this case if you want to remove only the swelling veins or the deep veins, as opposed to removing both arteries and nerves, it is important that all other veins are saved, including the arteries.
Mays empero conveneys a tu deves la fleubotomia que guardes que am le fleubotomi no punguas le cap del lacert tant solament, e cerques le loc pus leugier, e no notz a lu, si no es atrobat am la percussio primieyra que sia sobre aquela am fleubotomia alcunas veguadas.	 However it is important to remember that when performing a vein removal procedure make sure your hand is on the forehead only and seek out where you want it to go without touching anything else, unless you are making an incision at the top of the head first.
Mays empero fort leu es apostemat en alcus homes, quan no es fleubotomat en la primieyra percussio, mays no notz en re aquel apostema.	 When it is very painful in the first blow, when there isn't a relieving touch during the initial strike, then do not hit that spot again.
Mays la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquela e les accidentz de lu so motz, en les quals te cove cogitar en lor rectificacio.	 The quality of the bleeding in relation to those accidents should be taken into consideration when making a decision about treatment.
Le primier de lu es del qual cove que sapias que fleubotomia no es aministrada sino en conservacio de sanetat e per speransa de lu e cautela de aveniment de malautias, e que sia fayta fleubotomia en la una de las venas que so en le coyde, so es: cephalica, fusca e basilica; e que sia fayta fleubotomia al comensament de primaveyra, sobre dejun en primaviera e autunppne, e en invern aprop la comestio, quan apparo significacios de replecio.	 The first one is when you know that bleeding has been avoided but only by preserving health and preventing further injuries, and with caution in order to prevent accidents: cephalic, femoral, and basilar veins; the second one starts from a certain vein (not mentioned)
E sia fayta fleubotomia e le tertz dia o al primier pus que del jorn siran passadas tres horas.	 The third one or after the first hour has passed
Mays fleubotomia que es aministrada, mays quan provoca convenencia e necessitat ad aquo, o de nuoyt o de dia, en tota hora e en tot temps.	 Bleeding may be administered when it is necessary and convenient to do so, whether during the day or at night, in every hour and all times.
E cove que efant no sia fleubotomat entro que aja xiiii ans, e femna que sia prenhs no sia fleubotomada sino del quart mes entro al sete, e les viels no sian fleubotomatz les quals ja han passatz lx ans.	 It is said that when there has been bleeding for more than 14 days or if it was not done within the fourth month after surgery and in any other cases where it had already passed seven months, then the veins should be avoided unless they have already healed for 14 years.
E cum alcu vol esser fleubotomat per qualque manieyra sia, cove que mondifique les sieus budels denant la fleubotomia am clisteri leon, si en aquels ha mota fenda retenguda, per so que las venas no atiro las superfluitatz en la fleubotomia dels budels, que son puridas, e que no noguan als membres principals.	 If bleeding is to be avoided for any reason that might make the veins swell up during the cautery procedure if there are wounds already present in them, so that the veins do not carry out their function of carrying away impurities from the cautery on the veins, which are pure, and should never affect the principal members.
E no sian fleubotomatz les pascientz naucea sacertiva e crapula, ni evasent de malautia ni de ebretat entro que aquo sia remaugut aquo de lor, ni malaute de ydropici, e mays que fleubotomia sia temuda aprop colica passio e aprop vomit, e aprop cos de ventre, e aprop multiplicacio de coyt e de trebal e de exercici de dejunis o de vigilias e de tota causa que dissolveys la vertut, o sia corpore28 o animal.	 "The patient should remain in a supine position and have cushions placed under their thighs, legs, chest, and hands to prevent any leakage or spillage of fluids from the body.
E aprop considera en subtiliacio de humos denant aquo si le sanc es gros, am viandas e beures, e am medicinas si aquo es a lu possible ad aquo.	 "Take into consideration that if the pain is severe and accompanied by fever, vomiting, or other symptoms, then medical treatment may also be necessary.
E aprop intre en banh si alcuna causa no prohibeys, o sia excersitat per alcun exercici per so que·l sanc sia subtiliat.	 "There should not be any prohibition of exercise for the sake of keeping the pain under control.
E pausa la fleubotomia de lu en le pietz del dia, so es enviro la hora de tercia, ayssi cum havem dit.	 "The application of a pointed cautery to the foot should be done at this time and no sooner.
E perforsa te que·l pietz de aquel sia guardat en aquel dia de totz mals accidentz animals, ayssi cum es angustia, ira, temor, e de totz accidentz corporals, ayssi cum es trebal e pena superflua e coyt e semblantz a lor.	 "You should ensure that the patient's chest is protected against any animal accidents or bodily injuries.
E a la sua sezelha fassa esser presentz las causas en le us de la qual corr costuma dels homes am aromaticitat e odorament e am bals e semblantz ad aquels segon la cantitat de possibilitat.	 "The causes that are used by men to increase their ability in smelling, taste, and appearance should be present.
E segua le fleubotomador sobre un coyssi que sia pus aut que·l coyssi de aquel que deu esser fleubotomat.	 "Follow the cautery operator's instructions on how to apply it correctly.
E aprop extragua le sieu bras, e fregue aquel am la sua ma le fleubotomador doas o tres veguadas; e aprop strenha le liament am correia e involva aquel doas veguadas.	 "Extend the patient's arms and have the cautery operator place it on their forehead, and then apply a second band around their neck.
E sia la strictura temprada, quar la strictura quant no es engual, o la strictura es am superfluitat, lahoras prohibeys de fluxs del sanc; o es am mollificacio, e lahoras prohibeys le cors del sanc eyssament.	 When a sudden stiffness occurs that is not accompanied by pain or is excessive in its severity, doctors prohibit the passage of blood to it; or when it happens from excess heat, doctors prohibit circulation in the affected part altogether.
E aprop la strictura, cove que aquel que deu esser fleubotomat fregue las suas mas ensemps entre lor entro que las venas sian imfladas, e sian declaradas al sentiment.	 To treat a stiffness that has become flabby and swollen veins between its extremities enter, place poultices there to draw out the swelling; declare it to be inflamed.
E aprop le fleubotomador unte le sieu fleubotomi am un pauc de oli antic propriament; e aprop pausa le sieu di indic de la ma senestra sobre aquela vena, dejos le loc del qual vol la fleubotomia, per que la vena fuja un pauc, e la percussio sia sessada quar de las venas es la qual atrobas ayssi cum corda fugent deves la fleubotomia, e de aquelas es que es plena de ventositat e quan pauses le fleubotomi sobre aquela es contrayta deves le fleubotomi, e es desceubut le fleubotomador; e le fleubotomi no uobre la vena, e si uobre, aquela es streyta.	 Treat the flabby and swollen veins with a poultice gently applied to that vein for a short time in order to prevent blood from flowing out of it quickly, or else apply pressure over the area where the treatment is being performed so as not to allow any escaping; if there is leakage, place the poultice on top of it.
E donc, per aquo cove que·l fleubotomador sia fermat e sia sollicit en totas aquestas causas.	 Therefore, when the poultice has been applied and remains in place due to these causes.
E aprop depause le fleubotomi, mays si la vena es huberta en una veguada, lahoras bo es; e sino, tu itera aquo autra vaguada dejos aquel loc un pauc, o sobre lu am festinacio, si le loc no es apostemat.	 When removing the poultice, if a vein has burst through in this manner, then the doctor will declare it to be broken; otherwise, make another application of pressure over that area for a short time or at its base as needed.
Et si le loc es apostemat, o le malaute se spauresca, lahoras tu le layssa per un dia o per dos, e no strenha le liament, quar fort leu atirara apostema caut, ni no intre en banh.	 When the space is opened and the patient coughs or sneezes, you should give her a drink either one day or two, not to strain too much as it may cause pain in the abdomen, nor should be inserted if inserted
E aprop itera la fleubotomia si la ama.	 If an abscess is present
E si la apercio es petita e corr sanc subtilment, e temes que non yesca sanc la cantitat que voles, lahoras tu itera le fleubotomi en aquel trauc segon rectitut e ajusta en la appercio un pauc, e fay aquo am festinacio denant que·l loc sia apostemat, quar le loc es apostemat en motz homes deves pauca apercio.	 If the opening is small and can be gently stretched without causing too much tension, then you should perform a fistula by making an incision in that area and adjusting it so as to fit into the patient's anus, but if not then only make a tiny hole in case the space is opened.
Mays si vezes aquel ja apostemat, lahoras no iteres sobre lu, quar no escusa a tu alcuna causa; e pausa sobre aquel alcuna partida de la fenda de oli, quar alleuja le cors del sanc.	 If that already exists then do not perform another one as it would cause unnecessary harm to the patient's anus and may result in damage to their intestines.
E es milhor en aquest loc que oli e que les autres olis.	 It is better here than anywhere else.
E semblantment aministra fenda de oli en tota fleubotomia am la qual fleubotomes las venas deves la prohibicio de cors de sanc, e fan aquo tyriaca alfadoc e sagzenea quan es pausat de la una de aquelas sobre le loc, quar le sanc es subtiliat e es revolvut quan es gros.	 It is better to make an incision for oil drainage in all fistula operations where the veins are blocked and they perform this type of surgery when it is stopped by one of those in that location because the abscess is very small and turns around when it becomes large.
E si en le loc de la fleubotomia es engendrat gran apostema, quar motas veguadas accideys, e majorment ad aquel que no es stat sangnat sino aquela veguada, o en la apercio de la vena pauca, e lahoras tu coyta, e pausa sobre le loc sponja infuza en aygua e sal, un pauc scalfada, e strenh aquela per una hora, quar es dissolvut.	 If the abscess is large and you want to drain it, then make a small incision in that location, place your hand over the opening with salt water for one hour until it dissolves.
E cove que fassa aquo aprop le yssiment del sanc de aquela vena am compliment de lu o de autra vena.	 When you have inserted it into the appropriate vein of that arm or another, do this:
E si roman en le loc per alcus dias alcuna negror o viriditat, no notz aquo; e si voles, pausa sobre aquel alcuna causa de aloen e de mirra dissolvut, o alcuna causa de suc de mentastre o de calament o semblant de lu.	 If there is any redness or greenness in that location, do nothing about it; and if you want to, pause over whatever reason or cause of concern or worry, or a reason for any disease or ailment or similar thing
E motas veguadas accideysso apostemas e eminencias deves fleubotomia de la basilica.	 If it has been diagnosed with bubonic plague by the priest
E donc pausa la tua ma sobre aquela, e si lahoras tu atrobas mollicia deves la tua compressio sobre aquela, lahoras aquela eminencia es malvada e mala; e adonc guarda te que pauses sobre aquela alcuna causa de aquo que havem dit, quar fort leu fluira de la arteria sanc.	 Then place your hand over it and if the pain increases do not remove the compress but keep it, as that bad omen is evil; and remember to pause over any cause of this matter as a very bad thing may happen to the artery
E fay emplaustre am aquo en que es stipticitat, per que le loc sia endurat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	 Place a plaster over it so that the location will harden and place another bandage next to it in case of bleeding; and if necessary apply another remedy nearby.
E cove que extraguas del sanc a tot hom segon la quantitat de la sua vertut e segon la color vencent sobrc le sanc segon que appar.	 Take out the sick from completely healthy, based on their strength and color.
Quar si le sanc es negre, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia rog; e semblantment si tu le vezes gros, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia subtiliat; e semblantment si es agut, entro que sia ostada la acuitat de lu.	 If the sick is black, you should remove it from what is healthy; and similarly if they are gross, you should remove them to make subtle; and similarly if sharp, you should remove them to keep sharpness.
E cove ad aquel que es ple e fort e ha necessitat de extraccio de sanc en una veguada, que sia amplificada la fleubotomia de la vena e le fleubotomi sia lat.	 If it is thick and strong, you need to remove the sick from a vein in order to amplify the plague in both veins; and the flea bomb would be widened accordingly.
E en aquel que es freul, sia fayt le contrari de aquel, e cove que extragua aquel en tropas veguadas, e que le trauc sia streyt.	 In that case where it is cold, do you mean to say contrary to that? And by whom or what was it extracted in warm weather and how it arrived
E le milhor que es administrat en fleubotomia de vena es que sia la seccio transversa, no punctura.	 The doctor who administers phlebotomy for treatment of vein inflammation is the one who makes a transverse incision but not a puncture.
E aquesta manieyra de fleubotomia es salva de flux de sanc e de inscizio de nervi, e es pus lausabla e pus salva que fleubotomia segon latitut e longitut.	 This phlebotomy method is used to prevent the flow of blood and injury to nerves, it should be performed at right angles or at right angles.
E a la qual es acostumat sobrevenir sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e cove que tu cures aquel denant la fleubotomia am un petit de pa infus en vi de milgranas o de oximel simple scalfat; e extratz a l u del sanc en tres veguadas o quatre.	 When administering phlebotomy without interruption you should: infuse saline solution or oxygen through a small cannula, extract the vein in three veins or four.
E si es enfregiditat de compleccio, lahoras prengua denant la fleubotomia pa infus en eyssarop de mirra o en eyssarop de mel aromatizat am specias ayssi cum am pebre, canela, gingiebre e semblantz, o en eyssarop aromatizat e mot odorant.	 If the phlebotomy is performed in a cold environment, you should administer the solution through a warm cannula or an aromatic one, such as peppermint, cinnamon, ginger, etc., or a scented and non-fragrant one.
E si accideys sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e es causa de lu issiment de mot sanc, lahoras cove que prengua en beure aygua de carn e eyssarop mot odorant subtil; e use de aromaticitat am algualea, e sia linit le sieu pietz am aquela.	 If phlebotomy is interrupted due to a sudden change in body temperature, the doctor should administer water from the patient's blood and an aromatic solution, and use the latter for inhalation, keeping his own nose covered with something.
E usa de las autras causas que havem ditas en la divisio en le capitol de sincopi per evacuacio.	 Use the following causes mentioned in the chapter on phlebotomy to prevent interruptions:
E qui vol eventar le sieu bras e dissolver le sieu sanc segonda veguada, cove a lu del qual la fleubotomia es per mota evacuacio, e la vertut de lu es freol, que evacue le sanc petit a petit, so es segon la quantitat de la vertut en les dias continuables.	 When the first vein is opened and dissolved from the second one onwards, as you reach it, the bleeding will cease, and the wound will heal quickly over time, in proportion to the amount of blood lost.
Mays qui vol eventar le sieu bras, e gitar lo sieu sanc segonda vetz, e le sieu cors es fort, lahoras fassa aquo aprop vii horas o ix de la primieyra fleubotomia.	 When the first vein is opened and dissolved from the second onwards, as you continue doing so, the pain will eventually cease or diminish over time.
Mays qui vol atirar le sanc del cors sieu al contrari de la partida a la qual declina, cove que sia eventat en le segon dia o le tertz.	 When you aim to remove the wound from the chest side opposite of where it first appeared, and it continues for two or three days.
Mays aquel cors en le qual es mot sanc ja scalfat e es acuit e fa accidir febre, cove que sia gitat de lu sanc en una veguada e sia de lu gitada gran cantitat e sia amplificada la apercio entro que accidesca sincopi, pus que tu auras conservadas totas las condicios de fleubotomia; e que pauses la tua ma sobre le pols de lu deves le cors del sanc, per que no endevengua mort en loc de sincopi, quar motas veguadas endeve aquo quan le fleubotomador es ignorant e negligent.	 If the wound is already infected with a fever and begins to cause serious problems (like pain that won't stop or even death), then you should try to remove it immediately, as fast as possible, making sure to keep all the conditions of bleeding under control; place your hand over its location on the chest in order to prevent blood loss from causing further harm. If not handled properly by a professional who knows what they are doing (as this would indicate ignorance or negligence), then you should seek immediate medical help immediately and have the wound removed as fast as possible with all the conditions of bleeding under control at that point.
E no cove quan tu voles desliar le bras e evacua le sanc segonda veguada, cum ja sia claus le orrifici de la vena e sia fayt difficil issiment del sanc, que tu premas subre aquel am vehemencia e encurvat sia extendut leugierament, quar aquo es trop mal.	 And when you want to remove the second vein and evacuate the wound, but already have closed off some veins and find it difficult to remove the wound, make sure you put extra effort into it and stretch out its removal for as long as possible, as this is too bad a situation.
Habantz le layssa entro que sia fleubotomat segondament; o remau aquo am la acuitat del fleubotomi que es coagulat del sanc en le orrifici de la vena; o pausa sobre aquel de tyriaca alfarach, o de sagzenea, e comprem aquel am compressio leugiera entro que·l sanc sia fora yssit.	 When the vein is congested due to phlebotomy and coagulation occurs in the extremities of the vein, or when it is necessary to tourniquet the veins, either for varicose veins or to control bleeding, place a cushion under them both
E si la vena es apostemada, lahoras layssa aquela e no la toques entro que·l apostema sia sedat.	 If the vein has been closed (venous thrombosis), then lie on that and do not touch it to prevent further blood clots
E si necessitat te provoca a evacuar le sanc segondament, e no es excusacio, lahoras tu sagna aquel sobre aquel loc o en l’autre bras en autra vena.	 If there is a need to evacuate the vein (second time), and it is not an excuse, lie on that side or in another arm or another vein.
E la vena apelada “funis del bras” es fleubotomada en loc de la fusca o de la basilica, quan no so atrobadas o so amaguadas, quar es composta de aquelas.	 If the vein is blocked in the arm (ulnar vein), or in the forearm (brachial vein) when it was not ligated or ligated and closed, then it consists of those veins.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intrometa la sua ma en aygua cauda entro que·l focil se enrogezesca e que la vena apparia manifestament.	 The quality of the phlebotomy is that it causes the patient to place their hand in a puddle or water puddle, and for the veins to appear prominently.
E aprop sia strengut sobre aquel am liament am strictura migana; e aprop fleubotoma segon le tranvers petit, no latitudinalment ni segon la longitut.	 Then tighten around that in a very tight bandage, not making it too loose or not tight enough, and phlebotomize the second time by transecting the small vein, not transversely nor longitudinally.
E sia la apercio ampla e sia la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas aquela sobre la junctura de la ma un petit.	 Then make a large opening and your phlebotomy at which you phlebotomize that on the small joint of the hand.
E si es prohibit le fluxs del sanc, lahoras tu itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e layssa le sanc correr en la aygua entro que consieguas la tua necessitat.	 When one is prohibited from drinking alcohol due to medical reasons, the doctors are advised to place a cushion under their buttocks and another servant on their legs so that the patient does not urinate in water while trying to fulfill his need.
Mays si tu eras en les dias d’estiu, lahoras tu yest excusat de la iteracio de la ma en l’aygua cauda, e le mes es pausat le cors del sanc en aygua cauda en temps de yvern.	 If you are in the hot days of summer, the doctor is excused from performing the action described in the previous sentence and instead puts a cushion under the patient's buttocks to prevent urination while he tries to fulfill his need
E la fleubotomia de aquesta vena es pus salva que de totas las autras venas, quar dejos lu no ha vena pulsatil, ni nervi.	 The phlebotomy of this vein is saved when all the other veins are, except for one that does not have a pulse or nerve.
E la fleubotomia de la savatella de la ma dreyta es conferent a las malautias del fetge.	 Phlebotomy of the right arm vein is considered a medical procedure.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que tu strenguas la ma am liament o am la tua ma, pus que tu l’as mesa en ayga cauda, entro que la vena sia imflada e sia be demostrada al vezement; e aprop fleubotoma aquela transversan; e si inscidas aquela de tot no nozera aquo en re.	 The quality of phlebotomy is that you should stretch the arm or place your hand in cold water, so that the vein swells and becomes visible at once; and it's recommended to perform a transverse phlebotomy if possible; but otherwise, do not use this method.
E conserve que no ultimes la tua ma am la fleubotomi, quar dejos lu so les nervis dels ditz denudatz de carn.	 Do not apply any ointment or medication to the arm after phlebotomy as it may damage the nerves exposed due to skin removal.
E aprop itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e laysse correr le sanc en aquela, quar si tu no iteras aquela en l’aygua cauda, le sanc sira coagulat en lo orrifici de la vena, e es prohibit de flux.	 Place the hand in cold water and let the patient urinate into that; otherwise, if you do not perform this action, urination will occur inside the body and is prohibited from flowing.
E cum es extrayt le sanc segon la quantitat de necessitat, lahoras tu pausa sobre la vena oli e sal, per que no sia consolidada coytadament; e semblantment cove que tu fassas en tot ram streyt.	 When the second incision is made according to the quantity of necessity, then you are to place your hand over the vein and hold it, so that it may not be closed suddenly; and similarly do as I have instructed in all other parts of the body.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de aquela de la ma senestra, es que es conferent a las malautias de la melsa.	 The treatment for this type of mutilation is to confer on the ulcers that are related to it.
E fay semblantment en la fleubotomia de lu ayssi cum has fayt en l’autra.	 You do as you have instructed in other wounds.
E le juvament de la vena sephena de la fleubotomia es a las malautias que so en la partida dejos del cos, ayssi cum so malautias de la mayre, e a retencio de mestruas, et a las malautias dels ronhos e ulceracios de coyssas e de cambas antiquas, e a lor semblantz de las malautias.	 The veins of the phlegm and the ulcers related to it are those that appear on the part of the body, as well as other ulcers from older varicose veins, and similar ones from old sores and ancient ulcers.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute entrometa lo sieu pe en aygua cauda e fassa sobre aquel fricacio entro que be apparen las venas; e lia sobre la junctura del pe am correia; e le loc de la vena le talo apparent deves le dit pous, e de aquela so ramificatz en la facia del pe motz ramps.	 The quality of the phlegm wound is that the patient's feet swell up and spread over it, and there are ulcers on the junction between the foot and the ground; also, its location in the vein shows a certain prominence, which spreads out in the shape of a fan from the leg towards the foot.
E donc fleubotoma le pus ample ram o dejos la camba deves le talo deves la agreguacio de lu, quar es milhor e pus sal.	 Then phlegm wound has an extensive area of damage to it, and that is the most serious one.
E si fleubotomas aquela en la facia del pe, lahoras tu te guarda dels nervis que so dejos aquela sobre la facia del pe, e pausa la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas per le travers, quays cum si tu la volias inscidir.	 If the phlegm wound is on the surface of the foot then you are to hold back any nerves that may be caused by it over the surface of the foot and pause your phlegm wound incision where you want it.
E sia le fleubotomi vosil.	 Upon opening
Mays si es prohibit le issiment del sanc; lahoras tu itera le pe de lu en l’aygua cauda e layssa correr le sanc en aquela entro que sia evacuat.	 Do not allow the intestine to protrude from its cavity, and if necessary, place a cushion under them so that they cannot fall out
E si le fleubotomador erra en la primieyra veguada, lahoras itera am le fleubotomi en sus un pauc, quar le loc es sal; e no temes de lu malician, mays que te guardes dels nervis ayssi cum havem dit.	 If the first servant in the first place fails to hold or if you are not satisfied with them, then replace them quickly so that they remain secure; and do not worry too much about it as I mentioned earlier.
E semblantment fay de la sophena del autre pe engualment.	 Similarly, follow the procedure for another servant.
E de la vena sciatica, le loc ayssi cum havem dit es deves le talo dejos la cavilha de la partida silvestra.	 For the sciatic vein, place it in a cavity of the other leg as I mentioned earlier.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de lu es a dolo de anca quan es per sanc caut.	 The moment that the first servant is removed must be when you are about to remove the second one.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intre en banh, e festine e strenha la cueyssa de lu del latz de la ancha entro desus le talo desus quatre ditz an una benda longua subtil, quar no appar sino per aquo.	 The quality of the phlebotomy is that it will hurt and be painful to squeeze out through a narrow space between your four fingers as well, which may not appear unless you do so.
E donc quan appar, lahoras tu fleubotoma aquela segon cascun engen que es a tu possible e segon le tranvers, e es milhor; o inscidas aquela per inscizio o secces aquela per seccio, quar le loc de lu es sal.	 Therefore when it is visible, the second servant will be phlebotomized as soon as possible and thereafter, if you decide to remove it through incision or excision, because its place remains safe.
E ela es en motz homes mot ameguada; e si atrobas aquela, e no appar al sentiment de tot, lahoras fleubotoma alcun ram de lu, e es aquel que appar en le dos del pe enves le dit auricular e le anular.	 And if you happen to miss it or do not feel the pain of removing anything else, then leave that alone and proceed with the other servant on your two legs in order from ear to nose
E guarda te dels nervis, e fay correr del sanc la quantitat que voles.	 "Protect yourself from nerves; do as much running away that you want.
E aprop deslia la strictura e pausa sobre le loc de la fleubotomia coto e strenh le loc, quar leugierament es sanat.	 "Then open the strip and place it over the area of a phlebotomy cut; stretch it gently so that it is comfortable.
De ventozacio e de las qualitatz de uzar de aquelas.	 "With respect to the use of those tools.
Ventozas so de corns, o de eram, o de veyre.	 "They are used for gout or ulcers, veins or hemorrhoids.
E ventozacio es fayta segon doas manieyras: la una de lor es am scarificacio e extracio de sanc, e l’autra es ventozacio ses scarificacio.	 "The first one is used for scraping and removing sores, the other one is used for puncturing.
E aquesta ventozacio que es ses scarificacio es segon doas manieyras, quar o es am foc o ses foc.	 "The second one that is puncture is also known as a scalpel or scissors.
E a las ventozas que so administradas am scarificacio e extraccio de sanc son xiiii locs del cors, dels quals la un en lo qual so pausadas ventozas es alnocrati, e es la deriera partida del cap; e le mieg loc d’el de doas partz del col ensemp; e ventozas del mento dejos la mandibula pus dejos de la boca; e ventozas de doas spatulas; e ventozas de alohoster, e es sobre la fi de la coeta; e ventozas de dos focils, e so de dos brasses; e ventozas de doas cavilhas; e ventozas de doas cuoyssas.	 "The needles used for administration of sores are in these locations on the body: one is at the back of the head and another at the navel.
E ventozacio no extratz le sanc sino de las venas menudas sparssas en la carn, e per aquo no catz la vertut per aquelas, ayssi cum es cazement per fleubotomia; ni no cove que ventozacio sia fayta am foc o ses foc en alcuna malautia fayta per replecio entro que le cors tot sia evacuat.	 "The needles do not extract the sores but from small veins in the skin, so that they don't harm it by accident as when phlebotomy is done; nor should the needle be used if there are no injuries to treat.
Mays si necessitat provoca a ventozacio per malautia o per continua, aministrem aquela en tota hora al comensament del mes e en la fi de lu, e en le mieg loc de lu e en qualque temps sia.	 When it is necessary to treat the patient's anal area or for continuous use, we must apply it at the beginning and end of each month and in intervals of time as needed.
La qual causa es quar dels homes es en les quals es sanc multiplicat entro que indigeys de extraccio de lu per ventozacio e atroba en le sieu cap graveza e soda; e de aquels es que atroba replecio e rogor en la sua cara e en le sieu cap, e en le sieu col; e de aquels es que atroba pruziment en la sua cara e en le sieu front e tenebrositat e hebetut en les sieus huels; e de aquels que gieta le loc de la sua ventozacio; e de aquels es que le lor ris es multiplicat; e de aquels es que atroba gustament de sanc en la sua boca, o que la lengua es apostemada e escup sanc; e de aquels es que lor dormir es multiplicat, e de aquels que vetz sanc en lo dormir rogor e antics e plaguas e autras causas a lor semblantz.	 The homes that multiply into the anus are those which bring severe pain and soreness to it, and some cause redness on the head; others cause redness of the face, tongue, eyes, and hair, and still others cause the body to tremble and make the limbs restless at night.
E donc quan vezes en alcuna causa de aquelas, e propriament si es en le tertz o miga del mes, lahoras comandam ventozacio esser fayta pus que so passadas del dia dos o tres horas.	 And when such a cause arises at any time, especially if it is in the third or middle of the month, we command to apply the poultice immediately after passing three days or three hours.
E juvament de ventozacio de la nuca es que quan aquela confereys a gravitat en le cap e ad aquo que es efondit als huels; mays cove que aquo sia aprop evacuacio de tot le cors.	 Immediately after applying the poultice to the neck, if that brings about gravity in the head and to this extent it has affected the limbs: may such a poultice be applied as soon as possible all over the body.
E aquesta ventoza es en le loc de fleubotomia de la cephalica.	 This poultice is applied on the place of the head-laceration.
E no es legut que use de lu aquel que es de frega complecio, o en le qual es catarr, quar dona ad aquel gran nocument.	 When the complicated cold humors infiltrate or when there is a great effusion in it (the body), then pain occurs and doctors are accustomed to calling this gout.
E per aquo no cove que uso de aquela les vielhs, e en les caps dels quals so malautias frejas.	 And do not use those vessels that cause the ailments to which I referred earlier.
Mays ad aquel que sobre aquela es continuant sobre lu es fayta oblivio; e per aquo cove que tu comandes al ventozador que depause la sua ma un petit am la ventosa a las partidas dejos, temen de la generacio de oblivio.	 In order to prevent the obstruction that you referred to earlier, and for this reason it is advisable to command your attendant to place her hand gently over the ventilator's face, so that she may prevent the generation of oblivion.
Mays ventozacio de alkehel es en loc de fleubotomia de la vena fusca e de la basilica: e per aquo confereys a asma, e a la constriccio de ale e a la scissura del sturment de ale, e a tos, e a replecio.	 The ventilator should be placed in the area of the jugular vein and the basilica (ear), so that it may correct the asthma, constriction of the ear and the rupture of the ear drum, as well as the nose and throat.
E cove que sia enpellida la ventoza alkehel un petit, quar si es pausada dejos, engendra debilitat en le cors e en le stomac.	 And it is advisable to gently place the ventilator in a position where if stopped, it will cause weakness of the body and stomach.
E la ventozacio de alhagdahan confereys a las dolors accident en le cap e a obtalmia, e emigranea, e prefocacio, e a dolors en las razitz de las dentz; e es en loc de fleubotomia de la basiliqua.	 The ventilator should correct the pain in the head and hearing, inflammation of the eye, blindness, burning of the eye, as well as the pain in the teeth areas; it is placed at the jugular vein location.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que no prema la sua ma am scarificacio per que no inscida la arteria e accida fluxs de sanc.	 And it is advisable to command the attendant not to place her hand gently on top, so that she may not cause a rupture and the flow of blood.
E ventozacio dejos le mento comfereys a alcola en la boca, e a corrupcio de la gingiva, e a semblantz a lor de las malautias que so en la boca, e stan en loc de fleubotomia de aliheric que so en las doas labias.	 Open the mouth of the patient and put in a cloth soaked with a mild corrosive to clean it; remove any corrosion from the gums, tongue, and all sores that may be there on the inside of the lips and any ulcers on the outside of both cheeks.
Mays la ventozacio que es fayta sobre las doas spatulas confereys a caphatan, le qual es fayt per replecio de caliditat.	 The treatment for cleansing is as follows: apply a cloth soaked in mild corrosive to the upper and lower lips, which will be done by way of heat application.
E la ventosacio de las doas partidas dedintz dels focils confereys juvament de la fleubotomia de tres venas, so es de la basilica, fusca e cephalica, quar aquela atratz le sanc de totas aquelas venas pus manudas que so en la carn, e aquelas venas menudas de las autras venas pus grossas entro que pervengua la atraccio a las tres venas.	 The treatment for cleansing the face boils down to three steps: first apply heat to the basilica artery and the cephalic veins; second, cauterize the jugular vein; third, cauterize all other smaller veins that may have infiltrated into the skin around them.
E comanda al ventozador que trop no procezesca en scarificacio, quar le loc es denudat de carn, e dejos lu so nervis e arterias.	 The attendant is to avoid scarring and ensure all nerves and arteries are intact.
E es una ventoza am la qual es ventozat sobre alshosses e confereys a las emorroydas del cul e a las ulceracios pus dejos.	 It is a procedure used in the cleansing of hemorrhoids or ulcers that occur around the anus, to say nothing about any other parts.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que sia gran ventoza, e que sia de eram, quar le loc indigeys de fort seccio; e fort leu so traucadas ventozas subtils e sia scarificat am scarificacio.	 The attendant should ask the cleanser to make a large procedure, meaning one that requires a lot of time and effort. The assistant must also ensure that all small veins are cauterized during this procedure as well.
Mays ventozas de las cambas minueysso per minuicio manifesta, quar atiran le sanc de tot le cors, e comfereysso a dolors antiquas dels ronhos e de la mayre, e de la vesica; e provocan las mestruas, e comfereysso a bothor e ademil; e stan en loc de fleubotomia de doas sophenas, e alahorcoben, e de doas cavilhas.	 The attendant should apply the cleansing procedure to all small veins one by one, making sure that each sore is treated individually and removing any old or new sores from the anus, groin, vulva, breasts, abdomen, thighs, and calves.
Enpero mot debelitan tot le cors e fan accidir sincopi en motz homes.	 In this phrase there are two verbs in a similar order as each other but opposite meaning. The first verb means to cut, while the second is to open or begin.
E de las ventozas alahorcoben le juvament es propda al juvament a las ventozas de doas cambas.	 This phrase literally translates to "and from the openings of the veins take a step towards the openings of two legs." However, I believe it's referring to venipuncture or blood-drawing procedure used in medicine where a needle is inserted into a vein for drawing out blood sample.
E la qualitat de la posicio de las ventozas es que pauses la ventoza al comensament vueda e sucguas per succio temprada, e no prolongues la posicio de las ventozas, mays pausa aquelas leugierament, e reman aquelas coytadament, e que las humors venguan al loc per adveniment engual.	 The quality of the position of the veins is that pauses at first to come and draws quickly for a short time, but do not prolong the position of the veins, may pause those temporarily, and remain those slightly, so that the humors go where they are accustomed to going.
E no cesses iterar aquo e continuar entro que veja le loc ja enrojezir e inflar e que appara la rogor del sanc.	 Do not cease repeating this and continue inside until you see it become rigid and inflated, so that the rope's knot loosens.
E lahoras tu scarifiqua e itera la succio pauc a pauc, e aprop considera en la dispozicio dels cors.	 The pains of your joints are caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body and pain occurs in the feet.
Quar aquel home que es de tendra carn de rars pors, cove que tu le scarifiques una veguada e no pus, per que le loc no sia ulcerat.	 For him who is prone to rash skin, do not scratch suddenly and without preparation, for fear that the location will be inflamed.
E comanda al ventozador que amplifique la scarificacio e pronde un pauc, e atempre la succio am facilitat.	 The phlebotomist commands the needle to increase the scratching a little bit, and always keep the procedure easy.
E si en le sanc es grossitut, lahoras cove que scarifiques doas veguadas, quar en la primieyra veguada es uberta la via de subtiliacio al sanc e a la aquositat de lu.	 If the vein is narrow, then scratch two needles one at a time so that on the first needle you go through lightly to the center of it and from there proceed gently as well.
Mays en la segunda a la perscrutacio aquisida de la extraccio del sanc gros.	 In the second, an examination of the exterior of the large intestine
E si le sanc es mot feculent, lahoras sia fayta scarificacio la tersa veguada per que consiegua le derier.	 If the bowels are constipated, then let doctors administer laxatives to make them defecate properly
E derierament, quan volem extrayre le sanc pauc a pauc o un petit, abasta a nos una scarificacio.	 Also when we want to extract the bowel slightly or little by little, he administers one
E si volem extraccio de mot sanc, scarificam am mota scarificacio; e si nos conoyssem que·l sanc es gros, lahoras cove que scarifiquem per scarificacio preonda.	 If we want to extract the large intestine, he will administer a more powerful laxative; and if it is necessary that the bowel be very large, doctors prescribe stronger laxatives.
E le terme de scarificacio en la qual es la profunditat de la codena tant solament.	 The term for cautery in which depth of incision only matters.
E si aquel del qual la codena es grossa, dura, fusca, e les sieus pors so streytz, cove que les locs de las ventosas sian untatz lenitius, apertius resolutius; si es en temps d’estiu, ayssi cum es oli de aloen o oli de violat, o oli de amellas dossas, o oli de cemensa de coja; e si es en temps ivern, lahoras oli narci, o oli de liri, o oli de camamilla, o de sanc, e ad aquels semblantz.	 If the bowel is thick, hard, and filled with pus or other foul substances that cause great pain when it bursts, then doctors use cautery to cut open the bowels at once, without hesitation, whether in summer or winter, spring or autumn, early or late, or at dawn, dusk, midday, evening, night; they do this as a last resort.
E si la superfluitat es grossa, freja, lahoras le oli sia amaranti, o oli de balsamita, o oli de aloen, o oli aneti, e a lor semblantz.	 If the excess is thick and rancid, doctors will use cautery to cut it open; or if there are other foul substances that cause great pain when they burst, they do this as well.
Mays si le ventozador es de amples pors de tendra carn, lahoras cove que sia prohibit de oli, e cove que ad aquest les locs de ventozas de lor aprop la ventozacio sian lavatz am ayguaros o am aygua freja de solatrum, o am aygua de coja, o am aygua de bordolaguas, e semblantz ad aquelas.	 If the knife used is of good quality and strong enough to cut through tough meat, then doctors prohibit using it, so that when these incisions are made they can be washed with hot water or cold water, fresh from a well or a fountain, or cold water from a pond or a lake, and those like them.
E aquel del qual le sanc es de mota humiditat, lava las suas ventozas am vi agre, o am aygua de mirt e sumac e semblant ad aquels.	 When someone has a cold that causes mucus to be discharged from their nose, the servant should blow gently on it or water with vinegar and salt, as follows:
E de aquel del qual las superfluitatz son grossas, lava las suas ventozas am vi antic, o am aygua de sansuc, que es majorana, o de decoccio de anet, o de camamilla, e a lor semblantz.	 For someone who has thick mucus discharge, the servant should blow gently on it or water with vinegar and salt as follows:
E cove que la ventozacio sia guardada denant de banh; habantz cove que sia aministrada aprop issiment del banh per una hora o per doas, e cove que dorma aprop la ventozacio.	 The servant should keep the nasal passages open by using a bandage and administer it with the recommended amount of ointment or syrup for one to two hours, after which they should rest their nostrils.
Quid est quo oportet ut regatur ventosandus aus phlebotomatus ante ventosationem.	 What is required to regulate the nasal passages before a bloodletting procedure?
Cove que consideras al comensament: lahoras si le ventozador o aquel que·s deu fleubotomar es coleric e ventz sobre lu sanc agut e imflamacio, lahoras cove que prengua causas infrigidantz, ayssi cum milgranas acetosas, e endivia an vi agre e laytuguas, e secanabin, e julep, e a lor semblantz.	 When considering the beginning: if you suspect that the bloodletting procedure is causing pain and inflammation in the nose, then you should check for causes of coldness, such as chilblains, and also apply vinegar, salt water, or other remedies to soothe the affected area.
E pausa a lor viandas ayssi cum poletz, e carns de auzels serbiges, e viandas conditas am agras, e a lu semblantz.	 After applying these remedies as well: pause your wine, and make sure that you're using cold water instead of hot water, and apply the following mixtures for sores on wounds, such as:
E de aquel del qual la compleccio es freja, cove que prengua en beure eyssarop almiva, o eyssarop de alsecanabin de semensas, e sumac, e vi mot odorant migier entre viel et noel; e que a lu sia comendat que use de paucitat de beure e de mangar, e pausa las viandas de lu poletz e canabir e pissers e petitz auzels e colombat.	 For someone who has a feverish complaint: you should drink barley water (eyssarop), or eye-sore of the many kinds mentioned before, salt, and vinegar which smells like garlic between day and night; also, make sure to decrease the amount of food and drink, and pause the wine consumption with a servant's suggestion.
E cove que en lo dia de ventozacio e de fleubotomia le beure sia major que la vianda.	 "In the day of vomiting and bleeding, drink more water than usual.
E cove que sia donat en beure en alcunas horas ad alcus homes tyriaca alpharac, o medicamentz de musc, so es muscada, o alcelita denant la ventozacio o denant fleubotomia o aprop, per so que·ls membres principals sian confortatz e que·l sanc sia subtiliat; e no cove que prenguan aquela scalfatz.	 "If someone is given a drink of tyriac acid or mucilage when they vomit and bleed, either to soothe the pain, calm them down, prevent them from panicking, or to help with vomiting or bleeding itself.
Mays las ventozas que so ses scarificacio sian ventozas que so pausadas sus le fetge, e sobre la melsa e podagra, e sobre le umbelic, en les locs dels jonolhs, e la pixida del ancha, quar aquestz membres no suffertan scarificacio sobre si.	 "The pain of vomiting will be less severe than the pain of stopping it if you pause for a while before applying any treatment to prevent scarring on the skin.
E no es querit per aquelas sino atraccio de sanc de membre, ayssi cum pausam ventosa sobre mamilha en malautia de flux de sanc del sanc de las nars; e usam de aquela per que sia dissolvuda ventositat freja inviscade del membre, ayssi cum pausam sobre le ventre e l’umbelic; quar aquela rarifique le membre e scalfa lu e ramau la dolor quar resolveys ventositat.	 "It is not advisable to do so for those same reasons as mentioned before: to prevent scarring on the skin.
E ja es pausada sobre les ronhos quan accideys en lor opilacio o poyra, quar per vertut de atraccio fort leu huobre opilacio e erradica le poyra de son loc.	 "When you sneeze or cough, hold your breath to prevent sneezing and coughing too hard.
E semblantment fa quan es pausada sobre le fetge e la melsa deves ventositat en aquels enclausa.	 "In the same way when holding in vomit and bile at those moments.
E aquestas ventozas so administradas vuedas amb succio tant solament; e alcunas veguadas so administradas am foc.	 "The vomiting is treated with a gentle fluid, and some medicines are applied at high temperatures.
E alcunas veguadas so administradas plenas de aygua tebeza en las malautias de la melsa.	 In full, that first sentence translates to: "In the groin, a treatment has been applied completely wet.
E aquo es per que la ventoza sia umplida e sia pus gran, so es aygua cauda sola o aygua en la qual sian cuytas herbas ad aquo convenientz.	 That means: "It is necessary for the abscess to be filled and full, either with pure water or with a solution that contains herbs suitable for this purpose.
Forma de ventoza aministrada am foc: sia la amplitud del orrifici de dos ditz, segon que nos la havem formada; e la quantitat del preon sia la maytat de un palm; e sia en lo latz de lu, en le loc que es en le circuit, la maytat de lu, le trauc sia petit segon la quantitat que intre en lu una agulha.	 The manner of administering the treatment: first determine the diameter that will be used for inserting it (the size of two fingers), then apply a measured amount to one palm; and lastly in the last place where the abscess is located, apply a smaller quantity equivalent to the tip of a needle.
Sia fayta de eram rog o citri, de grosses marges, leon, enguals e terses per so que no leda le membre deves la sua posicio sobre lu.	 The remedy should be applied in such a way that it does not prevent the member from being in its proper position on top of it.
E sia al mieg de lu vergua transversa de eram o de ferr, on es pausada candela am lo foc.	 It may be applied across the abdomen or to the back, and should be done with a steady flame at its source.
E ja sia aquesta ventoza gran major de aquela la qual havem recomtat; e la pauca mendre de aquela segon las malautias e la etat de aquel que usa de aquela.	 That treatment is of the greater kind than that which we recommended, and should be applied with a small amount from that place onto other abscesses or to its current location.
E las ventosas dels efantz e extenuatz so autres que las ventozas dels joves e de grosses corssas.	 The ointments of the earlier type and the more powerful ones should be used only for young people or those with large abscesses.
E la qualitat de pausar aquesta ventoza am foc sobre le membre es que extenda la meca am foc de lenha decentment denant una pauca candela de cera, e pausa aquela sobre le mieg de la vergua transversa en le mieg loc de la ventoza, per que le foc sia accendut enviro la partida dejos per que no sia comburit le cors del malaute.	 The quality of applying the treatment with a steady flame at its source over the member is to extend it slightly by burning it gently while holding down only one candle of wax, and then apply it over the abscess in the transverse vein area so that the flame may be extinguished without burning through the patient's chest.
E aprop sia pausada sobre le membre del malaute, e le dit sia sobre le trauc que havem dit, entro que quan tenem las ventozas e non indigem que osten le dit e que yesca la vapor sobre aquel trauc, lahoras la ventoza sira tantost dissolvuda.	 When the space between a patient's thighs is open, place it over their chest and say that you will now administer a powder to stop any breathing that occurs as soon as the wind enters through that opening, until which time?
E prop igneys la meca segon la sua manieyra, e itera aquela si indigeyssas de aquela.	 Place your hand over their chest after you have opened the space between their thighs, and let them know to expect whatever else may follow that
Mays en ventosa que es aministrada en la malautia de plauressi, am aygua, en la qual no ha vergua transversa ni trauc, e no es aministrada sino que sia umplida de aygua, e es pausada sobre le membre tant solament.	 The powder to be administered is meant for breathing relief and has no transverse or opening passages within it; the powder should only be poured into their chest cavity.
E aquesta es la forma de lu: E aquesta ventoza quant plus es gran, tant es milhor, per que puya recebre gran quantitat de aygua.	 The form of this is as follows: And with larger quantities come the better results because more water will be received.
Capitol .xcvii.	 Chapter 72.
Sanguissuguas no so administradas en motz membres sino en les membres en les quals non es possible posicio de ventosas, per la parvitat de aquels, ayssi cum le pot e gingiva e semblantz a lor; o en membre denudat de carn, ayssi cum le dit e·l nas e lors semblantz.	 Bloodletting is not administered on the limbs but on the members where it is impossible to make an opening for the wind's passage because of their small size, as with lips and tongue; or in a member of flesh, as with the nose and mouth.
E la qualitat de usar de aquelas que si has trobadas sanguisugas que so en las ayguas dossas de poyredura mundas.	 The quality of using those which have found blood vessels that are in the hollows of the ear.
E aprop sian layssadas le dia e la nueyt en aygua dossa entro que sian famolentas, e que no romangua alcuna causa en le ventre de aquelas; e aprop sia evacuat le cors en le comensament am fleubotomia e am ventozas; e aprop fregua le membre del malaute entro que s’enrojezesca; e aprop sian pausadas sobre lu.	 Let the water drip gently into their ear, until they become famished and no cause of any kind occurs in their stomach; and place it on their chest from the start with a fumigation and air passages; and let them put it on.
E cum son umplidas e caso.	 When there are pains
E si es possible succio del loc am ventoza, es mays derier en juvament.	 If it is necessary to make a hole in the middle of the palm or the back, then do so with great care and youthfulness
E sino, lahoras lava le loc am vi agre e aprop am mota aygua; e sia freguat e expremut.	 If not, then apply water, vinegar, and salt to the area and compress it.
E si es prolonguat le cors del sanc aprop le cazement de las sanguissuguas, e es aquo resudan, lahoras tu enfon un drap de li en aygua freja, e pausa aquel de sobre entro que sia abdida la resudacio.	 If the swelling of the veins in the body's surface persists and is unbearable, then apply a compress soaked with water to it and remove any previous compress over time to avoid further swelling.
E si le sanc es multiplicat, lahoras polveriza sobre lu vitriol trissat, o guallas e semblantz a lor de las causas stipticas, entro que·l sanc sia abscidit; o sian pausadas sobre le loc las maytatz de favas excocicadas, e sian layssadas entro que las favas aderescan al loc, e es le sanc abscidit.	 If the swelling is multiplied, then apply vinegar to it or look for the causes of it, such as a strict diet, and if necessary, remove any previous compress to stop it.
E cove, si es necessaria, iteracio de sanguissuguas, quan es possible mudar aquelas.	 Then, when necessary, change the veins (venous system), if possible.
E si las sanguissuguas son prohibidas de suspenssio, lahoras sia freguat le loc am sanc recent o fique una agulha en les locs entro que yesca sanc; e aprop sian pausadas, quar aquelas quan sento alcun sanc tantost adarysso.	 If the veins are prohibited from suspension (venous thrombosis), then apply water or leave a needle in the area to stop any pain and prevent further recurrence.
E quan voles que cajan, polveriza sobre aquelas un pauc de aloen trissat, o sal, o cendre, e cazo tantost.	 When you want to soak them with a little bit of vinegar or salt, squeeze as much as possible.
Ayssi comensa lo prolec de la tersa partida: de restauracio.	 From the initial treatment: restoration.
Aquest capitol es motas veguadas necessari en la art de medicina; e es restauracio de fractura e de dislocacio accident en les osses.	 This chapter is about necessary healing procedures in medicine, including bone fractures and dislocations caused by accidents.
O, filh, sapiatz que jactan se de aquest capitol les fols metges e les vulguars e aquels que degun temps no reguardero les libres dels Antics ni legiro de aquels una letra.	 Oh son, please know that the physicians and surgeons referred to in this chapter are those who do not respect the liberties of the ancients or follow the laws of these times.
E per aquesta causa es fayt que aquesta manieyra dels scients in terra nostra es privat; e yeu no ho e obliat en aquo degun temps be de tot; e no he adhibit aquo que apres, sino per longitut de lectio dels libres dels Antics e studi sobre le entendement de aquels, entro que extrayssi la sciencia de aquels.	 For this reason, it is considered that the practice of medicine in our land is private; and you are not permitted to engage in it by these times unless you have also studied and understood the works of the ancients and learned their wisdom so thoroughly that no other science could replace theirs.
E aprop adirigui a experiment e studi en la longitut de la mieua vida.	 I recommend trying experiments and studying in the length of my life.
E yeu ja he de aquo descrit en aquest capitol tot aquo que conte la mieua sciencia e sobre le qual es passat lo mieu experiment; pus que agui abreujat aquo a vos autres e deliuregui aquo de occupacio de elonguacio; e abreujegui aquo en la fi de abreujacio; et e monstrat aquo en la fi de declaracio; e formegui en aquo motas formas dels sturmentz que so administratz en aquel, cum es fayt per addicio de declaracio, ayssi cum he fayt en dos capitols precedentz.	 In this chapter, all that is described in it are the means by which my science has been practiced and with which I have done great experiments; put into practice what you have learned from reading these chapters, and make sure to apply them as stated; also describe at the end of the translation, and provide forms for administration like those used in previous chapters.
Capitol primier.	 First chapter.
Summae et collectiones ex esse fracturae ossium, ex eis quarum praemissio necessaria est, antequam incipiamus rememorationem membrorum fraftorum et diversorum si uniuscuiusque.	 Summary and collections from the fractures of bones, which are necessary to be mentioned before we start on the remembrance of the members affected by various diseases one at a time.
Cove donc que diguam en le prohemi de aquest capitol las summas del sermo; e les capitols al entendament dels quals en le comensament es forsat le artifexs e a stacio sobre la veritat de aquels; so es vos e aquels que so promptz que sapian o aprenguan aquesta art nobla autres de vos.	 "You have now finished translating the first sentence of this text, which means you've successfully understood all the sentences in it and can figure out what each one means.
E donc dic que quan accideys a alcu fractura o dislocacio o torcio o cazement, lahoras cove que tu te coytes al comensament am fleubotomia o aleyar aquel, o quascu ensemps, si no prohibeys alcuna causa, ayssi cum debelitat de vertut, o es aquel al qual accideys effant, o viel en decrepitat, o es temps de vehement calor, o de vehement freg.	 "When a fracture or dislocation occurs in the limb, doctors advise to begin with phlebotomy or leech therapy on that part, if there is no other cause; otherwise do your best to heal it as soon as possible.
E aprop sia content en vianda sieua de erbas frejas e de carns de auzels e de crabotz; e prohibem carns grossas e umplir si de viandas e de tota vianda que umple las venas de sanc, entro que siras segurat de apostema caut, e si no temes efusio de materia al membre.	 "And let the veins be content with herbs and foods that are light and light-colored; avoid fats and fill in any excess liquid into the veins to prevent swelling of the member.
E lahoras retorne le malaute al sieu regiment primier am le qual corr costuma de lu.	 "Doctors return the patient to their first regimen as soon as possible.
E donc cum le os trencat comensa esser restaurat, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia pascut de viandas nutritivas de nutriment mot e gros e greu en les quals sia viscositat, ayssi cum so viandas faytas de froment cueyt am aygua, e ris, e caps, e pes, e ventres de vacas, e huous, e peys fresc, e vi gros e semblants ad aquels, e am aquest regiment es fayta coagulacio de fractura pus leugierament e miels.	 "When the bone is broken, doctors recommend feeding the patient with nutritious foods that are light and easy to digest; avoid fats and viscous food as much as possible; let them have water, fruits, vegetables, lean meat from cattle, eggs, fish, poultry, fresh bread, heavy or fatty foods, etc., in this regimen they put coagulation therapy on it for fracture recovery.
E sapias que les osses trinquatz quan so en les homes que so en la primiera vilura e en los decrepitz, no es possible que sian continuatz e sian consolidatz segon lur natura per la exsiccacio dels membres de lor.	 When bones are quenched when they enter the home and in their first layer and in their drops, it is impossible for them to continue and consolidate themselves over time due to the dryness of their members
E son consolidatz e continuatz segon lor natura tot temps per la exsiccacio de aquels membres, e so continuatz e consolidatz aquels que so de lor en la fi de la lenitat, ayssi cum les osses dels petitz effantz.	 They will continue to consolidate and expand over time due to the dryness of those members, except for the ones at the end of the length
Mays empero natura ajusta e amnecteys sobre le os trencat de tota partida alcuna causa semblant a glut en le qual es grossitut que adhereys e strenh aquel entro que so ensemps conglutinatz e liatz ensemps, entro que venen la fi de fortitut e de fermesa, ayssi cum foc al comensament, entro que denguna causa no prohibeys aquel de las suas obres.	 However nature adjusts and connects the torn parts with a strength that adheres them together and strengthens it until the end of hardness and firmness, except for when they come to an end due to fatigue and exhaustion.
E per aquesta causa es necessari que pauses las viandas del malaute, viandas en las quals so gravitat e viscozitat e grosseza, ayssi cum havem dit.	 For this reason, it is necessary that you hold the restraints of the patient, which are heavy and viscous and large, as I've mentioned before.
Mota diversitat de fractura segon diversitat del membre.	 A variety of fractures according to the variety of body parts.
E sapias que las specias de fractura son diversas segon la diversitat dels membres, quar fractura del os de la camba es diversa de la fractura del os del cap; e la fractura del os del pietz es divers de la fractura del os del dos; e semblantment totz les autres membres son diverses entre lor.	 The types of fractures are diverse according to the variety of body parts, for example a fracture in the arm is different from one in the head, and a fracture in the breast is different from one in the leg, and so on with all other members
E yeu venc am rememoracio de tota specia de fractura, expausada en le sieu capitol distincta del autre.	 Remember every type of fracture described in its separate chapter.
Mota diversitat de fractura en si meteyssa.	 Many fractures in one leg
E son diversificadas las specias de fractura del os en lor meteyssas; quar es fayta fractura arcuada otra aquo que accidan en lu stellas; e alcunas veguadas es fayta fractura segon la longitut del os: e so las fracturas de lu satagia e astelhas e addicios procedentz e no-procedentz, ayssi cum es fayt en la pena quan es preparada a escriure, e es fractura am plagua e disrupcio en le cap, e es fractura fissura petita.	 Many fractures in one leg
E a tota specia es engen o turment propri en restauracio de lu segon que vindra rememoracio de lu distincta en les sieus locs.	 Every kind is different in the restoration of it, as soon as it comes to memory in your places
Mota senhal de fractura del os.	 The sentence you provided was incomplete and didn't include any more context or information about fractures. Please provide me with more details if needed.
E per aquo es conoguda fractura del os: es tortuositat de lu, e de aquel eminencia e appericio de lu al sentiment, e so de lu quan compremes aquel am la tua ma.	 The type of fracture in the leg is known as: tortuousness of it, and its prominence and perception by it to your hand
E donc quan no es en le loc tortuositat apparent ni so no es feyt deves le tieu tocament quan toques le os am agitacio e le malaute no atroba gran dolor, lahoras no es aqui fractura.	 Therefore, when there is not an evident tortuousness in the location and it does not feel like a fracture while touching your leg with gentle pressure without causing much pain, then it may not be a fracture
Habantz es possible que sia tortuositat o petita fissura, adon no cove que tu mauguas aquel am la tua ma e am compressio de tot; habantz pausa sobre lu de las medicinas de las quals ve rememoracio aprop aquel moment le qual conveneys al loc; e aprop sia streyt per strictura subtil.	 It is possible that it could be a small fracture or a small tear, without knowing exactly what kind of lesion you have on your leg and compressing it all. You should pause over it to remember which medication was prescribed at the time that suited this place, and use a fine needle for stricture.
E sapias que·l loc quan es arcuat e no es scindit en dos o otra aquo que no accidan en lu satagie, cum es remauguda tota partida de la sua compar, lahoras cove que comenses de la tua hora a rectificacio de lu habantz que a lu accida apostema caut.	 You know that the location is curved and not cut in two or another way without causing damage to it, as you have removed all of its covering, so now you should begin your time to repair it by doing the healing treatment carefully.
E si a lu accida apostema caut, lahoras layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que cesse le apostema; e aprop engualha aquel segon quascuna manieyra que podes de levitat e de engen.	 When an abscess forms on the finger, cut off that finger in three days so it does not continue to fester and become infected.
E sapias que restauracio de lu e agulacio de lu es pus leugiera que del os en le qual accideysso sathagie.	 It is easier for you to restore the bone than to cut off the bone, that which falls out in such a way as described above.
E aprop strenh aquel segon que vindra la rememoracio de lu.	 Then take the second one and apply memory to it.
Mays si en le os so satagias, lahoras es necessaria extencio de aquest membre trencat de doas partz, si es la ma o le pe; o am la tua ma si le membre es petit; o am doas cordas o am una corda e la ma.	 If the body part is cut off from both ends but one side of it remains intact and the hand or leg is small enough to cover it, then you should use your hand as a bandage for the arm/leg that was cut off; or if two cords are available, wrap around them with one cord and place your hand over the area.
E sia la tua posicio am la qual pauses le membre loc engual segon la sua figura natural, mentre que las partidas so extandudas del membre trenquat, lahoras te perforsa que fassas retornar aquelas addicios am engen e segon quascuna manieyra que poyras en lor locs.	 While holding the member in a position that is close to its normal shape while extending the other parts of the body away from it, you should make sure that both hands or arms are placed over those areas so they do not come into contact with each other.
E guarda te segon la tua forssa que no accida sobre le malaute per la tua operacio delor ni lesio; e perforsa te segon le tieu poder que tu appliques la un os am l’autre son companho segon lors milhors formas.	 Do not apply any ointment or medicine to the patient's body during their operation, and make sure both hands are touching each other when applying anything from one hand to another.
E cove que en aquela hora aprofitablament tu toques am la tua ma aquel, e si vezes aqui alcuna causa diversa, rectifiqua aquel e enguala aquel per la quantitat de la tua vertut.	 While holding the patient's hand at that time, you should ensure it is in balance and correct any other position while maintaining a balance of effort based on your judgment.
E exquiva vehement extenssio e compressio, ayssi cum fan mots fols metges que motas veguadas fan accidir apostema caut per la sua operacio, o fan accidir contraccio en le membre ayssi cum havem vist aquo per la operacio de lor motas veguadas.	 When stretching and compressing the veins simultaneously with doctors' orders to squeeze down on them, they might cut off circulation in the limbs; especially when performed during the operation of varicose veins.
E aprop annecteys, aprop equacio e decent operacio e strictura de aquel membre, e repaus e tranquilitat; amoneste le malaute sobre aquo e fay le squivar que no maugua aquel en la hora de las suas vigilias e del sieu dormir, e ves la sua revolucio e agitacio, e deves la sua egestio, e deves totz les sieus movementz am tota la sua vertut; e aguarda se que la posicio del membre sia posicio am la qual sia asegurada la dolor, la qual causa es quar quan sent en la disposicio de la posicio del membre delor o lesio; lahoras cove que permutes aquel ad autra disposicio de aquela am la qual non senta dolor; e guarda am aquo que la posicio de lu aquela sia dreyta e engual, per so que al membre non accida tortuositat quan es restaurat.	 Stretch and compress the veins by attaching them together with surgery or stricture of that limb, pause and relax tranquility; apply the patient in this way and let the pain subside until the next day's rest and sleep, wait for it to take its place at all times during movement; guard against any other position which does not bring relief from pain; and keep them as such, so that there is no twisting when restored.
E la qualitat de la strictura del membre tranquat es aquela que yeu recomti; per que sapias que·ls membres trencatz so diversificatz en lor parvitat e en lor grandeza e en la forma de aquels.	 The quality of the limb stretch is one that you recommend, in order to know how different limbs are in their size and shape compared to each other.
E de aquels que son petits ayssi cum le bras e·l dit e·l focil e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras cove que la envolucio sia de drap mol subtil.	 For those who are very small like the arms and legs you mentioned above, it is customary for them to be wrapped in a very soft cloth.
Mays aquels que so grosses ayssi cum la cuoyssa o la camba, cove que en aquels sia envolucio lada e dura, quar la liadura lada connecteys le membre gran e strenh aquel de tota part am strictura engual, enayssi que en lu no intre macula.	 For those who are very large like the thighs or calves, it is customary to wrap them tightly and firmly so that they are connected closely to the limbs during surgery in order to strengthen and extend the limb from both ends of the stretch evenly; otherwise there may be confusion as to where exactly the limb begins.
E aprop comensa, aprop la tua evacuacio de equacio, pausar liament convenient ad aquo, sobre le loc de aquela fractura am tres envolucios o quatre segon que·l membre mereys; e strenh la tua ma un petit am le liament.	 When it is necessary to start an operation on the thigh of a patient who has broken his bone, you must suspend any necessary operations at that time over the location of that fracture, and gently stretch your hand towards him for support.
E aprop ve am aquel a la partida pus sobirana del loc de la fractura, e strenh mens que no foc la tua strictura am la qual has strengut le loc de la fractura.	 You must firmly press on the area of the fracture while supporting him with your hand to prevent any further stretching or weakening of the location of the fracture.
E aprop elongua te am envolucio del loc de la fractura un pauc, e mollifiqua la strictura petit a petit, entro que prenguas del loc sa una gran partida.	 You must gently stretch and loosen the area around the fracture slowly but surely until you regain control of the location after a large movement has occurred.
E aprop pren una autra benda e envolveys aquela autra veguada sobre le loc trenquat am envolucio, e aprop ve am las envolucios a la partida pus dejos de la fractura; e sia la tua operacio en la strictura de la envolucio e en mollificacio de aquela segon que havem dit en la envolucio primieyra desus.	 You must then take another object and wrap it tightly around the area near the fracture, covering any loose areas from the fracture; and thereafter, perform your operation on tightening up this area while loosening that one as you've already instructed in the first one.
E aprop pausa entre las volucios de stopa leon o drap am le qual sia engualada la tortuositat de la fractura, si en lu es tortuositat; e sino, no pauses en lu alcuna causa.	 You must pause between these two areas if they have the same tortuousity as that of the fracture, and otherwise do not pause in them for any cause.
E aprop pausa sobre lu autra benda, e aprop enguala sobre aquestas envolucios stelhas decentment faytas tantost, si en le loc no es imflacio o apostema caut, e lahoras pausa sobre lu aquo que sede le apostema aquel e que oste la imflacio; e layssa aquela per alcus jorns; e lahoras tu strenh sobre lu las stelhas.	 You must pause over the other object, and gently alternate between these two areas as much as possible, if in that location there is no effusion or swelling to be seen, and pauses on top of the area opposite it from which the swelling originates; and lay this down for a few days; and you will then stretch over both areas.
E sian las stelhas de la maytat de canna lada raza, e be formada saviament; o sian de fust de pi; o de ramps de palma ; e sia le ample de quascuna stelha segon aquesta forma e aquesta figura:	 The first steps of the ladder to climb are easy and broad
Empero cove que la astelha que es pausada sobre aquela fractura sia pus grossa e pus lada un petit que las autras astelhas, e la longitut de la stela segon qu’es legut al membre en magnitut e parvitat; e aprop strenh sobre las astelhas am autra benda segon la tua primieyra strictura; e aprop lia desus am fiel decentment segon que havem dit de strictura, e es que sia la tua strictura segon le loc de la fractura mes, e quant mes es alonguat de la fractura, es mendre la strictura.	 The first steps of the ladder to climb are easy and broad (meaning that the initial tasks or steps in a process are simple and wide), but as you progress towards more complex actions, they become narrower and more precise.
E cove que les fils sian migiers en grossesa e subtilitat, e sian de li mol; e si les fils so grosses, ayssi cum yeu he vist per la operacio de alcus fols pausantz les lors fils de cordas de li tort, e es error gran, quan catz la strictura fora equalitat.	 The threads become thinner and more subtle as you progress towards more complex actions (meaning that the initial steps in a process are simple but gradually become more challenging), and if they are too thick, then cutting them can cause damage to the cords of those performing it.
E eyssament fils subtils no so convenientz, quar tu no consaguiras per strictura am aquels aquo que voles, e no cove que entre astela e astela haja mens de un dit.	 Very thin threads are not suitable for that process (meaning very thin threads may be difficult to control during the course of a task), and it is important to ensure there is sufficient space between each thread
E si le malaute es ledit per las extremitatz de las stelas aprop la strictura en les locs sas, lahoras pausa dejos aquelas de stopa leon o lana carmenada entro que aquo no li fassa lesio.	 If the patient is being treated on the extremities of the threads placed near the site where the treatment takes place, then it is important to ensure that there will be no harm done (meaning if the patient is receiving treatment in areas where these threads are located).
Alcunas veguadas fractura es am plagua, e accideys disrupcio en la codena, e yeu vindre am rememoracio en aquela en le capitol segon singularitat.	 Some fractures heal quickly and without complications, but they can cause disruption in the code (meaning some fractures heal smoothly but may disrupt the sequence), leading to a change in the capital of an element's individual variety.
E sapias que ges tot membre trencat no es streyt am stelhas al primier dia; la qual causa es quar le membre, quan es gran, no cove que pauses sobre lu stelhas sino aprop v dias o vii o mays, segon la tua seguratat de adveniment de apostema caut.	 When a member is torn or ripped off the first day, it should not be held down by its sutures; rather let it fall freely unless you want to cover it with a bandage, in order to prevent further infection of an abscess
E aquesta es la manieyra dels emplaustres am les quals les Antics restauravan, les quals so pausatz sobre fractura e dislocacio e torcio.	 This refers to the methods used by ancient physicians when setting fractures or dislocations and twists (in modern terminology, these would be called setting a broken bone or twisting an ankle).
Manieyra de emplaustra comu abruejat de restaurament de fractura, convenient a motas compleccios e majorment a las femnas e als efantz, quar es de aquo sobre le qual no ventz calor ni freg: e es que prenguas de polvera de moli, e es la medula de la farina que pen deves le movement de la mola en las paretz del moli.	 The method used by ancient physicians when setting a fracture was to hold the limb still and prevent it from moving in order to avoid heat or bruising; it involved applying pressure with a mallet, which would compress the marrow of the bone until its movement is arrested at the joints of the arm or leg.
E comfeys aquel ayssi cum es, sino que cribelles aquel am album de huou, e pausa la comfeccio de lu no-spessa ni subtil; e aprop usa de aquela.	 The same method was used in order to compress a fracture without excessive pressure and prevent further movement of the limb after setting it.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre restaurant fractura e dislocacio e torcio: recipe de assafetida, de lapdanum, de acacia, de enula, e migrach, que es razit de milgraner salvage, de totz ana drac. x; de mirra e aloen ana drac. v; alochil ana drac. xx; totz sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian mesclatz am aygua alichil o am album de huou si la compleccio del malaute es scalfada; e aprop usa de aquest emplaustre, quar es de bona composicio e restaura les osses trencatz leugierament, e confereys a motz homes.	 Another method used to set fractures or dislocations and twists is the use of an afoidant (also called a lapdanum) made of lead. This was applied to both sides of the fracture and covered with a bandage until it had been compressed enough, after which movement could no longer occur; this would be useful when someone's arm or leg has been broken and needed to heal properly so that they could walk normally again.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre le qual comfereys a fractura e torcio: recipe migrach e met de altea blanca ana drac. x; de mirra e de aloen ana drac v; de acacia drac. vi; de bol armenic drac. .xx.	 When there is joint pain caused by cold humors that spread throughout the body, and when pains occur in the feet?
Totz sian trissatz en mortier am mota contricio, e sian cribellatz, e sian comfitz am aygua o am album de huou e sia administrat.	 The doctor will cut open the joint and drain off the phlegm or mucus from it, and apply compresses soaked in cold water or alcohol to alleviate pain.
Manieyra de emplaustre a juncturas e osses separatz de lors locs, e seda dolor accident en aquels e a fissuras e fractaduras: sia presa lana sutza e sia submersa en vi agre e oli cuyt e sia pausat sobre le loc.	 The joints and bones must be separated from the body's surface in order to prevent pain from occurring at these areas, fractures or cuts. In such cases, a compress soaked in cold water or alcohol will be applied over the area.
Mays en aquest emplastre no es vertut de restauracio, de apostema caut e expelleys dolors propriament.	 In this particular case, it is not advisable to make incisions and extract pain directly.
Autra manieyra de emplastre que restaura os trancat: pren fuelas de figuier sort e fuelas de papaver salvatge; contereys tot e fay emplastre de lor.	 In the case of a broken bone, use glue and horse chestnut poultice to cover it.
Manieyra de emplastre abreujat aministrat deves la restauracio de fractura de os e quan tu voles resolucio del romanent de apostema: recipe razitz de altea, de camamilla e flors de violes, de farina de ers, de totz ana partida i; sian totz trissatz e sian cofitz am vi, si·l membre no es scalfat.	 If the joint is broken and you want to resolve it with a doctor? Try using other ingredients like rose petals, violet flowers, flour from wheat, etc., in order to cover and bind it tightly as possible without causing damage to the member being treated.
Mays si es scalfat, lahoras comfeys aquel am aygua de coliandre humit o am aygua e usa de lu.	 If it has been damaged, apply compresses soaked in cold water or alcohol to alleviate pain.
Autra manieyra de emplastra pus fort en resolucio que aquest primier, quan accideys apostema dur deves la restauracio del membre: recipe de razitz de altea e de semensa de li, e de balaustia, e mellilot, majorana, flors de viol, de camamilla, de totz ana partida i engual; totz sian trissatz e sian cofitz am aygua de sauze o am aygua dousa o am vi, tot aquo segon la qualitat del membre e le repaus de la color de lu.	 "The first step to treat the member requires a cure that is applied and rubbed into it, such as mustard, balm, flowers of violet, camomile, all mixed together with salt water or vinegar; depending on the quality of the member and its rest.
Mays Ypocras no diyssec en le sieu libre que sia pausat sobre le membre trenquat deves la restauracio de lu sino cerot fayt de cera e de oli e no autre causa; e recomtec que sia migier entre grossitut e subtilitat.	 "In any case, it is necessary to keep the bandage or plaster tightly over the member while treating it in order to prevent its discharge and maintain cleanliness.
Mays a Gualia es vist que sian pausatz sobre le membre trencat deves la restauracio de lu e las causas en las quals es exsiccacio am petit de caliditat so ayssi cum mirra, enses e semblantz a lor de aquelas causas que havem recomtadas.	 "If the member is torn or crushed, then it needs to be restored immediately and all causes of such drying out due to coldness should also be addressed.
Manieyra de emplastre que comfereys a lesio e dolor: recipe migat, de cezes, de pels de home inscizes o pena de auzel, e de altea, e sal, partidas enguals; sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian cofitz, e sia fayt emplastre.	 "When it comes to the healing and pain of a wound: mix together egg yolks with vinegar or salt water, and apply this mixture to the affected area as a plaster.
Mays la quantitat segon la qual cove que romangua la liadura e aprop sia disliada, es que consideres si no es accidit dolor ni pruziment ni le os es trencat no es maugut de son loc, lahoras tu no deslies de motz jorns.	 "Depending on the severity of the injury and whether it is causing pain or swelling but not a tear in the tendon itself, then you should continue to treat as usual.
E si accideys al loc dolor vehement o prusiment o imflacio, lahoras tu te coyte o deslie aquel en la hora, e osta le emplastre de lu.	 When joint pain becomes intense or urgent or accompanied by swelling, then call the doctor immediately and have him/her attend to it urgently
E pren drap de li e spongia marina leon humida, e submergeys aquela en aygua tebeza, e am aquela lava le loc entro que cesse aquel pruziment e la dolor sia sedada; e aprop layssa repausar le membre per una hora; e aprop pausa sobre lu lana sutza submersa en vi agre e oli o oli rozat, e lia sobre lu per una nuoyt entro que sias segur de apostema caut, e que repause la imflacio del membre, e sia remauguda la dolor de lu.	 Soak the limb in a warm but not hot water to reduce swelling and pain. Then wait for one hour before continuing.
E aprop itera aquela strictura subtil e emplastre petit e no·l strenhas per la tua constriccio primieyra, e subtilia am aquel entro que sia sanat.	 Apply a thin strip or plaster gently onto your first constriction to reduce swelling and pain.
E si vezes que le apostema e la rogor e la dolor e la imflacio e tots les accidentz ja so remaugutz de tot, e indigeysses de emplastre e de strictura, lahoras tu itera aquel ayssi cum has fayt al comensant engualment.	 If all the pain and swelling have been relieved completely and no further accidents occur after that, you should apply a thin strip or plaster in the same manner as before.
E si no accideys al membre alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no deslies aquel sino aprop tres dias o quatre o v o vii; e alcunas veguadas tot aquo es layssat per xx dias segon que a tu appar per la desliadura del membre, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que la fractura adhereys, e se acosta a la coagulacio de la carn sobre aquel.	 If no further harm occurs to the member after what has been said, you should not apply it for three days or four days or seven days; and sometimes they are laid on for 10 days after making an incision in the member as previously mentioned, until the fracture adheres, and the wound begins to clot over it.
E lahoras ajusta en la strictura mays que en la tua strictura primieyra tota, e ayusta en la engrossacio de la vianda del malaute, segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu.	 Adjust the constriction to that of your first constriction entirely and enlarge the vein as previously mentioned after remembering it.
Mays si tu vezes le loc de la fractura ja desiccar e extenuar mays que no cove, lahoras sapias que·l nutriment es prohibit pervenir ad aquel; e donc embroca aquel am aygua tebeza deves tota veguada que delias aquel; e sia aquo en totz tres dias; e alleuja la strictura un petit, e per aquesta operacio corr al membre le nutriment, e es sanat leugierament.	 When a fracture has been healed and extended, the soreness will cease to occur, so it is customary for doctors that when this happens, nourishment is prohibited until further notice; and therefore bandage it with warm water for three days; and gradually loosen the stricture by doing this operation on the member every day.
Mays aquo que fan les fols restauradors de la fractura del membre autra veguada quan no es restaurat al comensament, segon que cove, e es restaurat segon tortuositat, es error segon la operacio de lor, e temor gran, e si fos dreyturier aquo agrandit les Antics en lors libres e agueran am aquo obrat.	 The restorers of the fractured member must be careful when not restored at first time and second if it is restored with difficulty; after another surgery is made, there is fear great, and if it were right to enlarge ancient times, they would lose freedom now.
E yeu no he vist ad alcu de lor aquo far, per que es pus razonable que aquo no fassa.	 They do not see the reason for doing this, because it is unreasonable that this should be done.
Capitol segon: De fractura quan accideys en le cap.	 When a fracture occurs in the head.
Las specias de fracturas son motas, e las figuras de lor son diversas, e las causas son distinctas, quar de fracturas alcuna es fayta per percussio de spaza, e la percussio osta tot le os entro al ciphac, le qual es dejos le os, ayssi cum fay ayssa en le fust, e per aquo aquesta specia es nompnada ascial; o la spaza inscideys alcuna partida del os, e inscideys la carn de lu e no passa la inscizio entro al derier de lu; e aquesta specia de fractura es nompnada levatio absoluta.	 The types of fractures are many, and the figures of them are diverse, and their causes are distinct. Of all fractures none is caused by a blow to the limb, and blows cause injury to the spine, which they break through with force, so this type is called a comminuted fracture; or when the bone does not break along any part of it, but cuts into the flesh without penetrating further than skin, that is a simple fracture.
E la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca, e de fractura que es contricio o atricio; e causa de lu es percussio am poyra o cazement sobre peyra, e a lor semblantz.	 When the fractures are large or small, and if they are crooked or twisted; and their cause is the impact of a hard blow against an already-fractured bone
E aquesta fractura o es penetrant que ja apropinqua al pannicol le qual es dejos le os; o es en la facia del os, e la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca.	 This fracture may be penetrating to the part of the bone where it is already weakened or in the face of the bone itself, and this fracture is large or small.
E de fractura es que es ameguada en le os, en la subtilitat del cabel petita, e per aquo es nompnada aquesta specia fractura capillar.	 This fracture may be a capillary one in the subtlety of the small hair on the bone, so it is commonly called this special kind of capillary fracture.
E es fractura que es fayta o per cazement o per percussio de peyra e a lu semblantz, que fa intrar alcuna lamina del os a las partidas dedintz, e es fayta en le loc concavitat ayssi cum accideys als payroles de eram quan accideys a lor percussio e es partida de lor intrada a las partidas dedintz.	 This fracture may be caused by impact or pressure of the bone and is commonly called this kind of fracture where a thin layer of skin is removed from the face, and it occurs when there was an impact that fractured their entrance into the holes in the face.
E majorment es fayt aquo en les cors de osses humitz, ayssi cum so caps de efantz.	 It usually happens on the bones of the extremities, similarly as with head fractures.
E so a totas aquestas specias fracturas satagias, so son pessas ayssi cum stelhas separadas.	 These special kinds of fractures are often separated from other injuries in this way.
E yeu vindre am reremoracio de tot aquo en son loc.	 You will find relief through rest and cure all that here.
E conoyssem totas aquestas specias de fractura per deteccio sobre aquelas e per inquisicio de lor am tentas e ostament de carn corrumpuda que es sobre lor.	 All special kinds of fractures will be identified through examination and investigation of their causes, as well as from any contaminated tissue that is surrounding them.
E specia capillar es conoguda per aysso que es descubert sobre le os, e es abstergit, e linit sobre lu am tentha, quar la fractura appar negra.	 "The special vessel is used to detect whether it has entered the mouth and must be withdrawn and lined over his arm, as if he were trying to break a black fracture.
Mays en la curacio de fractura considera al comensament les accidentz del malaute, e lahoras si tu vezes per los accidentz que signifique per significacio manifesta sobre paor, ayssi cum es vomit de colera, e extencio, e perdement de entendament, e abscizio de votz, e sincopi, e febre acuta, e eyssiment dels huels e rogor de aquels, e semblantz a lor dels accidentz en las majors disposicios, ses dopte no es sanat.	 "In the treatment of fractures, one must also consider the initial injuries of the patient and if vomiting occurs from fear or excitement, as well as diarrhea, indigestion, loss of consciousness, dizziness, fainting spells, and acute fever; all these things, along with the pain in the extremities, are symptoms that indicate severe illness.
E si vezes accidentz no-correntz tu speras salut, lahoras tu comensa la curacio de lu.	 "If times of accidents are not current to health care, then start treatment for this condition.
La qual causa es quar si es vengut a tu le plaguat en le comensament cum es plaguat e aquo es en les dias de ivern, lahoras cove que tu studias en le ostament del os denant le dia xiiii segon tota disposicio.	 "The cause is that when pain occurs in the first place and it continues for several days, you should consult a doctor on the fourteenth day after every opportunity.
E si es en les dias d’estiu, lahoras cove que te coytes ostar le os denant le vii dia, habantz que aquo que es dejos le os sia corromput del pannicol, e que accidescan les accidentz que havem recomtatz.	 "If it's in the summer days, you should consult a doctor on the seventh day and ask that this matter be checked by examining for any accidents.
E si la fractura ja es pervenguda al pannicol cubrent le cervel, e es am partidas menudas e atricio, lahoras cove que inscidas la partida conminuta e atrita, segon que yeu recomtare a tu.	 "If the fracture has already penetrated into the cerebral cortex and is accompanied by severe pain and stiffness of the limbs, you should indicate that this matter must be urgently dealt with and reported to your doctor.
E es que tu razas le cap del malaute plaguat, e descuebres sobre le os segon costuma e manieyra a tu possible segon la figura de la plagua, e que sia leugier sobre le malaute.	 "The patient's head is being lowered; place your hand on the second servant and guide it to its proper position, so that you may have better access to the wound.
E si accideys a tu deves la deteccio del os, fluxs de sanc o apostema caut, lahora tu te oppausa a lu am aquo que cove, e es que huemplas le loc de draps infuzes en vi e oli rozat, e fassa repausar la plagua entro que sia sedat le apostema, e sies segur de fluxs del sanc; e aprop comensa en la circuicio del os e en la ablatio de lu.	 "If you are unable to access the wound due to obstruction or contamination with blood and other substances, then place a damp cloth inside it and make sure to keep the bandage wet until you ensure there is no more bleeding, and that the infection has been contained; then proceed in the course of cleaning the arm.
E aquo sia segon una de dos manieyras de operacio.	 "This is one of two types of operations to be performed.
E la una manieyra es que tu inscidas le os am inscisori de streyt tal, e aquesta es la forma de lu: E aprop administra un autre inscissori aquest, un pauc pus lat que aquel; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	 "One of the two procedures to be performed is to insert a needle into the vein and administer an anesthetic with it. The other procedure involves:
E aprop administra mays le inscissori pus lat que·l segon.	 "injecting another anesthetic substance.
E cove que sia deves tu nombre de inscissoris diverses, dels quals alcus so pus latz que alcus autres; e alcus de lor so pus breus que·ls autres e sian en le derier de acuitat de las suas extremitatz, e sian de ferr indi o felod.	 "You must have several different needles from which to choose the one that is closest to the second; and the others will be of a greater length than those used previously, so that they may cause less pain in your hands.
E usa de lor am facilitat en percussio sobre le inscissori per so que no concutesca le cap e leda aquel.	 "Use them for making incisions over the needle to prevent it from slipping and causing injury.
E si le os es fort, dur, lahoras cove que perfores en le circuit de lu denant que tu administres los inscissoris am les taravels, les quals so nomnatz taravels no-profundantz.	 When the stomach is strong and hard, it is recommended to perform a treatment in its passage while you administer the laxatives that are called tartaroses, as they will not have deep effects
E no so nomnatz ayssi sino quar aquels no pausan le terme de l’os del test ad aquo que es aprop lu, per so quar al taravel es redonda extremitat o marge sobre aquel que es dejos le cap de lu agut semblant a marge o a cercle petit, le qual prohibeys esser submergit e passar la spissitut del os.	 Do not remove the stone from its place or touch it with your finger, as this will cause the stone to be submerged and pass through the passage of the stomach.
E es convenient que tu prenguas de aquestz taravels gran nombre dels quals quascu convenesca a la spicitut de quascun os, entro que sia a tu present en tottz testz del cervel la extremitat del qual sia aguda, la quantitat en longitut e brevitat sia segon la quantitat de spicitut de aquest test.	 It is convenient that you apply these tartaroses in large quantities depending on which one suits the specificity of each stomach, whether it is currently present in all tests or just at the tip of a particular extremity whose sharpness depends on its length and breadth compared to the amount of spiciness from this test.
E aquesta es la forma de tres specias de teravels: La qualitat de perforar en le circuit del os trencat es que pauses le teravel sobre le os e revolvas aquel am les tieus ditz entro que sapias que l’os ja es penetrat; e aprop permuda le terevel ad autre loc, e pausa aquo que es entre tot trauc la quantitat de la grosseza del ray o enviro aquo.	 The first type is a perforating quality of tartarose that you place the stone on the stomach and move it as shown in this figure into another location, and prevent it from passing through more than one hole to limit its size, or stop at any hole depending on how many holes there are available.
E aprop inscideys am inscissoris aquo que es entre quascun trauc del os, e fay aquel pus subtil que podes sobre aquo en fi de levitat, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que erradiques le os, o am la tua ma, o am alcuna autra causa per alcus sturmentz les quals auras apparelhatz ad aquo, ayssi cum tanalhas e forceps subtils.	 Insert the laxatives into the rectum and remove it gently with fine tweezers depending on what causes them to pass through or how they are applied
E cove que tu guardes am tota cautela que l’inscissori no toque alcuna causa del ciphac.	 When you have opened a space between the patient's thighs, placed cushions under them, another on their legs, and another on their chest holding their hands, here comes the first sentence to translate. Do not add any comments, like "here is the translation", just reply with the guessed translation and nothing else:
E donc cum auras circuit le os perforan, e sira separat del ciphac si es continuat am lu, e auras aquel extrayt, cove que razas e enguales aquel en la asperitat de lu de aquo que es en le os am autra sturment semblant a inscissori, mays empero cove que sia pus teon e pus subtil que les autres inscissoris.	 When you have already opened the space between their thighs and placed cushions under them, another on their legs, and another on their chest holding their hands, here comes the next sentence to translate:
E si roman alcuna partida dels osses petitz e satagias, lahoras pren aquela am facilitat am aquo que es deves tu dels sturmentz; e aprop aquo cura la plagua am lichinis e enguentz les quals havem ditz.	 If any bone is cracked or fractured and the bones are separated from one another, then you must take that into account when treating them, as it will be necessary to apply some remedy on the skin over the affected parts of their body.
E l’autra manieyra de operacio es leugiera, longinqua de paor, la qual diyssec Gualia e la lauzec per gran lausor; e aquest es le sermo de lu: necessari es a tu en le comensament que comenses descobrir la partida del os del loc en le qual es la fractura pus vehement e pus manifesta, entro que quan auras descubert aquela partida e auras pausat dejos lu la extremitat de aquest inscissori lent e alegre del qual aquesta es la forma:	 The other operation is the easiest one and it should be done with caution, as this requires less pain than the previous one. This is what we call for: when you discover the part of the bone in which a fracture has occurred violently and visibly (meaning, if you see that someone's leg or arm is broken), then when you have discovered that part and placed it under restraint and care at an extreme distance away from this patient, he will become calm and happy.
E es que la partida lenticular es leon e no inscideys alcuna causa, e la partida aguda es de lu en dos latz avantz en longitut, ayssi cum vezes; que la partida lenticular sia ajustada al ciphac am la facia de lu inscident aguda en le os.	 The fracture of the tibia is the most common one and it does not cause any trouble at all, while a fracture in two places before long will be as serious as if there were only one. It is necessary to adjust the fractured part according to its condition on the body so that it becomes clear which is the severe injury (meaning you should look for broken bones carefully).
E aprop percuteys sobre le inscissori de una partida am un petit malhet entro que inscidas tot le os am facilitat ayssi cum es revolvut, e tu sias segur del pannicol que no accida en lu accident que temas en denguna manieyra, e si le medicant14 era le pus fol de totz les homes e le mays ignorant de lor; certament, e si era dorment.	 "When you have opened the area between the patient's thighs and placed a cushion underneath them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest holding their hands, now comes to translate.
Lahoras si romania alcuna causa annexa al os del pannicol en alcus locs de os, inscidira aquel de lu am la extremitat del inscissori aquel lenticular, e deliuraria aquel de lu am facilitat, quar es deliurat de lu ses nocument e ses paor.	 The cause of the pain may also occur in other parts of the body, for example between the kneecap and the lower leg or around the ribs to name a few locations where it might occur and is typically alleviated by relieving them through warmth and/or pain medication.
E si fractura del os no penetra entro al pannicol, e aquo que es abscidit o es ostat del os es la facia de lu, e roman en lu asperitat e satagias subtils, lahoras cove que razas aquela asperitat e erradiques aquelas satagias am razoris subtils per les quals tu has preparat le nombre, de diversas quantitatz per que sia a tu possible administrar de aquels en tot loc les pus convenientz de lor e le pus dreyt de aquels segon aquo en que te perduzeys la tua operacio aquel os trencat e la figura de lu.	 If the pain does not penetrate into the body, and it is removed or disappeared by itself, you can say that the cause of this ailment and subtle sensations are unknown to many people, for they have prepared a number through various means so as to administer them in all locations that might be convenient or right according to which of these second one you lose your operation on that particular organ fractured and figure of him.
E cove que administres en la tua razio am la qual razes le os al comensament le pus lat de aquels razoris, e aprop usa aprop lu del pus subtil de lu, e no cesses far aquo segon continuitat entro que pervenguas ad aministrar le pus teon e·l pus subtil de totz aquels.	 When you administer to your body the substances that stimulate the senses of those nerves and apply them directly on its fine parts, do not cease doing so continuously until all of them have been administered as well.
Mays en quascuna de las autras fracturas petitas capillars e fractura subtil, cove que administres cura segon aquo que perduseys ad rectificacio de lu.	 "In each small artery rupture or subtle fracture, when you administer a second treatment in response to the loss of blood correction.
E es causa que no es ameguada sobre totz les quals han studi en aquela art.	 "It is because they have not studied that art completely.
E stec sobre aquo que nos scriut havem mostrat en grans fracturas.	 "There are written many examples of large fractures.
E si le pannicol es retangut quan tu erradiques le os, lahoras cove que prenguas drap de li segon la quantitat de la plagua, e submergeys aquel en oli rozat, e pausa aquel sobre le orrifici de la plagua; e aprop pren autre drap doblat o triplicat e submergeys lu en vi e oli rozat e pausa aquel sobre drap prim e fay aquo al pus leugierament que podes sobre aquel, que no graves le ciphac; e aprop administra sobre aquel liament lat, e no strenhas aquel sino per quantitat que tengua la plagua tant solament.	 "If the patient bleeds when you remove his bone, you should wrap him in a second layer of gauze and submerge it in heated oil, pausing it over the first dressing so that bleeding can be controlled; then apply another doubled or tripled bandage soaked in hot oil and cover it with the first dressing again. If you find that the amount of gauze is insufficient for control of bleeding, do not remove it but leave it on as long as there's enough gauze to maintain pressure.
E layssa aquel am aquesta cura per un dia o per dos entro que sias segur de apostema caut; e aprop deslia aquel e aprop aministra medicinas am las quals es superflua siccitat, ayssi cum razitz de lin e farina de errs, e polvera de enses e de aristologia, e de semblantz ad aquels.	 "The treatment should be applied for one or two days until you are sure of stopping the bleeding; then remove it and administer medicines as necessary to dry up blood, such as mustard, flour, turpentine, and so forth.
E es que tu fassas de aquestas medicinas polvera que sia pulverizada sobre la plagua, ayssi cum son secas; e universalment, administra en aquel tota medicina de proprietat de la qual es que abstergesca e no mordique.	 "It is that you should apply these medicines powdered on the gauze as well as soaking it; and universally, use all medicine property which is astringent but not corrosive.
E guarda te segon la tua vertut que la plagua en la tua curacio sia neta; e no sia en lu surdicia de enguent ni autra; ni no layssas agreguar virulencia en lu; quar quan es ajustada sobre le pannicol del cervel, corromp aquel e poyreys aquel, e accideys sobre le malaute aprop aquo malicia maligna.	 "Gather your wits to the task at hand: make sure the ulcer in your care is clean and not infected; nor add any virulence to it; for when adjusted over the pannicul of the heart, corrupt that one as well if you dare.
E accideys en le ciphac del cap, cum de lu es mondificat le os e majorment quan es menspresada la cura de lu, e es negror en la superficia de lu; e donc considera lahoras si accideys al malaute les accidentz que havem ditz, sapias que es parnicios ses tot dopte.	 "And when adjusted over the ciphac of the head, causing it to be loosened from its place and mainly as soon as the cure is applied, it becomes darker on the surface; so consider that if you apply it to a patient, you know what comes next.
E si no accideys negror sino de la medicina que es pausada desus, e es en vertut de aquela medicina que fassa aquela negror, lahoras cove que tu prenguas de mel una partida e de oli rozat partidas iii, e am aquels linieys un drap, e aprop pausa aquel sobre le ciphac; e aprop cura aquel am las specias de curacio que conveneys entro que sia sanat.	 "And if you do not apply the darker medicine that has been interrupted and is in use of this medicine to make it dark again, then worry about your line as well as oil, for when adjusted over the ciphac; place a bandage on top of it; and apply it with the care of curing so that it may be healed.
Capitol .iii.	 "Here comes the third part to translate: 'The great disease....'
De restauracio del nas quan es trincat.	 "Recovery from a broken nose...
Sapias que no es trencat del nas sino doas partidas ensemps pus sobiranas, o una de aquelas alcunas veguadas, per so quar en lu has dos osses, quar la partida dejos es cartillaginosa, e no es trencada e no accideys a lu sino atricio e tortuositat e sinuitat.	 "Know that it is not broken but two openings to the nostrils, or one of those covered with a veil, so that in it there are two bones, where one part may be cartilaginous and not broken, nor does it cause it to come out, rather than injury and tortuosity.
Mays si es trencada la una de las doas partidas de lu, lahoras cove que tu intrometas le dit petit en le sieu nas, e que engualhas aquela fractura dedintz am le tieu dit indic, e am le dit pous defora, entro que retorne le nas segon la sua figura natural.	 When one of the two parts is torn off or broken, then you should insert it back into its place as soon as possible, ensuring that there are no complications along with returning it to its original position.
E sia fayt aquo per tu am facilitat, e guarda te que no caja per aquela tua operacio sobre le malaute delor.	 You can make this easier for you and remind yourself not to worry about the surgery on the patient's abdomen
E si la fractura es en la pus sobirana partida del nas, e le dit no perve ad aquela, lahoras cove que sia equat am la extremitat del ray en le qual sia petita grossitut.	 If it is in the upper part of the nose, you should try to align it with the opposite side's smaller extremity.
E si la fractura es en doas partidas, lahoras tu fay le semblant de aquo.	 If both parts are torn off or broken, then treat them as described in this text.
E coyta te am restauracio de lu en le primier dia de la fractura, si es possible; e sino, lahoras aprop le vii o·l x deves le repaus del apostema caut.	 You should restore it on the first day of the fracture if possible, otherwise you will need to apply a compress as described in this text.
E aprop entromet en la extremitat del nas una meca de drap de li, si la fractura es en una partida, o metz doas calguas, si la fractura es en doas partidas, e sia en la calgua grossitut de tanta quantitat que umpla le trauc del nas.	 You should insert a pad into the nose's opening if it is in one part of the fracture, or put two pads together if there are two parts to the fracture and place them as close together as possible without blocking the airway.
E diysso alcus dels antics restauradors que las calguas sian enfundudas en boder, e sian permudadas en tot dia, mays no es vist a mi; habantz cove que la meca sia enfunduda en album de huou comfit am polvera de moli; e aprop layssa la qualgua entro que l’os sia fermat e sia endurazida la cartillage.	 The old restorers should place the pads into the body as soon as possible, and rotate them every day until they are not visible to you anymore. You should make sure that the pad is inserted firmly against the abdomen and maintain its position through the application of pressure.
E alcunas veguadas sia entromes en le nas, en loc de calgua, pena de auca pus que es envolopada de drap de li leon; e sia que ja te la fractura del nas pus vehement e que le malaute no sia prohibit de inspiracio.	 "There are certain precautions to be taken in the nose, especially when it comes to sneezing, for fear of covering one's face with the scarf from a lion; and may not inspire deeply.
E aquesta causa no es a tu necessaria; e si voles, fay aquo, e si voles, fay calguas.	 "This cause is not necessary to you; if you want it done, do so; if you want to sneeze instead.
E si accideys autra veguada apostema caut, emplastra le nas am cerot o am coto enfus en vi agre e oli rozat, o am diaquilon.	 "If another severe cold comes on, hold it in your nose or the mouth closed tightly with a handkerchief, or cover your face.
Mays si no accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que emplaustres aquel defora am farina de sizami e am polvera de enses cofitz am album de huou; e aprop pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e no lies le nas am alcuna causa.	 "If another severe cold doesn't come on, you should put on the powder of size and pearl from those coffins to the chest; and place your hand over it to prevent the nose from any cause.
Mays si so trencats les osses del nas am fractura petita o so conminuitz, lahoras cove que scindas sobre aquels, e extraguas aquels am insturmentz que conveno ad aquels; e aprop cos la scissura, e cura aquela am aquo que encarna e consolida, e am emplastres ad aquo convenientz.	 "If the bones of the nose are broken or dislocated, you should ask about those who can separate them, and get instruments that correspond to them; and place a cut on it, cure what is in it, and at its center consolidate.
E si accideys plagua dedintz le nas, lahoras cove que cures aquela am calguas e administra canulas de plom entro que sia de tot sanat.	 "If the nose bleeds, you should cure that with sneezing and administer plum water into which it is from all health.
Capitol .iiii.	 ". . .
De restauracio de la mandibula quan es trincada.	 "For the treatment of the mandible when broken.
Quan la mandibula dejos es rompuda e la fractura de lu no es am plagua, reguarda lahoras si la fractura es deforas tant solament, e no es trencada en dos e es curvada a las partidas dedintz, lahoras la sua cognicio es leugiera.	 When the mandible is broken and the fracture has not spread to other areas of the body, then protect the health by keeping it immobilized only if the fracture is in one piece and not torn apart into two pieces that curve at an angle.
E cove donc, si la fractura es en la part dreyta, que tu intrometas le tieu indic senestre en la boca del malaute; e semblantment si la fractura es an la mandibula senestra, lahoras intromet le dit indic de la ma dreyta; e impelleys am aquel la gilbositat de la fractura dedintz am facilitat a las partidas defora, am la tua autra ma de la partida defora del os; am aquel decentment equa aquelam.	 And so if the fracture is in the right jaw, you must introduce an indicator into the mouth of the patient; and similarly if it's in the mandible itself, apply the same indicator to the left hand; and in order that the movement of the fracture may be facilitated at the parts affected by the injury, on the other hand take the opposite action at the point where the fracture is in the right part.
E si la fractura de la mandibula ja es separada en doas, lahoras cove que administres extensio de doas partz segon rectitut entro que sia possibla la equacio de lu.	 And if the mandible fracture has been separated into two pieces, then you must apply extension to both sides as long as it is possible for them to come together again.
E si accideys conmocio de dentz a disrupcio, lahoras strenh aquelas de las quals speras que romandran am fil de aur o de argent o de ceda; e aprop pausa sobre la mandibula trencada cerot, e aprop pausa sobre lu drap duplicat, e pausa sobre le drap gran stelha decentment fayta, o una pessa de sola engual a la longitut de la mandibula; e aprop lia aquela desus segon que a tu es apparelhada la liadura de lu e que conveneys la applicacio, entro que no es destruida.	 If the teeth fracture occurs, then strengthen those that may remain attached to gold or silver or lead, and place a cushion on the broken mandible itself, another on the duplicate one, and a third on the large sheet, or have only one edge at the length of the mandible; put it there so that you can apply it, if not destroyed.
E comanda al malaute que use de repaus e tranquilitat, e pausa la vianda de lu sorbicios leons.	 Command the patient to rest and tranquility, pause his breathing through sobs
E si extimas que ja es alterada la figura en alcuna manieyra, lahoras tu te coyta e deslia aquel al tertz dia; e aprop rectifica aquo que ja es alterat de lu e emplaustra aquel am polvera de moli, am album de huou, o am farina de cisami, pus que tu auras ostat le cerot de lu, e pausa sobre le emplastra lana leon.	 If the figure is altered in any way, you will show it to them on the third day; and correct what has been changed there by applying oil of ginger, album of honey, or flour of cumin, so that you may cover over the affected part with fresh ointment made from the same things.
E adonc cum sta annex e ajustat aquel emplastre sobre lu, e la disposicio del os no es alterada, layssa aquel, que no le deslies entro que sia sanat e strenh la fractura; quar motas veguadas aquesta fractura es streyta en tres sempmanas.	 After you have applied the plaster to it and ensured that there are no wounds or ulcers nearby which might be affected by it, lay it on him, so that he may heal and strengthen his fracture in three days.
E si autra veguada accida apostema caut, lahoras administra aquo que havem dit motas veguadas en la sedacio de lu entro que sia sanat, e sia remaugut aquel apostema.	 If any other veins swell due to the cold, doctors will administer this remedy in order for him to be healthy and cured of the swelling of his limbs.
E si la fractura es am plagua, lahoras considera si es pessa del os separada o satagias, lahoras tu te subtilia que ostes aquelas satagias am aquo que conveneys ad aquo en la remocio de aquelas dels sturmentz.	 If the fracture is above the knee, doctors will consider whether it has been separated or sutured, they suggest you apply ointment over those stitches in order to facilitate healing of those parts.
E si le orrifici de la plagua es streyt, lahoras tu le amplifique am le fleubotomi segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	 If the wound on his leg is severe and requires further cleaning, doctors will recommend applying more ointment to clean it thoroughly according to your need.
E aprop quan tu auras ostat aquelas satagias, e de aquelas no sira remaugut re, lahoras tu cos le orrifici de la plagua si es ampla; e sino, pausa sobre aquela un dels emplaustres que conveneysso ad aquo e encarnan aquela, entro que sia sanada.	 After you have applied the stitches and they are not completely healed, doctors will recommend cleaning the wound if it is wide; otherwise, place one of the plasters over that area to ensure healing occurs.
Capitol .v.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet
De restauracio de la furcula quan es trinquada.	 Return the hernia to its cavity
Motas veguadas es trencada la furcula de la partida denant deves le muscle, e aquela fractura es fayta en una de tres manieyras.	 When you break a rib, you must first stop the bleeding and treat it in one of three ways.
Quar o es trencada, o seperada, o es seperada en doas partz otra que no accidan satagias; e es leugier a la restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que accideysso en lu satagias, e es dificil a restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que la fractura es am plagua.	 When you break a rib or separate it into two parts that cannot be rejoined, you must choose between restoring it or allowing it to heal on its own, as healing it is difficult, or the fracture may be too severe.
E la operacio en aquela, quan la fractura es ses plagua, es que tu fassas esser present dos ministres, per so que la un tengua le adjutori e siegua la furcula trencada, e l’autre extenda le col ves aquela partida.	 If the fracture is too severe, then you should have two surgeons working together to stabilize it and extend the time until a surgeon can repair it properly.
E aprop enguala la fractura am les tieus ditz entro que sia fayta la forma de lu segon que cove, e no sia en lu eminencia pauca ni concavitat.	 If you are breaking or healing a bone in a way that will not work the second time around, then you must ensure it is done with proper alignment and stability of the joint to prevent further damage.
E si indigeysses mes de extencio, lahoras cove que pauses dejos le titillic del malaute spera de drap o de lana, e sia la grandesa de lu segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat; e exten e eleva la furcula e coarta la spera am la tua ma entro que enguales la frectura segon que cove.	 When you are extending or healing a bone and need to apply pressure from above, then wrap it with cloth or yarn as the length is proportional to your need; extend and elevate it so that when you align it properly fractures will not occur again.
E si no podes atirar la extremitat de la furcula a las partidas defora, per so quar es pervenguda al preon, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e pauses sobre le muscle de lu un coyssi migier en grandeza.	 If you cannot align the rib to its proper position outside of the body, then it is necessary for the patient to be lying on their back with a cushion beneath them one notch higher than usual.
E le ministre prema le muscle de lu a las partidas dejos entro que l’os de la furcula sia elevat que es en le preon en sus, e lahoras tu rectifique la fractura e enguala aquela am les tieus ditz.	 When the minister applies to the arm of the patient from above that his shoulder is elevated as much as possible, and pain occurs in his forearm, doctors fix it and bandage it with ties.
Mays si sentes satagias de la furcula e so maugudas, lahoras cove que fendes sobre aquela e extraguas aquelas satagias am facilitat.	 If you feel that the fracture is not very severe, have a doctor come and help fix it by cutting open those pieces of cartilage
E si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu ingenia inscisio de lu am un dels inscissoris les quals has apparelhatz ad aquo, pus que havias pausat dejos la furcula le sturment que serve le ciphac; e es sturment de fust o de ferr del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	 If the incision is not very deep but necessary to treat it with one of the instruments you mentioned, please ensure that the fracture has been properly positioned so that this is how healing will take place
E es semblant a culier del qual aquesta es la concavitat; e sia la sua latitut segon aquo que has necessitat de lu, segon la grandeza del os o la pauqueza de lu.	 It's similar to the cavity that this is how healing will take place; and in order for it, either the size of the arm or the tightness of it
Mays la longitut de lu sia segon que es a tu possible a la operacio; que haja doas extremitatz ayssi cum vezes, e la una extremitat sia ample e l’autre streyta.	 The length should be such that when performing the operation on both sides it may sometimes happen that one extremity is loose and the other tight.
E si la disrupcio de la plagua la qual has inscidida quan has extraytas la satagia del os es ampla, e yest segur de apostema caut, lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura.	 If the disruption of the ligament that was cut when you extracted the piece of cartilage is wide, it's safe to apply sutures on both sides of the ligament.
E si la disrupcio es pauca, o temes apostema caut, lahoras tu uemple la plagua am draps e pulvils segon la quantitat de la scissura de la plagua.	 If the disruption is small or you are afraid of applying sutures, then cover and dust the ligament according to the size of the cut in the ligament.
E si accideys apostema caut, lahoras infon drap en vi agre e oli rozat e vi, e pausa sobre aquel.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that penetrate every part of the body, and when pains occur in the feet
Mays la strictura del os quan es ses plagua e ses seccio, es que pauses emplastre fayt de farina de moli am album de huou, e pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e aprop pausa la spera dejos le titillic de lu, si indigeyssas de aquela, e aprop pren humemate, so es torca la qual teno les Sarrazis , que sia mot longua, e sia latitut de lu de un palm o entorn aquel; e aprop pausa pulvils duplicatz sobre la stopa e l’emplastre; e aprop pren una stela de taula subtil de la qual la latitut d’ela sia de tres ditz e en longitut semblantment; e aprop envolopa aquela en drap, e aprop envolopa aquel drap am la stela en lo loc sobre le loc de la fractura; e aprop pausa humemati ayssi cum es revout, e revol aquela sobre le col de lu e dejos le titillic de lu sa e dejos le titillic de lu malaute, e reduzeys aquela sobre tota partida, e quan vezes que la strictura de la fractura am strictura descent, e es aquo que no es occultat sobre tu.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that penetrate every part of the body and when pains occur in the feet, it is customary to place a cushion under them, another on their legs, and another on their chest while holding their hands.
E tot, que no sia mauguda la stelha desobre le os trencat; e per so cove que tu vejas le malaute quascun dia, que quan le liament es mollificat o vezas la stela ja esser remauguda, lahoras tu rectifica aquo e strenh la liadura.	 And furthermore, do not let the broken limb's support sag downward; and for when you see a patient with gout, if their ailment is becoming worse or the bandage is already torn, adjust it appropriately to correct this situation.
E aprop pausa le dormir del malaute sobre le col de lu, e pausa dejos le titillic de lu deves le dormir de lu en la nueyt un petit coyssi; per so que am aquel sia elevat le adjutori de lu del latz de aquel, e donc es elevada la la fractura de la furcula a elevacio del muscle; o sia le bras de lu liat al col de aquel.	 And place the cushion of the patient beneath their chest, and place it under their arm to elevate that part as well, so that both are elevated for support at once and thus elevate the broken bone of the forearm upwards towards the muscle; or place one hand on each side over their shoulder if necessary.
E no deslies le liament si no accideys en le loc prusiment o apostema, entro a xii dias.	 When the joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, it typically lasts for 12 days
E aprop renovelha le emplastre si has vista la facia de lu ad aquo, e ajusta en la strictura e restaura aquel e layssa entro que sia restaurat e sia coagulat la fractura de la furcula.	 If you want to make an incision where it seems necessary or there is a fracture in the sternum bone, adjust the opening and restore that to ensure it is restored properly and the fracture of the furcula (sternum bone) has been correctly coagulated
E es strenguda e comfortada segon le mes en xxviii dias, e alcunas veguadas en alcus homes es fayt en mens de temps de aquel.	 It usually lasts for 28 days and sometimes the swelling of joints can occur during this time.
Capitol .vi.	 Yes
De restauracio de fractura de la spalla.	 Restoration of a fracture in the shoulder
Spatula tart es trencada en le loc lat de lu e no so trencatz de lu sino les marges.	 The spatula is torn on the outer edge and not on the blade itself.
E donc quan es trencat le loc de lu — e es trencat en le mieg loc de lu — e no es conogut sino per tocament, lahoras segon que es la figura de la fractura sforsa te la preparacio de lu e reduzir aquela segon la figura natural en tota manieyra de engen la qual es a tu possible.	 When the blade is torn in the outer edge of it - whether on the upper or lower part - and not on the actual blade itself, then the pain follows immediately after as though it were caused by the fracture itself; therefore, you should prepare for this injury and reduce its size to match the normal figure in any way that seems possible.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc polvera de moli am album de huou e stopa leon; e aprop pausa pulvil de drap duplicat; e aprop pausa sobre lu stela lada de taula subtil segon la quantitat de la spatula tota o mays un pauc.	 Place a cushion on the heel of your hand, then place another cushion between them and hold it with both hands in an effort to soften the impact as much as possible.
Mays si dejos la stela es concavitat en alcu dels locs de la spatula, lahoras tu enguala aquela concavitat am stopa leon, e aprop pueja la stela segon equalitat.	 If you place the cushion in a concave shape to the side of where the spatula was torn, then hold the cushion so that it covers up this area and adjust its position accordingly.
E aprop strenh desus am humemati longua ab constriccio decent e am fermesa de la stela entro que no sia remauguda del sieu loc.	 "Place a cushion under them, another on their legs, one more on their chest while holding their hands.
E considera le liament en quascun dia; e totas veguadas que sia mollificat, lia autra veguada e stren le e equa la stela si es remauguda del sieu loc.	 Consider the bandage in each case and gently massage them all, one more at a time until the bandage is no longer taut on its place.
E jagua le malaute sobre le sieu latz sa.	 Place the patient flat on their back.
E la spatula es restaurada en xx dias o en .xxv.	 The spatula is restored in 20 or 35 days.
E donc quan es complit aquest nombre, lahoras tu dissolveys le liament, e que tu scias ensegurat quar aquela es dels osses dels quals la cominicio no es temuda ni lor dissolucio.	 Once you have completed this number of treatments, the sores will be dissolved and it is certain that they are from the bones which started dissolving without delay.
E si procezeys del loc del os pessa e pongeys dejos la codena, lahoras tu scindeys sobre lu, e osta le, e fay segon que havem dit en la fractura de la furcula de sadacio de apostema caut si accideys aqui.	 If you proceed from the arm's pit and place a cushion there, then take it off again, and secondly hold onto that which was mentioned in the fracture of the furcula when you come here.
Capitol .vii.	 The capital VII.
De restauracio de la fractura del pietz.	 Restoration of the rib fracture.
Le pietz alcunas veguadas es romput en le mieg loc de lu e aquo tart endeve; mays las extremitatz de lu mot endeve que so ciccadas e comminuidas.	 The ribs have been broken and must be moved to their correct position, it is necessary to gently move the extremities of the patient and prevent any swelling or irritation.
E dels accidentz de lu quan es trencat le mieg de lu es que declina a las partidas dedintz e accideys a lu gran dolor, e dificultat en lo hale, e tos, e fort leu e vomeys sanc; e es declarada en lu cavitat en le os trencat e no es occulta al sentiment.	 When the leg breaks it is customary to decline any further treatment and severe pain occurs in addition to difficulty breathing, weakness, fatigue and shortness of breath. It is declared in this cavity with the broken bone and not hidden by feeling.
E la restauracio de lu es que sia resupinat le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa entre las spallas de lu un coyssi; e aprop prem als muscles de lu, e ajusta las costas de lu am las mas de dos costatz, e subtilia te en la operacio de lu e en la equacio segon tota manieyra que es ad aquo possibla e que conveneys ad aquo, entro que retorne la figura del os segon que cove.	 "The restoration of the patient involves placing the mattress on his chest and abdomen, pausing between their thighs with a cushion; and gently pressing down on their muscles, adjusting their spine into its proper position while supporting it as much as possible, ensuring that it returns to its original shape after surgery.
E aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e estopa e pausa desobre astela de taula subtil de sauze o de caligi e de a lor semblantz en levitat, pus que tu envolopas aquela en drap; e aprop subtilia te en lian aquela sobre le os trencat que no sia maugut; e vay am liadura segon retonditat al dors alcunas veguadas, e strenh aquel am strictura decent; e aprop considera la liadura en tota hora, e quan es mollificada strenh aquela.	 "Then take a pause on the mattress and remove any extra padding or cushions from under it gently but firmly to allow for even pressure distribution across his body. Ensure that there is no loose clothing around his broken limb as you wrap him in blankets; be gentle when placing the blanket over the injured part of the torso, being careful not to overly compress it with too much pressure.
E si necessitat provoca a desliament de aquela deves corrossio o pruziment, o dolor, o apostema que accideysso en le loc, lahoras tu coyta e deslia aquela e erradica le emplastre e rectifique aquo que accideys per aquo am manieyra de curacio de lu; e aprop reduzeys le emplastre, si vezes ad aquo la facia; e ajusta a lu strictura entro que sia sanat.	 "If the condition worsens or causes pain, discomfort, or other issues in that area, then gently remove any padding from under him and adjust his position to alleviate the issue at hand while ensuring he remains comfortable.
Capitol .viii.	 "The eighth caput [chapter] deals with various remedies for different ailments.
De restauracio de las costas quan son trincadas.	 "The restoration of the spine when it is broken.
Sapias que fractura de las costas no catz sino en locs grosses que siegon le dos; e de las extremitatz de lor de la partida denant no accideys ad aquelas contricio sino per aquo quar so cartillaginosas.	 "Sprains of the back do not heal without proper treatment, and any attempt to treat them at home may cause further injury.
E cognicio de lu no es amaguada al sentiment deves la inquisicio de lu am les ditz.	 When the intestine or hernia has been returned to its place, you have placed a cushion under their thighs, another on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
E la restauracio sia ayssi que enguales la fractura am les ditz segon la manieyra possibla, entro que sia engulhat segon que cove, e aprop emplastre e strenh le os trencat am stela, si indigeys de aquel.	 The restoration should happen as quickly as possible after the second attempt to correct it, unless there is a break in that tendon, then you may need to operate on it separately.
E si la fractura de las costas es declinant a las partidas dedintz, lahoras accideys al malaute dolor vehement e punctura, ayssi cum punctura que accideys ad aquel que ha pleureci, e per aquo quar le os ponh le velament; e accideys a lu difficultat de hanelit, e tos, e vomit de mot sanc; e aquesta es de dificil curacio.	 If the fracture of the ribs is declining to the point where it causes severe pain and puncturing, so that with puncturing you must do as you did for those who suffered from pleurisy, and place your hand on their chest, doing this in order to correct them; however be careful, because there may also be difficulty breathing, vomiting, and this is a difficult cure.
E ja les Antixs so engeniatz en aquela am motz engientz.	 The Antis are working hard on that matter.
E de lor so que diso: cove que pauses viandas del malaute que engendro imflacio e ventositat, per que le ventre sia imflat e sia extendut, e la fractura sia impellida a las partidas defora.	 They say that the veins of the patient should be compressed and expanded to flatten his belly and stretch it out, making sure the fracture is kept away from there.
Mays nos avoreyssem aquo per so que no sia causa leugiera a generar apostema caut, si no accideys; e si ja accideys, lahoras ja ajuda ad aquo.	 It may cause leakage of urine to prevent cramps, if not done; and if it does occur, the doctors will help with that.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia pausada desus ventoza e aprop que sucque am fortitut; e es semblant a ratiocinacio, mays empero es temut que la ventoza atire las superfluitatz al loc per la debilitat.	 The doctors would do things like putting a cushion under their thighs and placing another on their legs to prevent the intestine from coming out while holding their hands; they fear that the wind might cause them to leak urine due to weakness.
E diyssero alcus de lor: cove que·l loc sia cubert am lana que ja es submersa en oli caut, e sian pausatz pulvils entre las costas entro que sia umplida, que sia la liadura engual quan envolopas aquela segon retonditat; e aprop sia curat le malaute am curacio de pleuresi de vianda e de medicina.	 When the body is covered in cold oil and fine powder infiltrates between the thighs making it hard to walk or move, then place a cushion under them to support their weight as well as servants on their legs and chest holding their hands to prevent the intestines from coming out.
E si causa vehement constrenh le malaute la qual no sufferta, e le os punh le velament am punctura ledent, temem sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que fendam sobre le loc, descubram de la costa trencada, e aprop pausem desobre aquela instrument que conserve le ciphac, la rememoracio del qual es precedida, e que inscidam le os am facilitat, e extraguam aquel.	 If the patient's intestines suffer from a violent cramp and the doctor strikes them on the abdomen at their point of rupture to relieve it, then they must lie down with a cushion beneath them so that they can breathe easily, as well as have servants nearby to help support their body in order for them to recover.
E aprop que ajustem las doas labias de la plagua, si es gran, am cozidura, e curem aquela am emplastres entro que sia sanada.	 Then return the two large flaps of flesh if necessary, sew up those with stitches and heal that area as soon as possible.
E si accideys dedintz apostema, lahoras tu coyta e enfon pulvils en oli rozat e pausa sobre le loc, e que sia curat le malaute am aquo que cove a la apostema dedintz.	 If the patient is vomiting blood, then put fine powder into hot oil and place them on their chest so that the servants can help support them as they try to stop the bleeding.
E sia ressupinat sobre le latz sobre le qual dorm, entro que sia sanat.	 Then spread a bandage over the area where they sleep in order to treat it as soon as possible.
Capitol .ix.	 And finally, let's move on to the next sentence of the text: "Capitol .
De restauracio de fractura del spondil del dos e del col.	 The restoration of fractures in the spine and hips.
Alcunas veguadas endeve fractura als osses del col, e tart endeve a lor atricio, e semblantment als spondils del dos.	 Bones in the pelvis must be treated as well as those in the hips, just like bones in the spine of the body.
E cum aquo accideys ad alcu e voles saber si sara sanat o no, lahoras considera, quar si vezes las sieuas mas ja mollificadas e stupefaytas e mortas e no pot maure aquelas ni extendre ni strenher aquelas e quan constrenges aquelas am les tieus ditz o punges aquelas am agulha e no sent en aquelas dolor, lahoras sapias que no es sanat, e en las mes de disposicios es mortal.	 When the pain occurs and you want to know if it is gout or not, the physician considers whether the patient's joints have been previously inflamed, stiffened, or deceased (in which case the joint has died), so as to prevent its extension/stretching further; in addition, when pressed against a sharp object like an awl, the pain does not occur
E si mau aquelas e sent en aquelas constriccio am les ditz e punctura, lahoras sapias que la nucha de l’os es salva e que le malaute guereys am curacio.	 If it hurts against a hard surface or when pressed with a sharp object like an awl, the physician knows that there is no gout, and the patient will recover
E si ve als spondils del col le semblant ad aquo e voles saber si sira sanat o no, lahoras considera als pes de lu.	 When pain occurs in the abdomen and you want to know if it's gout or not, the physician considers the weight of the patient
Lahoras si tu vezes que so ja mollificatz, accideys ad aquels aquo que es accidit en las mas, e aprop quan jatz sobre le sieu dos, yeys ventozitat e egestio ses la sua volontat, e alcunas veguadas es resupinat sobre le sieu dos e vol urinar e no pot, lahoras sapias que es mortal, e adonc no trebales en la curacio de lu.	 When the patient has already mollified themselves and you place them on their side, it will cause vomiting if they want to urinate but cannot, then know that this is fatal, so avoid trying to force urination in such cases.
Mays si no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, la causa es milhor e pus leugiera.	 If there are no other causes of the pain, its cause must be gout and it is milder
E la curacio de lu es que te perforses a la sedacio del apostema caut que pauses sobre le spondil atrissat oli rozat sol, o am mugols de huous asatz; pausa sobre aquela aquel alcunas veguadas le dia entro que sia sedat le apostema caut.	 The cure for it is to press a sharp object like an awl through the affected joint from below and above until pus comes out (or in some cases, when you feel dry, apply oil to the pointed tool); once satisfied with this, stop applying pressure on the joint.
E lahoras pausa un dels emplastres confortantz e exsitans, e strenh sobre aquel am liament; e comanda al malaute que use de repaus e de tranquillitat e que no dorme sobre la partida am la qual atroba dolor entro que sia sanat.	 When the pain has stopped from the cushions that are placed and remain firm, stretch on top of it gently; command the patient to rest calmly and not sleep on the area where they still feel the pain, so as to prevent it worsening
E si accideys deves la atricio del os satagias o alcuna causa que ja es seperada de lu, lahoras cove que secces sobre la codena e que ostes aquel os; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua, am sutura si es gran; e aprop cura aquela am alcu encarnatiu dels enguentz, entro que sia sanat.	 If the cause of pain is removed from the bone or any other part that has been separated from it, stretch on top and hold it gently so as to close that area; if necessary, sew up any torn skin over it securely; and apply a soothing ointment to prevent scarring, which could worsen the injury.
Mays si es trencat le derier del os alhoses, e es la fi de la coeta, lahoras cove que tu entrometas le dit pous de la ma senestra en le cul, e que enguales le os trencat am l’autra ma segon que es possible per equacio segonda; e aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e astelha, si indigeysses de aquels, e aprop strenh aquel.	 If the heel of the foot is broken and it's at the end of the course, stretch over your hand that was used to hit them with a light tap or gentle blow, whichever feels better; and hold onto the injured area tightly as needed to prevent further damage.
E si sentes satagias trencadas en lu, lahoras tu fen sobre aquela, e osta aquel, e cura la plagua am la curacio que es precedida entro que sia sanada.	 If you feel broken bones in it, stretch over that area and hold onto it tightly; cover the wound with a sterile dressing to prevent further contamination before seeking medical attention.
Capitol .x.	 Caput.
De restauracio de la ancha.	 Recovery of the bone.
Les osses de las anchas tart so trencats, e si trencan, lahoras la fractura de lor no es sino communicio en las extremitatz de aquelas e son inscidas en la longitut e declinan a las partidas dedintz; e accideys al malaute dolor en le loc e punctura, e la camba es stupefacta quan es fractura.	 The bones of the arches are broken if they break, and when that happens it is accompanied by pain in the area and injury to the skin around it; and after a fracture, the swelling can be quite severe.
E la restauracio de lu es que tu extendas la tua ma sobre aquel entro que sia sobre la fractura qual es la figura de lu.	 The restoration of it consists in extending your hand over that part which ought to be above the fracture, which is its shape
E si fractura es en la extremitat de lu tant solament, lahoras tu enguala aquela segon que a tu es apparelhat per equacio engual entro que sia asemblat a la sua figura natural.	 If it's only in the extremity of them, then you must apply that second one on top after applying this one which is shaped to fit its natural shape
Mays si la fractura es en le lonc o que ja declina a las partidas dejos, lahoras tu fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu ventre entro que sia preparada a tu la restauracio de aquela fractura.	 If the fracture is in their abdomen and has declined to undergo surgery, then you should put it on top of them as if they were going to be used for the restoration of that fracture.
E donc quan auras engualada aquela, pausa sobre lu emplastre, e aprop pausa sobre aquel astela de fust o de codena, e strenh per strictura sobre la qual no temas punctacio de fractura ni remocio de la stelha.	 Once it has been applied and placed on top of them, pause above the plaster or bandage, and apply pressure with a finger or thumb over that spot to prevent any injury from the fracture nor damage to the splint.
E enguala la concavitat am aquo que uempla aquela entro que aquela prengua la strictura segon equalitat, e comanda al malaute que dorma sobre le sieu dos o desobre le sieu costat sa.	 Apply it in such a way that the part you're applying to should be above the bandage when applied for even pressure, and have the patient sleep on their side or back as necessary.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu cessa de extencio de lu e de la sua restauracio entro que sia sedat le apostema caut, e pausa sobre lu aquo que sede aquel segon que es precedit; e aprop retorna a la restauracio de lu, e strenh aquel ayssi cum cove.	 If an accidental cautery is needed, then stop applying the medication and its restoration when it has been burned off, and place it on top as before; and return to the restoration of them, and press it down so that it may be used for cautery again.
E si accideysso en le os satagias o son comminuidas, lahoras tu las tratz.	 If it happens in their mouth or tongue, then you should stop immediately.
Capitol .xi.	 When joint pain occurs due to cold humors infiltrating every part of the body, especially in the feet, it is customarily referred to as gout by doctors.
De restauracio de la fractura del adjutori.	 Repair or set right a broken bone.
Adjutori es aquo que es entre le coyde entro al cap de la spalla.	 The adjutory is that which goes between the head and neck of the vertebra
E si es trencat, lahoras la restauracio de lu es en una de doas manieyras, de las quals es la una que tu prenguas fust pla de migiera groceza segon aquesta forma:	 If it is broken, the restoration of that bone may be done in one of two manners.
E sian liatz en doas extremitatz dos liamentz, e aprop sia suspendut del loc elevat.	 The two extremities are placed on both sides and are suspended from a higher point
E segua le malaute sobre una sezela; e aprop gieta fora le sieu bras trencat sobre le fust entro que pervengua al titillic de lu en le mieg loc del qual sia annexa la curvitat del fust.	 The patient is placed on a bench or bed, and the broken arm must be supported so that it does not hang over to the side of which would otherwise cause damage to the curvature of the limb.
E aprop suspen sobre aquel alcuna causa greu, o·l minestre extenda aquel a las partidas dejos; e aprop le metge eque la fractura am las sieuas mas ensemps, entro que la fractura retorne segon que cove.	 The attendant should support it with something soft to prevent any injury, or extend the arm out into the air so that it does not rest on anything hard; and the doctor shall examine all of its bones thoroughly when it is broken, so that they may know where the break occurred.
E l’autra manieyra es que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sieua cervitz e suspen la ma del col de lu am liament; e aprop comanda a dos ministres que la un de lor tengua aquo que es desobre la fractura am las suas mas; e l’autre tengua le pus dejos de lu; e quascu de lor extenda a la sua partida.	 The other way is to raise the patient's head and support their hand in its hollow, ordering two attendants so that one of them has what it needs for setting the bone straight against his or her chest; and the other will have the plaster ready upon which they may apply it to the limb.
E si voles que la extencio sia pus fort, lahoras tu strenh sobre la fractura am liament e sobre aquela am autre liament, e quascu dels dos ministres extendan a doas suas partidas.	 When you wish to extract it strongly, the doctor will stretch over the fracture and over that other one too, whichever of the two ministers extends towards both its parts
E donc si la fractura es propinquada a la extremitat del muscle, lahoras cove que sia pausat la mitat del liament sobre le citillic e l’autre dejos la fractura deves le coyde.	 If the fracture is near to the extremity of the muscle, then place both ends of the ligament over that part and the other end should be placed on top of the fracture itself
E semblantment si la fractura es propdana al coyde, lahoras cove que sia pausat le liament sobre aquel loc e sobre aquel coyde.	 Similarly if the fracture is near to the joint, then place both ends of the ligament over that location and over the other one as well.
Enguala aquela am facilitat e ses trebal, e aprop quant sira engualada segon que cove e es applicada per bona applicacio, lahoras strenh aquela si no accideys apostema caut.	 Engage both ends firmly and apply it correctly as much as possible, the doctor will stretch that if the application is not correct.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras layssa la strictura entro al vii dia, e pausa sobre lu lana sutza enbeguda en vi agre e oli rozat entro que repause le apostema, e lahoras tu stren aquela.	 If the cautery was applied incorrectly, then place a cushion on the suture immediately after it is tightened and over that area if you want to prevent it from coming out, stretch that accordingly.
E la manieyra de strenher aquela es que pauses emplastre sobre la fractura, e aprop pausa envolopament de drap nau sobre le emplastre; e aprop ajuste le bras sobre aquel adjutori, e pause la sua ma uberta sobre le sieu muscle.	 The doctor's method for stretching that is to place a cushion over the fracture and use another piece of cloth around it as well. Then, put your hand on top of that and hold onto the other one as you stretch.
E pausa le drap e strenh sobre le adjutori le bras per so que·l bras sia en loc de stelhas, si no prohibeys de aquo alcuna causa del os trencat.	 Hold your hand in place of the broken arm if necessary to prevent that from occurring any further damage to the bone.
E lahoras usa de stelhas.	 The doctor uses stethoscopes.
E es que pauses sobre la fractura aquela stela que sia pus lada e pus fort de las autras stelas; e pausa entre quascuna stela la latitut del dit, e sia la longitut de las stelas segon la trencadura am addicio de tres ditz de tota partida.	 The doctor pauses on the fracture over which one of the stethoscopes should be placed and how far apart they should be from each other; then pause between each stethoscope to measure their length, so that you can calculate the total measurement after three measurements are taken.
E aprop strenh sobre las stelas am la strictura la qual he dita al comensament del capitol.	 Stretch over the stethoscopes at the beginning of the examination.
E es que la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura sia pus streyt.	 The doctor's touch on the location of the fracture should be gentle.
E quant pus es alonguada la fractura sia la strictura menor.	 When placing a tourniquet, apply it more gently than when applying pressure to an injury.
E donc si vezes le situament de las stelas e la strictura ayssi cum havem dit en la hora en la qual restauras le membre al sieu assituament, lahoras tu fay.	 If you find yourself in a situation where the examination is done and the member is back to its normal position, then the doctor may proceed as needed.
E si temes apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la strictura e las stelas entro al dia vii ayssi cum havem dit.	 If you are afraid of using a tourniquet, then apply pressure instead and use the stethoscopes later on as needed.
E aprop considera le liament en totas partidas per tres dias per so que no accida en le loc pruziment o imflacio; o es prohibida la vianda pervenir al membre per disposicio de superfluitat de strictura; e donc rectifiqua tot aquo segon que havem dit.	 Before applying pressure for three days to avoid bruising or swelling, it is forbidden to use a tourniquet in excess and restrict blood flow; therefore correct all of this according to what has been said.
Mays si tu yest sobre confizanssa que no accida alcuna causa de aquo, lahoras no deslias la liguadura sino aprop tres dias o mays.	 If you are concerned about causing any harm from doing so, then do not remove the ligature but wait three days or more.
E sia la sua dormicio del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e las sieuas mas sian sobre le stomac.	 "The patient's bed should be positioned towards their back,
E pausa sobre le adjutori cocena plena de lana engualment, e considera en tota hora de la nueyt o del dia que no sia deliada ni dissolta la figura del membre trencat, o que sia le liament mollificat, donc rectifica aquo tot am la tua vertut.	 "Ensure that the adjacent cushion is filled with warm wool, and consider checking every hour or so to make sure there are no tears in the broken member, as it may have become flaccid; correct this if necessary.
E pausa la vianda del malaute segon le orde le qual havem denant mes, enayssi que la vianda sia subtil en le comensament entro que es comensat strenher; e lahoras cove que egrossas la vianda de lu.	 "The patient's bandage should be changed as soon as possible after the initial dressing has been applied, ensuring that it is soft and gentle from the moment it begins to come into contact with the wound, and increase its size if necessary.
Quar de constuma del adjutori e de la camba de lu es que sian strengutz en xl dias; e lahoras cove que sian desliatz e sia administrat banh e sia medicat am enguentz los quals rectifican aquel.	 "The attendant and the nurse should change every 12 hours, ensuring that they are fresh, dry, and administered as needed to correct any errors.
E si la fractura es layha atrita, lahoras tu no deslies de aquela le liament e las stelhas entro a l dias o entro a dos meses.	 "If the fracture is closed, you do not need to change the dressing or bandages for days or even two months.
Capitol .xii.	 "Section XII.
De restauracio de fractura del bras.	 "Treatment of a broken arm.
Bras es compost de dos osses les quals so appelatz dos focils; dels quals la un es petit, e es aquel que siec le dit pous, e l’autre es gran e es aquel le qual es pausat dejos le petit dit, de la partida pus dejus.	 "The arm is composed of two bones called the ulna and radius. Of which one has a smaller end that acts as the thumb, while the other has a larger end that is held by the smaller bone to prevent it from coming out.
E fort leu es trencat le focil major solament, o le petit, e fort leu son trincatz ensemps.	 When a great fire has been extinguished only by a large one or a small one, and when a small flame is extinguished
E quan es trencat le focil petit desus, lahoras la restauracio de lu es leugiera, e la sanacio de lu es pus leugiera.	 When the small fire has been extinguished by you, then healing of it will be easier, and its cure will be easier
E quan es trencat le focil de lu dejos la fractura de lu es mala, e la sanacio de lu es dificil.	 When a large fire is extinguished only by a large one or small one, but when a small flame has been extinguished it will take longer to restore and heal
E pus mala de aquela es quan son trencatz dos osses essemps.	 It was bad when two bones were broken
Donc si l’os le qual es trencat es le focil petit desus, lahoras es convenient al metge, deves la restauracio de lu, que pauze petita extencio am facilitat entro que aquel sia engualhat.	 When the bone that has been broken by a small fire needs healing from the doctor, it is advisable for you to ask for assistance as soon as possible so that they may be quickly restored
Mays si le focil gran es aquo que es trincat, lahoras cove que pause extencio pus vehement.	 When a large fire has been extinguished then the healing will come swiftly
E si les dos focils so ensemps trincatz, lahoras cove que tu pauses la extritura mot pus fort.	 If both fires are extinguished at once, it is advisable to seek medical help urgently
E cove que pauses la figura de la ma deves la restauracio de lu e la extencio de lu estenduda sobre un coyssi, e sia le pols de la ma a las partidas desus, pus aut que totz les autres ditz, e le dit auricular sia pus bas dels autres ditz, e le malaute sia cezent sobre una cezela cayrada.	 And if you need to take the shape of her hand, then you must heal it and treat for its cure spread over a cushion, and put on each side your hands, so that all others might be done in turn, and the ear should be above one raised level, and the patient's head below another level.
E sia un coyssi denant lu en la altetut o endreyt de lu, per so que·l malaute no encorra trebalh.	 And if you have to put it in the upper or lower position of her body so that she won't fall down.
E aprop le ministre extenda le bras de la partida pus dejos am la sieua ma o am liament, e autre ministre extenda desus semblantment.	 When the first doctor extends his hands to the patient, place one hand under her breast or arm, and another minister extends similarly.
E aprop le metge engualhe le os entro que redugua aquel segon la milhor figura que pot.	 The second doctor should immediately apply this remedy on that part of the body if it is suitable for doing so.
E si en la factura del os so satagias, lahoras te perforsa raduzir tota pessa en le sieu loc am la tua vertut.	 If there's a problem with the bone that you need to drain all pus from its location and your own ability is fine for doing this.
E si appar en lu satagia separada que punh la codena e no es a tu speransa en la restauracio de lu, lahoras tu fen sobre lu e osta aquela segon la manieyra la qual havem dita desus.	 If the separation is from where you cannot reach to restore it, then do so with your own strength and place that hand over it as well as the other one mentioned before.
Mays si la fractura es am plagua, yeu ja he fayt ad aquo capitol singular, e donc pren la curacio de aquel.	 If there is a fracture in the leg, you should already do this capital letter alone and then take care of it immediately.
E si accideys apostema caut al comensament de la tua restauracio, lahoras tu lineys un drap am cerot fayt de oli rozat e cera blanca, e sia migier entre specitut e subtilitat, e strenh drap sobre aquel am strictura subtil entro que le apostema sia cedat; e lahoras remau le cerot e pausa emplastre preparat de polvera de moli am clayre de huou, e aprop pausa stelhas; e sia la stela la qual es pauzada sobre aquela fractura pus lada e pus fort.	 If the fall occurs immediately after your treatment begins, you must put a wet cloth soaked in cold water and white on it to make it more absorbent between two pieces of gauze and subtlety, then tie it tightly over that area which needs attention; afterwards remove the wet cloth and place a prepared plaster of quick-drying flour mixed with clay.
E sapias que·l nombre de las stelas del bras so vi en las majors disposicios, o sia la fractura en un focil o en dos focils ensemps.	 You know that the names of the splints for the arm are available in different places or if there is a fracture in one arm or two arms separately.
E aprop pausa la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura pus fort e pus vehement, e quan mays sira la extrictura a las partidas desus de la fractura o a las partidas pus bassas de lu, pausa la strictura un pauc pus molh segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu en le comensament del capitol.	 When the bone is broken very hard and violently, when it may be necessary to straighten the break or pieces that are loose and soft from the bone itself, pause the straightening for a short while so as not to precede the memory of him at the beginning of the chapter.
E les draps que so envolopatz sobre la fractura sian draps mols humitz, e no sian durs ni aspres, e·l fiel am le qual es strenhut sia de li propriament migier entre subtil e gros, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	 The bandages that surround the fracture should be soft and moist, not hard or tight, and faithful are those who stretch it gently between fine and coarse, as has been recommended.
E considera le membre e·l liament aprop alcus dias.	 Consider the member, its ligament is being pulled apart.
E si accideys alcuna causa de la qual rectificacio es necessaria, ayssi cum prusiment le qual accideys al membre, e lahoras cove que tu enbroques le membre am aygua cauda entro que cesse aquel pruziment.	 If any cause arises for which correction is necessary, then when it happens to the member, and the pain occurs from your touch that causes you to break the member apart as a result of this precaution.
E leysses le membre no costreyt entro que repause, e aprop torna la strictura.	 Do not put too much pressure on it, until you pause, then return to straightening the bone.
E si la extrictura ja es mollificada e l’os ja es remaugut e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras rectifiqua tot aquo am la tua vertut.	 If the bending has already been softened and the body is relaxed and as it was, then do all that with your strength to correct this matter
E considera mays si le nutriment es prohibit pervenir al membre per superfluitat de strictura, quar lahoras cove que mollifiques aquel un petit e laysses aquel per alcus dias entro que corra ad aquel le nutriment, e aprop strenh aquel.	 Consider that if the nourishment is prohibited to come from the bone through excess of pressure, then do soften it a little and let it go for some days until you run into that with your strength, and stretch it properly.
Mays si al malaute no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no cove que sia desliat entro aprop xx dias o enviro de aquels.	 When a patient's illness is not due to any cause mentioned above, the doctor understands that it must be treated within this number of days or within this period of time indicated below.
E aprop sia suspenduda la ma del malaute per la sua vertut de movement agitatius, e fay aquel dormir sobre le sieu dos.	 The hand of the patient is placed on his chest to keep him still and let them sleep in bed.
E sapias que aquesta fractura es restaurada en xxx dias o en xxxii dias, o fort leu es restaurada en xxviii dias, e tot aquo es segon la disposicio de las compleccios e las disposicios de la vertut.	 The fracture is restored within this number of days or the other indicated below, except in cases where it requires less than 28 days to restore due to complications and the healing process itself.
Capitol .xiii.	 Chapter 13.
De restauracio de fractura de la pinche de la ma e dels ditz.	 Of the treatment of fractures in the arm or leg.
Sapias que a la pinche de la ma e als nuzes dels ditz tart endeve fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio motas veguadas.	 When an arm or leg fracture occurs, and does not occur elsewhere, then it must be treated here.
E quan accideys a la ma fractura o atrissio, lahoras cove que·l malaute segua cayrat e denant lu lies cezent segon equalitat, e aprop pausa la ma de lu sobre aquela extenduda.	 When an arm fracture or injury occurs, the doctor understands that the patient should continue to move as much as possible and place their hand over the affected area for support.
E aprop le ministre extenda les osses trencatz e·l metge engualhe aquels entro que sian congongitz am bona congoncio.	 The minister extends the bones that have been broken, and the doctor will examine them immediately thereafter
E lahoras cove que pause emplastre e estopa, si no accideys apostema caut; e aprop pausa stela desus segon la quantitat del loc, e tu ja has envolopada aquela en drap de li.	 The doctors understand that they should place a bandage on and stop bleeding if it is not immediately stopped with cautery, and put the patient in bed according to how much of their body part was affected, and you have wrapped them in cloth
Mays si la trincadura es en las partidas dedintz deves le ventre de la palma, e lahoras fay semblant de spera de drap, e comanda al malaute que strenha aquela am la sua palma trincada; aprop sia strenguda am drap lonc.	 When the hernia is in the abdominal region, do as follows: place a cushion on the belly and lay your hand upon it.
E sia la stelha de cuer am drap en le qual sia levitat, per so que le cuer sia aplicat a la palma; e strenh aquela segon que cove.	 Place a cushion on top of the body in order for the patient's chest to be placed upon it, and hold that hand while you stretch this one as well.
Mays si la fractura es a las partidas defora, lahoras cove que pauses desus stela e autre estela de la partida dejos en la palma, per so que la ma sia uberta e dreyta; e aprop pausa la strictura, ayssi cum es revolvuda la ma a la rateta entre les ditz am liamentz.	 If the hernia is in the fore region, do as follows: place a cushion on top of your hand and lay it upon the chest, so that your hand may be elevated and bent; then release the knot and stretch them both simultaneously.
E si accideys fractura a alcu dels nozes dels ditz, lahoras si es le dit pous, sia engualat segon que cove e aprop sia strenhut am la palma e si·t voles, pausa a lu astela petita dreyta per so que sia elevada la fractura e no sia mauguda.	 If the hernia is in one of your armpits, do as follows: place both hands on top of it and stretch them simultaneously; then release the smaller cushion while keeping the larger one elevated to prevent swelling.
Mays si la fractura es en les autres ditz, ayssi cum en aquel del mieg loc, o en le indic, o en le auricular, o en le anular, lahoras sia engualhat e liat am le dit sa le qual siec aquel; o sian totz liatz segon continuacio, e es milhor; o pausa sobre aquel stela petita, ayssi cum havem dit en le pous.	 If the hernia is in any other part of your body: place both hands upon it and stretch them simultaneously while keeping one hand on top as well; or release that smaller cushion if necessary, alternating between stretching those two hands as before.
E considera, en la tua restauracio, e aprop aquela, la disposicio de apostema caut e oppose — am la tieua operacio — am aquo que cove quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, segon que es iterada la narracio de lu.	 In your care, always remember to apply a pointed cautery or other method of treatment while doing this: if any kind of cause appears during it, repeat the explanation given previously.
Capitol .xiv.	 "When joints are affected by cold humors invading each part of the body.
De restauracio de fractura del os de la coyssa.	 Restoration of a broken bone from the thigh.
Le os de la cueyssa motas veguadas es trencat e es declarat al sentiment segon que es convertit a la partida denant e a la pus sobirana.	 The bones that connect to the thigh have been torn, and it is declared as second degree by the fact of detachment from the lower part of the body
E la restauracio de lu se fa enayssi que·l liament es strenhut sobre la fractura e autre liament dejos la fractura, e le malaute sia prostrat sobre le sieu ventre e sobre la cara.	 The restoration is done by placing a bandage over the fracture and another around it, with the patient lying down on their stomach and face.
E aprop le ministre extenda tot le liament a la sua partida segon la qualitat, quan la fractura es en le mieg loc del os.	 And then extend the plaster to cover both sides of the wound after assessing its severity when the fracture is on the leg or arm.
Mays si es propdana a la razitz de la cueyssa, lahoras sia le liament propda al denolh a la partida del pentenilh, per so que la extencio caja en sus, e le autre liament dejos la fractura.	 If it is necessary to plaster the leg of the thigh, then apply the dressing to cover the wound at the bottom of the leg, so that it can be removed in its entirety, and another dressing for covering the fracture.
E semblantment si la trencadura es propdana al denolh, lahoras sia fayt le liament propda al denol, e sia la extencio a las partidas dejos.	 Similarly, if it is necessary to plaster the arm of the thigh, then apply the dressing over the wound at the bottom of the arm, so that it can be removed in its entirety, and another dressing for covering the fracture.
E aprop le metge enguale le os am amduas las sieuas mas entro que reduzesca aquel segon la semblansa natural e l’os es conjungit per bona conjunccio; lahoras cove que pauses emplastre e strictura, si no accideys al membre apostema.	 And the surgeon will bind and cover it with plaster if you reduce that second joint as a result of the swelling around the affected part, so that the wound is sealed and closed properly unless there's an additional member involved.
Mays si accideys en lu apostema, lahoras tu layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que l’apostema caut sia cedat, e aprop retorna a la tua curacio.	 When the seal of the letter is broken, you must unseal it quickly before time runs out, and return to your task.
La strictura de lu sia ayssi fayta: cove que envolopes sobre la fractura una benda dura, e dobla aquela dos o tres veguadas, e remaugua de lu superfluitat; e aprop envolopa la camba entro que pervengua al talo e a la razitz de la cueyssa.	 The seal of the letter should be made as follows: cover over the break with something hard and fold it in half, or three times around if necessary; remove any excess material; and close it up so that it fits into the pouch part.
E intromet lonc fiel entre la cueyssa e la camba prop del denol a las partidas dejos, e venguan las extremitatz del fiel de la partida pus sobirana de las doas partz, e aprop revolveys sobre la camba e la cueyssa aquo que superflueys de la benda.	 Between the pouch and the letter put in some parts that you can remove; also put a few pieces between each of your two arms to support them both equally well while holding on tightly with one hand, so as not to let go even if you're wearing gloves.
E aprop pausa sobre la cueyssa en le loc de aquela fractura astelhas, e pausa de aquelas una stela sobre le os de la camba.	 And place a cushion over the pouch in the location of that break as well, and also place one stone on either side of the letter's opening.
E aprop uempli las vacuitatz entre la camba e la cuoyssa am draps mols, per so que sia coagulada la extrictura.	 And put a few drops between the pouch and the strap to make it tighter around them, in order that they are closed tightly together.
E aprop comensa am strictura fort del mieg sobre le loc de la fractura am tres envolucios o quatre, e quant mays tu te alonhas am liament del loc de la fractura, la tua strictura sia menor e pus leugiera e pus molha.	 And start with a very tight seal around the location of the break three times or four if necessary; and as you get closer to sealing it, your seal should be looser but not too loose nor too soft.
E aprop exten a doas extremitatz del fiel a las partidas dejos entro que pervengua a la cavilha del pe, e strenh amdoas las extremitatz de las stelhas del autra part per so que·l liament no sia remaugut del sieu loc.	 And extend both of the letters' straps to their full length into place until they are connected securely around the foot; and hold tightly all four extremities in that way, so as not to let go from where you hold them
E aprop leyssa la strectura sobre aquel, don esta ayssi que no accideys al membre corrosio ni apostema caut ni emflacio e semblantz ad aquels; e si accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, adonc cueta te am desliament de lu, e rectifica aquo que accideys tot aprop, segon que havem dit motas veguadas.	 When the opening of a vein has been made over there so that it doesn't occur in another member or be cauterized or inflamed and such like those; but if any cause occurs from these things, then apply something to heal this with quick action while I have said previously.
Mays si en le os es pessa del os la qual pongua, lahoras cove que tu engualhes aquel segon que a tu es possibla; e sino, fen sobre lu e remau aquel, e cura am aquo del qual es precedida la rememoracio entro que sia sanat.	 If the vein is not easily accessible then apply it immediately after discussing with another person if that's possible and otherwise do so by itself and remember to cure whatever preceded this caution as soon as it has been remembered.
E alcunas veguadas es strenhuda aquesta fractura de la coyssa otra aquo que sian ajustadas a lu stelhas, ayssi cum havem dit en le adjutori e·n le bras.	 And certain precautions must be taken in this fracture of the thigh along with those mentioned earlier and on the arms.
Mays empero en la restauracio de lu en tal manieyra fayta no accideys al malaute claudicacio; e si es restaurada sola, otra aquo que li sia applicada l’autra camba, lahoras es necessari que claudique aquel del qual es tostemps.	 Moreover in the restoration of it this caution must be taken not to occur to the patient's claudication; and if restored alone then apply another cushion as well, it is necessary that the one which was just mentioned should stay seated.
E sapias que la coyssa es strenhuda en xl dias o un pauc mes o un pauc mens, e tot aquo es segon la diversitat de las compleccios e de las autras dispozicios.	 You know that the thigh is painful for days or a few weeks depending on its complexity and nature.
Capitol .xv.	 Chapter fifteen.
De restauracio de la fractura de la rodela del denolh.	 Restoration of the fracture in the ankle area.
Sapias que fractura de la rodela del denol tart endeve, mays accideys a lu motas veguadas atrissio.	 You know that the fracture in the ankle is severe and may lead to the loss of motion.
Mays si accideys a lu fractura, lahoras no es sino fissura o trauc en las suas partidas, e aquo es am plagua o ses plagua, e sobre aquo tot es estat am le sentiment.	 When a fracture occurs in the body, then pain is only a fissure or sprain at its places, and that over it all remains as feeling
E la restauracio de lu es enayssi que sia engualat aquo que es romput de las partidas de lu am les ditz entro que sia agreguat e conjongit segon que es possible per equacio e facilitat e fabricacio.	 The restoration of it is such that everything goes back to its original place, except for the parts that were lost due to injury or disease, and then it is placed back in another part as necessary according to its condition
E aprop pausa emplastre e pausa sobre aquel stela redonda, si indigeysses de aquela; e strenh desus am strictura ad aquo convenient.	 And place a cushion on that round stone if needed, and put your hand close to it in order
E aprop considera totas las disposicios las quals havem recomtadas en las autras fracturas, ayssi cum es apostema caut e semblant ad aquels enaissi que se oppause a tot accident am aquo que a lu es convenient entro que sia sanat.	 And consider all the dispositions that were mentioned in other fractures as well, so that you may put it back together and prevent accidents by making sure that everything is properly positioned where necessary for its health
Capitol .xvi.	 The sixteenth chapter of a medical treatise.
De restauracio de la fractura de la camba.	 Restoration of the fracture in the leg
Sapias que en la camba so dos osses dels quals la un es gros, e es le nompnat per nom de la camba; e l’autra es subtil, e es nompnat focil.	 It is known that one of the bones in the leg can be large and named after it, while the other is small and named fragile.
E accideys a quascus de las specias de fractura aquo que accideys als dos osses del bras, e per aquo es fayta restauracio de lu ayssi cum restauracio del bras engualment, e la operacio de lu es una.	 When two bones of the arm fracture in this way, then the restoration is done similarly for both and the operation is one.
E si so trincatz dos osses ensemps, la camba es convertida a totas partidas.	 If two bones are broken simultaneously, the leg becomes all parts.
E si es trinquat le os pus subtil, la camba es convertida a las partidas Denant.	 When the bowel has been gently pulled out from between the patient's thighs, it becomes visible to the doctor
E si es trincat le os pus gros, atrobas aquel dejos, e es de aquelas causas que no so a tu ameguadas.	 If the bowels are forcefully removed, then those causes may not be what is being looked for
E aprop aministra extencio e equacio e liguacio de las astelas segon aquel engualment.	 Then after having opened it gently and making a cut through it lengthwise, you should sew up the edges
Mays empero cove, si la fractura de la camba es laja havent motas satagias, que la extencio sia mendre e pus leugiera, e alleuja am la tua vertut.	 If a break in the bowel occurs during removal then it is customary to remove any parts that may be damaged and sew them up tightly
E en la camba es alcuna causa de operacio sobre le bras, e es quan tu engualas las stelhas e que comples tota la tieua operacio, lahoras tu prendras pessas de fustz de pi le qual es pausat dejos las cauzas las quals so pausades en solies, e so faytas eyssament de brancas de palma; aligeys de aquelas a las quals es petita groceza, e no sia ges de las manudas, e sia la longuesa de aquelas segon la longuesa de la camba, e del denol entro al pus dejos.	 The break in the bowel is not something to be operated on directly through the arm, and when you complete your whole operation it should be checked for any other causes that may have gone unnoticed, as well as checking all the muscles of which it was removed, the length of those compared with the length of the bowel itself, from the top down to the bottom.
E aprop envolopa sobre quascuna drap en doas envolucios segon la longitut de lu, e pausa la una sobre la partida de la camba de la una part e l’autra del autra part, e sian del denol entro al pus bas loc del pe.	 Then wrap it up tightly with multiple wraps going along its length to match the length of it exactly, and place one over the top incision from one side and another on the bottom incision from the other side, and then go around until you have finished the bottom edge.
E aprop lias las doas stelhas en tres locs de doas extremitatz e al mieg loc, quar am aquesta strectura la camba es prohibida de clinar a la partida dextra e sinistra, e sta per bona stacio.	 Then take the two sides and put them into three locations on both extremities as well as in between, for this procedure to be done correctly it is forbidden to sew the bowel at its left side or right side.
E ja es aministrat un brasset de fust segon la longuesa de la camba; e sia pausada en lu la camba per so que conserve aquel de movement.	 In this sentence, 'brasset' is referring to a tourniquet used for restricting blood flow in the arm or leg. The first part of it ('longuesa') seems to be related to the length and/or size of something within that limb - possibly 'camba', which might imply 'vein'. The sentence then states this tourniquet should be applied at its full extent, effectively closing off circulation to restrict blood flow in a vein.
E majorment cove que tu fassas aquo en fractura, e quan am aquela es plagua propriament.	 Additionally, when using it for fractures, remember that there is potential for the tourniquet to cause damage or restrict blood circulation even further if not properly applied.
E aprop considera en quascun jorn la camba e studia am aquel per derier studi, e tu le guardes de apostema e de imflacio o de autres causas semblantz; e cum accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, lahoras opausa te a lu am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	 When you study the vein and its surroundings in order to prepare for treatment, remember to also check for any other symptoms such as swelling or bruising that may indicate complications; if no problems are found then proceed with application of the tourniquet.
Capitol .xvii.	 What do you mean by "capitol" and what is its significance?
De la fractura del talo e dels osses del pe e dels ditz.	 This sentence indicates that the medical text pertains to fractures of the bones in the foot and fingers, i.e., the lower limbs.
Al talo no accideys fractura de tot; mays als osses del pe accideys fractura alcunas veguadas; e als ditz del pe pauc accideys fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio en las mes de disposicio.	 Fractures in the toes are rare and usually only result from unusual circumstances or injury to the foot itself.
E si als osses del pe endeve fractura e vezes aquels osses esser elevatz sobre si entre lor, lahoras le malaute pause le sieu pe sobre la terra preparat ayssi cum anant.	 If bones in the feet are broken and sometimes they need to be elevated above each other, remember that the patient should lie flat on the ground as well, prepared for any further complications.
E aprop pausa la un pe sobre aquo que es elevat de aquels osses, e aprop calca aquels, e prem, e engualha aquels entro que torno en los locs.	 And after lifting the foot above these bones, place them gently, press them down and hold them in that position until further instructions are given.
E aprop pausa emplastre e stopa desus, e pausa dejos le ventre del pe una petita taula a la qual sian dos caps plas.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, place a cushion under them to prevent their movement.
E aprop strenh aquela am le pe am strectura descent, pus que tu has envolopada aquela am draps e am autres causes de las quals indigeys.	 And then put your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out and place a cushion under them as well.
E cum a lu passan tres dias o quatre, lahoras tu deslia le liament, quar tu atrobaras les osses engualatz, o sian trincatz o sian dislocatz, e la operacio en aquels es ayssi co coneysses.	 When the three or four days have passed and you start to notice bones grinding together, or if they are starting to shift out of place, then it's time for surgery
Mays si alcus ditz son trincatz, lahoras restaura aquels, e enguala aquels ayssi cum yeu e recomtat a tu en la restauracio dels ditz de la ma.	 If the joints are shifting out of place, then restore them and align them as recommended by your doctor during a joint restoration procedure.
E aprop pausa al dit trincat stela segon la longitut del dit, e sia pus lada de lu un pauc; e aprop dejos le pe aquesta taula la qual e a tu recomtada, e strenh aquela am strictura decent.	 Place the second cushion at the length of the leg and place your hand on that recommended table, align it with the first one, and then put pressure on the joint to restore them.
Mays si aquo que es trincat dels osses so dos o tres o mays, lahoras tu pausa sobre quascun dit astela de la sua quantitat envolopada en drap leon, e strenh la taula en le pus bas del pe, e sia stant sobre la un dels caps de la taula foro le ventre del pe per que la tengua am bona retencio.	 If the joints are two or three times out of place, pause on each leg cushion placed with cloth covering and put pressure on the table at its lowest point, holding it over one of the heads of the table to prevent the abdomen from coming out.
E es convenient a tu que no oblides que no consideres totas las causas las quals que e ditas a tu en las autras fracturas dels accidentz que havem dit; e opausa te a tot accident am aquo que cove.	 It's important that you don't forget to mention all the causes mentioned in previous fractures of accidents, and pause from any more accidents at this point.
Capitol .xviii.	 When joints are afflicted by cold humors that spread throughout the body, especially in the feet, this condition is commonly called gout by doctors.
De fractura del conh de la femna e del os del pentenilh e de la vergua del home.	 Of the veins of the female part and the veins of the penis and the scrotum are torn off.
Quan le conh de la femna es trincat, lahoras fay aquela ceser en cezela cayrada, e aprop enclina aquela a la partida del dos un petit, e sia tenguda detras.	 When the veins of the female part are torn off, pain arises in that area and it is customarily called sciatica by doctors, with the feet being an important location for it to occur.
E aprop la matrona umpla le conh de coto, e sia fayt en le conh de lu ayssi cum spera; e aprop la femna sia concutida, e eleva le dos de lu petit a petit, quar tot aquo es fora-getat entro que sia denant la partida del conh ayssi cum spera e l’os trincat retorna.	 If the veins of the thigh are torn off, and if the veins at this spot hope to be restored; and if the woman's vagina is cut through, elevate her legs slowly step by step until everything comes back together with the veins healed up and the intestine restored.
E aprop pausa pulvils sobre le dos de lu, e quan vol urinar remaugua le coto am facilitat e aprop urine, e reduzeys e retorna aquel segon la manieyra segon la qual mezist aquel al comensament, e aprop retorne al sieu pulvil primier.	 Place powders on the thighs and when you want to urinate it flows easily; reduce them and return that second powder from where they were initially placed, and repeat this process as necessary until you have returned to your first initial powder.
E fassa ayssi per vii dias o enviro aquels, quar aquel es restaurat.	 It will be done within seven days or sooner depending on the case.
E si voles, pren una vezica de ovela e strenh sobre le trauc de lu una canula de canavera; e entromet tota la vesica en le conh de lu, e aprop ensuffla en la canula am vertut entro que la vesica sia imflada dedintz le conh, quar la fractura retorna.	 If you want to do this, take a sheath and stretch it over the opening of the vagina with a catheter; insert that into the vein in the vagina, and inflate it until the vein is filled up, then the tear will return.
E aprop sia umplida de coto e estia per alcus dias segon que havem recomtat, entro que sia sanat.	 When pain occurs in the joints caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body
E quan le os del pentenil de home o de femna es trincat, lahoras aministra en la restauracio e agulacio de lu aquo que havem recomtat en l’os del anca.	 When the nails of the fingers or toes are torn off, then apply a poultice and incision as prescribed in that place.
E aquo que es dreyt no es occultat en aquestas fracturas proprinquas e que pauc endeveno, majorment ad aquel al qual es alcun studi e us e enten aquest meu libre mot; quar aquela fractura significa a tu en las majors disposicios via dreyturiera en la restauracio e en la strictura de lu, e donc enten be.	 And in those injuries close by and few wounds, instead of that other person whose studies you mentioned and who understands this my free will; for that fracture means in the most severe cases to be restored and tightened in it, so to understand
Mays en la vergua del home quan es trincada, pren guarguamela de auca, e met la vergua en aquela; e aprop pausa sobre lu envolucio de drap, e sia envolopada, e aprop sia layssada per tres dias o enviro aquels, e sia sanada.	 When the nail is torn off a finger or toe, apply ointment and wrap it in that way; and if you have wrapped it with gauze for three days or more and then bandage it up again, so to heal it.
Capitol .xix.	 Chapter 9.
De restauracio de fractura dels osses quan es am plagua.	 For the treatment of fractures when they are open wounds.
Convenient es ad aquel al qual accideys fractura am plagua, e majorment si le os es gran ayssi cum es le os de la cuoyssa o de l’adjutori, o semblant ad aquel, que tu te cuoytes e fleubotomes aquel tantost si las condicios de fleubotomia a tu o testifican ayssi cum desus havem dit.	 If the bone is broken or fractured in such a way that it penetrates deeply into soft tissues like the finger joints, elbow joints, or any other similar area where the conditions of phlebolotomy are present according to my previous statement, then you must consider phlebolotomy as prescribed.
E si la plagua eflueys sanc, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la retencio de lu enayssi que tu polverizes sobre lu zegi trissat, si a tu autra causa no es present.	 If the wound becomes infected then apply poultice and powder it if you suspect it is due to another cause.
E aprop comensa restaurar la fractura en aquel meteys dia, e no prolongues aquo, si no accideys apostema.	 When healing a fracture in that time of day, do not keep it for long if there is danger nearby.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la restauracio de lu entro al ix dia, entro que sia cedat le apostema, e no apropinques a lu en le tertz dia e·l iiii de tot, quar tu faras accidir mals accidentz.	 If danger arises while healing the fracture, stop the process in one day and go to another day if there is still danger nearby, but do not continue on the third day or after that unless you find a solution for the danger.
Mays si le os trencat es eminent sobre la codena descubert, lahoras cove que te perforses reduzir aquel e engualar aquel am las tuas mas am facilitat e am pauca extencio.	 If your tooth is broken and you are in a hurry to reduce swelling, do the best and simplest thing possible.
Mays si extencio no es a tu preparada e la equacio de lu am las tieuas mas, lahoras tu reduzeys aquel am las tuas mas am aquest sturment; e es sturment le qual es fayt de ferr, la longitut del qual es de vii ditz o de viii e la latitut del qual es segon la quantitat de la plagua; e per aquo es necessari al metge que prengua de aquels tres o quatre segon la quantitat que indigeys ad aquo en la curacio en tota specia de fractura.	 If you are not prepared and cannot find one nearby, do the best you can with a similar tool; its length is seven or eight inches (18-20 cm), and its width second to the amount of the padding used for that specific fracture.
E sia redon, e sia en lu pauca groceza per so que no sia doblat deves la comprecio sobre aquel en la hora de la operacio.	 And when you finish, make sure not to leave any excess material in order not to be double-bagged during the operation time.
E sia de aguda extremitat al qual sia marge en las sieuas extremitatz; e sia le desus de lu a grossetut tendent, e de la maytat de lu entro a las partidas.	 The extremity for which there is no margin on its extremities, and the largest part of it towards the direction of the openings.
E aquesta es la forma de lu:	 This is how to do it:
E es nompnat en grec “labre volentz atelarem”, so es paleta pauca.	 In Greek, it means "the finger of the doctor.
Per que cove que sia pausada la extremitat de lu acuda elevada sobre la extremitat del os eminent.	 To prevent an extremity from touching the other's face, raise one extremity and place that above the other's face
E inpelleys aquel en una veguada entro que retorne le os, e sia engualat am alcuna equacio.	 That will make it so that returning to the eye causes no harm.
E donc esforsa te engualar las extremitatz de la fractura entre lor, e si la extremitat de lu trencada es subtil, e no pren aquela le sturment per bona axcepcio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas la extremitat de aquel os entro que l’insturment haja poder de aquo.	 Then force the limbs of the fracture to be between them if one limb is broken and cannot bear that burden without good reason, then call on doctors for help
Mays si no podes reduzir le os de tot am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras enscideys aquel am aquo que coveneys a lu dels inscizoris les quals havem ditz; o serra aquel am una de las serras en qualque manieyra sia a tu possible.	 If you cannot reduce the abdomen as recommended by doctors, then call on the servants to whom we have given instructions regarding those incisions that we have mentioned; or shall it be of one of the servants in whose hand is your power.
E aprop ratz aquel que roman en le os de asperitat e de scorsas menudas.	 Then raise him from beneath the abdomen and lower extremities.
E cum le os es reduzit, e aprop la reduccio le malaute atroba dolor vehement ledent, lahoras sapias que le os no es retornat al sieu loc natural; e adonc fay aquo quar tu confereyses al malaute gran juvament.	 When the abdomen is reduced, and lowering the pain of the gout becomes intense, doctors know that the organ has not returned to its original location; and at this time you consult a physician greatly.
Cum es complida la tua restauracio la qual fas al os, e lahoras submergeys drap en vi stiptic negre, e propriament si es en estiu, e no pauses sobre la plagua cerot ni autre causa en la qual sia oli, per so que no fassa en lu accidir poyredura e corropcio.	 When you have completed the restoration of the abdominal area and you see that it is black or other causes in the place where oil exists, then do not let anything drop on this surface, neither does it come into contact with the cloth nor any other cause that could damage the repair.
E aprop aministra stelas en la hora del tieu compliment de la restauracio de l’os, e layssa la plagua descuberta enayssi que inscidas le trauc am forfexs e uses de envolucios segon la quantitat de la plagua.	 "The servant should measure the surface of the patient's belly button and cut the bandage accordingly to avoid tearing.
E guarda te am tota cautela que no strenhas la plagua am la fractura, quar motas veguadas an fayt aquo les fols metges, e fero accidir sobre les sieus malautes mort o malautia corrodent o zuthement, so es sania.	 "Be very careful not to tear the bandage as you cut it, or else the stitches may be removed by the surgeons and the injury may worsen.
E si la tieua strictura leugiera, molli, diversa de la strictura de las autras fracturas.	 "If the patient's belly button incision is large, mild, and different from the incisions of other fractures.
E si la plagua es gran o es plagua mala, e temes sobre aquel alcus accidentz mals les quals havem recomtatz, e atrobas dolor en le loc, lahoras no cove que pauses sobre aquel astelas, mays fay ad aquel envolucio de draps durs en loc de stelas e strenh lu am aquelas.	 "If the bandage is large or of poor quality and you are afraid that it may cause accidents like those that have already been mentioned, avoid placing it over any hard objects in the area.
E cum aprop un dia o dos vezes ja la plagua comensar, que en lu sia engendrat brac, lahoras tu osta desus le drap le qual havias pausat sobre aquel am vi, e aprop aministra calguas, enguentz am les quals de nostra constuma es que mediquem las plaguas, ayssi cum enguentz tetrafarmacon e semblantz ad aquel.	 "Once or twice the bandage can be used repeatedly as long as it is intact and you still have a dressing to cover any wounds that may need attention.
E conveneys a tu que deslias le liament e considera la plagua en quascun dia mati e vespre entro que sia consolidada e fermada, e cove que·l membre sia preparat en tal manieyra que la poyredura corra de lu a las partidas dejos am facilitat.	 "Please consider the bandage every day and night until it is solid and closed, and make sure that the member is prepared in such a way that any bleeding will be minimal.
si a la plagua passan motz dias, e no es consolidada ni es abscindit de lu le brac, lahoras sapias que aqui so satagias de las petitas per que cove enquieras la plagua am tenta.	 "If the bandage is passing several days and it is not consolidated or closed on its own, then you should consider removing it to prevent further bleeding.
E de aquelas satagias aquelas que so separadas remau e extratz, aquelas que de lor no so separadas e pongen le membre e fan accidir dolor, perforsa te a inscidir aquelas segon que a tu aquo es possibla.	 When joints are affected by cold humors which separate and extend them, causing pain that affects the member and creates soreness to strike, you must apply what is below as soon as possible
E si accideys a la plagua zuchem o eluchen, so es stiomenios, o autra specia de corrupcio e de putrefaccio, lahoras cove que pauses a quada un de aquels am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio del qual es precedida narracio en le sieu capitol.	 If the abscess occurs to the vein or artery, it is serious, or if another species of corruption and putrefaction occurs, the doctors advise caution in applying what follows as soon as possible
E de aquo en le qual cove que stia lo mieu sermo e tu fassas present la tua pessa: quan os gros es trincat, emineys sobre le membre ayssi cum le os de la coyssa e del ajutori e semblantz ad aquels dels membres grans, e que no presumas atraccio de lu, ni la extraccio de lu quar motas veguadas accideys per aquo la mort; habantz layssa aquel entro que poyresca, quar fort leu cayra per si aprop xx dias o xxx; e lahoras cura la plagua si a tu es vist, e si no layssa aquela.	 From what you have just written: when large veins are torn apart, the attendant must gently touch both sides of the vein and the assistant's elbow, as well as the larger members of the body; never cut through the skin or extract it from the body, for this would lead to death; unless there is a quick solution available, you should cure the abscess if discovered, otherwise leave it.
Capitol .xx.	 The term "capitol" does not appear in my previous response. Could you please provide more context or clarify what "capitol" refers to?
De la curacio de nodacio que accideys en le vestigi de alcuna fractura.	 In the event of a fracture that occurred, it is customary for medical practitioners to apply treatment to restore the damaged area as soon as possible.
Motas veguadas accideys aquesta nodacio en le vestigi de sanacio de fractura, e majorment que es prop de las juncturas, e es orrasada per lu la figura del membre; e fort leu prohibeys le membre de la sua operacio natural.	 In the event of a fracture that occurred in an area important for joints and is causing the figure of the member to be distorted, it is customary for medical practitioners to strongly prohibit the movement of the affected limb as this would cause further damage.
Adonc considera si la nodacio es recent e aministra en aquela medicinas que han stipticat ayssi co es aloen, e enses, e mira, e sercacollo, e acrassia, e semblantz ad aquels; enayssi que prenguas de aquela alcunas o totas, e comfesiys aquelas am vi stiptic, o am album de huou, o am vi agre, e pausa aquela sobre la nodacio en estopa, e constringeys aquelas sobre lu per bona constriccio.	 When a rupture is recent and administered by those medicines that have just been taken with water or wine, examine them; see if there are any pus, pus cells, or discharge; also check for scratches, scabs, or wounds on the affected part of the body.
E leyssa extrictura que no deslies aquela per motz dias; e aprop deslia aquela e itera autra, entro que sia remauguda la nodacio; o strenh sobre aquela lamina de plom descentment, quar plom ha proprietat de remaure tot aquo que es imflat en les membres.	 Do not apply any poultice or compress to the affected area for at least 2 days. Instead, gently squeeze and press it firmly every day until it is softened up; then place a cloth soaked in something warm over it, as warmth helps to soften it more quickly.
Mays si nodacio ja es en peyra convertida e streyta es e nessessitat provoca a ostar aquela coytadament, e lahoras scindeys aquela per la partida pus sobirana de lu, e inscideys la superfluitat e eminent, o ratz aquela am alcus rezoris entro que sia remauguda; e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	 If the rupture is in a sensitive area (like your genitals) and you need to open it up carefully because of pain, the sores will be spread on the affected part of the body, and too much fluid may cause swelling or discomfort.
Capitol .xxi.	 Chapter 21.
De restauracio de fractura quan es restaurada e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul no segon la sieua natura.	 Restoration of a rupture when it is restored and brought back into its original position gently, without causing any discomfort to the affected part's natural movement.
Quan fractura de os es restaurada, e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul, lahoras aquo no es fayt sino per motas causas: de las quals la una es multitut de solucio del liament e de la liguacio de lu fayta no segon que cove; o per superfluitat de strictura dels liamentz entro que·l nutriment sia prohibit correr al membre; o per multitut de embrocaccio superflua; o per movement superfluent no en la sua hora; o per pauquesa de sanc en le cors del malaute e per debelitat de lu.	 When a rupture in the bones is restored, and brought back into its original position gently without causing any discomfort to the affected part's natural movement, the treatment does not involve anything except: excessive solution of the ligament or excessive tightening of it; due to excess fluid from inside the ligament that may cause nutrition to be prohibited for the member; due to excessive application of unguent; due to unnecessary movements at an inappropriate time; or due to poverty of strength in the body and weakness.
E curacio de aquo es dar a mengar al malaute e far le cor de lu tendre entro que·l sanc sia multiplicat en lu; e aministra banh; e entromet gaug e leticia sobre lu.	 "The patient should lie down and the doctor will administer leeches to drain away the bad humors, and provide bandages as well.
E aprop pausa pegua sobre le membre, per so que la pegua atire a lu mot nutriment, o continua embrocacio de lu am aygua tebeza, entro que·l nutriment corr e retorne a la sua figura natural.	 "The doctor should apply a compress to the limb so that circulation is maintained and continued application of leeches or a cold bath may be applied in order to restore normal nutrition.
Capitol .xxii.	 "Chapter xxii
De curacio dels osses trincatz quan so restauratz tortuozament e prohibeys la operacio de lor de aquo que cove.	 "When the bones are properly reset and prohibited from further surgery, the healing process begins.
Quan accideys al membre ja restaurat aprop la sanacio de lu de tortuositat e eminencia al os trincat e nodacio, e es per aquo fededa de forma del membre, mays empero le membre no es prohibit de la sieua operacio natural, lahora no cove que tu recipias la paraula de aquel que exsistima aquel membre sia de novel trincat.	 "When the member has already restored its natural healing of its injury and strength back to its original bone structure, it should not be prohibited from further surgery as long as that member is still a part of the body.
Mays ja so statz motz fols metges e restauradors les quals han fayt aquo en nostra tera; e aquesta operacio es mot vituperable perduzent a gran temor le senhal de la qual es mortal.	 "The doctors and restorers who have performed this operation in our time, they fear the consequence of which is deadly.
Mays si claudicacio e nodacio son recentz, lahoras cove que sian enbrocatz am aygua tebeza en la qual so coytas erbas mollificantz, ayssi cum son fuelas de altea e razitz de lu, e mellilot, e semblantz ad aquels; e sia fayt a lu emplastre am emplastre mollificatio ayssi cum dyallaquilon ben fayt; o que sia preza mucillage de razit de altea e sia contucida am gray de gualina o am oli de cirami, e sia emplastrat am aquel; o que sian prezes figuas grassas e sian trissadas am fems de colom, e semblantz ad aquels de las medicinas que son nompnadas amermans consolidacio.	 "If recent claudication and numbness occur along with the swelling of certain parts of the body, such as swelling in the feet or legs, it means that the leeches should be applied to the affected areas to alleviate inflammation.
E alcunas vetz es dissolvuda am assidua fricacio leugiera que sia am las mas humidas, e sia administrat movement del membre a tota partida en totas horas.	 When some veins are dissolved by cold humidity they cause leg pain that occurs during the day and lasts for hours.
Mays si tortuositat ja es anada denant e es fayta fort e convertida es en peyra e provocada es necessitat a curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que sia le pus desus cecsat e la continuacio del os sia dissolvut, e sia inscidit aquo que superflueys de nodacio de aquel meteys am le os am inscissoris subtils, e sia aministrada facilitat en aquel am sollicitut e studi.	 The tortuous veins become rigid and twisted as a result of cold humidity; they must be treated with care to prevent further complications, such as the dissolution or bursting of the veins themselves, which may lead to the loss of small capillaries due to the delicate nature of their rupture, and it should be done in a manner that avoids causing harm to nearby tissues while still achieving its goal.
Capitol .xxiii.	 Chapter 33
De sermo en dislocacio.	 On Dislocation
Dislocacio es eyssiment de alcuna de las juncturas del sieu loc, per que es prohibida de movement, e es orrezada la figura del membre, e fa venir sobre le malaute dolors e lesios grans.	 A dislocation is the act of forcibly separating a joint from its place, which prevents movement and results in severe injuries to the member.
Donc quan accideys ad alcu dislocacio, lahoras cove tantost perforsar que sia reduzit, e no tarde aquela reduzir, quar si es tardada, le loc es apostemat e fort leu am aquo es fayta dificil la reduccio de dislocaccio.	 When an accident occurs with a dislocation, doctors must act quickly to reduce it, and not let any delay pass by in which case the joint is separated from its place, causing severe damage and making reduction of dislocation difficult.
E per aysso no cove que sia maugut ni stendut en la hora de la apostemacio, quar motas veguadas fa venir spasme e dolors ledentz.	 And thus it cannot be that they should be held back or restrained during the time of the reduction procedure, as spasms and pain may come to light.
Mays quan aquo accideys, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la flaubotomia del malaute, e aprop sia layssat entro que repause le apostema; e aprop le membre sia embrocat am aygua cauda e oli, e aprop sia reduzit am facilitat.	 When that happens, doctors should proceed to the cautery of the patient's foot and place their hand over it to prevent the intestine from coming out, then return it back into its cavity; apply wet water and oil to the member and reduce in a manner that is easy.
E tot membre sia curat am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra en son loc.	 The first member being treated here will bring memory back into its location.
E yeu ja e ordenatz les capitols de dislocacio segon que es precedit en fractura; de la partida del cos pus sobirana entro a la partida pus dejos.	 After the previous dislocation of the limb, begin from the point where the fracture occurred towards the opposite side.
Capitol .xxiiii.	 The twenty-fourth chapter.
De curacio de dislocacio de la mandibula dejos.	 Treatment for dislocation of the jaw is as follows...
So dislocadas las doas mandibulas si no tart; e la dislocacio de amdos es fayta segon una de dos manieyras: que o son remaugudas de lurs locs per pauca remocio, e so mollificadas un petit; o so dislocadas per entiera dislocacio e complida, entro que sian mollificadas a la partida de la junctura entro que corro saliva del malaute e que no puesca tenir aquela ni puesca claure la sua boca, e la lengua de lu sia envolopada en sa paraula.	 If the two jaws cannot be reduced by little force (the first method), they are dislocated and held open by a third party, with their mouths closed to prevent saliva from escaping; or if this is not possible, then perform a complete dislocation into which saliva must run out and the patient's tongue is covered over his mouth.
Mays quan la dislocacio de lu es pauca, lahoras en las majors disposicios retorna per si an pauca causa.	 When the dislocation is slight, the pains return in a great many ways.
Mays si la dislocacio es entiera e complida, lahoras cove que sia administrada reduccio de lu leugierament, e no sia tardada de tot.	 If the dislocation is complete and painful, then treatment for it should immediately be given, and not delayed at all.
E es que·l ministre tengua le cap del malaute, e entrometa lo metge le dit pous de la una sieua ma en la razit de la dislocacio de la mandibula dedintz la boca de lu, si la dislocacio es de la una part; o que entrometa les sieus dos pouzes ensemps, si la dislocacio es de doas partz, e les autres ditz de las mas de lu sian defora am les quals enguale; e comanda al malaute que cesse las suas mandibulas e absolva aquelas anar de quascuna partida; e le metge engualhe la mandibula e enpellisca la mandibula entro que retorne al sieu loc.	 The minister shall hold the patient's head, and have his mouth open for the treatment of dislocation of one jaw only (if partial) or both jaws simultaneously if there are two dislocations; and in either case have another servant remove those that are further away from where they should go, so as to align them properly. And command the patient to close their jaws and allow them to fall back into place; then the surgeon shall open the mouth again and pull it back into position.
E si dificil es la reducio de lu, e majorment si amdos las mandibulas so essemps dislocadas, lahoras aministra evoporacio am aygua cauda e oli, entro que sia fayta leugiera la reduccio de amdos e no tardes la reduccio de amdos de tot, ayssi quo havem dit.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customary to call gout by doctors.
E donc cum retornam e so engualadas, e es clausa la boca del malaute e no es mollificada, lahoras pausa sobre aquelas polvils de drap am cerot, e sia fayt de cera e oli rozat; e aprop sia liat am facilitat am liamens mols.	 Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out.
E sia le dormir del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e·l cap de lu sia stant entre dos aurelhes, per so que no maugue aquel a la partida dreyta ni a la sinistra; e no li fassas per forsa masteguar alcuna causa; habans la sieua vianda sia forbicio leon, entro que quan las dolors sian remaugudas e las mandibulas so nozadas, lahoras maugue aquo que vol.	 Then place the patient's head between two pillows to prevent it from rolling to either side; and do not let any other cause a disturbance of its position; have established their base as requested, when the pains subside and the mouth is closed, you may proceed
E aquo sia aministrat am facilita, e no trebalhe sobre la apercio de la boca deves la comestio e beure e ocitatio, entro que la mandibula sia nozada e sanada.	 Then administer the medication that is to be given through this opening of the mouth; and drink water as requested when the mouth is opened; having closed it after having given or taken the medicine, and having made sure the mouth has been rinsed
E si es dificil la reduccio de duas mandibulas quan so dislocadas en alcuna hora e no so convertidas als lors locs, lahoras motas veguadas accideysso febres e soda assidua, e fort leu es alerguat le ventre del malaute, e fort leu e vomeys colera pura.	 If it is difficult to reduce both mouths at the same time and they are not converted into the correct positions during the day or night; then after a bath of vinegar and salt water, and having drunk pure cold water, do you get heartburn from the patient's belly, and suffer severe and frequent attacks of colic.
E quan tu vezes aquo, lahoras sapias que es perdicio; e motas veguadas mor aquel al qual accideys aquo en x dias.	 When you do this, the pains disappear; and sometimes it lasts until the person who gets that affliction meets with something like it in a certain number of days
Capitol .xxv.	 Chapter 25
De reduccio de la dislocacio de la furcula e de la extremitat del muscle.	 Correction of dislocation of the shoulder and arm extremity
Furcula no es dislocada del latz dedintz per la sua continuacio am le pietz; e alcunas veguadas es dislocada a la partida defora, e aquo es declarat al sentiment.	 The furcula is not dislocated by the continued pressure on its chest; and some patients are dislocated at the outset of treatment, as indicated here.
E la restauracio de lu es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos e extenda les sieus brasses.	 The restoration procedure is that the patient lies flat on their back and extends their limbs.
E aprop coarta le loc am la tua palma am fort coartacio, quar ela retornara.	 With a firm grasp at its base, where it returns to place itself
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre e pulvils e strenh aquela.	 Place your hand gently on the pad and pulp of that [area], and strain lightly over there.
Mays la extremitat de aquel que siec le coyde e·s continuat am aquel, no es dislocada en alcun dia; lahoras cove que sia reduzida e engualhada segon que havem dit e segon que es a tu aparelhat.	 The extremity that was dislocated will remain so until [unspecified time], and the pain is reduced and healed as you've been told, and after treatment is complete.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre, e pulvils, e extrictura, e comanda al malaute adherir a trenquilitat e a repaus entro que sia sanat.	 Gently place your hand on the pad and pulp, apply pressure over there, guiding the patient to remain still while it is being treated with calm and stillness.
E am aquesta meteyssa curacio es reduzida la extremita del muscle quan es separada del sieu loc.	 The procedure of reduction is reduced when the extremity is separated from its place.
Capitol .xxvi.	 Chapter 26
De la reduccio de la dislocacio del muscle.	 Correction of dislocation of the limb.
Sapias que·l muscle no es dislocat sino segon tres manieras, de las quals es la una que sia dislocat a la partida del titillic a la partida dejos.	 The first sentence translates to "The muscle is not dislocated, but only in three ways, one of which it is dislocated at the start of the thigh and another at the end of the thighs.
E la segonda es que sia dislocat a la partida desus del muscle, e aquo es fayt tart; e no es dislocat a las partidas detras per la spalla; e no es dislocat a las partidas denant per les nervis.	 The second sentence translates to "And the second way is that it is dislocated at the start of its muscle, and this is done with caution; and it is not dislocated from behind on the back; and it is not dislocated in front by the nerves.
E majorment es dislocat e defora eyssit a las partidas dejos deves le titillic, e majorment en aquels dels quals las carns son paucas, leugierament es dislocat; mays en aquels en les quals so motas carns, es eyssit fora am dificultat.	 "Furthermore, if dislocated in the place where the bones are scarce, it is done with great care; meanwhile, if in those in which the movements of the limbs are less, it is done with difficulty; and also on those that have fewer movements, it is done outside with greater difficulty.
E fort leu accideys ad alcus homes percussio o cazement, e le muscle de lu es apostemat de apostema caut, e es cujat per aquo que ja sia dislocat.	 "If the blow strikes forcefully on these bones and the muscle is dislocated with caution, then it is done in such a way that it has already been dislocated.
Adonc cove que tu sproes aquo entro que estias sobre-sertetut de lu, e lahoras procesiscas en la curacio de lu.	 "Furthermore, once you are above the level of his chest, the physician will proceed to examine him with great care.
E es conoguda la dislocacio de lu quan es a las partidas dejos deves le titillic; per so que distingescas entre le muscle dislocat e·l muscle sa, quar tu atrobas entre aquels diversitat manifesta; e atrobas en le cap del muscle concavitat e dejos le titillic deves le tocament del cap del muscle ayssi quo un huou, e al malaute no pot redusir la sua ma a la sieua aurelha, ni maure aquela per totz movementz.	 "You can distinguish between the dislocated and the normal muscle by noting whether there is concavity at its end or if it is straight; you also look for the concavity of the thigh bone and note how much motion in that direction it has, so that one hand cannot reduce to the head of the muscle without moving all over.
Si es dislocat deves le pietz o ensus, e tu lahoras atrobas manifest tocament, e no es amaguat.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, it causes pain in the feet as well, and it is customarily called gout by doctors.
E de aquesta dislocacio es fayta leugiera reduccio quan es fresca e le malaute es enfant.	 If this dislocation occurs when fresh and the patient is warm, do reduce its size quickly, otherwise not to be concerned.
E la reduccio de lu es que·l ministre eleva la ma de lu a las partidas desus; e aprop pause les tieus pouses dejos le titillic de lu, e eleva la junctura am fortaleza en sus al sieu loc, e·l ministre eleva la ma de lu, e extenda aquela en sus; e aprop pausa aquela dejos quar ela retorna leugierament.	 The reduction of it should be made while lifting the patient's hand to their chest, and placing a cushion under them as well, so that no parts are harmed by the motion.
Mays si per aquo que havem dit no retorna, e so del comensament que accidic la dislocacio, motz dias, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia banhat en aygua cauda e sia aministrada enbrocacio que mollifique e liniesca ayssi cum si so coytz razitz de altea, e fenugrec, e melillot en aygua, e sia administrada.	 If you have previously said not to return it or if the procedure is just starting, then days later, doctors should ensure that the patient's feet are elevated and moist with a compress, which will help soothe any discomfort caused by swelling, friction, and chills from the injury itself as well as treatment.
E aprop le malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu dos e sia pausat dejos le titillic de lu espera de lana que sia engual entre levitat e strictura, e aprop le metge pause le sieu talo sobre la spera, e eleva le cap del muscle am vertut, e atire la ma del malaute per que no sia mauguda a las partidas dejos, e autre ministre tengua le cap del malaute, que no sia maugut a las partidas dejos, quar aquela tantost retorna al sieu loc.	 And hold the patient's head up with support so that it does not fall back down during lifting and straining, and place your hand over their mouth to prevent choking or gagging as well, while another minister holds the head of the muscle at its top, and have a cushion placed under the patient's arm to keep them from being hurt by supporting their upper body.
E si voles, reduzeys aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu fassas esser prezent un home le qual sia pus lonc que·l malaute, e estia de la part de aquel latz, e entrometa le sieu muscle dejos le titillic del malaute e eleve le titillic de lu a las partidas desus entro que·l malaute sia suspendut en ayre, e autre ministre tire la ma del malaute de las partidas dejos del sieu ventre.	 "If you want to, then reduce that second man's member in the same way: and it is customary for you to have a servant present who is large enough to be able to reach into the patient's side, from which he will remove the testicles of the patient and lift them up towards your shoulder. And another servant should take hold of the patient's scrotum and gently pull him out through his belly.
Mays si le malaute es leugier, lahoras cove que am lu que autre causa sia suspenduda, per so que grave aquel, quar la dislocacio retorna tantost.	 "If a hernia is likely to occur, then the doctor orders that another servant should be suspended so that it cannot move around.
E es reduzit eysament segon autra manieyra: e es que sia ficat en terra un fust lonc le cap del qual sia redon de figura, ayssi cum pilo de mortier, que no sia gros ni subtil, e aprop sia pausat dejos le malaute; pus que so pausatz sobre·l cap del fust draps leons, e·l malaute sia stant segon la longitut del fust, e aprop sia extenduda la ma de lu a las partidas dejos del autra part; e sia extendut le cos de lu del autre part am fortaleza, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	 "You then proceed with another servant: and that you have placed on the top of his head someone whose body is broad but not too thick or soft, so that they can be lifted up by the patient's hands and held firmly while he moves around; and place your hand over the other part to prevent it from leaving. And extend the body of him with the strength required for the joint movement, as the hernia returns back to its place in a hurry.
E si es dificil reduccio de lu per totas las causas que havem ditas, lahoras usa de aquesta cura: e es que tu prenguas un fust la quantitat del qual sia en le lonc de dos brasses, e latitut de aquel sia de quatre ditz, e la grossetut de lu sia aleujat en le preon del tittilic segon aquesta forma:	 "If the reduction is difficult due to all the causes mentioned before, then the doctor uses this cure. And it is customary for you to take a cushion that has the length of two fists and width of four fingers, and its thickness should be as little as possible.
E aprop sobre le cap redon sian liatz drap leons per so que·l fust no ledesca le malaute.	 The physician approaches the patient's head to prevent the fall of the hernia into their face.
E aprop sia pausat dejos le titillic del malaute, e sia extenduda la ma o le bras sobre·l fust entro a las partidas dejos, e sia liat le fust sobre le adjutori e le bras e la extremitat de la ma.	 The physician places the patient's thighs and extends his hand or arm above the face to prevent the hernia from falling into their face.
Aprop sia pausat le bras sobre un scalo de scala segon la latitut, e la ma sia extenduda a las partidas dejos, e l’autre cos sia suspendut de l’autre part, quar la junctura intra tantost.	 The physician places the patient's hands on a flat surface at an angle and extends his arm to prevent the internal hernia from falling out.
E cum le intrament de lu es complit segon quascuna maniera que es a tu possibla, e lahoras cove que tu pauses dejos le titillic spera de lana de engual quantitat; e aprop pauza emplastre perparat de polvera de moli am enses e album de huou sobre tot le muscle, ayssi quo es revolvut desus, e aprop strenh dejos le titillic am strictura decent; e le liament sia revolvut sobre le emplastre, e la ma de lu sia annectida al col de lu, e sia leyssat, e no sia mauguda la ma de lu per vii dias.	 With the help of a skilled attendant, the physician places them on the stretcher and spreads out their limbs as much as possible to prevent straining during transport or removal from muscle tissue damage.
E cove que sia pausada la vianda del malaute pauca, entro que·l membre sia confortat, quar es pus leugier a la sanacio de lu.	 The physician gently places the patient's member as little as possible, ensuring that their body is supported to facilitate healing and recovery.
E aprop la vianda sia donada major aprop vii o v e sia exercitat un movement; e donc si es fermat e no es mollificat, lahoras ja es sanat.	 The physician first gently places the patient's member but does not overly restrict it to prevent swelling or restriction of blood flow, and if fixed in position is maintained without relaxation after surgery, the physician has completed their work.
Mays si la junctura es dislocada motas veguadas per humiditat que accideys a lu o per autra causa, lahoras cove que en aquela sia administrat cauteri am tres traucs, segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri.	 If the joint is dislocated due to humidity or other reasons, then doctors administer three incisions as mentioned in the chapter on surgery for its treatment.
E si tot aysso es fayt e aprop vii dias es desliat le liament e la junctura no es fermada, e le emplastre e la strictura son reduzitz sobre lu alcunas veguadas, e no es fermada e catz e no pot elevar aquel bras a las partidas desus, lahoras sapias que·ls nervis de lu, les quals so al cap del muscle, ja so inscizes o extendutz o mollificatz, e sapia que la junctura nul temps no sira ficada en loc sieu.	 When the ligament and joint are not fixed yet, and the space is reduced between the thighs, you have already opened this part to the patient's legs, placed a cushion under them, another on their chest, another on their hands holding them in place.
De la dislocacio de aquela qu’es fayta deves le pietz e la mamilha o las partidas detras, la reduccio es fayta am impulcio e extencio am las mas, entro que retorne.	 From the dislocation of that which you have already done on the back and buttocks, return to place the pillow or the mattress behind them, extending it as much as possible in front of where they are.
E sia administrada en aquela l’autra strictura, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	 And having administered that other stretch, apply this one so that it heals completely
E si accideys aprop la sanacio gravitat en le membre e tarditat en le movement de lu, lahoras le malaute uze de banh motas veguadas entro que aquela gravitat sia alleujada e que retorne a la natura de lu primiera.	 And if the severe pain occurs in one of the legs and is accompanied by slow movements, doctors will apply gentle massages to relieve this gravity and return it to its normal state.
Capitol .xxvii.	 Chapter 27.
De curacio de dislocacio del coyde.	 Treatment of dislocation of the hip.
Sapias que la junctura del coyde es dislocada am difficultat e semblantment retorna am difficultat; e aquela es dislocada a totas partidas, e majorment a la partida denant a la partida detras, e la dislocacio de lu no es amaguada a tu quar es cazent dejos le vezement o dejos le tocament segon qualque figura sia dislocat, e quan ajustes le coyde disloguat am le sa, aquo es a tu declarat manifestament, quar la junctura es concavada e no pot doblar le bras, ni tocar am aquel le sieu muscle.	 When the hip joint is dislocated and returns to its normal position with difficulty, or when it is dislocated from both sides, especially behind the front side, and the dislocation of it cannot be restored without great force, as you try to straighten out your leg by holding that part back while standing on one foot.
E cove que·t coytes, e reduzescas la dislocacio tantost denant que vengua a lu apostema caut, quar si ve a lu apostema caut, dificil es la reduccio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot; e majorment quan es a las partidas detras, quar pus mala es de totas las autras specias de dislocacio, e de major dolor, e motas veguadas deyssen am aquela la mort.	 When the patient's body is opened up to expose the dislocated part of their thigh or leg, then you will put a cushion underneath them and another on their legs as well, and another on their chest holding their hands in front so that they cannot be torn out, while keeping it open until after the cautery procedure has been performed.
E la restauracio de lu, quan es aquela que es possibla reduzir, es que la ma de lu sia extenduda am doas mas, e le bras de lu sia expandut, e las mas del metge sian sobre le coyde e dejos lu, e el empellisca la junctura am les pouzes de las suas mas ensemps, o am la razit de la sua palma entro que torne en son loc.	 The restoration of the leg will happen if it is possible to reduce by extending its foot and its arms, by spreading open its muscles, and putting a band around its ankle in order to prevent it from being torn out during this procedure.
Mays si la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras retorna ayssi que dobla la ma am la sua ma, entro que percuta le coyde am la razit de la sua palma.	 If the dislocation is at the front of the leg, then doctors will pull their hands apart and cut into the area of the palm to restore it.
E si la dislocacio no obezeys a la reduccio, lahoras aministra vehement extencio e mot fort.	 If the dislocation cannot be reduced, doctors will administer strong stretching and force-ful measures.
E es que dos ministres extendan le bras, e tenguan aquel eyssament dos ministres per so que no sia remaugut deves la extencio.	 Two ministers are holding them apart to prevent the stretching from pulling their hands away too far.
E aprop sia revolvut le bras deves tota part, pus que es envolopat drap doblat lonc sobre la ma de lu, o liament.	 Then they wrap around both arms of the patient tightly with a long bandage over their hand and arm.
E quant le metge toca la junctura am la sua ma, unte aquela am alcun oli per so que aquo sia aquelas causas las quals ajudan en lubricitat de la junctura am facilitat; e aprop empellesca la junctura am empulcio vehement entro que retorne.	 When the doctor cuts into the area of their palm, they will lubricate it to ease friction and prevent any harm that could come from tearing or cutting. After this procedure is completed, doctors should then tightly pull the joint back so it can be restored with a force.
E aprop la reduccio de lu cove que sia pausat sobre aquela empastre en le qual sia stipticitat e excequacio am album de huou, e sia extrenhut am strictura descent, e·l bras sia suspendut del col, e sia layssat per alcus dias.	 The first step is to place a cushion under the patient's thighs and another on their legs, ensuring they have support while lying down.
E aprop sia desliat; e donc si la junctura es formada en le sieu loc, lahoras tu deslia le liament de lu e layssa aquela.	 The next step is to loosen the joint and place a cushion over it, ensuring good support for the patient as they lie down.
E si vezas la junctura no be strenher, lahoras tu itera le emplastre e·l liament, e layssa aquela per alcus dias entro que sia extrenhuda; e aprop deslia aquela.	 If the joint is not stiff, apply some lubricant to help with mobility and place a cushion over it for support during treatment.
Mays si accideys a lu gravitat aprop la reduccio de la junctura, e la disposicio de lu es en movement, lahoras aministra humectacio en banh e fricacio subtil, e comprecio, entro que sia aleujat; o pausa sobre la junctura aleliati, so es coyssa de moto grassa; e aprop sia liada, e layssa aquela sobre le os le dia e la nueyt.	 If gravity becomes an issue when loosening the joint and movement occurs after that, apply a lubricant to lubricate it gently but not too much, compress tightly, keeping in mind that some looseness is necessary; pause over the joint occasionally as if you're trying to pull fat off of it, then place it on your elbow or knee.
E aprop osta aquela, e met aquel en banh; e quan suza, lahoras tu fregua la junctura am fricacio temprada, e aprop itera sobre aquela aleliati, so es ronhonal de moto, una veguada, e la segonda, e la .iii.a.,	 Once you've placed the cushion and applied lubricant as needed, ensure that any friction during loosening is minimized; when ready to treat, place it gently over the joint to support motion during treatment but not too hard for optimal movement.
am intrament de banh, entro que sia linit.	 The moment you're applying the lubricant, get ready as soon as possible.
E si voles, pausa sobre aquela fenda de vaca humida e scalfada am boder e stren sobre aquel; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas, quar aquela es humida e reduzeys a la sua disposicio.	 If you wish to, pause over the damp and cold area on your body while applying it to that joint; then apply some warmth after as needed to loosen it up further.
Capitol .xxviii.	 When pain occurs in the feet due to cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, it is commonly called gout by doctors
De curacio de dislocacio de malassen, so es de la junctura que es entre·l bras e la ma.	 During the dislocation of a joint, do not let your arm touch the other hand.
Malassen de la ma alcunas vetz es deslocada, e la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es leugiera, e·l contrari es de las autras juncturas, mays empero cove que sia velocitat en la reduccio de lu en la hora en la qual es deslocada, denant que le loc sia apostemat o que accida en lu apostema caut.	 When dislocation occurs on one arm and the reduction of it happens gently, then contrary to other joints, however fast it should be done at the time of dislocation so that the location is not lost or if it were to occur in the location where the cautery was previously made.
E la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es que tu pauses la junctura de la ma del malaute sobre una taula e le ministre extenda la ma de aquel, e le metge pause la sua ma o o la sua palma sobre la iminencia de la junctura, e empellisca aquela entro que retorne al sieu loc.	 The reduction of the dislocation is to place the patient's arm on a table and have the attendant extend the patient's hand towards it; then the doctor places their own hand or palm over the imminence of the joint, and pushes that back into its location.
Mays empero cove que sia considerat si la palma ja es ostada al ventre de la ma, lahoras le malaute pause le dos de la sua ma sobre una taula deves la extencio e la reduccio; e si la dislocacio es precedent deves le dos de la ma, lahoras sia la posicio de la ma de aquel intrinicequement sobre la taula, per so que la ma del metge caja sobre aquela iminencia de la junctura.	 If the patient's palm is already on their belly and there are no previous dislocations, then place both of the patient's hands on a table and have the attendant extend one; if the dislocation was previously done with one hand only, then position them intrinsically over the table so that the doctor's hand lies over the imminence of the joint.
E donc si retorna tantost, bon es; e sino, lahoras strenh aquela am empastre cedant le apostema e layssa aquel; e no iteres aquo, quar sino, no soferta ni no podes sobre la reduccio de lu pus que passan a lu dias.	 If that is the case then good, otherwise they will struggle with their arm pressed back and place it there; and if you do not agree or cannot, neither should be done nor can proceed to reduction without passing through them days.
Mays empero la junctura roman segon la sua tortuositat; e no notz al malaute alcuna causa, sino que la ma es mollificada e no pot strenher alcuna causa; lahoras sapias que les nervis son trincatz o trissatz, e lahoras no es engen en lu sino que sia strenhuda am cauteri prop le cazament de lu e fort leu aquo confereys alcuna causa.	 When joint pain is caused by a tortuous movement; and there is no cause for the patient other than its stiffness, softening it with gentle care can prevent any harm; knowing that nerves are strained or twisted because of this, doctors say that gout occurs due to excessive heat in the joints
Donc cum malassem es retornada, lahoras pausa sobre lu empastre le qual havem recomtat, e sia layssat e strenhut per v dias; e aprop sia desliat e sia layssat e la ma de lu sia excercitada.	 After the return of the intestine or hernia to its cavity is complete, gently massage it as recommended by doctors, and stretch it daily while also exercising the hand that held it tightly
Mays si le movement de lu es ostat e accideys en lu alcuna gravitat, lahoras leniys aquela am aygua cauda e am fricacio alcunas veguadas, entro que sia alleujat.	 If the movement of it is excessive and causes harm to its surrounding area or viscera, doctors will loosen that portion of the muscle as much as possible to alleviate any discomfort.
Capitol .xxix.	 The end
De la curacio de dislocacio dels ditz.	 From the care for dislocation of those things
Alcunas veguadas so dislocatz les ditz a tota partida.	 All the parts will be dislocated at once.
E quan es dislocat alcun dit de aquels al dos de la palma o al ventre de lu, lahoras sten le dit e impelleys la dislocacio de lu am les tieus pouses, entro que retorne.	 If any part of those things is dislocated between the two hands or in the stomach, then doctors will stretch it and try to prevent further dislocation by keeping both hands pressed together, until it returns to place.
E aprop sostenta le cap del dit, e suspen aquel deves la part a la qual es dislocat, e layssa aquel per dos dias.	 Then hold the head of the dislocated part and support that in the hand where it was dislocated with gentle care, stretching for two days.
E aprop suspen aquel e exten aquel entro que dreyt sia engualhat en aquel sieu dia.	 Then suspend it gently and stretch it continuously until both sides are even again.
E quan sira noyt, lia aquel segon aquela narracio, e no cesses desliar aquel en le dia e exercitar am movement, e lia aquel en la noyt; e fay aquo per alcus dias entro que sia streyt.	 When the second is done, I will then tell you another story and exercise that part of your body every day until it's finished; this may take several days to complete.
E fay semblant am aquo, si es dislocat al ventre de la ma, e lia aquel ad aquela partida e fay am aquo la tieua primiera operacio, entro que sia sanat.	 If the stomach is dislocated from the body's front, lie on that side and perform your first operation, making sure it heals properly.
E semblantment fay am aquo quan es dislocat a las autres partidas.	 Similarly, do this when you have dislocated any other parts of the body.
Capitol .xxx.	 [No meaning found]
De la curacio de dislocacio dels spondils del dos.	 The cure for dislocation of the spine from both sides.
Quan accideys ad alcun dels spondils del dos o del col dislocacio complida, e so remaugutz motz spondils de lors locs, lahoras en aquela no es curacio, quar la mort se coyta al malaute.	 If either of the two sides or the neck are dislocated and they cannot be restored to their normal position, then there is no cure; in fact death comes for the patient.
E senhal de aquo es que la egestio del malaute es fora-eyssida ses voluntat, e no pot retenir aquela; e motas veguadas so mollificatz alcus membres de lu o doas cambas de lu o dos brasses de lu, o un de aquels; o es remaugut un spondil de son loc, quar motas veguadas es remaugut e motas veguadas es fayta la remocio de aquels a quatre partidas.	 This means that the vomiting of the patient is outside their will and cannot be controlled; and any attempt to control it may make some of your muscles weak or do damage to your kidneys, liver, lungs, or any one of these organs; if you try to restore a spine back into its place, all attempts at restoration will fail, and all efforts made to restore the same will ultimately lead to death.
Donc aquela ja es remauguda a las partidas detras e es nompnada gelbozitat.	 So this has been done on both sides of it; no more attempt can be made after that
Mays la curacio de lu es que lahoras consideras si la gelbozitat accidey de puerissia, quar lahoras en aquela no es curacio ni de aquela no es sanacio de tot.	 The care of him is that the pain arises from cold humors infiltrating each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it's customary for doctors to call this gout
Mays en aquela que ve per cazement o per percussio o per semblant ad aquels, ja diyssero les Antics las manieras de curacio am sermo prolixs, del qual lo mays retorna am profieyt; mays yeu ja e abreujat de aquel del qual lo pauc escusa del trop de lu, per la mieua propinquitat a la entencio mieua exposicio, am la qual he aquo expausat et format ex instrument divers de aquel am le qual mostrero aquo e espausero aquel.	 The care of him may also involve percussive or percussive percussion on such parts, the ancient ways of treatment being most effective in this case. The practitioner should have prepared instruments for this purpose and apply them to that part of his body, so as to remove the excess from it, by the close proximity to another part of the body mentioned previously
E dic que en gelbosita que accideys de la partida denant en le pietz, no es engen ni sanacio de aquela; e semblantment en aquela que es fayta a dos latz.	 The care may also involve treating the space between the patient's thighs and placing cushions under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
E de aquelas no es curada sino aquela que accideys en le dos propriament am aquo que yeu recomti.	 The care does not include treating the part of his body where it has already been mentioned above, but rather treatment on another part that is specifically recommended in this case.
E es que·l malaute sia extendut sobre la sua cara sobre pug engual prop de paret, e sia extendut dejos lu esturment molh per so que no sia lidit le pietz de lu.	 The patient should be laid flat on their back and have something wet applied to prevent the feet from being exposed.
E aprop un fust dreyt sia pausat, ficat en la terra en la extremitat del pug entorn le cap de lu, e autra fust en aviro les pes de lu en l’autra extremitat del pueg.	 Place a pillow flat on the ground near their head and also place one on each of their feet in the other extremity of their body.
E·l ministre tengua le fust, e no sia fermat en fossa; e autre ministre tengua l’autre segon aquela forma.	 When the minister has taken hold of it, let it not be fixed into a cavity; another minister takes the other one in that manner
E aprop envolopa sobre le cap del malaute e dejos les titillic liamen leon ferm; e exten la extremitat del liamel al fust le qual es deves le cap de lu, e lia aquel en lu; e aprop strenh l’autre liament sobre las ancas de lu les denols de lu, e deves las cambas de lu; e aprop ajusta totz les liamentz e lia aquels en l’autre fust le qual es deves les pes de lu.	 The first minister shall gently place it on the top of the patient and let them hold it firmly; another minister takes the other one in that manner, placing his arm around her hips to support her; and adjust all the straps so they are placed together on the opposite side from where he places the head of the mattress onto her.
E aprop le ministre cascu extenda le liament a la partida del fust, e no sian remaugutz les dos fustz e les liamentz dels sieus locs en les quals son ficatz, mays empero no so fermatz ayssi cum havem dit.	 The minister holding the straps should extend it to the foot of the mattress without removing the two feet and straps from their places where they are fixed; but not as firmly as we said before.
E le metge pause las suas palmas sobre le spondil am fortaleza entro que retorne, o que pause sobre aquela una taula, e aprop que ajuste sobre la taula les sieus pes entro que retorne.	 The doctor places their palms on the back of the neck and onto a table, and adjusts them so they are positioned at each end of the table when returning.
Mays si no retorna per aquesta forma, lahoras pren una taula de la qual la latitut o la longitut sia en aviro de tres brassas, e cava en la paret de la qual havem dit que es prop le malaute un loc en le qual intre la extremitat de la taula.	 If not returning by that method, the doctors place a table with its latitude or longitude set to three leagues, and face it in such a manner as described for the patient on one side of which they have already spoken.
E aprop pausa la maytat de la taula sobre le spondilh, e·l metge pause les sieus pes sobre l’autre extremitat, e estrenha be entro que le spondil sia coartat e que retorne al sieu loc.	 The doctor places their hands on the back of the neck and onto another side, ensuring that the head is properly positioned as they return to their location.
E si tu voles, obre am torn le qual es revolvut am la ma; e es que tu fiques en terra deves le cap del malaute en le derier del pug dos fustz, la longitut dels quals sia d’un bras, e deves le cap de lu en le derier del pug eyssament dos fustz; e sia la longitut que es entre quascun fust un palm, e ja es fayt en quascun fust trauc en le qual corr torn, e quascun sia mot fermat en terra per so que no sia maugut.	 "If you wish to lift up the leg that is bent upwards and place it on the ground in front of the other leg towards the foot side, make sure there are two fists' width between them; then take hold of its head with one hand and pull it towards your chest, ensuring there are still two fists' width between the fist you used to hold onto it and that part of the body.
E sia mes un fust redon en le qual es le torn, e sia revolvut en les dos traucs dels dos fustz.	 "After you have made a fist with one hand, bend both fists together towards each other in two steps.
E en la extremitat de lu es un trauc en le qual es format le fust, la longueza del qual es un palm am aquo que es revolvut; e en les dos autres fustz es semblant de aquel.	 "In the extremity of it there is a fist that has formed from it and its length matches the one you are using to bend; in both other fists they are similar.
E aprop strenh les liamentz que has streyt en le pietz del malaute en le trau le qual es deves le cap de lu, e les liamentz que has streyts en las coyssas de lu en le torn le qual es deves les pes de lu.	 "Secure the restraints that you placed on the patient's chest and arm to prevent them from pulling away when you are lifting up their leg.
E aprop deves quascun torn e stia un ministre que torssa le torn am la sua ma, e le metge engualhe le spondil segon que havem dit.	 "You should place one hand in the center of your chest and have another doctor hold onto it while you lift up the leg.
E aquesta es la forma del torn:	 "Here is how to perform the move:
E aprop pus que le spondil es retornat, e le loc es engualhat, lahoras cove que pauses empastre exciccatiu am album de huou, e aprop estopa; e aprop pause sobre le empastre astela de taula de la qual la latitut sia de tres ditz o enviro aquels, e la longitut de lu sia quantitat que prengua le loc de la gelbositat, e sobre la partida del spondil sa.	 "After the spinal cord is returned and its location has been established: pause briefly at a sharp edge of the table which length is three inches or longer; then place your hand over this area to stop it.
E aprop sia liat am liament le qual havem dit, e uze le malaute de nutriment subtil entro que sia sanat.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, it is customary to call gout for doctors.
E si roman alcuna iminencia en le loc en la fi de la sanacio, lahoras cove que sian aministradas medicinas que moilifico e liniscan am aministracio de la taula per lonc temps, la qual havem recomtada; e ja es aministrada en aquel loc lamina de plom.	 If there is no urgency in the location of the treatment or it should not be done immediately at the end of the healing process, then the remedies are to be administered gradually and for a long time according to what has been recommended; so that it can be applied at that location with a feather pad.
E alcunas veguadas accideys imminencia en le derier dels spondils del dos, e es cujat per aquela dislocacio; e es aquel os le qual ja imineys per que no cove que sia fayta prosompcio a lu am aquesta medicina, quar fort leu fara a tu accidir mort.	 Some of the reasons for urgency in the lower back are: the dislocation itself, and it is necessary to treat such an injury; then there may be those who have been advised not to apply this medicine due to its cold nature, which can cause frostbite if applied improperly, so do take care that you prevent such an accident.
Capitol .xxxi.	 31st chapter
De curacio de anca dislocada.	 The treatment of dislocated bones.
Sapias que la junctura del ancha e la junctura del muscle no endeve sino dislocacio tant solament, e no accideys ad aquelas aquo que accideys a las autras juncturas de petita remocio e concavitat.	 Joints of large and muscles cannot be dislocated only; but do not apply to those that happen in the other joints with small relief or indentation.
E la junctura de la ancha es dislocada segon quatre manieyras, quar es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, o a las partidas defora, o a las partidas denant, o a las partidas detras.	 The joint of the large is dislocated after four ways: it can be dislocated at the fingertips or on the forehand, inside, outside, front or back.
E majorment es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, e pauc a las partidas denant o a las partidas detras.	 However, it is most likely to dislocate in the direction of the fingertips and slightly towards the front or back.
E senhal de la dislocacio de lu a las partidas de dintz es quar, quan tu ajustas la camba del malaute sana am la malaute, es pus longua e·l denolh es pus heminent que de la sana, e·l malaute no pot doblar le sieu pe deves le lenguonar, e es le loc que siec le lengonar apostemat de apostema caut, per so que·l cap de la coyssa ja es pervengut aqui.	 When the joint is dislocated at a finger's tip or when you adjust the mattress of the patient and the patient becomes pain-free, then the leg must not be allowed to bend; it should remain stiff for fear that its head might protrude from between the cushions
E·l senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio es a las partidas defora, es que les accidentz de lu so contraris ad aquest accident.	 The sentence refers to accidental dislocations being contrary to an intended dislocation (which is not specified in this context).
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas denant es quar expan la camba sieua segon compliment, mays empero no dobla aquela ses dolor que es en le denol, e si se perforsa ad anar e no pot sobre aquo a las partidas denant; e la urina de lu es retenguda e l’engonar de lu es apostemat, e deves la ambulacio de lu sobre le talo.	 If the dislocation occurs as mentioned and the mattress is stretched further than it can handle, then the pain that originates from this should not be bent or allowed to move around between the cushions; hold down the leg with both hands so its movement cannot cause harm.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas detras es que no expande le denol, ni no puesca doblar aquel denant que doble le engonar, e la camba de lu es pus breva que l’autra, e l’engonar es mollificat, e·l cap de la coyssa es deves aquel loc.	 If the dislocation occurs behind and does not expand the pain or cause further movement of the leg that could bend it, then hold down the foot with both hands so its head cannot protrude between the cushions.
Mays reduccio de las specias de aquesta dislocacio es que tu consideras, lahoras, si la dislocacio es vetusta et antiqua, que ja es anticada am le havent aquela aprop tu aministras reduccio de lu e roman segon la sua disposicio, lahoras no es en aquela curacio de tot; e adonc no cove que en aquela sia fayta prosompcio.	 The goal of this procedure is to consider whether the dislocation has already healed and been cured by previous attempts at treatment if it is a persistent or recurring condition, in which case further treatment may not be necessary; otherwise you should proceed with reduction as usual.
Mays en aquel del qual la dislocacio es recent, e es una de las quatre specias de dislocacio, lahoras te coyta ad aquo que volvas la junctura e extendas aquela a las partidas dedintz e a las partidas defora, e mau aquela a la dextra e sinistra, quar fort leu retorna e no indigeys de autra cura.	 When the dislocation is recent and it's one of the four types of dislocations, then you should apply what follows to restore the joint and stretch it in both directions, ensuring that it returns gently without any other cure being needed
Mays, si no retorna en aquesta manieyra, lahoras cove que tu prepares ministre fort e extendas la camba de lu de la partida pus dejos, o am las suas mas, o am liament lo qual es liat sobre la camba desus le denol; e autre ministre extenda la ma de aquel desus enayssi que meta las suas mas dejos les titillics de lu; e aprop strenha am liament leon sobre la razit de la coyssa, e tengua autre ministre ters le extremitat del liament.	 If it does not return in this manner, then apply a strong stretch to the limb from which it occurred, stretching both sides of that limb separately, or across the chest if possible; and apply a hand strap on top of that limb so as to prevent any more hiccups from coming out.
E sia extencio de lu o de la partida dedintz a l’angonar a la partida de la furcula, o de la partida detras a la partida del dos.	 Stretch the arm towards the opposite arm or stretch across it if possible to prevent any more hiccups from coming out.
E sia la extencio de totz aquels en una veguada entro que·l malaute sia elevat am le sieu cos de terra e que romangua pendent.	 Stretch the whole body of that patient as much as possible towards the ground, and hold them in position while you wait.
E aquesta specia de extencio es specia cominal a totas quatre.	 This type of stretch is common to all four types.
E donc si la dislocacio retorna am aquo que havem dit, sira bo; e sino, lahoras es necessari a tota specia aquo que dire de la propria curacio.	 If the dislocation returns in the manner that we've described then yes, and if not, then you should apply another type of treatment based on your own judgement.
En la reduccio de lu propria, quan es dislocada, e la dislocacio es a las partidas dedintz, cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu latz sa; e aprop pausa les liamentz sobre la razit de la coyssa en aquel loc le qual entre le cap de la coyssa e·l loc que es dejos le langonar; e aprop exten le liament en sus de la part del angonar a la pus auta partida de la furcula.	 When the dislocation occurs at the base, when the dislocation is at the bottom of that arm, place your elbow on top of their head so as to prevent any more hiccups from coming out; and stretch across both elbows towards the top of the shoulder and the upper part of the arm next to it.
E aprop autre ministre fort prengua les brasses de lu, e amerme le loc gros de la coyssa malaute e extenda a las partidas deforo per extencio vehement, quar aquela retorna en le sieu loc.	 When you have placed the patient on their back and opened up space between their thighs with a cushion, prepare to insert a large cushion into the opening of the hernia, extend it towards the heart in order to force it out violently as soon as possible so that it returns where it belongs.
E aquesta specia es de pus leugiera curacio am la qual aquest membre es reduzit que las autres specias.	 This treatment is used when one member of the body has been reduced in size compared to others
Mays si es excusat sobre tu e no obezeys al entrament am aquesta specia de curacio de tot, lahoras cove que sian liatz les dos pes del malaute ensemps am liament fort, leugier, sobre amdos les talos e amdos les denols.	 When performing this treatment, hold both of the patient's legs tightly and firmly, supporting them at the bottom as well as their ankles.
E sia la longitut de quascun de son par la quantitat de quatre ditz, e sia la camba malaute extenduda mays que l’autre per quantitat de dos ditz.	 The length of each leg should be equal to the quantity of four spans, and the patient's bed should be extended more than the other by two spans.
E aprop le malaute sia suspendut sobre le cap del fust, e que sia en la mayso; e sia la longitut de lu de la terra la quantitat de dos brasses.	 Place the patient on their back facing upwards and make sure it is on a flat surface that measures two spans in length.
E aprop comanda a un jove fort que minuesca le cap de la coyssa, e sia suspendut am le malaute autre jove, e l’autre jove minuent la coysa am fortaleza empellesca, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	 Prepare a strong young man to reduce the size of the hernia and place him on top of the patient, with his knees at an angle that pushes it back into its proper location quickly.
Mays en la reducio propria, quan es dislocacio a la partida defora, cove que·l malaute jaga sobre pug segon que havem recomtat en le havent gelbozitat; e sia strenhut le liament sobre la camba malauta propriament e sobre le pietz de lu.	 When performing this treatment with the patient lying on their back and experiencing dislocation, you should ensure that they remain in place as tightly as possible while also holding them down by placing your hand firmly over their abdomen and chest.
E aprop dos fustz sian pausatz, la un als pes de lu, e l’autre al cap; e aprop sian pausatz fustz ajustatz al mieg del pueg ficat sobre·l qual draps humitz sian envolopatz, per so que·l malaute no sia dampnajat per que·l fust sia entre las coyssas de lu, per que deves la extencio a las partidas dejos no sia atirat.	 "Place the cushion under their buttocks and another on top of them; place one cushion beneath their head as well.
E aprop quascun ministre extenda a la sua part, e·l metge am la sua ma enguala la reduccio segon l’art.	 "The doctor extends his arm towards the patient and gently guides the reduction according to the art.
Donc, si obezeys a revercio, sira bo grandament; e sino, pausa sobre aquela diligentment e ayssi quo havem dit en gelbozitat per aquela engualment.	 "If the gout pain goes away by itself, it will be greatly relieved; if not, stop applying the pointed cautery and do as mentioned before.
Mays cove que·l malaute jagua sobre les sieus latz sa quetament.	 "The patient should lie flat on their back at once.
E quan la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras cove que la camba sia extenduda leugierament, e es segon aquesta meteyssa narracio sobre pueg; e le metge pause la palma de la sua ma dreyta sobre·l langonar malaute, e aprop coarte aquel am l’autra ma, e am aquela coartacio pausa aquel extendut a las partidas dejos a la partida del denol.	 "When the dislocation occurs on their lower limbs, they should gently stretch out their leg towards the doctor; and after that, tell the story of how to do it for them. The doctor places his hand over the patient's hand and guides the other arm to place a cushion under both legs at once.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas detras, lahoras no cove que·l malaute sia extendut a las partidas dejos, e es elevat sobre la terra; habantz cove que sia pausat sobre causa dura, ayssi cum cove le eyssament si l’ancha de lu es dislocada a las partidas defora, segon aquo que havem dit del jasement de lu sobre dos anchas; e es sobre la sua cara e les liamentz sian extendutz, segon que havem dit, no ha guayre.	 "If the dislocation occurs on their upper limbs behind, they should not force them to stretch out both legs at once but instead lie flat on the ground; hold down their head and shoulders so that they cannot move, as mentioned before.
E cove que sia aministrada compressio am taula sobre le loc al qual yeys la junctura.	 The compression treatment should be applied to the location of the joint that experiences pain.
Donc cum la reducio es complida segon que cove — e·l senhal de la reduccio de lu no es amaguat a tu, e es que tu extendas del malaute doas cambas, e quan tu vezes aquelas enguals e le malaute extrenh la sieua camba e expandeys aquela ses excusacio, lahoras sapias que·l membre segon que cove es retornat — e lahoras tu ajusta doas coyssas e pausa empastre e extrenh am benda ayssi que la ancha no sia mauguda en alcuna de las partidas; e adheresca le malaute a repaus per tres dias o per quatre.	 After the reduction is complete and you extend both legs of the patient, when you pass over their groin area and expand that space, then the doctors know that the second member will be returned - and adjust two cushions and pause compression to stretch as wide so that it isn't too tight in any part.
E aprop deslia le liament e l’empastre, e compara la una camba am l’autra.	 After applying the reduction and compression, compare one leg with the other
Lahoras, si vezas aquelas enguals en vustament, lahoras sapias que la dislocacio ja es fermada, e adonc layssa le malaute anar.	 Then if you have stretched those fingers as wide as possible, the doctors know that the dislocation is fixed and you can remove the patient's foot now
E si vezas alcuna causa de mollificacio, lahoras tu retorna e emplastra aquel, e extrenh aquel segon la tua primiera strectura, e layssa aquel en tres dias.	 If there is no cause for mollification, the doctors return and stretch it again, extend that after your first stretch, then let that be stretched for three days.
E aprop deslia aquel, e fay aquel tardar en ambulacio sobre quascu per alcus dias, entro que sia confortat.	 After stretching that area, let it rest in mobility until you feel comfortable with it.
Capitol .xxxii.	 Chapter 22
De curacio de dislocacio del denolh.	 Treatment of dislocated fingers.
Le denolh es dislocat segon tres manieyras, quar es dislocat a las partidas defora, e a las partidas dedintz, e a las partidas dejos mays a las partidas detras; e a las partidas denant no es dislocat.	 The finger is dislocated after three attempts, if it is dislocated externally or internally and in between the joints; but if not dislocated at all then
E le senhal de dislocacio de lu es que comandes al malaute que aplique la sua camba am la coyssa; lahoras sapias que·l denol es dislocat.	 The first sentence seems to be a medical instruction for repositioning or realigning a hernia, specifically targeting the legs and chest areas of the patient. It commands the servant (possibly a physician's assistant) to apply a cushion on top of each thigh, as if it were a mattress, while holding the patient's hands in order to prevent any dislocation during this maneuver.
E la restauracio de totas las manieyras de lu es que fassas cezer le malaute dreyt, enayssi que ja extenda la sieua camba, si pot sobre aquo; adherir le tieu dos a la cara de lu, e pausa le pe de lu entre les tieus pes; e aprop fay adherir le denol de lu am las tuas palmas, e rete aquelas entre les tieus ditz sobre le denolh de lu am fortaleza, e autre ministre extenda le sieu pe entro que·l denol retorne a son loc.	 The second sentence is another medical instruction for repositioning or realigning the intestines back into place, this time targeting all of their parts (which I assume are organs). It commands the servant to first apply pressure on the patient's abdomen and thighs, then gently extend their belly, and finally hold both hands over the abdominal region while placing a cushion underneath them. The final instruction is to ensure that they return back into place once released from its restraining.
E senhal de reddicio de lu es que la sua camba adharesca am la coyssa am levitat no-laboroza.	 This sentence seems to be an additional instruction for the servant, possibly a physician's assistant or nurse, regarding the reinsertion of an organ back into its place in the patient's body. It commands the assistant to apply pressure on top of the patient's belly and thighs while lifting their legs off the ground, but without exhausting themselves (as indicated by "no-laboroza").
E aprop emplastra aquel e fay adhirir la camba am la coyssa, e aprop lia aquelas emsemps am una benda per tres dias o per quatre, e aprop deslia aquelas.	 This sentence seems to be another instruction for the servant, possibly a physician's assistant or nurse, regarding the application of pressure on top of the patient and their legs in order to reinsert an organ back into its place within the body. It commands the assistant to hold this cushion (possibly a mattress) onto the patient's belly while also securing it with a bandage for three or four days, and then removing it later.
E no uze le malaute de ambulacio per alcus dias, entro que sia sanat e cofortat.	 This sentence seems to be an instruction given to the patient regarding their mobility while they are recovering from surgery or injury. It commands them not to walk for a certain number of days so that they can heal and feel comfortable.
Mays si la reduccio de lu a tu es excusada, lahoras aministra fort extencio am liamentz dels quals en la curacio de la hancha precedit narracio.	 If the reduction to you is excused, the doctor will provide very strong and urgent remedies for any infection that may occur during treatment as a result of this narrative history.
Capitol .xxxiii.	 Chapter XXXIII
De la curacio de la dislocacio del talo.	 Of dislocation of the ankle
Le talo alcunas veguadas es remaugut per petita remocio, e alcunas veguadas es dislocat segon compliment, e la dislocacio de lu es fayta o a las partidas dedintz o a las partidas deforo.	 The ankle may be dislocated by stretching or the second blow, and dislocation of it is either called internal sprain or external sprain.
E le senhal de la dislocacio de lu es que vezes le talo imflat procedent a la partida a la qual es dislocat.	 It's important to note that the cause of dislocation could be flattening of the ankle at the time it is dislocated.
Mays la curacio de la remocio de lu es de leugiera reddicio, e es que sia extendut am facilitat am las mas e sia engualhat entro que retorne.	 The treatment for sprain may be to rest, and that both quick relief and healing time can vary greatly depending on severity.
Mays en la curacio de lu quan es dislocat segon compliment, cove que fasses cezer le malaute dreyt, e tengua aquel un ministre fort e valent de la partida detras del dos de aquel en le mieg loc de lu.	 When dislocation occurs as a result of the second blow, you should gently press on the area directly behind the two fingers that caused it and apply a very strong and urgent remedy for pain relief
E aprop te tu am la tieua ma dreyta le pe de la pus sobirana part, e am la tua ma sinistra de la part pus dejos del pe en le loc de la cavilha.	 Take your right hand to the top of your chest and place your left hand at the back of your head.
E aprop atira le pe a tu am la tua ma dreyta, e aprop am la sinistra per dos veguadas, e aprop exten am la sinistra; e empelleys le pietz del pe am la dreyta deves la camba ses trebalh.	 Take your right hand to the top of your chest and place both your hands on opposite sides, extend them in front of you, hold your head up with your left arm, and support yourself with your right arm for walking.
E fay aquo doas veguadas segon que havem comtat.	 When joint pain occurs due to cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, it customarily called gout by doctors.
E aprop empelleys le pietz del pe a la camba la tersa veguada, e tu es a la cavilha.	 And return the intestine or hernia back into its cavity and place your hand over that area to prevent it from coming out.
Donc si retorna en una veguada o en dos segon aquesta manieyra, e si vezes le pe engualhat, es bo; e sino, lahoras sobre lu itera la operacio, quar aquel retorna.	 Then if you return it in one or two attempts and the patient's foot stays intact, that is good; otherwise, doctors will perform surgery to remove it.
Mays si a tu es prohibida la reduccio de lu am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu dos sobre terra, e estrenh un paysel mot en terra fermat, e que caja entre las coyssas de lu, e tu ja has envolopat sobre lu drap per so que no ledesca le malaute.	 If the reduction of this hernia is forbidden and it was recommended by doctors, then place a cushion firmly on the ground under its two legs, put another cushion on the floor nearby, and keep your hand over that area to prevent the hernia from falling out.
E aprop le ministre de lu tengua las suas coyssas, e aprop autre ministre extenda le pe am las suas mas o am liament que lie sobre le col del pe; e aprop extenda aquel quascun ministre contre extencio del sieu par, e le payssel sia extant entre las coyssas del malaute retinent aquel, per so que·l cos de lu no sia atirat a las partidas dejos deves la sua extencio.	 The minister of that part should extend his leg over the patient's chest or abdomen and on to their side; another minister extends it against extending from its side towards the bottom of the leg, and keep a cushion between the thighs of the patient in place so that the patient does not lose his hold.
E aprop le metge enguala la dislocacio am las sieuas mas, e autre ministre tengua la coyssa sana a las partidas dejos, quar la dislocacio retorna am la facilitat.	 The doctor inserts into the healthy part of their leg and another minister holds on to the patient's thigh so that the dislocation returns in a comfortable position.
E donc cum retorna la dislocacio e es declarada a tu la sanetat de la reduccio de lu, lahoras pausa emplastre e extrenh aquela am liamentz fortment, e ligua le pe am liament a la camba.	 And once the dislocation is back in its place and declared to be healed from the reduction of it, doctors will continue holding their leg firmly as before, and make sure both legs are straight.
E cove que temes o te guardes dels nervis les quals so detras sobre le talo, per que le liament sobre aquel no sia vehement e leda aquel fortment.	 The first sentence of your text translates to "The nerves that run behind the tailbone must be protected from damage in order for it not to cause pain.
E aprop layssa aquel per dos dias o per tres; e si le liament es mollificat, extrenh aquel.	 You should support that part with two or three days, and if the discomfort is alleviated, hold on a little longer.
E aprop deslia aquel en le ters dia o en le quart, e prohibeys le malaute de anament per xl dias.	 Support it for one more day or four days, but do not let the patient strain themselves excessively in that time.
Mays si es forsat de anar denant aquel spazi, no es fayta segurtat que la dislocacio no sia sobre lu dissolvuda e corrumpuda, e aprop aquo que no recipia curacio.	 If you remove it right away, make sure the dislocation is not caused by damage to the bone or cartilage, and do what's necessary in order to correct any swelling that may arise.
E si accideys a lu apostema caut, lahoras cove que tu aministre en la cedacio de lu aquo en lo qual precedic la nostra narracio, en autre loc de curacio e de embrocacio, entro que sia remauguda.	 If the cautery is applied on that part where our narration previously mentioned it and another location for treatment and anointing, make sure all wounds are healed before proceeding with further care or anointing in order to ensure proper healing.
Capitol .xxxiiii.	 Chapter xxxiv
De curacio de dislocacio dels ditz dels pes.	 The treatment for dislocation of the feet.
Cove que aquel qu’es dislocat sia engualhat am pauca extencio ses trebal; e aquo que no es dificil, abantz es leugier.	 If it is dislocated gently support with minimal force and let go when done.
Mays si la dislocacio es en alcus nozes del dos del pe, lahoras cove que fassas cezer le malaute le sieu pe sobre loc engual de la terra o sobre taula, e sia estant ayssi cum si anava.	 If the dislocation is in both feet, make sure to lift the patient's head so that it rests on a flat surface or table, and hold them like you would if they were normal.
E aprop tu sta de pes, e pausa le tieu pe sobre aquo que imineys de las juncturas, e aprop calca aquel am le tieu pe am vertut entro que retorne, e que vejas aquel ja engualhat e no aparesca en le loc eminencia.	 Then support their feet and place their head on something like a pillow that is positioned against the joints, hold it in place as firmly as you would if they were normal, and keep them steady until you see them still and not appear anywhere else.
E aprop pausa dejos le ventre del pe de lu una taula que prengua tot le pe, a la qual sian dos caps, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent e ferma per tres dias; e aprop deslia aquel e fay aquel repausar de ambulacio per motz dias, entro que sia estrenhut e de reddicio sia assegurat.	 When you have opened the space between the patient's legs with a cushion placed under them and another servant on their legs, and another on their chest holding their hands, hold this first for three days; then remove it to allow free movement of the bowels for three days unless the bowel is completely healed or there is no discharge from it.
Capitol .xxxv.	 Chapter 55
De las specias de dislocacio que sian faytas am plagua o am fractura o am quascuna ensemps.	 Of the injuries that are caused by blows or fractures or any other kind of injury.
Quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, e tu te perforssas en la curacio de aquela e en la restauracio de lu, motas veguadas succezeys la mort.	 If the cause of these is not treated and you do nothing to heal or restore it, there will be a high risk that death will result.
E per aquo no cove que sobre la curacio de lu presuma, sino aquel que es savi en l’art, de lonc uzatge, misericordios e pietados, tardiu, no-ardit ni presomptuos; e que use en le comensament de medicinas que cedan apostemas cautz tant solament, e leyssa le malaute al divinal jutgament, sino ad aquel al qual speras salut de perdicio, am de la malautia alleviacio, e en la qual appareys alcuna speransa.	 It is not advisable to rely on the art of medicine alone, nor that which saves only by length of time and compassion; but rather it is better for one who uses medicines as a remedy from the outset with caution, so that good health may be obtained instead of or in addition to relief from disease.
E adonc esforsa te tantost far de lu la reduccio en le comensament de la causa, denant que endevengua apostema caut.	 Instead of using the remedy at an early stage when it is possible without risk
E adonc si le membre retorna segon que volem, lahoras aministra regiment le qual ceda apostema caut e cura la plagua am aquo que conveneys a lu dels enguentz desiccatius.	 Instead of administering the remedy to the member when it is possible without risk and curing the lesion at this point, it should be used as an ointment that has been prescribed with caution and cure the wound from the dry heat.
E si dislocacio es am fractura e accideys en le os satagias separadas, lahoras tu perforsa le stement de lor, e fay en aquo so que havem dit en las malautias simplas de aquo que es precedit en les locz de aquels.	 When a dislocation occurs and the separated bones are set to heal, the physician will perform this procedure in order for them to say that what was previously mentioned in those areas where it is preceded.
E guarda e esquiva segon la tua vertut aquel del intrament en las vias de temor segon que a tu es precedida la mia predicacio; quar aquo es milhor a tu deves le tieu Creator, e mays permanent a la tua gloria, e mays saludos al tieu cos verays aquels en le tieu temps.	 After this, guard and avoid the second one from the same way of fear as in previous times, for it is better to you by your own Creator, may be eternal with your glory, and many blessings to your body, true in these days.
Ayssi fineysso las paraulas de Albucasim perfieytament de las quals Dieus ne sia benezeyt.	 After saying the prayers of Al-Baqarah perfectly as he has mentioned it earlier
Amen.	 Ameen.
