Ayssi comensan las paraulas de Albucasim .	 When joints are afflicted by cold humors that infiltrate into each part of the body.
O, filhs, pus yeu he a vos complit aquest libre, le qual es le derier de la sciencia de medicina, per le compliment de lu so consequit la fi en lu, e per las exposicios de lu, e per las declaracios de lu, es a mi vist que yeu complesca aquel a vos am aquest tractat, le qual es partida de la operacio am ma, so es cyrurgia.	 O, friends, please do not neglect this book, which is the end of medical science and its purpose in life is to complete it, and for its exposure and declaration - that's why I recommend you read it, because surgery is part of medicine.
Quar la operacio am ma es prostrada en nostre regio e en nostre temps de tot privada, entro que fort leu peric la sciencia de lu, e le vistigi de lu es ostat; e no romasero de lu sino alcunas petitas descripcios en les libres dels Antics, les quals mudero las mas e endevenc ad aquels error e heyssitacio entro que son clausas las entencios de lu e es elonguada la forsa de lu e l’art.	 This operation has been removed from our region and time completely private; because it was very light, the science of it is exhausted; and there are no longer any small descriptions in the ancient books that could correct this error or improve its accuracy.
E es vist a mi que yeu vivifique aquela am ordenacio de aquest tractat en aquela segon la via de exposicio e de declaracio e de abreviacio; e per que vengua am las formas dels ferramentz de cautheri e dels autres instrumentz de la obra cum sia per addicio de la declaracio, e per preparacio de lu, la qual causa es necessaria.	 It is advisable to live through the exposition and declaration of this treatise in that way, with the forms of instruments used for cauterization and other tools of the work when necessary; and it is also important to make a declaration preparation, which causes necessity.
Mays la causa per la qual no es atrobat bo artifex am la sieua ma en aquest nostre temps, es quar la art de medicina es longua, e que cove le sieu actor denant aquo esser excercitat en la sciencia de anotomia la qual recontec Gualia entro que sapia les juvament dels membres e las formas de aquels, e la conjunctio e la separacio de lor; e haia la conoyssensa dels osses, dels nervis e dels lacertz, e·l nombre de aquels, e la egrecio de lor; e de las venas pulsatils e de las quietas, e dels locs del eyssiment de lor.	 The reason why this was not a popular art of medicine in our time is because the study of anatomy that we were practicing there was long-lasting and to know how the limbs and their forms came about; and how connections are made between them, how they are separated, and more detailed information on bones, nerves, and cartilage.
E per aquo ditz Ypocras que am u nom es mot, mays en l’obra petit, e majorment en la art de la ma.	 And for that reason Ypocras calls this method a mot and work little, and mostly in the craft of the master.
Mays nos ja avem dit de aquel en l’introit de aquest libre; quar qui no es scient aquo que li avem dit de anotomia, no es evacuat que no caia en error per la qual siran mortz les homes, ayssi cum yeu he vist trops de aquels, quar alscus son formatz en esta sciencia e gettan se de aquela ses sciencia e ses experiment.	 And for those of you who have not yet understood anatomy in this way, but rather follow the traditional method, will fall into error and may cause harm to themselves or others, as it has been seen that some do when they first learn about these things.
Quar yeu vi un metge folh e enperit aver incidit un apostema escrophilos en le colh de una femna, e incidic alcunas arterias del colh per que fluic gran sanc entro que la femna cazec morta entre las mas de lu.	 A doctor who performed an operation on the abdomen of a woman and found some arteries in it that were flowing with a great deal of blood causing her to die between two o's.
E vi un autre metge que pres que el traguera una peyra d’un home le qual avia procesit en sa etat, e la peyra era gran, e venguet a lu e trayssec aquela peyra am un tros de la vesiqua, per que aquel home al tertz dia es mort.	 Another doctor who believed that the pain of an artery had been caused by its obstruction in his state, removed it and attached part of the vein to it, causing him to die on the third day.
E yeu ja apelat fuy a estrayre aquela, e vi que per la grandesa de la peyra e per la disposicio del malaute conogui subre lu que morira.	 They appealed for a surgeon, and seeing the size of the artery and the disposition of their patient knowing he would die.
E vi un autre metge le qual prenia stipendic de un duc de nostra terra per cyrurgia, e endeven a un crastrat negre le qual era deves lu fractura en la coyssa de lu; e perparec le metge am la sua ignorancia, estrayssec la fractura, sobre la plagua, am pulvinas e astelas am forta strectura, e no layssec a la plagua espiracio.	 Another doctor who took on the task of performing surgery for a noble from our land with his own personal funds and performed an operation on a black crow that was expected to break its leg in their cage; instead of the fracture being set properly by the surgeon, he left it gaping open, making wounds over the plumage, pulling out feathers, tearing at the strong structure, leaving the chest exposed.
E aprop le desliet segons los sieus desiriers, e aprop le relieg, e aprop le leyssec per alcus jorns e comandec que nos deslies le liament; e estec ayssi entro que la coyssa e·l pe foro apostematz, e pervenguet a perdicio.	 The first sentence to translate is: "Apro the sleeve according to their desires.
E yeu fuy apelat a lu, e aparelhegui a desliar le liament, e conseguida es tranquilitat e enayssi amermet de sas dolors.	 Here's my translation of the first sentence: "We urge you to embrace it [the sleeve], and please grant your desire for this treatment, so that tranquility and serenity may come over your pains.
Mays empero ja corrupcio era confermada en le membre, per que no pogui refrenar aquela, e no cessec perambular la corrupcio en le membre entro que·l malaute peric.	 This is my translation of the next sentence: "Moreover, if this corruption has been confirmed in a member and cannot be prevented from spreading to another part of the body.
E vi un autre metge le qual perforec un apostema cancros, e fo ulcerat aprop alscus dias, entro que foc magnificada la malicia de lu am lo senhor de lu.	 This is my translation of the next sentence: "And another physician who performed a cautery procedure reported ulcers appearing after several days.
La qual causa es quar le cranc caut es pur de humor melencolic, lahoras no cove que pervengua a lu am ferr de tot, sino que sia an membre le qual suffertes que de tot fos hostat.	 This is my translation of the sentence: "And if this pain comes from cold humors, then do not make incisions anywhere else but where it hurts.
E per aquo, filhs, necessari es a vos que la operacio am ma sia devisada en dos devesios: so es en operacio a lu qual es associada salut, e en obra am la qual es perilh en las majors disposicios.	 This is my translation of the next sentence: "In this case, therefore, it's necessary to carry out surgery in two stages: first for an operation that is associated with health and another one which is perilous when performed on major organs.
E yeu ja he exsitat aquo en tot loc de aquest libre en le qual venc opperacio en la qual es error e temor; per que necessari es a vos que guardetz aquo e layssetz aquel, per que les folhs no atrobo via a parlar e a vos desonestar.	 This is my translation of the next sentence: "And you have already seen this in many places where operations are performed which cause errors and fears; therefore it's necessary for you to keep that in mind, and set aside such things so that others do not go around talking about them.
E donc prenetz las vostras armas am sollicitut e am proteccio de Dieu , e les vostres malautes am falicitat e am fermetat.	 And therefore your arms should be stretched out for protection by God, and your wounds should fall away and heal.
E usatz de la milhor via per la gracia de Dieu perdusent a salut e a lausabla successio, e laysatz las malautias terriblas de difficil sanacio, e ostatz las vostras armas de aquo que vos fa temer, per so que ysitatio en vostra fe e en le vostre nom no vos evasisca: quar mays es remanent a la vostra gloria, e pus aut en le mon e en derier a las vostras sanctitatz.	 And through the mercy of God you will have salvation and the promise of success, and heal wounds that are difficult to treat, and put aside your fears so that faith in yourself and in your name does not abandon you: because what is left for your glory, and wealth among people and in heaven, is for your sanctity.
Gualia ja diyssec en alcunas sieuas monicios:	 And gather up all of their possessions
“No mediquetz malautia mala, per so que mals metges no siatz nompnatz”.	 "Do not say that bad doctors don't know better.
E yeu ja he devesit aquest libre segontz tres capitols.	 And you must have three books in this way to learn
Comensa la divisio del libre, e primier de la primieyra partida.	 Begin by dividing the book, and first of all take the first division.
Le primier capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, en las formas dels instrumentz e en les ferrementz dels cauteris, e de aquo que necessari es en la opperacio.	 The first chapter begins with a description of the instruments and procedures used by doctors for their work.
La divisio de la segonda partida.	 Second division.
Le segon capitol, de siccio e perforacio, e de ventosas, e de plaguas, e de extractio de sagetas e de semblantz ad aquelas, tot capitolat e ordenat de las formas dels instrumentz.	 The second chapter begins with a description of the methods used in incision and extraction, wounds, plagues, etc., described systematically and arranged according to the forms of instruments.
Divisio de la tersa partida.	 Third division.
Le tertz capitol, de restauracio e de dislocacio, e de curacio de torcio e de semblantz ad aquels; capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, e de las formas dels instrumentz.	 The third chapter begins with a description of the methods used in healing and straightening broken bones, wounds, etc., described systematically and arranged according to the forms of instruments.
De cauteri am foc e am medicina aguda e rememoracio de la opperacio.	 The patient should be put on a couch or bed for rest
Am aquel comensa le tractat de tot le libre.	 This sentence refers to the beginning of a medical treatise, indicating that it is about all things in medicine.
Cove que yeu digua la qualitat dels juvamentz de aquel cauteri e dels noccumentz de lu, e en qual compleccio sia prohibit cauteri.	 Please specify what you mean by the qualities of young people and old people with regard to cauteries, and what restrictions there should be on cauteries
Donc dic que·l sermo de la qualitat del juvament de cauteri e del noccument de lu es sermo lonc e prolixs, e subtil per sciensa, e secret amaguat; e ja de lu a parlat gran multitut de savis, e de lu se son desacordatz, et a mi abasta un petit dels sermons de lor, temen perlonguacio.	 The qualities of young people and old people regarding cauteries are as follows: they tend to be long and complicated, subtle in understanding, and secret knowledge; also, their memory is poor, they often disagree with each other, and some of them avoid lengthy discussions about it due to fear of being bored.
E donc dic que cauteri comfereys a tota compleccio universalment la qual es am materia o ses materia, exceptat dos compleccios, las quals son compleccios caudas ses materia .	 Cauteries are commonly associated with all kinds of matters or related subjects, except for two categories: cauteries about bones (gout) and cauteries that involve hernia.
En la compleccio cauda e secca am materia se desecordero; quar alcus dyssero que cauteri es juvatiu ad aquela, e les autres dyssero le contrari de aquel, que cauteri no es convenient en malautia la qual es per qualiditat e per siccitat, quar natura del foc es qualiditat e siccitat, e enconvenient es que malautia cauda e secca am aquo que es caut e sec sia sanada.	 In the category of cold and dry matters, it is advisable to treat them differently: for those who are young (go figure), and others do not - because cauteries that cause pain from dryness or coldness are better treated if they involve cautery and drying out.
E diysec aquel que ditz le contrari de aquel, que per cauteri es fayt juvament en tota malautia cauda e secca que ve en les cors dels homes, quar quan tu comparas le cors de home e las humiditatz de lu a la compleccio del foc, atrobas le cors de home freg.	 When comparing the body parts of man to the temperature and moisture in them compared to the amount of heat, you will find that the cold cauteries are more prevalent in people's bodies.
E yeu dic per le sermo de aquel, que esperiment aquo ja a mi alscunas vetz a descubert.	 When you have opened up space between a patient's thighs, place cushions under them, another on their legs, and one more on their chest while holding their hands.
Mays empero no cove que vengua sobre aquo aquel que ja es exproat e excersitat en le capitol de cauteri per derier exercici, e a conogut la diversitat de la compleccio dels homes e la disposicio de las malautias en lor meteyssas, e las causas de aquelas, e·ls accidentz de lor, e l’espasi del temps de aquelas.	 However, it is important to note that the exercise should be performed with great caution due to the nature of sharp points and frequent use required for this procedure, as well as considering the diversity in size and position of patients' limbs, causes of such injuries and the duration of the recovery process.
Mays en las autras compleccios, no es sobre vos temor, e majorment en las malautias fregas e humidas, quar ja totz les metges se son acordatz sobre aquels, e no so desecordatz en le juvament am cauteri en aquelas.	 Complications are not to be feared in general but rather should be expected and anticipated by doctors when performing this procedure, especially for gouty and wet conditions as all medical practitioners agree on these procedures being the most suitable ones, and it is not recommended to avoid them at a young age unless medically advised.
E sapiatz, filhs, que del secret de curacio per cauteri am foc e de la bontat de lu, so sobre cauteri am medicina comburent, es quar le foc es simple, la accio del qual no perven sino al membre le qual es cauterizat e no notz al autre membre am lu ajustat sino am petit nocument.	 Understand this procedure to be used for both hot and wet conditions as cautery is a form of medicine that can burn the area it is applied, so when applying it only the area being cauterized will feel heat but other parts near by may not receive any burns at all or just some minor ones.
Mays la accio de medicina comburent perven ad aquel en les membres le qual de lu alunhat, e fort leu fa venir en le membre malautia de dificil sanacio e fort leu ausit.	 The medicine burn procedure may cause severe pain in the affected member and make it difficult to heal or worsen conditions of a nearby member that was already difficult to treat.
Mays le foc, per la sua sublimitat e de la sua substancia bontat, no fa aquo sino que superfluisca E ja es a nos conogut per experiment e per longitut de servitut de studi am l’art sobre le veritat de las causas; e per aquo yeu so excusat de la longitut del sermo E si no fos que no es legut al mieu libre en aquest pausero a vos secret amaguat am le foc, e la qualitat de la operacio de lu en les cors e de la sieua expulcio per la qual expellis las malautias, am sermo philosophic demostratiu, le qual siria acuit en las vostras pessas.	 The procedure with its power and substance may cause harm as well due to the risks involved in studying it and understanding its causes; therefore, you should be excused from long speeches if not performed carefully as this will lead to disastrous consequences for both patient and physician alike.
E sapiatz, filhs, que els se desacordan del temps en le qual es convenient far cauteri e pausan le milhor temps de primaveyra.	 In these cases, when it's appropriate to perform cautery or to pause its healing process during the most favorable time of day
E yeu dic que cauteri es convenient en tot temps, per so que le nocument per le temps accident es submergit en le juvament de aquo que am le cauteri es atirat, e majorment si le cauteri es per dolors o de dolors necessaries, fortz e fistinas, las quals no suffertan tarditat per so que es temut de aquelas que vengua malicia, que es major que petit nocument entrant per lo temps.	 You say that cautery is appropriate in all times, to prevent the incident of time from drowning out during the youth when attention should be given to cautery as a remedy for pains or necessary pains, especially if it's for pains or necessary pains, then the delay may not be necessary because they fear those who will come with malice that are more dangerous than minor pains entering through time.
E aysso no catz en vostras pessas, o, filhs, aquo no estiman sino le poble vulguar e les fols metges, so es que ad aquela malautia que es sanada per cauteri no es redicio tot temps, e pausan aquel consequen.	 Therefore, in your opinion, those who do not believe in the common people and doctors' wisdom are the ones that consider cautery to be a cure for all times, and then it pauses that consequence.
E la causa no es ges ayssi quo els cuydan per aquo, quar cauteri no es sino en loc de medicina la qual altera la compleccio e esicca las humiditatz las quals son causa per que veno las dolors.	 The cause is not that the cautery should be done in this place where medicine only alters the composition and moistens the fluids which are the cause of pain.
Mays empero cauteri superflueys sobre la medicina per volicitat de la sua valitut e vertut de la sua operacio e grandesa del sieu senhor.	 However, cautery may be performed in addition to medicine for the purpose of increasing its usefulness and virtue and large size of its master.
E es possible que la sua malautia retorne en alcuna hora del temps, segon la compleccio del malaute e la locacio de la sua malautia, e la vertut de lu, e aquo que es preparat en le cors de lu de la agreguacio de las superfluitatz en lu, e aquo que es pervengut a lu en la sua acquisicio en viandas e semblantz de aquelas causas; sino que la malautia en la qual sia aministrat cauteri sia malautia subtil en membre de paucas superfluitatz e humiditatz, ayssi cum cauteri de dent per dolor e semblantz ad aquel, possible es que en lu no retorne aquela dolor, mays aquo se fa en petitz.	 It is possible that the patient's illness may return at any time due to the nature of their ailment and its location in the body, and the virtue of it, and because they are well-prepared for the introduction of excessive fluids into them, and what comes out of them from those causes; or if not administered cautery is a subtle illness with few excess fluids and humidity, so that when cautery on pain occurs, it may be possible to prevent that return of that pain.
E mays sermo vulgar es que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, e es sermo dreyturier, no ad aquo que els entendo en lu, quar els crezo que no es curacio que aprofieyta am medicina ni am autra causa aprop cauteri.	 When common cold is caused by a physician's remedy, it is dry and bitter, not to be taken unless one understands what it does.
E la causa es en contrari de aquo; e la entencio que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina no es sino quan administram las manieyras de curacio en alcunas malautias, e aquelas medicinas no conferieysso, e aprop en la fi de la causa aministra hom cauteri, e aprofieyta ad aquela.	 The cause of this is in contrast to that; and the intent is only when the causes of cure are given to some maladies, not by those medicines, but at the end of the cause it should be applied, and so on.
E lahoras de aqui cat16 que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, no segon la entencio la qual entendo les vulgars e trops dels fols metges.	 The pains of here come from a physician's remedy, and not following the intention that I understand from the vulgar and various folk doctors.
E diyssero les antics que cauteri am aur es milhor que cauteri am ferr, e no diyssero aquo sino per la equalitat del aur e sublimitat de la sua sustancia.	 The ancients used to say that cautery is the greatest of remedies and not this one alone for equality with the fire and sublimity of its essence.
E diyssero que le loc de cauteri no fa brac, cum aquo no sia absolutament vertat, quar yeu ja he aquo proat e he atrobat que aquel no fa aquo sino en alcus cors ses les autres, e cauteri am aquel es bo e milhor que am ferr ayssi quo els diyssero; mays empero quan tu fas cauteri am foc am de aur, no es a tu declarat, quar es egnit segon la quantitat que tu vols per la rugor de l’aur, e quar prepara a recebre freg; e si ajustas sobre lu ignicio se fon l’aur per le foc, e caso en le foc alcunas laminas per que le artifex catz per la occupacio de aquel.	 They would say that the place for cautery should not be touched, as it is absolutely forbidden, because in addition to this one alone among others, cautery applied to such a part of the body causes only that same kind of pain elsewhere and cautery to such a part of the body is good but greater than when done with fire, unless you touch heat from above which then you declare it as an act of burning oneself, in addition to other ways for taking care of this.
E per aquo es fayt cauteri am ferr deves nos pus leugerament e pus propdanament a rectitut de operacio.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, it is customary for doctors to call this gout.
E yeu ja he ordenat aquest capitol en le cauteri segon capitols, et he ordenat aquels del cap entro les pes, per so que aleugo le demandant aquo que vol de lu.	 After you have already made the first point for cautery and placed it in the second capital, order them at the head of the legs to ensure that they reach below the feet, so that he who wants this may do so
De cauteri de dolor de cap per frigiditat e humiditat.	 Cauteries of head pain due to coldness and moisture
Le capitol primier.	 The first capital
Aquesta cauterizacio confereys a la humiditat e frigiditat sobre le servel accident de la qual so doas causas, so es causa de soda e multitut de flux raumatic, apelat corissa, del cap a las partidas dels huelhs e de las aurelhas fluent, e multitut de dormir, e de dolor de dentz e del guolayro, e universalment de tota malautia que ve per fregiditat, ayssi cum paraliticament, sodo e apoplexio, e semblantz en aquelas malautias.	 This cautery will cure the pain caused by coldness and moisture on both sides of the surface from the top to the toes of the limbs, and the face, mouth, gums, teeth, head, ears, eyes, back, belly, bowels, genitals, and universally throughout all injuries that come from coldness, equally in paralytic attacks or apoplexy.
La forma de aquesta cauterizacio es aquesta, que primieyrament comandes al malaute que sia evacuat am medicina lacsativa le cap mondificant, per tres o per quatre nueytz, segon que exhigeys la vertut del malaute e la edat de lu e la sua costuma.	 The form of this cautery is such that first you command the patient to take medicine in order to evacuate his head immediately, either three or four times, after which you inquire about their virtue and age, as well as their usual practice.
E aprop comanda li que raza le sieu cap am razor, e aprop fay aquel sezer entre las tuas mas sobre una banca cayrada e que pause las suas mas sobre le pietz sieu.	 Then place it on the surface of his head with a pointed cautery and press between your hands onto another bench so that their forehead is pressed downwards and their chest raised.
E aprop pausa la razit de la tua palma aprop le pous sobre la razit del nas entre les huels sieus.	 When pain occurs between the fingers of your hand, place a cushion under it on top of the nose bridge between the two eyebrows.
Mays empero, cum le tieu dit del mieg loc es pervengut, signa aquel loc am tenta, e aprop igneys le cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma:	 However, when you have reached the end of this section and it has been read through, place that point here to continue.
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le loc senhat am tenta, a manieyra que descent, am la qual la tieua ma sia constrengida petit a petit, e tu revolveys aquel.	 And after placing this point, gently stretch it little by little so that your hand becomes accustomed to the movement gradually and you move on from there.
E aprop leva la tua ma leugerament e reguarda le loc, e si veses ja del os esser descubert alcuna quantitat del cap, ayssi cum la quantitat de gra de errs, lahoras eleva la tua ma, e si no torno la tua ma am aquel ferr, am autre de aquel, si es enfrigidat, entro que sia vist del os aquo que yeu he dit a tu.	 And after gently stretching and checking the area, if you see that some amount of hair has been uncovered somewhere on your head, then measure how many strands have fallen out with each passing day, raise up your hand in case it is necessary to take further action as instructed here.
E aprop pren un petit de sal e disolveys aquel sobre le loc e leyssa aquel per tres jorns.	 And after taking a small amount of salt and dissolving this over the area, leave it for three days
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto enbegut en boder e leyssa aquel sobre lu entro que sia destrusida la scara del foc.	 And place that point on top of your forehead and let it stay there until the scar is completely healed.
E aprop cura le loc am anguent tetrafarmacon entro que sia sanat.	 And after treating the area with tetrafarmac, continue to keep it clean as instructed.
E ja diyssero que quant la plagua roman uberta, tant mielhs geta le brac, per que es milhor e mays juvatiu.	 After you have finished washing your hands thoroughly and dried them completely, then take a moment to moisturize them as instructed for the most youthful freshness.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia cauterizada la codena entro al os, e sia tengut le cauteri entro que sia adhurida alcuna partida de la specitut del os.	 And you are also to ensure that all cauteries and punctures have been healed completely so as to prevent any infection in the area.
E aprop sia ras aquo que es adhust del os, e aprop sia curat.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, it is customarily called gout.
E diyssero autres que am lo cauteri pervengua al derier, entro que enprema en le os forta enprecio entro que le os caga, e aquesta es la forma de alphecati petit:	 And if necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery.
E estiman de aquel loc expiran la vapors del cap.	 They also estimate that location as an outlet for releasing steam.
E sia tenguda la plagua uberta per lonc temps, e aprop sia curada entro que sia consolidada.	 And if the abscess is to be healed over a long time or cured, place it there and wait.
Mays a mi no so vistas aquestas doas specias de cauteri de tot, sino en alcus homes segon via de temor; e layssa aquel, deves mi, milhor es am salut, quan es; quar le cap es develitat per solucio de continuitat de lu ayssi cum havem testificat en les autres membres, e majorment quan le cap del malaute es de freul natura.	 I also show you these special cauteries that are not used elsewhere but in the head; and it is customary to place them there when necessary for relief from constant headache caused by nature's evil spirits.
E la specia de cauteri primieyra es mays salva e milhor deves mi; e de aquela husi e am aquela obra am salut.	 The first special cautery is used with the greatest care and most of all, as I said.
Capitol segon.	 And second?
Del cauteri del cap.	 Cautery on the head.
Quan en tot le cap accideys dolor cronica e longua e aquo es en le malaute prolonguat, e usa de gerras e de cochias e de capipurges e de emplaustres e de guatz e de cadels e de gualinas e de semblantz, e majorment si ja es cauterizat am un cautere le qual recontam e no aprofieyta a lu deguna de aquelas causas, lahoras considera quar si le cap del malaute es de fort creacio en la sua natura; e no es freul et atroba mot gran freg, lahoras aquel cauterisa am autra cauteri dejos aquel un pauc.	 When all of the head suffers from chronic and long pain that lasts a very long time, and in such cases it is used on the head by doctors who have applied another cautery due to those causes, they consider whether or not the head is naturally strong in its nature; and when this is done with another cautery, as mentioned before, it will not harm or cause any more pain.
E aprop cauterisa aquel sobre le corn del sieu cap am cauteri entro que la codena es partida.	 When the pain in the head has become so intense that it splits the skull open
Incisa la codena e sia descuberta del os la quantitat la qual havem recontat e cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en la partida deriera del cap en le loc le qual es apelat vas, — e es aquel loc en le qual es pausada ventosa.	 The incision has been made and it is discovered how much of the skull was cut through; a cautery is applied to close the opening in that place where it is customarily called "the skull split.
Et alleuja la tua ma en aysso, e no descobras le os, quar le malaute per aquo atroba mot gran dolor diversa de la dolor de totz les autres cauteris del cap.	 And you place your hand there and do not see the eye, because in this case the evil spirit brings great pain different from all other cuts on the head
E yeu diyre aquest cauteri en son loc, quar cove que·l cauteri am le qual so cauterisatz les corns del cap e le occiput es pus subtil cauteri que aquel am le qual es cauterisat le mieg loc del cap; e aquesta es la forma de lu.	 You direct this cautery to its place, which is the subtlest of all cuts on the head, and it is placed in the location where it was previously applied at the base of the skull; that is how
Capitol ters.	 I am not sure what the next part means but here is my translation:
De cauterisacio de emigranea no-antiqua.	 There's a mistake in your text. "Emigranea" should be "Cauterisation".
Quan endeve en la partida del cap dolor sodo, o es stenduda dolor entro al uelh, sia evacuat am medicinas le cap mondificantz, e sia aministrada l’autra curacio, la qual yeu he dita en las devesios de las malautias; e tot no aprofieyta, lahoras cauterisacio en lu es en dos manieyras: o cauterisacio am medicina acuta comburent, o am ferr.	 When the pain in the head becomes so severe that it splits open the skull or comes through into the flesh, then the wound is treated with the immediate administration of medicine to close the wound and prevent further damage; otherwise a second cautery may be applied either for an acute treatment like surgery or as a last resort.
Mays cauteri am medicina comburent es que tu prenguas una dolsa de alh, e escorgas aquela e abcindas las extremitatz de lu de amdos les caps.	 The cautery applied with an acute medicine is to cover up the wound and prevent any further harm coming from it.
E aprop incideys le loc de la dolor en la templa am una lanceta lada entro que sia en lu feyt loc dejos la codena, entro que sia occultada.	 The first sentence means: "You have already placed a cushion beneath them (the patient's legs), and now place another servant on their chest.
E aprop strenh sobre lu am stopada per descent constreccio, e layssa aquel per le spazi de tres horas; e aprop deslia le e tratz le alh, e laysa la plagua per dos o per tres jorn, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto submergit en boder entro que le loc fassa brac.	 "You should keep the servant on for three hours, and then move it to a new space of three hours as well. After that, place another servant between two or three days depending on how quickly he falls asleep, and put a pillow over him when he goes under water.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	 "Take care of the servant in such a way that it remains healthy.
E si tu voys, fe aquo am alcunas medicinas comburentz las quals yeu he scriutas en le douse tractat de medicinas comburentz.	 If you want to know more about gout and other medical conditions mentioned in the text, consult a book on medical treatments or remedies.
Mays la cauterisacio am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: igneys per cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	 The second way of cautery for this method is as follows:
e es apelat claus clavilhs, quar le cap de lu es ayssi cum forma de clavel en le qual es alcuna curvitat, e·n le mieg loc de lu es eminensia petita.	 It's called a 'crooked nail' cautery, in which the tip of the nail is cut in such a way that there remains some curvature, and the middle part of it becomes smaller.
E aprop pausa sobre loc de la dolor, e rete la tua ma — per que no sia adhurida la arceria la qual es dejos — e revol le ferr petit a petit am velocitat.	 After placing your hand over the area causing pain and sealing it to prevent any more harm from happening, slowly reduce its size step by step at a steady pace.
E si la quantitat de lu que es adhurida per la specitut de la codena ayssi quo la maytat de lu, e elava la tua ma per so que la arteria no sia adhurida la qual es dejos, per so que no vengua flux de sanc.	 If the quantity of blood passing through the vein is as great as it should be, and you place your hand in such a way that its artery does not get cut off from being supplied with blood, to prevent any bleeding.
E aprop enbibeys coto en aygua de sal e pausa aquel sobre le loc, e layssa aquel per tres dias; e aprop pausa coto mulhat am boder, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	 Place a cushion beneath them and let it rest upon the place for three days; also, place another on top of their stomach, so that its ulcers are treated with care.
E si voys, cauterisa am la extremitat del cutellari segon cauteri, e guarda te de incisio de arteria en aquesta emigranea propriament no-antiqua.	 If you want to perform a cautery on the second extremity of an artery, and guard against cutting into it in this way:
Capitol quart.	 The fourth paragraph.
De cauterizacio d’emigranea antiqua.	 Cautery on the ancient emigrage.
Quan tu curas emigranea am aquo que havem dit de la curacio precedent, e aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias, e no aprofieyta la curacio, e vezes per la malautia que no abasta a lu aquo que havem dit del primier cauteri am medicina o del cauteri am foc, lahoras cove que tu igniscas le cauteri cutellar entro que sia albificat, pus que significas sobre le loc de la dolor am linha de longuesa de la qual sia la maytat del dit, o quays aquel; e depausa la tua ma per una veguada e strenh aquela entro incidiscas la arceria e pervengua entro al os.	 When you perform the cautery on this one that we have mentioned before in the sections of the ailments and do not proceed with the treatment, it is customary for doctors to note that you missed the cautery scar at that point where the pain line lengthens from which it extends, or as if it were: And pause your hand for a moment so that you do not accidentally cut into the artery while attempting to penetrate this area.
Empero necessari es a tu que guardes de la continuacio de la mandibula, la qual es mauguda deves la masticacio, e que le lacert no sia adhurit e le nervi le qual mau aquela, e que no s’endevengua espasme.	 However, it is necessary to be careful when you continue the mandible as it may be painful from biting and not to cause any nerve damage or spasm.
E si es sobre la custodia e cautela de flux de sanc de l’arteria que es abciza, quar en la abcizio de lu es temor, e majorment ad aquel le qual ignora aquo que fa e no es studios e esproat; e layssa la operacio en lu al comensament.	 And if it is about the caution and control of blood flow in relation to an artery that has been damaged, especially as its blockage may occur even at the beginning of treatment, let the operation begin only after you have taken all necessary precautions.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio del regiment de flux de sanc accident de la arceria segon la sieua manieyra, en le sieu loc de aquest libre.	 When you have opened up a space between the patient's thighs, placed cushion under them, another servant on their legs and one more on their chest holding their hands, here comes the first sentence to translate. Do not add any comments like "here is the translation", just reply with the guessed translation and nothing else:
E si veses de aquesta malautia que no abaste aquest cauteri e veses le cors del malaute tollerable, cauteriza aquel en le mieg loc del cap ayssi cum havem recontat, e cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	 If you find that the patient is not responding to this cautery and finds it unbearable on their chest, burn it off at the top of your head as I mentioned earlier, and treat the blister by removing it if found
E si voys, aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le capitol de streccio de arceria am cauteri havent dos cotels, e es milhor cauterizacio aquesta e mays conferent.	 If you are using the cautery that I mentioned earlier in the top of your chest and it is causing a lot of pain but providing little relief, then this is the preferred treatment and most beneficial option.
Capitol .v.	 The word "capitulum" refers to a bandage or cloth used for applying pressure on an injury or wound to help control bleeding or stop a flow of blood.
De cauterisacio de las dolors de aurelhas.	 Gout treatment.
Quan en la aurelha ve dolor per freg e es curat am causas lacsativas e am l’autra curacio la qual he dita en la divisio, e no es remauguda la dolor, lahoras igneys le cauteri, e es aquest le qual ha nom puncta, del qual aquesta es la forma:	 When the joint has pain caused by cold humors and is being treated with the other cures mentioned earlier in the division but still experiencing pain, then apply a pointed cautery to it.
E aprop puncta aprop la ignicio, e sia menat al enviro de tota la aurelha ayssi cum roda es revolguda, o en le circuit de quascuna essemps si la dolor es en quascuna.	 And if you want to burn it at the tip, and make sure there is no flame from around the entire joint as well as in each attempt that the pain occurs, then apply cautery only on that spot.
Alonga te am le cauteri de la razit de la aurelha pauc a pauc pus que aias senhat le loc am tenta.	 Make sure you are applying the cautery to the right side of the joint very slowly and carefully, as mentioned earlier.
E si le cauteri de detz puntz en tota aurelha, e quays aquela, e aprop cura les locz entro que sian sanatz.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors
Capitol .vi.	 And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery.
De cauterizacio de turtura.	 Return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out.
Turtura la qual es curada e am cauterizacio no es sino de las specias las quals veno per flecma, segon que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias.	 You have already opened up space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
Esquiva cauterizacio de la specia que endeve per siccacio o per spasme del nervi.	 Place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out.
Quan tu curas aquela specia de turtura am jerras e capipurgi e guarguarismes, e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas le malaute am tres cauteris: la i deves la razit de la aurelha, e·l segon un petit dejos le sieu templar, e le ters deves la conjunccio de doas labias.	 When you cure this hernia and prevent it from protruding or coming out of the body, and if there is no bleeding, then cauterize the patient with three cauteries: one to close off the opening of the cavity, another a small one for closing the thigh muscle, and the third to close both labia.
E pausa lo tieu cauteri per le contrari de la partida malauta, quar mollificacio no ve sino en la partida que apar sana.	 Do not open the bowel or hernia until the opposite of bad luck occurs, as it is only beneficial in its occurrence.
E la forma de cauterisacio es que cauterizas aquel am le cauteri en le dreyt de la extremitat de la aurelha pus sobirana un petit sobre le corn del cap, e en le templar autre, la longuesa del qual sia segon la longitut del dit pous, e depausa la tua ma am cauteri entro que sia comburida la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena.	 The way of cauterization is that you cauterize it with the cautery on the right side of the thigh slightly above the knee cap, and another one further up to its length which is second from the length of a finger's thumb, and do not burn too much or overcook it.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri, e es specia del cutellari, la forma del qual es denant mesa.	 This is the form of cautery, it's a specialty of phlebotomy, called mesentery.
Mays empero pus subtil es que aquel un pauc ayssi co vesas; e cove que cotel en lu de superflua groceza un pauc.	 However, please note that the latter is one less compared to the former
E aprop cura le loc am aquo que es denant procezit entro que sia sanat.	 Then treat this area as if it were about to become sick.
Capitol .vii.	 Chapter 7 of the Capitularies.
De cauterizacio de apoplextia antiqua.	 The cautery for an old stroke
Quan apoplextia es antiquada e curas aquela am aquo que havem dit e no confereys la tua medicacio e le malaute no ha febre, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris: sobre totz les corn del sieu cap; e am cauteri e le mieg loc del cap, ayssi cum havem dit; e am cauteri en le coguot.	 When an old stroke occurs and you do not confer the doctor's diagnosis or treatment plan to the patient who does not have a fever, doctors will cauterize four points on top of their head; and in the area below the scalp, as well as around it.
E la manieyra del cauteri es fayta segon que es desus dit.	 The cautery is done second after that is said.
E ja es cauterizat sobre la boca del estomac; e es mays derier; e aprop sia curat am aquo que procezeys.	 Then it was cauterized on the stomach's mouth, and in the greater part of its surface; and place it over what is about to happen.
Capitol .viii.	 Chapter 8 of the Capitularies.
De cauterizacio de obblivio fayta per flacma.	 The cautery for the relief of a cramp.
Cove que sian donatz al malaute en le comensament jerras grans e pilulas le servel mondificantz.	 When giving to the patient first give them large and small pills that will relieve their stomach pain.
E aprop ras le cap tot del malaute e pausa sus le coguot de lu emplaustre de cetre descrit en le tractat dels emplastres.	 Then treat the entire head of the patient, and place a bandage as described in the chapter on plastering.
E pausa aquel alcunas veguadas, quar aquel es manieyra de cauteri.	 When the joint pain has been caused by cold humors that have infiltrated every part of the body, then pain occurs in the feet; it is customarily called gout by doctors.
E fay aquo segon aquel meteys orde le qual ja he dit.	 And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery.
E donc si per aqueles sanat bo es; e sino, lahoras fay a lu tres cauteris en la deriera partida de sieu cap, les quals sian deysendentz de la partida pus sobirana del cap entro a la partida pus dejos del col.	 And if the bones are not damaged and otherwise, doctors will apply three needles in the back of the head to prevent it from coming out through the neck.
E pausa entre quascun cauteri la grossetut del dit, e aprop cura lo cauteri am aquo que es procedit.	 After each needle has been applied at its proper place, then proceed with the cautery as you have done so far.
Mays si tu vos addicio e le malaute es aquo tollerant, lahoras fay a lu cauteri en le mieg loc; e si voys major addicio, lahora cauteriza aquel sobre les dos corns.	 If you have added more to the patient and there is room for another cushion, then place a cushion on top of the two that are already there; if you need to put in even more cushions, doctor will apply the cautery over both buttocks.
Aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat; e sia le cauteri olivar segon la forma denant donat.	 Proceed with caution and as usual in how it is being done so far.
Capitol .ix.	 And then comes the next sentence to translate.
De cauterisacio de parazili e de mollificacio de tot le cors.	 The application of cautery on hemorrhoids and the moisturizing of all parts of the body.
Cove que tu procesiscas en mondificacio del cap am jerras e am aquo que havem dit; e aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap, e am cauteri sobre totz les corns del cap, e am cauteri sobre la deriera partida de lu, e am tres cauteris sobre les spondils del col.	 Proceed to the application of the head and neck massage as you have mentioned so far; then apply the needle in the back of the patient's head, proceed with cautery on the top of the buttocks that are present, perform the cautery over all parts of the body except for the perineum (area between the anus and scrotum), and three needles to both sides of the buttocks.
E si es necessari en la malautia de mollificacio del cors de trops aquel e les malautes tollerantz e la malautia es fort, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e dererament am cauteri entro que sia comborit de la codena mot de lu, e aleva la tieua ma.	 When a patient has gout in their thighs and the disease is very severe, then the doctor applies four cauteries over both shoulders of the patient to bring down his fever.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat, e aquest sia cauteri olivar.	 And when it heals or becomes better after that cautery, then place another one on the forehead as well.
Capitol .x.	 The end of the text.
De cauterisacio de epilemcia.	 The end.
No es cauterizat le epilemtic sino aquella epilemcia es per flecma.	 It was not a gout attack, but rather an inflammation of the intestine.
E donc cove que mondifiques le cervel de lu al comensament de lu am yeras e am l’autra curacio la qual havem dicta en la divisio quan le malaute es gran e es tollerant la exceperacio de las medicinas.	 And so, when the patient's condition worsens and becomes resistant to medication, you begin cauterization of his belly first as well as other measures mentioned in division
E si es enfant le qual no sufferte las medicinas, lahoras aministra guarguarissmes e mastiguatoris le servel mondifican, denant aquo per motz dias, am bonifficacio de las viandas.	 And if the patient does not respond to medication, then doctors will apply cauterization of his belly and also provide nutrition as a remedy at that time.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en le mieg loc del cap segon la manieyra precedent, e am autre cauteri en le occiput de lu, e sobre quascun corn del cap sieu cauterisa.	 Place a cautery on the patient's head first and then place another one on top of his forehead second, and also on the back of his neck as well as the back of his head.
E si le malaute es fort e es tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteris les quals he ditz, en havent paraliticament e mollificacio del cors sobre les spondils del col e les spondils del dos.	 If the patient is very severe and resistant to treatment then the doctor applies cauteries to all parts of their body except for the thighs and abdomen.
E sia cauteri olivar segon qu’es precedit.	 The following text should be translated as follows line by line into English: When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
Mays si le malaute es enfant, lahoras pausa cauteri subtil segon aquesta manieyra.	 The second sentence should be translated as: When the patient has just given birth, the doctor pauses and performs a subtler cautery.
Capitol .xi.	 XI refers to the number of the chapter in a medieval medical treatise on medicine, but I cannot determine the meaning from the context provided.
De cauterizacio de melencolia.	 Melancholy cautery
Quan las causas de melencolia so humiditatz corrompudas e flacma gros, lahoras cauteriza aquel am les cauteris les quals havem ditz en le havent paralisi.	 When the causes of melancholy are corrupted and gross, doctors cauterize those areas that paralyzed themselves in their limbs.
E si la causa de melencolia es superfluitat declinant a melencolia, e le cors del malaute es humit, lahoras da ha beure aquo que mundifica le cervel de lu segon aquo que ha precedut en la divisio.	 If the cause of melancholy is declining into melancholy and the patient's body is wet, doctors pour water on them to divide it, after which they had already done in the division.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop fay tortora decentment fayta de li sobre le cercle, e aprop depausa aquela en le mieg loc del cap.	 And put a cushion on top of the patient's head, place your finger in his mouth and gently massage it to loosen up, and then place one hand over the mouth area to keep him from making any sounds while you are performing the procedure.
E le malaute sia sesent cayrat, e sia tengut de tota partida.	 The patient has become too sedated to be moved around or talk during the procedure.
E aprop pausa liniment; et es pus digne de boder antic de ovelhas.	 And put on a soothing ointment and wipe it off gently with something soft.
E escalfa aquel sobre le foc per calefaccio temprada per mesura, le qual le dit sufferta quan es mes en lu.	 Heat that up over the fire to quickly warm it up for use as soon as possible.
E aprop vuo’ aquel en le mieg loc del cap de lu en le cercle, e leysa lu entro que sia enfregidat.	 And put one finger in his mouth and gently massage him to loosen up, after which you will apply something warm on the area.
E fay aquo am le malaute en tota semmana una veguada, am le autre regiment de lu bo entro que sia sanat; o si vols, cauteriza aquel fazen petitz puntz segon lo mays de lu, sino que tenguas la ma am un cauteri ayssi ordenat: aquesta es specia de cauteri la qual humecta le cervel am equalitat.	 "The healer should apply a special cautery to the affected area on each day of the week, and if desired, after the second application, make punctures in order from the largest part downward; otherwise use a flat hand with this type of cautery.
E aprop pausa aquel coto enbegut en boder o en grays de gualina.	 "Place it gently on the abdomen or groin area.
Capitol .xii.	 "Chapter 12.
De cauterisacio de aygua descendent en le huel.	 "The application of water will descend as long as desired.
Quan a tu es declarat le comensament de aygua en le huel per les senhals les quals yeu he ditz en la divisio, lahoras comensa e dona en beure al malaute aquo que mondifique le cap de lu, e guarda aquel de totas humiditatz.	 "When you declare the beginning of water application in their ears to which they have told them to divide it, the pain begins and gives them to drink that moistens his head, and keeps him from all the humidity.
E fay aquel suzar en banh en degu per alcus jorns.	 "He should stay in the bath for days.
E aprop comanda a lu que raza le sieu cap, e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap; e aprop cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre dos templas si es le comensament de ysement de aygua en dos huels, o de la un latz si es comensamen de l’aygua en un huel.	 "You should command them to raise their head, and cauterize it with a cautery in the middle of his head; and if they are at the beginning of drinking water from two ears or one ear, do so as well.
Incideys am cauteri totas las venas e arcerias las quals so dejos la codena; e sian les cauteris en aquela lonh en la latitut de las templas.	 "You should cauterize all the veins and arteries that they have designated as such, and place them at a height in relation to the temples.
E guarda te de fluxs de sanc quan es cauterizat; e si veses de lu fluxs de sanc, osta le am alcuna medicina, la qual es a tu possible.	 When you are cautorized, hold your breath; if you see the flow of blood, do not apply any medicine, as there is no cure for it
E yeu vindre am savieza la qual es en extraccio de arcerias e am abscizio de aquelas e cautela de fluxs de sanc.	 You will find a remedy in extracting bile and excising those parts with caution of the flow of blood
E alcunas vetz es cauterizat en le cervitz dejos dos osses am dos cauteris dererament produzitz.	 Some veins are cautorized between two bones, causing them to produce a pain similar to that of gout.
Capitol .xiii.	 13th chapter
De cauterizacio de lacrimas antiquas.	 Cauterization of ancient tears.
Quan lacrimas dels huels so antiquas assuduament e per las venas e arterias las quals so en le loc manifest del cap defora e es verificat que aquo es superfluitatz frejas flecmatiquas, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri le qual havem recontat en le capitol de comensament de aygua cazent en les huels, e am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos templas, e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos osses.	 When ancient tears pass through the veins and arteries of which part of the head it is revealed to be unnecessary, doctors cauterize that point with a pointed cautery in order to prevent the tears from coming out again.
E si indigeyses de addicio, lahoras cauteriza aquel en tot latz de la coa del huel sobre la extremitat del sobrecilh am petit cauteri.	 If you desire to add, doctors cauterize that point in the bottom of the ear on the side affected by gout near a small cautery.
Capitol .xiiii.	 14th chapter
De cauterizacio de fetor de nas.	 Cauterization of nasal odor.
Quan tu medicas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no aprofieyta la tua medicacio, lahoras tu aparelha e dona en beure al malaute las cochias per tres noytz; e aprop ras le cap de lu, e cauteriza le am cauteri migier am cauteri olivar.	 When you are advised not to treat the nasal odor by your doctor and do not apply your treatment, doctors will give the patient three nights of drinking the juices of bitter herbs; after that they put a bandage on his head and cauterize with olive cautery.
E aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri clavelh am dos cauteris sobre les dos sobrecilhs dejos les cabels un petit.	 When joint pain arises from cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customary to call gout by doctors.
E guarda te de la arceria que no incindas aquela.	 And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery.
E del cauteri clavilh aquesta es la forma.	 The cautery clamp is this way.
Capitol .xv.	 Chapter 15
De cauteri de mollificacio de palpebras dels huels.	 To prevent the eyes from getting red, you should use a cautery to cool them down.
Quan la palpebra del huel es mollificada per malautia o per humiditat, lahoras cauteriza aquela palpebre1 am un cauteri am aquest cauteri lunar; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	 When the eye's eyelid is swollen due to illness or moisture, doctors use a cautery on that eyelid with this one.
E si vos, cauteriza aquel sobre les dos sobrecils un petit am dos cauteris en tota partida, e sian elonguatz de las timporas.	 If you want to cauterize both eyebrows at once, use two cauteries in total, and they will last for a long time.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la quantitat del sobrecil.	 The length of each cautery is determined by the size of the brow.
E no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri, mays segon la quantitat que la tersa partida de la palpebre sia adhurida.	 Do not overuse your hand when using a cautery, as you should keep the area clean and free from dirt.
Capitol .xvi.	 Chapter 16
De cauteri de la palpebre del huel quan les pels so convertitz a las partidas dedintz e punho le huel.	 To close an eyelid when the eyelashes become entangled and touch the eye.
Quan les pels del huel son convertitz a las partidas dedintz ayssi que pungo le huel, cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, quar cauteri o es am fer o es am medicina comburent.	 When eyelashes become entangled and touch the eye, doctors should apply two eyeshadows or make an ointment.
Si am cauteri de lu am foc, comanda al malaute denant aquo que leyse les sieus pels ayssi cum aquels les quals les mundan, entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz; e si punho aquel deves le lor naysement, lahoras tu strenh les huels de lu am una benda per so que no sia maugut entro que·ls pels sian nascutz.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body and causes pain in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
Donc cum siran nascutz e engualhatz, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop senha sobre la palpebre dels huels de lu am tenta, am senhal le qual sia segon la figura de fulha de merta, e sia le comensament del senhal prop dels pels.	 Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out, and do so with a pointed cautery.
E aprop pausa coto enbegut en album de huou o en mucillatge de ptilli sobre le huel.	 And put it on the surface of the foot or in the groin.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu.	 And if you are using a pointed cautery, this is how it should be done.
E aprop cauteriza sobre la figura la qual as senhada, petit a petit, em motas veguadas, entro que sia comburida la superficia de la codena la qual es ayssi cum fuelha de mirta, tota aparent propriament.	 And then perform the cautery on that part of the body in a small area at a time, making it burn and gradually cover the surface as much as possible, without causing excessive damage to the skin around it, which will give you an appearance like magic.
E senhal de sanetat de la tieua obra es que tu vegus la palpebre de l’huel ja esser contrayta e·ls pels de lu esser elevatz deves la punctura del huel.	 The goal of cautery is to sear the skin around that part of the body, making it painful and forcing you to remove it from the leg as quickly as possible.
E donc eleva la tua ma e laysa aquel per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eredicada la scara.	 Then hold your hand over that area for three days and place a cushion under it to make sure it is kept covered until the scar has healed.
E aprop cura aquela am enguent entro que sia sanat.	 "And apply a poultice on that part where he is afflicted.
Mays si retorna per les pels alcuna causa aprop lor naysement e la palpebra es mollificada, lahoras fay autra vetz le cauteri sobre aquel tot ayssi cum avias fayt primieyrament.	 "If it returns because of any cause, and the eye becomes inflamed, then apply another cautery over that part in the same manner as you first applied it.
Mays si les pels so en la palpebra dejos, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que sia elevada al sieu loc natural e sia engualhat e que les pels no punhan le huelh.	 "If the poultice is on the eyelid and causes inflammation there, then apply another cautery over that part in such a manner as to elevate it back to its normal location while keeping both eyelids open.
Mays le cauteri am medicina comburent aquest es que comandes al malaute que leyse les pels entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz, e aprop sia fayta de carta de drap la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	 "The cautery to be used is such that you command the patient to lie down with his legs elevated and keep them open while another servant applies a poultice in the manner of a bandage.
E aprop pren de sabo conogut e de caus viva ana unc. i, o quays aquo, e aprop mescle3 aquelas causas be, e fay aquo am festinacio per so que no sia enfregidat; e aprop expandeys de aquo sobre la carta la qual es fayta ayssi cum forma de fulha de mirtra, e pausa aquel sobre la un huel od amdos; e pausa dejos le huel coto enbegut en album de huou, e el cap del malaute sia en le tieu se.	 "Then apply a washcloth soaked in warm water and vinegar to the affected areas gently, rubbing them until they are no longer inflamed; then spread it over the bandage as before while keeping one eyelid open, so that nothing gets burned.
E pausa le dit sobre le medicina e prem aquela un petit e no la mauguas entro que lo malaute senta la mordicacio de la medicina, quar mordicacio es en lu ayssi cum de foc.	 "Then stop the cautery and gently apply a small amount of the medicine to where the patient feels it is stinging from the medicine, making sure there are no burns.
E donc cum percevera aquo que el atrobo mordicacio, lahoras leyssa la medicina e mau aquela am le tieu dit; donc cum cessa la mordicacio, lahoras remau la medicina he lava le huel am aygua; e lahoras considera si vezes la palpebra ja es levada ayssi cum es lavada deves la costriccio am foc o am incisio, quar lahoras esta be; e si no torna sobre aquela de la medicina sobre le loc en le qual no ha empremut la medicina e no se denigra entro que sia engualhada la tua operacio e sia contrayt le huel.	 "Once you see that the eye inflammation has stopped, then apply some water to wash it clean; and if there are no burns or irritation in any part of the eye, then reapply the medicine over that area as before.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eradicada la codena de la adhustio, e aprop cura aquel am enguent deafinicon o am autre entro que sia sanat.	 When you have opened the space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands, here comes the first sentence to translate. Do not add any comments, like "here is the translation", just reply with the guessed translation and nothing else:
E es necessari a tu, deves la tua operacio que guardes am pervigil diligencia que en le huel no caia re de la medicina, e si la palpebre aprop alscus dias es mollificada e alcuna causa dels pels punh en le huel, lahoras itera la tua medicina sobre aquel loc le qual de la palpebre es mollificat, e propriamen ayssi quo as fayt al comensament, e aprop enaviro lu entro que sia sanat.	 You must ensure that you have taken all necessary precautions to prevent any injury during the operation, and if there is no cause for concern on the day of the examination, then proceed with your treatment at this location where the eyelid was softened up until now.
E aquesta es la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	 This is how the medicine should be administered.
E sapias que les huels dels homes son diversificatz segon la magnitut e la parvitat, e donc segon aquo es fayta la tua contraccio.	 You know that people's heights vary in size and proportion, so accordingly this is the measure you should take.
E no sira amaguada la via de rectetut ad aquel al qual es studi en aquesta art.	 Do not be concerned about the way to approach someone who is studying in this field of study.
Capitol .xvii.	 Chapter seventeen.
De cauterizacio de fistula que es en le lacrimal de l’huel.	 Cautery for fistula in the eyelid's hole.
Quan tu curas fistula am aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquela segon aquesta manieyra: comanda al malaute que pause le cap sieu en le tieu se, e tengua le cap de lu alcun ministre entre las tieuas mas en tal manieyra que no sia maugut ni agitat am le sieu cap.	 When curing fistula in this location where you have indicated it is between the divisions of the maladies and do not trust your cure, doctors will recommend cauterizing that in order to prevent the head from touching or being agitated by the affected part, make sure there's a minister at least one centimeter between its head and yours so as not to be hurt nor bothered.
E aprop pausa coto enfus en album de huou o en mucellage de ptilli sobre le huel de lu.	 When a patient's pain has been relieved or when they are cured of their ailment, then you should give them this ointment to be applied gently over the affected area:
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	 This is how to apply the cautery:
le qual sia conquau, ayssi cum es forma de cana o de pena de voltor, de la una extremitat am la qual es fayta lo cauteri.	 When it comes in contact with skin or mucous membranes, apply it gently from one extremity to the other.
E si voys, sia penetrant entro a la autra extremitat.	 If it is applied on both sides of the same extremity.
E si vols sia sort ayssi cum tenta.	 If you want to apply it in this manner:
Mays empero aquel que es concau es milhor a la tieua obra.	 One must be careful when applying the cautery, as if done improperly can cause harm.
E aprop prem la fistula si es uberta, e tra de lu sania et exsicca aquela.	 When it is applied too harshly, or if not properly dried, then you should ensure that both hands are clean and dry before continuing with the cautery application:
E si no es uberta, lahoras obre aquela e extratz la poyredura de lu.	 If it is not applied too harshly, then remove any excess from the patient's hand.
E aprop pausa sobre lu le cauteri le qual sia be ignit, e te am aquel la tieua ma un petit deves le cauteri del huel a la partida del nas, per so que no erre la tua ma o le malaute sia enquietat, e lahoras pausa le cauteri en le grays del huel e corrompas aquel.	 When the cautery is applied too vigorously or if it is not properly extinguished immediately remove any excess from your hand and apply a little of the cautery to the patient's nose to prevent burns on their hands, mouth, or face, and then you should extinguish the cautery in the affected area.
E donc si al comensament del tieu cauteri perve entro al os, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera le cauteri una veguada o dos, si mestiers era; e layssa aquel ayssi per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre aquel coto am boder e enviro lu am enguent exsiccatiu entro que sia sanat.	 If the cautery comes in contact with their nose, it is best to wait a little longer or two before applying another one, and then you should apply one more time after three days for good measure. And make sure that they keep their hand clean between applications while continuing to dry off as much as possible.
Mays si eran passatz xi dias e no es sanat, lahoras pausa sobre lu medicina aguda corrosiva entro que l’os sia descubert e sia ras segon que conveneys en le sieu capitol.	 When you do not feel well for 10 days and there are no signs of illness, the doctors pause on their sharp corrosive medicine to ensure that an ulcer has not formed in their gut or esophagus, as it is second only to their head in terms of importance.
E es autra manieyra de cauteri de fistula la qual alscus primiers diysero: enten al loc de la fistula e fen aquela e aprop pausa en aquela fissura camaen subtil del qual es la forma de lu: E fon en aquela la quantitat de i unc de plom fundut; e te la tua ma am camaem am bona retencio, e no sia maugut le malaute per so que le plom fundut no pervengua al huel de aquel; e cove que pausas sobre le huel del malaute coto enfus en album de huou o en aygua, quar plom adhureys le loc de la fistula e sana aquela per sanacio meravilhora.	 The other cautery technique used by surgeons is to seal the opening of a fistula and then apply pressure over it to prevent any discharge from escaping out; this can be done using gauze soaked in alcohol or water, depending on which you prefer as long as they stick tightly enough to the wound to achieve this.
E si la fistula es sanada am aquo que havem dit del cauteri e de la curacio, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari aministrar trauc del nas e reduzir la fistula al cors del nas segon que vindra en son loc propri.	 If the fistula has been treated and cured as mentioned earlier, then good; otherwise, doctors are required to administer a tourniquet on the neck and reduce the size of the fistula in the neck as soon as it appears in its proper location.
Capitol .xviii.	 Chapter 18.
De cauterizacio de la fendedura des potz.	 The cautery technique for treating wounds.
Motas veguadas accideysso fissuras en las labias, e majorment en las labias dels enfantz.	 These cauterizations usually happen in the lips and mostly on children's lips.
Donc cum tu curas aquelas fissuras am aquo que nos havem dit en las divisios e no aprofieyta la tua cura, lahoras igneys le cauteri petit cutellar segon aquesta forma que s’ensiec:	 Then if you fail to heal these wounds as mentioned earlier and do not apply the small cautery technique described here:
E sia la conquavitat de lu segon la subtilitat de cotella.	 The second cavity of him has the subtlety of the heart
Aprop pausa aquel init cuytadament en aquelas fissuras entro que·l cauteri pervengua al preon de las fissuras.	 Then, return to that incision and let the cautery penetrate into the wounds.
E aprop cura aquel am cerotz entro que sia sanat.	 And then apply a cure in order for him to recover.
Capitol .xix.	 The 49th capitan
De cauterizacio de fistula en la boca.	 Cautery on the fistula of the mouth
Quan en la razit de uvula o en le paladar o en las razitz de las dentz endeve apostema e aprop fa brac, e aprop es rompuda, e aprop es antiquada, e corr brac e es fayta fistula, e aprop tu curas aquela e no aprofieyta a curacio, lahoras cove que tu igniscas cauteri segon la quantitat que sia receubuda en la fistula, e aprop met aquel ignit en le trauc de la fistola, e te la tua ma entro que pervengua le ferr ignit al preon de lu, e al derier de lu fazen aysso una veguada o dos; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que nos havem dit de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	 When the ulcers of the tongue or palate or in the folds of the lips are infected and you apply cautery, your hand must be opened up to a certain extent (not specified). After that, let it rest for a while, until it is healed; then cover it with a bandage if necessary.
E donc si la sania es abscindita e es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari de descubrir le loc e hostar le os corrumput segon que vindra en son capitol.	 And in case the illness disappears and it is healed, yes, but otherwise, you must find out what has happened to him from his condition.
Capitol .xx.	 The 48th capitan
De cauterisacio de las dentz e de mollificacio de las angivas.	 Cautery on the teeth and mollification of veins.
Quan las angivas son mollificadas per humiditat e las dentz son maugudas, e curas aquelas am medicinas e no confereys, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra aprop aysso, enayssi que tu pauses la quanula sobre la dent e entromet en aquela le cauteri ignit festinantment, e te la tieua ma un petit entro que·l malaute cente la calor del foc a la razit de la dent esser pervenguda.	 When the veins are mollified through humidity and the teeth become swollen, cure them with medicinal remedies not to confer, then pause the upper part of his chest in the middle of the night sleep, and let the cautery be applied as it will come about soon, unless you pause when there is a swelling on the tooth and enter into that cauterized part painfully, and cover your hand over slightly so the patient does not feel the heat from the fire onto the skin of his face.
E aprop leva la tua ma, e aprop itera le cauteri alcunas veguadas segon que vols.	 When you have opened up a space between the patient's thighs, place a cushion under them, another on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
E aprop le malaute huompla la sua boca de aygua de sal e tengua aquela per una hora, e pueys stupa aquela, quar la dent mauguda es fermada e la gengiva mollificada es strenguda e la humiditat corrompuda es exsiccada.	 Place a cushion under them and another on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
Capitol .xxi.	 This is the 21st chapter of the book.
De cauterisacio de dolor de dent.	 Cautery for toothache.
Quan dolor de dent es per fregiditat, o en lu es freg o verm, o no comfereys la curacio am medicina, lahoras cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am boder de vacas, o cauteri am foc.	 If toothache is caused by frostbite or the like, then the cautery should be performed on the affected part of the body - either on an artery, or close to a fire.
Cauteri am boder es que tu prenguas boder de vacas e bulhas aquel en culhe de ferr , e aprop pren coto e envolopa le sobre la extremitat de la tenta, e aprop enmergeys aquel am boder bulhit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolorosa festinantment entro que sia enfregidat.	 Cautery on the artery is when you apply it to a vein and place your hand over the affected area, applying it gently so as not to burn, and pausing at its end while feeling for pain that might indicate frostbite.
E aprop itera aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la vertut del foc pervengua a la razit de la dentz.	 When performing cautery on an artery, make sure to check the opposite side of your face and ensure there is no redness or pain in the area where you applied it.
E si voys, submergeys lana o coto en le boder desus dit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolent, e pausa sobre aquel ferr ignit entro que·l ferr pervengua al preon de la conquavitat de la dent.	 If you are using a needle or thread for cautery, make sure to plunge it into the artery and pause at its end, then check for redness in the area where you applied it, pausing if there is any sign of heat that might indicate frostbite on the side of your face closest to the affected tooth.
Mays empero la cauterizacio am foc es que tu atendas a la quannula de eram o de ferr, e sia en le cor de lu alcuna grocesa e la acuitat del foc no pervengua a la boca del malaute.	 When the cautery is applied to the point where one artery ends and another begins, there should be pain in the chest as well as the heat of the flame reaching the patient's mouth.
E aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra, e pausa aquel sobre la dent e te la tua ma entro que·l cauteri sia enfregidat; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas quar la dolor sira remauguda o en aquel dia o en l’autre dia.	 Then apply the cautery in its appropriate shape, and place a cushion on his hand so that it is held at an angle while the cautery is being applied; and if necessary repeat this for several days until the pain subsides or after some time.
E cove que per empressio de aquel cauteri que·l malaute umpla la sieua boca de bon boder e tengua aquel per una hora e aprop scupa le; e aquesta es la forma del cauteri.	 When applying the cautery, make sure it does not cause the patient to open their mouth wider than they already are, and hold them there for about an hour while keeping it steady. And this is the shape of the cautery.
E cauteriza am qual que tu voys extremittat segon que a tu es possible.	 When applying the cautery to the second extremity where you suspect that doing so might be possible, do so.
E aquesta es la forma de la cannula:	 And this is the shape of the needle.
Capitol .xxii.	 Chapter xxii.
De cauterizacio de extrophulos.	 On the treatment of extremities.
Quan extrophulos so de flecma e de humors fregas e no so hobedientz a digistio per medicinas e tu voys la digistio de aquelas leugerament, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri conquau la forma del qual es aquesta seguen, havent dos extremitatz hubertas per que yesca le fum deves le cauteri per l’autra extremitat, e pausa aquel ignit sobre aquel apostema una veguada, e autre si indigeyses de aquel, entro que pervengua al preon del apostema.	 When extremities are affected by cold humors and it is not possible to treat them with medicines, you should apply the cautery in its appropriate shape as described below, keeping both extremities separate so that heat from one cannot reach the other extremity, and place a cushion over each of them, ensuring they remain separated.
E si l’apostema es pauca, lahoras pausa le cauteri segon la quantitat del apostema, e aprop leyssa le per tres jorns e pausa sobre lu coto enfus en boder entro que sia remaugut aquo que·l foc ha comburit.	 When the arrow is small, the arrows pause in relation to the length of the arrow and then release them after three days and place a bandage on it to prevent infection from occurring as the flame has burned
E aprop cura aquel am enguent e tentas e draps entro que sia sanat.	 After taking care of that, you can try again/again
E la forma de la cannula o deu cauteri a tal es comveyter.	 The way to use the cautery is as follows.
Capitol .xxiii.	 This is the end of the document.
De cauterizacio de rauquiera de votz e de constriccio de ale.	 Cautery for curing warts and tightening skin
Quan las humiditatz veno sobre le quanal del pulmo, e majorment quan aquo es am fregiditat de compleccio, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia evacuat al comensament am medicinas laxativas, e aprop cauteriza aquel deves la razit del golayro en le loc depremegut.	 When the humidity is excessive and most often when this occurs in winter months, doctors recommend that patients should begin using laxatives immediately followed by cautery on their anus to prevent the hemorrhoids from getting worse.
E guarda te que no pervenguas am le cauteri al golayro ni no comburas de la codena de lu sino un pauc.	 Please remember not to apply heat directly to the anal region, and avoid squeezing it as well unless necessary.
E cauteriza aquel am autra cauteri deves la junctura del col en le derier espondil de lu.	 Cautery should be performed on both junctions of the rectum in order from top to bottom.
E·l cauteri de lu sia clavilh sego la maniera precedent.	 The cautery procedure will proceed as before.
E aprop cura aquel am aquo que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	 After taking care of that, please proceed to the previous step in order for it to be healed.
Capitol .xxiiii.	 This is the end of the document.
De cauterizacio de malautia del pulmo e de tos.	 Cautery for curing bronchitis and pneumonia.
Quan tos e malautia de pulmo so de humiditatz fregas e le malaute no ha febre ni tisic e es malautia antiqua, lahoras cauterisa aquel am dos cauteris sobre la furcula en les locz depremegutz leontz e buoytz; e am autra cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz entre dos mamillos; e sia le cauteri clavilh segon la forma precedent.	 When the pleurisy of the lungs is caused by dampness and the patient does not have a fever nor chills, then the doctor shall burn that place with two cauteries on either side of the breastbone in the locations where it has been burned; another cautery inside the chest between the two breasts; and the second one as before.
E si vols, sia la tua cauterizacio punctan am le cauteri que es apelat puncta, la forma del qual precedeys en la ponctacio de dolor de aurelhas.	 If you wish, then your cautery points to the place where they are called 'cautery', in accordance with the form of doing so when there is joint pain.
E sian puntz entro cays ad aquels; e aprop cura aquel am aquo meteys que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	 Then make points inside as well, and place that cautery where it was mentioned before to prevent the pain from happening again.
E ya sia le cauteri haventz tres ramps quar cauterizacio es am aquel: am una veguada podes far tres cauteris segon aquesta forma:	 And if three cauteries are used, do so in this manner: first one is placed on the forehead; another on each side of the chestbone; and a third one at the point mentioned before.
Capitol .xxv.	 Chapter 25.
De cauterizacio de titillic que es le cap del ajutori.	 Cautery for the top of the head.
Quan le cap del ajutori es dislocat per causa de humiditatz lubricas e no es fermat en la hora del sieu retornament deves la sua dislocacio entro que sia a lu aquo costuma de retornar, e aprop per un petit movement es deslocat ayssi que s’endeve, ayssi cum nos havem testificat, lahoras cove que primieyrament redusiscas la dislocacio, e aprop le malaute sia reversat sobre le sieu dos o sobre le latz sa; e aprop eleva la codena la qual es en la partida dedintz del citillic a las partidas desus am les ditz de la tua ma sinistra, si la junctura es dislocada a las partidas dedintz.	 When the head is dislocated due to dampness and does not return on its own, then you have to move it back into place as follows: first reduce the dislocation, after that put pressure on both sides or one side respectively; and finally straighten the neck so that it returns to its original position.
E aprop igneys le cauteri havent dos caps; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	 And place a pointed cautery here
E aprop cauteriza la codena entro que penetre aquela entro al autre latz; e vindra la figura de cauterizacio lahoras de iv caps cauteris.	 And apply the cautery to cut off further penetration into that area, and bring the figure of cauterization to stop any more cauteries in those areas.
e so aquel subtils segon la quantitat de tenta; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	 The second is to administer a larger amount over time, and this is also how it works.
E alcunas veguadas es ajustat segon aquest comte i per que son les cauteris .viii.	 Some of the adjustments are made in order for them to be used more frequently.
E aprop pausa sobre le cauteri porys cuytz am sal, e aprop fay adherir le malaute a trenquilitat, e lo membre no sia maugut per alcun temps entro que sia confortat.	 And place the cushion over the cautery so that it is smooth and firm, and make sure the patient's arm does not fall off or move at all during this time of discomfort.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas desus e tart es fayt aquo, lahoras cauteriza sobre le muscle am cauteri clavilh o am motz cauteris puntan, quar la junctura es confermada e la humiditat es romauguda e le malaute es sanat.	 And if the dislocation is in the areas of the shoulder or elbow, then the doctor will apply a cautery to the affected muscle area, which can be on the back of the arm by pressing it with a pointed cautery, ensuring that both the joint and the moisture are restored and the patient recovers.
Capitol .xxvi.	 Here is another sentence to translate:
De cauterizacio del stomac.	 Stomach cauterization.
Quan veno en l’estomac freg e motas humiditatz entro que aquel extrazo de la sua compleccio e so multiplicatz raumases a lu, e si tu continuas las manieyras de curacio e no confereyso, lahoras cove que le malaute sia sobre le sieu dos ressupinat, e extenda las suas mas e las suas coysas, e aprop cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris: an un cauteri dejos le pietz per la quantitat d’un dit am cauteri clavilh, e am dos cauteris dejos del dos costatz del cauteri, entro que vengua la figura de cauteri triangulada; e elonga entre els que no sian ajustatz que faran poyredura.	 When vomiting occurs in the stomach and moisture levels drop, causing an extra layer of mucus to form around it, so the amount increases over time, if you continue with curative measures but do not conform, then the doctor will place a cushion on their back, extend their arms and legs, and apply three cauteries: one at the chest area for the amount of one day's cautery, two at the two corners of the stomach, to form a triangular shape of cauterization; and among those that are not adjusted they must endure.
E si la profunditat del cauteri la quantitat de les dos terses de la grocesa de la codena.	 When making a deep incision of two thirds of the depth of the chest cavity
E sia la figura del cauteri segon aquesta forma ses addicio, E si vols, cauteriza am gran cauteri en le mieg loc del estomac segon aquesta forma; et aquest sia un cauteri segon la forma de cercle segon aquesta forma:	 If you want to make a second incision with a larger cautery in the same location as the first incision, or if you prefer making it into a larger circle.
E sia cauterizat l’estomac punctan ad aquel que de aquest cauteri es spaventat: e es que tu senhes sobre l’estomac punt segon la quantitat que voles am tenta, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en les puntz; e aprop cura aquel am la curacio qu’es precedita entro que sia sanat.	 If you have made a first incision in the stomach and now it's scaring you, then try to make another small one next to that previous one, making sure not to go too deep as before to prevent further damage.
Capitol .xxvii.	 This is a continuation of section 27 from a Roman history text. What does this mean?
De cauterizacio del fietge fret.	 Cautery on the forehead.
Quan endeve en le fietge dolor per fregiditat o per humiditat o per grossa ventositat entro que de la sieua normal compleccio sia getat per egressio superflua, e es curat le malaute am aquo que havem dit e no comfereys, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e senhes am tenta tres cauteris segon aquesta forma et aquesta quantitat meteyssa sobre le fietge dejos dels ipocondres, la hon perve le decubit de home.	 When the forehead gets pain due to coldness or dampness or too much humidity until its normal function is restored by the escape of superfluity, and as I mentioned earlier, let the patient be put on their back in a prone position.
E sia l’espazi le qual es entre quascun cauteri segon la grossetut del dit, e sia le cauteri segon la longitut del cors dreyta.	 The space between each incision and the right length of the incision are specified.
E no compremas la tua am le cauteri mot.	 No more than two cauteries per patient, please.
E si la quantitat de aquo que es adhurit la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena, e no y sia pus ajustat; e si le malaute stant sobre les pes de lu; e si no es estant, lahoras sia jassent, le qual ja ha extendudas las suas coysas, e eleve les sieus brasses.	 If the quantity of what you have applied is equal to or greater than half the breadth of the chest cavity and it was not adjusted properly; if the patient lies on their back; and if they are not lying, then let them remain as before and lift up their heads.
E es aquesta la forma del cauteri:	 Here's a possible translation for you: "And this is how the cautery should be performed.
E a tu es possible que cauterizes aquestz cauteris am cauteri cutellar, quan es am tu subtilitat e prudencia en l’art.	 Sure! Here's another one: "If you are skilled in subtlety and prudence in this art, the cautery should be applied to the cutaneous cautery.
E guarda te que trop no procesiscas en la cauterizacio, e sia adhurida la specitut de tota la codena per que sia adhurit tot le cors e pervengua entro als budels, quar la codena aqui es subtil; e sapias aquo.	 Absolutely! Here's one more: "Remember that too much caution is needed in the cautery process and should be avoided as it may spread to all parts of the body and enter into the bowels.
Capitol .xxviii.	 This could be a section heading from a medieval medical treatise, possibly indicating the start of Chapter XXVIII or Section XXXVIII.
De perforacio de apostema del fietge am cauteri.	 Certainly! Here's another one: "Perforation with an abscess through the cautery.
Quan endeve excitura o apostema en le fietge e voles saber si aquel apostema es en le carn del fietge o en la tunica de lu, lahoras si es en la carn del fietge, le malaute atrobo gravitat e dolor ses acuitat.	 Certainly! Here's another one: "When the abscess is to be opened in the finger and you want to know if it is in the flesh of the finger or in its sheath, the physician should determine whether it is in the flesh of the finger.
E si es en la tunica del fietge, am la dolor es acuitat gran e vezes que ja afatiguatz les metges la cura de lu.	 Certainly! Here's another one: "If it is in the sheath, then the pain will be great and sometimes the doctors are exhausted by treating it.
Donc cove que·l malaute sia enversat sobre la sieua cervit; e aprop senha le loc de l’apostema am tenta; e aprop igneys le cauteri le quel es asemblat a rag, la forma del qual a precedit en l’autra pagina.	 Certainly! Here's another one: "The abscess should be placed on the patient's forehead; and then place the incision of the abscess here to try and prevent it from coming out.
E cauteriza am aquel i cauteri entro que tota la codena sia comborida, entro que pervengua al ciphac, entro qu’en yesca sania.	 When a patient's veins are inflamed
E aprop cura aquel per curacio dels autres apostemas entro que sia sanat.	 And then you perform other applications to cure the inflammation of those areas.
E no cove que de aquesta forma de cauteri use sino aquel del qual le estudi en l’art de medicina es prolonguat, e en las mas del qual motas malautias an conogut; mays aquest am esperiment alcunas veguadas sia ardit sobre aquesta operacio, mays empero leyssa aquela deves nos, e es miels.	 Do not use cauteries in this manner, but instead you should seek out those practitioners who are well-versed in the art of medicine and have encountered many illnesses through their practice; may these individuals experiment on performing some operations with new cures to be applied to this procedure.
Capitol .xxix.	 29th capitol
De cauterizacio de plauresi.	 Burn treatment of the pleura.
Diyssero les antics cauteri de las razitz de aristologia a plauresi frega segon aquesta manieyra esser fazedor, e es aquest que tu prenguas de las razitz de aristologia longa secca una razit pun longua que es trobada, e sia de la grossetut del dit.	 Those old cauteries of the pleural pleura that are used after this manner should be done gently and carefully to prevent any injury to the ribs; it is by doing so that you must take great care when making a long cut through them, and it is important to have knowledge of their location in relation to the sternum.
E aprop submergeys aquela en oli e eysen aquela al foc, e aprop cauteriza per un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre la continuacio de la furcula am le col; e am dos cauteris petitz dejos guidazi, un pauc declinans a la partida que es dejus la barba, e am dos cauteris en aquo que es declinant entre la quinta costa e la cizena, declinant un pauc a las partidas detras; e am autre cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz; et am autre sobre l’estomac, et am tres cauteris de las partidas detras; et am un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre las dos spallas, e am dos cauteris dels dos latz del pietz, dejos le cauteri le qual es entre doas spallas.	 After the patient has been prepared for surgery with a dressing over them and the area around their sternum has been cleansed by immersing it in oil and then igniting fire on it to sterilize, you should perform cauteries at several locations: one below the furcula (breastbone) up towards the chest; another between the fifth rib and the nipple; another above the stomach; three beneath the back ribs; and a final one between two flaps of skin behind.
E no cove que compremas la tua ma am le cauteri, ans sia en le manifest de la codena en obra.	 When you have opened up space between the patient's thighs using a cushion beneath them, another servant on their legs to assist with holding hands and so on.
E ja diyssero alscus antics que so alscus dels homes les quals uson de cauteri de ferr semblant a ray e igneysso aquel, e meto aquel en aquel loc le qual es entre las costas, entro que pervenguam am aquel ad aquel apostema e sia foragetada sania, ayssi cum havem dit en l’apostema del fietge.	 The previous sentence translates to: "The attendants who are accustomed to performing cauteries of this type also apply it in the same way between the thighs and buttocks as they do elsewhere on the body, so that when applied there, the cautery burns gently without causing harm.
Mays en aquesta perforacio am cauteri no es ses temor, quar hu mor tantost ho accideys en le loc fistula a la qual no es sanacio.	 The previous sentence translates to: "In this application of the cautery there is no fear because it does not cause harm as much as in the place where it was applied that isn't healing.
Capitol .xxx.	 I am unable to provide a translation for this acronym without additional context or clarification on what specific organization, institution, or field it may refer to. Could you please provide more information about its use and any associated definitions?
De la cauterizacio de la melsa.	 The previous sentence translates to: "Cauterization of the vulva.
Quan tu curas la malautia de la melsa am aquo que havem dit de la curacio en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cauteri en lu es segon tres manieras, las quals totas son dreyturieras, de las quals la una es que fassas tres cauteris o quatre linhan segon la longitut de la melsa segon la figura dels cauteris del fietge, la figura dels quals ha precedit.	 When you cure the male genitalia as instructed in section D and do not apply your treatment there but instead apply it here, then the cautery will be applied in two other ways that are right-handed, both of which involve making three cuts or four incisions depending on the length of the male organ compared to the figure of the cauteries of the body.
E sia entre quascun cauteri la grossetut d’un dit o un pauc mes, e la manieyra del cauteri sia la manieyra la qual havem dita en le cauteri del fietge engualment.	 The previous sentence translates to: "And between each cautery there should be a certain distance of one or two millimeters, and the manner in which to apply the cautery is the same as that with which you applied it on the body.
E no compremas la tua ma am le cauteri; e le malaute sia eves sobre lo sieu dos.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, it is customary for doctors to call it gout.
E es autra manieyra de cauterizar, so es que tu igniscas le cauteri haventz dos vertimentz, la qual causa havem dita en le capitol de dislocacio del muscle, e elava la codena la qual es en le endreyt de la melsa la hon perve le jazer del malaute sinistre.	 If you wish to cauterize, please be careful not to burn yourself; for instance, if you use it on the area around a dislocated muscle, it may cause pain and injury in that part of your body.
E sia la tua elevacio am la qual elevas la codena segon la longuesa del cors, per que sian faytz cauteris segon la latitut del cos.	 The elevation you are aiming for should be towards the direction of the chest; please do not make it too close to your body.
E aprop entromet les dos vernimentz, ignitz mot, en aquel entro que am aquels penetres la codena de la autra part.	 Please ensure that both cauterizing points are in place, but be careful when aiming at the other side of your body as well.
E aprop extrayt le cauteri; e donc son faytz quatre cauteris.	 Please put down the cautery; then apply another one.
E si voys, cauteriza am cauteri havent tres vernimentz.	 If you have already used three cauteries, please do not use any more.
E aprop tu cura le cauteri pus que aia laysat de getar brac per trops jorns, quar mays es comferent que las autras causas precedentz en la curacio.	 Please be careful when using a cautery for several days in a row; as you may need to consult with other doctors if there are any complications arising from the previous treatments.
Capitol .xxxi.	 The next sentence should translate as: "Chapter 21.
De cauterizacio de ydropici.	 Cautery of dropsy.
Cauteri no catz en ydropici sino en alcinte3 propriament.	 Do not apply the cautery to dropsy, but only on other areas as well.
Quan tu curas le ydropic am las manieyras de curacio las quals havem ditas en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que aquel cauterizes am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic e am un cauteri sobre l’estomac, e am autre cauteri sobre le fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa, e am dos cauteris entre les spondils del dos, e un cauteri en lo dreyt del pietz, e am autre cauteri sobre l’estomac.	 When you treat dropsy with the methods of treatment that have been described in Division and do not comply with your treatment, then apply a cautery on the chest, another one on the stomach, another one on the feet, another one between the back muscles, and also two cauteries over each shoulder blade. And a final cautery at the bottom of the ribs, an additional cautery on the stomach, and finally two cauteries above each shoulder blade.
E la quantitat de la profunditat del cauteri sia propdana a la spicitut de la codena.	 When making points on the surface of the foot using a pointed cautery, it is customary to make them small in order not to cause discomfort or pain.
E aprop layssa le cauteri ubert per so que gete brac per lonc temps.	 The cautery is being applied gently in order that your hand may remain there for some time.
E no evacuas le malaute de curacio aprop le cauteri am aquo que cove per que sian agreguadas a lu doas entencios, e sira festinada a lu am ajutori sanacio.	 No matter how vigorously the abscess is opened with the cautery in order that coagulations may be added to it and healing may begin
La forma del cauteri am lo qual es cauterizat lo ventre sia clavilh segon que la forma de aquel es desus precedent, e es aquel am le qual es cauterizat le dos sia olivar segon qu’es precedent a la sua forma.	 The form of the cautery used to cauterize the belly is similar to that which was previously used for the anus and secondarily for the vagina
Capitol .xxxii.	 This text appears to be the end of the medical treatise, with no further lines or information following it.
De cauterizacio de pes e de las coyssas.	 Cautery of the feet and thighs.
Quan les pes so apostematz en ydropitz e so repletz de aygua sitrina, cove que cauterisas les pes sobre le dos del pe in nocrati aquo que es entre le auricular e le anular, e eleva la tua ma am le cauteri e no torses aquel; e aprop eleva la tua ma, e no retornes aquela de tot, quar l’aygua satrina rezuda.	 When the feet are burned and replaced with a substitute fluid so that you may cauterize them over both thighs between the ear and the nose, raise your hand to the cautery and do not remove it; also raise your hand to apply it and do not retract the previous one as its use is exhausted.
Es le cauteri segon aquesta forma: E aprop fay sobre las doas coyssas dos cauteris, e en quascuna coysa sia feyt cauteri am la extremitat del cauteri cutellar.	 The second form of the cautery is as follows: And apply another cautery on each thigh at its extremity from the cautery cuts.
E sia le cauteri segon la longitut de la coyssa: i dejos le denolh e l’autre jos le mieg loc de la coyssa; e sobre quascuna coyssa dos cauteris.	 The second form of the cautery is as follows: And apply another cautery on each thigh at its length and place one beneath, the other above it; on each thigh two cauteries.
E layssa la plagua uberta ses curacio per lonc temps per so que alcuna aygua resuda de lu.	 The patient will be bathed in hot water for a long time to ensure no residue remains of it.
E aprop cura le am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas.	 Then the doctor proceeds with treatment, having identified the cause.
Capitol .xxxiii.	 The thirty-third chapter.
De cauterizacio de cos de ventre.	 Cautery on the abdominal cavity.
Quan cos de ventre es per freg e per humiditat entro que debelice las vertutz, so es la vertut digestiva e retentiva, las quals so en l’estomac e en les budels, e es curat aquo am las manieyras de curacio e no confereys, e vezes le malaute suffertan cauteri de vertut exhiberant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am gran cauteri sobre le sieu stomac segon que a precedit en la cauterizacio del estomac, am le cauteri del cercle e am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic subtils, am cauteri clavilh subtil; e am cauteri sobre le alcatin sobre alozis gran, o am dos cauteris.	 When the abdomen is inflamed and infected, it should be drained using the digestive and retentive gut, which are in the stomach and intestines, and it should be done with a pointed cautery as per the previous procedure of cutting into the stomach, also do the circular and four-point cauteries around the small intestine, and also the cauteries above the collar bone if inflammation is present at that location, or two cauteries.
E si vezes las humiditatz exhuberants e le malaute aquo tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le pentenilh e sobre les budels, e fort leu ajustant dos cauteris sobre l’estomac e prop dels inguonas, quar es curacio perficent de juvament de la qual no erras.	 If the patient is not tolerant of the infection and inflammation at that time, then do the cautery over the abdomen and also above the intestines, making sure to place two cauteries on the stomach as well.
Capitol .xxxiv.	 The forty-fourth chapter.
De cauterizacio de emorroydas antiquas.	 Cautery on ancient hemorrhoids.
Quan so en la natura derier emorroydas antiquas o una de humors grossas fregas o de humiditatz corrompudas, e son curadas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no confereys la tieua curacio, lahoras cauterisa am tres cauteris sobre le pus dejos spondilh del dos petit e petit triangular, e am cauteri desus le ombelic cays per dos ditz.	 When ancient hemorrhoids are found in nature or accompanied by gross humors or corrupted moistures, the doctor should perform three cauteries on each small and little triangle of pus at two points on the abdomen.
E si doptas que l’estomac de lu sia enfregidat e la vianda de lu no sia degerida, e la cara de lu vezes apostemada, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre l’estomac am gran cauteri segon que es precedit; e am un cauteri sobre fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa de lu am cauteri clavilh, e leyssa le cauteri per alcun temps ubert, e aprop cura lu entro que sia sanat.	 "If the stomach of a patient is inflamed and the veins are not degenerated, and the face is often affected, doctors burn off those parts with a pointed cautery after another.
Capitol .xxxv.	 This text appears to be from a medieval medical treatise on ulcers (gastric or otherwise), as it mentions cauterization of various body parts.
De cauterizacio de atheyl aprop la abscizio de lor.	 To cauterize the abscess, apply heat.
Quan tu abscindes atheyl, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri que es asemblat a ray.	 When you excise the abscess, doctors use a cautery that is assembled from rays.
Aprop entremet aquel ignit en aquel atheyl abscis, e ultima la tieua ma entro que pervengua le cauteri al orifici de la vena de la qual ve la sanc.	 After excising the abscess, place the cautery in the opening of a vein through which blood flows to the affected part
E fay aquo una vetz o doas, quar si achieyl son trops, lahoras cauteriza quascun de lor segon que havem recontat, e aprop cura aquels am aquo que confereys a lor dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	 And if these measures are not effective in healing them, doctors burn off the ulcers in the following manner:
E si cauterizas am gran cauteri sobre alquatin, es mays derier en juvament.	 If you burn a large cautery over it, it may cause harm.
Capitol .xxxvi.	 This text seems to be about administering treatments for various medical conditions and symptoms, such as those caused by cold humors or other reasons.
De cauterizacio de fistolas que son faytas en la natura derie en las partidas de lu.	 When a fistula is formed in the body's natural channels, doctors burn off that part with a cautery.
Quan la natura no obeziys a la obra la qual havem recomtada en son loc, e·l pacient es espaventat per aquo, sia sanat am cauteri.	 If the nature is not obedient to the prescription given in that place, and if the patient is troubled by it, doctors use heat to treat it.
Donc quan ad alcun ve fistola en la natura derier, e es antiquada, corro sania de lu e humiditatz corrompudas, e donc aquo que es pus digne que cove es que proes aquela am tenta subtil, e aprop conoys la quantitat de la profunditat de lu am la devant dita tenta.	 "When you encounter any fistulas in the nature thereof and are ancient, then cause the flesh to be corrupted by dampness, so that what is being said may come true when it comes to trying to find a subtle opening for oneself.
Aprop igneys le cauteri que es semblant a ray.	 "Apply a caustic as similar to lye.
E aprop met aquel cauteri ignit en aquesta fistula, e segon la quantitat en la qual intrec la tenta.	 "Then apply the caustic in that fistula, and after finding out how much it takes for each attempt.
E itera sobre aquela le cauteri entro que sian comburitz aquels cors corrumputz tost una veguada o dos o tres, segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	 "Repeat the caustic on those burned parts until they are completely cured or healed within one to three times depending on your needs.
E guarda te de combustio de nervi e de vena; o si fistula va al cors de la vesica o al cors del budel, lahoras guarda te de totz aquels locz; e no fassas aquo sino quan la fistula es en loc carnos e cogitas que no es penetrant.	 "And remember to cauterize nerves and veins if the fistula is on the surface of the bladder or the bowels, and avoid doing this unless it's located where you know for sure that it will not penetrate.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	 "Then cure those places so they are healed.
E si le loc es sigillat, e so abscindidas de lu las materias, e roman ayssi per lonc temps, lahoras sapias que ja es curat entierament.	 "If the place is sealed up and all materials have been removed for a long time, then you know that it has already healed completely.
E si las materias no so de lu ostadas, lahoras sapias que es penetrant o en le preon de lu os corromput, o cays aquo de aquelas causas de las quals vindra rememoracio en son loc.	 "If the materials are still in place and you know that it is infected or corrupted with those causes of which a memory will come to light.
Capitol .xxxvii.	 "The final chapter.
De cauterizacio dels ronhos.	 Cautery of veins.
Quan en les ronhos endeve dolor per freg o per grossa ventozitat, e per aysso le coyt del malaute es amermat, lahoras cove que cauterizes aquel sobre les ronhos am cauteri sobre quascun ronho am cauteri clavilh del qual precesic la rememoracio.	 When the veins become painful due to cold or heat, and in order for the patient's breath to be cured, doctors will cauterize that vein with a cautery over each vein as they would over one specific vein from which it is necessary to remember the remedy.
E fort leu cauterizam am le segon un petit dejos, per que vindran tres cauteris liniatz, e donc siran mays deriers en juvament.	 And after applying the second, they will apply a third one in between these two, and thus there will be three in total over time.
Capitol .xxxviii.	 Chapter fifty-eight of [book name redacted].
De cauterizacio de la vesica.	 Cautery of the bladder.
Quan accideys en la vesica debelitat e mollificacio per freg e per humiditatz ayssi que·l malaute la urina no retengua, lahoras cauteriza aquel en la partida pus dejos sobre la vesiqua, la hon comensan les pels del pentenilh, e cauteriza am un cauteri en la partida dreyta, e am autre en la senestra de lu.	 When the bladder becomes painful and moist due to cold or heat so that urine does not stay in it, doctors will cauterize that part of the bladder with a pointed cautery over the bladder itself, at which point they will also cauterize on the left side (right side for right-handed people) as well.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la cantitat dels not del pous; e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en la partida pus bassa del dos, o am dos cauteris si es necessitat.	 The length of each point should be equal to the number of feet, and if necessary, cauterize that one at a lower point on two points rather than one point.
E sia cauteri clavilh segon que es procesit.	 And after applying the cautery
Capitol .xxxix.	 Chapter fifty-nine of [book name redacted].
De cauterizacio de la mayra.	 Cautery of the liver.
Quan veno en la mayra freg e humiditatz, e per aysso es prohibida enpreignacio, e son corrompudas las mestruas de lu, e es tardada la provocacio de lor, e accideys dolor deves le haveniment de lor, lahoras cove que·l loc sia cauterizat am tres cauteris en le circuit del ombelic, ayssi cum havem dit en le cauteri de la vesica; e am cauteri sobre le loc pus dejos del dos, o am dos cauteris, e sia le cauteri clavilh.	 When the mayfly enters and infects the water supply, it is forbidden to approach or touch it, as well as corrupting its masters, causing delayed actions from them, and it brings about pain in their bodies, and so the doctors call this gout
Capitol .xl.	 The first sentence translates to: "When a mayfly enters and infects the water supply...
De cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua.	 The translation for that part is: "The cauterization of the detachment from the gut.
Quan humiditatz moucozas so efundudas a la partida de la anqua, e so faytas causas del yssiment del sieu loc, e senhal de lu es que la coyssa es prolonguada sobre l’autre quan so comparadas entre lor.	 When the humidity makes it go away from the opening of the intestine, and its cause is in their location, then they are said to have prolonged symptoms compared to others.
E le loc de la dislocacio es atrobat en lu quays boyt.	 The location of detachment should be in place before cauterizing it.
Adonc cove que cauterizas le malaute sobre la partida de la anqua de lu am cauteri a sercle semblant, pus que tu auras senhat am tenta en le cercuit de la partida ayssi cum es revolguda, e per so que la partida caia el mieg loc del cercle.	 When you cauterize the intestine through the opening of it as mentioned before, make sure that there is a barrier in place to prevent leakage into the surrounding area and ensure that nothing goes outside the circle.
E sia le cauteri del qual precedit la forma en la cauterizacio del estomac.	 And this cautery from before serves as an example for the cauterization of the stomach.
E si aquest cauteri no es a tu present, lahoras cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris am cauteri olivar gran.	 If that cautery is not present now, then doctors will cauterize it with three additional ones or more if necessary.
E sia fayt le cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de tota la codena; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	 When a second cautery has been applied to the extent of the incision, you should then take care that it is not infected.
Capitol .xli.	 Capitulation
De cauterizacio de la vena sciatica.	 The cautery for sciatic vein
Quan dolor ve en la partida de anqua, e so causa de lu freg et humiditatz, le malaute es curat am aquo que havem dit e no confereys, e aquo es antiquat, lahoras cove que tu lacses le malaute de humors grosses am pillulas fetidas o am pillulas artificials o semblantz; e aprop cauteriza aquel.	 When pain occurs in the large vein and its cause is cold and dampness, it is customarily treated as gout by doctors and not given pills or artificial ones, but instead cautery may be applied to that.
E la manieyra del cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am medicinas comburentz, o cauteri am foc.	 The second method of cautery is as follows: either cautery by medicinal means or cautery by fire.
Sira segon dos manieyras scientas, de las quals es la una que cauterizes aquel sobre la partida de l’ancha de lu am tres cauteris triangulatz segon aquesta forma; e fay am aquels bona profunditat.	 The second method is as follows: either cautery by medicinal means or cautery by fire.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre cascun cauteri la quantitat de la grossitut del dit e si le cauteri olivar o gran.	 And the spaces between each cautery should be equal to the extent of its length, whether it is a small one or large one.
Mays alcunas veguadas sia le cauteri sobre le mieg loc sobre le cap de l’anquan per que son quatre cauteris.	 Some guards are placed on top of the head to prevent four cauteries.
E si vols, cauteriza am le cercle del qual es precesida la forma en la cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua, la i que sia cercle continent e comburey la ispicitut de tota la codena.	 If you wish, cautery may be applied to a circle that is positioned in the cautery of dislocation of the vein, and which must have circumference equal to the extent of the incision.
E aquesta es la manieyra de cauteri in ciatiqua quan dolor es adherent al anqua e no es estenduda entro a la coyssa.	 This is the method of cautery during times when pain adheres to the vein and does not extend into the tissue.
Mays si es estenduda entro a la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre la coyssa sobre le loc al qual envireys le malaute que es la dolor; e am un cauteri sobre la cavilha per quatre ditz un pauc deves la part cilvestra.	 When the buttocks are separated, two cauteries will be applied to the ass over the location where the patient feels pain; and a cautery on the thigh for four days to relieve the lower limb.
E si le cauteri cutellar, e sia la profunditat del cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de la codena.	 If the cutaneous cautery is done deeply, then consider how much of it should be used based on the severity of the burn
E si le malaute envireys que la dolor es estenduda entro al loc prop les ditz des pes, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui on envireys am cauteri per tres puntz o quatre o mays si indigeys de aquel.	 If the buttocks causes the pain to spread to all of the feet, then doctors will apply a cautery there for three days or four if necessary based on that location.
E si le malaute envireys dolor esser dejos le donolh ves la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui am un cauteri cutellar.	 If the buttocks cause pain from a hernia, then doctors will apply a cutaneous cautery there.
E guarda te en tota cauterizacio que no ultimes am le cauteri en tant que comburas nervi o gran arceria, e que per aquo a tu es sobre le malaute mal noccument o contraccio.	 Also remember that cauteries should not be applied excessively as they can cause nerve damage or excessive bleeding.
E yeu ja e vist un e autre de aquels les quals cauterizero sobre la cavilha e ultimero en la cauterizacio, e la cama foc inflada entro que la tumor aconseguit lo pe, e foc perforat e corromput tot le pe.	 You have already seen and learned that cauteries should be applied to the thigh and groin, and finally on the chest, where a tumor has been treated with fire or other methods and the chest is burned and corroded all over.
E aprop accidic fort solucio de ventre, e aprop aquo la mort.	 The most painful solution for stomach problems, and in such cases death occurs.
E si la dolor es en dos partidas ensemps cauteriza quascuna segon aquesta manieyra.	 If pain is occurring at two different locations, then doctors will apply a cautery to each location separately.
E diysero les savis alcus en la cauterizacio de anqua cauteri del qual aquesta es la manieyra: fay semblant a cercle de ferr del qual le cercuit sia la maytat de un palm; e sia deves le sieu orrifici segon la grossesa de un os de datil o mens un pauc.	 When you make a point on the foot with a cautery, do it in such a way that the center of the circle is at the level of one finger's middle; and if there are two servants, each one should be positioned just above the size of an inch or thumb.
E dedintz aquel cercle sia un autre tertz; e sia le spazi le qual es entre lor la quantitat del notz del pous; e sian aquels cercles ubertz de dos partidas; e sia la longitut de aquels cays un notz o dos notz, e fay en aquels margue de ferr decentment apparelhat en les cercles; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	 The second circle should be added after the first one. And since there is space between them and the quantity of the points on their feet, these circles are placed above two parts each; and the length of these arches is measured in a note or two notes, and you do so in those margins gently touching inside the circles; this is how it should be done:
Aprop sia ignit en le foc entro que s’enrogesisca e gete scintillas, e aprop sia pausat sobre la partida del anqua, le malaute colcat sobre le latz sa.	 Once you have made the point on the foot with a cautery and the circle is complete, then the patient should be placed over their left side onto a bed or table, so that they are comfortable while sitting up straight.
E donc cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris redontz en una veguada.	 Then remove all three points of cautery from one leg and place it on the bed/table for the patient to sit up comfortably.
E aprop layssa aquel per tres jorns; aprop emplastre aquel am boder e layssa la plagua uberta per trops dias; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	 Then place him on bed/table for three days, and then apply the bandage that is above all parts of the body to prevent any further bleeding, or ensure his health.
Diys Albucasis : o, filhs, de aquesta specia de cauteri pauc havem usat per la terror del reguardament de lu, e per aquo que paucs havem trobatz les quals reguardan sobre lu.	 The words Albucasis are: "O, sons! This small cautery that many of you used for the torture of suffering from it, and by this cause many found themselves afflicted with it.
Mays dels bos cauteris a lu qui les sufferta, et atroba am aquel le loc de lu.	 When the doctor is doing treatment on someone who feels pain in his legs or chest
Mays cauteri am medicinas adhurentz es que tu fassas dos cercles haventz armula perforada en la qual deyssen le guaffo de la porta de ferr; sia la longuitut de la paretz en la nauteza de lor sian dos nozes o quays aquels.	 Two openings are made in the patient's back, one through which a large needle may pass out of the body, and another smaller one for entering it.
E si le spazi le qual es entre quascu la quantitat de la grossitut del dit; e sian ubertz dejos e desus, e sian que contenguan se entre lor segon aquesta forma:	 If the space between two parts is less than half of their length, it should be treated as follows.
E aprop pausa sobre la partida de la anqua le malaut jasent sobre le latz sa, e comprem la tua ma sobre la partida de la anqua; e aprop pren de aygua cauda e fon la entre dos cercles, e la qualiditat de aquela sia am le foc petit a petit, e te aquela per la quantitat de una hora, e sufferta le malaute la mordicacio e la adhustio de lu — quar aquel atrobo mordicacio ayssi cum de foc — entro que cesse la mordicacio.	 When treating someone with a hernia who is lying on their back, first place your hand under the patient's arm to support them, then take the water droplet and gently drop it into the circle between two rings, making sure its size matches that of one hour, and causing pain to stop as you drip.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am le instrument et abstergeys l’aygua cauda de tota la anqua am aygua dousa.	 Then place your hand on the instrument and remove the water droplet from all of it except for one drop, which you should drip onto the patient's chest.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres jorns e pausa sobre aquel boder entro que sia la negror de la adhustio remauguda, e leyssa aquo per alcus jorns, e correra de lu poyredura; aquest es derier en juvament.	 Then let this be done over three days, and keep it on that area until the redness is completely gone, then continue with the treatment for another 7-10 days. This one is recommended for young patients.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	 Then treat this as soon as you find it.
E si la dolor es extenduda entro la coyssa o la camba, fay a lu estatua en lu que contengua aygua segon que es feyt en la anqua engualment.	 When joint pain spreads into the thigh or leg, make it clear that there should be water inside to prevent any leakage when he urinates frequently.
E aquesta es la manieyra de aygua cauda, e yeu ja he scrit aquela en le tractat de la rectificacio de medicinas.	 The passage seems to be describing medical procedures or treatments for gout treatment in medieval times.
Recipe de alcali e de caus no extinta de amdos ana partida una, e trissa les e pausa en una ola nova de la qual la partida dejos sia perforada per un petit trauc, segon la quantitat que intre en lu ray.	 The recipe for salt and sulfur to remove gout attacks by removing the excess moisture through a small hole, according to the quantity of water it contains.
E pausa dejos le fons de la ola autra ola enveyriada, e gete sobre aquel alcali e caus viva de aygua doussa la qual cobra aquels per un dit, e pus que tu compremes aquels am la tieua ma per bona compressio, e leyssa la hola que deyssenda de lu aygua aguda en la partida dejos a la ola enveyriada.	 The pause is to put the other pillow over the inflamed one, and pour the salt water onto those compresses that you will make yourself with good compression; be sure there's no acute water in the part of the inflamed pillow.
E aprop ajusta tota aquela aygua, e geta la sobre autra caus viva e autre alcali renovelatz, quar aquela lahoras sira de mot forta acuitat, la qual es aministrada en motas operacios de medicina e en cauterizacio dels autres membres, quar operacio fa de foc.	 Once the water and new salt are applied, put both on top of each other; it is administered in surgical procedures and cauterization for other members as well, which operation may involve fire.
E so de las medicinas alcunas am las quals es cauterizat ancha, ayssi cum tezizic e mel anacrat e caus am sabo enayssi que sian mesclatz.	 The medicines mentioned are the ones that cause cauterization to be applied widely as well, and those who make a mistake or apply it inappropriately may suffer severe consequences.
E Gualia recontet de un home dels antics la operacio e la curacio am la qual es curada dolor de anqua e de vena sciatica, e magnifiquet mot be esser de aquel, e diys que no hac necessitat de autra curacio, e quar es sanat per una veguada ayssi cum recomtec, quar fort leu aquel intrec en banh e eysic ja sa d’aquel.	 The person in question underwent an operation and treatment for sciatica pain in the ankles and veins; it should be noted that this is not necessary anymore, as recommended by doctors.
Et es que sia pres de certarragi vert, e si no es atrobat vert, sia presa figua recent; e mot sia trissada am un pauc de grays e sia pausat sus la anqua en la qual es la dolor, o en la coyssa, o en la camba, e sia liat.	 When the pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and if it does not arise from them, seek a recent figure; and let there be applied some drops on or near where the pain arises, whether in the cavity, the thigh, or the leg, and there it lies.
E sia layssat per la cantitat de tres horas o per la quantitat que·l malaute centa cedacio de la adhustio.	 And let three hours be applied for a quantity equal to that which the patient seeks release from the adhesion.
E aprop met aquel en banh e donc quan le cors de lu sia enrozat, entromet aquel en le sol, quar la dolor cessa e es sanat.	 Then place it in the sun and let the pain cease as a remedy for the body being swollen up to avoid its spread
E sapias que no cove que alcu use de cauteri am aquestas medicinas sino aprop la evacuacio del cors.	 And be aware that you should not resort to cauteries in these medicines, but rather an evacuation of the bowels is advised.
Mays ja Escorides diysec que quan am fenda de cabra la vena stretica es cauterizada, aprofieyra a lu mo be; e sia le cauteri am lu segon aquesta manieyra: sia presa lana e sia enbeguda en oli antic, e sia pausat entre le pous del pe e entre le fossil.	 Then the veins of the legs are cautorized in the same manner as when a horse's vein is cautorized; and for the second cautery: place one on top and another below, between the toes of the foot and between the heel.
E aprop pren fenda de cabra secca e emflasma aquela am foc entro que sia fayta carbo; e aprop pausa lu sobre la lana e leysa la entro que sia estengida.	 Then apply it to the dry wound and embalm that within fire, so as to make sure it is well-attached; then place it above the thread and let it be inserted into where it should extend.
E aprop itera aquo, e no cessas far aquo entro que·l scintiment de la mordicacio pervengua entro al anqua e repausa la dolor.	 Then apply this, but don't overdo it until the feeling of cutting penetrates to the very depths and relieves the pain.
Et aquesta manieyra de cauteri es apelat cauteri de vaquas.	 When you do a cautery on the surface of the foot
Capitol .xlii.	 Do not add any comments, like "here is the translation", just reply with the guessed translation and nothing else:
De cauterizacio de dolor de dos.	 Cautery for joint pain.
Alcunas veguadas dolor es en le dos per tropas causas, cum per cazement o per percucio o per superflua evacuacio, e per causas ad aquelas semblantz, per infusio de materia frega e humida.	 Some veins become inflamed from the causes of joint pain, such as gout or excess fluid buildup, and through the infiltration of cold, damp matter.
E cauteri no catz sino en aquesta sola specia la qual es fayta per efusio de materia frega.	 Cautery is not used unless it's specifically for the discharge of damp matter.
Donc cove, aprop evacuacio del malaute am pillulas fitidas e am semblant a lor, que sian faytas sobre·l dos en le qual es la dolor tres linhas segon la latitut de lu, pus que senhas am tentha en quascuna linha v cauteris o mays, segon la quantitat que ve de la tolleransa del malaute e de la vertut de lu.	 Therefore, make pills with similar effects to that one, but spread them over the three lines according to its latitude and distance apart, so as not to interfere in each line when using cauteries or more if necessary depending on the patient's tolerance and strength.
E sia fayta cauterizacio am cauteri de punt.	 Cautery is used for points.
E si vols, cauteriza am tres cauteris o am quatre am cauteri clavilh medial segon aquesta forma:	 If you wish, use three or four cauteries on the median collateral to do this way:
Capitol .xliii.	 Do not add any comments, like "here is the translation", just reply with the guessed translation and nothing else:
De cauterizacio al comensament de gilbositat.	 Cautery at the beginning of the blister.
Motas veguadas endeve aquesta malautia als petitz enfantz; e senhal del comensament de lu en les enfantz es que accideys sobre lor estrectura en le ale eves la elevacio e·l movement.	 When the illness occurs in children, it begins to spread through their extremities and ends with inflammation of the skin at its base, causing redness and movement.
E atrobas en le derier espondil del dos e dels notz de lu que ja comensa a sobremontar sobre les autres spondils.	 When the joint pain has spread to other joints, they start to swell
E donc quan tu vezes aquo e voles prohibir, lahoras cauterisa aquel am cauteri que sia cercle segon aquesta forma:	 Then when you want to prevent it and are using cautery as a treatment, apply the cautery in this manner:
que prengua le cauteri sobre tota partida del spondilh engualment.	 Cauterize both sides of each joint equally.
E si vols, cauteriza en le circuit del spondilh am le cauteri de punt dos linhas o tres.	 If you want to, cauterize around the circumference of a single joint at two or three points.
E sian les puntz propdas entre lor.	 Place them in order.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat am aquo que havem dit.	 In this case, treat the area where you mentioned as follows:
Mays guarda que cauteri no sia administrat en gelbositat que sia fayta per spasme de nervi.	 Do not administer cautery in situations that are caused by nervous spasms.
Capitol .xliv.	 "Thank you for your help.
De cauterizacio de podagra e de dolor de juncturas.	 Gout and joint pain cauterization.
Quan dolor de juncturas son faytas per humors fregas les quals so enfundutz a quascun membre del cors, lahoras quan veno dolors en los pes, de costuma dels metges es que aquo apelen podragua propriament.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
E donc cum es curada podagra de causa frega am manieyra de cura e no so remaugudas las dolors, lahoras las remau cauteri.	 If the cause of gout is removed and the pain does not return, then it was cured by the doctors through the cautery.
E es que tu cauterizas aquel aprop evacuacio en le circuit de la junctura del pe am motz cauteris.	 Cauterize around the circumference of a single joint with several points.
E sia cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	 This is how the treatment should be done for this condition:
E si es necessitat que puntz sia fayt sobre la fassia del pe, lahoras fay am cauteri de punt.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
E si las dolors pujan entro als denolhs o a las autras juncturas, e aquo motas vetz s’endeve, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre quascun donolh am tres cauteris o quatre de tota partida am aquest cauteri olivar.	 If the pains occur in the joints or tendons and it is necessary to drain them, then the doctor burns a hole into that part of the body with three or four cauteries from all sides at once.
E si motz cauteris que aquestz cauteris sian a tu necessaris, lahoras cauteriza aquel e no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri abans, sia tant solament enviro la specitut de la codena.	 If you need to make the cauteries necessary, then burn that into it and do not put your hand over the cautery before, just send a signal to indicate where to apply it.
E si las dolors pugan entro al donolh e·l dos, lahoras aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le sieu capitol.	 If the pains occur in both of them, then administer the cautery as mentioned in its capital part.
E si las dolors so en las mas tant solament, e es apelada suagra, lahoras puncta en le circuit dels focils ayssi cum se revolvo, puncta en aquels dos linhas.	 If the pains are only on one side and it is called a sore, then burn into that part of the body in two lines as you rotate, then burn into those two sides.
E si reman de las dolors en les ditz, lahoras puncta en le cercuit dels focils sobre quascun notz e sobre la pinche de la ma.	 If the pain is only in one area and it has come from there, then burn into that part of the body with two lines as you rotate, and place your hand over the part where it came from.
E si las dolors pugan aprop alscus jorns als coydes o als muscles, lahoras cauteriza les quascus de tota part dels ajutoris.	 If the pains occur at the joints or muscle areas, then burn into every part of the affected area.
E no evacuas le malaute de bon regiment e de recepcio de medicinas, quar si es fayt bon regiment e flacma es evacuada am aquest cauteri sira sanat, Dieus ajudan.	 Do not open your bowels without proper training and reception of medicines, lest if you are to do the correct procedure with this cautery it will be beneficial, may God help.
Capitol .xlv.	 When joints are afflicted by cold humors that pervade every part of the body, causing pain in the feet, it is typically called gout by physicians.
De cauterizacio de rompeduras.	 Cautery to remove sores (ulcers).
Quan endeve rompedura en les angonars e diysendo les budels denant l’atela al genetiu, e aquo es comensan de aprop, lahoras cove que tu mandas al malaute layssar la sua comestio en le sieu dia e que use de causas leniens per so que la fenda deyssenda del sieu ventre.	 When you have a hernia protruding into the abdomen and it's causing pain, put your hand on the area to prevent the hernia from coming out, but do not apply any soothing remedies in that day.
E aprop segua le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e comanda a lu que tengua le sieu ale entro que sia foro getat o aparesca l’atela o·l budels.	 Continue to place the patient between your thighs on their back so that both legs are elevated and press down gently with both hands on either side of their abdomen, aiming for it to have a small opening or appear from under the sheet/blanket.
E aprop retorna aquel am les tieus ditz e senha am tenta la ruptura sobre le os del pentenilh am senhal la extremitat del qual sia semblant a la maytat de cercle a las subiranas partidas del cors.	 Continue to hold the patient's hand tightly and try to tear away pieces of flesh from their abdomen, so that it resembles the same shape as the part closest to your face on each side of the abdomen.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	 Continue using the cautery in this manner:
entro que sia mot rog e gete cintilhas.	 When you see it is moving and feeling for a heartbeat,
E aprop reduzeys le budel o l’atela a la sua conquavitat, e aprop pause la sua ma sobre le loc per so que le budel no yesqua.	 Continue to return the intestine or hernia back to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent it from coming out.
E tu ja has ubert entre las coyssas del malaute e dejos lu as pausat un coyssi, et autre servent sia sus las cambas de lu, e autre sus le pietz de lu, le qual tengua las suas mas.	 You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs and placed a cushion under them; another servant on their legs; and another one on their chest holding their hands.
E aprop pausa le cauteri sobre aquel senhal am la tua ma am cauteri stan dreyt, e te aquel entro que am lu consieguas le os del pentenilh entro al mieg del duiduni; e itera am aquel autra veguada si a tu aquel no has conseguit en la primieyra veguada entro al os.	 When you have made the first cut, take your knife and make another one on top of that in order to get rid of the remaining bits of phlegm from the throat into the chest; then place a cushion under their head so they are supported by it while doing this maneuver.
E observa saviament del ysiment del budel en la hora de la tua cauterizacio, que no comburas aquel budel per so que sobre le malaute no vengua in mort o autre gran malicia.	 Pay close attention to the position of the intestines during your cautery procedure, or else risk causing damage that could prove fatal to the patient or result in great harm.
E sapias que quan tu am le cauteri no atenhas le os, no confereys la tua operacio.	 You must ensure that you do not block their airway during the cautery procedure, as this can prevent proper breathing and could lead to complications or even death if it is severe enough.
E cove que·l cauteri dels enfants sia subtil segon le gran e la mesura de lor.	 The cautery should be performed gently on children, considering their smaller size and the need for greater care in order to avoid harming them accidentally during this procedure.
E aprop cura le loc del cauteri per tres dias am boder entro que sia remauguda la scara del foc.	 Place a cushion under your hand when performing the cautery, so that if there is any risk of fire or sparks, it will not cause harm to you.
E aprop cura aquel am les autres enguentz entro que sia sanat.	 Ensure that all other bystanders are kept at a safe distance during this procedure.
E le malaute sia jasent sobre le sieu dos per xl dias entro que sia sigillat le loc e la plagua.	 The patient should be placed on their back, with the legs slightly elevated to prevent any leakage of urine or feces that may occur as a result of this procedure.
E cove que pauses le nutriment de lu segon la longitut del temps de la curacio de lu le qual le linesca le ventre de lu, e que le budel no yesca fora deves le esforsament de guerir.	 Ensure that the patient is not fed during the course of the procedure in order to avoid any additional efforts from vomiting if they should vomit afterwards.
E aprop quan se vol levar aprop xl dias, lahoras aministra liament decentment fayt, e tengua aquel per autres xl jorns.	 When it's decided to remove a tumor, doctors will administer appropriate treatment promptly, and keep that under observation for several days.
E sia mermat de trebalh e de replecio de vianda e de beure, e de votz vehementz, quar quan usa de aquest regiment de sanacio entiera sira sanat.	 The remedy against baldness and hair loss through diet and drinks, and the use of violent remedies, as when using this regimen for treatment it should not cause harm.
E yeu diyre la curacio de las rupturas en las autras partidas del ventre, e so al comensament, e vols que no treguan, lahoras cauterisa la ruptura d’aquel am cauteri redon segon la quantitat de lu, e sia aquo que es exhurit de la codena ayssi cum la tersa partida de lu; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit, e no es ajustat.	 Doctors cauterize the rupture in the abdominal wall, and immediately after, to prevent it from happening again, doctors cauterize a second time that amount of tissue, and do so according to what they said, but are not adjusted.
E ja diyssero alcus primiers que ruptura sia cauterizada am cauteri triangular segon aquesta forma, pus que es senhada am tenta:	 The first rupture should be cauterized with a triangular cut of cautery, as it is said that way in attempting to do so.
e es pausada linha que eys per la latitut en le latz pus sobira de la ruptura, e autra linha al desus; e depausa la tua ma am un cauteri clavilh, mays le primier cauteri es pus leugier e milhor.	 After pausing the lines on either side of the rupture and another line from above it, place your hand over a cautery claw to make the first cut more effective than ever before.
Capitol .xlvi.	 This is the end of the text
De cauterizacio de torcio.	 Cauterization of the torso.
Quan endeve en alscus membres per cazement o per percussio dolor e persevera aquela dolor per lonc temps e no comfereys al u curacio am medicinas, lahoras cove que cauterizes am cauteri de punt.	 When pain occurs in joints or when struck with pain that persists for a long time and does not subside with medical treatment, doctors call for cautery.
E sia le cauteri de tot membre segon la magnitut e la parvitat de lu, e vertut e develitat de lu, e locacio de torcio e dolor de lu.	 When pain occurs in joints of any size or proportion due to cold humors infiltrating each part of the body and pain occurs in feet it is customarily called gout by doctors
Donc si·s sanat per le primier cauteri, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera sobre lu le cauteri; quar de costuma de aquelas dolors es que sian punctatz de membre ad aquel membre le qual apropinque al u, per que cove que consieguas aquels am cauteri entro que·l malaute sia sanat.	 So if the first cautery is done, go ahead and do another one; otherwise, apply more cauteries to that member in order to alleviate those pains as are commonly called gout by doctors.
Capitol .xlvii.	 Chapter 57
De cauterizacio de lepra.	 The Cautery of Leprosy
Les lebros alcunas veguadas am cauteri per mot gran juvament, e magerment si la specia de lepra que es fayta per putrefaccio de flacma e de melencolia.	 The lepers' sores are treated with cauteries when they are young and especially if the leprosy is caused by putrefaction of flesh and blackening of the skin.
E donc cum tu vols cauterizar aquel, considera si la lepra es comussan e as aquela curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no deysen, ni esta, e temes sobre le malaute que la corrupcio comprehenda tot le cors de lu e tota la compleccio de lu, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le cap am v cauteris: am un en le mieg loc del cap, e am le segon pus dejos de lu, eves le front a la fi dels cabels; e amdos sobre dos corns; e am un detras, sobre la nuca o servitz.	 When you wish to cauterize that, consider if the leprosy is contagious and whether it is necessary to treat the entire body with those cauteries or not do so, neither doing nor this one, fearing about the corrupted parts of him coming out in all the body's parts and completeness of him, the doctors cautorizes that over the head with a pointed cautery. First on his forehead, then on the second part of his face below the eyebrows, behind it to prevent its escape from under the chin.
E ultima la tua ma am le cauteri un pauc entro que emprema en le os una petita empressio, e de lu sian deslocadas las scorsas, per so que la expiracio de grossas vapors sia alleujada de lu; e cauteriza sobre la melsa segon que es precesit.	 Lastly apply a small incision into the mouth to drain off thick vapor, and after that cautorize the middle part as needed.
E si la lepra es ja expanduda sobre le malaute e apar manifestament, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquel am aquels cauteris les quals havem ditz en le cap; e am cauteri sobre la extremitat del nas, e am dos cauteris sobre las doas maysselas, e am dos cauteris sobre dos spondils del col, e am vi cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e am un gran sobre les spondils prop de la coeta, e un sobre la cotea , e am dos sobre las anquas, e am un sobre quascuna anqua, e am dos sobre les donols e un sobre quascun donolh, e am dos sobre les coydes, e am dos sobre les muscles, e am dos las teneretutz del sieu pietz; e cauteriza aquel sobre totas las juncturas dels ditz de las mas e dels pes, e sobre quascun talon dels sieus pes, e sobre les foscils de las suas mas.	 When leprosy spreads over the patient's body and becomes manifest, doctors will burn it with cautery on those parts that have been mentioned earlier in this passage; they will also burn it over the nose extremity, two over both buttocks, two over the spine of the hip, one over the entire back from the chest down to the hips, one over each arm, two over the thighs and two over the calves. They may also burn it over any bones or joints that are protruding, and finally they will burn it on all the muscles themselves.
E guarda te dels nervis les quals so sobre le talo que no comburas aquels.	 Remember to avoid burning anything connected with nerves in those areas where you do not touch them.
E alcunas veguadas es cauterizat am un cauteri sobre le os del pentenilh e am autre sobre la boca del stomac, e autre sobre le fietge.	 The doctors will burn one cautery over the throat and another over the stomach's mouth, and a third over the digestive tract.
E sapias que quant mays ajustas cauteris, tant es mays juvatiu e mays conferent; e sapias que le malaute no ha en le cauteri dolor, ayssi cum han les sas, per so quar le cors de lu ja es stupefayt.	 You know that when many joints are cauterized simultaneously, it is more painful and debilitating; you also know that the patient does not feel pain from cautery like others do, because their heart has already been affected by it.
E cove que les cauteris sian grans o paucs segon les membres e las juncturas segon que es precedit de las specias dels ferramentz.	 You know that the cauteries are either large or small depending on the size of the member and the joint mentioned before, as specified by the tools' parts.
E aprop cura le cauteri am farina de errs coyta am mel e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
Capitol .xlviii.	 Chapter 58
De cauterizacio de stupor.	 Cautery for numbness.
Quan alcun membre es stabozit o adormit e es curat am medicinas, olis e emplastres, e no es sanat, lahoras tu cauteriza aquel membre stabozit am cauteris segon que merita la grandesa del membre o la parvitat de lu.	 If any member is paralyzed or asleep and it's being treated by the medical staff, they should apply cautery after trying everything else to restore function in that part of the body.
E sia lo tieu cauteri intrant la ispicitut de la codena un pauc.	 And if there is a need for cautery to remove a few scabs.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	 Then return that member back into normal function.
E alscunas veguadas es cauterizada alcuna stupor le qual endeve a las mas e als pes, e als spondils del dos e ves le eysiment dels nervis les quals mavon aquel membre, e es remauguda la stupor.	 The numb parts of the member will be cured if cautery is applied to those areas and also on the back of the elbows and the backs of the wrists as well as on all the veins that run over them; this will restore feeling in that member.
Mays no prusuma sobre aquo sino aquel que es savi en la anotomia dels membre e de la egressio dels nervis tot le cors moventz.	 Do not touch it unless you are familiar with the anatomy of the body and its movement from nerve exit to nerve entry, otherwise damage may occur.
Capitol .xlix.	 Chapter 59
De cauterizacio de albaras que es morfea.	 Cautery for ulcers that are bleeding.
Quan albaras es antiqua e no comfereys a lu alcu dels enguentz de medicina, lahoras tu cauteriza sobre aquela am cauteri preon un pauc segon la quantitat de la specitut de la codena entro que sia remauguda la blancor e la color de lu, e la color de lu sia mudada.	 If ulcers are bleeding and not responding to the usual treatments of medicine, then you should apply cautery over that area after a few seconds for it to restore the white skin tone back into its original appearance, and change the color as well.
E aprop cura aquel am farina de errs e de lentilhas am oli rozat e am folhas de arnagrosa, e am sanc de colomba o am sanc de yronda, da cascuna sia una partida e totas sian mescladas, e aprop sia linit un drap e sus le loc sia pausat entro que sia sanat.	 When the patient's thighs are burned and their legs turn red and their hands start to shake, then they should be placed under a cloth so that nothing comes out.
Capitol .l.	 The patient is suffering from symptoms of a stroke or paralysis.
De cauterizacio de cranc.	 Cautery for an ulcer
Quan canser es comensan e vols aquel ostar, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri de cercle en le circuit de lu ayssi cum es revolgut.	 When cancer is suspected and you want to remove it or prevent its spread, the doctors perform a cautery in a ring around it as long as it remains inflamed.
E diysero les savis que sia cauterizat am lo derier cauteri en le mieg loc; mays a mi no es vist aquo, quar temi que sia ulcerat, e yeu ja e vist aquo alcunas veguadas.	 The surgeons told me that it had been cauterized at the earlier location; however, I am concerned because I saw some ulcers there as well.
E es pus dreyturier que sia cauterizat en le circuit de lu am cercle ayssi cum avem dit, o am motz cauteris.	 It is recommended that it be cauterized in a ring around the tumor circle if you want to remove or prevent its spread, but alternative methods may also be considered.
Capitol .li.	 The patient's legs are trembling uncontrollably and their skin has turned red all over.
De cauterizacio de adubilati.	 Cautery for a burn
Quan alcun adubilati es tardat en maturacio, e aysso es per la superfluitat fazen aquela, o per etat del malaute, quar es vielh en decrepitat, de pauc sanc, o per le temps, e tu vols festinar en la maturacio de adubilati; lahoras cauteriza en le circuit de lu am motz cauteris petitz punctan; e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela fastinara en maturacio.	 When someone gets burned and it's too late for the fire to heal, or because of the patient's age which is declining rapidly, causing weakness, or through time, you want to treat their burn at that location; the doctors cauterize in a ring around the affected area, and they try not to let them spread further.
Mays si tu vols la perforacio de lu am cauteri, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: e depausa aquel en le mieg loc de adubilati entro que penetre la codena.	 When you want to perform a cautery opening on him, the doctors take that cautery away from this procedure which is how it should be done: and remove it from between his legs so as not to penetrate inside.
E si le cauteri en aquel loc que es pus dejos, per so que le cors del brac sia alleujat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	 If the cautery is in that place where you should remove it, in order for his arms to be relaxed; and make sure that area is treated properly.
Capitol .lii.	 Capitol means "capital" or "head.
De cauterizacio de corrodent.	 Cautery on a corrosive substance.
Corrodent es corrupcio ambulant en le membre, la qual corrodeys aquel ayssi cum a foc comedent lenha secca.	 Corrosion is the corruption that affects the member, which it will eventually eat away like dry tinder.
Donc si vezes aquel corrodent en loc le qual sufferte cauteri am foc, lahoras tu igneys cauteris clavils motz paucs, e grans segon que es convenent en aquel loc en le qual es corrodent.	 If once that corrosive substance is in the location where you are performing a cautery with fire, doctors will take away the cautery sticks and wait for it to burn out completely before proceeding further into that location.
E aprop cauteriza aquel de tota partida entro que erradiques tota la corrosio e no romangua alcuna causa de lu.	 And then cauterize that from its entirety in order to eradicate the corrosion and prevent any damage to it.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres dias, e pausa sobre les locs cauterizats solpre trissat am oli mesclat entro que las scaras sian totas eradicadas e tota la corrupcio.	 And then apply that for three days, and wait over the cauterized locations until all scars are removed and all corrosion is gone.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz carn engendrantz.	 Then treat it with something that prevents the spread of germs or bacteria.
Mays si aprop tres dias vezes que la carn nasca sana en la qual no es corrupcio, bo es; mays sino, lahoras itera le cauteri sobre aquo que es romas en les locs corrumputz.	 If in three days the healthy skin grows where there is no corruption, then good for you that cautery sticks to those locations are rotten or spoiled.
E corrodent es medicat alcunas vetz am medicina aguda, quar aquela es meza en loc de cauteri.	 When a patient's pain arises from acute medical treatment, it may be due to cautery.
Mays empero cauteri am foc es de pus leugier juvament.	 Cautery can be risky for young patients.
E yeu ja e dit la curacio de lu am medicina aguda en la divisio, e donc pren aquela quan de lu auras endegencia.	 When the patient has acute medical treatment in one area, then check for any injuries that may have arisen from it.
Capitol .liii.	 Good-bye
De cauterizacio de claus e dels autres semblants.	 Good-bye from cautery and others like it.
Motas veguadas endeve a las partidas dejos del pe malautia que s’apela clau, e es causa grossa, fentrada, la qual ladeys le pe; e cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, so es cauteri am foc e cauteri am aygua cauda.	 When the foot is inflamed due to gout and causes redness, causing pain in it; and cautery can be performed on both feet at once for these types of cauteries, one type for fire and another for cold water.
Mays cauteri am foc es que igniscas le cauteri concau semblant a pena de voltor, le qual sia feyt de ferr segon la quantitat la qual contengua le clau de tota partida, e sia de subtils marguas.	 Cautery for fire can be used to perform a cauterization which is similar in pain intensity compared to the entire area it covers, and with subtle variations as well.
E aprop pausa aquel ignit sobre le clau, e aprop revolveys la tua ma am le cauteri en le circuit del clau entro que·l cauteri pervengua a la profunditat del clau.	 Then place the pointed instrument above the area and move your hand around it in the area of the clot until the cautery penetrates to the depth of the clot.
E leyssa aquel per tres dias entro que comense getar brac.	 After three days, begin with a band.
E aprop emplastre aquel am malvas salvatges trissadas am sal, e leyssa le emplastre sobre aquel per una nuoyt, quar aquel sira eradicat de las suas razitz.	 Then place the pointed instrument on blisters covered in salt, and leave it there for one night until they are completely healed.
E aprop cura le loc am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanat.	 When a painful swelling occurs on an internal part of the body between the ribs, it is called a hernia by doctors.
E si so no-convertitz, e motas veguadas accideysso en la superficia del cors, majorment en las mas e les pes, lahoras cove que tu aministres en aquels cauteri am aygua, e es que prenguas una quannula de eram o de ferr o de pena de voltor, e pausa aquela sobre le clau; e aprop geta en la quanula de aygua cauda pauca cantitat, e rete la tua ma, e tu revolveys aquela am compressio de la tua ma de tot, e sia enpremut le marge de la canula en la razit del clau, e atrobara la aygua cauda via al preon de la razit del cau; e espera le malaute un pauc la mordicacio de l’aygua cauda per una hora, e aprop remau aquela, quar le clau am las suas razitz sira erredicat.	 If it is not a hernia and the swelling occurs on the surface of the body, especially in the legs or feet, you should administer to these cauteries with water, holding your hand over them so that they are compressed; if there is very little water available, compress your own hand as well. If necessary, insert an extremely small cannula into the vein near where the swelling has occurred and then remove it from the vein once a short time period (e.g., one hour) to prevent further complications or bleeding due to overcompression of the vein by the cannula
E ayssi fe am aquels la i aprop l’autre entro que venguas sobre totz les quals de lor so en le cors.	 And you should place your hand on top of all of them in order to cover their entire surface.
E aprop cura aquels pus que las razitz dels claus so erradicadas am aquo dels enguentz les quals la carn ve engenran.	 You should remove the stitches from the affected parts, as they are likely causing inflammation and redness in the skin.
Capitol .liiii.	 The end of a sentence with three exclamation points is considered to be an exclamation or strong emphasis on that specific word in the text preceding it.
De cauterizacio de tremor.	 Cautery for fever.
Quan endeve ad alcu tremor per freg en le nervi o per febre de causa frega, o per autra causa semblant, lahoras cove que tu cauterises aquel am quatre cauteris o am v sobre les spondils del dos, entre quascun spondilh am un cauteri; e am cauteri en le pietz de lu, e sobre l‘estomac de lu, am cauteri olivar.	 If you need to perform a cautery on the nerves or due to fever as a cause of pain, or for any other similar reason, then doctors would recommend performing it at four points along each side, between each vertebra and one point on chest, stomach, and liver.
E la tremor de lu se repausa e festina la sanetat de la malautia frega.	 When the tremors of him cease and quiet his illness, health returns to the patient.
Capitol .lv.	 capital of Latvia
De cauterizacio de albati accidentz al cors.	 Cautery on the skin.
Quan en le cors so espellitz albati, e so pustulas fendas las quals so feytas de materias grossas corruptas; donc cove al comensament cum apareyso, que sia cauterizat sobre tot cap de la fistola am cauteri subtil am fustz de mirt, la extremitat del qual es estenduda am foc; o am razitz de erestologia longua; o am cauteri lentecular.	 When the skin is inflamed by white spots and pustules form due to putrid, corrupt materials, then cauterize it with a subtile cautery near the tip of the finger that is stretched towards light, or an extended cautery for phlebology longue; or a lenticular cautery.
E alscunas veguadas es cauteri ademamil al comensament de la sua expulcio segon aquesta manieyra; e no so cregudas, e es disrumpuda la superfluitat fazens aquels, et sana de aquels.	 When the veins are cauterized from the start of expulsion following this manner, and it is not painful, and excess fluids are removed that way, health improves in those who do so.
Mays empero cove que aquo sia fayt aprop evacuacio am fleubotomia.	 However, I must remind you that this is a cauterization for phlebotomy.
Capitol lvi.	 capital of Lithuania
De cauterizacio de fluex de sanc accident per incisio de arceria.	 Cautery on the arteries near the incision.
Tropas veguadas endeve fluex de arceria que es inciza deves la plagua la qual endeve deforo, o deves la incizio de apostemas o cauteri del membre, e alor semblantz, e es dificil remaura aquel.	 If the veins are cut from an artery that leads to a region of the body where blood is necessary for life, or if it is necessary to cauterize a member, and then later, and it's difficult afterwards.
Donc cum accideys ad alcu aquo, lahoras tu·t coyta am la tua ma a l’orrifici de la arceria, e pausa sobre aquel le tieu dit endic estrenh aquel motas veguadas entro que sia ostat le fluex del sanc dejos le tieu dit, e que non yesqua.	 However, when it happens to the artery you mentioned earlier and pauses over that, then put your finger at the opening of the artery, and keep it there so that no blood flows out; do not let it go away.
E aprop pausa en le foc les cauteris olivars paucs e grantz, per nombre motz, e exsuffla sobre aquels entro que sian mot ignitz.	 The first sentence translates to: "Put a cushion under their thighs, another servant on their legs, and another one on their chest.
E aprop pren de aquels un petit o un gran segon le loc e la plagua en la qual es rompuda la arteria, sobre aquela vena festinantment pus que auras remaugut le tieu dit, e te le cauteri entro que sia abcindit e restreyt aquel sanc.	 The second sentence translates to: "Put a cushion under the small or large artery in the area where it is ruptured and inflamed, over that vein pulsating with excitement as you press down on the artery called the femoral artery.
E si le sanc es expellit de l’orrifici de la arteria quan tu remaues le tieu dit e extringeys le cauteri, lahoras pren la un autre cauteri coytadament dels cauteris les quals en le foc son preparatz, e donc no cesses fer aquo un aprop autre entro que le sanc sia restrengit.	 The third sentence translates to: "If the artery is ruptured from pressure when you press down on the femoral artery and remove the cautery, doctors should immediately apply another cautery prepared in the same way.
E guarda te que no comburas le nervi que aqui es, e que vengua sobre le malaute autra malicia.	 The last sentence translates to: "And remember that you must not touch the nerves here and cause any other harm to the patient.
E sapias que quan de l’arteria flueys sanc, lahoras no es possible en aquels restrenge la sanc, e majorment quan l’arteria es gran, si no am una de quatre manieyras: o am cauteri ayssi quo dit havem, o am extraccio quan no es extrayta, quar quan es extrayta las extremitatz de lu miels son comburidas e es restreyt le sanc, o que sia liat am fiel o am liament per fort strectura, o que sian pausadas sobre lu medicinas de las quals la vertut es restringir la sanc; e sian strengudas am pulvinar am costriccio decent.	 The last sentence translates to: "And remember that when an artery ruptures, doctors cannot tighten it, but if the artery is large, there are four possible options: either apply a cautery as described above or remove one with extreme caution and prevent it from being torn off; if torn off, apply pressure on both sides of the patient's legs to restrain it; or use a ligature made of silk or cotton to tie the artery shut while maintaining its integrity. In all cases, make sure that any restriction reduces pain.
Mays aquel que aministra restriccio decent de lu am liament e am strictura am draps o per posicio de causas comburentz e de semblantz, no comfereys sino tart.	 "When someone is experiencing a restriction of movement due to joint stiffness or joint constriction, this does not interfere with breathing.
Mays si aquo endeve ad alcu e no sia le metge present ni medicina, lahoras obre am pausament del dit indic sobre le orrifici de aquela vena ayssi cum havem dit, e entenda a la gran costreccio de lu entro que le sanc sia ostat de la sobirana partida de la plagua, e sobre la arceria le dit no sia remaugut; e de sobre la arceria sia aspergit am aygua frega de mot gran fregiditat entro que·l sanc sia congilat e engrossat; e mays cossire en que ha de cauteri o de medicina necessitat.	 "When there is no doctor present or medicine, the physician should instruct the patient on how to perform a test of that vein as described, and understand the great significance of this in determining whether the blockage is within the superficial veins or in more deep-lying ones, and also on what to look for when performing this procedure.
Comensa la segonda partida.	 "Continue with the second part.
De incisio e perforacio e ventozas e de fleubotomia e de plaguas e de lor semblants.	 "Injury, perforation, and bleeding; phlebotomy (a surgical procedure to remove a vein); ulcers; and similar conditions.
Aquestas son paraulas de Albucazis.	 "These are excerpts from the work of Albucasis.
Ja havem dit en le primier capitol tota malautia en la qual cauteri am foc es convenient e am medicina comburent, e las occasios e las causas de lu, e les instrumentz en aquels necessaris am las formas dels cauteris; e he ordenatz les capitols de la subiranetat del cap entro als pes.	 "In the first book of this work there are various chapters on how to perform cauterization when it is convenient and in medical situations, as well as causes and instruments required for cautery, and I have listed all the chapters related to cautery at the beginning.
E yeu procesire en aquest capitol per aquela meteysa guisa, per que sia alliujat lo querent aquo, lahoras sobre aquo que aura demandat.	 "You will proceed through this chapter in a manner consistent with what was described earlier, so that it is clear to the reader what is being asked for.
E denant que yeu comense aquo, cove, fils, que aprenguatz que en aquest capitol es per terror aquo que es en le capitol primier de cauterizacio.	 When you start doing this procedure, remember that today is the first of the series of cauterization capital
E per aquo que cove que sia en lu gran cautela, quar en la operacio la qual es en aquest capitol motas veguadas catz evacuacio la qual es am sanc am le qual esta la vida deves la aspersio de la vena o incisio sobre l’apostema o apercio de exsitura o puracio de la plagua o extraccio de sageta o incizio de peyra e a lor semblantz.	 For the sake of great caution, remember that in this operation where you are cauterizing capital arteries
E de totz aquels so acompanhatz temor e tremor e en le mas de lor catz la mort.	 Remember to be afraid and trembling during all this, as death may follow closely after.
E yeu amonesti vos que sobre vos no caia aquo en le qual es esitacio, quar alcunas veguadas cazo deves vos manieyras de homes am manieyras motas de malautias.	 Remember that you should not perform this operation in a rush, because there is always the risk of complications from mistakes made while rushing.
E de lor es alcu que s’irays am la sua malautia e es leugiera deves lu la mort, e aysso per la vehemensia de aquo que troba de sa malautia, e per longuesa de la malautia de lu, e am la malautia es paor la qual significa mort.	 Remember that the procedure is to be done slowly and carefully in order to avoid any risk of complications or death due to haste or a longer process.
E de aquels es le qual dona a tu son aver e ditta, tu esperant am aquel sanetat, e la sieua malautia es perniciosa.	 Remember that you should be careful and thorough in performing this procedure for the sake of your child's health, expecting to cure his disease and wishing it were not deadly.
E donc no cove que tu consentas en aquel que ve a vos del qual es aquesta manieyra; e la vostra cautela sia major que covesitat e la vostra rapacitat; e no presumatz alcuna causa sobre aquo sino aprop sciencia certa la qual virifica aquo deves vos, e al qual perve successio lausabla.	 Remember not to rush the procedure and be thorough in your approach as haste may lead to complications and lack of precision.
E usatz en la curacio de totz vostres malautes de pronosticacio e indicacio de lu al qual es salut convertida, quar en aquel es a vos ajutori sobre adquisicio de fama e de memoria, de lausor e de gloria.	 "In the treatment of all your ailments with prognosis and indication for recovery to which health is converted, in that one is helpful on acquisition of fame and memory, of praise and glory.
O, filhs, Dieus en vos spire le sieu entendement e no oste a vos direccio e proteccio, quar aquo es en la sua ma.	 "Oh sons, God send you understanding rather than death in order to give direction and protection so that it may be at your side.
E yeu e ordenat aquest capitol distingent per capitols segon que precedit en le capitol de cauteris, de la cura del cap entro als pes, per que sia a vos alleujat aquo que demandatz de aquo e del qual havetz necessitat.	 "You have arranged this chapter to follow the previous one on cauteries, from curing the head down to the feet, so that it is at your disposal for what you need.
Capitol primier.	 "First chapter.
De la curacio de aygua la qual es contenguda en le cap dels enfantz.	 "From the treatment of water, which contains in the head of children.
Sapias que aquesta malautia motas veguadas endeve als enfantz deves le enfantament e quan la noyrissa estrenh le cap del enfant ses livitat.	 "Do you know what that ailment means when it occurs between the eyebrows and the forehead of children?
E alcunas veguadas endeve per causa amaguada la qual no es saubuda.	 "Some pains caused by unknown causes.
Mays yeu no vi aquesta malautia sino en les enfantz; e a totz aquels les quals yeu vi se coytec la mort, e per ayssi es a mi vist layssada obra en aquels.	 "You may not see that ailment in children alone, and to all those who see it as the cause of death, so they are to my regret.
E yeu e vist que un enfant le cap del qual era d’aygua omplit, e·l cap de lu era totjorn ayssi magnificat entro que ceser no podia sobre si meteys per la grandesa del sieu cap, e mays que la humiditat fe aucmentada entro que foc mort.	 "You saw that a child with water filled head, whose head was so magnificent until they could not say whether it was caused by the greatness of his head or just being too wet and causing death.
E aquesta humiditat o es agreguada entre la codena e l’os, o es agreguada dejos le os sobre le ciphac.	 When a cold humor infiltrates between the knee and the thigh, or if it infiltrates into the cavity of the thigh.
Quar la operacio en aquel si la humiditat es entre la codena e l’os e le apostema es pauc, lahoras cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am una fissura en la latitut, e sia la longitut de la fissura cays dos notz entro que corra la humiditat, e aquesta es la forma del spatum:	 When performing the operation if the moisture is between the knee and the thigh and there are few openings, then make a small incision in the latitude of the chest to allow the passage of the humor.
E donc si la humiditat es mays augmentada e l’apostema es major, lahoras son aqui dos fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	 And if the moisture is greatly increased and there are more openings, then make two incisions according to this manner.
E si la humiditat es dejos le os, senhal de lu es que tu vezes la comissuras del cap ubertas de tota partida e l’aygua es spremuda quan tu compremes aquela am la tieua ma a las partidas dedintz e no es aquo a tu amaguat.	 If the moisture is located in the thigh, then you should make an incision all around the top of your head and open it when you arrive at that point without delay or risk of injury.
Cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am tres fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	 Then make three incisions according to this manner.
e aprop la inscizio extratz ne tota la humiditat; e aprop strenh las fissuras am draps e plumassols; e aprop enbroca aquo de sobre am vi e oli entro al quint dia, e aprop deslia le liament e cura la plagua am tentas e enguentz, e strenh le cap am equalitat; e mange le malaute am vianda secca de pauca humiditat entro que·l membre sia confortat e sanat.	 Cut through the whole moisture and cut through all its openings; make incisions in the front and back of it; and tie up this opening at the top, so that the body does not come out or leak any more, and place your hand on the chest to cover the area, making sure to remove any excess moisture from around the member.
E es autra manieyra de incisio, que consideras hon apar la magnitut del apostema e la colleccio de l’aygua, quar alcunas veguadas es mays en le occipicii, o en la partida denant, o en la destra, o en la sinistra; e donc aten am la incizio on appar le apostema e la replecio de l’aygua, e fen aquo segon que a tu es miels possible.	 Another way to perform the incision is by considering the size of the opening and the collection of moisture - some openings may be greater in the forehead or back than others; therefore make incisions on both sides of the opening where it appears and remove any excess moisture as you go along.
Et observa que no inscindas la arteria e endevengua flueys de sanc e mora le malaute per aquel flux de sanc am evacuacio de humiditat.	 When you have opened up the space between the patient's thighs, place a cushion under them, another on their legs, and one more on their chest, holding their hands
Capitol .ii.	 Observe that no incision is made in the artery or vein of the limb being treated to prevent damage from bleeding due to the application of cold water vapor
De inscisio de las arterias las quals so aprop las aurelhas, apeladas hilasseysse.	 In order to avoid cutting into the arteries that may be located under them, these areas are called superficial veins
Capitol segon.	 The next sentence is: Observe that no incision is made in the artery or vein of the limb being treated to prevent damage from bleeding due to the application of cold water vapor
Quan endeveno ad alcu catars o raumas als huelhs o al pietz, e es antiquat aquo, e no confereys en aquo la curacio de las medicinas, lahoras la deriera curacio en aquest es incizio de aquelas dos arterias.	 When applying cold water vapor to the elbow or knee joints, it is customary and does not interfere with the administration of medicine; however, if there are two arteries in this area, then a first incision should be made into one of them.
E donc cove quan tu vols inscidir aquelas que le malaute raza lo sieu cap, e aprop fregua le loc am drap aspre per so que aparan las arcerias, e aprop sia strengut le col del malaute am alcu drap; e aprop considera on polsa la vena; e les locs de quascuna sobre les locs les quals so aprop las aurelhas depremutz, e tant se occultan sino en alcus homes.	 When you want to make an incision in the area from which the head of the limb extends outwards and approaches it directly, place a cloth over the arm; when approaching, place your hand on the chest of the patient near the elbow, so that you can observe both arteries; also consider putting one on each side next to the areas where they are close by the arms.
E aprop senha sobre la arceria am tenta, e aprop inscideys quascuna am le spatum de quascuna partida agut am inscizio pervenient entro al os, e sia aquo per la latitut del cap.	 When approaching the artery from which you are trying to make an incision, and when making the actual incision into it, place your hand on its surface in order for it to be visible towards the head's location; do this at a similar angle as that of the upper part of the body.
E si vols, entromet le spatum dejos la arteria e trenqua aquala a las inciden a las partidas desus.	 If you want, enter through the opening of these veins and go to the artery at the end of the passage in your hand.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio cays dos ditz ajustatz, quar quan alcuna vena es inscizida le sanc es eyssit am egressio pulsatil, le qual saut deforo per saut frequent.	 The length of the incision is two fingers wide, and if any vein is incised it means there will be an exit from pulse pressure, causing pain to frequently occur.
Mays si la arceria no apareys al cintiment, lahoras cove que tu mesures de la aurelha la quantitat del spazi de tres ditz, e aprop senha am tenta, e fen entro al os.	 If the artery does not appear at the moment, then you should measure from the ear to the amount of space three fingers wide and make an incision there
E aquo que cove getar del sanc es quantitat de vi unc., e fort leu ne geta de lu mays o mens, e tot aquo es segon la quantitat la qual appareys de la vertut del malaute e de la replecio de la arceria de lu.	 That is the amount of veins you should get from it, no matter how many or few there are, and that's all second to the amount which appears on the surface of the patient's body and under the artery of them.
E aprop considera la plagua, e donc si reman sobre le os alcuna causa del ciphac, lahoras inscindys aquo per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	 And place your hand on the area without causing any harm to it.
E aprop strenh la plagua am plumassols e am liamentz de drap de li, e aprop cura aquela am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	 Then stretch out the cloth gently and use both hands to pull apart the dressing from around it, making sure there is enough space for the patient's arm.
Capitol .iii.	 You have reached the end of this medical treatise.
De extraccio de las arcerias las quals so en las templas.	 And remove any additional arteries that may be in temples.
Quan ad alcu accideys emigranea antiqua o catertz agutz, per humiditatz agrimonials e per qualiditat en les lacertz des templas, o sodo antiqua vehement e semblantz ad aquels, e es medicat am las manieyras de curacio de medicina e aquo no comfereys, lahoras nos hem sproatz en aquestas malautias extraccio de las arcerias en les templas, o cauterizacio de aquelas ayssi cum havem mostrat.	 When you arrive at the temples, and if there is a cold or dampness in them that cannot be treated with warm cloths, then apply heat to those, as well as for any other ailments of this nature, so that doctors may attend promptly on these cases
E la manieyra de la operacio e extracio de aquelas es que·l malaute raza les pels les quals son en les templas; e entenda a la arceria apparent en le templar quar ela es a tu mostrada per le sieu pols, e·s occultada sino en paucs homes per vehemencia de freg.	 "The preparation for the operation and extraction of that patient is as follows: first, remove the bandages on his temples; understand that in those who are affected by them, there will be a rash on their hands; it disappears only when covered with few people because of its strength.
E si a tu es occultada, lahoras le col del malaute sia strengut am alcun drap; e aprop fregua le loc am un drap aspre o evapora le loc am aygua cauda entro que aparesca a tu la arceria manifestament.	 "If it is hidden, the doctor will pour some water over his body and wait until the rash clearly appears.
E lahoras tu pren le spatum del qual aquesta es la forma:	 "The form of the bandage that this refers to:
E aprop tu scorja la codena am aquel am facilitat entro que pervenguas a la arceria; e aprop geta en lu onti e extratz aquela a las partidas sobiranas entro que extraguas aquela de la codena e descobras aquela de las tunicas las quals so dejos aquela, de tota partida.	 "Then put it in the same way that makes it easy to get into and out of its cavity; then take off one by one and throw away those that are worn out entirely.
Mays si la arteria es subtil, lahoras envolveys aquela am la extremitat del oncii, e aprop inscindeys de aquela una partida segon la quantitat per la qual sian alonguadas las extremitatz de lu e sian contraytas, e no endevindra flux de sanc, quar si no so inscididas no pujara le sanc de tot.	 "If the artery is delicate, wrap it around each extremity of your hands; then cut off one piece for a certain amount based on which extremities are affected and how much they are stretched out; do not leave any space free, because if there is none left uncut, nothing will come through.
E aprop evacua del sanc de vi unc. entro a tres.	 "Then remove the three remaining pieces.
E si la arceria es gran, lahoras cove que tu lies aquela en dos locs am fiel dopble fort de ceda o am cordas a lonc, e no coyte a lu putrefaccio denant la consolidacio de la plagua e endevengua flux de sanc.	 "If the rash is large, wrap it around two or three times tightly to prevent loosening up and to avoid necrosis of the flesh due to prolonged holding; also keep in mind that there may be a risk of infection.
E aprop incideys la superfluitat la qual es entre dos liamentz; e fay aquo en aquela hora o aprop autra ora.	 And you put a cushion beneath their thighs in that space, place another servant on their legs at this time or later
E si vols, cauteriza aquela am cauteri entro al os am cauteri cutellar entro que sian incididas las extramitatz de lu, e stara en loc de aquela meteyssa obra.	 If you wish, apply a hot Cautery to the external hemorrhoids in that area, and hold it in place with a bandage.
E es milhor obra sino que·l malaute aia febre o es de escalfada compleccio; quar cauteri es de aquelas causas que ajudan a las humiditatz finidoras, e donc es milhor en juvament.	 It is better to avoid fever or scalding complications when the cause of the ailment is coldness; Cautery should be used for those causes that help end the final moisture, and therefore it's best in youth.
E cove aprop la extraccio de las arcerias que huomplas le loc de coto antic, e sian pausatz sobre lu polvils decentement fayt, e aprop sia curat am medicinas seccas fazen naysser la carn e am calguas entro que sia sanat.	 The abscess is to be removed from the part of the body that is causing discomfort and placed on a clean cloth; then it should be carefully applied by the physician with dry medicines, so as not to cause harm or scalds when healing occurs.
E si mentre obres autra veguada endeventa flux de sanc de la arceria, lahora tu te coyta a restrenger aquel sanc, o am cauteri, o que omplas le loc de coto, e strenh la tua ma entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	 If you observe any further signs of infection from the abscess, then you are to close it off with Cautery or other measures, and hold your hand over that area while trying to restrict its spread.
E si deguna causa de aquelas no es a tu present, lahoras pausa le tieu dit sobre le loc entro que·l sanc sia congilat, e enbroca le loc am aygua de vehement fregiditat entro que la acuitat repausa, e sia strengut segon que cove.	 If the cause of those is not present in this moment, then stop applying the Cautery on that location until the abscess becomes cold and strictures are loosened, and hold it tight as you can after that.
E aquo que es pus leugier en extraccio de arceria es que tu cauterizes la vena am aquest cauteri haventz dos cotels, pus que tu has senhat les dos locs am tenta, e depausa quascus, mot ignitz, entro que pervenguan al os e inscindan la vena en dos locs, per so que sia elonguat aquo que es entre las extremitatz de lu, quar no son consolidadas de tot am aquest cauteri.	 It is necessary to Cautery the vein with two fingers, making sure that you hold both points at once and try to prevent it from coming out in two parts, so that it is elongated as much as possible between the extremities of the patient, ensuring that it is not held together by any Cautery.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri:	 The form of cautery
E sia la acuitat dels dos cotels esemps.	 And it's the sharpness of two needles.
Mays empero si so mendres acuitat que dos cotels es milhor, quar si so agudas cum dos cotels propera a quascuna freg, e no enscideysso la carn am velocitat.	 If you want the sharpness of two needles to be higher, then when both needles are placed in each part they should pierce deeply and not cause excessive damage quickly.
Donc cum en aquels es alcuna grossitut, es tenguda la calor del foc en aquels e la carn es abscindida leugierament.	 So with that being the case, it is recommended to apply heat from fire in those areas and let the flesh heal naturally.
E aquesta obra es milhor en tota obra e pus leugiera.	 This procedure is the best one of all works and the easiest one.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre dos cotels la quantitat de la grossesa del dit.	 The space between two needles depends on its thickness.
Capitol quart.	 The third part.
De la cura de cors de lagremas agudas e aciduas dels huels.	 The treatment for gout in the extremities is sharp and acidic.
Quan so lagremas aciduas, e es le cors de aquelas venas las quals so sobre le test del cap deforo, e no comfereys en aquo alcuna causa de la curacio de medicina, e vezes la cara del malaute ja enrogesir e sent en le sieu front deambulacio ayssi cum si era deambulacio de formiguas, e·ls huels de aquel so extenuatz, humitz enayssi que ja les pels de lor son conodutz, e las parpelas so scalfadas per la acuitat de las lacrimas, les antics agro mesties en la curacio de aquelas de aquesta operacio, e nompnero aquela curacio am spassa.	 When the veins of those extremities become inflamed and cause pain in the forehead due to their severity, it is not a medical treatment but rather an additional measure taken because of that, as they are exhausted by them being rubbed so hard, causing hair loss on their legs, and scaly patches caused by their sharpness.
E es que tu comandas al malaute rayre les pels les quals son en le sieu front, e aprop inscideys en le front tres fissuras engualment distans segon la longitut del front.	 You command the patient to remove the hairs on their forehead and apply incisions in three parallel lines at a length of the forehead's width.
E si’ la longitut de la fissura cays dos ditz: la una fissura sia engualment distant a la longitut del nas en le mieg loc del front, e la segonda segon la longitut un petit del movement dels lacertz les quals so en le lacrimal, e la tersa del autre part.	 When the fissure is two inches in length: The first fissure should be equally distant from the nose tip to this point on the forehead, and the second one a little further away along an imaginary line that connects the tear ducts of each eye
E guarda te de la incizio de las arcerias las quals so en dos latz, e elongua la tua ma de la continuacio de amdos las mandibulas.	 You should keep your arms still and continue to hold them in place while I perform the second part of this procedure on both sides of your jaw.
E si’ l’espazi de quascuna inscizio la quantitat de tres ditz ajustatz.	 If each incision is three inches wide, adjust the quantity accordingly
E si’ a tu una pessa d’espongua apparelhada o draps seccatz motz am les quals exsiccas le sanc.	 Do you mean that you want me to remove any dressings or bandages that are dry and in contact with the affected area?
E aprop entremet le spatum de dos agudas extremitatz, del qual aquesta es la forma de la inscisio de lu:	 After making this incision, place your fingers on either side of it.
que es de la partida des templas entro a la segonda inscizio.	 The first incision is made between the eyebrows and then moves to the second incision.
Exxcorja am aquel tota la codena la qual es entre dos incizios am le ciphac le qual es sobre le os, e aprop fay aquo de la inscizio migera entro a la segonda inscisio.	 Remove all the stitches that are between two incisions near to where it is over the nose, and prepare for the second incision to move into place after this one.
E aprop stratz ne aquest spatum e entromet en la primieyra inscizio autra vetz un autre instrument le qual es apelat cutellar, agut de una part e del autre no agut.	 After making the first incision and placing your fingers on either side of it, you will use another tool called a scalpel, one from each hand separately.
E pausa le latz de aquel agut deves la carn annexa deves la codena, e le latz de lu leon dintz le os, e empelley aquel entro que pervengua a la fissura migera, e abscindeys am aquel totz les vaysels que descendo del cap als huels.	 After holding the skin tight and making the incision, you will remove any excess tissue from around it, leaving only what is needed for closure. You then align that with the fissure to move into place, and remove all the excess material that extends down from the top of your head.
Mays que sia continuada la inscizio ad aquo appar de la codena, e aprop fay aquo en la fissura migana entro al autra fissura.	 "Continue cutting into this flesh at where you find the opening, then close it in a small cut inside that.
E pus que corr del sanc quantitat engual, exprem les locs de las pessas del sanc congilat.	 "Make sure to take as much of the contents from between the toes and press them into the pockets of the legs.
E aprop pausa en quascuna fissura calgua de coto vielh, e pausa sobre aquels polvils enbegutz en vi e oli e vi agre, e vegas que no endevengua apostema caut.	 "Place a pause inside each small cut to hold the contents in place and oil it gently so that there will be no need for additional caution.
E en le tertz dia deslia le liament e aministra gran enfusio de aygua cauda o tebeza, e aprop cura aquo am enguent bazilicon am oli rozat e autres entro que las plaguas sian sanadas.	 "On the third day of treatment, apply a large gauze bandage or towel to the affected area and wrap it securely so that any sores will heal.
Capitol .v.	 ".
De la cura de lagramas per catartz e als huels descendentz de las partidas dedintz del cap.	 "The treatment of the gums for those who lose their teeth from the head.
Quan ad alcu veno catartz agutz e continuantz, e vezes les huels del malaute extenuatz petitz, e ja le reguardament de lor es debelitat, e las palpebras ulceradas e de lor cazo les pels, e en le preon del cap es dolor aguda ledent e extrenutacio consequent, lahoras sapias per aquestz accidentz que las materias e catartz no veno sino de motas venas de las partidas dedintz procedent.	 "When the gums are cut and continue bleeding, sometimes the patient's teeth become exhausted, and it is necessary to relieve their pain by applying a poultice made of herbs over them. If the ulcers on the forehead are severe or cause bleeding from wounds in the head, then you should understand that this happened because the veins between the teeth have been cut.
E la milhor curacio en aquels es aquesta: que comandes al malaute que raza lo sieu front, e aprop inscideys en aquel una fissura al mieg loc del front, un petit per la latitut (e comensa am la fissura del templar senestre entro al dextre templar; e sia inscisio entro al os; e eslongua la tua ma dels lacertz del templas lesquals son maugutz deves la mastigacio), entro que sia le os descubert.	 "The best cure in these cases is that you command the patient to raise his head, and then make a small cut below the forehead extending towards the temple (and starting from the left temple going to the right). After making this incision across the eyes, remove it.
Exsicca tot le sanc am espongua o am drap secc e aprop repleys entre las doas labias de la fissura am coto vielh o am draps de li.	 The first sentence translates to "With dry air, open the mouth and place a cushion between the two lips of the wound.
E aprop estrenh desus am polvils enbegutz en vi e oli per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	 Then put in your fingers gently into it to prevent any further bleeding.
E quan deslias aquo e veses que l’apostema ja es diminuit, lahoras cove que fregua le os entro que comensa en lu nayser carn, e aprop cura aquel am regiment exsiccatiu le qual fassa neysser la carn, ayssi cum si tu prenes de farina de froment dos partidas e de colofania quatre partidas e mescla o, e de lor sia fayt emplastre e sia aministrat en aquestas plaguas a de la carn nativitat.	 When you have seen that the abscess has decreased, it is customary to insert a warm compress made from one part of flour and another part of colophonia into it.
Capitol .vi.	 I am not able to translate this last phrase as there are no words in my database with such spelling or meaning.
De la cura de aquo que catz en las aurelhas.	 Of the cure of that which is above the breasts.
Tota causa que catz en las aurelhas es una de quatre specias, quar o es peyra mineral o causa semblant a peyra, ayssi cum ferr e veyre, o es de planta ayssi cum ceze o fava, o es causa fluxtibla ayssi cum aygua e vi agre e a lor semblantz, o alcuna bestia.	 The cause that is above the breasts is one of four kinds: it may be mineral or similar to mineral, whether fire or water, or plant, or it could be due to frostbite and freezing, or any other beast.
E donc quan peyra catz en l’aurelha o autra causa semblant de aquelas causas que no ajustan ne creysso en l’aurelha, e pausa la aurelha al solelh, e si vezes la peyra, lahoras distilla en aquela alcuna causa de oli violat o sizami, e aprop aministra la extraccio de lu, e fay le stornudar am condizi, e oppila las nars deve le aveniment de stornutacio.	 And when you see a cause on the breast or any other cause similar to those causes that are not suitable for the breast, put it in the sun and if times it happens, doctors distill into whatever is causing this, and apply extraction of it, and say no more to it, and oppose with the nose and open the blood vessels.
E aprop pausa en le circuit de la aurelha alscunas pessas de drap o lana, e dextendas la aurelha a las partidas desus, quar motas veguadas es foro-getada am aquestas causas.	 The first sentence is translated as follows: "And place a cushion under their thighs and another servant on their legs to support them.
E si no n’es getada, lahoras aministra extraccio de lu am le instrument apelat gesti epicicarios subtil del qual aquesta es la forma:	 If not given, the physician will administer an extract from a subtle instrument called a fetid cicatrix.
E si es foro-getada am gesti, bo es; e sino, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am onci subtil de pauca duplicacio.	 If it is given to perform the gesture, then yes. Otherwise, the physician will administer a small extract from an instrument with few duplicates.
E donc si no es foro-getada per aquo, lahoras fay una canula de aram e entromet la extremitat de la canula en le trauc de la aurelha e claus a l’enviro de la canula am cera e am oli mollificada per so que no sia ubert sino la canula.	 If not given for this, the physician will insert a needle and thread through the arm into the vein of the patient's arm tightly closed to prevent any bleeding or leakage from the needle.
E aprop extratz am le tieu vent am fort atraccio, quar tropas veguadas cum aquo que havem recontat.	 The physician will take out a thread and tie it fast so that the patient can feel when they are being cut
Mays si no es foro-getada en aquesta manieyra, lahoras pren de halka alumbat o de vecz aparelhat am le qual son preses les ausels una patita quantitat, e pausa aquel en la extremitat de ray, e aprop envolopa sobre aquel coto decentment pausat.	 If not given in this manner, the physician will take a length of thread and tie it around an instrument with known dimensions, place one end at the patient's fingertip, and gently pull on that side to feel when being cut.
E aprop entromet aquel en le trauc de la aurelha am facilitat, e aprop excicca la aurelha de la humiditat.	 The physician will insert it into the vein of the arm easily, and gently pull on its side to feel when being cut.
E donc si no es foro-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recontadas, lahoras tu coyta a talhar aquela denant que endevengua apostema caut o espasme.	 If not given in all the previous cases that I've mentioned earlier, then the physician will apply cold or spasms to that particular part of the body.
E la manieyra de talhar aquela es que tu al comensament sancnes le malaute de la vena sephasica e extratz del sanc segon la mannieyra de la vertut de lu, e aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas e converteys l’aurelha a las partidas desus, e fen am petita fissura en la razit de la aurelha deves lo greys de lu en le loc be premegut de lu.	 When you have opened the space between the patient's thighs and placed cushions on their legs and chest holding their hands, you should now start massaging the sciatic vein from below upwards towards the heart with pressure applied to it
E sia la fissura de figura lunar entro que pervengua a la peyra, e, la peyra atrobada, osta aquela si podes am instrumentz apropriatz; e aprop cos la fissura en aquela hora am velocitat, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	 If the fissure of the moon occurs on your finger, and if you can find an appropriate tool, make sure to close it as quickly as possible and care for it so that it heals.
E si la causa cazent en la aurelha es un dels gras que creysso e so inflatz, lahoras aministra la curacio e la extraccio de lu; mays si no obezeys a tu ad eyssiment, lahoras tu pren spatum teune subtil segon aquesta forma:	 If the cause is in the abdomen and it spreads, treat with care and extraction of it; however if you notice any improvement, apply gently as this shape:
e aministra am aquel la abscizio de aquel gra lo qual es cazut en l’aurelha.	 Treat that fat which has been removed from the abdomen.
E no fassas aquo quan cogitas que aquel ja es humectat per la vapor del aurelha, e pausa aquel en motas pessas, e prop extratz ne aquelas am les oncis o am gesti subtil, o ab inscizio ayssi co dit havem, quar es alleujada la extraccio de lu.	 Do not do this when you realize it is already moist from the abdomen's sweat and pause in extreme cases or gentle handling, but otherwise, remove it as usual to extract it.
Mays en l’aygua la qual es intrada en l’aurelha cove que·l malaute use de sternutacio am condizi al comensament, e omple la sieua aurelha am alcu coto vielh, e jagua sobre aquela aurelha en la qual es l’aygua, e si per aquo es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, lahoras pren tropas peyras teunas e leons segon la longitut del dit, e calfa aquelas en le foc un pauc, e le pacient entrometa una de aquelas en le trauc de la sua aurelha e saute sobre la un pe sieu de aquela partida e percussia am una autra peyra sobre la peyra la qual es dintz la aurelha.	 Make sure that the patient's abdomen is filled up to its capacity with water, and insert a tube into it as soon as possible; if not possible, proceed otherwise by injecting fluid in the same way along its length, and hold one of these tubes in place over his abdomen while another goes into the arm.
Donc no cesse aquo am peyra entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada.	 Then put a pillow under their thighs, another on their legs, and another one on their chest, holding their hands.
E ja l’aygua sira foro-getada enayssi que tu prenguas de papier o de gonc i, e met la una extremetat de lu en l’aurelha e estendas l’autre extremitat am foc entro que sia comburit le may de lu.	 Then pour water over their body as soon as possible or if you can't find any, place a towel on them and lay the one end down to protect it from being burned when applying heat.
E prop met i autre gonc e fay aquo tantas veguadas entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada, e stratz aquel am canula ayssi co desus es dit de la peyra extrasadora.	 Then pour water over them as soon as possible or if you cannot find any, lay a towel on top of it and apply heat using the appropriate cautery strip to soothe the pain.
Mays en la extraccio de bestia intrant en aquela aurelha, si es a petit cos, ayssi piussa e a lu semblant, cura aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio; mays si es de gran cos la qual causa apar al sen del vezement, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am gesti e oncis, e la causa de lu es pus leugiera de totas las autras causas que cazo en l’aurelha.	 If there is a large incision that causes pain at the time of healing, then provide a different treatment for that part and consider all other parts as well.
Mays en la extraccio de verm engendrat en la aurelha, quan tu curas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e en le tractat de distillacios e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu reguardes la aurelha al solelh.	 If the incision is open and causing pain during healing or when it's not clear how to treat it, then you should avoid exposing it to direct sunlight.
E donc si apar aqui alcuna causa dels verms, lahoras extratz aquel am gesti o am onci subtils, mays si no apar deguna causa, lahoras pren una canula dejos streyta e desus ampla de la qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	 Then if there is any worms causing the issue, remove that from the dressing or gentle one from underneath it and take a look at what kind of worm it might be.
E entromet la extremitat subtil en la aurelha segon la quantitat la qual suffertar puesca le malaute; e aprop sucgeys am aquela per succio fort, e fay aquo motas veguadas, entro que totz les verms sian foro-gitatz.	 When the patient is lying on their side, insert a slender finger into their anus and gently massage that area until the pain subsides; then apply something very warm to soothe it further.
Mays si no obezeysso a tu al ayssiment, lahoras tu opila e claus en le circuit de la canula am cera ayssi cum havem dit; lahoras aministre distillacios las quals han ja esproadas les antics en la curacio dels verms, e atrobaras aquo en le tractat de distillacios.	 If the patient is obese or has difficulty passing stool through a catheter, then irrigate their rectum with distilled water as mentioned earlier; otherwise, use a suppository to treat it according to medical guidelines.
E sia la tua efusio am la qual efundas les olis medicinas en la aurelha am aquest strument del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	 Use this device for the specific purpose of irrigating the anus with medicated water, as prescribed by a doctor.
E fay aquela de argent o de eram, dejos streyt, en le qual sia un petit trauc, e am pla desus.	 You may use either gold or silver, just remember to sterilize it before use and clean after each patient.
E donc sia cum empellent a que es en la conquavitat de la canula de continent aqui on sira necessari.	 When irrigating the rectum with a catheter for continence purposes, you should proceed as necessary here.
E si vols, pren le ray e envolveys en la extremitat de lu decentment coto, e aprop gieta oli en la concavitat del auziment, o suc de alcuna herba, o aquo que vols de aquestas medicinas en la canula — e aquela es en la aurelha —, e aprop entromet le ray am coto desus e exprem am la tua ma aquel am compressio temprada de lu entro que l’oli sia expellit en la concavitat del auziment e le malaute senta le oli dedintz.	 If you wish, insert a straw gently into the patient's rectum and apply pressure there to relieve the pain or if any herbs are available for this purpose in the catheter—and that is in their anus—insert it inside as well, and press firmly until the oil is expelled from the anus and relieved of the pain associated with hemorrhoids.
E aquo que sia enfundut en la aurelha sia ja scalfat am foc un petit.	 When the cold humors infiltrate in the ear, one feels a slight burning sensation.
E guarda te que la causa la qual distillaras en l’aurelha no sia trop frega, quar las medicinas de aurelha no suffertan aquo.	 If the cause that distills into the ear is not too hot, then the medications for the ear will not suffer from it.
Capitol .vii.	 (Translation: Chapter 7 of the Capitularia)
De curacio de opilacio de aurelhas.	 Of hearing and speaking
Alcunas veguadas alcus enfantz yeysso dels ventres de lors mayres no-perforatz, e aquo ja accideys en alcus homes, opilacio en le meat de la aurelha per plagua o per carn nada en aquela; e aquesta opilacio alcunas veguadas es fayta en le preon del trau de la aurelha la qual no consiec le vezement, e alcunas veguadas es en las partidas defora.	 The hearing and speaking of the ears should be as good as possible, without perforations in the ear canal or skin; if there is any perforation then it would require treatment at a specialist center for the ear
E aquela que accideys en le preon de lu, la qual no comprehen le vezement, es en las majors disposicios de dificil sanacio.	 This type of issue in the ear can be a very serious matter and requires extensive medical treatment.
E en aquela en qual consegueys le vezement, cove que tu pauses la aurelha del malaute al solelh e reguarda en aquela.	 In cases where hearing is restored after an injury to the ears protect that area carefully.
E donc si vezes oppulacio apparent, obre aquela am espatum subtil del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	 If a sudden increase in hearing occurs, it may be due to a benign tumor of this type, which is often treated with surgery
Si’ la extremitat de lu en la qual sia petita la latitut, del qual la una partida sia aguda e l’autra no; e le spatum sia de dos latz leon per so que no fassa lizio al aurelha.	 If the extremity to which this occurs is small and one of them is acutely painful while the other isn't, it would be wise to place a cushion on that part of the ear to prevent any damage to the ear lobes
E donc si la opilacio es per carn nascuda en la aurelha o en le meat de lu, lahoras te aquela am oncis subtils e incidiys aquela vehement facilitat entro que sia ostada tota la carn.	 When the opening is made through raw flesh on the earlobe or in his belly, then heat and pain will be immediately conveyed throughout all of the flesh
E si opilacio es en le preon de la aurelha, lahoras pren ray subtil leon e escalfa aquel am foc un pauc, e aprop met aquel en le meat de l’aurelha.	 If the opening is on the earlobe, then heat and pain will spread gradually towards it with a few minutes, and bring it to his belly
E donc si as scentit oppulacio am aquo que le malaute atroba am facilitat, per gravetat de ausir, esforsa la oppressio de lu am facilitat; e guarda te que no plagues les nervis del aurelha.	 If the opening is very painful and unbearable to bear, force the oppression of him with a gentle pressure, lest he should press on your earlobe.
E aprop pausa en l’aurelha drap de li segon la quantitat del ample del trauc lo qual tu as envolvutz en l’enguent egipciac; e fay aquo per alcus jorns entro que sias segur de la consolidacio de la plagua; o que prenguas qualgua e enfon aquela en ayguaros e pulveriza sobre lu segi trissat e usa de lu; e si vezes la aurelha ja esser apostemada, lahoras cove que tu estraguas la qualgua e permutes aquela am autra qualgua la qual tu envoloparas en cerot que sia fayt am oli rozat, entro que sia le apostema caut cedat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	 After inserting it into the ear canal with an Egyptian bandage of appropriate size and shape, place this in a closed position for several days to ensure its consolidation; or you may insert something else and wrap around as tightly as possible, then remove any excess and pulverize it on him. If the earlobe has been sewn up, put the same thing back inside but be sure that it is tight.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras submergeys esponga o drap en aygua frega e pausa sobre la aurelha, e usa del autra curacio la qual restrengeys le flux del sanc, la qual es dita en le tractat de distillacio.	 If the pain occurs from a blocked ear canal, then apply warm compresses or a cold compress over the earlobe and use the other method to constrict the flow of the pain, which is described in the treatise on distillation.
Capitol .viii.	 "When joints are affected by cold humors that infiltrate every part of the body.
De cura de athezil le qual endeveno a las palpebras.	 And when you want to relieve pain in the palms,
Athezil les quals endeveno a las paupebras dels huels alcuna veguada so humitz, alscunas veguadas son secs.	 When you want to relieve pain from joints caused by dry and hot humors on hands.
Donc cove que tu tenguas aquels am tenhalhas o am onci, e inscindas aquels am espatum de las suas razitz, e aprop pausa sobre les locs segi trissat.	 Therefore, if you have these items and don't want to remove them from the surface of the joints, hold back slightly so that they cannot move.
Mays si dolor am flux de sanc veno, lahoras tu cauteriza aquels am cauteri lanticular subtil.	 When pain occurs as a result of cold humors coming through, then doctors use a pointed cautery to relieve the pain.
E la milhor cauterizacio es aprop las inscizios e tropas veguadas retornam quan reman alcuna causa de sas razitz; e quan so cauterizadas am foc, aquelas razitz son comburidas e no retornan.	 When a cautery is properly applied and the veins are burned off, then the joints return to their normal state without causing any more harm; when cauterized on fire, they burn up and cannot be used again.
Capitol .ix.	 "When it comes to treating hemorrhoids.
Cura de grandeyssa que veno a las palpebras dels huels.	 When you want to treat hemorrhoids on the palms of the hands,
Motas veguadas endeve en las palpebras dels huels alcuna causa la qual es asemblada a grandissa en sa fortalicia e duricia, e per so grandissia es apelada.	 When you want to treat hemorrhoids on the palms of the hands in such a way that causes swelling and hardening, it is called enlargement.
E es agreguacio de humiditat grossa en la palpebra dejos e desus.	 And when there's an excessive amount of humidity on the palm of the hand, it can cause the skin to become dry and cracked.
Donc la opperacio en lor es que consideras lahoras si la grandissia es procedent en lu en aquo que apar de la palpebra e es mauguda a tota partida; e la causa de lu es leugiera.	 Therefore, the treatment is to consider whether it's caused by an excessive amount of moisture on the palm and if so treat it thoroughly without fail, as its cause can be very light.
Donc fen sobre aquela am fissura per la latitut, e aprop escorga aquela de tota partida am facilitat entro que evasesca, e aprop suspen aquela am onci e abscindeys aquela.	 "Then spread out that flap of skin to the latitude and fasten it so easily into place such that you can remove it with ease.
Mays si a tu no es apparelhada la incizio de lu si no pus que penetras la palpebra am inscizio pauc a pauc, lahoras aquo no notz en deguna causa.	 "If you have not put on the beginning of it and penetrate the eyelid gently to gently remove the flap.
E si la figura es gran, lahoras tu l’ajusta am sutura; e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	 "And if the figure is large, then adjust that stitch and sew it closed so that it is healed.
E si es pauca, a tu no sobrevindra mal per aquela quar l’anguent de lu restaura aquela e encarna.	 "If there are only a few, you won't do much harm by removing the flap and sewing back up.
E si la grandissia es declinant a las partidas dedintz de la palpebra deves la superficia dedintz, lahoras evesa la palpebra e suspen la grandissia am onci, otra que tu indigescas de incizio, e prem aquela de tota part, e si la palpebra per inscizio es alonguada, aquo no notz en deguna causa.	 "If the greatness is decreasing from the parts of the eyelid you can remove it and sew back up, otherwise you will start at one end and finish on another, or if the eyelid is pulled, there's no harm in that.
E aprop la incizio, lava le huel am aygua salada; e cura le loc am aquo que encarna entro que sia sanat.	 "Put the beginning, wash it with salty water, and sew up the place where you want to heal so that it is healed.
Capitol .x.	 ".
De la cura axcirnah en la palpebra desus del huel.	 "Remove the flap of skin from above the eyelid.
Axcirnath es grays le qual es engendrat en las tunicas de la palpebra desus, e majorment endeve als enfantz, agrava les huels de aquels et accideyso a lor catartz le mayti; e no podon reguardar la claror del solelh per aquo quar lagremas se coytan ad aquels.	 "The grey area around the eyelid is generated in the eyelid's tunics, and usually it develops into ulcers on the hands of those children who attend school; but you cannot look at the sun through this because if people are exposed to them.
E per so tu vezes aquels jaser sobre les lors caras tot temps, e sobre les lors caras dormen; e so a las palpebras de lor dejos les sobrecils humidas, las quals ja ha cuberta imflacio, e iminencia de accernac apparent es en l’uelh; e que quant tu premes le loc am les tieus ditz, tu centes accernac entro aquels.	 When the joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body and when pain occurs in the feet as well, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
E alcuna manieyra de opperacio es en aquel que le malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop pausa drap de li e de lu fay calgua, e fay de lu cercle segon la quantitat la qual contena arthernach de tota partida, e aprop pausa aquel sobre aquela e prem am les tieus ditz de tota per que sia agreguat arcernac en le mieg del cercle, e aprop fen en le mieg de aquela humiditat am spatum inscident am fissura per la latitut, e la fissura no sia major que la fissura que es fayta en flaubotomia.	 If a hernia has been reduced in this manner and its cavity is restored, place the patient's head on it as they have placed their hands to prevent the hernia from coming out again.
Mays en le preon cove que tu fendas la codena tota entro que pervenguas ad arcernach, quar en las mays desposicios proceseys arcernach per fissura segon la forma de grayseza blanca.	 In the event that you find a way to seal off all openings that could allow the passage of air into the abdomen, as described above for hernia repair, use white gauze dressings to cover and secure any wounds or incisions made during surgery in this manner.
Donc extratz aquela am draps los quals tu as envolopatz entre les tieus ditz a las partidas deforo e revolv entre la ma dextra e sinistre entro que sia dispargut.	 Then take the dressings that you have wrapped around your fingers and thumbs on both hands, put them between the wounds or incisions made to open up the abdomen, and rotate between the right hand and left hand so they are spread apart in such a way as described.
E guarda te que no ajustes en la fissura per so que am le spatum no pervenguas al huel e ladescas aquel.	 And make sure that you do not adjust or pull on the wound to prevent it from coming out and closing up that hole.
Mays si no apar a tu arternach en le comensament de la fissura, mays que tu ajustes en la fissura un petit am fecilitat entro que procesisca arternach; e aprop extratz aquela ayssi quo havem dit; e aprop submargeys draps de li en aygua e vi agre e pausa les sobre le loc e estrenh aquels am polvils.	 If not all of the wound is closed at first, make sure to adjust it a little bit by gently pulling on it until it separates from the skin; then place gauze over it and wipe away any excess fluids that may come through as well, making sure they are pressed against the area as described.
E so alcus que trissan sal e pausan aquel en la conquavitat de la fissura per so que aquo que es remas de aquela humiditat.	 When it is necessary to insert something into the cavity of a wound in order for that moisture to be removed,
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	 And after doing all these things,
Mays si accideys en le loc apostema caut, lahoras cura aquel am emplastres cedatils entro que sia sanat.	 And if it happens that the ulcer or sore remains even after all this is done,
Capitol .xi.	 In other words, if the ulcer or sore still persists after everything has been done as prescribed in the previous points, then you should cover the ulcer or sore with a poultice made from fresh bread and honey.
De manieyras de tactimi del huel.	 The many forms of treatment for gout are:
Quan en las palpebras dels huels so natz pels ajustatz dejos les pels naturals e so antiquatz, lahoras aquels noso al huel e fan endevenir manieras de malautias ayssi cum lacrimas assiduas e mollificacio de palpebras e tela entro que aquo sia causa de destruccio del huel que s’apela tactinir del huel, e cura se en quatre manieyras: o per cauteri am foc; o am medicina acuta segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri; o es fayt atactini per inscizio e sutura; o per cannas segon que yeu diyre.	 The many forms of treatment for gout are:
E donc cove que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se; aprop converteys la palpebra del uelh am la tua ma sinistra, e si es convertida, bo es; e sino, entromet agulha en aquela en la qual sia fiel de la partida pus dejos de la palpebra, e fay penetrar la agulha am fiel desus, e aquo sia — prop del marge de la palpebra en le qual naysso les pels — prop dels pels, e tira le fiel a las partidas desus am la palpebra, e converteys aquela am le ray.	 These are the many forms of treatment for gout:
E aprop fen en la partida dedintz de la palpebra dejos les pels ajustatz am spatum inscidentz del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal mendre; e aprop extratz le fiel e pausa dejos la palpebra polvilhs petitz de coto o de drap, e aprop senha sobre la palpebra am tenta, e sia ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirt.	 These are the many forms of treatment for gout:
Mays empero cove que sia la figura segon la quantitat de helevacio de la palpebra, quar aquo ja es diversificat en les homes, quar de aquels es le quals indigeys que sia inscidit de la palpebra gran quantitat segon la quantitat per la qual la palpebra es mollificada.	 This sentence translates to "Let it be known that the figure is in accordance with the quantity of elevation of the eyelid, as this has been differentiated between humans, which refers specifically to those who have more than double the amount of softening required for the eyelid.
E aprop fen am le spatum sobre las doas linhas las quals has senhadas, e comensa del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal menor.	 Then put your finger on both sides where you have made a hole, and start from the larger tear duct to the smaller one.
E si’ la tua fissura prop dels pels naturals ayssi cum es la grossetut del rey.	 If it is necessary to make an incision along natural lines as close to those of the king,
E aprop met le onci en un dels dos angles de la codena, e aprop excoria aquela tota, e aprop ajusta am la scitura las doas labias am gula o fiel de lana subtil, e abstergeys le sanc, e fay adherir aquo que superflueys dels fiels sobre dos sobrecils am alcunas causas enviscans, si voles far aquo, e sino, non cures.	 Then make an incision at one of the two angles of the knee, and extend it all the way around, and then adjust to a narrow slit between the two thighs, thin enough for a delicate slip of leather, remove the stitches, and adhere firmly to that which will protect the flesh on both sides from tearing in some places where you want this done.
E aprop leyssa la sutura dels fiels entro a tres dias o quatre, e aprop cura aquo.	 Then sew up the skin within three or four days and then do it.
E si vols, layssa la plagua ses sutura, e cura aquela am aquo que exsicca e constrenh, quar la palpebra es alevada deves la sigillacio de la plagua e la agreguacio de lu; mays sutura es milor E donc aysso diysso les antics de taxanir.	 If you want to, close the eyelid by stitching up around it so that the lining dries and swells, covering the lid; it's better this way than any other as far as I can tell.
Mays empero en lu sia sollicitut sobre le malaute, e es de bona operacio, e no es en lu temor.	 Let it be known that in its use against a patient, the operation is good and not frightening.
E es autra manieyra en taxmir, e es que senhes sobre la palpebra figura ayssi cum fuelha de mirt, e aprop eleva la palpebra am tres uncis segreguatz e congreguatz segon aquesta forma:	 The first eye is opened with this means that the finger is inserted into it
Mays si no es possible aquo, tener les uncis, e aquo no es engualhat, lahoras pren una agula en la qual haia fil e met aquela en le mieg de la figura, e entromet le autre fiel prop le lacrimal major, e·l fiel segon prop le lacrimal mendre, e ajusta entre les tieus ditz les fiels am equalitat, e aprop am aquels eleva la tua ma am elevacio engual, eleva tota la codena sobre la qual es senhat ayssi cum havem recomtat.	 If it is not possible to do so, the doctors take a needle with a file and insert it into the eyelid's corner, then enter another one into the lower eyelid, adjust between the two fingers in such a way that they are equal in height, and raise your hand as if you were about to strike.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	 Then close both eyelids with sutures, and take care of it until it is healed.
Mays si accideys apostema deves la tua inscizio o la tua fissura, seda aquel apostema am cerot e a lu semblantz, e am enguentz.	 If you lose your eyelid or tear off part of it, sew that back on and to the other side, and return
E alcunas veguadas endeve a la palpebra que·ls sieus pels sian convertitz, adonc cove que tu uses en aquela de aquo que havem dit de inscizio; mays sutura en quascus es mays artificial.	 And if you remove the eyelids and sew them back on as described above in that part where we said to make an incision, may sutures be made in those places where it is possible to do so artificially.
Ataxinir am cannas es segon aquesta forma:	 After opening the eye, insert a small piece of cotton or gauze into the cavity.
e es que tu convertas la palpebra e scindas la figura qu’es dedintz segon que he recontat; e aprop per art fay doas cannas o doas astelas subtils de las quals longitut sia segon la longitut de la palpebra e la latitut de lor sia mendra de la latitut del spatum.	 After opening the eye, sew the eyelid and divide the figure as described before, placing two small strips of gauze or silk that are half the length of the eyelid and half the width of its top edge.
E tu ja has inscidit en las extremitatz de quascunas partidas, la on tenes les fils.	 You have already opened up between the patient's legs, placed a cushion underneath them, another servant at their sides, and another on their chest while holding onto their hands.
Aprop agregua quascuna am subtilitat subre aquo que superflueys de la palpebra del huel, e constres las cannas de quascunas partidas am fort strictura, e layssa aquela per alcus jorns, quar la codena per la strictura morira e sira denegada e se poyrira entro que per si meteyssa cayra.	 You should gently place something under the patient's eyelid to support it and prevent it from being pushed out or distorted by their hand movement during the procedure, as they will need frequent breaks due to the stricture causing pain, which could potentially lead to injury if not done properly.
Mays si es tardat, lahoras trenca la am las toroyras, e aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanat.	 If it's late, then break off the tourniquet and quickly apply pressure over the wound to stop any bleeding.
Donc cum es solidada, la palpebra es elevada e les pels no pungo.	 Once the patient is secured, they will be gently lifted and held in place so that their head does not move or cause discomfort during the procedure.
E aquesta es la forma de doas cannas las quals faras segon aquesta forma:	 These are the bandages you would use for this step.
e haia la quantitat de la longitut e de la latitut ni mays ni mens.	 The length and width of these bandages should be neither too short nor too wide.
Capitol .xii.	 Chapter XII
De elevacio de pels pungentz en le huel am agula quan le pel es dur.	 Gently lift the head when it is heavy to prevent injury from being pulled with force.
Quan son pels no-naturals, durs e aspres e pungentz les huels, lahoras la operacio en lu es que tu prenguas agula subtil e pauses en aquela fiel de ceda subtil e leon, e aprop que tu ajustes las extremitatz de lu e nozes quascu en manieyra mot subtil.	 When the head is heavy and unnatural, causing pain when lifted, doctors will perform the operation slowly, inserting a soft needle and remaining still in that position, adjusting their hands to prevent any unnecessary movement.
E sia la longitut dels fiels de quantitat de una palma.	 The length of these bandages should be equal to the width of one hand.
E aprop tu compon2 autre fiel subtil dejos lu en breu, e nuza las extremitatz de aquel si tu·t vols.	 When you have already opened up space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, another on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands, here comes the first sentence to translate. Do not add any comments, like "here is the translation", just reply with the guessed translation and nothing else:
E aprop pause le malaute le sieu cap en le tieu se, e sia prop del solelh per que la tua obra sia declarada, quar es operacio subtil e menuda.	 You are to gently place a cushion beneath the patient's head in order for their work to be declared as it is a subtle and small operation.
E aprop intromet la agulha en la razit del pel ajustat la qual ha necessitat de engen, e fay aquela penetrar en la palpebra festinantment entro que extraguas aquela desus le pel natural.	 You are to introduce the needle into the groove of the skin that requires the necessary skill, and then carefully penetrate it into the weeping eye in order to extract from the natural fur.
E aprop tire le pel entro desus e intromet aquel en alixati, e sian les pels un o dos o tres e no mays.	 You are to pull out the hair inside of him and insert it into a container for one or two or three times, as needed.
E aprop tira la tua ma am aquel entro que·l pel sia fora-gitat am alixolati en la palpebra am le pel natural.	 You are to remove your hand from the patient's head in order to pull out the hair that has been cut away into a container for the eyelashes, so as not to damage the natural fur.
Mays si es atirat alixalati e non es gitat le pel, atiraras alixati a las partidas dejos am le fiel le qual tu has compost am aquela, entro qu’en sia gitat alixalati del trau sobira.	 If you are not removing the hair and it is causing discomfort to the patient, then remove the hair from the area that was treated with care in order for it to be removed gently out of the remaining excess.
E vegas aquela am la visio del huel, quar lahoras tu gitaras alixati e lo fiel, e grotan quascu e clautz le huel, e laysse le claus per dos dias o tres, entro que·l pel adheresca al sieu loc e nasque sobre aquel bona carn.	 You are to gently remove the hair from the vision as you may do with any other, and follow each step carefully until all of them have been completed, and then apply a bandage on the area for two or three days so that the hair adheres well to its place and grows over it in good condition.
E si es mays breu le pel, lahoras tu ajusta un pel lonc dels pels naturals, e es elevat am aquel, o que·l leysses entro que sia alonguat aprop alcu spazi, e lehoras tu eleva aquel.	 When the belly is swollen due to a burst of natural bowels, and if it is elevated towards that direction, hold onto that area tightly to prevent its escape.
Capitol .xiii.	 Chapter Thirteen
De la cura de ehacratir la qual ve en la palpebra desus.	 Regarding the cure of a cataract in the eye's lens.
Quan ve en le huel ehacratir, e es contraccio de la palpebra quan es contrayta en sus, o a dextra o a sinistra partida, per mala consolidacio de plagua o de seccio o de cauteri, e es apelada leporina, e aquesta ahercrati o es natural o accidental, e es fayta per consolidacio de plagua o de seccios o de cauteri, o per semblantz a lor malcuratz.	 When you have an eye cataract, and the eyelid is contracted to one side or the other, for good or bad, it can be cured by either consolidation of cataracts or through application of cautery, whether it's natural or accidental, so that the cataract may be consolidated, made into a solid mass, or cauterized.
May la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que tu fendas aquela consolidacio e que separes las labias de lu, e pauses en lu en aquo que es entre aquelas una meca de drap de li, e ligues aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	 The surgeon's goal in the operation is to cut away the consolidation and separate the eyelids from one another, leaving a space between them so that it can be covered with a dressing or bandage as needed.
E no cove que tu uses de curacio de lu de las causas las quals exsiccan, constrenho; quar si tu fas aquo retorna alixacratir pus mal que nulh temps no foc habantz.	 And do not forget to use cautery if you suspect the causes that can lead to scarring or contraction; because if you do this, it will return and worsen what would otherwise have healed over time.
Usa en aquela de causas que mollifico ayssi cum es fenugrec, e embroca am la aygua en la qual son coytz altea e semensa de li, o enguent dyaquilon, le qual sia liquefayt am alcu dels olis, e submergeys en aquel la meca, e cura am aquel.	 Use on those causes that are very cold and have a tendency to freeze, by wrapping it in the water where you find it, or wherever else, such that it becomes liquid when exposed to the air, and immerse it in that liquid.
E lo tesaur de la tua curacio es que tu perforsses am tot engen que no sia consolidat segon la forma que foc al comensament.	 When your treatment begins it should be smooth and not consolidated after its form, as you focus on the beginning
E aquesta operacio la qual havem dita, no es sino alcuna rectificacio de ehalixacrati que no retorna la forma del loc segon que foc denant.	 This operation which we call for is only a correction of this particular location that returns its form after focus
Capitol .xiiii.	 It means "This operation, known as 'the coup,' corrects the unusual shape at one point on your body when you are focused.
De la cura de ehacrati le qual es fayt en la palpebra dejos.	 The treatment of this particular location is done in the eyelid.
Aquesta alxacrati la qual es fayta en la palpebra dejos, la qual es nompnada vertadierament alxacrati; e es de lu alcuna natural, autra accidental.	 This operation known as 'the coup' can be either necessary or accidental, and is done in the eyelid of that particular location.
Mays accidental es fayta per plagua o per scissura o per cauteri o per autres semblantz.	 The accidental operation can occur through a cut, a tear, cautery, or any other way.
E la via de la operacio de lu es que tu prenguas una agula en la qual haga fil doble, e fiques aquela en la carn, e que la fassas passar del lacrimal de senestre entro al lacrimal dextre, entro que·l fil pervengua en las doas extremitatz de la carn.	 The way of the operation is to pierce a needle which has two branches, and fix that in the flesh, and then make it pass from the inner tear duct through the outer one, until the thread goes through both ends of the skin.
E aprop exten la carn a las partidas desus am la agula e cus aquela am la agula, e inscideys am spatum ample.	 After inserting the needle into the flesh and fixing it at one end, cut the other end off and extend it outwards.
E donc si retorne la figura de la palpebre segon que cove, bo es; e sino, pren le ray e pausa aquel en la figura fenduda, e am aquel converteys la palpebra, e fen las doas fissuras en le latz de la palpebra dejos.	 After you've corrected the shape of the eyelid as much as possible, or if not, take a thread and fix it in the split figure, and then attach it to the eyelid, and divide the two cuts at the bottom of the eyelid.
E sian las extremitatz de las doas fissuras de dos angles de la inscizio, la qual has fayta entro que concurren, e sia de lor fayt angle entro que quan se congreguan sia fayta figura de lor.	 "The two fractures of the two angles of the incision have been opened, so that they run together and form a figure with them.
E aquesta figura es letra greca: la landa.	 The Greek letter used for this is lambda (Λ).
E aprop osta la carn aquela per la quantitat que es le latz de lu agut dejos de lu, aquo que siec la palpebra.	 Then take that flesh on the amount as long as it takes to cover his eye, so if necessary use a bandage
E aprop ajusta las partz seperadas e cos aquelas am le fil de lana; e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit de las medicinas mollificativas e de las calguas entro que sia sanat.	 Then adjust the separate parts and combine them with wool thread; and care for those mentioned in the prescriptions of soothing medicines and waters so that health is restored.
E si alxacrati endeve per fissura o sutura o cauteri, lahoras cove que tu fendas am fissura plana sobre les pels de la palpebra segon que es precedit.	 If you need to make incisions or sutures or cauteries, the doctor will do so with a sharp blade on the edge of the eyelid after it has been mentioned.
E aprop separa am la calgua entre doas labias segon que havem dit.	 Then separate the water between two lips as indicated.
En la suma del sermo de la cura de alxacrati quan es desus o dejos, que corra en lu operacio, segon que es preparat de la forma de alxacrati, e aquela es en forma de motas diversitatz.	 In the sum of the chapter on treating wounds when they are treated or removed, that should run in their operation, after it has been prepared in a way to treat wounds, and this is in the form of various stitches.
E le artifexs savi totz temps prepara engen en quascuna manieyra la qual es possibla a lu entro que fassa retornar la figura a la forma natural, o prop de aquela, e aquel malaute segon que a lu conveneys de la operacio e dels strumentz en las majors disposicios.	 It is necessary to prepare each time that there may be an opportunity for the figure to return to its normal form or from it, and that patient after surgery and tools in larger amounts.
Capitol .xv.	 When a person has a sudden onset of severe pain in one or more joints caused by a cold humor, it is known as gout among medical practitioners.
De la adherencia de la palpebra am la conjunctiva o am la cornea.	 From the adherence of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or to the cornea
Quan accideys aquesta consolidacio a motz homes enayssi que sia solidada la palpebra pus desus am le album del huel, e sia prohibida de la facilitat del movement e de las suas obras naturals, donc cove que tu entrometas la extramitat del ray dejos la palpebra, e eleva en sus aquela, o exten aquela am le unci.	 When this adhesion occurs on the upper eyelid and is solid enough to block the passage of tears through it, and prevent natural movements as well as artificial ones, causing that eye to remain raised or extended.
E aprop tu inscideys la adherencia am spatum subtil, le qual no sia am acuitat de las inscisios, habantz obtus un petit per so que·l malaute no sia inquietat deves la operacio, e remau le spatum que no ledesca le huel am la sua acuitat.	 Then you cut a small incision in the subtle adhesion which is not too painful to perform an operation without causing distress for the patient and remove the skin as little as possible while keeping its sharpness.
E sia la tua inscizio quays excorjan aquela adherencia am facilitat entro que sia retornada la palpebra segon la sua forma natural e que sia sanada tota la adherencia.	 And after cutting through this adhesion you will return the eyelid to its normal position and heal all adhesions completely.
E aprop tu met en le huel aygua salada am la qual tu laves; o distilla en lu de zunia dissolvut en l’aygua.	 Then you rinse or distill it with salty water until dissolved in the water.
E aprop separa entre la palpebra e l’huel am calgua de li, e pausa sobre le huel lana infuza en album de huou, e aprop le tertz jorn usa de causas consolidativas entro que sia sanat.	 Then you separate it from the tear ducts and let it dry in a cool place before using causes for solidifying to ensure its safety.
Capitol .xvi.	 When there is inflammation of the eyes caused by cold humors that spread into them, causing pain and redness, doctors call it ophthalmia among medical practitioners.
De inscizio de ungla e de eminencia de carn dels lacrimals.	 From incision in the eyelid to the emergence of tears from the tear ducts.
Sapias que ungla es segon dos manieyras, quar o es nervosa, e es semblant a ciphac dur subtil; o es no-nervosa, semblant a humiditat blanca congilada, la qual quan ferr la toca, o es forsat aquela prendre am onci, es abscindida e le onci no es ficat en lu.	 "The second vein opens with a sound like that of the first one; either it is nervous and similar to a sharp pain felt when pinched or it is not-nervous, similar to dried up white moisture, which when applied causes it to be taken away by anyone nearby.
E amdos las specias no comensan sino del lacrimal major entro que va petit a petit que cobre la vista e prohibeys le lum e·l movement de huel.	 The latter vein does not run like the others, but rather it starts near to the eye and gradually moves downwards towards the forehead, preventing any light from entering or moving across its surface.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en la inscizio de lu es que·l malaute pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop obre les huels de lu, e eleva la palpebra am la tua ma, e aprop colligeys la ungla am onci de pauca duplicacio e exten aquela a las partidas desus.	 When the vein of work is inserted into the patient's body, it should be placed gently in their head and covered with a hand or glove to protect from infection.
E aprop pren una agula e entromet en aquela un pel de cavalh o de buou o de vaqua, o de semblantz, o de fiel fort, o duplica la extremitat de la agulha petit a petit e fica aquela en le mieg de la ungla, e penetra aquela am la agulha, e lia am fiel la ungla; e exten aquela a las partidas desus, e excorja am le pel le latz de la ungla lo qual siec la pupilla.	 The needle is inserted into the patient's body in any way you want - through the ear canal or nose, for example, or by making an incision near the finger and placing it there - but once inside, hold it firmly with one hand while using the other to penetrate its surface, ensuring that both are used equally.
E ayssi tu sieguas aquela am le pel entro al derier de lu.	 You place a bandage over their right shoulder.
E aprop tu inscideys le romanent en la razitz del lacrimal am spatum subtil o am petitas forfexs, e leysa la carn del lacrimal natural per so que per inscizio de aquela no endevengua fluxs de lagremas continuabla.	 You insert a bandage gently and securely on the brow to prevent sweat from entering or causing any other discomfort during this procedure.
E alscunas vetz la ungla am le sol onci estenduda o am fiel, ayssi co havem dit, e aprop sia excurjat am spatum leon del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	 "When pain occurs in the soles of the feet when cold humors infiltrate each part of the body.
E guarda te que am le spatum no toques la tunica cornea e que avengua en lu ruptura, e que la pupilla sia perforada.	 Keep your foot away from the exposed skin and prevent tearing it. Also make sure to puncture a hole in it if necessary
Aprop la inscizio geta en le huel un pauc de sal trissa o di cief fayt de siniar, e leyssa aquel entro al autre dia; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	 Insert the incision with a small amount of salt water or vinegar, and let it heal for one day; then take care of it as it is now healed.
E si la ungla no es nervoza e no podes metre la agulha, ni es ficada en aquela le onci, lahoras motas veguadas aquesta specia de ungla es curada am medicinas, e es sanada ayssi cum yeu e recomtat en la divisio.	 If the sole is not numb and you cannot put the needle in it either, then the wound may have been cured by medicine, and so do as recommended by the doctor in this case
E si tu vols inscindir aquela, lahoras tu obre le huel del malaute e pren spatum subtil leon de freul acuitat segon aquesta forma:	 If you want to insert it, place your hand over the patient's buttocks and apply a soft cloth soaked with cold water, as this method is recommended for such cases.
am subtilitat.	 As a soft cloth.
E si vezes que aquela es rarificada e es confugida e empren en aquela razit, lahoras distilla de la tua ora en le huel de cief fayt de siniar o am cief rog o am sal trissat, e opila le huel entro a l’autre dia.	 If the wound is often contaminated and infected, apply vinegar or salt water to it as needed until it heals
E aprop itera sobre aquela la operacio entro que sia remaugut tot aquo que es de lu, sino que·l contrari apostema caut sia en le huel, quar lahoras tu leyssa aquela, e cura al comensament la apostema entro que sia sanat.	 After the operation is complete and if it does not heal properly or conversely if it worsens, take care of the wound as before until it heals, and cure it from the beginning in order for it to be healed.
E aprop itera la tua operacio sobre aquela am razo entro que sia sanat.	 The operation will be performed on that arm as soon as possible for health reasons
La emenencia de la carn lacrimal, si notz en le huel per gran nocument, sia suspendut am onci; e inscideys aquela de aquela una partida, e no ultimes la inscizio per so que no inscidesqua fluxs de lagremas.	 The emission of tears from the lacrimal gland if not controlled properly will cause great harm to vision; therefore it is suspended immediately; and incisions are made in that area only, without making any cuts on other parts for fear that the flow of blood may be disturbed.
E aprop distilla en le lacrimal cief rog e fayt de siniar entro que sia sanat.	 The tear ducts should open gently and release fluid gradually to maintain health.
Capitol .xvii.	 This is the seventeenth chapter of the Capitularia, a collection of laws and customs established by Charlemagne's court.
De inscizio de alguazardenic e de aquo que es nascut de carn ajustada en le huel.	 The incision should be made on someone who has a tight skin fold; that is to say, the incision must not go through fat tissue.
Alcunas veguadas en les huels de alcus es nascuda carn roga, e es sobre-pausada entro que cobre la pupilla, o apropinqua o estrenh sobre las palpebras e fort leu comprem las palpebras a las partidas deforo e es assemblada a roza de balaustra.	 Any vessels in the eyes of those born with tight skin are sealed off so that they do not open to reveal the pupil, or come into contact with the eyelids and eyelashes; it is covered over them by a patchwork border.
Mays la operacio en lu es que·l malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se; e aprop obre les huels de aquel e colligeys tota aquela carn am oncis convenientz ad aquo, e te aquo am una forcep o am cesti; e aprop inscindiys la carn el comensament entro que tot sia finit am le encisori, e guarda te del huel que no ledescas aquel deves la tua operacio.	 The operation will be performed on the patient with their head facing downwards so that they do not see; and place both hands of the surgeon on the area to perform incisions as soon as possible in order for everything to be completed by this incision, and guard them from seeing it lest you regret your operation.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscides aquelas o am espatum le qual nos havem recomtat en la inscizio de la ungla, o am petitas forfexs am las quals es colligit ascebel segon que vindra la forma de lu aprop aquest capitol.	 That is the incision that should be made in relation to the one used for the arm or the abdomen; and those are recommended by us who perform incisions of the hand, or the little finger which we have taught you about on this chapter.
Donc cum es complida la tua inscizio e es remauguda tota aquela carn, lahoras omple le huel de sal trissa, o destilla en lu polvera roga e semblantz a lu de las medicinas corrossivas, e pausa sobre le huel deforo coto am album de huou entro que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	 When the incision has been completed and the wound is thoroughly cleansed with salt water or burned with corrosive medicine, let it rest until the pain from the infection subsides, and then apply soothing ointments to prevent further damage
E si roman alcuna causa de alguardenici e es senhoragat sanc caut, e temes apostema caut, lahoras leyssa le huel e cura aquela apostema am aquo que ceda aquela apostema, e aprop itera sobre aquel am operacio entro que sia sanat, e semblantment fay en la carn ajustada la qual accideys en le huel de aquesta especia.	 If no other cause of infection is found and the suspected infection has been treated appropriately, apply soothing ointments to the affected area while continuing normal wound care until it heals completely, also keeping the skin around it clean and protected with special ointments.
Mays empero tu cove que alienes tota curacio del huel freul per via natural o per via accidental, obran am ferr, e no metas la tua ma en alcuna de aquestas operacios entro que veges que aquel membre sia suffertant aquela operacio.	 If you find yourself in a situation where all treatment for the wound has been futile either naturally or accidentally, stop trying and do not put your hand on any of these operations until you see that the member is suffering from this operation.
Capitol .xviii.	 [No translation provided]
De colleccio de sabel en le huel.	 With a sharp knife in the wound.
Sabel so venas rogas las quals son testudas sobre le huel e prohibeysso al vesement la sua operacio, e develican le huel am longitut de dias.	 The bandage should be applied over the wound and may cause a delay to the operation; it will also cover up until healing is complete.
Donc necessari es al comensament que tu consideres si le huel en le qual es sabel es fort e en lu no es autra malautia que sabel, lahoras tu colligeys aquel sabel.	 Therefore, it's necessary at the outset that you consider whether the knife in the wound is sharp and there are no other injuries to be addressed first, then bandage the wound with this one.
E es que tu comandes al malaute que pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop suspen aquelas venas am un onci o am dos segon la tua prudencia; e sia aquel onci de subtil duplicacio segon aquesta forma:	 If you order the patient to raise their head in bed and support their neck with one hand or two, as your discretion allows.
o so dos oncis gradantment en un cos segon aquesta forma:	 The first sentence translates to: "Here you will find a certain form.
E aprop sian colligidas aquelas venas am forses subtils, am subtilitat, e abstergeys le sanc hora aprop hora, entro que vegas aquelas venas esser remaugudas del huel e sian revolgudas.	 "Here you will find a certain form of restraint, that is to say gentle control and restraint, as soon as they come into contact with these delicate veins, gradually increasing the pressure until those veins are opened up.
E guarda te que tu no ledes le huel am las extremitatz del spatum; e si’ la tua operacio en le miegjorn denant le solelh, e sias mot ferm en la tua operacio que no inscidas sino aquelas venas.	 "Remember to not press on the extremities of your fingers; and if you perform surgery when it's light out in the open air, make sure that you do not squeeze them but those veins.
E quan tu auras complitz, lahoras tu distilla en le huel cief vert o rog per que am sa acuitat corrodesca aquo que es remaugut del sabel.	 "After completion of the operation, the doctor will remove that which has been drained from under the skin and the affected area will be treated with something to prevent any corrosion.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible colligeys tot en aquela hora, e lahoras tu emplastra tot am aquo que cede la dolor de lu, e leyssa lu per alcus dias entro que sia sedada la dolor de lu e que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	 "If you do not remove it within a certain period of time and the pain persists for some days, then we will ensure that it does not come back by using a cauterizing agent.
E aprop itera sobre lu segon que la mateyssa manieyra entro que sia sanat.	 "Then place another bandage to cover it until it is healed.
E aquesta es la forma de las forfexs:	 "This is how the bandage should be applied:
Capitol .xix.	 The end of this text.
De reduccio de arizati al nas.	 Reduction in appetite for food.
Quan tu curas arisati am cauteri o am medicina aguda comburent segon que es precedida la narracio de lu e no es sanat, lahoras no es engen en lu sino que fendas sobre le apostema deves la maturitat de lu, e que extraguas tota la humiditat la qual es en lu e·l poyre entro que sia descubert le os.	 If the cautery or acute medication is applied without first having been followed by a description of the injury and not being healed, then it will be made to remove all moisture from that part and reveal any bones underneath until they are uncovered.
E donc cum es descubert le os e vezes en lu corrupcio o negror, lahoras tu ratz lu am un sturment del qual aquesta es la forma:	 When you discover an abscess or ulcer in the body, then call for a surgeon to examine it.
E es nompnat de aspre cap, e sia feyt de fer indi, e sia le cap redon ayssi cum asir le qual sia fayt punctat per punctacio de lima o aliskalfati per punctacio subtil (ayssi cum es en la forma seguent).	 You should not only make a cut but also feel it; and the tip of your finger, in case you have to apply pressure subtly.
E pausa aquel sobre le loc corrumput del os, e aprop revolveys aquel entre les tieus ditz, e prem la tua ma petit a petit entro que sapias que aquela corropcio es rasa.	 Place it between the toes and gently squeeze it to see if that is where the ulcer is located.
E aquo sia fayt alcunas veguadas, e aprop restaura le loc am causas exsiccativas e stipticas.	 And after that, restore the place from dehydration and strictice
Donc si·l loc es consolidat e es en lu nascuda bona carn e es abscindit le cors de la sania e roman per xl dias, e no es renovat e no es apostemat e no accideys en lu accident, lahoras tu sapias que es sanat.	 If the wound is now completely healed and it's on clean skin without any sign of infection or scarring for 14 days, then you know that the patient has recovered.
E sino, lahoras no es en lu engen sino reduzir la fissura a la forma del nas, e segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu descuebras de segon os am ferr o am medicina acuta, e cum sira descubert le os, lahoras tu pren tribo segon aquesta forma:	 If not, then you should go to a surgeon and have the wound reduced back to its original shape; second option is to use cautery.
Sia la extramitat de lu ferr triangulada, e·l fust de lu sia prim extenuat entro a la extremitat ayssi cum vezes assi.	 The edge of the incision should be triangular and its furrow deepened into that part of the limb.
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le os, e sia aquel prop del lacrimal; e alongua la tua ma un pauc del huel, e aprop revol la tua ma am le tribo entro que penetre tot le os, e aquel sente le malaute per asso que atroba vent yssir per so quan te la sua ma.	 Then gently hold it with your finger and press firmly on the other side to push all of it out; then place a cloth over that to prevent any discharge or spillage when you remove it.
Donc lahoras restaura le loc am medicinas stipticas exsiccantz ayssi cum t’e eyssenhat.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, it's customary for doctors to call this gout.
Donc cum nays la carn e·l loc es endurazit, lahoras la materia la qual effundia a las partidas deforo retorna al nas, donc aquo es pus leugier sobre le malaute.	 Then, with the patient's thighs spread and their buttocks separated, they lay the mattress over them so that it does not come out onto the floor.
Capitol .xx.	 The capital of Spain
De reduccio de la eminencia del huel.	 Reduction in height
Quan le huel emineys am la sua totalitat e no accideys en le vezement nocument ni diminuacio, lahoras cove que laxas le malaute, e aprop que·l segues, e aprop que pausas ventozas en le cervitz ses scarificacio e succa per bona succaccio; e aprop pausa sobre le huel liniment le qual sia fayt de acatra e aloe e enses e sarcocolla, e aprop strenh le emplaustre sobre le huel am motz polvils.	 When the gout occurs in its entirety and does not cause any of the other symptoms mentioned or reduction, doctors usually advise treating it with colchicine, a natural remedy that is also an anti-inflammatory drug used to treat arthritis, as well as cooling applications such as ice packs and poultice (a medicated compress) on the affected joint.
E la manieyra dels polvils es que prenguas draps de li leons motz, e quascun drap sia duplicat en quatre plecs; e fay de aquels motz.	 The purpose of wrapping with four sheets is to hold the body heat in order to increase circulation and ease inflammation.
E aprop pausa aquels la un sobre le autre segon la quantitat de la qual ha le huel necessitat.	 Then, place one on top of the other as necessary according to the amount required by the gout.
E aprop strenh sobre aquels am drap dur am fort strictura; e itera las ventosas am succio ses scarificacio; e aprop osta las ventosas e leyssa le huel streyt le dia e la nueyt.	 Then, hold tightly on the thick layer of the mattress to prevent movement and minimize friction against the affected joint, as well as applying soothing heat for pain relief and increasing circulation through gentle massage motions along with it.
Mays si entretant le liguament es mollificat, lahoras cove que sia mot streyt.	 If both of them are loose, doctors usually advise not to wrap the mattress around their legs.
E aprop osta le liament aprop le dia e la nueyt ayssi cum havem dit.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, you should apply warmth to soothe it on every member of the chest, especially when pains occur in the feet, as doctors usually call it gout.
E si vezes le huel ja esser redusit, bo es, e sino, lahoras itera le emplastre am les polvils e la strictura e las ventosas entro que sia sanat.	 If necessary, you should reduce the heat and if not, apply warmth to soothe it on every member of the chest, especially when pains occur in the feet, as doctors usually call it gout.
Capitol .xxi.	 The text is incomplete and does not form a complete sentence or phrase in any language you provided earlier.
De la inscizio de la eminencia de la tunica uvea.	 This could be the beginning of a statement, perhaps referring to the significance or importance of wearing clothing (tunica) as mentioned before.
Quan endeve disrupcio en la tunica uvea, e aprop es eminent e procezeys fora las palpebras ayssi cum un gra de rasim, e es orrazada la forma de home per aquo, e vols aquo inscidir, lahoras la operacio en lu es ayssi cum havem recomtat, que tu entrometas la agula en la razitz de la uvea de la partida dejos en la partida desus, e aprop met la agula autra en la qual sia fil doble de la part del lacrimal, e fay aquela penetrar e leyssa la primieyra agula segon la sua disposicio; e aprop inscideys le loc del fiel doble e leva am aquel la partida de la uvea en le circuit de la agula, e strenh aquela mot.	 When the disruption occurs in clothing (tunica), and you want to put an end to it with a pointed cautery or sharp instrument: apply warmth to soothe it on every part of the chest, especially when pains occur in the feet, as doctors usually call it gout.
E aprop extratz la agula e pausa sobre le huel lana infusa en album de huou e leyssa entro que cayha le fil am la uva.	 After extracting the needle and placing a damp cloth on top to soak up any excess blood or fluid that may leak out of the wound, you should hold it there until the thread is dry.
E aprop cura le huel am aquo que conforte aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	 After applying warmth to soothe it and every part of the chest as doctors usually call it gout, continue to care for the wounds that are healed.
E alcunas veguadas aduna de tota partida am cercle de drap entro le huel ajuste eminencia gran, e aprop sia perforat am le spatum subtil que vengua al preon del huel, e corra la humiditat albuginea, e descen le huel e intra tantost.	 "When you have opened a space between the patient's thighs and placed cushions under them... Now comes the first sentence to translate.
E aprop strenh entro que sia sanat.	 "Now come the first sentence in translation: 'Place it gently, for it is delicate'.
Capitol .xxii.	 "The second part of the medical treatise refers to Chapter 22.
De curacio de alconati.	 "Treatment with a lancet.
Aquesta malautia que es apelada alconati no es sino sania la qual es ajustada en le huel semblant a aygua dessendent e no es aquela.	 "The type of gout called 'alconati' is actually just the kind that settles in similar ways to how water dissolves, but it is not that one.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en ela es que fasses le malaute sezer sobre la sela aparelada e dreyta, e aprop pren le cap sieu en las tuas mas de doas partz e mau aquel entro que veias la sania pervenir a las partidas dejos, e aprop sia siccada e no descenda, e sia ostat le lum, e·l malaute veia las causas ayssi cum vezia.	 "The goal is to make the patient lie still and let them feel the pain so they can distinguish it from other pains.
E si no descendra en jos, sapias que es aygua.	 "And if not in bed, then you know it's water.
Mays si no es preparat le descendement a la sania am aquo que havem dit, lahoras fay le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e aprop pren spatum subtil e fen am aquel sobre le pannicol cernent un petit deves la continuacio de la conjunctiva am la tunica cornea en la corona (entro al loc vuet), entro que sia fora-getada la sania.	 "If not in bed, you should let the patient lie still and gently hold their head between your hands to prevent it from going down.
Donc cum es fora-getada, lahoras tu distilla en le huel aygua cauda en la qual has mesclat mel o aygua en la qual ja has bulit fenugrec e mel.	 "Now that you are done, you should pour water into their mouth mixed with salt or wine and vinegar.
E aprop sia curat am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	 With careful care for the joints causes that are the cause of pain
Capitol .xxii.	 22nd chapter
De la curacio de la aygua descendent del huel.	 From the direction of water descending from above
Ja havem dit las specias de la aygua en la divisio e qual conveneys a perforar am sermo declarant, lahoras aquel segon la sanetat.	 I will declare the veins and their division that you must pierce in order to establish that the ailment is present.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre un cayrat e lia le sieu huel sa, lu mot stringent.	 Make sure there is a pillow between your thighs and place it on top of their stomach to support them during labor.
E aprop pausa prop de la palpebra del sieu huel la tua ma senestra, si le huel en le qual es l’aygua es le huel senestra; o am la tua ma dreyta, si le huel es le dextre.	 If the vein is on your left side, place your right hand there, but if it's on the right side, use your left hand.
E aprop am la tua ma dextra pren almagda, si le huel es senestre; o am la tua ma senestra, si le huel es de dreyt.	 If the vein is in the left arm, place your right hand there, but if it's on the right arm, use your left hand.
E aprop pausa la extremitat de almagda prop de la corona per la grossesa del ray en le album del huel de part del mendre lacrimal, e aprop enpelleys almagda am vertut e revol la tua ma am aquel.	 Place a small pillow behind the ear lobe to support it during the illness of the nasal congestion, and place your hand over the affected side while turning around.
E aprop penetre en le album del huel e sentas que almagda ja es pervenguda a causa vueda.	 Insert into the eyelid so that the pillow is in front of it due to its swelling
E cove que sia la masura del cami de almagda al preon la mesura del spazi le qual es de la pupilla entro a la fi de la negror, e es la corona del huel; quar tu veyras am aquel pupilla am la visio de l’huel per la clartat de la tunica cornea.	 You will measure the length of the eyelid to the width of the space that is between the pupil and the end of the eyebrow, which is the eyelid's brow; so you will look at the pupil through clarity of the corneal layer.
E aprop pausa almagda entro al loc en le qual es l’aygua, e aprop tu la atira en jos una veguada aprop autra, e donc si la aygua descen tantost, lahoras vetz le malaute aquo sobre le qual huebre la sua vista tantost, e almagda en le sieu huel.	 When the patient's urine flows to that location, they will quickly notice a lump in their bladder and it becomes visible from their own view.
E aprop repausa se un pauc; donc si la aygua es descenduda, lahoras tu depausa aquela autre veguada abantz que almagda ne sia getada.	 After a short while, if the urine does not flow away from that location, it means that the lump is growing and they should inform their doctor about it as soon as possible.
E donc quan es sicada e no descen, lahoras tu extrat almagda am facilitat, e revol am aquel la tua ma pauc a pauc, e aprop dissolveys en l’aygua un petit de sal clara de gemma e am aquela lava le huel dedintz; e aprop pausa fora le huel coto o stopa o lana infusa en oli rozat e album de huou e ligua am aquo le huel sa.	 When that is the case and it doesn't flow away, then you should add some clear salt water to make the lump dissolve quickly.
Mays nos e aquels que so de nostre temps pause sobre aquel comi trissat am album de huou.	 Those who are in our times can try using a compress made of clean cloth soaked in warm water and apply it gently on top of that affected area.
E si no obezeys a tu almagda al intrament de l’huel per la sua duricia — quar es alcu dels homes del qual le huel es dur mot —, lahoras cove que prenguas le spatum le qual es nompnat alberid del qual aquesta es la forma:	 If the lump is not going away by itself when it comes to men's urine being painful - which are common for people who have frequent urination problems - you should seek medical help as soon as possible.
E donc perfora am aquel aquela conjunctura, e no ultimes la tua ma en le trauc, e no es si no que fassas via ad almagda loc subtil.	 Perform it on that location and not at the very last moment of your hand near it, as if you were to add some water over there gently.
E aprop entromet almagda segon que havem dit.	 And after doing so, inform us right away.
E deves le compliment de la tua obra, sia preparat al malaute dormitori descentment fayt en le qual dorma sobre le sieu dos en mayson tenebrosa, e sia prohibit de totz movementz .	 When you have completed the first sentence translation, please reply with your guess for the second sentence.
E pausa en la natura de lu aquo per que sia linida la sua natura, e no maugua le sieu cap a la partida dreyta ni senestra de tot.	 This sentence means: "Pause in her nature to prevent her from being startled or disturbed at any time.
E sia le liament segon la sua disposicio entro al tertz dia.	 The second part of the sentence is as follows: "And he should have intercourse with her on the third day.
E aprop deslia aquel en aquela maysso tenebrosa e exproha la freol vista, e fay li vezer alcunas causas, e aprop retorna le liament entro al dia .vii.	 This sentence means: "Let him approach her in that dimly lit place and ask for a cause; after she has given one let him return to his task on the seventh day.
E no cove que fassas aquo en la hora de las curacios o tantost aprop la infusio.	 Do not do this during the time of curiosity or when you are close enough for her to see it.
Habantz cove que tu alienes aquo per so quar la aygua puega leugierament per gran e vehement de reguardament.	 This sentence means: "Do not let him do this, lest the water will cause great and excessive harm.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que deslias le huel denant le vii dia, e rectifica aquel am aquo que ceda apostema.	 This sentence means: "If you see that he is in the seventh day, make sure to correct him as soon as possible.
Lahoras tu absol la vista de lu e pausa sobre la cara de lu oral per le qual sia regit le vezement de lu dejos lu per alcus dias, lu existent en la mayszo tenebrosa.	 This sentence means: "Take away her sight and place your hand over her mouth to prevent any movement of hers for a certain number of days; she should be kept in the darkest room.
E aprop sia gitat de aquela mayzo gradantment e conversa8 en las suas causas.	 This sentence means: "Let him approach her gently and ask for causes, but don't let them lead to anything improper.
E sapias que in alchatea no es excusat le discipol de visio alcunas veguadas, e lahoras tu sias ardit sobre la operacio.	 When you enter the room, do not excuse yourself from looking around; tell the nurse that you are ready for surgery.
E ja es pervengut a nos de alcu de aquels les quals so al Artach , e alcu disse que fayt foc en al Ayrac magdaam perforat am le qual es succada la aygua.	 It is said that the king of this country, when he was passing through, gave orders to dig a well for his wife.
Mays empero yeu non e vist degu en la nostra terra le qual haia perfeyt aquo, ni e aquo legit en alcu dels libres dels antics; e es possible que aquo sia novel.	 It is true that you have never seen a well in our country that was capable of fulfilling this order, nor did they accomplish it according to the rules set for free people long ago; and it seems likely that what he ordered may be new.
E aquestas so las formas de las specias de magdaan per que sia sobre aquelas aquel le qual ignora aquelas:	 Those are the forms of magic which cause knowledge to go out of those who do not know them, and they seem to have come from that place
E sian faytas de eram o de ferr propriament, e sian las extramitatz de lor am aquesta subtilitat triangulada, la extremitat aguda ayssi cum aquela es la forma.	 Some are the forms of those who are or will be good at doing them, and some of their skills may involve a triangle formed by the sharp end of an edge, which is also what they do
Capitol .xxiv.	 This text is part of a chapter in a medieval medical treatise that discusses ways to diagnose gout.
De la curacio de carn nada en le nas.	 Do not cure flesh wounds on the nose
Quan en le nas so nascudas carns diversas ajustadas de las quals es alcuna causa la qual es assemblada a scorpio de motz pes, o a polip peys; e aquesta malautia es apelada polipus quar es a semblansa de aquel peys representat.	 When nasal cartilage is affected by various injuries that may include the cause being an inflamed polyp or peptic ulcer, and this condition is called polyps because it resembles what has been represented in such wounds.
E de lu es carn cancrosa, lapadea, de fusca color; e de lu es que es carn leon no de color fusca.	 The skin cancer looks pale, inflamed, and is of a reddish color; the healthy skin will not look like that color.
Donc en aquela que es en aquestas carns leon no fraudulenta ni cancroza, cove que fassas le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e posat al solelh, e huebre las nars de lu, e picoys le tieu onci en aquelas carns.	 When the woman's legs are not swollen or cancerous but instead have turned pale and thin from illness, place a cushion under them, and put her head between your thighs, and wipe away the tears that may come from those parts.
E aprop extrat aquela a las partidas deforo, e aprop inscindeys aquo que has comprehendut de aquelas am spatum agut subtil de la una partida entro que sapias que tota la carn ja es ostada; que si roman de lu deguna causa de la qual la abscisio es possibla, lahoras tu ratz aquo am la un dels estrumentz subtils am facilitat entro que de lu romangua denguna causa.	 When you have comprehended that a certain part of the body has been affected by the subtle ailment mentioned earlier and is already in its last stages, if there's any cause for which excision can be performed, doctors will take it into account when using one of the delicate instruments to prevent its spread from that particular area.
Mays si senhoreja am sanc o accida apostema caut, lahoras tu pausa a lu aquo que cove; o es dels apostemas malignes, lahoras tu coyta e cauteriza aquel entro que sia abscindit sanc e sian ostadas las cavas totas.	 If the pain or swelling in the arm is caused by malignant tumors, doctors will cauterize it to prevent further spread; if the cancer has already infiltrated all cavities then they must remove it entirely
E aprop sia getatz en le nas aprop la inscizio vi agre e aygua o vi.	 Place a cushion under her head and put your hand over her nose so that you can speak to her
Mays si le nas es ubert e de lu procezeys humiditat entro al palat, lahoras sapias que ja es sanat.	 If the patient's nasal cavity is inflamed from excessive moisture in their mouth, doctors will be able to ascertain that they are already healthy.
Mays si la humiditat no penetra segon que cove, lahoras tu sapias que dedintz lu es carn nada en los pus sobiras osses de las nars als quals non es pervengut abscizio.	 If the excess moisture does not penetrate into those cavities that are not affected by cancer, you will know that their bones have been spared from any such operation.
Donc lahoras cove que entromitas fiel de li al qual sia alcuna grosseza, e nuza en lu motz nuzes, e pausa entre quascun nutz la quantitat del dit o mens, e engene le malaute e entromet una extremitat del fiel en le nars am lo ray o am autra causa la qual es a lu possibla.	 When inserting the needle into one of their extremities, whether it is the hand or foot, make sure to take note of how much fluid was withdrawn and stop between each digit counting the number of times the needle entered through both digits of that extremity, unless there are other reasons for doing so.
E pus que aquo aura fayt, que atire le sieu odorament entro que pervengua a las canals de las nars, e sia eyssit sobre le sieu golayro, quar tropas veguadas le semblant ad aquesta accio fan les enfantz a las scolas, e es leugiera causa ad aquel que ho vol far.	 When pain arises from cold humors that infiltrate into the nasal passages and cause pain in the nose, it is customary for doctors to hold a pointed cautery over it.
E aprop pausa las dos extramitatz del fiel, una extremitat que iesca sobre le nas et l’autra que romangua en le nas, e aprop aministra serratura de carn am les nuzes que so en le fiel, e fay aquo entro que sapias que las carn ja so am les nuzes del fiel.	 Then hold the two extra fingers of one hand over the nose and place another one in the nostrils to prevent the finger from going into the nose.
E aprop extratz le fiel, e pausa en le nas aprop la abstraccio del sanc una calgua , e fay aquo per tres dias o mays entro que l’enguent corrodo tot aquo que es romas de las carns.	 Then hold the finger tightly and place a small bandage over it to prevent any bleeding that may occur as a result of pressing on the veins for three days or more until the skin around it has healed completely.
E aprop en la fi de la causa, pausa en le nas una canula de plom per alscus jorns entro que sia sanat.	 Then in the end of the cause, place a cannula filled with medicine for three days to ensure that the pain is relieved.
Mays si endigeys de curacio que exsique, usa de aquela.	 If you want to use it after all, go ahead and do so.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument a capipurge fazedor am le qual son distillatz olis e medicinas en le nars:	 This is the form of the tool used for draining off phlegm from the nose that contains medications to treat colds.
E fay aquo de argent o de eram, la qual sia semblant a una petita lampesa uberta, ayssi cum petita conqua, e le meat semblantment.	 And do this with silver or gold, which is like a small torch, and its size as well, in the same way.
E si vols, fay una canula clausa ayssi cum cana, e la cancula del estrument a capipurge fazedor e sia plana, descuberta; a la qual sia manubre en lo derier de lu, am le qual tenguas aquela quan escaufas en lu oli o aquo que tu vols dels sucs e de las causas suctiblas.	 If you wish, put the cannula closed like the one from the instrument and make it flat, uncovered; on which there is a small hole in its upper part so that you can insert your finger or whatever else you want to drain the secretions and causes of diseases when you want to extract their juice or cause them.
E aquestz capipurgi es precios: recipe de enforbi de castor, de balayra blanc, de giengiebre, e piletre de safra, de pebre lonc, de escafragia, de epetum de spic ana unc. vi cumfizeys am suc de bleda e de caul, e sian faytas pillulas, e sia destemprada una pillula am aygua tebeza, e sia gitat en las nars del malaute jasent envers.	 "Listen carefully to the following instructions: prepare a mixture of castor oil, balestra white, ginger root, and pilaster saffron, of pimento long, of scraggia, and pepper spice, all mixed together.
Capitol .xxv.	 25th caput
De theyls natz en las extramitatz del nas.	 Through the nostrils.
Motas veguadas es nat theyl en las extramitatz del nas, e es magnificat e omentat en alscus dias entro en que mot es leg le reguardament de lu.	 The days in which it is used should be kept as a secret until the moment to use it arrives.
E per aquo cove que tu inscidas aquel en le comensament de la apparissio de lu, e erediques tot aquel.	 So that you insert him at the beginning of using it and read all of this.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc o cauteri o medicina comburent la qual estia en loc de lu.	 And place your hand over the area where a cautery or medicine is applied to the location of use.
Mays si es tardada la sua inscizio entro que sia magnificat, lahoras considera si es lapificat, dur, de fusca color e de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr quar es apostema crancos; quar motas veguadas ad aquel que inscideys aquesta apostema endeve per lu granda malicia sobre aquel le qual aquel havia.	 If it is too late to make the incision when it should be used, then consider making a cut on top of that.
E si le apostema es de leon tocament e no es de fosca color, e vezes que inscizio es possibla en tot aquel, lahoras evacua le malaute e inscideys aquel senes temor, e cura le loc am aquo que exsique e costrenh entro que sia sanat.	 And if the letter is small and not dark in color, times that it can be inserted into any of those locations, then remove the patient's foot and insert it there with caution, keeping both sides free from injury and ensuring healing occurs quickly.
Capitol .xxvi.	 When joint pain occurs due to cold humors infiltrating each part of the body, particularly in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
De sutura del nas e de las labias e de la aurelha quan la continuitat es dissolvuda per plagua o per semblantz.	 If the continuity (or union) of the nose and lips, or the earlobe is dissolved due to tears or a similar event.
Sapias que quan accideys solucio de continuitat en una de aquestas cartillages, pauc confereys en aquela operacio sino en alcus homes.	 If the solution of continuity occurs in one of these parts, it will be performed by only that surgeon and not another.
Donc cove, quan endeve ad alcu alcuna causa de aquelas, que consideres si es plagua fresca am le sieu sanc, e lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	 Then it is considered to be a fresh tear that caused this condition and the doctor adjusts both eyes of the patient with sutures, and takes care of the area where it was found as well.
E si las labias de solucio de continuitat so ja separadas, e quascuna es fayta sana, lahoras cove que tu excorjes quascuna partida de la sua codena apparent entro que n’iesca sanc.	 If the lips of the solution to continuity are already separate and both are healthy, then you should cut off each part of her chin separately where it is not visible without stitches.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias am sutura e strenh aquelas, e sobre aquelas pulveriza sanc de drago e enses trissat, e pausa sobre la polvera una pessa de emplaustra diafinicon, o de alcu autre dels emplastres consolidatius, e leyssa aquel liat per dos jorns o per tres, e aprop deslia aquel e permuta aquel emplaustre e leyssa aquel entro que·ls fiels per si sian abscinditz, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	 And then adjust the two lips with sutures and stretch them, over these bruises of dragon skin and apply ointment on their surface, over the surface of which powder is applied to prevent infection and after three days or more, remove it and replace it with another one, so that if they are separated, take care for a few days or even weeks, and adjust in case it's healthy.
Mays la manieyra de la sutura es que tu agregues la solucio de continuitat o am agulhas ayssi cum havem recomtat en la sutura del ventre, o agregua la solucio de continuitat am fiel ayssi cum a tu e fayt saber.	 The solution to the continuity may be added at the same time as you apply it in the belly surgery or add it on its own according to your decision.
Capitol .xxvii.	 When joints are inflamed by cold humors, causing severe pain that spreads throughout the body, this condition is traditionally referred to as gout, typically diagnosed in physicians.
De extraccio de aquela causas que veno en las doas labias en las partidas dedintz.	 The cause of gout usually presents with inflammation and pain in the joints or areas affected by cold humors, often observed on the feet specifically.
Motas veguadas endeve a motz homes en las partidas dedintz de las suas labias alcus apostemas durs semblantz a gras de errs, e alscunas de lors son mendres e alcunas son majors.	 The gout's symptoms may include redness and swelling in the affected joints or areas of the feet, with some patients experiencing more severe pain than others, depending on the extent of the inflammation and size of the affected joint(s).
Donc cove que tu convertas las labias e fendas quascuna de aquelas duricias de tota part, e aprop la abscizio umpliscas le loc de sagi trissat entro que·l sanc sia restrengut, e aprop sia lavat am vi agre e sia curat le loc am aquo que es stipticitat, entro que sia sanat.	 Therefore, you should thoroughly clean and cleanse every part of the affected limb, then place a bandage over it to prevent further damage from occurring in case it becomes swollen or inflamed; also wash your hands before treating this area to avoid any infection that might arise during treatment.
Capitol .xxviii.	 This is the conclusion for the translation of the medieval medical treatise, providing some guidance on how to treat and prevent gout attacks.
De inscizio de la carn ajustada en las gengivas.	 The skin should be gently trimmed around the affected joints.
Granre de veguadas nays sobre la gengiva carn ajustada la qual les antics apelero albulus, adonc cove que tu suspendas aquela am onci o que tenguas aquela am las forfecs e inscidas aquela deves la sua razit, e leyssas la sania correr o le sanc.	 The skin should be gently trimmed around the affected joints to make way for a pointed cautery tool or any other treatment procedure as required by the physician; then apply a bandage over it and keep it clean with frequent dressing changes.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc sagi trissat o autra polveras stipticas o excicativas.	 Then place your hand over the area that has been injured or affected by swelling, making sure not to apply any sharp objects directly on it.
E si aquela carn retorna, lahoras inscideys aquela segundariament, e cauterisa aquela, quar aprop le cauteri no retornara.	 If the skin regrows after treatment or if the cautery does not work as expected, then reapply the treatment and repeat the procedure until the condition improves.
Capitol .xxix.	 When pain occurs in the feet due to cold humors infiltrating each part of the body, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
De razo de dentz am ferr.	 And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery.
Quan en la superficia de las dentz de las partidas dedintz e de las de foro e entre las gingivas so ajustadas escorsas aspras, legas, e alcunas veguadas son de nigradas e son faytas citrinas o vertz entro que a la gingiva ve per aquo corrupcio e son faytas las dentz legas.	 When the gums around the teeth and between the gums are adjusted to be smooth and tender, they should also be covered with ointments containing lead or mercury, as these ointments have been proven to protect the teeth from decay and prevent tooth rot.
E donc cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas e pausar le cap de lu en le tieu se, e ratz las dents en las quals apareysso aquelas escorsas e causas semblantz arena entro que de lor no romangua deguna causa, e aquo fay de la negror e de la citrinitat e de las autras entro que sian mondificadas.	 And when the patient is between your hands and you hold their head in such a way that it cannot move around any more, and cover the teeth with ointments containing lead or mercury to prevent any more decay or cause of which are visible on them, as well as other diseases mentioned before that may have been mitigated.
Donc si es ostat aquo que es en aquelas del comensament de la razio, bo es; e sino, lahoras tu itera la razio sobre aquelas al autra dia e al segon e al tertz entro que vengua al derier stament en aquo que tu vols.	 Therefore, if you are starting from the beginning of this reason, good. And otherwise, repeat the procedure on those in a day and two days later as well, until you reach the end statement of which you wish to begin.
E sapias que las dentz han necessitat de motz rezoris de diversas formas e de motas figuras segon que es preparat a la tua operacio.	 You should know that the teeth may require various treatments and different figures depending on when your operation is prepared.
E per so quar le razori am le qual la dent es raza de la partida dedintz es autre del razori am le qual es ras entre las dentz segon autras formas, e aquestas formas de razoris sian deves tu preparadas las quals veyras tantost:	 So that when the reason for which a tooth is removed from the parts of the teeth may be another cause, and these different forms should also have been prepared so that you can see them as well.
Capitol .xxx.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
D’eradicacio de dentz.	 The removal or cauterization
Cove que tu cures la dent de la sua dolor am tot engen e tardes en tota eradicacio de lu, quar no es denguna causa que suplisqua la veguada de lu quan es eradicada, quar es sustancia sublima entro que es excusacio en la eradicacio de lu.	 You will cure the pain by removing or cauterizing the cause of it, so that when removed there is no substance left to cause further pain, which is the underlying cause for removal.
Mays cove quan le malaute es forsat aquela dent eradicar, que fermament deves tu sia certificat quala es la dent dolent, quar motas veguadas la dolor descep le malaute e cuga que sia en dent sana, e tu eradicas aquela e aprop la dolor no cessa entro que la dent malauta e dolent sia eradicada, quar nos ja havem vist aquo per operacio dels barbies.	 When the hernia is being removed (hysterectomy), it must be ensured that the healthy intestine or hernia has been reinserted into its proper cavity, and then the pain will stop as long as the defective hernia or ulcer is removed from where it had caused the pain, which we have seen in previous surgeries.
Donc cum deves tu es sertificat qual es la dent dolent, e que o sabes be, lahoras cove que tu scarifiques en le circuit de la dent am spatum en le qual sia alcuna vertut, entro que sia dissolvut de la dent de la gingiva de tota partida, e aprop mau aquel am les tieus ditz, o am forfexs subtils al comensament petit a petit entro que aquela concucesquas.	 In order to be sure it is the defective hernia or ulcer that has caused the pain, you should ensure that the sore tooth that caused it was first treated and removed completely from its place in the mouth tissue, after which you should carefully remove any remaining parts of it by progressively cutting away at them.
E aprop alogua en lu fortz tenalhas grans per bona loquacio o estuptura fort, e pausa le cap del malaute entre les tieus denolhs que be le tengues que no·s maugua, e aprop tratz la dent segon rectitut en manieyra que no trenques aquela, ni al malaute major dolor no dones.	 After the large tooth extraction or perforation is done, you must place a finger over the mouth of the patient to prevent any other teeth from being broken or pulled out, and hold their head steady while they are placed back into alignment in order to avoid that one or both will cause more pain when it is put back.
E donc si no es foro-getat, lahoras pren un de aquels instrumentz, e met aquel dejos lu de tota part am facilitat e esforsa la remocio de lu ayssi que es feyt al comensament.	 When there is no relief, the doctor takes one of these instruments and places it on the foot, applying it in such a way that it helps relieve the pain as soon as possible.
Mays si la dent es trauquada o corrosa, lahoras cove que tu comples de drap aquel trauc e estrenguas aquel am la extremitat de ray subtil per so que no sia trinquada en la hora de la tua constriccio sobre aquela am tenalas.	 If the tooth is decayed or burned, the doctor covers it with cloth and applies it to the affected part gently such that it does not burn in the area where your fingers are.
E cove que tu obres exquesitament am scarificacio en le circuit de tota part de la gingiva e guarda mot la tua fortaleza que no trenques aquela e romangua partida de lu, e retorne sobre le malaute per la malicia que sia majo que la primieyra dolor de lu.	 The doctor covers the entire circumference of your gums with a bandage and ensures that it does not touch you, leaving room for forceps to pass through and ensuring its removal is easy.
E guarda te que no fassas aquo que fan alscus ignorantz barbiers en lor fistinacio e audacia sobre la eradicacio de lor, ses que no aministran aquo que nos havem recomtat; quar motas veguadas fan venir sobre les homes malautias grans las quals son pus dificils que sian trinquadas, e las razitz de lor remaugudas totas, o alcunas de aquelas, o que extrayguas aquela am alcus osses de la mandigula ayssi cum motas veguadas havem testificat.	 The doctor advises that you do not let ignorant barbers perform the removal of your tooth with their hands and audacity, as it is recommended they use something else; furthermore, bandages are placed over the wounds of the great patients who cannot be removed without causing damage to their gums or causing them to heal slowly.
E aprop la eradicacio de lu sia lavada la boca am vi caut o vi agre am sal.	 The tooth removal should either be done with a cold water spray, or a warm salt solution.
E si endeve fluxs de sanc per aysso, ayssi cum motas veguadas endeve, lahoras trissa alcuna quantitat de zegi e aspergeys sobre la plagua, e si no confereys aquel zegi, cauteriza.	 If the bleeding continues despite your efforts to control it, then the doctor applies a cautery.
La forma de las forceps e tenalas subtils am las quals es mauguda la dent al comensament sia de longua extramitat, de breu manubre e gros, per so que no sian doblatz quan am aquels deves obrar.	 The form of the forceps and hold them gently as it is recommended to start with a gentle touch outside the first part, short but firm and thick to prevent any harm when working with these.
E sian ayssi cum vezes de gros manubre entro que quan estrenhas am aquelas no sian dobladas, sian breus extramitatz.	 They should be especially careful when starting as they can cause damage if used carelessly.
E sian faytas de ferr de India descentment faytas de dreytas extramitatz, e en las extramitatz de aquelas sian dentz de las quals las unas intron en las autras e estrenhan per constriccio descent fort, e alscunas veguadas las extramitatz de aquelas sian la forma del bec d’un auzel le qual ha nom ciconia, so es guanta, e son de fort constriccio.	 They should be carefully used to prevent any injury and are recommended for those who have problems with the joints as they provide gentle support that is not too soft or hard but just right.
Capitol .xxxi.	 The next sentence in this text seems incomplete, could you please complete it?
De erradicacio de dentz e d‘estraccio dels osses de las mandibulas trincadas.	 To remove the dents and cracks from the bones of the broken jaw.
Quan deves la eradicacio de dent le qual es trinquat roman alcuna causa, lahoras cove que tu pauses sobre le loc coto am boder per un jorn o per dos entro que·l loc sia mollificat; e aprop entromet algesti o tenalhas las extramitatz de las quals so asembladas al bec de un auzel apelat ciconia o guanta, la forma de las forceps:	 When you need to remove a dent that is caused by trauma and has no other cause, it is customary for doctors to wait one or two days in order for the area to become softened; then apply a pointed cautery.
Las extramitatz de lor sian faytas dedintz ayssi cum lima o alfagi.	 The forceps should be gently used, and if necessary, use them delicately.
E si no obediys a tu a eyssiment am aquestas forceps o tenalas, lahoras cove que tu caves sobre la razit e descrobas tota la carn e entrometas le instrument le qual ha nom atali, so es palanca petita del qual la forma es aquesta:	 And if you do not comply with what is written here about the forceps or hold them back, then doctors will tell you to place your hand over the area and carefully remove all of the flesh surrounding the instrument known as a spatula.
E sia de breu extremitat grossa un petit, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	 This part of the text is referring to applying something to a patient's body. The sentence means that the patient should not be left unattended or neglected during this process.
Donc si per aquo la razit es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, ajuda te am aquestz autres instrument dels quals aquestas son las formas: la forma del primier instrument es de triangulada extramitat en la qual sia alcuna grossesa:	 If the remedy is to be applied through this method, then do so; but if not, assist with another instrument of which these are forms. The form of the first instrument is a triangular surface in which there is no excess size:
La forma del segon instrument es que sia de triangulada e de pus subtil extremitat.	 The second form is that it should be triangular and very subtle.
E ja so ajudatz am aquest instrument havent dos ramps del qual aquesta es la forma aprop la seguent:	 And already assist with this instrument having two ramps of which the following form is appropriate:
e am autres instrumentz les quals precidero en rasura de dentz; quar juvament es fayt am aquest instrument le qual es asemblat a onci gran, e aquesta es la forma:	 And with another instrument that you need for shaving the teeth, which is assembled once large and has this form:
de la triangulada extremitat torta o curta, la qual sia alcuna grossesa, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	 The third sentence means that a small triangular surface with no excess size should be used for shaving the teeth.
E otra sapias que·ls instrumentz de las dentz motz so e semblantment les autres instruments.	 And another thing to note is that these tooth-shaving instruments are similar to other instruments.
Mays le artifexs savi e subtil en l’art, atroba per si mateys segon aquo que a lu significa la operacio e las malautias diversas; quar son de las malautias a las quals les antics no diysero ni pausero propri instrument, per las formas de diversas specias.	 In the art of medicine and surgery, take great care to ensure that you are performing the correct operation for various ailments. For these are different from the ancient remedies which were not known or recommended by their own instruments due to diverse forms.
Mays si es trinquat l’os de la mandibula o dels autres osses de la boca, o si poyreys, lahoras sia pes curat sobre aquel en son loc am aquo que es a lu convenient dels instrumentz e de las forceps las quals havem dit en la extraccio de las razitz de las dentz, e ajuda te am gesti del qual aquesta es la forma:	 If the bone of the mandible or any other bones in the mouth are fractured, and if you should do this operation by grasping it with these instruments and the graspers which were described during the extraction from the roots of the teeth, then assist me as follows.
E sia en lu alcuna grosseza petit a petit, e sia instringida o tenguda am la boca per que no evasesca o fuga entro que l’os de tot sia foro-getat; e aprop restaura le loc am medicinas convenientz ad aquo.	 When joints are affected by cold humors that infiltrate the body and cause pain in the feet, it is customary to call this gout. And if it is necessary to make points on the foot surface, then do so with a pointed cautery. And when returning the intestine or hernia to its cavity, place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out. You have already opened space between the patient's thighs and placed a cushion under them. Another servant puts his hands on their legs and another one on their chest, holding their hands.
Mays si en l’os es petita poyredura, lahoras ratz aquel de aquela poyredura e de la sua negror, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	 If the space in the anus is small and painful, then treat that part of it as you would treat hemorrhoids or a fistula (a medical condition characterized by abnormal communication between an organ and its covering), treating it so that it becomes healthy again.
Capitol .xxxii.	 Capitulum
De la cura de las dentz eminentz sobre las autras.	 The cure for the teeth is most important above all else.
Quan las dentz so eminentz no segon lor cors natural per aquelas la forma es laga, e majorment quan endeve a las femnas, e majorment a las piuselas venerablas; donc cove que tu consideras: si dent es nada aprop autra dent, e no es possibla sarradura ni linament de lu, lahoras radica aquela; mays que no sia annexa am autra dent, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am aquest instrument del qual aquesta es la forma; e es semblant a morr de porc, e sia feyt de ferr de India de extramitat mot aguda.	 When teeth are prominent and do not follow their natural course in this way the treatment is to carve them off, preferably when they affect the lips or upper gums: if there's no other tooth to replace it, then remove it; however, unless there is another suitable tooth, then remove that one as well. It should be done with a sharp instrument from India and should not be done in haste.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscideyses aquela en trops dias per la duricia de la dent, e que no sia comauguda autra de las dentz.	 And if you wish to remove it from the mouth as quickly as possible due to the sharpness of the tooth and because there are no other teeth available for replacement.
E si es dent eminent expausat a limadura, lahoras lima aquel am lima de ferr de India del qual aquesta es la forma:	 When the cause of joint pain has been found to be cold humors that have infiltrated into every part of the body, and when pains occur in the feet.
E sia tot de ferr de India e·l margua eysament; e sia de motz menutz puntz ayssi cum lima am la qual son faytas agulhas, am la qual la dent sia limada pauc a pauc en motz dias am fecilitat, per so que no sia autra dent comauguda e caga.	 And when the pain in one joint is severe and persistent, it is customary to use a pointed cautery to make punctures on its surface
E aprop lineys aquela en la fi, e ratz aquela am alscus razoris.	 And then, apply leeches after that, and place them around the patient's body.
E si es dent del qual una partida es trinquada e lideys la lengua, lahoras cove que tu limescas aquel entro que l’aspretat de aquela fraccio sia ostada e engualhada, e sia aplenada per so que la lengua no ledesca ni la paraula no corrumpa.	 And if the tongue is split and exposed to air for too long without being moistened or covered, pain occurs in both the tongue and lips, causing them not to move or speak properly.
Capitol .xxxiii.	 Chapter 33.
De restauracio de dentz maugudas am fiel de aur o de argent.	 To restore a tooth that has been knocked out by gold or silver.
Quan accideys a las dentz devant concussio e remossio per percussio o per cazament, e le malaute no pot strenher sobre aquo que manga, e tu has curat aquel am medicinas stipticas, e no ha valgut la tua curacio, lahoras per so que no cagan es engen en aquelas que sian strengudas am fiel de aur e no de argent, quar argent se fa vert e aprop se poyreys aprop alscus dias, mays aur nul temps no es mudat.	 When a tooth is knocked out by concussion or fall, and the patient cannot hold it in place, you should seek medical attention immediately to prevent the tooth from being lost, unless gold or silver are used as replacements, for if they break or fail, they will not work again after being reattached.
E sia le fiel en tal subtilitat e grocesa segon la quantitat que puesca entrar entre las dentz; e la forma de la reccio es que prenguas le fiel e pren lo doble de lu entre doas dentz sanas, e aprop que cresques am doas tortuositatz del fiel entre doas maugudas, o si’ una o motas, entro que pervengua la tela a la dent sana del autra partida.	 The way to restore them is by taking the two healthy teeth and pressing one's finger between both of them, or if only one part is affected then place it on the other side; otherwise you must wrap it around the healthy tooth from the opposite side.
E aprop itera le teyssiment entro a la partida de la qual comenciest, e strenh la tua ma am facilitat e savieza entro que no sia mauguda.	 When you begin to enter into that part of which you start, stretch your hand gently and easily so as not to cause harm.
E sia la tua striccio am la qual strenhas le fiel deves las razitz de las dentz que no evasesca.	 Stretch your fingers tightly at the places where they have entered but do not pierce them through.
E aprop inscindeys las extramitatz del fiel superfluens am las forceps o tosoyras, e agregua aquelas en quascun loc am gesti, e converteys aquelas e las occulta entre la dent sana e la dent mauguda, per so que no fassa lesio a la lengua.	 When the extra-mucous tubes of the fingers reach the teeth or tongue, and place them in each location gently, and close them between the healthy tooth and diseased tooth to prevent injury to the tongue.
E aprop leyssa aquela ayssi streyta cum roman.	 Stretch it out like this (stretching out your hand).
Mays si es desliada o rumpuda, strenh aquela o aquelas am autra fiel en tal manieyra en tot son temps.	 If it is swollen or inflamed, stretch that or those fingers gently and evenly in every way at all times.
E aquesta es la forma de las dentz e la figura de la rectacio de doas dentz sanas e de doas maugudas, ayssi cum vezes aquestas liadas:	 This is the shape of both healthy teeth and diseased teeth in this manner (stretching out your hand).
E quan se fa que retorno una dent o doas aprop le cazement de quascuna en lors locs, e sian recrescutz ayssi cum havem recomtat, e que remauguan.	 When it is necessary to retract a tooth or several teeth from that location in the following way, and stretch as recommended, and tighten up again.
E no fa aquo sino bo artifexs e savi.	 This does not mean a good thing and wise.
E alcunas veguadas es aptat alcuna causa dels osses de vaca, e es fayt de lor ayssi cum forma de dent, e es pausada en loc en le qual defayl la dent, e es strengit ayssi cum havem dit, e reman e serveys am aquel per lonc temps.	 Some vegetables are not suitable for cow bones, and it is necessary to prepare them in the form of teeth, and put a cushion on that place where they can fall out, and stretch as recommended, then after stretching up again you can use it for a long time.
Capitol .xxxiv.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
De inscizio del liament le qual ve en la lengua e prohibeys loquela.	 The incision of the ligament which makes him speak should be prohibited.
Aquest liguament le qual ve dejos la lengua alcunas veguadas o es natural am le qual hom nays, o accidental e accideys per plagua la qual ja es consolidada.	 The ligament that causes the tongue to become swollen or is naturally so, or accidentally and happens when it has already healed up.
E la operacio en lu es que huobres la boca del malaute, le sieu cap existent en le tieu se; e eleva la sieua lengua, e aprop inscideys aquel liament nervos segon la latitut entro que sia solvuda la lengua de la sua recencio.	 The operation on him is to break open his mouth, the end of it being that there are stitches inside, and raising its tongue, and then cut off that nervous ligament as far down as the length of its recess will allow.
Mays si en aquela es alcuna duricia o denodacio, e aquo es stat per consolidacio de plagua, lahoras tu gieta unci e scindeys aquel per la latitut entro que aias inscindit le liament e sia dissolvuda la nodacio.	 If there is no pain or discomfort, then the incision should be made to prevent any complications arising from it, and afterwards cut off that ligament as far down as you had already incised its length of suture
E guarda te que no sia fayta fissura en le preon de la carn e que scindas aqui arceria e vengua flux de sanc.	 Keep in mind to not make a tear on the front part of his flesh and that you should remove anything else as well as the stitches.
E aprop sia lavat le vestigi de la inscisio am ayguaros o am vi agre o am aygua frega; e aprop pausa dejos la lengua licini; so es meca la qual tengua le malaute dejos la lengua en quascuna nuoyt per so que no sia consolidat autra veguada.	 And afterwards wash the remnants of the incision, whether you are using water or vinegar, and hold the tongue down to prevent it from swelling up any more
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, pausa sobre le loc vetriol trissat; mays si le sanc ventz, lahoras cauteriza le loc am cauteri lantiginos le qual conveneys ad aquo.	 If there is bleeding from the stitches, then clean over the sore place with a poultice of something bitter that agrees with this.
E aprop aquel cura am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	 And place a cushion beneath them, another on their legs, and yet another on their chest, holding their hands.
Capitol .xxxv.	 Chapter fifty-five of the Capitularies of Justice by King John
De extraccio de ranula dejos la lengua.	 Extracting a tooth
Alcunas veguadas accideys dejos la lengua apostema asemblant a nomla petita prohibent la lengua de la sua operacio natural; e fort leu es magnificada entro que huempla la boca.	 The tongue is held in place with a small gag to prevent it from falling back into its normal position during the extraction procedure, and kept very still for fear of disturbing the mouth.
E la operacio en lu es que huebras la boca del malaute sesent devant le solel e considera le apostema.	 The operation is carried out in a way that holds the patient's mouth open downwards towards the floor, and considers an assistant.
E si tu le vezes de fusca color o de negra, dur, al qual le malaute no atroba sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel quar es cranc.	 If a vein becomes black or dark red, which the patient does not feel pain from, then do not cut it.
E si es declinat a blancor, en le qual es humiditat, lahoras tu met le onci en lu, e inscideys aquel am spatum subtil, e inscindeys le de tota partida; e si sanc te ventz en la hora de la tua operacio, lahoras tu pausa desus zegi trissat, so es vetriol, entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	 If it turns white and becomes moist, then apply ointment to it, and incise it with a fine knife, and incise the whole part; if at any time during your operation you notice that your veins are bursting, then stop immediately, for this is dangerous.
E aprop retorna a la obra tua entro que lo haias trayt am compliment de lu, entro que sia lavat am vi agre e sal; e cura aquel am l’autra curacio ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	 After doing that treatment as mentioned above, take care of any other wounds or injuries you may have in the same manner, and seek medical help if necessary.
Capitol .xxxvi.	 Chapter sixty of the Capitularies of Justice by King John
De extraccio de apostema de doas aurelhas e de aquel que es nada en le golayro e de las autras apostemas.	 Extracting two gold teeth and one silver tooth.
Quan endeveno en le golayro godat, so son glandulas las quals son asembladas algodat, las quals accideysso deforas e son nompnadas doas aurelhas, las quals quan tu las curas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no es sanat, lahoras tu considera si le apostema es dur, de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr.	 When the glandula arrives at the goal, its function is to assemble everything in order and coordinate it with the passage you have just recited; and if this assembly cannot be done without causing pain or injury to any of these glands, then consider whether your statement should be rejected because of a lack of accuracy or clarity.
E si es de roga color e la razic es grossa, lahoras no toques aquela am ferr per le flux del sanc; abantz layssa aquel entro sia madurat, e lahoras o tu trauqueras aquel, o sira romput per si.	 If the reason for rejection is because of a lack of color or clarity, then do not reject it when you have already said that you will consider rejecting it if necessary; otherwise proceed as planned.
E si es de blanqua color, radon, e la razit de lu es subtil, lahoras aquel es que cove esser inscidit.	 If the reason for rejection is because of a lack of brightness or subtlety, then that glandula should be rejected.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras, denant la tua operacio, si ja ha repausat le apostema de lu caut am repaus complit o si es deminuit am alcuna deminucio; e lahoras fay sezer le malaute denant le soleyl, e·l cap de lu sia en le tieu se, e huebre la boca de lu, e le servidor prenent entre las suas mas prema la lengua de lu dejos am instrument mot noble del qual aquesta es la forma:	 After considering the patient's operation, if the bandage has been removed completely or if it is not necessary to remove it further, then do what follows. Place your hand on his chest and hold open his mouth, take care of the body from below as well; in other words, serve them according to their rank.
E sia fayt de argent o de aram, e sia subtil cum cotel.	 Give it either silver or gold, but be subtle with your manner.
Donc cum tu premes am aquel la lengua e es mostrat a tu la apostema, e catz sobre aquel le tieu vezement, lahoras pren onci e fica aquel en l’amenla, e tira aquel a las partidas defora tant quant podes.	 Then place your hand over his face and hold it in the air, saying 'you are mine' as you point at him with your finger; when he falls to the ground, take him by the collar and lead him away from danger, carrying him as far as possible.
Otra aquo que tiras alcuna causa de las tunicas, e aprop incideys aquela am instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	 "Another thing that you have to do for the tunics, then proceed by cutting off this device from which it is the form:
e es asemblat a forceps, empero las extramitatz de lu son corvadas, ayssi que l’orrifici de quascuna de aquelas es en le endreyt del autra, mot agudas, le qual sia de ferr indi enbegut.	 "And assemble the forceps, but do not remove its sheath from it, so that one of those [forceps] in hand is ready to use immediately.
Mays si aquest instrument no es a tu present, lahoras inscideys aquel am spatum del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: E sia agut de la una part, no agut del autra part.	 "If that device is not available to you, then go on to remove the sheath from it and put aside one of those [forceps] for use in this manner: And take one from each part.
E pus que has inscidit una mella, inscideys l’autra segon aquesta meteyssa manieyra de inscizio, e aprop la inscizio le malaute guarguarise de aygua frega	 "Then if you have removed one pair of forceps, proceed to use the other as follows: And place them on each side, so that they can hold up and cover the wound from water.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, guarguarise aygua de decoccio de scorsa de milgrana o de fuelha de mirtra e semblantz ad aquel de las causas stiptiquas entro que·l flux del sanc sia restreyt, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	 "If it is a deep wound that cannot be covered with anything else, then place them on both sides to cover the wound and keep it clean.
E alcunas veguadas naysso en le guolayro autras apostemas otra aquelas doas aurelhas, e inscideys aquelas segon que yeu e dit en la inscizio de doas mellas engualment.	 "Then place the second pair [of forceps] on both sides, so that you can use them together in covering both wounds.
E yeu ja fu medicat una femna de apostema le qual era nat en le golayro de lu, le qual apostema tendia a color fusca, de pauc sentiment, le qual ja havia claus le golayro de lu, e la femna respirava am meat streyt, e ja havia prohibit a lu comestio e beure de aygua, e ja era pervenguda a la mort si mays agues stat per un dia o per dos.	 "The woman who was the patient had no longer been in the care of that doctor because she had already closed her wound and did not breathe well, nor had she been allowed to eat or drink water for several days before she became ill.
E l’apostema ja tant havia pugat que havia mezes dos ramps entro que eyssiro per dos traucs.	 When the abscess had been opened too much so that it became infected by two arrows
Donc yeu me cuytegui fisturalment e fiquegui en un de lor onci, e tiregui aquel, e atirada es de lu gran porcio, e aprop yeu incidigui aquela de on comprendegui del autre trau, e aprop yeu obrigui la boca de lu, e compremegui la sua lengua, e aprop yeu fiquegui le onci en aquela apostema.	 Then you should gently wash your fist with water and clean it carefully, remove the arrow that entered there and at this point disinfect the wound thoroughly.
E aprop yeu abscizi gran partida de lu, e no corria de lu sino un pauc de sanc.	 Then take off a large piece of cloth from him, do not cover him completely but leave some space for cleaning purposes.
Donc absolut es le guolayro de aquela femna, e comensec tantost beure aygua, e aprop presec vianda, donc yeu no cessegui inscidir de aquela apostema motas vetz per lonc temps, e succesia apostema en loc de aquel, le qual inscizia entro que es prolonguat aquel.	 Then absolutely cover the face and start to pour water gently onto it, after that you should not miss a single drop of blood from the wound in order to avoid making matters worse for a long time.
Donc yeu engen agui e cauterizegui le guolayro de lu, donc astec de addicio; e aprop yeu perambulegui e no saubi que fec Dieus de aquela aprop mi.	 Then you should gently remove the cloth from his back and clean it as well, after that you should bandage him properly without getting too close to the wounds.
Capitol .xxxvii.	 Chapter XXXVII
De inscizio de huvela quan es apostemada.	 When an abscess is opened.
Quan catarr deysen a la huvula, e es apostemada e es longa, lahoras ela es nompnada perpendicular; e si es en la partida dejos grossa e redonda, e lahoras ela es apelada buba.	 When the catarrh is open and long, the pains are called paroxysmal; if it's in a large and rounded part, they are called bubonic.
Mays quan es curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio, e no comfereys la tua curacio, e eyssament ja vezes que apostema caut ja es ostat de lu e es subtil, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquela que es agreguadas redonda; e si es ad aquela longitut, e es sanguina, de fusca color o de negre, e no es a lu centiment, lahoras cove que tu temtes la inscizio de lu, quar en aquela es temor sobre le malaute.	 Then when the abscess is cured as mentioned in the division and you do not worry too much about your care, but sometimes an arrow may have entered him and be very subtle; so if it's into a round part or long and bloody, with a red color or black one that does not cover the entire length of them, then pains arise from the abscess itself which is feared by the patient.
E quan tu vezes aquela segon la manieyra que yeu he dita de la sua blancor e longuesa, que tu fassas sezer le malaute e premas la lengua de lu am instrument del qual procesic la sua forma e aprop fica le onci en la nuva, e tira aquela en jos e inscideys aquela am un de dos instrumentz les quals e ditz en la inscizio de dos mellas.	 "When you have entered the second stage of the procedure where one must remove his or her gag reflex and extend their tongue as far back as possible, then fix it in place with a clamp on each side to hold it securely in position for the following steps.
E cove que no inscidas aquela sino aquo que es ajustat sobre le terme natural ses addicio, quar si tu inscides de lu mays, lediyras le sieu parlar.	 "Once inserted and adjusted to its proper position at the back of the throat, you should then proceed with speaking as usual.
E aprop la inscizio, usa de aquo le qual havem recomtat en la inscizio de dos mellas, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	 "Once inserted and adjusted to its proper position at the back of the throat, use that which we recommended in the previous step, and check it for any damage.
Mays si era le malaute espaventat per la inscizio de lu, cove que use de engen en la cauterizacio de lu ses temor, e la manieyra del cauteri en lu no es sino am aygua aguda, e es que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop prem la lengua de lu am le instrument le qual havem dit, e aprop pren de l’aygua la qual havem dita en le capitol de cauterizacio, e comfeys am aquela caus viva, e pausa aquela no spessa ni subtil, e de aquela omple la concavitat de l’estrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	 "If the patient is panicking during the insertion of the tube, use caution in the cauterization process and make sure to keep their head still while performing the procedure. Before inserting it into place, ensure that you have warmed up water as recommended from the previous step, and then gently insert the tube back into their mouth with a gentle touch, making sure not to cause any bleeding or discomfort.
Sia la extramitat de lu conquavitat en la qual sia pausada la medicina ayssi cum la conquavitat de culher de ray, e pausa le strument am la medicina sobre la vula, e·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu latz per so que corro saliva o musellage de la boca de aquel per la intrinscequa medicina, per so que no deyssenda de aquela deguna causa sobre le golayro de lu e que ledesca aquel.	 "In the meantime of their airway being obstructed by their swelling or a foreign object, pause medical treatment over their throat and place the tube on top of their vocal cords to ensure that any saliva or mucus from their mouth will not enter through this intrinsic medicine, so as to prevent any choking hazard for them.
E aprop te la tua ma am la medicina, e exprem aquela sobre la uvula per l’espazi de miega hora entro que vegas aquela esser denegrada e sedada per la mordicacio de la medicina.	 "You should apply your hand to the patient's mouth and hold it open for some time so that saliva is not allowed inside, in order to prevent infection by medicine cuts.
E si vols, prengues coto e envolopes aquel sobre la extremitat del ray, e submergeys le coto en la medicina, e entrometas le ray am le coto en una canula de sobre entro que·l coto adheresca en aquela canula, e fay aquo tantas vetz entro que consiegues aquo que vols de la cauterizacio de la uva, e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela se seccara e cayra aprop tres dias o quatre.	 "If you wish to prevent bleeding from the catheter, take a cotton swab and apply it on the extremity of the vein, immerse it in medicine, insert it into the catheter as mentioned above so that it adheres to the catheter, and then proceed with cauterization of the vein. This will help prevent the clot from becoming dry and may last for three or four days.
E si indigeysses que iteras la medicina, itera aquela, e aprop la cauterizacio abstergeys en le circuit de la uva am coto enbegut en boder, e mondifica am aquel aquo que es en le circuit de lu de la medicina, e sia lavat am aygua frega, e sia curat deforo am embrocacio, e dedintz am guarguarismes entro que sia sanat.	 "If you need to administer medicine, apply it and then proceed with the cauterization of the vein on top of the catheter in order for it to go into the circuit of your body's medicine, and make sure that you wash thoroughly after administering the medicine, as well as cleaning the wounds if necessary.
E aquesta especia de curacio es pus salva que inscizio e pus long de temor.	 "This special cure is very dangerous and should be avoided at all costs.
Alcunas veguadas es curada la uvuola am aquo que es pus subtil que cauteri e inscizio, quar es curat am subfumigacio en aquesta manieyra: recipe calament, ysop, origua, ruda, scicados arabic, camamilla, broyda e semblant ad aquels de las erbas, e ajusta totas aquelas causas, o alcunas de lor, en una ola, e sian submergidas am vi agre, e bulhan; e la ola sia be lutada am lut decentment, e sia en le mieg loc de la ola un trauc, sobre le qual sia pausat un instrument conquau de aram segon aquesta manieyra; sia fayt de argent o de aram.	 "One cure that is applied in a very subtle way and prevents infection: apply calmly, slowly, gently, cautiously, cautiously, and gradually, smoothly, steadily, steadily, with all herbs mentioned above, adjust their causes, some of which are taken together into one mixture, and submerge them in the wind; then place it in the middle of the mixture, over which a pointed instrument is placed to prevent it from falling off. Then put either silver or gold on top.
E sia entromesa la extremitat en la boca del malaute entro que la vapor poge a la uvula sobre la quanula, entro que la uvula sia mot ofuscada.	 The patient's neck is swelling up as the air enters through his/her larynx and into their voice box, making it difficult to open their mouth due to the swelling.
E aprop itera sobre aquela motas veguadas entro qu’es secca, e guarda te que no fassas aquesta curacio al comesament de l’aveniment de apostemas, quar trop ajustaria en le apostema, e no cove que tu fassas aquo, sino deves la declaracio de apostema de lu caut.	 To prevent the tongue from becoming swollen and dry when swallowing, it is recommended to avoid making excessive pressure on the larynx during swallowing, as this could cause it to swell further, so please refrain from doing this unless you need to perform a laryngoscopy.
Mays si no es a tu present aquest instrument, lahoras pren una cana e compon en la extramitat de lu un clos de huou, per so que la boca del malaute sia comborida, quar le closc del huou prohibeys la vapor comburir la boca.	 If you do not have this tool, the doctor will place a piece of cloth in the patient's mouth to prevent their breath from entering through their throat and causing further discomfort.
E aquesta curacio es bona am salut.	 This procedure is good for health.
Capitol .xxxviii.	 The end.
De extraccio d’espinas e de aquo que adhereys en le golayro e de las autras causas.	 Extracting spines and such things that stick in the throat, like hairs or objects.
Motas veguadas adhereys en le guolayro o spina de peys o alcuna autra causa.	 Swollen mucous membranes sticking to the throat due to phlegm, mucus, or other causes.
Adonc cove que tu extraguas aquo que de aquels es apparent, sobre le qual catz la vista, pus que tu premes la lengua am instrument denant solelh, per so que a tu sia declarat aquo que es en la guola.	 If you are extracting from the latter mentioned part and it appears as if this is in the larynx, please insert your tongue into the instrument just before removal to ensure that this is indeed in the glottis.
E aquo que no apar e es a tu occultat en le guolayro, cove que tu fassas vomir le malaute denant que la vianda sia degerida en l’estomac, quar fort leu la causa annexsa le golayro sira foro-getada per vomit; o que deglusia le malaute una pessa de nap o de razit de laytuga o un boci de pa sec; o prengua una pessa de sponga marina sequa leon, e lia aquela fortment am fiel, e aprop le malaute transglussia aquela, quar cum perve al loc en le qual so spinas e es extrahuda, lahoras so foro-getatz.	 If this is the case and you suspect it may have been swallowed into the stomach, please make the patient vomit to induce vomiting in order to remove whatever has caused the obstruction from their esophagus; or alternatively, offer them a piece of bread soaked in salt water if they are able to eat normally, as this will help alleviate the discomfort while gently clearing any obstructions that could be causing it. Or you may prepare a solution of warm saline and give them a sip, ensuring they drink slowly so as not to provoke further coughing or retching; then observe their response closely as the substance is extracted through the opening in which it was removed from, observing for signs of aspiration and ensuring nothing has been missed.
E mays pren una anguila e be am fiel liada, e sia dedintz mesa e soptament sia extrayta; o pren un porr e soptament le metas e soptament l’en tratz.	 When you have opened the space between the patient's thighs and placed a cushion under them, place another servant on their legs and another on their chest, holding their hands to prevent the patient from moving around.
Mays si no so foro-getatz am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas, lahoras husa de un instrument de plom segon aquesta forma:	 It is customary for the physician to use a second tool made of lead in order to perform this way
E sia pus gros que ray un petit, e en la extramitat de lu sia conquavitat la qual tu entrometas en la sua guola am facilitat.	 If it is too large, or if the extra space around that area becomes too cramped to allow for easy entrance into its cavity.
E el aga le sieu cap elevat en sus, e guarda te que·l tocament del sieu os de la gola, per so que endevengua a lu cos e am aquela que enpellesca le os o la spina, o que aquel le metge am la sua ma.	 The physician will lift the patient's head and place their hand over the patient's mouth to prevent them from biting or choking on it, or that they put a finger in their nose
Mays empero que·l malaute aquel entrometa es miels, per la sua sciencia del loc de la causa annexa e enpellisca en jos, e tira la sua ma am le instrument en sus, tot aquo segon la quantitat la qual es a lu preparada entro que sia foro-getada.	 It is possible that the patient will enter with their own hand in order to avoid touching or inserting anything into it, depending on how much space around its opening has been prepared.
Capitol .xxxix.	
De extraccio de sancguisugua annexsa al golayro.	 To remove the sacubiguitas from the gullet.
Quan es medicada sanguisugua am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la curacio am medicinas e no comfereys, considera lahoras en le guolayro del malaute al solelh, pus que tu aias compremuda la lengua de lu am instrument le qual a tu havem recomtat.	 When administering an enema without interference from the medicine, consider placing it in the gullet of the patient and use the tool recommended by your doctor to remove any obstructions that may be present.
Donc si tu vezes la sancguisugua, extratz aquela am onci petit o am gesti subtils decentment.	 When gout pain occurs due to cold humors infiltrating each part of the body, particularly in the feet, it is traditionally referred to as "gout" by physicians.
E si no es a tu possible estrayre am aquel, lahoras pren una canula concava e entromet aquela en lo guolayro del malaute, e aprop pausa en la concavitat de la canula un ferr ignit, e fay aquo tantas vetz (entro que la sancguisugua sia morta e se osta del guolayro) e abstengua se le malaute tot lo jorn de aygua.	 If it is not possible to extract the gout from that location due to certain circumstances, such as if the gout attack has already ended or there are no more of them, then the physician will insert a small and thin needle into the concave area around the patient's urethra (the opening in males), light a fire under its base, and prevent water ingress until the gout attack has passed.
E aprop prengua una veyria plena de aygua frega, e obra la boca de lu en aquela, e lava la boca am aquela; e no trasglucia de aquela alcuna causa e maugua l’aygua una hora aprop autra am la sua ma, quar la sancguisugua tantost cum sent l’aygua catz.	 Then the physician will take a full bowl of water and pour it into that area, rinsing out their mouth in that way; then rinse your own mouth with that same amount of water as well.
Mays si no es foro-getada am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras subfumigua le malaute am cimetz o am assafetida per le instrument le qual havem recomtat en la sufumiguacio de uvula.	 If the physician believes it to be a good idea, they will swab or apply something cold and damp from what was used in that procedure onto the patient's tongue or the tip of their tongue.
Fay aquo, so en quar cayra.	 And then you are done with this matter.
E es un’autra manieyra de operacio en sufumiguacio de aquela, es que tu prenguas una ola en la qual sian carbos ignitz e la ola sia cuberta am una cobertora en le mieg de la qual sia un trauc, e sia compausat en aquel trauc la extremitat del instrument; e aprop dega desus la subfumigacio; e pause le malaute la sua boca en la extremitat de la canula, e claugua la sua boca per que la subfumiguacio no sia foro-getada entro que sapias que la subfumigacio es pervenguda a la sancguisugua, quar la sancguisugua tantost cayra.	 Another way to perform this procedure is by using an olive oil soaked cloth that covers the tip of the instrument used for this purpose; place it over such a patch on the patient's lips and wrap their mouth around it so as not to miss any part of the procedure, except perhaps where you feel that the sub-freezing has caused or been caused by gout.
E si no catz, lahoras tu itera la subfumiguacio motas vetz, e abstengua le malaute de beure, e mange causas saladas e alhs, e no begua aygua, e ayssi necessari es que am aquest regiment sia fora-getada.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body and the feet are affected, doctors call it gout.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument am le qual es trayta sancguisugua del guolayro quan es vista; e es semblant a forceps ayssi cum vezes, sino quar es en lu alcuna curvitat:	 This is the form of an instrument that is used to straighten out any crooked things when it is seen. It's similar to forceps in some ways, but unlike them in their shape.
le qual sia mesa al guolayro, e la extremitat de lu es semblant a bec de ciconia, que es guanta, en la qual es aspretat de lima, per so quar, quan comprem alcuna causa, aquela no leyssa.	 That is the form of an instrument that goes to the crooked thing and its extremity is similar to the beak of a stork which grasps it, in such a way that when any cause is found, they grab it.
Capitol .xl.	 May I know what does this mean?
En le qual es la suma del sermo en apercio de apostemas e en seccio de lor.	 The sum of the words in the beginning and end of the sentence.
Les apostemas so motas specias, de motas manieyras, segon que ve rememoracio de lor, de quascuna en aquest libre.	 The commas are special letters that mean a pause or a brief rest when you remember their positions in this free text.
E so diversas en perforacio e seccio de lor per doas manieyras, de las quals la una es per la specia de apostemas en si meteys; e per aquo que comprem de las humiditatz.	 They are different in the positions of opening and closing them through two ways: one is to mark a special kind of letter within it for that purpose, another by using commas. And because we want to make sure they're clear.
E la segonda manieyra es prop les locs en les quals accideys del cos, quar le apostema accident en le cap es autra de la apostema accident en le cul; e le apostema en le loc carnos accident es autra del apostema accident en junctura; e a quascun de lor es son juguament per operacio.	 The second way is to place them in the places where you might get hurt, so an accidental one on top may be different from the one at the bottom, and the one that occurs at the knee will be different than the one at the joint. And each of these must be performed separately by operation.
E mays de apostemas so alcunas las quals cove que no sian perforadas sino aprop maturacio de la sania en aquels o compliment de lor.	 The first sentence translates to: "To make sure all holes are closed, except those that were opened.
So autras apostemas les quals cove que sian traucatz quan son cruzes, e no son maturatz segon lor compliment, ayssi cum apostemas que son propdas a las juncturas, quar apostema quan ve prop junctura, lo esser de lu es prolonguat entro que·s poyreys aquo que es en le circuit de lu, e fort leu son corromputz les liamentz o les nervis de aquela junctura, per que es fayta causa de contraccio de aquel membre; o es apostema prop de membre principal, e si tu tardas la perforacio de lu entro sia madurat nosira al membre principal; o es prop le cul, donc perfora aque no-madurat; e no cove que·l perforas cru, de no-complida degestio, sino aquel que es prop del cul, per so que no poyresca le preon de lu e sia elonguat a las partidas dedintz del cul, e sia fayta fistula, o que sia fayt en le terme de lu que no sia sanat.	 The first sentence is describing the steps taken to treat a hernia that has already been opened (the "first" part of the sentence refers to this). It includes several clauses about closing other holes and making sure they are not accidentally reopened during the treatment process, especially if it's in the abdominal area.
Mays cove que tu sapias la hora de la perforacio de la apostema, e aysso es quan es maturat.	 The second sentence translates to: "You know the time when you have opened up the hole [or 'the aperture'], and that's when it is mature.
E sapias que es madurat quan es la cedacio de la dolor e la cessacio de la febre, e aprop la diminucio de la rogor e de la pulsacio, e la acuitat del cap del apostema, e les autres senhals.	 The third sentence translates to: "You know when it is mature that the pain and fever have subsided, and you apply the reduction of swelling and pulse, the sharpness of the aperture, and other nerves.
E quar cove que sapias la perforacio cazer en le loc pus dejos del apostema e de pus venient de curacio de la eminencia.	 The fourth sentence translates to: "You know when to perform an incision at this place [in the abdomen], and how to act in case of emergencies.
E perforacio tostemps sia per le lonc de la carn o del cors, si las apostemas son en las partidas de las mas o dels pes, e en loc dels lacertz, de las cordas dels nervis, de las arcerias; e, al derier, en totz locs enguals en les quals no es reflecio; quar en aquels que so reflectitz, usa de perforacio segon aquel membre.	 The fifth sentence translates to: "The incision should be made at the level of the skin or chest if it is in the areas near the most [or 'nearby'] major organs and nerves, and any other location where reflection occurs; but when they are not reflective, use the incision for that member.
Mays quan le apostema es en loc carnos, lahoras miels es que leysses la perforacio de lu entro que sia confermada la digestio de lu segon compliment, ayssi quo havem dit; quar si tu perforas aquel denant aquo, es prolonguat le cors del poyre de lu e de mota sordicia, e fort leu las labias de lu so enduradas e la profunditat de lu.	 "When the anus is opened in a place where it cannot be confirmed that digestion of it has been completed, as we have said; if you perforate it during this time, it will prolong the suffering and cause severe pain to both the buttocks and the depth.
Mays alcus apostemas so perforatz segon la latitut de la carn o del cos deves la necessitat, o segon aquo del qual lo membre indigeys.	 "When you open an anus in a place where this is necessary or if it is of the member that matters.
E cove que administres petita perforacio , e·n les apostemas grans gran perforacio e ampla o motas seccios segon la diversitat de la grandesa dels apostemas.	 "When administering a small incision, in large incisions or wide ones depending on the diversity of their size.
E autras so dels apostemas en les quals cove que la codena sia conquavada e sia encidida, quan es fayta ayssi quo pan e fayta es en terme que ja stigua, ayssi cum aquel que accideys en trops de dubelec e de bubos.	 "Then the abscesses in which the cavity has been opened and closed when it is done in that way as it was said; but also when you happen to come across a lot of bubbles.
E de aquels so que so insciditz am seccio havent tres angles; e de aquels es en le qual es inscidit ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirtra, ayssi cum las apostemas dels angonars.	 "Of those in which the abscess has three corners; of those it is done like a funnel or the corners.
E de lor so en les quals es administrada seccio redonda e seccio lunar, e semblantz ad aquels.	 "Then there are ones where round and crescent incisions are administered; as well as these.
Mays aquel al qual no es cap ayssi cum son apostemas leons superficials, cove que tu perforas aquel am perforacio superficial, o plana tant solament.	 "Then one like that which is not so with superficial abscesses, if you make a perforation of it by making a superficial incision or flat only.
E cove quant le apostema es gros e ya ha colligit mota sania, que perfores aquel e no te coytes que extraguas tot le poyre en aquela hora; habantz extratz de aquel una partida, e aprop opila le apostema entro al autre dia, e aprop extratz una partida major, e aprop fa aquo motas veguadas segon graduacio entro que sia foro-getat.	 "And when the abscess is large and has collected a lot of pus, do not try to extract it all at once; have patience and wait for one day, then take it out in two parts, and afterwards, if necessary, you can remove another part gradually as well.
E majorment si·l malaute es de freol vertut, o femna prens, o enfant petit, o viel en decrepitut, quar l’esperit animal motas vetz es resolvut am la egressio de la sania, e fort leu mor le malaute, e tu operte les.	 When a patient is experiencing gout caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet or toes, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
Don guarda aquest capitol am gran cautela, e aprop la tua perforacio en la qual perforas aquestz apostemas, cove que abstergescas las plagues e consideras donc si la plagua del apostema es pauca, o es una seccio plana, lahoras tu aministra las qualguas de li o de coto antic; e si le apostema es gran, e las fissuras de la perforacio son motas, lahoras cove que tu pauses meca en quascun trauc entro que pervenguan ensemps.	 Please be cautious when making a hole in which you want to insert the needles, and consider whether or not the seal of the needle is tight, as well as if there are any fractures from the puncture itself; and if the seal is large enough and the wounds from the puncture are minimal, then proceed.
E si en le apostema es abscindit una partida de la codena o has concavada aquela en le circuit, lahoras cove que tu la complescas de coto viel o de fil fayt de drap de li, ayssi cum quan has traytz pans o razizos, ses humiditat; e strenh aquel entro al tertz dia; e aprop proceseys aquel e cura le am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	 If the seal of the needle is broken or bent in some way that causes a circuit to be created inside it, then you should fill and wrap the thread around it as soon as possible; and after wrapping around three times, tie it tightly at its center. Then place it on where you want to sew so that no harm comes from entering there.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc en la hora de la operacio tua, lahoras tu aministra aygua frega e vi agre en les quals mules un drap de li, e pausa aquel sobre le loc del fluxs del sanc motas veguadas.	 If there is bleeding during your operation, you should apply cold water and press on the cloth where it was applied to stop the bleeding; then place a bandage over the area of the bleed as soon as possible.
Mays si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras cove que tu aministres regiment e curacio e polveras las quals he recomtadas en motz locs de aquest nostre libre e de divisio.	 If bleeding persists after applying cold water and pressure on the cloth, you should apply ointments and care as recommended in different locations throughout this book of ours.
Mays si es en temps de hivern, e·l loc de la apostema es loc de motz nervis, lahoras cove que tu enfundas pulvils en vi e oli caut, e pauses aquels sobre les locs.	 When it's winter time and the place of the stomach is a location for nerves, then pain occurs when you infiltrate dust with moisture and apply it to the area
E si es en estiu, e les locs son carnoses, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils enbeguts am aygua e oli o am vi e oli, e tot aquo sia freg entro que sia le ters dia, ayssi cum havem dit, e lahoras cove que tu deslies le apostema e abstergescas aquel e aministres en la curacio de lu aquo que a lu conveneys entro que sia sanat.	 When it's summer time and the places are hot, then pain occurs when you sprinkle dust with water or oil, and do so until that place is cool
E aysso es aquo que es necessari de la cognicio de la curacio de apostemas universalment, mays segon la via de distinccio ja he dit de tot apostema en qual manieyra es via de la cura de lu per capitols singularment.	 That is to say that generally it's necessary to have a general understanding of how to perform the treatment on all sores universally, but secondly for distinguishing between different types of sores individually.
Capitol .xli.	 The 51st Capitular
De seccio de apostemas les quals veno en la codena del cap.	 Section of sores that occur on the head
En la codena del cap petitz apostemas, e so de specias de nodes les quals conteno tunicas que so a lor factz ; e las specias de lor so motas.	 On the head there are sores and specific types of sores that contain garments that should be removed; such as boils or carbuncles
E de lor son pingas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditat semblant a lima.	 And for those ones containing moisture similar to lime.
E de aquelas so las quals conteno humiditat semblant a pols, et asemblantz a lor; e de aquelas so que son lapideas, durs.	 For sores that contain humidity similar to soot and are rough; and for sores that resemble blisters, tough.
E en la seccio de totz, e en la extraccio de aquels no es temor, cum deves la exteccio de aquels no fa contrariat arceria.	 In the section of all and in the extraction from those there is no fear; as long as you do not cause harm to them.
E la operacio en seccio de aquels es que tu esproes aquels am instrument la forma del qual ve aprop aysso, le qual es apelat entromes, entro que sapias que contengua.	 The operation is divided into two parts as you have learned how to use the instrument that you are using now, which is called an embolectomy, in order to know
Quar si aquo que conte es humiditat, lahoras scindeys aquel am seccio segon la longitut per seccio superficial segon aquesta forma:	 After this operation on the second section, doctors will perform a further subdivision into two parts. The first part is to cut through the humidity of the joint, and then move laterally along the surface for that division
E comensa en la seccio de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G. Donc cum la humiditat es evacuada, lahoras tu excoria aquela pel que conte aquela humiditat, e no leysses de aquela alcuna causa de tot, quar tropas veguadas retorna, si roman de aquela alcuna causa.	 After the humidity has been removed from section B to section G of that joint, they then remove the part which contained that humidity and do not consider it as a cause for anything else, unless Roman is in that part.
E aprop submergeys coto en enguent egipciach, si es present, e sino, en aygua e sal; e umpleys am aquel la plagua e layssa aquel entro ad autra dia, quar am aquo corrodeys tot so que es romas de aquela pellicula.	 Then take it into the water and salt if that is available, otherwise just use water alone. And after doing this on every other day as well to prevent the corrosive damage of that film.
E aprop itera sobre aquel coto am enguent egipciach segondament e tersament si indigeyses de lu, entro que·t comfides que no y haia romas alcuna causa de aquela pellicula; lahoras cura la plagua am enguent entro que sia sanada.	 Then they will apply it to the part of that joint second and third times as needed, making sure there is no other cause for that film. And after doing this on every other day as well in order to cure the skin from that film.
E si apostema conte nodi gras, lahoras tu inscideys aquel segon aquesta forma:	 If you want to know if there is fat content, then doctors will insert it into that part of the body following this procedure
am seccio havent forma de crotz, e geta oncis entre doas labias de la seccio e scorsa aquel de tota partida, e esforsa la tua vertut en extraccio de la tunica la qual conte aquel.	 After sectioning through the fascia and extracting it from both sections of that joint and removing its skin, they will stretch out your body to extract that tissue.
Mays si a tu arceria fa contrarieta, lahoras fay aquo que yeu t’e recontat primieyrament.	 When one's arm is contrary to nature (meaning that the person has arthritis), doctors call this gout.
E semblantment fay en le apostema lapificat de seccio e de curacio segon que a tu havem dit; e seccio sobre apostema lapificat es pus leugiera, quar es de pauc sanc e de pauca humiditat.	 Similarly, if the appendix is afflicted with secretion and infection following what has been said (meaning that someone has appendicitis), doctors call this gout.
E alcunas vetz so alcus de aquestz apostemas les quals so en le cap en alcus homes am los quals de tot no es humiditat; la qual causa es quar yeu inscindigui sobre un apostema en le cap de una femna vielha e atrobegui le apostema ayssi cum peyra sorda, aspra, blanqua, la qual no podia esser trinquada, e si a alcu fos am aquela percussit, plaguera aquel.	 Some veins are affected by this condition in the head of some men whose veins have never been wet; it causes that when a vein is struck there, it will cause pain and be unable to be tied up tightly, unless immediately treated with vinegar or white vinegar
Mays en les autres apostemas accidentz en le cap otra aquest no es aquest capitol, ayssi cum les apostemas que veno als caps dels enfantz e deves las razitz de las aurelhas, mays la seccio de aquestz totz sia seccio superficial.	 The other veins that are affected in the head will not be this severe like those that come to heads of children and adults alike; it is a superficial secretion.
E pausa la perforacio de aquels de la partida pus bassa de lor per so que sia alleujat le cos de la sania a las partidas pus bassas.	 Stop the puncture below which will be relieved as the body's balance is restored to its normal state at these lower levels.
E aprop cura aquelas am aquo que conveneys ad aquel de curacio.	 Then apply treatment here that addresses both conditions.
Capitol .xlii.	 The end of the text.
De seccio de scrophulas las quals accideyso en le col.	 Secretion from the bowels which causes irritation in the belly
Motas veguadas endeveno aquestas apostemas en le colh e en las aysselhas e en les angonars; e alcunas veguadas accideyso en las autras partidas del cos.	 These veins are affected by this condition in the colon and elsewhere, affecting other parts of the body as well.
E so aquelas que accideysso en le colh, e so motas que so engendradas entre lor, e tota scrofula de aquelas es dintz la sua tunica propria, e ayssi cum en les nodis e apostema del cap, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	 When the pain occurs in the belly, and it is accompanied by a swelling of the parts between its sides, and every part of that has that affliction is to blame for his own clothing being torn, then you must come forward with your remedies
E las specias de aquestas scrophulas son motas, quar de aquelas so alcunas lapideas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditatz, e de aquelas so malignas las quals no obeseysso a curacio.	 The particular symptoms of these sores are swollen lumps that contain moisture and are malignant in nature
Donc en aquela la qual tu vezes de bona disposicio en le Tocament, de la qual la color de aquo que es manifest es propda a la color de la codena, e es mauguda a tota partida, e no es annexsa am le nervi del colh, ni am las venas, ni am la arceria, e no es preonda, cove que tu inscidiscas aquela am siccio superficial de la partida desus a la partida dejos del cos de la linha de .G. entro la linha de .B., e scorja aquela de tota partida, e exten dos labias de la codena am onci, o am motz oncis si has necessitat de aquels, ayssi cum havem dit en las apostemas del cap, e extratz aquela petit a petit.	 In that particular case where you are disposed to touch it with the proper touch, as its color indicates, and is extremely harmful in any part of the body, do not attach yourself to any surface inside or outside, unless absolutely necessary; but if you need to make those points on the chest, then proceed.
E es mays cautela que no sia inscidida la vena o nervi.	 You must be very careful not to damage the vein or nerve.
E sia le spatum no mot agut, que no ajuste a tu la tua ma am inscizio, o que enquiete le malaute, e que inscidas aquo que no es necessari inscidir; quar si inscideysses vena o arceria e prohibeys tu de la tua operacio, lahoras pausa en la plagua vetriol trissat o autras polveras las quals ostan fluxs de sanc, e estrenh la plagua, e layssa aquel entro que·s repausa la acuitat de la apostema e sia mollificada la plagua e comense esser poyrida.	 You must not be too rough when touching the patient and should not adjust your touch or apply any medicine unless it is necessary; if you hurt a vein or artery, then stop immediately from doing so; for these reasons, paste on cloth some corrosive substances that will flow out of the abscess after being applied to heal quickly and soften the abscess.
Quan le sanc es abscindit.	 When joint pain occurs
Donc retorna a la tua operacio entro que l’aias complida.	 And then return to your operation after you have completed it.
E aprop inquireys am le tieu dit indic si es romas alcuna causa de las autras petitas scrophulas, donc inscideys aquelas e munda aquelas.	 Then check if there are any other causes of the pains that may be related to these small lumps.
E si es en la razit de la scrophula gran vena, cove lahoras que no inscidas aquela scrophula de la sua razitz.	 If it is in a large vein's area, then you should not have checked that particular lump of the body part.
Abantz cove que lies aquela am fiel doblat fort e que leysses aquela entro que caia per si ses nocument.	 Make sure to push it gently and test if any bleeding occurs before closing it.
E aprop omple la plagua de coto vielh le qual tu has ja submirgit en enguent egipciac, e aprop cura aquel.	 Then apply a plaster that you have already used on the patient's chest and care for it.
E si inscides aquela scrophula tota, lahoras cove que tu ajustes las doas labias de la plagua e cuzas2 tantost pus que no y ha romasa deguna superfluitat.	 If you find all the lumps then apply two plasters on each of the wounds and ensure there is no extra gauze required.
Mays si tu vezes que haia romasa superfluitat per la grandeza de la scrofula, cove que tu entendas a inscidir la razit de aquela, e astrayra aquela e aministra sutura e aquo que es dit.	 If you have found too many lumps due to the size of the lump itself then consider inspecting that area and treating it separately while also addressing the other wounds.
E aquela de las scrophulas que conteno humiditatz, perfora aquela am perforacio superficial aqui la on appar a tu le loc de maturacio de lu, e pausa perforacio de aquo que siec le pus bas del cos, ayssi cum havem dit.	 The lumps that contain moisture should be pricked with a superficial needle in the area where it appears to you and pause puncturing of this for as long as there is no further bleeding from the body, like I said before.
E aprop aministra perforacio, calguas am enguent e semblantz ad aquels, per so que corroda aquo que es romas de la corropcio.	 Then apply puncturing, checking and attending to those wounds until it is determined that the source of bleeding has been found.
E aprop quan tu vezes la plagua ja esser mundada, lahoras tu cura aquela am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanada.	 When you have opened a wound that has already been infected, then treat it as soon as possible before the infection is cured
Capitol .xliii.	 Chapter thirty-three
De seccio del pilhot del apostema accident dintz le guolayro.	 From the section of the apostle's wound, drain off the pus
Diyssero les antics aquesta seccio en le epilhot, e no vist alcu hom en nostra terra que aquela aia fayta.	 Drain out all the pus from that section and do not show it to anyone in our land
E aquesta es la inscriptura del sermo de aquels.	 This is an excerpt from the sermon of those.
Mays en les homes haventz esquinencia, cove que sia esquivada la extraccio del epilhot, cum per aquo no sia fayt juvament per so quar totas las venas e las majors del malaute so aqui.	 In the houses of those who are poor, it is customary to avoid showing them anything from the wound, unless you want to show only veins and major arteries here.
Mays en aquels que han apostemas cautz en la boca o guolayro o dos aurelhas, quan la malautia no es en la cana, cove husar de la seccio de epilhot a fugir la perdicio la qual es fayta per perfocacio.	 In those who have apostles' wounds in the mouth or ear, when illness is not in the neck, do not apply the section of the wound to prevent infection.
Donc cove quan volem aquo, que inscidam le epilhot dejos tres cercles dels cercles del epilhot, o quatre am petita seccio per la latitut en aquel que es entre dos cercles per quantitat, que la seccio sia en ciphac, no en la cartillage, e aquest loc es convenent a seccio, quar es privat de carn e les vayselhs de sanc de lu son luhen.	 Therefore, when we want to do this, put the wound into three or four sections of the wound, or divide it into small pieces along lines that are halfway between two circles in length and width; place each section on a separate dressing so as not to damage it and ensure privacy is maintained.
E si le metge es pauruc, cove lahoras que extenda la codena del golayro am onci, e aprop fenda la codena entro que pervengua a la canal, mays evite les vaysels de sanc si vetz de aquelas alcuna causa.	 If the doctor is fearful that exposing the wound to air will worsen it, cover the wound and prevent any other cause of infection.
E aprop inscida li ciplach segon que havem recomtat; e es significat sobre la seccio de la canal per le flacma le qual es de aquela eyssit am aquo que es de lu disromput e per la abscizio de la votz.	 "The first step is to cleanse the affected area as recommended, meaning wash it with water
E layssa la plagua uberta per alcun temps.	 "Once you have applied the poultice, leave it undisturbed for some time.
Donc cum la hora es remauguda en la qual perforacio es temuda, agregua doas labias de la codena de la plagua, e cus aquela sola ses la cartillage.	 "After the poultice has been applied and left undisturbed for a while, add two sheets of cloth soaked in water to it.
E aprop administra medicinas que fan naysser la carn entro que sia sanat.	 "Then administer medicines that help the flesh recover from being burned.
E diyssec Albucasis que la summa del sermo le qual havem recomtat, exposicio no es sino que veias que alcus de aquetz apostemas ja han opilat lo guolayro del malaute, e le malaute es vengut entro a mort, e le ale de lu es entresecat, e alcus van a inscidir le epiglos per so que respire le malaute sobre le loc de la plagua per alcuna respiracio, e sia salvat de mort.	 "Then apply the poultice to the affected area as recommended by doctors and try to prevent further infection of the wound, because if left untreated it may lead to death.
E per aquo comandero layssar la plagua uberta entro que sia consumida la malicia de la malautia; e es la malicia de lu per tres dias; e donc lahoras comandero cosi la plagua, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	 "After that, apply the poultice to prevent the spread of infection and leave it on for three days.
E aquo que yeu he vist per mi meteys, es que una sirventa pres un cotel e mesec le en le sieu golayro e inscidic am aquel una partida de la cana del pulmo, e yeu fu apelat a la curacio de lu, e atrobegui la mugen ayssi cum es mugit del moridos, e descubrigui la plagua e atrobegui le sanc le qual era yssit de la plagua petit.	 "Once you have taken care of the other things (as recommended), ask a servant to cut open his chest and make an incision in his lung, then ask another servant to apply medicine over it as he is coughing heavily.
Donc yeu fo confessat que aquela no havia inscidit vena ni guidegi, e le vent yssia de la plagua, e curegui aquela entro que foc sanada.	 When you first confessed that there was no vein or guide-vein found, he advised you to apply a warm compress
E no accidic a la sirventa si no rauquiera en la votz, e aprop alcus dias retornec ad miloracio de las suas dispozicios.	 And if the servant did not agree in returning the favor, and it was necessary for you to go first.
E ara dic yeu que en la seccio del epilhot no ha temor.	 Now I tell you that there is no fear in the section of the episode.
Capitol .xliv.	 At this point, it seems that the author has reached the end of their text and wishes to conclude with a phrase or statement about the subject matter they have discussed.
De seccio sobre apostema le qual accideys en le golayro defora, e es apelat hernia del golayro.	 At this point in the discussion, it seems that the author has reached their conclusion and wishes to conclude with a phrase or statement about the subject matter they have discussed.
Aquest apostema nompnat hernia del golayro es apostema gran segon la color del cors, e es mot en las femnas.	 The final statement is that gout pain occurs in both men and women, but more commonly in men.
E es segon dos manieyras, quar o es natural o accidental.	 And it is the second time of life when it is natural or accidental.
E en le natural no es engen de curar.	 In the natural there is no cure for gout.
E l’accidental es segon dos manieyras del qual la un es semblant a nodes grasses, e l’autra manieyra es semblant apostema le qual es fayt per nodacio de arteria, e en aquel es temor.	 The accidental second attack is similar to a heart attack, and in that case there is fear.
E no cove que·s fassa presumpcio a lu cum ferr sino en aquel que es petit.	 Do not assume that it will happen unless the time comes when it happens.
E tu proha aquel e investigua aquel am le dit, e si atrobas lu semblant a nodi gras, e no es suspendut am alcuna de las venas, lahoras tu inscideys aquel ayssi cum les nodes, e extratz aquel am aquo que conte lu de la pel e bursiclam; e sino, lahoras es perscrutat tot le sieu esser, e aprop cura le loc am aquo que cove de curacio entro que sia sanat.	 If you find it similar to a heart attack and no veins are blocked, then you should apply heat immediately to the area of the leg or foot; otherwise, note down what happened in that particular case and call on your doctor for treatment as soon as possible.
Capitol .xlv.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
De seccio de las specias de nodes.	 Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity
Dels nodes so motas specias e yeu ja he dit totas las specias de lor en la divisio.	 Then, you shall take all the parts of the body and divide them
E cove que yeu recomte assi la diferencia entre node e exitura cum fassa dubitacio.	 You must make a distinction between nodes and hernias as well as consider their causes.
Donc yeu dic que am exitura es caliditat e febre e dolors vehementz entro que es sedada la ebullicio de la superfluitat; e es complida putrefaccio que lahora cessa la febre, la dolor e la calor.	 So you are saying that an exiture is caused by cold, fever and severe pain brought on by the excess of phlegm; it also involves decay which stops the fever, pain, and heat.
Mays am node no es caliditat ni febre ni dolor, e conte aquel ciphac leon le qual es al u sac propri.	 A node does not have coldness or fever nor any pain, but rather has a quality which is like the seed of the devil itself.
E es segon la color del cors, e le comensament de lu es cum un ceze e es fayt ayssi cum vace, sia major o minor, e son segon dos specias, quar o so grassas e conteno humiditat, e las colors de la humiditat son motas, segon que yeu diyssi en la divisio.	 It is the second color of the body and its onset feels like a sting or itchiness which then spreads to be either more or less severe depending on how much moisture it contains; and in terms of division, humidity refers to this color as well.
Donc cove, quan pervenas a la curacio de node, que exprohes aquel e inquiras aquel al comensament am sturment le qual es apelat intromes, segon que vindra la sua forma en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	 When you encounter an issue with nodes, check to see if it is also accompanied by the onset of a certain condition called introitus which in time develops into the capital lesion which is known as hemorrhoids.
E es manieyra de inquisicio de apostemas e de totz nodes, e es que tu prenguas aquest sturment e entromet aquel en le loc pus humit le qual atrobas en le apostema, e tu revolveras les tieus ditz am aquel petit a petit entro que sapias que·l sturment ja ha penetrat la codena.	 You should investigate the cause of nodes and check if it is accompanied by another condition called introitus which in time develops into hemorrhoids; as you cleanse that area with water, ensure to gently pull out any foreign bodies one at a time until you know for certain that the lesion has penetrated deep enough.
E aprop ultima la tua ma segon la mesura de la grandeza del apostema, e aprop extratz le entromes e considera aquo que es yssit en le vestigi de lu.	 When you have completed filling in all the lines with their respective translations, reply with "Complete.
E si es fora-getada la humiditat corrent, de qualque color sia, lahoras tu le inscideys am seccio superficial segon que he dit en les autres apostemas.	 If there is a current humidity that may vary in color, then you will apply the incision on the surface of the skin as I mentioned earlier for other spots.
E si del vestigi de l’intromes no hieys humiditat, lahoras sapias que es gras.	 If there is no current humidity at the entrance, then doctors will know it was a mistake.
E secca sobre lu am seccio havent forma de crotz segon aquesta forma:	 Then place the incision in such a way that it does not cross
ayssi cum t’e ensenhat, e suspen aquel am oncis, e excorja la codena de tota part am facilitat, e guarda la pel o sac, si podes, sobre aquel e extraguas aquela sania am le node.	 Then hold the incision closed, and keep it open at its base if possible to facilitate drainage of the entire area; otherwise, just leave it open and cover it with a pad.
Mays si es romput en la operacio, no es possible extrayre aquela sana, e motas veguadas endeve aquo, e lahoras tu la extratz a pessas entro que de lu no romangua denguna causa.	 If it was removed during the operation and cannot be reattached because of some cause, then doctors will treat it as a non-recoverable case.
Quar si de lu roman denguna causa, pauc o trop, le node retorne segon le mays.	 If there is any reason, small or large, the site will reopen in time.
E si tu vezes que de lu roman alcuna part petita, lahoras comple la plagua de alcunas polveras corrosivas agudas e strenh la plagua, e pausa sobre aquela que sede apostema caut, e cura aquel del autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	 If there is any reason that the site reopens in small parts, doctors will apply corrosive substances and stretch it open, and place a pointed cautery over it to cure this other ailment while treating for health.
E si es node gran, lahoras tu cus las doas labias de lu e cura aquel am aquo que encarna.	 If there is no reason the site reopens on its own and doctors will apply two fingers to it and treat that part as well.
Mays si vena pulsatil es a lu contraria, o no-pulsatil, lahoras tu coyta e huemple le loc de zegi trissat que es vetriol e leyssa aquel streyt per dos dias o per tres entro que·s poyresca la plagua e que repause la ebullicio del sanc; e aprop retorna a inscindir aquo que es romas del node.	 When the pulse is slow or absent, you will take and apply it to the place where the veins are twisted so that it may loosen up and relieve the pain; and when applied, return it to the incision made
Capitol .xlvi.	 Chapter 64
De las formas del sturmentz necessaris en seccio e perforacio.	 In section and perforation forms
De aquels so las formas dels intromesas, e so de tres specias, que de aquels es alcu gran, e de lor es migier, e de lor es petit.	 These are the different forms of openings, three in number, great ones being large and small ones being smaller ones, and tiny ones being the smallest ones.
La forma de intromes gran es aquesta:	 The opening form that is big is this one:
La forma de intromes migier es aquesta:	 The opening form which is smaller is this one:
La forma de intromes petit es aquesta:	 The opening form that is small is this one.
Sian faytz de ferr, de alfulud, de extremitatz cayradas decentment, per so que festino le intrament en les apostemas.	 To make it clear
E aquestas so las formas dels experientz, e son nompnatz albered, e un de aquels es apelat berid.	 These are the different forms of experiences and their names are added, and one of these is called "beard.
E so de tres especias, quar de lor es gran, migier e pauc.	 There are three kinds of openings: one big, one smaller, and one small.
La forma de experient gran, forma de lu:	 The opening form that is great one is this one:
La forma de experient migier, forma de lu:	 The opening form which is smaller is this one:
La forma de experient pauc, forma de lu:	 The opening form that is small is this one.
Conveneysso que sian per aquels apostemas e exituras e fistulas e bubos per so que entre aquelas so dels osses e de autras causas.	 This way the openings and ulcers, fistulas and abscesses will be between bones and tendons as causes.
E so faytz redontz, grosses, leons, ayssi cum grans agulhas am las quals son cosidas las selhas, e son faytas de eram citri, o de eram o de ferr, o de argent, E las milhors so quan so faytas de eram citri.	 When the doctor approaches a patient with gout, and places them on their back, he first strikes his bell to announce that there is someone in need of his help.
E son faytz les experient de plum negre, les quals se acordan que per aquels sian ubertas las fistulas en la conquavitat de las quals so reflexios, que sian reflectidas am la sua levitat am aquelas refleccios.	 The doctor then makes a small incision in the patient's abdomen to access the gallbladder and bile duct, reflecting that they are reflected back into his body at these points.
E so de tres specias, quar alcus de lor so loncs, e dels autres migiers, e dels autres breus, segon la quantitat del ample de la fistula e de la strictura de lu.	 The first servant cuts open the space between the ribs and makes a small incision in each of them to access the gallbladder and bile duct, reflecting that he measures according to the amount of length of the fistula opening and the stricture of it.
Forma del experient gran de plom:	 The doctor prepares for the operation by making an incision along his chest from side to side.
Forma del experient migier de plom:	 The second servant makes a smaller incision in each of them, reflecting that they make smaller incisions according to their skill and experience.
Forma del experient petit de plom:	 The third servant cuts into the abdomen and inserts his tools through the small incisions made by the first two servants, reflecting that he is the least skilled among the three of them.
Las formas dels oncis so de motas specias, quar de aquels so alcus simples, als quals es una curvitat solament, e so de tres specias: grans, paucs e migiers.	 The shapes of these incisions are determined by the servants, with some being simple and only having a curve, while others have three servants: large, small, and medium.
E de lor so uncis orps, e so de tres specias.	 And the incision is made as deep as possible to reach all of these organs.
E de aquels so uncis haventz doas curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	 The incisions having curves are cut into by one servant only, and others have three servants: large, small, and medium.
E de lor so haventz tres curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	 Three curves
E totz aquetz so necessaris en lor loc.	 It was necessary in their location
Forma de unci simple gran, forma de lu:	 Simple and straightforward
Forma de unci simple migier:	 The simpler the better
Forma de unci simple pauc, forma de lu:	 The less complicated, the better
Forma de unci orp gran:	 Large form
Forma de unci orp migier, forma de lu:	 A more complex form is needed
Forma de unci orp pauc, forma de lu:	 The simpler the better
Forma de unci gran havent dos curvaturas:	 With two curves
Forma de unci migier havent dos curvatas:	 A less complicated form with two curves
Forma de unci pauc havent dos curvaturas:	 The simpler the better with two curves
Forma de unci gran havent tres curvaturas:	 With three curves
Forma de unci migier havent tres curvaturas:	 A less complicated form with three curves
Forma de unci pauc havent tres curvaturas:	 The simpler the better with three curves
E aquestas so las formas dels scalpels am les quals son seccatz e scorjatz les nodes e le apostemas, e so de tres specias, quar de aquels es gran, migier, e pauc.	 These are the forms of scalpels that will cut and remove the nodes and stakes, and come with three sizes, one large, medium, and small.
Forma de scapel gran:	 Scalpel form
Forma del scapel migier:	 Scalpel form of less complexity
Forma de scapel pauc:	 Scalpel form of the simplest
Las extramitatz de aquels am les quals es fayta seccio so agudas e las autres extramitatz so no-agudas, e no so pausadas en tal manieyra, sino per que sia fayt juvament en la excorjacio dels nodes la temor de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e per aquels sia sanat le malaute e atrobe tranquilitat un petit per la adustio la qual atroba deves la excoriacio del apostema.	 The outside edges of these scalpels have sharp points and the others have blunt tips, but not all are equally sharp, because it is necessary for youth to exercise caution when excising nodes near veins or nerves, as well as for those who may want to avoid causing damage to the patient's skin.
E aquestas son las formas de almagidas, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc, ayssi cum veyras.	 The first sentence translates to "These are the shapes of the liver, and three qualities: great, middle, and small.
La forma de magda gran:	 The shape of a large liver
Forma de magda migier:	 The shape of a medium liver
Forma de magda pauc:	 The shape of a small liver.
Sian faytas de eram e so semblantz de ray am le qual e fayt alcofol.	 These are the shapes from which you can tell that it is alcohol-induced,
E es en la extramitat lada punctada am spatum occultada e en aquela corr a las partidas dedintz e defora, quan tu vols, ayssi cum veses.	 It's in the extraperitoneal cavity and at the level of the hidden perforations and far from those that are open when you want to
Las formas de spatimis, les quals so amaguatz entre los ditz deves la perforacio dels apostemas e no les percebo les malautes, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc.	 The shapes of the spleens that are between the ones you have to make a perforation and not those that are closed, and three qualities: large, middle, and small.
E aquestas so las formas de aquels:	 These are the shapes of those
Las formas de ventozas am las quals es abscindit le flux del sanc, e so de tres specias; gran, migiera e pauca; las formas de lu:	 The shapes of the spleen that is separated from the flow of blood, and three qualities: large, medium, and small.
Sian faytas de eram citri, redondas am alcuna longitut , e sian subtils.	 These are the shapes of the liver with a rounded shape at any length, and subtle ones.
E cove que sian aquestas specias de ventosas deves tu grans, migieras e paucas, per so que per aquelas abscindas flux de sanc am velocitat en necessitat, e lahoras quan a tu primieyrament no es medicina.	 The qualities of the spleen are to be great, medium-sized and small, in order that when there is an obstruction in the flow of blood at speed necessity arises, and doctors call it urgent care when this first occurrence isn't medicine
Enpero no uses de aquelas ad abscidir sanc en tot loc del cors, e non uses sino en locs carnoses, ayssi cum en les lacertis de las cambas e de las coyssas, e en les lacertz dels brasses, e de las mamillas e del ventre e dels engonars, e semblantz a lor dels lacertz carnoses humitz.	 Do not obstruct blood flow in any part of the body except for the veins, arteries, breasts, abdomen and buttocks, and to them belong the knots of the bowels, and are also those of the nipples, the stomach and the groin.
E alcunas veguadas son faytz de aquels strumentz autres petitz semblantz scorsas de fisacs segon aquesta forma; per les quals lo sanc es abscindit quan es fayt per fleubotomia, o deves inscizio de vena o de arceria.	 When certain veins become inflamed from this procedure called phlebotomy, or when a vein is opened due to a wound, the abscess will be discharged.
E alcunas veguadas son faytas redondas segon aquesta forma:	 The specific veins referred to here are round veins of the body.
Capitol .xlvii.	 Chapter 77.
De la cura de las mamillas dels homes las quals so asembladas de femnas.	 For curing the breasts of men that resemble those of women.
Alcunas veguadas so infladas las mamillas de alcus homes deves le compliment del dormir cum comensan esser pellutz, e aprop so infladas las mamillas, e so asembladas las mamillas de las femnas, e romano apostemosas, lejas.	 When certain veins become inflamed in the breasts of some men who resemble women, it is customary to apply a compress and let them remain thus inflamed until they fall off.
E ad aquel que avoreys aquo, cove que inscidisca aquelas am seccio lunar segon aquesta forma, de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G., e aprop excorja la groceza tota, e aprop uempla la plagua de medicament encarnatiu, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am cosidura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	 For that who applies this method of phlebotomy, when you have reached the line B and then go to line G, fill your veins completely with a heated ointment applied from both ends, put on the bandage covering the whole area, and adjust the two bandages over the bandaged part of the body.
Mays si la mamilla declina a las partidas dejos e es mollificada per la sua magnitut ayssi cum endeve a las femnas, lahoras sia fendut en dos latz sieus pus sobiras, am dos seccios semblantz a figura lunar, de las quals quascuna sia contenguda en l’autra deves la fi de quascuna, entro que sia que la linha major contengua la menor segon aquesta forma de la linha de .B. e la linha de .G. E aprop excorja la codena la qual es entre dos labias de la plagua, e osta la pingueza, e aministra aquo que havem dit de la sutura e de las polveras aquo que es necessari en la curacio entro que sia sanat.	 If the breast has become inflamed and enlarged like that of women, then cut it off at the end of each part separately, until both are equal in size from line B to line G. Then apply a bandage between these two parts, and place a dressing on top, and administer as prescribed by the surgeon with the powder and sutures necessary for healing until health is restored.
E si tu non conpleysses la inscizio de aquo que cove inscidir per la inquietut del malaute, e per flux de sanc, lahoras cove que huemplas la plagua de coto submergit en enguent corrosiu e layssa aquel entro que aquo corroda que es romas de la grayssa, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	 "When the patient is frightened or anxious due to pain from gout, and because of the flow of phlegm, it is customary for the doctor to cover his chest with a damp cloth, so that this cold and wet spot does not cause harm.
Capitol .xlviii.	 The text seems to be describing medical procedures or treatments for a patient experiencing pain related to gout. It appears as if the physician is trying to alleviate their discomfort through various methods such as covering them with a damp cloth, placing cushions under their legs and chest, and having someone else hold their hands. Additionally, there's mention of using a pointed cautery on specific body parts for unknown reasons. The overall tone seems urgent or critical due to the patient's pain and anxiety.
De perforacio de apostemas que veno dejos le titillic.	 "The opening of apertures through which come from the intestines.
Aquetz apostemas que veno dejos le titillic so de las specias de scrophulas, durs, las quals conte una pel que es sac.	 These openings that come from the bowels are called sphincters, and they play a crucial role in holding back waste matter.
E de aquelas so alcunas que conteno humiditatz; e aquelas que conteno humiditatz cove que sian inscididas am seccio lunar segon aquesta figura: de la linha de .G. a la linha de .B. E cum es tot evacuat aquo que es en le apostema de la sania, lahoras tu le comple de coto viel e leysa le entro al autra dia.	 "Some of them contain moisture; others are dry and can be opened up under the influence of the full moon, like this: from .G to .B. And after everything has passed through that sphincter which is called the anus, then close it tightly and open it again tomorrow.
E aprop le coto sia ostat e sia curat am enguent convenient ad aquo, entro que sia sanat.	 "When you want to cover or protect something with a cloth, make sure it's dry before applying it for safety.
E si le apostema de las specias dels nodes es, e de las scrophulas, lahoras tu scindeys sobre aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la seccio sobre las scrophulas engualment.	 "If the openings in the rectum and sphincters are closed, then you should also close them at this point as mentioned earlier about sphincters.
May si la plagua es extenduda en aysso que yesca poyredura, lahoras administra en lu cauteri segon que en aquo havem denant dit.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body and pain occurs in the feet
Capitol .xlix.	 You are correct! The translation for this sentence is: "When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet.
De seccio de apostemas que accideysso per arceria o per vena.	 This sentence translates to: "From the section where it happens through artery or vein.
Quan arceria es rompuda, e la codena es consolidada la qual es sobre aquela, lahoras motas veguadas accideys apostema E les senhals per les quals es conoguda que imflamacio e apostema sian per la arteria o per vena: quar quan apostema es per arceria es lonc agreguat en le preon del cors; e que quan inpelleysses le apostema am les tieus ditz, sentes en lu quays sia stridor.	 When the artery is ruptured and the seal has been removed from it, the veins become inflamed where they are located either through an artery or a vein: when the vein is through the artery it causes damage to the inner part of the body; and if you try to remove the vein by pressing on them with your hands, you will feel pain in that area.
E aquel que es per vena es redon al manifest del cors.	 This sentence translates to: "The one through the vein is revealed at the breast.
E seccio sobre aquest apostema es error, e majorment en aquel que es dejos las aysselhas, e en les angonars, e en le col, e en motz locs del cors; e es mot gran, donc cove que la sua curacio am ferr sia esquivada, e aquel que es en las extramitatz, o al cap, cove que sia evitat.	 If there is a mistake in the vein, and especially if it's in the arms or legs, or in the belly, or any other place on the body; and if it is large, then you should avoid its treatment, unless it is external to the head.
Mays sobre aquel que es de lor per imflacio de l’orrifici de la arceria, scindeys en la codena seccio en le lonc; e aprop huebre la seccio am uncis e aprop la arceria, e deliura de las tunicas entro que sia descuberta.	 If it is through inflammation of the artery seal, then cut off the seal and remove the artery itself; be careful to not cut into any other part of the body as you may have discovered.
E aprop met sobre aquel agulha e fay aquela penetrar entro al autre latz, e estrenh la arceria am fiel doble en dos locs, — la qual causa yeu a tu eyssenhegui en extraccio de doas arcerias les quals so en les templars.	 "Then place the needle over there and let it pierce through to the other leg, and secure it with double thread in two places, - which causes you to lose both needles at once.
E aprop punh le loc le qual es entre dos liamentz am spatum entro que yesca le sanc tot que es en lu, e sia dissolvut le apostema.	 "Then place it in the area between two fingers so that everything is done as it should be, and dissolve the needle.
E aprop administra curacio en la qual es engendrat poyre entro que caian les liamentz; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz convenientz ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	 "Then administer a remedy which causes pain to cease between the fingers, and treat that with gentle care so that it becomes well.
E si es apostema per seccio de vena, lahoras cove que tu tenguas am la tua ma aquo que es a tu possible del apostema am la codena, e aprop intromet la agulha dejos le loc le qual tu has tengut dejos la tua ma, e fay aquela penetrar; e sia en aquela fil doble entro que tu extraguas aquel del autre latz, e aprop ligua le apostema am bo liament segon que yeu he dit a tu en le liament de uva4 de doas partz am doas extremitatz del fil.	 "If it is an embolism of the vein, you must have your hand on that very spot where the needle was inserted, and make the needle pierce through to the other leg, and bind it with double thread between both ends so as to extract it from two parts of the two legs.
Mays si temes que extraguam le fil, lahoras entromet le fiel am aquela agula dejos tot le apostema deves la inscizio de la agulha primieyra, e strenh les tieus fiels en quatre locs.	 "If you want to extract the thread, remove your hand from that needle and bind it with a four-thread knot.
Aprop secca le apostema en le mieg loc de lu entro que quan es yssit aquo que es en lu, lahoras tu inscideys la superfluitat de la codena, e layssa aquo que de lu es liat.	 "Then fasten the needle in that place where you feel it is so, and let this be done as it should be.
E aprop pausa sobre lu pulvil le qual has submergit en vi e oli, e aprop administra la curacio la qual es fayta am calguas e enguentz entro que sia sanat.	 When you have moistened it with water and oil, apply a medication that soothes the cold and enters in such a way as to promote health.
Capitol l del apostema le qual accideys per torcio de nervis.	 The artery of which part is affected due to tension on nerves?
Ayssi cum accideys apostema en arceria e en vena, e semblantment accideys apostema en les nervis quan accideys en lor percussio o accideys per trebal superfluable, e per semblantz.	 Both the artery in the arm and vein are affected when pressure is applied to them or by a nearby strike that is too strong; similarly, both the artery in the nerves and the nerve itself may be affected when it is struck or struck with excessive force.
E es fayt le mays de lu en les locs dels adjutoris o del talo, o en tot loc en le qual so maugudas las juncturas.	 It should be done at the joints of the assistants or on the feet, or anywhere that makes them ache from the joints.
E es apostema greu, e es asemblat a la color del autre cors, e es en las majors de lu disposicios ses de lor e quan es streyt am vehementia, sent en lu le malaute semblant stupor.	 It is very difficult to do so; it also involves placing the hand on another part of the body and when it is done violently with great force, there's a numbing effect on the patient that makes them numb.
E no es apostema agreguat en le preon del cors, e per so es dejos la codena, e el es maugut a tota partida e no va a las partidas denant ni detras.	 Do not put it on the front of the body; to do this is to put your hand under them, and it will cause pain throughout all of its parts and there won't be any openings in front or behind.
Donc aquo de aquels que es en las juncturas no cove que sia envasit am ferr, quar fort leu endevenguera contracio.	 Therefore, if it is done to the joints themselves, they will contract very hard and cause pain.
Mays aquel que es en le cap o en le front fen la codena am spatum.	 Do this on the head or forehead so that it goes through the opening of their mouth.
Mays si es apostema pauc, lahoras te aquel am les forfecs e abscindeys aquel de razitz.	 When joints are affected by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, pain occurs in the feet, it is customary to call gout for doctors.
E si es gran, lahoras tu le suspen am unci, e excorja aquel, e aprop osta aquel; e ajusta la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	 And if the abscess comes about a finger or thumb, it is customary to squeeze and drain it, apply an ointment on top of that, and treat it as soon as possible for healing.
Capitol .li.	 There
De seccio de apostema le qual accideys de cheil que accideys al ventre.	 The abscess occurs in the belly.
Endeveno ad alcus homes motas veguadas en les ventres de aquels e en las autras partidas del cors de aquels theils les quals son apelatz funguals per similitut de aquels am funges, dels quals la razitz es subtil e·l cap de aquel es gros; e ja las labias de aquels so conversas, e es de aquels que es petit, e es de aquels que es mot magnificat.	 The abscess occurs in the belly and is generally small compared to other abscesses on those parts of the body where they are often found, the head of which is large; and as for those that are very small, it's from those who are considered magnificent.
E yeu ja e vist un, e en le ventre de lu eran dos theils les quals eran mays a funges semblantz, e no era diferencia entre aquels blancs, de menuda razitz.	 You have already opened it and in its belly were two parts which are similar in appearance, there was no difference between them of small size.
E ja las labias de aquels eran enversadas e se fendian, e humiditat corria de aquel tot temps.	 The abscesses' membranes became inflamed and tore away from each other, humidity spread to all parts.
Donc yeu inscidegui aquels e atrobegui en la un en pes quays xviii unc. e l’autre quays vi unc.	 Therefore you should squeeze them both on the bottom of the foot that is eighteen inches away, and the other one that is twelve inches away.
E la operacio en la inscizio de lor es que consideres lahoras si·l malaute es humit, e la color de atheil es blanca, humit, de subtil razitz; lahoras tu le inscideys am spatum lat, e sian en la presencia tua cauteris en le foc, quar motas veguadas deves la seccio de lu es expellit mot sanc; e si te ventz le sanc, cauteriza aquel.	 The operation on the abscess is to consider whether it is caused by a wet and white sore of subtle size; squeeze them with a pointed tool at the tip of your finger, and when they come out in front of you cauterize that. If there was no such pain, cauterize that too.
E si vezes le malaute pauruc e temeros, guarda te de inscizio am ferr; mays lahoras pren fiel de plom recent fayt, e strenh am aquel atheil, la manieyra del qual es aquela que havem dita; e leyssa aquel per dos dias.	 When the patient is afraid and trembling, guard your hand to prevent injury from cutting; may the sores heal quickly by frequent application of fresh ointment, and strain the hand vigorously, let it be that which was mentioned before; and lay on for two days
E aprop ajusta en la strictura del fil de plom; donc, no cesses strenher le plom granre devetz en theil, entro que sia abscindit e cayha per se ses trebalh.	 Then tighten the skin fold of the palm; however, do not squeeze too tightly with a great force in it, as that may cause separation and tearing away from itself.
Mays si theil es de grossa razitz, lahoras en la inscizio de lu es alcuna causa de temor e de paor, e majorment en aquel que es en le ventre.	 If it is a large size, then the wounds on the body are not cause of fear and panic, but rather those that occur in the abdomen
Mays possibla es que tu inscindas la maytat de lu , e aprop cauteriza aquel per que no retorne.	 Perhaps you should make an incision through it, then cauterize to prevent its return.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanada la plagua.	 Then cure that by healing the wound
E guarda te que tu no presumas inscidir theil le qual es de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, de leg reguardament, quar aquel es absi cancros.	 And remember to not cut into it which is already scarred and damaged, as that would cause additional harm.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio de cranc aprop aysso.	 You will later regret cutting the wrong part
Capitol .lii.	 Goodbye.
De curacio de eminencia del umbilic.	 From the care of the navel's prominence
Eminencia del umbilic es fayta per motas causas; o per fissuras del ciphac le qual es sobre le ventre, e yeys de lu la tela o budel segon que endeve en las autras rupturas; o per sanc le qual flueys de vena o de arceria segon que es denant dit, o per ventositat coarctada en lu.	 Navel prominence is caused by various reasons; from tears in the diaphragm over the belly that are also found on it, to the hernia which protrudes out through a tear, or the varicose vein that may occur as well, or from narrowing of the aorta (aorta) which may cause swelling in the body.
Mays si es per fissura del ciphac e per yssiment de la tela, lahoras la color del apostema es semblant a la color del cors; e es leon ses dolor, e aprop appar de divers situament.	 When the pain arises from a rupture of the diaphragm and by inflammation of the skin surrounding it, then the appearance of the pain is similar to that on the chest; and he knows its cause, so as soon as possible to treat this situation
E si es per egressio del budel, lahoras le situament de aquel am lu de aquo que havem recontat, de mays vehement diversitat, e cum tu premes aquel am les tieus ditz es occultat, e aprop retorna; e fort leu es am lu so, e es magnificat mot deves le introt de banh e vehement trebalh.	 If it arises from the exit of the intestine, then he understands the situation and knows that one must be careful to prevent this recurrence, with utmost urgency; for when it is very severe, it is a magnificent movement which drives out the entrails violently.
Mays si per humiditat, lahoras es leon e no es occultat quan premes am la tua ma, ni es constrengut, ni es cregut.	 When humidity arises, he knows and does not occur when you press on your hand; it is neither constrained nor believed.
E si es per sanc, lahoras am aquestz senhals apareys le apostema a negror declinant.	 If it occurs from the abscess, then the appearance of the abdomen turns black and becomes gradually less intense.
Mays si es per carn nada, lahoras es apostema greu, gros e dur, e es ficat segon una quantitat.	 When pain arises from flesh itself, the abdomen is heavy, large and tough, it appears after a certain period.
Mays si es per ventositat, lahoras le tocament de lu es leon.	 If it occurs by coldness, then the touch of it feels like ice.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras lahoras si la eminencia de l’umbilic es per sanc de arceria, o de vena, o per ventositat; lahoras cove que sias prohibit de la curacio de lu, quar en aquela es temor e paor ayssi cum t’e ensenhat en le capitol en le qual he dit les apostemas per arceria e per vena.	 The operation in it is considered necessary if the pain arises from a rupture of the epiglottis or vein, or by coldness; and when he sees that doing so would bring fear to someone, then he does not do this, as such an action would be feared.
E si la eminencia del umbilic es per le budel o per la tela, lahoras cove que comandes al malaute que tengua le ale sieu, e sia stant extendut; e aprop senha am tenta en le circuit de tot le umbilic, e aprop comanda a lu que stia envers entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e aprop circunda am spatum lat en le circuit del umbilic sobre le loc le qual has senhat am la tenta; e aprop exten la maytat del apostema a las partidas desus am unci gran; e aprop lia en le circuit am fiel fort o am ceda e la manieyra del liar decent.	 "If the elevation of the umbilicus is caused by the intestine or the membrane, it should be instructed to hold tightly as long as possible and extend its support. The servant should then proceed around the perimeter of the umbilicus, directing the patient's hand towards their own back between their two thighs, making a loop over the location where they have placed their cushion, after which the servant should extend the patient's arm out to one side, guiding it with the other hand. And lastly, the servant should carefully remove any loose clothing or garments that may interfere with the movement of the patient.
E aprop huebre le mieg del apostema extendut sobre le liament e intromet le dit tieu en aquel indic e quereys le budel; e si tu l’as atrobat ni guardat per le liament, lahoras tu extratz alxorati e impelleys le budel a las partidas dedintz del ventre.	 "The servant should hold the patient's arm extended in front of them and guide it towards their own back between their two thighs as indicated by the previous instruction. If the servant finds that they cannot grasp the membrane, they should remove the excess flesh from around the intestine and gently lead it out through an opening to the abdomen.
E si has atrobada la tela, lahoras pren aquel am unci; e inscideys las superfluitatz de lu.	 "If the servant finds that they have grasped the membrane, they should then remove any excess flesh from around it.
Mays si es contraria a tu arceria o vena, lahoras circunda aquel mot, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio; e pren dos agulhas e met en aquelas dos fiels fortz e entromet dos agulhas en le circuit le qual has feyt entorn le apostema en manieyra de crotz, las quals fassas penetrar; e aprop strenh le apostema en quatre partidas sobre las agulhas.	 "If it is contrary to your instructions or vein, the servant should turn around and return to their previous task. Then remove two needles and insert them into the holes on either side of the patient's hand as indicated by crossing with one needle through each hole in a pattern that penetrates towards you (i.e., in opposite directions). Then stretch the intestine four times over the needles.
E si tu vols, osta las agulhas e leyssa le loc entro que poyresca la carn extenduda e caia per si; o inscideys aquel quan es subtiliat e se poyreys, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	 When you want to do a venipuncture on the extended arm or hand, stick that place where blood will run freely and drip off; or insert it into something when it is small and seeps through, and apply pressure there for as long as possible until bleeding stops.
E si la eminencia del ombilic es de carn nada en lu o per humiditat, lahoras cove que tu conquaves le apostema ayssi cum havem dit e estraguas le sanc o la humiditat, la qual atrobas en lu, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove e que consolide le loc.	 If the prominence of the umbilicus is in flesh or by moisture, then pain occurs when you press it or through wetness, which spreads to that place and causes pressure there. And apply pressure there until bleeding stops.
Capitol .liii.	 Three
De curacio de cranc.	 Of care for the ear.
Ja havem dit, en la divisio, de specia de cranc e en qual manieyra es via a la curacio de lu am medicinas, e que es squivador en lu la curacio am ferr per so que no sia ulcerat; e havem dit cranc engendrat en la mayra e cautela de la curacio de lu.	 It has been said that in the division of care for ears and which manner is the way to provide this care by medicine, it being a surgeon in doing so that it won't be ulcerated; and have been mentioned the generation of an ear infection due to careless handling of it.
E diyssero les antics que alcunas veguadas cranc es en loc on es possibla la eradicacio de lu, ayssi cum de cran le qual es en las mamillas o en la coyssa e a lor semblantz dels membres allocat a estrayre tot aquel, e majorment quan es comensant petit.	 It would be advisable to remove the infected ear if it were possible in that location where eradication of it is possible, as well as removing those which are located at the bottom of the ears or in the crease between the thighs and buttocks, all of whom should be treated equally but more so when starting small.
Mays quan es antiquat e es gra, no cove que te propries a lu, quar yeu non pogui sanar de aquel alcu ni no he vist autre, ni que sia pervengut ad aquo.	 If it is ancient and heavy, do not try to remove it unless you are certain that you will heal the wound or prevent infection at that location; otherwise, seek medical attention instead of attempting to remove it by yourself.
E la operacio en lu es quan es allocat ayssi cum havem dit, es que tu precedescas e laysses le malaute e purgues de colera negra alcunas veguadas, e aprop sagna aquel, si es atrobada replecio manifesta.	 The operation is performed when you are positioned in such a way as described, and you will apply the black bile purge to the patient's veins with small stones, and if the result is positive.
E aprop prepara le malaute am preparacio en le qual sia locat am operacio, e aprop prohiceys en le trauc uncis les quals cove ad aquel; e aprop concava de tota part am la codena sego bona perexcrutacio entro que no romangua alcuna causa de las razitz de lu.	 Prepare the patient for surgery in which location you are to prepare, and prevent any cuts on the path of that incision; and make a thorough examination into each cause of the disease that may not come up with nothing.
E layssa correr le sanc, e no abscidas aquel leugierament, e exprem les locs, e abstergeys le sanc gros tot am la tua ma o am instrument am le qual es a tu possible dels instruments.	 Lay the patient flat on their back and do not remove it from there, take care of all wounds and sterilize any tools you might use for the operation.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat de sanc gros inscizio de vena o de arceria, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que·l flux del sanc sia cessat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	 If the incision is large enough to enter a vein or artery, after closing it, apply another cure on which the flow of blood has stopped and attend to that with another treatment until the bleeding ceases.
Capitol .liv.	 The end
De curacio de ydropici.	 Treatment for diarrhea
Nos ja havem recomtat, en la divisio, de las specias de ydropici de l’aygua, e les senhals de quascuna especia, de la curacio de lu am medicinas.	 We have recommended in the division of remedies for diarrhea from water, and the symptoms from each remedy, to seek medical treatment.
E aquela la qual es curada am ferr no es sino la specia de althitas sola, e no es aproximat am ferr a la specia de timpanistres ni a la especia de yposarcha, quar aquo es mortal.	 That which is treated to become nothing but the remedy for madness alone, and is not suitable for the remedy of deafness or the remedy of insomnia, as that one is fatal.
E quan tu ja has medicat aquesta especia de ydropici timpanistre am medicinas e no comfereys la tua medicacio, lahoras considera, quar si al malaute ja es conseguida debelitat, o es am aquel autra malautia otra ydropici, ayssi cum si es en lu tos o cos de ventre e semblant ad aquels, lahoras guarda te que no le mediques am ferr, quar temor es sobre aquo.	 When you have already treated this special medication without any side effects or complications in the treatment, the doctors consider that the patient's ailment has been resolved, or it is another malady of similar nature to gouty dropsy; if so, then go on to treat the belly and such things.
Mays si tu vezes le malaute de vertut exuberant, e am lu no es autra malautia sino ydropici tant solament, e no enfant ni vielh, lahoras la manieyra de la operacio de lu es que tu eleves le malaute entre las tuas mas, e le ministre aprop lu exprema le ventre de lu am la sua ma, enpellen la aygua a la partida dejos del pentenilh, e aprop pren spatum spinos segon aquesta forma:	 If the patient's belly is prone to abundant flow and it is neither another malady nor gouty dropsy alone; but just gouty dropsy without excess or pain, then let doctors perform the operation on their abdomen.
sia de dos partz agudas lonc, de aguda extremitat ayssi cum spatum; mays empero sia en lu alcuna brevitat petit a petit, per so que en la operacio am aquel no passes entro al budel, e que ledas aquel.	 The operation will be performed in two parts: the part that is closest to the tip of both sides and this side as well; but may still come from little by little, for fear of entering into the abdomen itself.
E aprop considera si la generacio de ydropici es de part dels budels, quar lahoras cove que tu am la seccio te alonhes del ombelic per la quantitat de tres ditz a las partidas dejos, en le dreyt de lu sobre le pentenilh.	 The doctors consider that the generation of gout is from between the bowels; so they advise you to cut off only part of the abdomen for three parts as mentioned earlier on the belly itself.
Mays si la generacio de hydropici es per malautia del fietge, lahoras la tua seccio sia sinistra del ombilic per tres ditz.	 The doctors consider that the generation of gout is due to a kidney ailment; so they advise you to cut off only part of the abdomen on the left side for three parts.
E si la generacio de lu es per la melsa, lahoras la tua seccio sia en le las dreyt.	 When delivery occurs through the lowest part of the body, then the pain should be treated by applying cold compresses to that area.
E no cove que la tua seccio sia sobre le costat sobre le qual vol jaser le malaute per que no corron las superfluitatz ad aquel loc freul.	 Do not place the cushion on the side where you want to deliver the patient in order to prevent any unnecessary injury at that location.
E aprop perfora am le instrument tota la codena, e aprop entromet en aquela seccio, e eleva la tua ma am le spatum entre la codena e·l siphac, e tu excorja aquel; e si’ la quantitat de una ungla o enviro.	 Apply the instrument thoroughly all around it, and enter into that area, lifting your hand between the incision site and the flap, you will remove this one; if there is more than one, do so as well.
E aprop perforo le ciphac entro que pervengua le spatum al loc vuoyt, e es loc de l’aygua.	 Apply it into the flap where you want to drain fluid from, and this is a good location.
E aprop extratz aquel e entromet un instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	 Extract that one out with an instrument of which kind?
e es semblant a canula de argent subtil; es fayt de argent o de eram o de lato leon, al qual en la partida pus bassa de lu es un petit trauc, e en les costatz de lu so tres traucs: dos de una partida e un del autra partida; e fayta es la extremitat de lu insciza segon la manieyra de pluma, ayssi cum vezes:	 It is similar to a fine silver needle. It can be made of steel or iron, with the point small enough in its original form that it could fit through one part of the body's opening three times, two on each side and another in the center; as for its extremity, it should be sharp enough such that when inserted into the hand would allow fine feathering.
E en la extramitat de lu pus sobirana es armilla, quar quan le instrument perve al aygua, lahoras aquela tantost deysen sobre le instrument, donc evacua de l’aygua en la ora miega quantitat, quar si tu evacuas de aquela mes que no cove en la hora, fort leu mor le malaute per resolucio del sieu spirit animal, o accideys a lu cincopi que es appropinquada la mort.	 In the extremity of that which was inserted into water, doctors should ensure to remove it promptly from the instrument as quickly as possible in order to drain all excess liquid; if you fail to do so then very bad things can happen to the patient and may lead to their death.
Mays evacua de aquela segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu e segon que significan a tu las disposicios del malaute de la vertut del pols de lu e de la bontat de lu.	 When there is excessive heat in or around the body, and pain occurs in the fingers, it is commonly called sciatica by doctors.
E aprop extrats le instrument, e rete l’aygua la qual causa es quar tantost es retenguda per la codena la qual rete le trauc que es sobre le ciphac del qual e recomtat a tu que perfores aquel segon aquela manieyra.	 Remove the tool and apply cold water, which will help to relieve the swelling that is causing it on your wrist or ankle, recommended by doctors for such cases.
E aprop itera le instrument al autra dia si vezes le malaute tollerant aquo, e extratz de la aygua petita quantitat, e fay aquo per alcus jorns sobre temor, e guarda te de error entro que no romangua de l’aygua sino pauc.	 Use the tool on alternating days if you are able to tolerate it, and apply a small amount of cold water every day for fear that it may not be strong enough.
Mays si tu temes sobre le malaute, e leyssas de l’aygua gran quantitat, lahoras cura aquel am sepultura en arena cauda, e mota suzor en banh, e al solelh espere per lonc temps; e cura aquel am medicinas dessicativas entro que sia sanat.	 If you are afraid of the patient, and fear getting bitten or scratched by them as they move around, have them buried in a container filled with sand to prevent escape attempts while they dry out under the sun, and provide them with medical dehydration solutions to ensure their survival.
E cauteriza sobre le stomac, e la melsa e·l fitge aprop la extraccio de l’aygua, segon que yeu he recontat en aquo que es precedit.	 Cauterize over the stomach and apply a small amount of cold water on top to seal it off, as you would in the previous example.
Capitol .lv.	 I am sorry, but that text does not appear to be a coherent sentence or question in English. It appears to contain non-English characters which might affect its readability and meaning. Could you please rephrase your request?
De la curacio dels enfants les quals so natz les locs de la urina no-perforatz.	 To prevent urine leakage from the children, make sure they are trained properly to control their bladder.
Alcunas veguadas alcun dels enfantz es eyssi del ventre de la sua mayre e·l cap de la sua mixtio no es perforat (o es trauc streyt o no es en son loc).	 Are any of the children's belly buttons pierced or not, as it could lead to urinary tract infections.
Donc cove coytar am perforacio de lu tantost que es nascut am spatum mot subtil segon aquesta forma:	 Therefore, a sharp incision must be made as soon as possible, in this manner:
E aprop pausa en le trauc un clavil subtil de plom e ligua aquel, e te per tres jorns o per .iiii.tre.	 Then place it gently against the wound and tie it with three stitches or so
E quant vol urinar sia remaugut e hurine; e aprop retorne aquel.	 When urine is excreted, and return to the patient
E si tu no pauses le plom, ja es possible que la urina la qual va sobre le loc, no leysa aquest claure.	 If you do not put it against the wound, then urine may leak onto that area.
Mays aquel del qual le trauc es streyt sia medicat am clavil de Plom, ayssi cum havem dit, per trops dias entro que sia amplificat.	 The cloth used to bandage the wound should be soaked in warm water and then tied around the patient with three stitches or so.
Mays aquels en les quals es le trauc no en son loc, so leditz, la qual causa es quar de aquels, aquel que es nat e·l trau es deves la fi del cap de la vergua per que no pot urinar a las partidas dedintz, entro que eleva la vergua am la sua ma a las partidas desus; e no es a lu generacio, per so quar le sperma no pot pervenir a la mayre segon rectitut, e es malautia mot laga.	 If the cloth used to bandage the wound is not in place, then it should be changed by washing another one and soaking it in warm water, tying it around the patient with three stitches or so, and putting your hand over the area where urine will come out between the buttocks, until you elevate the buttocks to the level of the waist.
E la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que·l malaute sia envessat sobre le sieu dos, e aprop exten le cap de la vergua de lu am la tua ma sinistra am vehement extraccio, e inscideys le cap del cap de la vergua del loc del perpucii am spatum agut, ayssi cum es inscizio de pluma, o que tu ne razas alcuna partida, per so que·l mieg de lu vengua semblant al cap de la vergua e que le trauc caia en le mieg loc segon que cove.	 The purpose of the operation is to have the patient lie on their back and push down on their buttocks with your left hand, while holding onto the head of their penis tightly with the right hand, so that any ejaculation will occur similarly to ejaculating into a cup.
E guarda te que en la tua operacio de flux de sanc, quar motas vetz accideys aquo; e pausa te a lu am aquo que abscindeys le sanc, e cura la plagua entro que si’ sanada.	 "In the process of bleeding, where clots may arise, pause it to avoid the clot, and cure the wound when it is healed.
Capitol .lvi.	 In Book 6, Chapter LVI
De albater le qual accideys en le prepucii en le cap de la vergua e de corropcio e negror e adherencia del prepucii del cap de la vergua.	 To remove the clot from the forehead and the top of the head, and to be removed from redness and adherence to the forehead of the head
Motas veguadas accideys aquest albater en la vergua e es eminencia de carn laga.	 The clots that arise in the veins may cause this clot in the head to harden.
E de aquela una es maligna e autra es no-maligna.	 Whether it is malignant or benign.
No-maligna, cove que suspendas am unci subtil e abscindas aquela entro que aquela mondes tota; e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto submirgit en enguent egipciac; e aprop aquel, cura le am enguent diafinicon entro que sia sanat.	 If it is benign, you must act with great subtlety and prevent it from escaping at all costs; then pause over the area to prevent its escape through the Egyptian channel; finally, cure the wound when it heals.
E si albater es maligna, de lega color, lahoras cove que tu aministres cauteri aprop la inscizio de lu e la razio de lu.	 If the clot is malignant, then you must administer a pointed cautery to its site and reason for it.
Mays si albater es en le prepuci del cap de la vergua no-circumcis, e la una partida de albater es dedintz le prepucii e l’autra partida es defora, lahoras cove que tu ostes albater le qual es dedintz al comensament entro que es consolidat; e lahora tu cura aquel deforo, quar quan tu curas aquel ensemps le prepuci, no es asegurat que no sia trinquat.	 If the clot is not removed from around the forehead of the head and instead it is only divided at its beginning as it solidifies, then you must wait until that division is complete; otherwise, when you cure that wound on the prepuce, there is no guarantee that it will be healed.
E ja eysamen accideys en les genetius e en le prepuci negror e corruccio, adonc cove que tu conquavas tot aquo que ja es denigrat e que ja se vol corrompre o que ja es corrumput; e aprop lineys sobre aquel aprop aquo am mel, le qual es contusit am farina de scorsa de milgrana e de errs trissatz e crivellatz.	 The first sentence translates to: "The first servant should open the intestines and prepare them for receiving the purge.
E aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sana.	 And then have another attendant who will be ready
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, lahoras aministra cauteri lunar segon aquesta forma:	 If the second servant is not available at that moment, the first one should administer the purging with a pointed cautery.
quar cauteri juvatiu es a dos disposicios ensemps, so es a flux de sanc e a la plagua quan es corrumpuda.	 A young cauterizer has two tools: a knife and a purge when it is corrupted.
E si le cap de la vergua es corrodut e es destruit tot en la hora, lahoras cove que tu intrometas en lo meat del prepucii una canula de plom per so que le malaute urina per aquela.	 If the top of the vein is damaged and destroyed at that moment, then place a plum plug into its opening to prevent urine from coming out through it.
En la adherencia del prepucii am le cap de la vergua (et aquesta adherencia no accideys sino en aquel del qual le prepucii es sa, e sobre lu no es exhigida circumcizio; e quan accideys adherencia per plagua o per apostema) cove que excorjas am spatum obtus entro que sia dissolvut le liament e sia deliurat le cap de la vergua de tota partida.	 In the attachment of the vein (and this attachment does not occur unless it is in a suitable place, and over it there is no requirement for circumcision; when the attachment occurs due to injury or abrasion), you should excoriate the skin inside so that it is dissolved from all sides and deliver the top of the vein completely.
E si es dificil desirnir aquelas exquisidament, lahoras cove que tu excorjes am spatum alcuna causa del cap de la vergua e del prepucii, e aysso es quar le prepucii, quan es subtil, fort leu es perforat per la sua subtilitat leugierament.	 If it is difficult to desire those things very much, the doctor should excoriate any cause of the top of the vein and the prepuce, so that it is as if the vein has been perforated through its own subtlety.
E aprop separa entre·l prepucii e·l cap de la vergua am dra7 de li subtil, le qual ja es mulhat en l’aygua frega per que no adherescan autra veguada.	 "The doctor is placing a cushion between the patient's thighs and their chest to support them while giving them medical care.
E aprop sia curat am vi stiptic entro que sia consolidat.	 "After positioning, continue providing supportive care.
Capitol .lvii.	 Capitulum.
De mundificacio dels enfants e de la curacio de aquo que accideys ad aquels de circumcisio.	 "To circumcise the children and to provide aftercare for those who have undergone circumcision.
Circumcisio no es solucio de continuitat ayssi cum las autras plaguas: mays empero cum sia de la nostra operacio e de nostra voluntat, e lus de aquela sia propriament en les enfants, es necessari que asignem en aquela milhor operacio e via pus leugiera perdusent a salut.	 "Circumcision is not the solution to continuity as other problems may arise from it: however, if performed in accordance with our operation and will, and for the sake of those who undergo circumcision, we need to assign this procedure as necessary for their health.
Donc dic que les antics no diyssero circumcisio en alcu dels lors libres, quar no n’usan en las suas leys, e no es sino quar havem aquisit per speriment, la qual causa es que yeu he atrobat la major partida dels artifexs e dels barbies usar circumcisir e mundificacio am novacula e am torores; e usan de liament am fiel e de inscizio am la ungla.	 "If the old ones would not have circumcision in the free children, who do not use it according to their laws and custom: but for having gained this experiment that we have come upon the greater part of the vexations and troubles using circumcision and mutilation at once; and they use a faithful one and one from the oath.
E yeu ja he prohadas totas aquestas manieras e no atrobegui milhor mondificacio am forfexs, am liament am fiel que en mondificacio cum la ungla, quar motas vetz efugeys la codena pus desus, quar la codena del prepucii a dos tunicas, e roman la tonica pus dejos, e fort leu es forsat ad autra inscizio e dolor sicura.	 "You have already prohibited these manners and no longer seek the greatest mutilation at once with the oath: faithful to the oath that in mutilation with the flesh, which goes away from what is said, and the oath of the testicles divided into two tunics, and read the tunic pushing him out, and it feels good as other injuries and sure pain.
E am mundificacio le qual es fayta per alphecati, e es digital, del qual usan les sabatiers, no es segurada la inscizio de la extremitat del membre viril, quar fort leu intra en le trau de lu.	 "The cautery is applied to the affected area with a pointed instrument.
Mays en la operacio am ungla, fort leu obazeys ferr e corromp la tua operacio.	 During the operation, be careful not to burn or damage the skin of your hands.
E la codena del enfant es breu per natura, e motas veguadas nays en tal manieyra que no ha necessitat de mondificacio, e yeu he vist aquel.	 The child's cry is short by nature, and sometimes it may be that there is not need for cauterization, and you will see that one day.
Mays de la mondificacio que·s fa am forfexs e liamentz am fiel, la bontat, experiment descrobic a mi, quar las forfexs so de proporcional inscizio, per aquo quar la acuitat que es desus es ayssi cum la acuitat que es dejos; e donc cum tu premes la tua ma so proporcionadas dos acuitatz, e inscideysso segon una comperacio en un temps; e es fayta compressio del fiel am figura contenent la codena de la vergua de tota partida, am le qual no catz error de tot.	 Cauterization should be done slowly and carefully as it is a painful process, the benefit of which will gradually increase your sense of touch proportional to its intensity, so that when you premeasure your hand with suitable force, you can prevent errors in every way.
E la manieyra de la operacio primeyra es que tu fassas estar le enfant majorment si es de aquels que entendo un petit, que no fassas sino que tu lies le fiel en la sua vergua tant solament, e que leysses aquel entro al autra dia.	 The first thing to do in the operation is that you should keep your child still if it is small, and only gently touch its hand with it alone, otherwise make sure it stays in place tomorrow as well.
E aprop fay aquel alegrar en tota aquela manieyra que es a tu possibla de aquo que recep la sua intelligencia.	 After doing the operation you should rejoice at all that comes from your power to receive intelligence.
E aprop fa aquel estar entre las tuas mas estatuir preparadament, e no sia ges cezent; e occulta las forfexs en la tua ma o dejos le tieu pe, que l’enfant no veia aquelas ni degun autre dels instruments.	 Then make sure that the cautery is placed between your fingers and does not touch them or any other part of the hand, so that the child will not see those things nor any others of the instruments.
E aprop entremet la tua ma a la vergua de lu e suffla en la codena, e tira aquela entro que sia eyssit le cap de la vergua, e aprop mondifica aquel de aquo que es agregat en ela de sordicia.	 Between the patient's thighs you place your hand and blow into it gently, pulling it out as if to remove a head from a crowd, and make sure that is inside the vagina, and remove the one added for silence
E aprop lia le loc signat am fiel dobla, e aprop ligua pus bas de aquel un petit le segon liament, e aprop te am le dit pous e endic tieu le loc del liament dejos am bona retencio, e inscideys entre dos liaments.	 The first servant ties the left foot firmly to a small rope in place, and the second servant binds his right hand tightly around it as well, and between them both they hold onto one another.
E aprop eleva la codena sus leugierament e estratz le cap de la vergua; e aprop leyssa le sanc corre petit e petit, quar es milhor ; e pausa polvera desus e sobre la polvera pausa drap en le qual es spandut mugol de huou coyt en ayguaros concosit am oli rozat recent bo; e layssa aquel sobre aquel entro al autra dia; e cura aquel am curacio entro que sia sanat.	 The first servant lifts up the vagina and pulls out the head of it, the second servant gently lowers his left hand downwards a little by little until reaching the top, then pauses for breath, and lies him over on her back to prevent any semen from coming out; she places another cushion under them both as well.
La forma de las forfexs a mondificacio, aquesta es la forma:	 The manner of giving birth is by the name "delivery", this is the term for it.
Sian las unas extramitatz no-talhantz e las autras sian talhant, que non sia yssit le ram del clau, e sia la longitut de las doas acuitatz ayssi cum la longitut de dos manubres engualment.	 The first servant's fingers should not be tightly pressed together and the second servant's fingers should also not be tightly pressed together, so that there may no come out of the passage any semen, but its length is equal to two fists' length.
Mays la error en mundificacio es quar fort leu efugeys la codena intrinseca tota, o partida de lu deves la inscizio.	 The mistake in childbirth occurs when the internal head of the vagina comes out entirely, or is torn away from its place.
Donc cove que tu extendas aquela de la tua hora am la tua ungla denant la apostemacio del loc e que inscidas aquela segon equalitat.	 "When you stretch that out of your body, put it into a straight line.
E si no la podes tenir am la tua ungla, lahoras extratz aquela am unci e inscideys aquela.	 "If you can't hold onto it with one hand, stretch it and then grab it.
Mays si son passatz tres dias, e roman aquo que es imflat dejos la vergua apostemat, lahoras tu leyssa aquo entro que sia cedat le apostema caut, e excorja aquel am fecilitat, e inscidex aquel segon que a tu es preparat.	 "If three days have passed and you've noticed swelling around the joint, then stretch it gently until any pain subsides, and after that apply some ointment.
E guarda te del cap de la vergua, quar no nosera a lu aquo.	 "Put your hand on top of the swelling to prevent it from coming off.
E donc cura aquel am aquo que la plagua consolida de las polveras las quals havem recomtadas en le tractat de las polveras.	 "Then apply some powder compress as recommended in the book on powders.
E si es inscidit de la codena sobre mesura, e obezeys a las partidas desus, aquo no notz a lu.	 "If it's applied too much and causes itching, just remove it.
E mays cura aquel am aquo que havem dit entro que sia sanat.	 "Then apply something that is said to be good for the healing process.
Capitol .lviii.	 The end of the medical treatise.
De curacio de urina retenguda en la vesiqua.	 "Urinary retention in the bladder.
Retencio de urina en la vesica es fayta per oppulacio fayta per peyra o per sanc congilat, o per poyre o per carnada, e semblantz ad aquels de aquo que havem dit de las manieyras de curacio en la divisio.	 "Urinary retention can be caused by oppression, fever or cold, injury to the bladder, burns, or skin disease and such.
E si no es dissolvuda la urina, e veses retencio de lu esser per peyra le qual ja es en le col de la vesica, lahoras cove que le malaute sia encorbat sobre les sieus denolhs.	 "If the urinary retention does not go away and you have a blockage at its opening in the bladder, then blame it on a blockage.
E aprop conponeys les pes de aquel sobre le sieu dos e extendas le sieu ventre de la partida pus desus del sieu dos, e le malaute estrengua le sieu ale tant quant es a lu possible.	 "You have already placed the cushion beneath their thighs and extended their stomach from the beginning towards their back as much as is possible.
Donc lahoras le col de la vesica es costreyt ha espulsio de la peyra a las partidas detras, per que la urina es absolta.	 "The urethra was opened through the vesica's canal to allow for complete urination.
E si no es dissolvuda am aquo que havem dit he vehement es fayta la causa sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que aministres extraccio de lu am instrument le qual es apelat siringua, del qual aquesta es la forma: Sia de argent e sia subtil leon conquau, ayssi cum canula de pena de ausel am subtilitat de ray lonc en similitut d’un palm e mig, al qual sia cana subtil en le cap de lu.	 "If the cause of gout is not dissolved by this treatment as you have mentioned earlier, then apply a syringue, which has silver and subtle iron tips; like the needle used in acupuncture but much more slender.
E la manieyra del eyssiment de la urina per aquel es que prenguas le fiel doblat e lies en la extramitat de lu lana o coto per bona liadura; e entrometas las extramitatz del fiel en la partida dejos de la ciringua, e inscideys am las forfexs si superflueys alcuna causa de la lana, mays intromet la en la canula am vehemencia E aprop enongeys la ciringua am boder e am album de huou.	 "The urethra must be closely and carefully held during urination; if a fistula develops outside the canal or within it then insert the needle forcefully to prevent any harm.
E fay cezer le malaute sobre la selha, e embroca la vesiqua de lu e la vergua am olis umitz, e oli de oliva e ayguaros.	 "Remove gout from the heel, and bind its vessel up with olive oil; then spread it evenly.
E aprop entromet la ciringua am facilitat entro que pervengua a la razit de la vergua; e aprop dobla la vergua desus a la partida del embelic; e aprop empelleys la ciringua dintz aquela; e aprop empelleys aquela entro que pervengua a la vesica, e aquela centa le malaute esser pervenguda a la causa vuoda, e no es fayt asso segon aquest orde, sino le meat en le qual va a tortuositat.	 "Insert the needle gently into its cause through the vein; then bind it up to your elbow and tie it securely there; then fasten it down with something like cord or rope so that it cannot move around inside.
E aprop exten le fiel am la lana petit a petit, quar la urina siec la lana.	 "As you please extend gently the little finger one at a time, as urine should be the same.
Aprop extratz aquela e fay per curacio urina, e usa ciringua, no cesses fer aquo e usa ciringua entro que sia evacuada la vesica e le malaute atrobe alleviacio.	 "As you please extend that finger to gently remove the urine and use a ringlet, do not stop doing this unless it is evacuated from the bladder and the patient's buttocks.
Capitol .lix.	 14
De qualitat de clisterizacio de la vezica am clampcedra e am semblantz instrumentz les quals sian acordants ad aquo.	 "Quality of the circumcision procedure done with a clamp and instruments that are consistent with this.
Quan accideys en la vesica ulceracio o apostema, o sanc congilat en aquela, o es coartat poyredura, e vols en aquela destillar ayguas e medicinas, lahoras sia fayt am instrument le qual es apelat clampcedra, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	 "When the bladder ulcer occurs or perforation, or gangrene occurs in that area, it is customary to treat with these remedies and medicines. The remedy is called a clamp because of its shape.
sino que en la extramitat de lu es sorda, so es clausa.	 "If there are no other parts affected besides the bladder, they should be closed.
Et en aquela so tres traucs: dos de la una partida , ayssi quo vezes.	 "And in that area three cuts were made; two from one part and once more.
En le comensament es loc concau, en le qual es aquo que es enpellit, e sia segon quantitat que oppile aquel, ses addicio, entro que quan alcuna causa es ab aquel tirada de las humiditatz, sia atirada, e quan es expellida, am aquo sia atirada, e quan es expellit lonc, segon que fa clampcedra am la qual es phicat naphta en las batalhas de mar.	 "In the beginning there is a space that is filled up to this amount and another quantity added on top of it; as you add more water until no longer any cause to continue pouring, then stop adding, when expelled from above, do what's mentioned below.
Donc cum tu vols prohicir humiditatz en la vesica, entromet la extremitat de clapcedra en la humiditat, e atira am aquel aquo que es empellit a las partidas desus, quar la humiditat es atirada en la conquavitat de clapcedra.	 "Then once you want to pour water into the bladder, enter one of the fingers of the clamp in the water and remove what was poured out from above.
E aprop entromet la extramitat de clapcedra en la vergua segon que havem recomtat en la ciringua; e aprop empelleys la humiditat am aquo que empelleys, quar aquela humiditat perve a la vesica tantost, e le malaute cent aquela.	 "When performing the operation on the thighs of a patient who has requested it in our chamber; apply oil to where you wipe away moisture with your hand as well.
Forma del cristeri subtil am le qual la vesica es cristerizada, e es aquela la forma:	 The form of the subtle stretcher is such that the bladder will be stretched.
E sia fayta de argent o de lato, de la qual le cap pus aut sia semblant a petita pluma, e dejos lu cana dedintz liament.	 And if it's made of gold or silver, then its top part is either similar to an eagle's beak or small in size, and that which you may call the handle by name.
E aprop pren vesica de moto, e pausa en aquela la humiditat que vols cristirizar en la vesica, e aprop lia aquela entre dos am fort liguatura am fiel doble, e escalfa aquela humiditat sobre le foc.	 Then put the bladder on fire with this heated oil and hold it between two strong cords tightly bound together in such a way that they are held firmly; then let the heat spread over its surface.
E aprop entromet la extremitat del cristeri en la vergua.	 Put the stretcher into place on the patient's body part.
E aprop estrenh la tua ma sobre la vesica am la humiditat am strectura descent entro que·l malaute centa que aquela humiditat ja es pervenguda a la vesica.	 Apply your hand to stretch and spread the moisture evenly onto the bladder, making sure it doesn't spread over other parts of the body.
Mays si a tu no es present vesica, lahoras tu pren una pessa de parguames e fay de aquel cercle; e perfora aquel de tota la sua retonditat; e aprop entromet fiel fort en aquels traucs, ayssi quo so revolgut; e aprop agregua le cercle ayssi quo es agreguat alsofatur, pus que tu pausas en aquel aquo que tu vols de las humiditatz, e olis e ayguas.	 If the bladder is not present you take a piece of iron and put it there around its circumference tightly; make sure that all of its surface is covered with the heated oil as well, making sure to spread evenly.
E aprop tu lia aquel en le instrument e fay am aquel ayssi cum has fayt am la vesica, e exprescio am la tua ma entro que la humiditat pervengua a la vesica.	 Then you put it in the device and apply your hand to it just as if you are applying to the bladder itself; make sure that no moisture spreads outside of it.
Capitol .lx.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
De extraccio de peyra.	 And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery.
Nos ja havem dit en la divisio las specias de peyra e curacio de lu am medicinas, e la diferencia entre peyra engendrada en los ronhos e peyra engendrada en la vesica, e les senhals de aquela.	 You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
E havem dit la peyra en la qual catz operacio am ma, e seccio.	 And do you perform the operation on which part of the body first?
E la peyra engendrada en la vesica propriament es aquela que es ficada en la vesica.	 The gout caused by cold humors in the bladder is called "gout of the bladder.
E yeu so narrant aquel am exposicio manifesta e abreviacio.	 And you make a more detailed and brief explanation?
Donc dic que peyra engendrada en la vesica majorment ve als enfantz; e dels senhals de lu es que la urina que es eyssida de la vesica es semblant a aygua en la sua subtilitat, e apar en aquela arena; e le malaute fregua la sua vergua, e motas veguadas pen, e aprop es dressada; e am aquo yeys foro le cul en motz de aquels.	 You mean to say that gout caused by cold humors in the bladder is more severe and painful compared to other types of gout, due to the acidity of urine coming out from it being similar to water's subtle nature?
E es laugiera la sanacio dels enfants de aquela entro que han conseguitz xiiii ans; e es dificil curacio en les viels.	 And you are asking about the treatment for children who have had gout attacks for more than 14 years, which is difficult to cure?
Mays en les joves es migiera per aquo quar es entre aquels.	 For younger people it may be easier because they often do not develop this type of gout
E de aquel del qual la peyra es major e la curacio es pus leugiera; E si es pauca, es contraria ad aquela.	 Of the one where the pain is severe and the treatment is more difficult?
Donc cum pervenem a la curacio de aquela, cove al comensament de aquela que mondifiquem le malaute am cristeri le qual extragua tota la fenda la qual es en les sieus budels; quar aquela fenda alcunas veguadas prohibeys la envencio de la peyra deves la inquisicio de lu.	 When you've arrived at this, the first thing to do is cut open that of which the patient has complained, and extract the hole that caused it in his bowels; for that hole is causing some inflammation somewhere else on him.
E aprop sia pres le malaute am les sieus pes e sia contosit e maugut enjos per so que la peyra descenda al preon de la vesica, o que saute de loc aut alcunas veguadas.	 After that, take the patient's legs and press them together tightly to prevent his stomach from falling out; or if it goes somewhere else, tie a bandage over that place as well.
E aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas preparat, e las mas de lu sian dejos las coysas de lu, per so que la vesica tota sia fayta declinant a las partidas dejos.	 After you've done that with the patient's legs and pressed them together tightly to prevent his stomach from falling out, then tie your own hands behind her back to free up one of your arms for other tasks; or if it still goes somewhere else, wrap another bandage around whatever is left.
E aprop perquier aquela e tota aquela deforo.	 After that you've done everything as described, gently lay the patient down on their stomach to ensure they won't vomit up any more food.
Donc si sentes la peyra en l’espazi, lahoras tu te coyta tantost am seccio sobre lu.	 If you feel a hole in his body, gently pull him into as much of the sitting position as possible over him.
E si no catz de tot dejos le tieu tocament, lahoras cove que tu untes am oli le tieu dit indic de la ma sinistra, si malaute es enfant, o le dit miga si es jove complit, e entrometas aquel en le sieu cul.	 If you don't get him completely up on his hands and knees yet, gently pull his right hand to the left side of his chest if he is a child or to the middle of his body if he is fully grown, and guide that arm into his buttocks.
E perquier de la peyra entro que stia dejos le tieu dit.	 When you've done everything as described earlier, ensure that you have pulled him up completely on his hands and knees; then gently pull his right hand to the left side of his chest if he is a child or to the middle of his body if he is fully grown, and guide it into his buttocks.
E converteys aquela petit a petit entro al col de la vesica.	 Gently insert it gradually into the hole of the bladder.
E aprop prem sobre aquel am lo tieu dit, e expelleys aquel a las partidas defora ves le loc del qual vos la seccio.	 Place pressure on that area and expel it from the opening in which you want to urinate.
E comanda al ministra que prema la vesica am la sua ma; e comanda a un autra ministra que am la sua ma dextra extenda les genetius a las partidas desus, e am la sua autra ma remaugua la codena la qual es dejos les genetius, en partida del loc en le qual se fa la seccio.	 Order the minister to press on the bladder with his left hand; and order another minister to extend his right arm so that it will stretch out the legs towards the opening in which urination occurs, and then withdraw the other arm at the point where the urethra enters.
E aprop entromet espatum be inscident del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	 Gently insert a pointed instrument into this opening, as follows:
e scindeys en lu aquo que es entre·l cul e·ls genetius, no en le mieg loc, abantz al latz de la coyssa sinistra; e sia la seccio sobre aquela peyra e·l tieu dit sia en le cul, e sia fayta seccio transversa, per que la seccio defora sia ampla e dedintz streyta segon la quantitat que egrecio de la peyra sia a lu possibla, e no major, quar fort leu comprem le tieu dit le qual es en le cul la peyra deves la seccio, e es foro-getada ses defacultat.	 Insert it gently into the area between the buttocks and thighs; do not go inside the anus or urethra; make a transverse cut on that side of the penis to allow urination out, making sure it is wide enough so urine can flow freely without difficulty, but no wider than necessary, as cutting too deeply may cause damage.
E sapias que de la peyra es alcuna a la qual so angle e margers, per que le eyssiment de lu es fayt deficil per aquo.	 You know that from the tip of the penis to where it is angled and curved (the foreskin), urination can be difficult for this reason.
E de aquela aquo es leon semblant a glan, e es redonda, e es fayt de lu leugier eyssiment.	 It is similar to a ball, round, and feels soft from the outside.
Donc si es aquela al qual so angles e marger, ajusta en la fissura.	 If it's that one at which angles are curved, insert into the opening.
E si no es ayssi foro-getada, lahoras cove que tu engenes sobre aquel, o que strenguas sobre aquel am gesti decentment, la extremitat del qual sia ayssi cum lima am le qual strenguas sobre la peyra, e no evasesca de lu; o que entrometas dejos lu instrument subtil de curvada extremitat.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
Mays si tu no podes sobre aquel, lahoras tu amplifica le trauc un petit, e si tu veus flux de sanc, abscindeys en strenh aquel am vitriol trissat.	 If you cannot find relief with heat, the doctor may recommend applying a small amount of vinegar to the affected area and massaging it gently if there is any discharge or redness present.
Mays si la peyra es mays de una, lahoras al comensament tu impelleys la ma a la boca de la vesica, e aprop inscideys sobre lu; e aprop impelleys un petit aprop aquo; e semblantment fay si son motas mays de doas.	 If the bladder is tight and painful to start with, you should gently apply your finger inside it, and then press on it a little bit there; as well if any movement is more difficult or painful.
E si es peyra mot gran, lahoras ignorancia es que tu inscidas aquel am gran seccio, quar accideys al malaute una de doas causas: o que mora o que endevengua a lu destillacio de urina continuabla, per aquo quar le loc no es de tot consolidat.	 If the bladder is large and painful to begin with, you should avoid inserting anything inside of it because that could lead to further complications such as blockages or problems in maintaining its consistency.
Mays aministra expulcio de lu entro que sia fora-getada, o engenia en la fractura de lu am las forfexs entro que extragua aquela en pessas.	 If the expulsion is blocked and cannot be forced out or if there are fissures in it that you can't extract from it, you should avoid straining or forcing it out and seek medical attention instead.
Donc cum tu auras cumplit la tua opperacio, lahoras omple la plagua de enses de aloe e de sanc de drago, e strenh aquel.	 Once your task is completed, the doctor should clean up all of the waste and secretions from the patient's body, and then apply heat to the affected area gently.
E pausa sobre aquel drap enfus en oli e vi, o en oli rozat e aygua frega, per so que apostema caut sia cedat.	 And if you are worried that the application of oil or fat may cause burns or burns from excessive heat, then apply a pointed cautery instead to provide relief.
E aprop resupina le malaute sobre le sieu col, e no deslias le liament entro al tertz dia.	 The servant should put the patient on their back, without allowing any part of them to touch the third side.
E cum aquel auras desliat, embroca le loc am aygua e mot oli, e aprop cura aquel am enguent diafinicon e am enguent diabazilicon entro que sia sanat.	 When that happens, apply water and oil simultaneously, and then apply a mixture of vinegar and lime to it; after that, put on something like sulfur or lime lotion to protect it from further damage.
Mays si en la plagua accideys apostema caut, adhust e corrosiu, e de aquel semblantz ayssi cum si le sanc es en la vesica congelat, e per lu es la hurina prohibida (e aquo es conogut per la egressio del sanc am urina), a donc entromet lo tieu dit en la plagua e extratz aquel sanc, quar si roman provoca la vesica a corropcio de la vesica e de lu putrefaccio.	 If the bladder is scalded, and if it has been burned or otherwise damaged, do not enter that area; if you have to enter through urine, then extract the bladder, because if one of these occurs with urination (and this can be indicated by urine escaping), a doctor should open up the bladder and look for the cause of vesicular injury.
E aprop lava la plagua am vi agre, aygua e sal, e am opposicio a tota specia, am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	 After washing the bladder with water and salt, apply something very special to protect it against future injuries; that is how you take care of your bladder so that it stays healthy.
E cove en las horas de tota la curacio que tu lies amdos las coyssas e ajustes las medicinas las quals so pausadas sobre le loc.	 Throughout the treatment process, make sure to alternate between massaging the thighs and adjusting the medications that have been placed on them.
E si la peyra es petita e es en le meat de la vergua, e es ficat en lu, e eyssement de urina es prohibit, lahoras cura aquel am aquo que yeu recomti denant que pervenguas a seccio, quar tropas veguadas per aquesta curacio yest acusat de seccio; e ja yeu e esproat aquo, e es que tu prenguas un perforador de ferr alfelut, del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	 If the urethra is small and located in the male genitalia, it has been blocked up, and urination becomes prohibited. The doctors then treat that as a blockage; you should be careful to not force urine out, because those who have undergone this treatment may become infected with the disease; so do your best to prevent such complications by preventing excessive friction. And if you do need one, there's a special kind of tool used for it:
de triangulada extramitat, agut, ficat en fust.	 The first part of this text seems to describe a medical procedure involving an examination between the patient's thighs (extramitat), followed by some kind of treatment using cushions on their legs and chest while holding their hands (agut, ficat en fust).
E aprop pren fiel, e lia am aquel la vergua dejos la peyra per so que no retorne a la vesica.	 The second part seems to involve the application of something on the patient's perineum in order to prevent it from returning to its original position (pyeura).
E aprop entromet le ferr en la vergua, perforant am fecilitat entro que·l perforador vengua ad aquela peyra.	 The second part seems to indicate that a tool is inserted into the patient's perineum in order to ensure that the applicator penetrates all the way to the pyeura and does not come out during insertion (ferr en la virgua).
E revolveys le perforador am la tua ma en aquela peyra petit a petit, e tu perforsa la perforacio de lu entro que fassas aquel del autra part penetrar; quar la urina tantost es absolta.	 The second sentence seems to describe the process of inserting the tool into the patient's perineum in small steps while ensuring that it penetrates all the way until it reaches a certain point on the other side, at which point urination will be complete (revolveys le perforador am la tua ma en aquella virgua petit a petit, e tu perforsa la perforacio de lu entro que fassas aquel del autra part penetrar; quar la urina tantost es absolta).
E aprop prem la tua ma sobre aquo que es romas de la peyra de la partida deforo de la vergua, quar aquela es trinquada, e es foro-getada am la urina, e le malaute es sanat.	 The final part of the text seems to describe the relief experienced by the patient after the procedure is completed and their bladder has been emptied, as indicated by the phrase "que aquella es trinquada" (meaning that it was relaxed)
Mays si aquesta curacio no es a tu aparelhada per alcuna causa la qual prohibeys de aquela, lahoras lia un fiel dejos la peyra, e autra fiel desus la peyra.	 If this procedure is not to be performed due to any cause that prohibits it, then the text suggests that doctors should use a second applicator for penetration and insertion (mais si aquesta curacio no es a tua aparelhada per alcuna causa la qual prohibeys de quella, lahoras lia un fiel dejos la peyra, e autra fiel desus la peyra).
E aprop encideys sobre la peyra en aquela vergua entre doas liaduras.	 And return the intestine or hernia to its cavity
E aprop extratz aquela.	 Then place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out
E aprop deslia le liament e mondifica le sanc congilat, le qual es fayt en la plagua.	 And return the intestine or hernia to its cavity.
E no es necessari liament de fiel dejos la peyra, sino per que no retorne a la vesica, e l’autre liament desus sino, quar quan es desliat le fiel aprop la egrecio de la peyra, la codena retorna a son loc e cobra la plagua.	 And do not need to return the intestine or hernia if you want it to stay in place instead of returning to its cavity, and another servant should also be done so that when you put your hand over the area near the urethra, the penis returns to its place and covers the hole.
E per aquo es a tu necessari quan lias le fiel desus, que tu eleves la codena a las partidas desus, o que retorne deves le tieu compliment, e cobra la plagua ayssi co havem dit.	 And because of this it is necessary when you put the servant down to remove the bandage and cover the hole so that nothing falls out.
Capitol .lxi.	 This completes the medical treatise.
De extraccio de peyra de las femnas.	 And return the intestine or hernia to its cavity.
Peyra en las femnas pauc es engendrada.	 The vagina in women is usually not caused by it.
Mays si ve peyra ad alcuna de aquelas, lahoras dificil es la curacio de lu, e es prohibida per tropas manieyras.	 If you see the intestine anywhere but its cavity, then pain occurs and it is forbidden to touch it with your hands.
La una de lor es quar la femna fort leu es verges.	 One of their symptoms is that a woman feels cold in her vagina.
E la segonda es quar tu no trobas femna be scient que descroba si meteyssa al metge quan es casta, o es de las femnas haventz maritz.	 The second symptom is when you do not find any discharge from the vagina when examined by a doctor or if it has been a long time since there was discharge.
La tersa es quar tu no hatrobas femna be sabent aquesta art, majorment la operacio am ma.	 The third symptom is that you do not feel any discharge from the vagina when you urinate and this makes it hard to find a doctor's appointment.
E la quarta es que·l loc de la seccio sobre peyra en las femnas es longinc del loc de la peyra, per que indigeys de seccio preonda, e en aquela es temor.	 "The fourth thing is that the location of the section on the thigh in the legs is longer than the location of the section at the front, for which it is customary to press with force.
Mays si necessitat provoca a tu ad aquo, lahoras cove que tu prenguas una femna metga be scient, e pauc es atrobada.	 "If you need this, then pain may occur in the foot; it is customary to try and apply a woman's heel.
Mays si tu es privat de aquela, lahoras cerca metga quast e subtil, o presenta una femna matrona be esenhada en le feyt de las femnas, o femna que en aquesta art ennueys partida del art.	 "If you are private about that, then call upon a woman and gently place it on the foot or present to a lady's hand if she is not available in front of the feet; another who does this well.
Donc fay aquela present, e comanda a lu que fassa tot aquo que tu li mandaras, de la enquisicio sobre la peyra al comensament; la qual causa es que reguarde si la femna es verges, lahoras cove que meta lo sieu dit en le cul de lu e quiera la peyra.	 "Then bring it forward and instruct him to do everything you instructed him earlier from asking about the location of the section to the beginning; for that is what custom dictates when a woman is very small, that she should put her finger in his anus and try to push out the hernia.
Donc si atroba aquela, coarte aquela dejos le sieu dit, e lahoras comanda a lu que inscida sobre aquela.	 "If you are unable to do it as described above, place your hand over it instead.
Mays si no es verge, lahoras comanda a la matrona que entrometa lo sieu dit en le conh de la malauta e enquiera sobre la peyra, pus que pausa la sua ma sinistra sobre la vesica, e comprem aquela am bona comprecio.	 "If not very small, tell the lady to enter her finger into the anus of the patient and inquire about the hernia; place your left hand on his bladder instead.
Donc si atroba aquela, lahoras cove que gradantment maugua aquela de l’orrifici de la vesica a las partidas dejos am somman de la sua vertut entro que pervengua am aquel a la razit de la coyssa.	 "If unable to do it as described above, gently place your left hand on his bladder opening, and gradually move it down towards the scrotum until it comes between the two parts of the hernia.
E aprop inscida sobre aquela apposicio de la maytat del conh deves la razit de la coyssa de qualque part sia a lu parada e cent la peyra en aquela partida, e·l dit de lu no sia remaugut de la peyra coartan dejos lu.	 When the pain in the joints is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
E la seccio sia pauca al comensament; e aprop entrometa lo ray sobre aquela seccio, e si sent la peyra, lahoras ajuste en seccio segon la quantitat la qual sap que la peyra sira getada de aquela.	 The passage suggests that the procedure should be started slowly and gently at first, with a small incision being made over this area, feeling for pain afterwards as you adjust the size of the opening according to how much further penetration is needed in order to achieve the desired effect.
E sapias que las specias de peyra son motas: quar de aquelas es pauca e gran, e leon e aspra, e longua e redonda, e havent ramps.	 The types of instruments used for penetration are varied; some small and large, one sharp and blunt, one smooth and rounded, with or without a shaft.
Donc tu sapias quantas specias so de lu per aquo que tu signifiques sobre aquo que vols.	 You know how many instruments there will be for this purpose according to what you want to signify by doing it.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, ajusta en le loc vetriol trissat e te aquela per una hora entro que sia abscindit le sanc, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	 If you see blood, immediately apply the location marked with vinegar and wait for half an hour until the bleeding stops, then return to your operation as soon as the pain has subsided.
E fay que prepares am tu dels instrumentz les quals e ditz en la extraccio de peyra en les homes, per so que sias ajudat per aquels en la tua operacio.	 Ensure that you have all the instruments mentioned in the extraction of the penis at home for your use during this operation.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, e sabes que la expulcio del sanc es de la arceria que es insciza, lahoras tu pausa polvera sobre le loc e estrenh aquel am pulvils e strictura descent, e no iteras aquo; e layssa la peyra e no extraguas aquela, quar fort leu morira la malauta.	 If you see blood and know that the expulsion of the penis is through a narrow opening which is marked out, the doctor stops pouring vinegar on this area, wipes away any surplus fluid or constriction caused by it gently without applying pressure there; leaves the penis and does not squeeze or pull it back as otherwise severe harm could occur to the patient.
E aprop cura la plagua.	 To begin treatment of a patient
Donc cum es cedada la acuitat del sanc aprop alcus jorns, e·l loc se poyreys, lahoras tu retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	 Once the acuity level is obtained and the location is known, you return to your operation within 24 hours.
Capitol lxii.	 The twelfth chapter
De seccio sobre ernia acoza.	 It discusses hernia surgery
Hernia ayguoza no es sino agregacio de humiditat en le ciphac blanc lo qual es dejos la codena dels genetius contenent le huou, e es nompnat ciphac.	 A hernia is not merely an accumulation of fluids in the white sac that encloses the bowels but it's more specifically called a hydrocele.
E alcunas veguadas es en le propri pannicol le qual a lu preparec natura en la partida del huou, entro que sia cuyat que ja es autre huou; e es la codena del genetiu entre le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, e no es aquo sino tart.	 Some vegetables are prepared in a pouch made of the animal's skin that is sewn into place at the beginning of the bowel, after which it may be used for another bowel; and this pouch was called the genetium between the white sac from which we have spoken, and it is not this but rather a gastrostomy.
E la generacio de aquest hernia es per debelitat la qual accideys als genetius, per que ad aquels es efundunda aquesta materia, e alcunas vetz accideys per percuscio fayta sobre les genetius.	 The cause of this hernia is a weakness that occurs in the bowels and because of it, some vegetables may become entangled around the bowels.
E aquesta humiditat es havent motas colors, quar la color de lu o es declinant a citrina o a sanguinent, o rog, o es negra feculenta, o es ayguosa blanqua, e es aquo que es mays.	 This fluid may have different colors: the color of it can change from light to dark brown or red, or it can be black and foul smelling, or white and cloudy, depending on its nature.
E les senhals per les quals es saubut on es aquesta agreguacio de aygua so aquestz: quar si es en le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, lahoras le apostema es redon declinant un pauc a longitut ayssi cum figura de huou, e appar le genetiu, quar la humiditat conte aquel de tota part.	 The signs that indicate this accumulation of water are: when it is in the white sac which we have spoken about, the pain returns and appears around the bowel, or hernia, because there is fluid all over the pouch.
E si la humiditat es en le propri pannicol, lahoras le apostema es redon am partida del huou e per aysso hom estima que es autre huou.	 When the humidity is in the property of pain, the doctor's prescription is to rub it away with warm water and apply oil on top of it.
E si la humiditat es entre la codena dels genetius e·l ciphac blanc, lahoras catz dejos le centiment.	 If the humidity is between the heel and the calf skin, the doctor suggests rubbing it with warm water to remove it.
E cum tu vols la cognicio de la color de la humiditat, lahoras tu esproa la color de la humiditat en le apostema am entromes cayrat del qual la forma es precedida; e segon aquo que es eyssit en le vestigi del entromes, jutga de aquo que es dedintz lu.	 To know the color of the humidity, the doctor suggests to smear it with a colored dye before applying it and then wash off the excess dye after applying on a test area that has already been prepared in advance.
Donc quan nos vinem a la curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que comandem al malaute que sia fleubotomat si aquo es a tu possibla, e vezes le cos de lu ple.	 When you come to the care of someone who is sick, the doctor commands that if there are such medicines available for them, they should be used instead of others.
E aprop sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos sobre alcuna causa un pauc auta, e pausa dejos lu motz draps.	 Then apply something slippery to prevent the sheets from sticking, and place a pillow under their head.
E aprop setz tu sobre la part sinistra de lu, e comanda al ministra que segua a la dextra de lu, le qual extenda la sua vergua a hun de dos latz a la codena dels genetius e a la partida del mirac del ventre.	 Then place it on the left side of their body and order the servant to follow with the right one as well, extending his hand towards the calf muscles and the navel area.
E aprop pren spatum lat e scindeys la codena dels genetius del mieg loc per la longitut entro prop le pentenilh.	 Then apply a smooth strip that extends from the heel to the calf, cutting through between the legs towards the back of the thigh.
E sia fayta la seccio segon rectetut engualment distant de la linha que deveseys la pel dels genetius, entro que pervengua al ciphac blanc comprehendent.	 Then make sure to pass over both sides equally far from the line you should follow for shaving the calves until reaching the calf skin completely.
E excorja aquel, e observa, e guarda te per aysso que tu no inscidas aquel; e la tua excoriacio am la qual aquel excorjas per partida jassia que sia suspenduda am le huou mays e subtilment escruta am la excoriacio segon la quantitat a tu possibla.	 "You shall cut away that which you observe and save it for future use, so that the cutting will not cause pain; your task is to make an incision according to the amount possible.
E aprop perfora le ciphac ple de aygua am perforacio ampla, e extratz tota l’aygua.	 "Then you shall perform a small incision in the vein and remove all the blood.
E aprop separa entre doas labias de la seccio am uncis, e exten le ciphac a las partidas desus; e no toques la codena les genetius comprehendent, e inscideys le ciphac en aquela manieyra que es a tu possible.	 "Then you shall make two incisions on each side of the section and extend them to their maximum length; do not touch the nerves that comprehend it, and cut until the size is as much as is possible.
E inscideys aquel am la sua totalitat o en pessas, e majorment le sieu latz subtil, quar si tu no perscrutas exquisidament la inscizio de lu, no es fayta segurtat que la aygua no retorne.	 "Then cut it entirely or almost so, and mostly the small parts that are subtle; if you do not very carefully make the incision of it, then it is necessary to ensure that the blood does not return.
Mays si le huou procezeys de aquela defora de la sua codena en la ora de la tua operacio, lahoras quan tu auras complida la seccio del ciphac, retorna dedintz aquel, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la codena dels genetius am sutura, e aprop cura aquel ayssi cum las autras plagua, entro que sia sanat.	 "If the incision is made at that place of your operation, then after you have completed the section of the vein return it; and also adjust the two parts on either side of the vein with sutures, and also care for it similarly as you did before, until everything is in order.
E si atrobas le huou corromput per autra malautia, lahoras cove que tu lies les vayssels les quals so sore le suspensori, e extrat le huou, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit.	 "If another injury occurs to the vein itself, then you shall lie on any vessel that supports it, and remove the part of what we said.
Mays si l’aygua es agreguada en doas partidas esemps, lahoras sapias que doas son las ernias; donc inscideys aquela partida segon que has feyt en l’autra engualment; e si es a tu vist que sia una opera, lahoras tu la fay.	 When the body is divided into two parts and one of them is opened, then you know that these are the wounds; afterwards proceed to open the other part in the same way
E aprop tu abstergiys le sanc, e entramet en las seccios lana submersa en oli o en oli rozat; e pausa deforo autra lana la qual tu as submersa en vi e oli, e expandeys aquela sobre dos genetius e·l mirac del ventre; e pausa desobre draps doblatz e pulvils, e lia aquels desobre am liament le qual es segon aquesta forma:	 Afterwards, place a cushion under the womb that you have submerged in oil or fat liquid and spread it over two legs of the belly. After spreading it, dry off with towels and powder it as if it were this form
e aprop sian preses dos draps e sian humplitz de lana carmenada segon aquesta semblansa; e sian faytas las extremitatz am les quals es premut de coto o de lana humida, e sian agreguatz am strectura en le braguier de las braguas, e la una de las extremitatz prengua del cul entro al dos, e la segonda prengua a la partida del pantenilh, e dos extramitatz sobre dos coyssas dejos e dos extramitatz autras sobre dos angonars, e tota extrictura sia ajustada en le braguier de las braguas.	 Afterwards, put two cloths on the back and soak them in wet wool as with this shape; tie them around both thighs tightly so that they do not come loose, and place one of the cloths over the buttocks opening to the other. Do the same for the front part of the belly.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta hernia es medicada artificialment am cauteri en loc de seccio am ferr; e es que tu prenguas cauteri cutellar subtil e que inscidas am aquel la codena dels ginitius, e es ignit segon que havem recomtat entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc contenent la aygua, e lahoras tu pren cauteri segon aquesta forma:	 Afterwards, the artificial hernia is treated with cautery in a part of the body that has been opened; and it is necessary to use a subtle cautery and cut off its blood vessels.
e es asemblat a letra greca.	 You have correctly translated "Es como assemblar una letra griega.
E aprop perfora am aquel ciphac, e es ignit entro que tota la humiditat sia fora-gitada.	 When you have prepared this way (meaning unclear), ignite it in order to remove all humidity.
E aprop exten le ciphac am uncis, e excorja am uncis, e excorja am cauteri subtil ignit; e inscideys aquel segon que es a tu possible entro que eradiques tot lu; e guarda te del huou que·l foc no·l toque.	 When you have extended it this way (meaning unclear), ignite it in order to remove all moisture, and afterwards go inside of the cavity and gently scratch with a pointed cautery tool as well, then wait until it is possible to remove everything; and keep from touching flame.
E sapias que aquesta operacio es pus salva e pus longinqua de flux de sanc, e milhor que operacio am seccio.	 You know that this operation is very long in terms of blood circulation, and the most recommended operation for this would be a section
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat apostema caut en la hora de seccio o en hora de cauteri, o flux de sanc, lahoras cove que tu cures qual contrarietat fa a tu per aquo, am curacio la qual conveneys a lu segon que es dit.	 If you feel pain when applying the cautery tool during or after sectioning, or blood circulation is affected, then it would be advisable to consult with your doctor for advice on how to handle this, considering what was advised earlier.
Mays si le malaute es pauruc, e no spera la segonda operacio per la sua horribilitat, lahoras administra perforacio segon que yeu recomti aquo; e es quan es certificat deves tu, per aquo que havem dit de las significacios, que aquela hernia es ayguosa.	 If the patient is anxious and does not want a second operation due to its horror, then it would be advised to administer a perforation instead of another operation; and it will happen when you are certified by this, which means that the hernia has been diagnosed.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute sobre alcuna cezelha elevada, aprop perfora le apostema en la partida pus bassa de lu am spatum lat, e pausa la perforacio segon la longitut del cos.	 It is advisable to make the patient lie down with his head slightly elevated, apply a pointed cautery tool on the lowest part of their chest, and wait for perforation after measuring its length.
E sia la apercio ampla entro que corro tota l‘aygua.	 The opening must be wide enough to allow all water through.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc coto e lia aquel e layssa aquel, per so que corro le romanent de l’aygua.	 The first sentence translates to "Then place a cushion under them
E aprop cura aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	 Then cure it until the wound is healed
Mays si contrarietat es a la egrecio de l’aygua en aquela hora tu perforas aquela: e aquo no es fayt sino per aquo quar le pannicol blanc en le orrifici de la plagua fa contrarietat e prohibeys le eyssiment de l’aygua, lahoras cove que tu metas en la plagua pena o instrument am la qual es extrayta l’aygua dels ydropitz, la forma del qual es precedida; o ajusta en la opprecio de la plagua un petit.	 "Then, if there is a hole in the vein of that hour, you perforate it with this: and thus prevent leakage or discharge of water, because you put on the wound a cloth soaked in vinegar.
E sapias que l’aygua retorna, e es agueguada aprop vi meses o enaviro aquels; e cum es agreguada, lahoras sia perforat segon aquela meteyssa manieyra, quar le malaute ayssi passara les sieus dias.	 "You know that water returns and is cleansed through these ways: if it is cleaned in weeks or months, then you will have perforated the vein accordingly to prevent the passage of the patient's days.
Capitol .lxiii.	 This is a closing statement indicating the end of this section/chapter.
De seccio sobre hernia carnosa e la curacio de lu.	 "Now about the treatment for a hernia and how to cure it.
Sapias que en la seccio sobre aquesta hernia es temor perdusent a pernicia en las majors disposicios; per que a mi es vista la dimissio de lu e esser salvat per aquela milhor.	 "Now, in the section about this hernia there is fear of losing use or being injured by them if not treated properly. For my part I see discharge as an option and to be saved through that remedy.
E yeu so rememorant la operacio en aquela e las specias dels apostemas.	 "Remember the operation and the specifics of the stitches.
Donc, dic que l‘apostemas natz en les cos dels quals les genetius so conponutz e es fayt aquo per motas causas: o per superfluitat aguda agra, la qual es efundida als genetius, o per percuscio.	 "And then say that the stitches are in the places where the veins are connected and it is customary to break them for the following reasons: or due to an acute excess of fluid which is drained from the veins, or due to injury.
E es la color de la apostema segon la color del cos, e no es atrobat en lu dolor, e es apostema greu.	 The second part of it says that if you want to prevent pain from spreading to other parts of the body after treating one painful area, put a cushion under their thighs, another on their legs and another on their chest while holding their hands
E fort leu es apostema lapificada, del qual la color es fosca, e no es centiment a lu.	 If you want to prevent pain from spreading by covering it with a dark-colored cushion
E alcunas veguadas es fayt per nodacio de las arcerias, e per imflacio de aquelas ayssi quo ja es perceubut la rememoracio de lu, o per imflacio de venas.	 Some vessels may be blocked because of damage to the arteries or veins.
Mays aquo que es per imflacio de arcerias es conogut per la dispercio de la apostema quan compremas aquela am les tieus ditz; e no cove que aquel toques.	 It means that if it is caused by the overflow of blood into a blocked artery, when you press on those points as directed, the pain will be relieved and not felt anywhere else.
Mays aquel que es fayt per imflacio de vena no es dispergut de lu alcuna causa deves la compressio am les ditz.	 It means that if it is caused by the overflow of blood into a blocked vein, applying pressure to those points will not relieve the pain and should be avoided
E ja es possible que sobre aquesta specia sia fayta seccio e sobre les autres carns; e es que tu inscida la codena dels genetius, e aprop esten le huou a las partidas desus, e extratz aquel del ciphac blanc, e deliura le suspensori dels vaysels, e ligua les, e inscideys le suspensori pus que tu deliuras aquel de tota partida de las partidas del huou.	 It is possible that the special treatment may be applied to other areas as well; and you should apply pressure on the calf muscles, and press down on your chest, squeeze out a white phlegm from your throat, relieve tension in the veins, lie flat, and take notes of the specific points where you feel pain.
Donc si l’huou ja es am aquelas carnadas consolida, lahoras cove que tu extraguas le huou e inscidas aquel.	 Therefore, if all other areas have been treated successfully, after treating those painful areas, proceed to extract the phlegm from your throat and take notes of the specific points where you feel pain.
E si es adherencia entro alcuna causa del ciphac, o entre aquo que es entre les bayssels, lahoras cove que tu deliures tota aquela adherencia e inscidas aquela per inscizio redonda.	 "If there is a cause of inflammation within the veins or between the thighs, then tell him to treat that inflammation with hot baths.
Mays si es nativitat de carn en le loc de la adherencia la qual es detras, lahoras cove que tu inscidas tot aquo que es de lu, e extraguas le huou ayssi cum havem dit.	 "If the inflammation is in a part of the body that was recently injured and is behind it, then tell him to treat that inflammation with hot applications.
Donc cum es complida la tua operacio, lahoras omple la plagua de lana imfuza en oli rozat e vi; e aprop cura aquela am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	 "After your operation is complete, tell him to make a poultice of fresh, moistened cloth and apply it directly to the wound with warmed oil. And also instruct him on how to carry out any other recommended treatment.
Capitol .lxiv.	 This appears to be the end of the medical treatise.
De la curacio de hernia que es de vitz.	 "Regarding the treatment for hernia.
Vit es apostema envolut per alcuna envolucio semblant a broto am mollificacio dels testiculs, e es fayt dificil movement exercitiu e deambulacio sobre le malaute.	 The scrotum is being squeezed through some sort of constricting sheath resembling a boot and it makes movements, exercise, and walking difficult for the patient.
E en la curacio de aquesta malautia es per temor per aquo del qual es precedida rememoracio.	 "Regarding treatment of this illness that is preceded by fear.
Empero cove que diguam opperacio en aquela segon que fero les primiers.	 However, tell him to perform the operation in the same way as they did for the first time.
E dic que cove que fassas sezer le malaute sobre una cezelha elevada; e aprop enpelleys le suspensori dels testiculs a las partidas dejos; e aprop te la codena dels genetius am les tieus ditz am les baysels que so probdas a la vergua; e tengua aquels autre ministre que tu, e extenda aquels am extencio vehement.	 "Tell him to cut off the leg of the patient on an elevated board, and place a cushion under their testicles. And also instruct them how to stretch the thigh muscles as described in previous instructions.
E aprop inscideys am spatum lat agut per seccio traversa en le dreyt dels vaysels entro que sian les vayssels descubertz.	 "The first servant should place a cushion below their buttocks, while another servant is placed on the patient's legs, and yet another on their chest with both hands.
E aprop excorja de tota partida ayssi quo a tu havem dit en extraccio de arceria las quals so en las templas.	 "The first servant should also lift up everything that was mentioned in the previous sentence, namely the sheets covering their temples.
E aprop fica en aquelas un’agulha en la qual sia fiel doble, e lia aquel en le primier del locs en les quals accideys vit, e lia aquel autra veguada en le derier de lor.	 "Place a double-edged knife that is loyal to the patient in such a way that it can pierce through the first of many layers in which pain occurs, and another sharp blade should be placed on the last layer.
E aprop inscideys aquels en le mieg loc per seccio dreyta segon la longuesa del cos, e extratz aquo que es agreguat de las humiditatz fetulentas e corruptas.	 "The first servant should place these in a cavity on the right side of the body for piercing second by second from the length of the body, and extract that which is added to the poisonous and corrupted fluids.
E aprop cura la plagua am curacio de las autras plaguas en las quals vols sania esser engendrada per so que caian les vaysels les quals noyreysso un de dos genetius, quar no es mal per aquo.	 "The first servant should cure the sores on the buttocks with ointments that can be applied in such a way as to make sure they are not broken during childbirth, which is necessary.
Mays si accideys vit a totz les bayssels, lahoras cove que·ls testicols sian extragutz o que les testicols per aquo se cequo am les vayssels, per que sia privat de tot nutriment per la inscizio dels vayssels, e que sian estaborits, o que cequo per so que no sia juvament am aquels.	 "If all the veins are affected by gout, then make sure that their extremities do not receive any nourishment from these veins, and they should be starved or prevented from consuming them.
Capitol .lxv.	 The end of this treatise.
De la cura de hernia entestinal.	 On to the cure for intestinal hernia.
Le adveniment de aquesta hernia es per seccio que endeve en le ciphac extendut sobre le ventre de part dels angunars del mirac del ventre, per que deysendo les budels de aquela ruptura ad alcu dels budels.	 The occurrence of this hernia is caused by a cut made through the diaphragm on the belly's side from the bottom to the top, so that both intestines may escape in its entirety
E aquesta ruptura es o del ciphac o de excencio de lu, e accideysso aquestas doas specias per motas causas: o percussio, o per sautz, o per clamor, o per elevacio de alcuna causa greu, o per semblantz.	 This rupture may be caused by a cut through the diaphragm or an excision of it, and thus these two factors cause the following symptoms in different ways depending on the nature of the causes: cutting, crushing, roaring, or elevation from heavy weight.
E·l senhal de aquo, quan es per extencio del ciphac, es que accideys pauc a pauc en lonc temps, e no accideys soptament, e es apostema engual entro ves le preon per so quar le ciphac comprem le budel.	 When an excision of the diaphragm occurs, it is that the pain comes in short periods over time and does not cease completely, with every breath entering through a small hole for the intestine to escape.
E le senhal de lu es quan es per seccio del ciphac, quar al comensament fa accidir dolor vehement sobtament; e es apostema divers aparent dejos la codena propdana aparent, e aquo es per eyssiment del budel, e·l cos de lu a las partidas deforo del ciphac.	 It is when there is a cut through the diaphragm where initially severe pain occurs immediately; and it seems different from this, because it's an escape of the bowels, which makes them very soft around the incision site.
E alcunas veguadas es fora-getat am le budel la tela, e es apelada aquesta hernia entestinal zirbal.	 Some vegetables are forbidden to eat for those with this intestinal hernia.
E alcunas veguadas es fayta am ventositat, e alcunas veguadas corr en le budel fenda, e aqui es retenguda, e es am aquo gran pernitia3 del malaute, e alcunas veguadas fa endevenir dolor malvada e majorment quan es premut.	 Some vegetables are forbidden to eat during pregnancy and some vegetables cause pain when eaten near the intestine; thus it is necessary to abstain from them because of this significant burden on the patient, and some vegetables can worsen the bad and stronger pain when consumed.
E en la curacio de las especias de aquesta malautia am ferr es temor, per que cove que sia esquivat le cazament en aquela.	 In the examination of this ailment, it is customary to fear that it will occur during intercourse.
E la manieyra de la operacio de aquela es que comandes al malaute que redugua le budel am la sua ma a las partidas dedintz de la sua conquavitat si obezeys al sieu retornament, e aprop sia envessat sobre le sieu col entre las tuas mas, e eleva las cambas de lu.	 The procedure for this ailment is that you should command the patient to lower their intestine into their palm when they are done returning it, and then place a cushion between your thighs, raise their legs.
E aprop sten la codena la qual siec la codena dels testicols a las partidas desus, e inscideys la codena dels testicols tota per le lonc; e aprop fiqua en doas labias de la seccio uncis segon que indigeysses a hubrir la seccio am aquels.	 Cut the cords of the testicles at the points where they divide, and cut them entirely through in length; then sew up two stitches at the bottom to seal it.
E si’ la seccio segon la quantitat que a tu sia possible que de aquela le huou sia foro-getat.	 If you think that cutting it open is not possible,
E aprop excorja aquela ciphaqueth les quals so dejos la codena dels testicols, entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc dur de quascuna partida.	 Cut through the cords of the testicles as if you were cutting open a white bandage from each part.
Lahoras tu entromet le tieu dit en aquo que siec le testicol, en aquo que es entre ciphac blanc, le qual es dejos la codena del huou, e entre le ciphac segon, e absolve am aquel’adherencia que es en la partida detras del huou.	 The pains of the testicles are felt when cutting through them as if you were cutting open a white bandage between which there is a cord, and after that, remove from it the adherence on the back of the scrotum.
E aprop mau am la ma la codena dels testicols a las partidas deforo, e am aysso exten le ciphac blanc en sus am la ma sinestra, e eleva le huou am le ciphac a la partida de la seccio; e comanda al ministre que extenda le huou ensus e tu dissolveys la adherencia que es detras am solucio complida.	 Cut the cords of the testicles at both sides of the scrotum, and then extend the white bandage over your left hand without touching it with your right hand, raise it to its position in the cut, and command the minister to stretch out his penis into you as you dissolve the adherence that is behind him.
E cerqua am les tieus ditz que lay no sia alcuna causa del budel envelopat en le ciphac blanc dur.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors
Mays si tu atrobas de lu alcuna causa, lahoras tu enpelleys aquel al ventre dejos.	 You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
E aprop tu pren una agulha en la qual sia fiel gros fayt de x fiels, e entromet aquel deves le derier del ciphac, le qual es jos la codena dels testicols, la qual siec seccio; e aprop inscideys las extremitatz las quals emineysso del fiel entro que sian quatre fiels, e aprop compausa alcus de lor sobre alcuna figura en manieyra de crotz; e lia am aquel le ciphac del qual havem dit que es dejos la codena dels testicols am fort liament de dos partz.	 You should then take a needle with fine threads, and introduce it into the abdomen, ensuring that its tip touches the liver, which is known as the gallbladder; also ensure that you insert it between four fingers of each hand at once, holding them together tightly; finally, make sure to remove it from the abdomen through the same hole where you inserted it.
E aprop envolveys las extremitatz dels fiels e lia aquelas am liament vehement entro que alcu dels vayssels que noyrrisso aquels no puscan trametre alcuna causa per so que de aqui no accida apostema caut.	 You should then wrap the fingers tightly and firmly, keeping them together; also ensure that you remove it from the abdomen through the same hole where you inserted it.
E pausa autra veguada liament segon foro le primier liament, lonh de lu mens tres ditz; e aprop aquestz dos liaments layssa del ciphac le qual es dejos la codena dels testicols la quantitat de la grandeza del dit, e inscideys tot le romanent segon redondeza, e osta de lu le huou.	 Then remove the first needle and insert a second one at once from another hole on the abdomen; ensure that it is inserted through the same hole where you removed the first one; also make sure to remove this second needle as well.
E aprop inscideys en la partida dejos de la codena dels testicols per seccio de la qual corra sanc e sania ayssi cum havem recomtat en aquo que havem dit.	 Then, once you have removed the gallbladder's code from its cavity as recommended above, proceed with your treatment of choice.
E aprop aministra lana submersa en oli, e pausa en la plagua; e aministra le liament le qual havem recomtat (e alcunas veguadas le ciphac blanc es cauterizat, le qual havem dit aprop la inscizio de lu temen de flux de sanc, quar motas veguadas accideys aquels) e leyssa le liament entro que per si caia.	 When the patient is lying on their back with a cushion under them and another servant on their legs, you should spread out one end of the linen sheet that has been marked for use over the area below the patient's ribs to prevent it from coming up into their face if they move suddenly; fasten this down securely.
Mays si le cazement de lu es tardat, lahoras de aygua cauda sia embrocat, e pausa sobre aquel entro que caia segon que havem dit.	 If the patient is late in coming and has already had water applied to their forehead, then place this strip over where it was about to go down so that if they move quickly, it will prevent it from falling into their face.
E aprop cura la plagua am l’autra curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanat.	 And apply further treatment to the other cushions as necessary.
Capitol .lxvi.	 Chapter 66
De hernia ventosa.	 Of inguinal hernia
En aquesta hernia no e vist alcu que sia estat ardit sus la curacio de lu am ferr.	 In this type of hernia, there is not much that can be done to cure it.
E les primiers diyssero que es fayta ayssi cum havem recomtat en la hernia que es am vi; la qual es que tu lies les vayssels aprop la seccio sobre aquela am fecilitat de lu; e aprop secca en le mieg loc en enviro le apostema am aquo que obro aquel, entro que caian les vayssels.	 The first servant should spread out the linen sheet marked for use between their thighs so that it covers the weakness of the hernia as much as possible; and fasten this down securely at its lower end to prevent it from coming loose when they move.
E cura la plagua segon que havem dit entro que sia sanada.	 Apply further treatment after saying it is cured.
Capitol .lxvii.	 Chapter 67
De la disropcio que es fayta en les anguonars.	 Of the dislocation that occurs in the shoulders.
Alcunas veguadas endeve ruptura en les angonars ayssi cum havem dit, e emineys le loc.	 Some servants end up causing rupture of the shoulder joints when treating dislocations as I've told you earlier and make sure to avoid such actions.
E no deyssen als genetius alcuna causa dels budels al genetius; e si deyssen, aquo es pauc; e retorna s’en en totas horas.	 When joints are painful due to cold humors spreading throughout the body, or if pains occur in the feet, it is customary for doctors to call this gout.
Mays si es prolonguat le temps am aquo, es ajustada fissura en le ciphac entro que deysenda le budel en le ciphac; e accideys aquo per la extencio del ciphac le qual es en le angonars ayssi cum havem dit, la qual causa es quar le ciphac es estendut, e aprop es mollificat e·l loc es apostemat e emineys.	 If the pain from gout lasts for a long time, make an incision in the septum between the bladder and the urethra. And apply this to the outside of the opening as mentioned before; it will cause the bladder to empty out, easing the pain.
E la cura de lu es am cauteri ayssi quo es precedida la narracio de lu.	 The cure for it is with a pointed cautery in the same way as described above.
E alcunas veguadas es curada am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: e es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos entre las tuas mas, e aprop secca le loc de la ruptura dels apostemas emineys am seccio per la latitut segon la quantitat de tres ditz.	 If the gout is accompanied by swelling in the joints, cure it with this method: place a cushion between your thighs, and apply pressure to the area of rupture at the height described above for three times.
E aprop strenh le ciphac blanc que es jos la codena entro que sia descubert.	 Push gently on the bladder opening until it is completely opened up so that you may discover what lies inside.
E aprop pren le ray e pausa aquel sobre le loc eminent del ciphac, e prem aquel al preon del ventre.	 Then press lightly on this point over the location of the urethra and press gently against your abdomen.
E aprop cus le dos locs eminentz sobre la extremitat del ray del ciphac, e ajusta am la sutura un de aquels am l’autre.	 Then apply pressure to both prominent points on the edge of the bladder opening, and sew one of these over the other.
E aprop extratz la extremitat del ray, e no inscidas del ciphac de tot, ni no extenda le huou, ni autra causa ayssi cum yeu te fi saber en la curacio de hernia entestinal.	 Then extend the edge of the bladder, but do not cut into it or expand it in any way as you would have to learn how to treat a hernia in that manner.
E aprop cura aquela am la curacio de las plaguas, e cum inscideyses les fiels, mundifica aquela e restaura la plagua entro que sia consolidada; quar le ciphac es contrayt e no es ajustada la eminencia de ruptura.	 Restore the fistula and restore its lumen after it has been closed, ensuring that any stricture is not present or adjusted at the moment of closure
E cauteri es milhor en aquest loc, quar es pus propda a salut.	 Cautery should be preferred in this location because it promotes healing.
Capitol .lxviii.	 Chapter fifty-eight
De mollificacio de la codena dels testiculs.	 De mollification of the testes' semen.
Motas veguadas la codena dels testiculs en alcus homes es mollificada per aysso quar las carns que so entre aquela son mollificadas, e es fedat le reguardament de lu.	 The sperm is cooled in these vessels for the purpose of maintaining freshness while it remains stored.
Adonc necessari es ad aquel que es preguat en la curacio de lu que fassa jazer le malaute segon le sieu dos, e enscida tota la codena la qual es mollificada sobre la codena natural; e aprop que ajuste doas labias am la sutura.	 When necessary it is to be preformed in the cure of the intestine after passing through its own lumen, and cool all the sperm which has been cooled on the natural semen vessel; then place two sutures on each opening.
E si vols, cus en le comensament la superfluitat de la codena mollificada am tres cozeduras o quatre e am ferma sutura.	 If you wish, cut off three or four of the cooled sperm vessels and make a firm suture.
E aprop inscideys entre las suturas; e aprop cura per curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat e caian les fiels.	 After cutting between the sutures, restore the fistula care to ensure that it is healed and the lumen is clear.
Capitol .lxix.	 Chapter fifty-nine
De castracio.	 Castration.
Sapias que castratio en nostre ley es excomengada, mays per causa es legut a mi que·m remembre de lu en aquest libre; e no es necessaria la rememoracio de lu sino per doas manieyras, de las quals es la una per so que aquo sia en la sciensa del metge quan es enterroguat de aquela, que sapia la curacio de lu al qual accideys; e l’autra manieyra es que nos motas vetz havem necessitat de castracio de autras bestias per les juvamentz nostres per aquelas, ayssi cum de motos, e de bocs, e de porcs, e de semblantz a las bestias.	 You should know that castration is banned in our law but for two reasons: first so the doctor knows how to perform surgery on animals when he has to; and second because it's necessary for castrating young animals so they can be used as food, or for breeding, and butchering, and for hunting.
E donc dic que castracio es fayta en dos manieyras: o per atrissio, o per fissura a seccio.	 Castration can be performed in two ways: either through traction or through section of the glans penis.
Mays en aquela que es fayta per atrissio, la via de la opera es que nos fassam cezer la bestia en aygua cauda entro que·ls genetius de lu sian mollificatz e sian linhitz e que pendan.	 In the case of castration by traction, the method used for the operation is to squeeze the testicles into a water bag until they become softened and limp, then hang them down
E aprop pren aquels am la tua ma entro que sian resols e no apparescan dejos le tocament.	 And once you have done that, don't let go of your hand so as to prevent the operation from being detected.
Mays en castracio fayta per fissura e seccio, cove que tu tenguas la bestia e premas la codena dels testicols de lu am la ma senestra.	 In the case of castration through section and tear (cutting off), hold onto the penis with your left hand while you press down on the testicles with your right hand.
E aprop lia le suspensori, e inscideys sobre quascun huou am una seccio entro que dos huous proceseysso.	 After tightening it up and securing both ends together, insert into the anus to allow for double penetration.
E aprop inscideys aquels pus que auras quascu excorjat.	 Insert that part of you that is used during intercourse.
E no leysses sobre aquels del ciphac alcuna causa, sino le ciphac subtil le qual es sobre les vazes.	 Do not apply it to the pharynx unless otherwise indicated by a doctor as being necessary for breathing.
E aquesta manieyra de castracio es milhor la qual es fayta per atrissio, quar atrissio fort leu layssa alcuna causa dels testicols per que la bestia desira coyt.	 The method of castration by traction is considered superior because it does not cause any pain to the testicles as the penis desires to release.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	 Take care that the bandage remains in place until healed.
Capitol .lxx.	 The end of the text
De la cura de hermafrodozia.	 Farewell, farewell
Hermafrodozia en les homes es segon dos manieyras: la una es quar o appar en aquo que siec l’espazi en la codena de testiculs, en aquel que es entre dos testiculs figura quar cunh de femna en la qual so pels.	 "Joint inflammation in the thighs is a second type of pain: one where swelling occurs at the groin area between two testicles, and another where there's pain from semen passing through.
E alcunas veguadas de aquel corr urina le qual es en la codena dels testiculs.	 "Some veins in that area become inflamed due to urine leakage which is found at the groin area between two testicles.
Mays en las femnas es una specia: e es que·l conh de la femna sobre le pentenilh es ayssi cum dos testiculs de home un pauc de tot yminiheys a la partida deforo ayssi cum le perpucii de home e dos testicols.	 "In women, there is another special type: it's when semen becomes too viscous due to the presence of two testicles in close proximity and a small amount of ejaculation occurs at that time with the ejaculation of one man and two testicles.
E la curacio es de tres specias: de dos dels homes e de una specia de las femnas.	 "The cure is threefold: for two men, or for one woman.
E es que cove que tu inscidas aquelas carns ajustadas entro que efuga la emprecio de aquela, e aprop que cures aquelas am curacio de las autras plaguas.	 "It's necessary to tighten the joints so that they don't move or become loose due to friction in those areas, and to cure any pain caused by inflammation.
E en la segonda specia dels homes de la qual yeys urina la qual es en la codena dels testiculs, no es curacio ni opperacio en lu.	 "In the second type of joint pain in men that occurs at the groin area between two testicles, there is neither treatment nor relief.
Capitol .xxi.	 "The end of Chapter 21.
De lentinge e de carn eminent per causas de las femnas.	 "Itching and inflammation due to female causes.
Lentige fort leu es ajustada sobre causas naturals entro que es etressat e es fayt leg le reguardament; e alcunas veguadas es magnificada en alcunas femnas en tant entro que es spandit ayssi cum en les homes e perve entro al coito.	 "Itching is controlled by tightening the joints and making them stiff, but swelling may be intensified in some women as it occurs more frequently in men during intercourse.
Adonc cove que tu tenguas la superfluitat de lentinge am la tua ma o am unci e inscidas.	 When you have removed the excess of lint from your hand or arm and bandaged it,
E no ultimes en inscizio, majorment en le preon de la razit, per so que no endevengua flux de sanc.	 Finally, insert a bandage on top to prevent further bleeding.
E aprop cura aquela am curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanada.	 Now apply proper care to the wounds until they heal.
Mays carn nascuda es carn que nays en le horrifici de la mayre entro que umple aquel, e fort leu es eyssit a las partidas deforo segon semblansa de coa (e per aquo alscus primiers appelero aquo “malautia caudada”); donc cove que nos inscidam ayssi cum inscidem lentinge, e curem aquela entro que sia sanada.	 Newly born flesh is flesh that needs care to prevent the worst from happening inside it (and therefore the first-aid provider uses "freshly lacerated" as a term; so, in order to treat this, we bandage it and continue treatment until it heals.)
Capitol .lxxii.	 This is chapter 22 of a larger medical text.
De curacio de alratica.	 In the course of care
Alratica es que le conh de la femna no sia perforat, o sia le trauc petit.	 The female urethra should not be perforated or injured during treatment.
E es o natural o accidental.	 It can be either accidental or deliberate.
Accidental es per malautia la qual ha precedit, e aquela es fayta o per carn nada ajustada o per ciphac subtil o espes.	 Accidental means due to a previous injury (such as an unhealed cut), or through inappropriate care with inadequate equipment or tools.
E es fayt o en le preon de la mayre, o en les costatz de lu, o en le pus sobira de lu, o en le pus bas de lu, e prohibeys de cuoyt e de enprenguacio e de enfantament, e fort leu prohibeys las mestruas.	 It's used for injuries to the head (such as a concussion), or wounds on top of the body, underarm, armpit, buttocks, and groin; it is forbidden during pregnancy due to its potential harmful effects on the fetus.
E la cognicio de aquela es fayta per reguardament de la metrona, si la oppilacio es apparent, propdana; mays si no es apparent, lahoras tu cerqua aquela am les tieus ditz o am le ray.	 The judgment of this is made based on observation if the pain is obvious, but otherwise they seek further diagnosis or treatment.
Mays si oppilacio es per ciphac subtil, e es propda a las doas labias, lahoras tu coyta e disromp aquela.	 When the opening is made skillfully, it will cause pain in both of their thighs, causing them to collapse and fall back.
E es que pauses sobre las doas labias pulvils, e aprop pausa les tieus ditz indicz de amdoas las mas encemps.	 It is customary that someone be present on the flanks in order to make sure everything goes smoothly and without issues.
E la femna sia sobre le sieu dos, las sieuas coyssas extendudas, e aprop exten las doas labias am forsa entro que aquel ciphac subtil sia romput e la oppilacio sia uberta.	 The woman should be on the other side of both thighs, with their extended legs, and she is there to ensure that the skillful opening goes as planned without any issues.
E aprop pren lana e enbeu le4 en oli e pausa aquela sobre·l loc, e jagua am home le dia per so que·l loc inscis no sia consolidat.	 And after performing this, you should apply ointment and bandage over the area to prevent any further damage or injury in case it is not properly closed (collapsed).
Mays si le ciphac es gros e espes, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel am spatum lat o am fuelha de mirta.	 If the opening is large and swollen, make sure to use a soft spatula or gauze pad instead of your hand.
Mays si la oppilacio es per carnada, lahoras suspen aquela am unci, e inscideys aquela.	 If it's an abdominal opening, put a pad under them and apply pressure to stop the bleeding.
E sian am tu las medicinas que fan cessar flux de sanc ses mordicacio, ayssi cum ahacatia, e sanc de drago, e enses, ajustat am album de huou.	 These are the medicines that will stop the flow of blood and pain associated with childbirth, as well as cuts on the head and hands.
E aprop aministra una canulha de plom ampla per so que la plagua no sia consolidada leugierament.	 And after applying a wide gauze pad to ensure it is not compressed in any way.
E tengua aquela per alcus jorns e aministra calgua de li sec.	 Keep them clean for some time and apply lotion to keep the skin soft.
E aprop sia curada am l’autra curacio de consolidacio entro que sia sanada.	 And afterwards, be sure to make another cut to ensure it is closed properly (collapsed).
E alcunas vetz accideys en la mayre nativitat de autres carns, e lahoras cove que inscidas segon aquesta manieyra.	 When certain veins are affected by greater natural coldness in other limbs, it is customary to apply these remedies thereafter.
Mays si aysso es per apostema crancos, a l’apostema crancos le qual es en la mayre no sia fayta contrarietat am ferr en deguna manieyra.	 If so, do not use sharp instruments to pierce the swelling, as this is against custom in any vein
Capitol .lxxiii.	 Chapter LXXXIII
De la cura de emorroydas e de tayl e de botor roja que accideysso en le conh de las femnas.	 Of the cure for hemorrhoids and boils that occur in the groin of women.
Emorroydas so apprecio dels orificis de motas venas entro que de aquelas corro mot sanc continuadament; e cum so antiquadas emorroydas e son fayts theyls.	 Hemorrhoids are appreciated for their openings into veins, which can become infected continuously; and since ancient times hemorrhoids have been treated with these remedies.
E ja yeu he dit en la divisio las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e diyre ayssi aquelas que recebo curacio e aquelas que no recebo curacio.	 I also divide those whose symptoms are being treated and those who are not receiving treatment.
Donc dic que emorroydas e theyls quan so en le preon de la mayre e no apparo al sentiment, lahoras en aquelas no sia fayta curacio am ferr.	 Therefore, hemorrhoids and boils when appearing on the lower half of the body are not treated with these remedies.
Mays aquelas las quals so en le orrifici de la mayre sobre las quals catz sentiment, so aquelas que so curadas.	 Those that occur in the opening higher up and those whose symptoms indicate it, these are treated
E cove que tu metas la femna en mayso frega e aprop exten atheyl am les forfexs, o am drap aspre, e inscideys aquelas am las razitz.	 Do not cover the woman in a very tight way and extend it to her elbows or back, leaving those on her stomach uncovered.
E aprop pulveriza sobre aquelas deves le fluxs del sanc de una de las polveras insciscivas ses mordicacio, ayssi cum acassia e semblant ad aquels.	 Then sprinkle with powders that contain strong corrosive substances such as acids or alkalis, just like those used for certain poisons.
E aprop enpellesca les sieus pes per una hora, e aprop pausa aquela en aygua freja.	 When you have opened space between patient's thighs, place a cushion under them, another on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
E si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras fay aquela sezer en decoccio de sumat e de scorsas de milgranas e de gualas e de semblantz.	 And if the flow of illness persists, the doctors will prescribe a diet of fruits and vegetables rich in potassium, magnesium, sulfur, and iron.
E aprop pren farina de ordi e comfiys aquela am miel e vi agre e fay emplastre am aquo sobre le dos de lu.	 Then spread the meal on cloth or linen, place it on a plate next to them.
E si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, fay adherir am dos ventozas, e a las mamilhas ses escarificatio.	 If the illness has been cured, good! Otherwise, stick with two remedies and breast compressions.
E aprop pren lana e submergeys aquela am suc de coliandre o am suc de arnagloza o am suc de guarravier am vi pentit e fay adherir al loc; e aprop cura le loc am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	 Then spread the cream on cloth or linen, put it in water with chamomile or lavender tea and let it sit for a while; then apply to the affected area and pat until dry.
Mays athyl rog le qual es de aspre reguardament, cove que tu inscidas aquo que a tu appar de aquel segon que he dit en theyl engualment.	 When you feel that you should take this medicine because your doctor has prescribed it to you before, make sure to follow the instructions closely and exactly as mentioned in those instructions.
E cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	 Cure that so that it is healed.
Capitol .lxxiv.	 The twenty-fourth chapter of the Capitol.
De perforacio de eyssedura accident en la mayre.	 The perforation in the ear causes pain and discomfort.
Motas specias de apostemas accideysso en la mayre, ayssi cum cranc e apostema lapident e ulceracios e adhubelat e erpetromens e fistulas emorroyas e raguarrias e thyl e autres apostemas.	 Special circumstances of apostemes cause pain in the ear as well as cramps and ulcers on fingers, fistulas, abscesses, and others.
E yeu ja he dit aquestas malautias e las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e las curacios de lor en la divisio.	 And you have already inserted the malevolent spirits and their qualities in those parts of that person's body, into the divisions.
E cove que yeu digua en aquest tractat de apostema caut le qual ve en la mayre quan es dels apostemas que collegeysso sania, e si vols saber en qual manieyra se fa la opperacio de lu am ferr.	 You are to read in this treatise about the exorcism candles that is performed on a greater scale when compared to the other types of candles mentioned here, and if you want to know how it is done, perform the operation yourself.
Adonc cove que tu consideres si la dolor de la apostema en le sieu comensament es aguda am percussio e flecma e febre, e vezes aquel enrogezir e si catz sobre aquel le sentiment, lahoras no·t coytes am perforacio de lu, e cura aquel am aquo que ajuda sobre la maturacio entro que cesse la acuitat dels accidentz.	 When the pain of the exorcism occurs suddenly and is accompanied by striking, trembling, and fever, you are to consider it a severe attack and if so then proceed with treatment immediately in order to decrease the severity of any accidents that may occur due to this condition.
E lahoras cove que tu fassas cezer la femna sobre una cezelha que aia doas cezelhas; e recline sobre le sieu dos e ajusta les sieus pes a la partida pus dejos del ventre, e las sieus coyssas sian expandudas, e pausa les sieus brasses dejos les sieus denols, e lia quascus am liament ad aquo convenient.	 Then place the woman on a couch with two cushions; recline her on her back and adjust her legs to a position as close as possible to the belly, spread out her thighs, and put cushions under her breasts so that they are elevated, and lie down on top of them in order to perform this operation.
E aprop la matrona segua del latz dreyt e aministre le instrument am le qual es ubert le orrifici de la mayre, la forma del qual vindra en aquelas causas que·s faran aprop.	 Then guide the lady towards the tool by which the greater orifice will be opened, and follow the form of it that is to come from these causes that are to be applied.
E cove quan vols ministrar aquest instrument que tu fiques am lo ray le preon de la mayre de la femna, e aquo que del instrument es intrat en la mayre no sia mays que·l preon de la mayre e leda le malaute.	 When you want to use this tool for the larger orifice of the woman, and when it is inserted into the greater one then ensure that its width is not more than half as much as the greater opening, lest damage occur from the tool.
Mays si l’estrument es major que·l preon de la mayre, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils sobre la textura del preon de la mayre per sso que sia prohibit l’intrament de tot instrument en le preon de la mayre.	 When the tool is greater than that of the master, then pain occurs as you cover it with powders on its surface to prevent any other tool from entering into it
E cove que tu pauses le vertitge que corr en le strument del latz pus desus e que le ministre tengua le strument e revolva le vertitge entro que sia ubert le orrifici de la mayre.	 And you cover the channel of the tool with powder, so that the minister has it and turns it around to ensure it is straight
E cum appar la excitura, e es tocada am la ma e es leon e molh, lahoras cove que tu secces aquela deves le cap de lu am spatum lat.	 And when the excision occurs in the middle of them and their head has been removed, then you cover it with a damp cloth to prevent any dirt from entering
E cum la sania es evacuada, lahoras cove que tu pauses en la plagua una meca submersa en oli rozat o oli vert en le qual sia alcuna stiptisitat; e pausa la calca7 en la seccio en le preon de la mayre.	 And when the vein is evacuated, then you cover it with a soaked cloth or one that is wet and filled with oil to prevent any stagnation; and place a gauze on top in the area of the chest.
E pause deforo la mayre e sobre le pentenilh lana munda submersa en aygua en la qual sian bulidas malvas.	 And you cover the breast with a damp cloth, so that any foul smell is prevented; and place a pad on top of it in the area of the chest.
E aprop sia curada aprop dos dias am enguent le qual conveneys ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	 Then apply two days later to where it was applied, so that it may be healed.
E alcunas veguadas es lavada la mayre e la plagua enayssi que es cristerisat am aygua e mel, e aprop am aygua en la qual es bulhida razit de liri o de aristologia longua, e aprop retorna al enguent.	 And the wounds are washed with water and vinegar until they become free of dirt or lint; then you apply with water that has a solution of balsam of gold or arnica oil, and place it back into its position.
E si la plagua es dedintz en la mayre ameguada, lahoras cove que tu sias prohibit de la curacio de lu am ferr, habantz cura aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio.	 When the gout occurs in the great toe, it is customary that you should not allow any care to be given on it as well, and instead cure what has been mentioned in this division.
Capitol .lxxv.	 Chapter 75 of The Capitularies
A ensenhar las matronas en qual manieyre les enbrios bius sian medicatz quan yeysso segon figura no-natural.	 To put on the girdles when there is no natural second figure (i.e., a second visible breast).
Necessaria causa es que la matrona conogua en le comensament la figura del enfantament natural per senhals de lu, e es que quan tu vezas la femna expremar a las partidas dejos e desira odorar le ayre, e sobre aquo es enleujada per aquo que sobre ela es del part, e festina le eyssiment del enbrio, lahoras sapias que aquest part es segon figura natural, e es l’eyssiment de lu sobre le sieu cap, e la segondina am aquel o suspensa o pendent del ombelic.	 It is necessary that the girdle knows at first sight what the normal figure of her breasts should be by looking at them from the front and side. If she wants to wear this belt while lying down or standing, it is customary for a servant to undo and remove both belts, leaving one on each side under her belly button, and fasten it in place over her head as well.
Donc cum tu vezes aquels senhals, lahoras cove que·l ventre de lu sia compremut per so que l’embrio deysenda leugerament quar quan deyssen sobre le sieu cap, deysen a lu la segondina, e es mondada de aquelas superfluitatz am bona mondificacio.	 So when you see her breasts, it is customary for the belt to be tightened up so that there will be less of an impression on her belly and she may enjoy more comfort in this way.
Mays aquel que es otra aquest part es no-natural e no-lausable, quar quan le enbrio es eyssit sobre sos pes e·l cos de lu es eyssit devant le cap de lu e·ls pes de lu, e la ma de lu una, o al pe de lu i, o es eyssit le cap de lu e la ma de lu, o al ventre de lu, e fort leu es convertit sobre le sieu col, e semblant de las figuras de lu no-lausablas.	 If that part is another natural figure and not visible, when the belt is removed from her body, both legs and arms of hers will be exposed to view as well, either on top or below (i.e., between her belly button and navel).
Don necessaria causa es a la matrona que sia savia e subtil en totas aquelas causas, e que·s guarde de error e de decepcio.	 The first sentence to translate means: "It's necessary for her [the midwife] to be wise and subtle in all of those cases, so that she may avoid error and disappointment.
E yeu so mostrant tota figura de aquelas, e qual engen es en aquelas per so que sia significat per aquo e sia stat sobre aquo.	 It is important for you to show a complete picture of those things, and what should be done in those cases that it means here and should be on this
Quan le feyt es eyssit sobre le sieu cap per egrecio natural, e aquel es vehement sobre la femna e es fayt a lu part dificil, e vezes la vertut de lu ja debelitada, lahoras fay aquela sezer , o que las femnas tenguan lu, e evapora le conh de lu am fenugrec coyt e am olis humitz.	 When the blood is spilled onto his head through a natural accident and it's very painful for him to have that part of his body touched, the doctors avoid touching her in those cases or any other women who has experienced something similar, as women are often more sensitive in this regard.
E aprop entrometa la metrona entre les sieus ditz espatum petit e fenda am aquel la segondina, o secce aquela am la sua ungla entro que corro aquo que es en ela de humiditat.	 The midwife should place the second between her breasts and gently touch it there while she holds onto that part of his body to prevent moisture from coming out.
E preme le ventre de la femna entro que deyssenda le fet.	 Put a cushion on her belly in order for the baby to come out.
Mays si no deyssen, lahoras cove que la femna sia cristirizada de mucellage de ptilli e mucellage de fenugrec am cizami.	 If this is not necessary, it's customary that the woman has become infected with pus in her breast and pus from the nipple as well.
E aprop comanda a lu, aprop le cristeri, que sia compremuda e fay aquela stornudar am condisi; e te la boca de lu e·l nas de lu per huna hora, quar le fet sira foro-getat tantost.	 The midwife should command the woman to lie down, remove her clothing and let them be torn apart as needed; place a pillow under her head for comfort, feed her breast milk by mouth and with a straw every hour until it is born as much as possible.
E si las doas mas del fet so foro-getadas al comensament, lahoras cove que tu redusiscas aquelas am fecilitat petit a petit.	 When the two feet are first separated at the beginning of treatment, it is customary for you to gently reduce those flexible parts little by little
Mays si no obezeys al intrament, lahoras pausa la femna sobre una cezelha e leva les pes de lu sus, e aprop concuceys la cezelha sobre la terra; e la femna sia tenguda que no caia deves la concussio.	 If they are not obese from the outset, you should place a cushion under them and support their feet with your arms, and ensure that the female is positioned so as to prevent any injury
E si las mas no son dedintz tornadas e morr le fet, lahoras inscideys aquelas e extratz le romament del fet o lia le cors a la ma de lu am drap e extratz aquel am equalitat, quar aquel sira foro-getat.	 If the legs cannot be turned or if they are too weak to support themselves from their back and chest respectively, you should gently lift them towards your chest and equalize that part of their body by placing an equal cushion on both sides
De eyssiment del embrio sobre les sieus pes.	 With the abdomen resting on their legs.
Quan le fet yeys sobre les sieus pes, lahoras cove que tu impelliscas aquels en sus, e aprop convertas le fet petit, e aprop que engualhes aquel, e aprop que prenguas un pe de lu e extendas aquels petit a petit.	 When the body lies on their legs, it is customary to gradually pull them up towards you and gently support their back with one hand, while holding onto another part of their leg or chest with your other hand and stretch that part little by little.
Mays cum son eyssit entro a las coyssas, lahoras tu comanda a lu que se exprema, e fay aquela extornudar am condizi, quar sira foro-getat si Deus lo vol.	 If the belly protrudes into their thighs, you should gently pull it out and hold that part down while ensuring they remain flat on their back if possible, as this will help prevent any injury
E si no es foro-getat am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras tu retorna le fet petit a petit entro que pauses aquel segon figura natural, quar aquel sira lahoras foro-getat am leugier eyssiment.	 If you find that their body is not flat on the ground as recommended by your doctor, continue gently pulling them towards you and gradually return to supporting their back with one hand while holding onto another part of their leg or chest with the other hand, so that they remain flat wherever possible, which will help prevent any injury.
E si es prohibit am tot aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras pren de musellage de altea e de goma dissolvuda, e percuteys tot en le mortier per bona percussio, e aprop linieys am aquo le conh de la femna, el pus bas del ventre de lu.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body and pain occurs in the feet as well, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
E aprop fay aquela cezer en aygua tebeza, entro que consegua les ypocondias.	 And if it's necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery.
E cum vezes que las partidas dejos de lu so lenificadas, lahoras fay a lu subfumiguacio de mirta e sub-pausa aquela a lu.	 And if it is necessary to lubricate the passages of urine and feces as well, doctors suggest doing this with a pointed cautery.
E quan te la sub-fumiguacio per una hora, lahoras tu la fay sezer sobre una cezelha, e aprop fay aquela stornudar e extrenh la boca de lu, e levas de aquela, e prem la partida pus bassa del ventre de lu am leugiera compressio, quar le fet sira tantost foro-getat.	 After a half hour of lubrication, doctors suggest putting the pointed cautery on your finger and gently press it against the mouth to prevent vomiting and hold it there while applying gentle compression over that part to prevent the vomit from coming out too forcefully.
Eyssiment del fet sobre les sieus denols e las suas mas.	 First, cover up the patient's nose and mouth as well.
Quan le fet eyssira segon aquesta forma, lahoras tu engenies en entrometen las suas mas petit a petit; e aprop la femna stia evessada sobre le sieu col, e les pes de lu pengo en jos, e aquelas sia jasent sobre le lieyt, e complegua las suas mas.	 After the patient has become quiet in this manner, doctors insert a small tube into their nose one by one; then place the woman's hand over their chest to prevent them from spilling out of it as well as putting their hands on their feet and compressing their legs.
E aprop prem sobre le ventre de lu petit a petit, e aprop extratz aquo que es dejos les pes de lu de las aurelhas entro que sia preparada en la partida pus dejos.	 After placing the hand gently over the patient's stomach one by one and then remove them from their ears until they are prepared for the next part of the passage.
E si le fet no es fora-getat, lahoras pren les pes de lu e mau aquels am movement vehement, e aprop prem aquo que es sobre les ypocondres petit a petit entro que le fet puege a las partidas desus.	 When the body part is not yet fully relaxed, then lay on its weight and apply this ointment to strengthen it gradually until it can move independently again
E aprop entrometa las suas mas e engualhe le fet petit a petit, e comanda a la femna que se exprema entro que le fet sia foro-getat.	 Stretch out the limbs little by little and order them to try to come free so that they are fully relaxed
Eyssiment del fet latutidinalment pendent una de las suas mas.	 Stretch out the lower part of the body gently for a while.
Sia engeniat en reduccio de la ma de lu, mays si no podes aquela reduzir, lahoras eleva la femna e fe aquela anar.	 Reduce the pain in her hand if you can't reduce that leg.
E si anar no pot, lahoras fay la jazer sobre le lieyt, e concuteys las coyssas de lu am concussio vehement, e aprop aministra liamentz les quals yeu e recomtatz de mucillages.	 If not possible, lay the gauze on its side and quickly apply a compress with warm damp cloths to relieve it.
E si es vengut le enfantament, lahoras fay aquela sezer sobre cezelha, e aprop studia sobre la reduccio de la ma, e enguala le fet segon figura natural, e fay stornudar la femna e comanda a lu que comprema a si entro que sia foro-getat.	 If it is hurt and cannot move, lay that limb flat on the ground and encourage it to relax naturally as much as possible, then force its opposite side again to make it free so that it can move independently again.
Eyssiment del fet sobre·l col expandudas las suas mas e la fassia de lu es al dos de la sua mayre.	 Stretch out the upper part of the body gently for a while.
Cove que la matrona tengua la ma del fet e aprop revolva aquel petit a petit, e eque aquel am facilitat.	 Have her hold on to the foot of the patient and slowly revolve it little by little in order to facilitate its movement.
E cum es e quant so es engualhat, e lahoras pausa sobre le conh de lu aquo que havem recomtat de oli e de mucellages.	 When you do this as directed and pause over the head of him at that point we recommend applying oil and cloths for lubrication.
E aprop comandas a lu que·s maugua petit a petit, e quan auras feyt aquo, lahoras fay aquela cezer sobre una cezelha e comanda li que sia inclinada sobre le latz dreyt, e aprop comanda a lu que sia compremuda; e fay aquela stornudar am condizi.	 "Apply the ointment gradually and when you've finished applying it, instruct them to lie down on their right side.
Exitus foetus praeparati super latus.	 A child is being born
Quan deyssen a horrifici de la mayre segon aquesta manieyra, considera, e lahoras tu inscideys la segondina am la tua ungla entro que sia evacuada de la humiditat.	 When it comes to the second of the three tasks that are part of this procedure, consider that and instruct your assistant to remove any excess saliva from your tongue
E si le fet es suspendut sobre la cara e·l col de lu, lahoras tu inscideys aquela del embelic, per so que no sia retengut e mora.	 If the task is suspended over their face and neck, instruct them to remove any excess mucus so it does not stick or drip.
E aprop empelleys le fet a las partidas dedintz entro que pauses aquel segon que cove, e manda a la femna que comprema a si alcunas veguadas, e el sira fora-getat am eyssiment leugier, si Dieus o vol.	 Then instruct the assistant to perform the next task when you've given them permission and ask the woman to check if there are any vegetables or herbs in it, otherwise proceed with the remaining tasks as planned.
Exitus geminorum aut foetuum multorum.	 Either of twins or multiple births
Sapias que gemels motas veguadas so natz, e alcunas vetz naysso tres o quatre , mays aquo es estranh e tart s’endeve; mays v so causas foro natura, e no vivo.	 Do you mean that multiple births are caused by nature or life itself?
E conte aquelas, ja sia que sian montiplicatz, una segondina, e son seperatz per ciphac, distingen aquels enter le liguament en l’ombilic de cascun de aquels E alcunas veguadas so foro-getatz ayssi cum es un fet per eyssiment natural leugier, e so eysitz alcunas veguadas per eyssiment no-lausabla ayssi cum havem recomtat.	 Do you mean that either twins or a second child are separated at birth because of an umbilical ligament?
E si son dificils alcus de lor deves le enfantament e perveno ad aquo que havem dit de las figuras no-naturals, lahoras tu cura aquels ayssi cum havem recontat.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and when the feet are affected, it is customarily called gout by doctors
E si’ la matrona subtil e fassa aquo que fa am facilitat e subtilitat, e am tarditat, e sia ingeniat segon tota figura segon que es a lu preparat de l’engen amenant a salut.	 And if the mistress is subtle and capable of doing it in a simple and delicate way, without delay, and has ingenuity beyond any other figure when preparing for health
Rememoratio eius quod formatur in matrice ex embrionibus et Abortiuntur.	 To remember that they are formed from the embryo and will be aborted.
Alcunas veguadas son formatz en la mayre un, e dos, e tres, e quatre, e v, e vi, e vii, e mays x, e ja es deves mi verificat que una femna abortem ne getet vi, e una autra x totz formatz, la qual causa fo fayta per mensuracio dels glorios savis.	 The ovaries are formed in the first month, and also in the second, third, fourth, fifth, sixth, seventh, eighth months; and from them it is necessary to check that a woman who has aborted once will abort again, and another one may be formed which causes this affliction through measurement of the glory holes.
E tot aysso cove que sia en la sciencia de la matrona quar fort leu ad aquela parve semblant de aquo, e donc opause se ad aquo am so que cove.	 Therefore, it is in the science of the mistress that she may be very light and similar to this, but also pause herself from doing so as much as possible.
Capitol .lxxvi.	 The sixty-sixth chapter
De extraccio del fet quan es mort.	 About the extraction of the fetus when it is dead
Quan tu curas le fet mort am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la medicacio e no es defora eyssit, e tu yest forsat usar de opperacio am ma, lahoras cove que consideras si la femna es de sana vertut e no es am alcu dels accidentz per les quals sobre ela es temuda perdicio.	 When you cure the dead fetus as stated in the division of medicine and it is not forbidden by law or custom, use your best judgment to determine whether the woman is a healthy one without being subject to accidents for which she was warned could result in loss.
Lahoras cove que la femna sia envessada sobre le lieyt sobre le sieu dos, e sia le cap de lu enclinat enjos e las coyssas de lu sian elevadas.	 The woman lies on her back over a table or bed with her feet elevated and the head of the patient is tilted to their chest while cushions are placed between her thighs
E·l ministre tengua aquela de doas partz o sia liada en le lieyt per so que·l cos de lu no se extenda deves la extraccio del fet.	 The minister has that of the two parts laid on a table to prevent the body from extending towards the exit of the anus.
E aprop tu humecta la boca de la mayre de lu am olis humitz e am mucellage de altea e de fenugrec e de semensa de li.	 And you should lubricate the mouth of the larger patient with saliva, and mucus from other places as well.
E aprop unte la matrona la sua ma am aquels olis e mucellages, e aprop entrometa la sua ma am fecilitat en la mayre, e aprop cerque am la ma loc en le qual fique les uncis en le fet.	 And you should lubricate the arm of the woman with her own saliva and mucus, and put a finger into her vagina to feel for any semen inside it.
E locs convenient en aquo: adonc tu considera si le fet es preparat que deysenda sobre le sieu cap, e lahoras tu fique les uncis en les huels de lu, o en le col, o en la boca, o en le palat, o dejos la barba, o en la furcula de lu, o en les locs propdas de las costas, o dejos les ypocondres.	 The place you should choose when: after considering that the body is ready to ejaculate over its head, the semen will stay in its hands or between them and testicles or on its beard or in its throat or on its palate or on the places of the shoulders, or on the back of his neck.
Mays si le deysendiment es sobre les pes de lu, lahoras en le pentenilh, o en le mieg de las costas.	 The ejaculation may occur in the feet, and then they will feel it, or between their shoulders.
E cove que tengua le unci am la ma dreyta, e pausa la curvitat de lu en aquel loc le qual es entre les ditz de la ma senestra, e entrometa la ma am facilitat e fique le unci en alcu de aquels locs les quals havem ditz, entro que pervengua a la causa boyda.	 And you should lubricate the right arm with your own saliva and place it in between the fingers of the left hand, to insert it into those places where we have mentioned them, until ejaculation occurs.
E aprop pause e fique en la apposicio de lu un autre unci, o le tertz si es necessitat, per so que sia atraccio engual, e no sia extencio segon la sua rectetut tant solament.	 When you have already placed the cushion between their thighs, another on each leg, or if it is necessary for that third one, to ensure they stay attached and not be pulled out only by the doctor's touch.
Ans sia maugut a tota partida, per so que l’eyssiment de lu sia alleujat ayssi cum es fayt en dent deves la eradicacio de lu.	 Once all is ready for the operation to begin, you must make sure that the patient's intestine is fully out and ready for removal.
E cove en lu aquo que es entre lor que la extencio sia mollificada; e si alcuna partida de lu es retenguda, lahoras cove que la matrona unte alcus sieus ditz am oli e entrometa aquels espertament e revolva am aquels aquo que es retengut.	 Once all is ready for the operation to begin, make sure that the attachment of the intestine has been loosened; and if any part of it remains attached, then inform a nurse who will undo her stitches and enter through these slits to reach and remove this object as soon as possible.
Donc si la partida del fet es fora-getada, lahoras les uncis sian permudatz entra loc le qual sia pus aut; e fay aysso entro que tot le fet sia fora-getat.	 Once the part of the patient's body has been cut open, then proceed to remove everything from that location as quickly as possible; and make sure all parts of the body are removed in order.
Mays si la ma es eyssida denant l’autra, e no es possible reduzir aquela per la coartacio de lu, lahoras cove que drap sia envolopat sobre aquela; e aprop extratz aquela entro que tota sia fora-getada, e inscideys aquela o en la junctura de la ma o en le coyde.	 If it is not possible to reduce this object with the other hand due to its size or any other reason, then wrap a bandage around that part and proceed in removing everything from there; and ensure that it has been completely removed either at the joint of the arm or on the side where the body was cut open.
E ayssi cove que fassas en l’autra ma e en les dos pes.	 Proceed with both hands.
Mays si le cap del fet es gran, o accideys a lu coartacio en le eyssiment, o es en le cap de lu aygua ajustada, lahoras cove que entrometa entre les ditz espatum spinos e fenda le cap e extragua la aygua, o que discroba aquel am un instrument le qual es nompnat “alundat”, la forma del qual vindra am las formas dels autres instruments en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	 If the head of the patient is large or if there are any difficulties in removing it, then enter between the two slits and cut off the head with a tool called "alundat", which has the form that will come to match the forms of other instruments located at the place where it should be.
E semblantment fassa si·l fet es de gran cap per natura: e lahoras cove que inscida aquel am algematu, o que prengua aquel am alunda ayssi cum havem dit; e aprop extra les osses am les forceps.	 When the patient's head is large in nature, and the gout has attacked that part of it, or if it attacks someone on top of their body, do so by cutting off the extremity with a pair of scissors.
E si le cap es eyssit e es coartat deves la furcula, lahoras sia fendut entro que la humiditat la qual es en le pietz sia efunduda.	 If the head is small and the attack has reached its surface, it is customary to remove that area with tweezers.
Mays si no es complicat, ni obezeys a eyssiment, lahoras tu inscideys le cap tantost segon que a tu sira possible.	 If not complicated or excessive, then proceed and make an incision on the head as long as it is feasible to do so.
E si le dejos del ventre es apostemat o es en lu ydropici, lahoras cove que tu perfores aquel entro que corro la humiditat que es en lu.	 If the belly button has been removed or perforated, proceed and cut through that area as long as there is moisture present in it.
Mays si le fet es sobre les sieus pes, lahoras la atraccio de lu es leugiera e la direccio de lu a la boca de la mayre es leugiera.	 If the body part is below your waist, the cutting shall be made lower and directed towards the mouth of that leg as lower in level.
Mays si es coartat deves le ventre e·l pietz, lahoras cove que tu extraguas aquel am drap le qual auras envolopat sobre la tua ma, e que fendes le ventre e·l pietz entro que corra aquo que es en aquels.	 If the attack has reached or is near to your stomach and chest area, proceed by removing that extremity and placing it over your hand so that you can cut through your abdomen into that area as directed.
Mays si les autres membres so ostatz e torna le cap, lahoras la metrona entrometa la ma senestra; mays si la boca de la mayre es huberta, lahoras intrometa la ma en le preon de layre, e cerque am aquela le cap, e atira aquel am les ditz entro a la boca de la mayre, e aprop entrometa en lu un unci, o dos uncis, e atire lu am aquels.	 If the other limbs are affected and returning to the head is necessary, proceed by cutting off one arm from your shoulder up to the elbow if it is possible, or two arms if needed, and direct that extremity towards the mouth of the larger limb as directed.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada per apostema caut le qual accideys a l’u, lahoras cove que no sia trebelhat sobre lu; abantz cove lahoras aministrar efusio de causas humidas grassas.	 When the mouth of the woman is closed by a pointed object that hits her, pain occurs to him/her; so doctors say it should not be treated with dry remedies but with humid ones instead
E aministre emplastres; e segua le pacient en ayguas que mollifican e humectan.	 Use plasters and continue to treat the patient by soothing and moisturizing means
E si le fet es sobre le sieu costat, lahoras si possible es, sia agulat: e sia aministrat aquo que havem dit en le fet viu.	 If that part is on his side then doctors should try to treat it; otherwise continue as previously advised.
E si aquo no es possible, lahoras sia inscidit en pessas, e sia extrayt.	 If this isn't possible, the doctor will prescribe pessaries and remove them.
E cove que non layssas alcuna causa dedintz de la segondina.	 Nothing that could cause the second one.
E cum tu auras complida tota la tua opperacio, lahoras aministra aquo que havem dit de la curacio en les apostemas cautz les quals accideysso de la mayre.	 Once you've finished all your work, the doctor will treat this by following what we advised in the previous procedure for dealing with the pain of the woman.
E si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras deyssendas en ayguas stipticas e aministra l’autra curacio.	 If it occurs suddenly, the doctor will use sharp remedies and proceed to another treatment.
E yeu ja e vist una femna en le ventre de la qual era fet mort, e aprop sobre aquel foc autra veguada emprenhada, e aprop foc mort es le fet autre.	 You saw a woman in her belly who was dead and you covered that area with another bandage, and when the corpse moved, it is necessary to cover it again with another bandage.
Accidit al u aprop lonc temps apostema en le sieu embelic; e inflat es entro que foc ubert, e comensec a getar brac.	 The pointed object hit her in the belly and went inside where she had a stomach ulcer; as soon as it moved out of place, begin to bandage
E yeu fu appelhat a la cura de lu, e medicat a lu per lonc temps, e la plagua no es consolidada.	 'You have called for healing of him, and treated him for a long time, but the swelling has not subsided.'
Adonc yeu pausegui sobre lu de alscunas causas emplastra de forta atraccio, e eyssic de lu un os, e aprop passero alcus jorns, e eyssic un autre os; e yeu fu trop meravilhat, cum en le ventre no sia os.	 'You have already placed a cushion under his feet, and made him rest on another leg or chest, and you were amazed that the swelling did not subside in the belly.'
E adonc yeu cogitegui que eran dels osses del fet mort.	 'And since then, you realize that it is from the bones of a dead man.'
Donc yeu enguisigui la plagua, e extrayssi de lu motz osses , la femna existent en las sieuas milhos disposicios, e ja visquec en tal manieyra per lonc temps, correc de lu un petit de brac.	 'Then you tried to heal the swelling but only found that his bones were breaking up, and there was a fluid present in both of your lungs, which had been causing you pain for a long time.'
E yeu no afermegui asso esser stranh, sino quar en aquo es sciensa e ajutori ad aquo que le metge artifec am la ma per curacio aministra.	 'You were not able to stop being strange but realized that this is known and helps the doctor treat.'
De las formas dels instrumentz que so necessaris a extrayre le fet.	 'The forms of the instruments necessary to remove the body.'
Forma de vertitge am la qual es uberta la mayre:	 'A form of truth that is greatest:'
Aquesta es la forma de strenhedor en le qual so engualhatz les libres, al qual engualhament sian dos virtitges en doas extremitatz de dos futz.	 'This is the form of strength in which two virtues are equalized at each extremity of two forces.'
May empero aquesta virtitge cove que sia pus subtil de strictori, e sia fayt o de eba o de fust de boys.	 'However this virtue may be most subtle and precise, or it may also be rough and fast moving.'
E sia la latitut de quascun fust quays dos ditz e le marge de quascu amdos quays un dit, e la longitut de quascu es un palm e mig; e en le mieg loc de dos fustz so dos ajustaments de aquel meteys fustz les quals ja son fermatz, dels quals la longitut es la maytat de un palm e un pauc mes, e la latitut de quascu es quay dos ditz, o un pauc mes.	 'The length of each fist is one palm and a little less than that, and the breadth at which two fists touch or come together is like the width of a small finger.'
E aquestz dos additamentz sian entromeses en la boca de la mayre per que sia uberta am aquels quan tu revolves las doas prescriptas virtigges.	 When the two openings enter into the mouth of the woman, so that she is taken in by these prescribed virtues
Forma autra semblant de aquela pus subtil e pus leugiera:	 Another way like this one is very subtle and light
Sia fayta de fustz de eba o de boys segon la semblansa de forceps.	 The procedure to be done with a pair of pliers or a similar tool after the manner of a scalpel.
Mays empero en la extremitat de lu so dos additament ayssi cum vezes, e la longitut de aquels additament es quays un palm, e la latitut de quascu es dos ditz.	 The two openings may be placed at the extremity of them as often as you wish, and their length is to have a palm's breadth, each one being twice that width.
E cum tu vols am aquels ubrir la mayre, lahoras tu fay cezer la femna sobre le lieyt les pes pendentz, ubert aquo que es entre las coyssas de lu.	 When you want to move the woman onto her back with her feet bent, hold that which is between her thighs.
E aprop obre la tua ma am le instrument ayssi cum fas am forfexs engualment segon la quantitat que vols de la aprecio de la boca de la mayre entro que la metrona fassa so que vols.	 Then place your hand on the tool similarly as when you grasp a fork, and in accordance with how much of the opening to the woman's mouth you wish for it to measure
La forma de vertitge la qual diysero les antics:	 The manner which they used to do formerly.
Forma de impellent am le qual es empellit le fet:	 The method by which the matter was done.
Forma de amisidat2 am le qual es conterit le cap gran	 Form of doing with what is put on her head
E es asemblat a forceps al qual so dentz en la extremitat, ayssi cum vezes, e alcunas veguadas es fayt lonc ayssi cum forceps segon aquesta forma, ayssi cum vezes, al qual so dentz ayssi cum dentz de ressegua am le qual es inscidit e conterit.	 The instrument is placed in the extremity and then with pliers like this one similarly often times, and some guards are put on it similarly to that of forceps similarly often times, where the instrument is inserted and held.
Forma de amesidat pauc:	 First
Forma de unci havent una spina:	 To apply a poultice
Forma de unci havent doas spinas:	 To apply a plaster
Forma de forceps a la qual so dentz de cerra am le qual le cap del fet sia conterit:	 To use forceps to lift the head of the child.
Forma de spatum havent dos extremitatz am le qual le cap es abscindit:	 To apply a poultice to the part where the head is detached.
Forma de dos espatums latz:	 Two flat plates
Totz aquels instrumentz so excersitatz, e quan mes so multiplicadas las specias de aquel e so preparadas deves le artifexs, quant es pus leugier a la sua opperacio e pus aut deves les homes per la sua quantitat.	 When these instruments are used, and if many of the same species exist in different sizes, then they must be prepared with equal care to achieve their purpose, as is required by its nature or for the benefit of its users.
E no obres de aquels instrumentz ja sia qua sia deves tu aparalhat, quar la necessitat de aquels no es excusabla.	 You should not use these instruments if they are not available when it is necessary to do so, because their absence cannot be excused.
De extraccio de la segondina.	 Second part of the text.
Quan la segondina es retenguda deves le enfantament, lahoras cove que tu comandes a la malautae que retengua le sieu ale, e aprop fay aquela stornudar am condizi, e strenh la tua ma sobre la boca de lu e sobre las nars de lu, e si per aysso es defora eyssit, bo es.	 When the second part is removed you should command to close the mouth of the patient and if necessary spread your hand on his chest and nose, because as long as he can stay still it's all right.
E sino, lahoras tu pren una ola e perfora en la cuberta un trauc e pausa en aquela erbas ubrent la boca de la mayre, ayssi cum calament e ruda e anet e camamilla e scicados arabic e cassia lignea e santaurea.	 Otherwise you will put a poultice in the cloth over his throat and keep it there until the herbs become hot enough to burn off the mucus from his mouth, as calmly and gently as possible without burning him or causing any harm.
Totas aquestas erbas o alcunas de lor sian submersas en aygua en la ola, e pausa aquela sobre le foc.	 When these herbs or some of them are submerged in water on the ground, place that over fire.
E aprop pausa una canula de canaviera en la boca de la mayre, e tengua aquela entro que la evapor vengua a la concavitat de la mayre.	 Then place a drain tube in the mouth of the patient and keep it inside so that any vomit enters into their throat.
E aprop fay aquela stornudar ayssi cum havem dit, e la segondina sira fora-getada am velocitat.	 Then say these words quickly: "Give me a moment.
Mays si roman aprop aquesta curacio e no es eyssida, lahoras tu comanda a la matrona que submerge la sua ma sinistra en oli sizami o en micellage de altea, e aprop entrometa aquela en le conh e queresca am aquela la segondina, e cum aquela auras trobada, lahoras pren la e exten aquela pauc a pauc Mays si es annexsa en le preon de la mayre, lahoras entrometa la sua ma segon que havem recomtat, e quan aura trobat la segondina, extragua aquela petit a petit segon rectetut per so que la mayre no caja deves la atraccio vehement.	 Then take this action and do not miss it: place the left hand into olive oil massage or micellar water, and arrange that into her palm, waiting for its arrival, then immediately extract it gently one by one until you reach the second one, after which quickly remove them gently from their chest to prevent strong contractions.
Abantz cove que sia permudada als costatz dreyt e sinestre am facilitat.	 Then take a small amount of medication in your left hand and place it on both sides of the right and left nostrils, making breathing easier.
E aprop sia ajustat en la quantitat de atraccio, quar ela obedira e evasira de adhirencia.	 Then adjust its quantity so that it is gentle yet effective.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada, nos ja havem recomtat la curacio am sturnutacio e am medicacio de la ola am erbas.	 If the patient's mouth is closed, then recommend a tube for feeding and medication of their herbals to assist in recovery.
Mays si no es fora-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recomtadas, lahoras guarda te que no fetigues sobre aquela en iteracio de abstracio, mays empero cove que aquo que es eyssit de lu a la boca de la mayre lies a la coyssa de la femna, e aprop cristeriza aquela am enguent e tetrafarmacon; quar aquel fara poyrir aquela aprop alcus dias e sira dissolvuda e sira fora-getada.	 Then keep in mind that if it is not possible to put anything into their mouth due to injury, place a spoon filled with food or medication next to them and wait for their next meal to be dissolved and ready.
Mays quan se poyreys, es de lu elevada mala audor al cap, e al estomac, e aquo ledeys la malauta; e adonc cove que sian aministradas sub-fumiguacios e convenientz ad aquo.	 When you are about to begin, elevate the patient's head and stomach, and place a pillow under them; then proceed with care as needed.
Mays alcus dels Antics ja so esproatz sub-fumigacio de nazitort e de figuas seccas.	 It is customary to use cold compresses on the nose and cheeks to help with joint pain caused by cold humors that have infiltrated into each part of the body, including the feet.
Forma de instrument am le qual la femna es sub-fumiguada deves la retentio de mestruas e de la segondina:	 To perform a cautery procedure on an area where you would apply a cold compress, first make sure to tighten the muscles and secondarily press down.
Sia fayta de veyre o de eram.	 The text is incomplete without more context or information about what 'veira' or 'eram' refers to in this sentence.
E sia pausada la extremitat subtil en le conh e la extremitat ampla sobre le foc, e la sub-fumiguacio sia pausada sobre las brazas del foc.	 Place a cold compress on the delicate area of the chin and cover it with a larger one over the eyebrows; also place another cold compress under the hands by the fire.
E tengua aquela entro que sia consumida aquela sub-fumiguacio e itera·n autra.	 You must then apply this cold compress, and after that proceed to apply another.
De curacio del cul del enfant no-perforat.	 The procedure should be avoided for the anus of a child.
Motz enfantz naysso e les culs de lu no so perforatz, les quals ya ciphac subtil e opilat.	 Do not touch or rub the ears of children; they are very soft and sensitive.
Adonc cove a la matrona que perfore am le sieu dit aquel ciphac; e sino, perfora aquel am spatum agut, e guarda se que no toque le lacert.	 Also make sure to avoid touching the nostrils of the patient if you do not want to touch the throat as well, and be careful that you don't touch his/her ear canal.
E aprop pause sobre aquel lana enfusa en vi e oli; e aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia senat.	 Then place a cold compress on the inflamed part of the eye and eyelid, and care for it as needed to prevent infection.
Mays si temes que sia opilat, lahoras pausa en le trauc una canula per motz dias, e osta la quan le enfant voldra degerir.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery
E ja accideys oppilacio del cul per consolidacio de plagua o de apostema; adonc cove que aquela consolidacio sia inscidida, e aprop sia curada am aquo que avem dit de la curacio e del plom.	 If hemorrhoids occur from straining during defecation or stool passage, and if such consolidation is suspected, then apply a remedy to cure it by moistening the area with water and linen.
De curacio de las fistulas que endeveno dejos.	 From curing of the fistula that ended up in you.
Las fistulas que endeveno en la partida dejos pus bassa so nodacio e grossetut las quals endeveno prop del cul defora o en l’espazi de la una partida.	 Fistulas that originated in the anus, protruded through it or into another part of the body.
E es una fistula o motas.	 It is a fistula or abscess.
E cum aquela nodacio es antiquada e corr de la humiditat aygosa blanca o poyridura subtil, e alcunas veguadas so de aquestas fistulas alcunas penetrantz.	 If such a nodule has become old and eroded from dampness or pressure, some vessels may be affected by it, causing penetration.
E aquelas penetrantz so conogudas per aquo que es eyssit de aquelas per la egressio e per ventosetat; e alcunas vetz use le malaute de egressio, e fort leu es eyssit de aquelas verm.	 Such penetrations cause the exit or flow of mucus to be obstructed, and some vessels may be affected by it, leading to erosion.
E so de aquelas fistulas alcunas veguadas en l’espazi penetrantz entro a la vesica, e entro al meat de la vergua; e so de aquelas penetrantz entro la junctura de la coyssa e entro al notz de la coeta.	 Such fistulas may enter the bladder or urethra, and into the vagina of the vulva; and such penetrations may enter the junction of the scrotum or into the testicles.
E aquo en que es conoguda fistula penetrant entro al cul e no-penetrant, es que tu metas le tieu dit endic en le cul, e entrometas tenta subtil de eram o de ferr en la fistula quan no y es turtuositat.	 When a fistulas that are penetrative enter the anus but not penetrative ones do so gently or may be inserted into the fistula if it is not closed up.
Mays si en aquela es turtuositat, lahoras entromet en aquela tenta subtil de plom o de pels de caval entro que tu sentas la tenta o le pel en le tieu dit.	 When the gouty pain is already in that part of the body, there will be a subtle infiltration of phlegm or hair from the horse to come down your arm and touch you on the chest
E si no sentas aquela de tot ni no procezeys del trauc alcuna causa de egestio ni verm ni ventositat, ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras sapias que es no-penetrant, e lahoras coyta te a la curacio.	 If you don't feel that part of your body or there is no reason for vomiting and diarrhea, as mentioned above, the pain should go away and the doctor will check on you
E quan la fistula es penetrant entro a la vesica o entro al meat de la vergua, lahoras la significacio de lu es eyssiment de urina de aquela e prohibicio de lu ad aysso que·l loc am medicina sia consolidat.	 If the fistula penetrates into the bladder or into the rectum of urine, then the meaning of it is to be found in urine and it will prevent you from getting out medicine that way.
Mays si es penetrant entro la junctura de la coyssa o entro al os e envencio de dolor en le circuit, lahoras senhal de lu es que la tenta perve entro aqui si en lu no es turtuositat entro al os, e envencio de dolor en le circuit de la partida; e que de lu yeys poyredura tostemps; e que no val en aquela medicacio, ni es consolidada am enguent.	 If it penetrates into the joint of the finger or into the ear and causes pain in the circulation, then its meaning is that there is a swelling inside here if this swelling is not present at the site, and causes pain in the circuit from where it came; and that this medicine should be avoided temporarily; and that no use can be made of this treatment until it is consolidated.
E en totas aquelas fistulas penetrant no es curacio de tot, e la curacio de aquelas es trebalh e vanetat dels folyls metges sobre·l qual so fermatz.	 In all these fistulas that are penetrating nothing can be done and the treatment of those is only recommended by some doctors who have their opinions firm up to there.
Mays en aquela que no es penetrant e no antiqua, sanacio am ferr es sperada segon que yeu a tu recomtare, e aquo que ja yeu e proat.	 If it is not penetrating and does not exist, then the healing should be sought after consulting with your doctor and doing what you have already been told to do.
E es que le malaute jagua entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos e eleva las cambas de lu entro sus, las coyssas sian enclinadas al ventre de lu, e aprop entromet tenta de plom, o de eram si es en la fistula turtuositat, entro que sapias le loc on perve la tenta.	 "The patient is positioned between two legs with their buttocks towards the chest and a cushion placed under them. The cushions are then tilted towards the abdomen of the patient.
E si aquela sent le malaute entorn le cuol, lahora cove que tu entrometas le tieu dit endic en le cuol.	 "And if it comes to an incision in the bowel, the doctor will open this area.
E si sentas en le tieu dit la tenta ja per si meteyssa descuberta penetrar, otra aquo que sentas entre le tieu dit e aquela siphac o carn, lahoras sapias certanament que aquela es penetrant; e adonc no trebalhes en aquela, quar no es en aquela sanacio, ayssi cum havem dit.	 "And if you suspect an opening in the bowel or between the scrotum and anus, it is customary to confirm whether this is a penetrating injury by feeling for any protrusion of the intestine; and if there is none, as long as no other serious injuries are present, then proceed with closure.
Mays empero diyssero alcus que es sana en alcus homes tart.	 "If it was possible to remove the stone, they would have removed it from his body.
E de la medicacio per la qual es sperat juvament en lu es que tu ignes cauteri subtil segon le ample de la fistula, ayssi cum es precedit, e intrometas aquel ignit en la fistula entro que pervengua entorn le cuol; e aprop itera aquel doas o tres vetz entro que sapias que ja son adhustas totas aquelas carns ajustadas fistuladas que so semblantz a cana de pluma de ausel.	 "From the medical procedure for removing the stone, they made a small incision in order to enter into it with an instrument, as previously mentioned; and then closed that opening after taking out any stones or tissues from inside of it.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder entro que en yescan totas aquelas carns que so adhustas, e aprop cura aquela am medicinas la carn engendrantz e consolidantz, e si es sanada, bo es; e sino, lahoras no es sana en degun temps per autra curacio.	 "Then they treated the ulcer with a dressing to protect it and prevent infection while healing took place, as before mentioned; and if healed then good, but otherwise not healthy for another treatment.
E si la tenta intra, e no penetra entro·l tieu dit le qual es en le cul, e entre aquel e la tenta que es velament spes de carn o de ciphac, e vezes la fistula en aquo que siec la superficia de la codena, lahoras secca la codena del comensament de la fistula, e tu ve seccan am la tenta, e sia en la fistula entro que la seccio pervengua al loc en le qual perve la extremitat de la tenta, e per la tenta es liberat e catz.	 "If the attempt enters but does not penetrate into that place where semen comes out and between which and the attempt is only a skin wound or phlegm abscess, then seal up the fistula at its beginning with the cautery and you will cut it off so that when released from there, it goes to the location in which the extremity of the attempt falls on, and for the attempt being freed and dead.
E aprop mundifiqua aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so asembladas a canula de pena de ausel e no romangua de aquelas alcuna causa.	 "You will then insert into those inflamed fistulae that resemble a cannula of the cause of which nothing comes out and are not caused by any other thing.
Mays si flux de sanc vezes que vengua entre tu e la tua opperacio quan ensideysses aquelas carns, lahoras le milh que sia e del pus leugier instrument es cauterizar am foc o am medicina acuta, quar cauteri am foc ajusta bonas doas habitutz: so es adhustio de aquelas carns ajustadas, e abscizio del sanc exseccacio de las humiditatz.	 "If at any time you feel inflamed between your hand and arm when cleansing those fistulae, the doctor will apply cautery to either spot or an acute medicine if necessary; for which spot is preferred depends on good habits: so it's custom to make these fistulae closed off, and to remove the inflammatory discharge from the humidity.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder o en caus trissat entro que·l loc geta brac, e aprop lahoras cura la plagua am enguentz carn dura engendran e consolidan.	 "Then you will cure that which is swollen in the body or between the fingers such that it becomes firm and solid.
E so medicinas en las quals so stipticitat e exseccio; quan lahoras es restaurada ja es sanada e no temes iteracio.	 "Then you will use medicines for those who are stiff and dry, when the cure is restored they are cured without recurrence.
Mays si la fistula ja perve entro al preon del cul e es elonguada de lu superficia del cos, lahoras entromet le tieu dit en le cul e inquireys am aquel.	 "Then you will introduce it into that place of the anus and hold it there.
E donc si centes la tenta e entre tu e ela es velament de ciphac o de carn, e es propda a la penetracio, lahora no es operacio en lu sino segon via di fiducia e de speransa.	 If you notice any itching or tingling sensation between your finger and her elbow, proceed with caution as it may indicate an abscess
La qual causa es aministrar en lu una de tres manieyras: o que cauterize aquela ayssi cum havem dit; o que secces aquela entro que consieguas la conquavitat de lu per que sia a tu possible entrometre las qualcas e la curacio propdana; e no procesiscas mot am seccio per so que no inscidas le lacert contenent le cuol, e que accidisque sobre le malaute eyssiment de la egistio ses voluntat; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit quar fort leu sira sanat; o que elongues aquel velament e mondes aquel pus que seccas aquel entro prop le cul, ayssi cum havem dit, o am tenta o am autre instrument de aguda extremitat, e aprop mondifique aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so en la seccio entro la on podes am percrustacio; e aprop esforsa te a far la restauracio de tota la plagua am seccio, e si le orrifici pus desus no es consolidat, e romangua la fistula uberta en la partida del cul, e sira pus leugier per le malaute.	 You may administer one of the following three ways: cauterize that area to stop any further irritation and ensure proper healing; proceed with great caution as it may indicate an abscess or sore; or remove that part through which you inserted it in order for it to be possible to enter the anus later on, by using enemas and cleaning procedures.
E alscunas veguadas la fistula es finida segon aquesta manieyra: es quan tu entrometas la tenta en la fistula, e es en le latz del cul entorn la superficia del cos am la codena e en le marge del cul, lahoras pren tenta de perforada extremitat, que es ayssi cum agulha de preparantz les coers segon aquesta forma:	 If the fistula has been completely closed through one of these ways, proceed by puncturing that area (like using a needle).
e entromet en aquela fiel envolopat de v fiels o entorn aquels; e aprop entromet tenta am fiel en la fistula entro que consiegua la conquavitat de lu.	 If you notice any itching or tingling sensation around the vagina, proceed cautiously as it may indicate an abscess.
Mays si es penetrant en le marge del cul prop dedintz, lahoras tu extratz le fiel de aquel trauc ayssi que tu intrometas le tieu dit en le cul; e extraguas la extremitat del fiel e ajustes las duas extremitatz essemps, e estrenh cascuna, e leyssa aquo per un dia o per dos, e quan mays inscideys le fiel en la carn, estrenh be aquel entro que aquelas carns sian inscididas las quals so entre doas extremitatz del fiel e que cajan.	 If you notice any itching or tingling sensation around the anus, proceed cautiously as it may indicate an abscess.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia consolidada e sanada.	 Cut off the abscess that has been consolidated and healed
Mays si le orrifici de la fistula no es penetrant, lahoras fay aquel penetrar, en qualque manieyre sia a tu preparat, sino que sia mot en le preon, quar no es a tu que fassas aquo per que no inscidas le lacert; e aprop fay am aquela entro que sia sanada.	 If the abscess is impenetrable, do not try to insert anything there, but rather clean it thoroughly and leave it as it is.
La forma de spatum spinos am lo qual es fenduda la fistula: la curvitat del qual es mot aguda e l’autra partida es no-aguda, per so que no inscidas aquo que no es necessari, ayssi cum vezes.	 The shape of the septum is that which opens the fistula; its curvature must be acute and the other part is non-acute, in order to avoid inserting anything unnecessary, as you have mentioned.
De sutura de emorroydas en las quals corra sanc en la inscizio de aquelas.	 Suture cuts in those which are running across the incision of these ones.
Emorroydas so segon dos manieyras, quar o so entre le cul semblantz aysi que es de carbos, o quays aquelas sian cum a gras de rasim.	 Epididymitis is usually encountered after two weeks, which means that the epididymis swells with pus or inflammation.
E de aquelas so petitas e grans, e que le sanc corr de aquelas tostemps e es una, e so motas, e so fora·l cul, e en las extremitatz de lu.	 These are small and large, and the pain occurs in steps or in a continuous manner, on all parts of the body, including the buttocks and extremities.
Mays empero aquelas que so foro le cul so segon las mes de pauca humiditat, de las quals corr aygua citrina o un petit de sanc am cos continuabla, e so segon la color del cos.	 The epididymis may swell with citrinous water or a small continuous pain because of increased humidity around the scrotum and the color change.
E la curacio de aquela que es dedintz le cuol es que comandes al malaute que se assela e que se exprema entro que le cuol yesca e las emoroydas apparescan a tu.	 The treatment of that which is being drained from the urethra is to command it to relax and empty itself before examining the epididymides.
Adonc tu te coyte e suspen am uncis o que tenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, e aprop incideys aquelas deves las suas razitz.	 When you put it on your hand or the thumb of your finger, and if they get into that part of your palm, then immediately apply something to stop them from spreading further.
Mays si les uncis no so tengutz en aquelas per la humiditat de lor e mollificacio de aquelas, lahoras pren aquelas am drap aspre o am coto o am flassada de lana, e extratz aquelas am les tieus ditz, e aprop inscideys aquelas e polveriza sobre lor alcunas polveras caudas aprop la inscizio, per que sian ad aquelas en loc de cauteri; o cauteriza aquelas segon que es precedit en le capitol de cauterizar.	 If the humors don't fit into that area or are too cold and soft there, then apply it to the rough part of the arm, the elbow, or a folded cloth from wool, and extirpate them on their eyelids, put powder on top of them to stop spreading further.
E aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	 And then apply it with another cure once they are healed up.
E si le cul no obezeys a egressio, lahoras cristerisa le malaute am cristeri en le qual sia mordicacio petita, e sia lavat am aquel aquo que es en le cuol e que obezesca a egressio leugierament quan le malaute s’esprem.	 If the intestine does not exit on its own accord, then apply a cure which will cause the patient's abdomen to contract and squeeze out the intestine when it tries to come out.
Mays si las emorroydas so defora le cul, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiera, e es que tu prenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, o que prenguas aquelas am unci, e inscidas aquelas, e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit entro que sian sanadas.	 If the hemorrhoids are in front of the anus, it is said to be caused by urine and should you apply them to your hand or finger, or if applied to one's thumb, and you place them there, then immediately cure them with what was mentioned earlier that they were healed up with.
E aquel que avoreys inscizio, cove que aministres sutura de lor segon aquesta manieyra: pren fiel envolopat e entromet aquel en agulha e aprop extratz las emorroydas a las partidas dessus, e fay aquel penetrar am la agulha en la razit del autra part, e envolveys las doas extramitatz del fiel en la partida pus dejos de la agulha, e so latitudinalment; e estrenh la emorroyda am strectura fort, e aprop noza le fiel e extratz la agulha.	 If you are inserting them, then apply sutures of theirs after that fashion: take a faithful follower and entwine it around the needle and place the hemorrhoids on top thereof; and let him penetrate with the needle into another part, and involve his two extra mitts in intertwining in the part near to the point at which the needle penetrates, so latitudinally. And stretch out the hemorrhoids with great force, and put a halt to the faithful follower and withdraw the needle.
E fay aquo a totas, e layssa de aquelas una e no la cozes, per so que la superfluitat del sanc corra de aquela.	 This sentence translates to "Do all this, without those who are not necessary, in order that the excess of blood may run from there.
E aprop pausa sobre le cul drap enfus en oli rozat o en cerot; e pausa aquel sobre·l cuol e comanda al malaute que·s repause.	 This sentence translates to "Then place a cushion over the buttocks, spread it with oil or lard, and put one on top of the chest while commanding the patient that they should stop.
E aprop layssa aquela entro que caja; e quan es casuda, cura aquelas am enguentz o am autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	 This sentence translates to "Then place it in a box, and when it is full of water, cure those which are empty or others according to the need.
De curacio de fistulas.	 This line is not part of any translation, but rather indicates that this text is about fistula care.
Motas veguadas accideys per exseccacio de fenda o per costriccio de natura.	 This sentence translates to "The veins swell up due to either the drying out or restriction from nature.
E cum so antiquadas e no val en aquela medicina, lahoras cove que tu razas aquelas am la puncta de spatum o am la tua ungla entro que sian faytas humidas e sia hostada de aquelas la escorsa pus desus, la qual prohibeys aquelas de consolidacio; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian consolidadas.	 This sentence translates to "Even if they are old and no longer useful in this medicine, the doctors say that you should remove them at a certain spot or under your arm so that they may be soaked with moist and prepared for use by those who need them, which is forbidden those of consolidation; and place them where they are solid.
Lahoras tu osta aquelas am razio pus vehement que la primieyra entro que mot sancno e sian excoriadas; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	 This sentence translates to "Take those away in a rush, as the first ones which have been affected and are being burned with sores, and place them where they are healed.
De curacio de almesamir, so es clau.	 This line indicates that fistula care is crucial here.
Sapias que alamermar, so es clau, e no es si no notz redon segon la color del cors semblant a cap de claviel, e es fayt en tot le cors e majorment en las partidas dejos les pes e als ditz, e endeve per aquels dolor deves le anament.	 This sentence translates to "You know that the heart is crucial here and not if you do not notice any redness on the chest resembling a fingernail, it is placed throughout the body, especially in the parts of the feet and hands, and it is necessary for these pains.
E adonc cove que sia inscidit aquo que es en le circuit del clau, e sia tengut am les forfexs o am unci, e sia eradicat de la sua razit; e aprop cura aquel.	 When a gout is inflicted on the finger or toe, and it spreads to the joints of that limb, then treat that patient
E si vols, cauteriza le segont que es precedit en le sieu capitol.	 If you want to cauterize the previously mentioned space in the patient's head
Mays de veruca es eminencia petita aspre fistulada redonda sobre la superficia del cos, e motas veguadas veno en las mas dels enfantz.	 A rash that appears suddenly on a surface of the body is commonly called measles by doctors.
E curacio de lu es que estendas e inscidas aquela, o que estrenhas aquela am fiel o am pel entro que caja.	 Care must be taken to prevent it from spreading further or returning as soon as possible, or cauterize the lesion if it is on the face or hands.
E si vols, cauteriza aquo, segon que havem dit, am foc o am medicina acuta.	 If you want to cauterize this one mentioned earlier at the forehead or at a sudden wound.
E ja so eradicadas enversas e no-enversas am le instrument le qual yeu diyre.	 It is customary not to scratch in any direction near the affected area with the instrument that you hold.
Mays formica es eminencia petita feutrada o fistulada grossa sobre la superficia del cos anant mot en le preon, e quan le freg atroba aquela es centit en lu semblant de mordificacio de formigua, e es fayta entorn le cos.	 A flea bite that appears suddenly on the body is commonly called chickenpox by doctors, and once it begins to spread or itch, it spreads throughout the body.
E curacio de lu es que prenguas una canula de pena de auca o de pena de voltor, e sia fort, e pausa aquela sobre la formigua entro que la contengua le cercle de la canula de las partidas de lu; e aprop revolveys la tua ma am la canula entro que inscidas aquo que es en le circuit de la formigua, e pauses aquela en le preon de la carn, e que eradiques la formigua de la sua razit.	 Care must be taken to prevent it from spreading further or coming out of the needle hole, and cauterize once you find it on the skin near the cannula circle by placing your hand over it and cutting off circulation to that area; and remove the bite from its cavity.
E si vols, fay aquo am canula de eram o de ferr segon aquesta forma:	 When you want
Sia la partida desus de la canulha trahent a subtilitat, sorda (so es no-perforada), envolopada per so que sobre le dit la aprencio de lu sia ablaviada e la revolucio de aquela.	 If you wish to use a catheter of this kind (if it is not perforated) wrapped around in such a way that the tip touches her vagina and allows for easy insertion, as well as movement inside
E si vols cauteriza la formiga segon que es denant dit en la cauterizacio de atheyl en le capitol de cauteri.	 If you want to cauterize the vein (meaning artery) in the process of cautery at that point, do so using cautery
De forma dels instrumentz que so aministratz a dar cristeri.	 Using instruments as described below.
Alcunas veguadas es fayt cristeri de argent o de lato o de eram fondut o malleat; e alcunas veguadas es fayt de aquels instrumentz petit e gran segon aquels als quals so aministratz, quar aquel que es aministrat en la curacio dels petitz enfants sia petit; e de aquel dels quals los culs son freuls o doloyrozes, les cristeris de aquels sian petitz.	 Some cauteries are small or large depending on the ones used, for example, a cautery given to children is small; and for those who have cruel or painful bites from them, their cauteries should be smaller.
La forma de cristeri gran e pauc:	 The form of a small one
Le cap de la canula de lu desus en le qual es liada la borsa sia ampla segon aquesta manieyra; e sia a lu distinacio la on la borsa es liada ayssi cum vezes.	 The tip of the catheter is positioned in such a way that it lies flat against her body, and at each turn.
E la extremitat de lu pus dejus, la qual es entromesa en le cul, sia sorda (so es no-uberta) mot leon, atrasent a subtilita; e en la un del latz de lu sian dos traucs, e en l’autre costat un trauc, e sia la amplesa del trauc segon la groseza dels rays e pus gros un petit.	 The end of the catheter is placed inside her vagina, which should not be inserted in any other opening; it is wrapped around gently, with two twists on one side and one twist on the other, and its width is adjusted according to the size of the body and is smaller for a small one.
E sia la borsa en la qual sian pausadas las medicinas de vesica de bestia o de pel de ovelha, e la razit de lu sia un palm.	 When the bladder or bowel of a beast is to be opened up, put one hand inside it
E sia perforada per motz traucs ayssi cum es revolvuda; e si l’espazi le qual es entre les traucs la grossetut del dit.	 When the opening is made through the mouth of an animal and you are ready to roll, then place that space between the tracks where the passage goes through.
E aprop entromet en aquels traucs fiel fort de fiel cru le qual sia de detz fiels, o enviro aquels; e ajusta am aquel la borsa; e quan es pausada en lu la borsa, sia streyt en le cap del cristeri entre dos distingentz am fort costriccio, e aprop cristeriza am aquel quascun trauc: Mays la qualitat de cristerizar am aquel es que tu omples la borsa de la medicina, que sia escalfada segon la quantitat de la tolleransa del malaute; e guarda te que no sia trop cauda ni trop freja.	 When it is necessary to enter into those closely adjacent tracks where there are two fine spaces or openings between them, and adjust the opening so that it fits properly in one of those entrances: when you have done this for a beast, then stretch out your arm to the tip of its head between two strong cords tightly spaced apart from each other. Stretch out your hand into the opening of the medicine pouch with both hands; when you are finished stretching and ready to roll, guard it so that there is no excess or waste.
E aprop le malaute sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos, e eleva las suas cambas en sus e pausa dejos lu un cuer sobre le qual ja so les homes o un lansol; e aprop unta la extramitat del cauteri am oli o am album de huou o am mucellage de fenugrec o de semblantz; e aprop entromet aquel en le cul am facilitat, e aprop le ministre prengua la borsa e exprema aquel am doas mas e essemps am vehemencia entro que sia evacuat en le budelh tot aquo que es en le cristeri; e aprop extra le cristeri e le malaute leva las suas cambas a la paret.	 When the beast is mounted on its back, elevate its two legs and place one hand over it to which already has men or any other object: and arrange that opening in such a way so that you may roll easily into the intestine. After that, take out the intestine from the medicine pouch and stretch it gently but firmly across your arms towards the side where evacuation must be done; then remove the intestines and place both legs on the wall.
E si la medicina forsa aquel a eyssiment, tengua le tant quant poyra; e si dorm am aquel per tota una nueyt, es mays derier en juvament.	 When someone has fever due to illness, it is customary that he get as much rest as possible; and if someone falls ill in the entire body, this may lead to death at a young age.
Mays si tu cristerizas aquel en las malautias de solucio de ventre e l’eyssiment de lu le coyta, lahoras tu itera le cauteri entro que sia sanat.	 If you are applying heat on the abdominal muscles and the illness of him is improving, then the sores will be treated with a cautery so that he recovers.
E si en le cul so emorroydas o apostemas ledens, lahoras sia le cristeri mot subtil e leon, dels cristeris am les quals les enfantz so criterisatz.	 If the tail is swollen or inflamed, doctors will prescribe gentle creams and lotions, using creams that children use as guidelines.
De curacio de las plaguas.	 For the treatment of bruises.
Yeu ja e dit en la divisio de la curacio de las plaguas aquo que convenia al libre, e yeu dic assi la curacio de aquelas am ma e am medicinas segon le conpliment.	 And you have already said that the division of care for bruises should be given freely, and also tell them about the care to give those who are injured as well as medical treatment in accordance with your advice.
Donc dic que las plaguas son diversificadas segon aquo en que son faytas las plaguas e segon le loc sobre le qual cazo las plaquas.	 Therefore, tell them that bruises vary depending on the part of the body they occur in and where they are located.
E las causas per que motas vetz son faytas las plaguas so ayssi cum getament de peyra, o inscisio d’espaza o de cotel, o percussio am lansa, o am fustz, o am sageta, o semblantz ad aquels de motas causas.	 The causes that cause bruises are as follows: sprains or strain of the muscles, friction burns on rough surfaces, blunt force trauma, frostbite, or heat stroke, all of which may be signs of bruising.
Mays las plaguas que so en les locz del cos so ayssi cum plagua la qual catz sobre le cap, o·l col, o·l pietz, o·l ventre, o·l fitge, e semblantz ad aquels dels membres.	 Bruises that occur on the parts of the body include those on the head, neck, chest, abdomen, back, and legs, as well as other members.
E yeu so recomtant la curacio de alcunas plaguas per que pauses aquela ratiocinacio e regla sobre las autras plaguas.	 You are advised to make a careful examination of all these wounds, so that you can reason out their cause and apply remedies accordingly.
E yeu comensare de las plaguas del cap simplas, quar la rememoracio de las compostas vindra al comensament del tertz capitol.	 You should examine the head wounds one by one, recalling the composition that will come into play at the beginning of this third chapter.
Donc dic que quan accideys en le cap plagua simpla e no es fractura, lahoras considera: si es per getament de peyra o de semblant, e ja ha trinquada la codena tant solament e es gran plagla e temes sobre aquel malaute havinement de apostema caut, lahoras tu te coyta e fleubotoma la cephalica tantost, e no tardas aquo; e extrats ad aquel del sanc segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu si no mes alcuna causa prohibent de fleubotomia, majorment si·l sanc que es eyssit de la plagua es pauc.	 When you encounter a simple head wound that is not broken, the doctor should consider: if it's from trauma or impact, and there was an immediate cauterization of the wound only to stop bleeding, but otherwise do nothing; and remove any stitches second by second, checking for each stitch whether it needs removal due to lack of cause.
E sia la flaubotomia del contrari de la partida plaguada; e guardase le malaute de replecio e de vi e de viandas grossas.	 And be aware of the possibility that the bleeding might stop on its own, and make sure to check for any major or large veins in proximity as well.
Mays si de la minuicio prohibeys alcuna causa, lahoras sia aminorat de la vianda e no apropinque a carn ni a vi.	 If there is not an immediate cause, the doctor should apply pressure to stop bleeding and avoid puncturing skin or veins.
E pausa sobre la plagua, si a lu accideys apostema caut, coto enfus en oli rozat solet o en vi en le qual es stipticat.	 Pause over the wound if it is suspected that an immediate cauterization was required; and inspect for any signs of burning flesh or injury in the area where sutures were applied.
Mays si est segur de apostema caut, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua, si es recent am le sieu sanc e le ayre no ha mudat aquela la polvera la qual yeu recomtare aprop petit.	 If you are sure an immediate cauterization was needed, the doctor should pause over the wound and inspect it if there is any indication of bleeding or injury in the area where sutures were applied recently; but otherwise do nothing more.
E si le ayre ja ha mudada aquela, lahoras pausa sobre alscus enguentz entro que sia sanada.	 When the arrow has entered that space, pain will cease as soon as it is cured.
Mays si la plagua es gran o es per inscizio d’espaza e de semblantz, e no so ajustadas las labias de lu per puvils, lahoras ajusta aquelas am sutura segon que yeu recomtare de la sutura de lor.	 If the arrow is large or has a long shaft and does not penetrate through the lips without piercing them, then adjust that opening when you recommend adjusting their clothing.
Mays si la plagua ja es discuberta del os e pen, e no es retencio de lu sino un petit suspensori, lahoras inscideys aquela e aprop cura la plagua am medicinas e restaura la carn aprop en loc de codena, e comanda al malaute que sia pescut de viandas en las quals es groceza: caps e formen coyt e semblantz a lor, entro que sia compost.	 If the arrow has been discovered in their anus and penetrates, not stopping inside them without making a small cut, then doctors will cut off that opening and cure the skin properly at its location by removing it with scissors, ordering them to eat from the parts they have become accustomed to: head and face.
E si atrobas en la codena putrefaccio e no adhereys al os, lahoras tu inscideys tot aquo poyrit e geta aquo, e aprop cura aquo.	 If the arrow gets rotten in their anus without adhering to it and they cannot remove it, then doctors will cut off everything around that area completely and get rid of it, treating it properly.
Mays si en aquestas plaguas es arteria o vena de la qual fluxs de sanc pot evenir, e no es abscindida per medicinas, lahoras tu inquier sobre la arteria, e si atrobas aquela no-inscidida, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am spatum, o lia aquela; e si necessitat te provoca que aquo que havem dit no comfereys, lahoras tu cauteriza entro que·l sanc sia abscidit.	 If these arrows are arteries or veins through which blood can flow and they cannot be closed by medicine, then ask about the artery, if it is not closed, then cut off that opening too, either from the back of your hand or from the other side; and if you need to prevent any bleeding, cauterize when the arrow has been removed.
E si aquestas plaguas son simplas e petitas, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiere; enayssi que tu polverizas sobre aquelas aquesta polvera, quar consolidada aquela denant que l’ayre mude aquelas.	 If these arrows are simple and small, the cause of them is light; but if you powder those arrows to this powder, they will become consolidated when the arrow moves against that place.
E la manieyra de la polvera es aquesta: recipe oli de enses partida una, de sanc de drago partida doas, de caus no-extincta partidas tres; sia tot mot trissat e crivellat, e de lu sia la plagua omplida, e sia constrengida per bona constriccio entro que be sobre aquela aderesca, e sia coagulada am le sanc.	 "The physician's task is to open the space between the thighs and place a cushion underneath them for comfort; then have another servant on their legs, one on their chest, holding their hands; it will prevent them from moving around.
E aprop strengeys aquela desus am pulvils e leyssa aquela, e no la deslias mentre esta ayssi que no es apostemada, quar no es eredicada de lu la medicina entro que sia sanada.	 "And the physician must gently place a cushion below and above them; if they are already sitting comfortably without slipping or falling, do not interfere with that as it would be harmful to their health.
E alcuna vetz fa aquo sola cautz, quan no es a tu en present enses e sanc de drago.	 "There is no need for cautery alone when there are already servants and staff taking care of the patient's comfort.
E ja fa aquesta meteyssa operacio en las grans plaguas quan conveneys que sia pausada sobre aquelas e sian streytas, e so plaguas recentz am le lor sanc, las quals le ayre no ha alteradas.	 "The surgeon performs an operation on large wounds when it is convenient to place a cushion over them and have the legs stretched out; these cushions will be placed below their abdomen as well.
E si le ayre las ha alteradas, e majorment quan es en temps d’estiu, lahoras no es entencio a la posicio de aquesta polvera, mays adonc cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit, enayssi que tu pauses sobre aquelas alcus enguents degistius, o que pauses sobre aquelas pols de la farina del ordi am aygua e mel entro que getan poyredura; e aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	 "If the wounds have healed but it's still summer, they are not accustomed to that position so you should gently place them on their side while holding hands or placing their arms around your neck and chest to prevent drowning; and tend to those at another station where they will be treated.
Mays si accideys am la plagua fractura en os, e es petita, lahoras tu extratz aquo am gesti.	 "If the broken bone is in your hand or foot, then you should apply some of this ointment to it gently.
E yeu diyre la cura de las fracturas del cap en aquo que es envenidor.	 "You shall perform surgery on the skull in order for it to become swollen.
De las plaguas del col.	 The hemorrhoids of the buttocks
Mays si la plagua accideys en le col, lahoras no es en lu differencia en medicacio, e entre la plagua del cap quan es simpla.	 If a hemorrhoid occurs in the anus, it is not different from that in surgery, and between the hemorrhoids of the head when simple.
Mays si ja le nervi del col es inscis o arteria, lahoras si es nervi, no es en lu engen sino que sia evitada curacio de lu am aquo que fa vehement stipticitat, ayssi cum ziniar e zegi que es vetriol e semblantz a lor quar nozo als nervis e contrazo aquel.	 If the nerves of the anus are cut or artery, it is nerve, not the vein that needs to be treated with strong constriction, as well as indicating and saying that it is poison like the others, which are against those nerves and contrary to that one.
E no pauses sobre la plagua alcuna causa de tot freja, quar la sustancia dels nervis es freja e la continuacio de lu es am le cervel, le qual es le pus aut de totz les membres.	 It does not matter which cause of the hemorrhoids causes their substance to be disturbed and the continuation is in order for it to be a problem that affects all members.
E si’ aquo am que es curat de medicinas leugieras, ayssi cum es caus lavada am aygua dousa, alcuna veguada enfusa en oli rozat o no-rozat, e thucia quan es lavada am aygua dousa e las autras peyras minarantz segon aquesta manieyra, e enguentz humitz.	 If it is necessary to cure the disease with leeches, as well as causing a bad taste in the mouth, regardless of whether it is wet or dry, and thinking when treating it with water and its own juices that follow this method, and count the humidities.
Mays si la plagua es gran, lahoras aministra sutura, o coarta las labias de lu, e aprop cura aquela am pulvils entro que sia sanada.	 If a hemorrhoid is big, it will be treated with sutures, or cut off the lips of that person, and the cure for powder between which should be restored to health.
Mays si a la plagua es profunditat o accideys en lu a la pus bassa partida poyredura, lahoras perfora aquela en le loc mays depremegut.	 If a hemorrhoid is deep or occurs in the lower part of the body, it will be treated by cutting that place open.
Mays si en la plagua ja es inscisa arteria e es conseguit flux de sanc, lahoras separa o secca aquela, o lia aquela, o cauteriza aquela si necessitat te provoca ad aquo.	 When the artery is inscribed with a seal that seals off the flow of blood, doctors cut or burn it off as necessary
Mays si ja ha insciditz les spondils del golayro o tot, e so salvadas las venas del col, lahoras tu ajusta las labias de la codena am sutura sobre la cana del golayro e no toques aquel; abantz egala aquel e reduzeys aquel sobre la sua figura natural, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent, e leyssa aquela per alcus jorns; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz en les quals es stipticitat e excitacio entro que sia sanat.	 When the bowels of the groin or all parts are sealed off by a seal, and you save the veins of the colon, doctors adjust them with sutures over the side of the groin and do not touch it; burn off this one and reduce it to its natural form, and place it on the stretch so that it is well-stretched.
Mays si la plagua ja en le os a fayta enprecio, lahoras percuireys aquela, e lahoras si en lu ha fragmentz de hos, extratz totz aquels que podes de lor; e aquo que a tu no es apparelhat, leyssa aquo entro que la plagua se poyrisca, e sia separat e la egrecio de lu sia alleujada.	 When the seal is placed on or near your finger, doctors will treat it as a burn and separate its edges to reduce swelling and pain.
E si la plagua es recent lahoras polveriza sobre aquela polvera la qual t’e recomtada.	 If the seal has recently been applied, you should dust over that powder which your doctor recommends.
Mays si en la plagua es fayta fistula, lahoras cura aquela am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra aprop en le sieu capitol.	 When a fistula forms in the seal area, doctors treat it as they would any other wound and remember to take care of that part accordingly.
De las plaguas del col o de semblantz quan fayta entre las spallas e es fayta am spaza o am cotel o am lansa o am semblantz.	 When a seal is between the thighs or on the buttocks and occurs when it is split open, it may be treated as a tear in the flesh below or above depending on its location.
Si es percussio de lansa o de cotel, e vezes de lu la profunditat, lahoras considera mays si de la plagua yeys ventositat quan le malaute elena; lahoras sapias que la plagua es mortal.	 If it is a tearing of the flesh or very deep, doctors consider that the seal may cause death to the patient; they understand that the seal is fatal.
E si en lu no es profunditat e la plagua es recent am le sieu sanc, lahoras tu pauses en lu de la primieyra horo polvera, e no strenhas aquel per que no sia le sanc retengut en la profunditat de lu e que retorne al cor e que aucigua le malaute, mays pausa en lu enguent atractiu, e deslia aquela doas veguadas le dia.	 When the abscess is not very deep and comes up recently from within the body, then you should apply pressure on it at its first appearance, without forcing it into returning to the heart, but allowing it to come out of the body in a few days.
E si l’enguent no es a tu present, lahoras tu pausa en le orrifici de la plagua coto viel per que sucque aquo que yeys de las humiditatz; e fay que le malaute dorma sobre la plagua per que corra aquo que es en lu ajustat.	 If the abscess is not currently present, then apply pressure at its origin to prevent it from spreading further and make sure that the patient keeps their hand on the abscess as long as they can tolerate it
Mays si ja de la plagua son passatz tres dias o mays e no accideys al malaute spasme ni tremor de cor mal ni strictura de ale, e vezes las autras dispozicios bonas de lu, lahoras sapias que plagua es salva; e adonc cura aquela am calguas e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanada.	 If the abscess has lasted for three days or more without any complications such as chest pain, heart palpitations, or constriction of breathing, and if you find that the patient is otherwise healthy, then it is safe to allow the abscess to be drained naturally (without using a needle) over the next few days.
Mays si la sanacio de lu es excusada, e ja tot temps es uberta, lahoras sapias que ja es fayta fistula; cura donc aquela per le sieu capitol.	 If the cure is satisfactory and has lasted for a long time, then you should know that it has healed properly.
E si la plagua es per inscisio de spaza o de cotel, e es simpla en la superficia del pietz o del dos, lahoras cura aquela am aquo que es precedit de sutura, si es gran, o am polvera, si es petita.	 If the abscess is caused by a small fold of skin or by a little cyst on the chest or arm (or in any other part) and it is simple to find at the surface, then cure that with what was previously described as sutures; if it's large, apply pressure instead
Mays si ja ha fayta enprecio en le os, e so ja de lu inscizas pessas, lahoras tu torqua la plagua e coyta ad extrayre aquelas pessas, si so separadas.	 When you have heated up the oil, add a small amount of olive oil slowly and steadily to lubricate the skin while massaging it gently in circular motions with your fingertips.
Mays si no so separadas, lahoras leyssa las entro que se poyresca la plagua, que la extraccio de lor es alleujada.	 If they are not separated, the process will be eased as you press on them to extract them out gently and slowly.
E de las autras plaguas accidentz en les autres membres le juvament en curacio es le juvament de aquo que havem dit.	 And in cases where one of the blisters appears on another part of the body at a later stage, it is customarily said to be a late occurrence of that which we mentioned earlier.
De las plaguas del ventre.	 The belly ones.
L’indisposicio la qual accideys en le ventre es o gran, o pauc, o migiera.	 The disorder that occurs in the belly is either small or large, or mild to severe.
De la gran alcunas veguadas yeys le budel o nervi del budel, per que es fayta intromissio de lor e la sutura de lor esser pus vehement e pus subtil.	 From the great vessels that supply blood to the intestines or nerves of the bowels, through which an intrusion into them is made and their sutures are torn violently and subtly
E disrupcio petita es fayta dificil per autra manieyra, e siec se que la reduccio de lor es pus dificil, si no te coytes de la intromissio de lor al sieu loc tantost, quar se ubre e es engrossat per que le intrament de lu es fayt difficil.	 And a small disruption is difficult for one more person, and if the reduction of them is very difficult, unless you prevent the intrusion into their place so soon that they swell up and become hard because the process inside becomes difficult.
E donc la milhor disrupcio es migiera, quar en aquela no es dificil la reduccio del budel, ayssi cum es dificil en las doas specias denant ditas.	 And in this case the great disruption is mild, whereas if that reduction of the bowels were difficult then these two species mentioned are as well.
E sapias que sutura del ventre es segon quatre manieyras, mays doas suturas son comunas que conveneysso en suturas de las autras plaguas del cors.	 And you know that the sutures of the belly are second to four stitches, whereas two of these sutures are commonly used in suturing of blisters on the body.
E duas autras suturas proprias comunican a las autras plaguas, mays empero so mays proprias en la sutura del ventre.	 The first sentence translates to: "Two plews are joined together in places where they should not be.
E yeu recomti a tu quascuna am exposicio e declaracio.	 You recommend that each of them gives an account and makes a declaration.
Donc dic que quan la plagua es petita e es eyssit alcuna causa del budel per aquela, e es fayt dificil a reduzir aquel, lahoras aquo es en una de doas manieyras: o per parvitat de la disrupcio ayssi cum havem dit, o quan al budel es venguda inflacio per la frigiditat de l’ayre.	 It means that when the plew is small and has no cause for the intestine to come through it, then it is a matter of two ways: either by reducing disruption as we have said, or when the intestine is inflamed due to coldness in the air
E donc quan aquo es ayssi, lahora cove que tu scalfes aquel enayssi que tu submerges una sponga ho drap humit en aygua tebeza sola, o que coguas en aygua squinant, e cyperum, e spic, e embroques am aquela le budel entro que la imflacio sia resolvuda.	 When this happens, the doctor covers it with a damp sponge that is soaked in water and waits alone or by immersing it in water, stirring, and massaging until the inflammation has been resolved.
E alcunas veguadas fa aquo vi en le qual ha stipticitat, e es milhor que la aygua sola en resolucio de la imflacio.	 Some vegetables are good for it in terms of relieving inflammation and are more effective than water alone to resolve the inflammation.
E donc cum tu vezes la imflacio esser resolvuda, lahoras tu humecta le budel am aygua en la qual es coyta altea e malvas, quar per aquo es alleujat le intrament de lu am pauca causa.	 When the inflammation is resolved, doctors soak the intestine in a solution that contains salt and water, which helps to quickly heal it after minor causes.
Mays si es escusat le intrament de lu aprop aquesta curacio, lahoras scindeys la disrupcio un petit am strument am le qual so inscididas emorroydas.	 If the intestine is completely healed from this treatment, doctors suggest performing a small examination with a specific instrument to check for any remaining issues.
E la curacio primieyra es milhor, quan es propriada que no es seccio, e no sia occupacio a seccar aprop necessitat e defaliment.	 The first task seems to be making preparations for the procedure that will follow. It appears necessary not only that it should not become dry, but also that there is no need for anything else other than what follows next in terms of care and nourishment.
Del instrument, sec se la forma de lu:	 From the instrument, arrange its form as follows:
La una partida de lu torta aguda, e l’autra partida no-acuta, e la extremitat subtil, e no sia am la subtilitat de spatum, abantz sia obtusa un pauc.	 The first part sharp and the second non-sharp, and the subtlest extremity, but not to be like the subtlety of a spur; rather make it blunt by about one inch.
E donc cum la plagua es amplificada e yeys fora le budel, lahoras cove que la sua reduccio sia segon la forma de lu natural, en le sieu loc propri, si es possible sobre aquo, quar milhor es.	 And then after amplifying the vein, you should reduce its size to match the form of the body part in question, in its own place if possible, as best it may be.
Mays quan la disrupcio es ampla, e es en la partida pu bassa del ventre, lahoras cove que tu fassas jazer le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa las suas cambas pus autas que·l sieu cap; e si es en la partida pus desus del ventre, lahoras tu pause le cap de lu e·l pietz pus autz que las partidas dejos.	 If the rupture is wide and in the lower part of the belly, then you should make the patient lie on their back, and hold their legs; if it's in the upper part of the belly, then place your head below his chest and press his thighs to keep them together.
E semblantment si la disrupcio es en una de las doas partz del ventre, lahoras pausa la tua entencio e la tua consideracio tostemps en aysso per que la partida en la qual es la plagua sia pus auta que l’autra.	 Similarly if the rupture is in one of the two parts of the belly, then pause your entry and your consideration temporarily so that the part where the vein is shall be higher than the other.
E ayssi cove que tu aministres aquo en las plaguas grans e en las plaguas migieras.	 And so you should administer this in large veins and medium-sized ones.
E en las plaguas petitas, pausa aquo que es a tu preparat, e aprop fay que·l ministre sia entre las tuas mas pyatados, le qual tengua la disrupcio tota am la sua ma e ajusta las labias de lu, e aprop descuebre de aquela ad aquel que siec la sutura alcuna causa aprop autra.	 When very small blisters appear on the feet, pause so that it is prepared; and place a minister between your big toes, which will have all the disruption at its right and left sides adjust the lips of the patient in this manner, then cut away from such an incision another
E aquesta es la manieyra de sutura comuna: una que prenguas la agula, o comte de agula segon la cantitat de la amplitut de la plagua; e aprop layssa de la extremitat de la disrupcio del dit anular, e strenh la agula una, otre que tu no metas fiel en las doas extremitatz de la codena, am doas extremitatz del ciphac que es dejos la codena de las partidas dedintz, entro que fassas aquela penetrar de aquela partida; e tu ja has agreguadas doas extremitatz de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, e so faytas quatre ordes.	 This is the common method of suturing: one who takes a needle or counts how many needles to use based on the size of the blister; and stretches it out until you reach both sides of the disruption, from the thumb side inward, so that no more than four stitches are used
E aprop strenh am fiel doble en le circuit de la agula, e alcunas veguadas de doas partz ensemps, e aprop agregua las doas labias e la plagua per agreguacio decent; e aprop layssa la grossitut del dit e fiqua una autra agulha en aquela, e aprop lia aquela am fiel ayssi cum fiest am la primieyra agulha; e no cesses far aquo si es necessitat am las agulhas entro que ajas complida tota la contriccio de la plagua.	 Stretch tightly around the needle's circuit, sew together two parts of the patient's lips, and place a new needle in there too; stretch out until it reaches another, as closely as possible while still keeping all four stitches intact; do not stop unless you need to complete sewing up the whole edge of the blister.
E sian las agulhas migieras entre groceza e subtilitat, quar las agulhas subtils mot leugierament insciden la carn; e las grossas so de dificil intrament en la codena, e donc per aquo cove que sian migieras en subtilitat e grosseza.	 Needles should vary in both coarseness and subtlety, which makes them less sensitive to skin and more manageable on the foot; the coarse ones are easier but harder on the nail, so that they may be used with differing levels of finesse and roughness.
E no cove que la agulha sia ficada en doas extremitatz de la codena propdana mot, per so que la carn no sia inscidida leugierament e que la plagua se huebra devant la sua consolidacio.	 When the needle is placed in both of the patient's arms, to prevent the flesh from being injured and that the bandage remains firmly attached to its fixation
E no sian prolonguadas de sutura per que la plagua no sia prohibida de consolidacio.	 Sutures should not be prolonged so that the bandage does not become forbidden for fixation.
E aprop inscideys las extremitatz de las agulhas per so que no ledescan le malaute deves le sieu dormier; e pausaras sobre la sutura pulvils expanduts de tota partida, les quals tenguan las extremitatz de las agulhas; e layssa aquelas entro que sapias que la plagua ja es consolidada.	 Insert needles in both the patient's arms to ensure they do not touch the mattress and place a bandage over the suture after it has been expanded completely, covering the needle sites on either arm. The bandage is placed so that you know the patch has already been fixed
E aquestas specias de sutura am agulhas en cal manieyra es pus convenient en las plaguas petitas, quar habasta en la sutura de lor una agulha o doas o entorn aquelas.	 This special type of suture is best done with small needles, as it may be difficult to pass through the sutures if too large a needle is used, one or two or around those areas.
Mays la segonda sutura es cominal: e es que tu aministres am sutura las quatre extremitatz, de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, en una veguada, am agulha en la qual sia fiel envolopat engual en subtilitat e grosseza.	 The second suture is like this: you administer the four sutures, one from each of the thighs and two from the buttocks in a zigzag pattern, with a needle that has been carefully wrapped tightly and evenly so it can be easily removed in subtlety and size.
E aprop quan am la agulha auras penetrat aquestas quatre extremitatz, reduzeys la agulha de aquela meteyssa partida de la qual comensest, per so que le fiel retrayt caja de la pus subirana partida a la plagua, per so que la sutura sia segon sutura de drap am la qual les draps so strengutz.	 Once the needle has entered these four areas, reduce it to that segment of the bandage from which this starts, to ensure the faithful wrap tightly around the patch as it is now the second layer of cloth over which the cloths should be tight
E pausa entre quascuna sutura la quantitat del gros del dit mendre.	 The space between each of the patient's thighs should be measured by the thickness of a finger.
E aquesta sutura sabo les homes.	 This measurement will help determine...
E am tal sutura yeu cozegui la plagua la qual era accidida a un home en le sieu ventre le qual era stat plaguat am un cotel, e era la disrrumpcio de la plagua major de un palm, e era eyssit dels budels entorn dos palms del budel del mieg loc e era la disrupcio en le mieg del membre; e adonc yeu reduzegui aquel depus que le budel havia stat foro la plagua per xxiiii horas.	 This measurement will help determine...
E la plagua fo consolidada en le spazi de xv dias o entorn, e curegui aquel e es sanat; e aprop aquo visquec per motz ans, e es conversat en las suas disposicios.	 The wound had healed within 15 days or so, and it was cured; afterwards, the patient felt better as a result of this treatment.
E les autres metges havian jutgat que no fora sanat; e per miracle foc, quar yeu no curegui aquel am enguent, quar era en loc en le qual enguent no era atrobat ni deguna medicina, mays pausegui sobre la plagua coto viel dos veguadas lo dia e ablucio assiduo am aygua de mel entro que foc sanat.	 The other doctors had tried unsuccessfully to cure it; however, by miracle, when you didn't try that treatment, which was in a place where no remedy could be found either, they placed wet cloths on the wound two or three times a day and rubbed them with melted honey until it healed.
Mays yeu diyre dos specias de sutura proprias segon narracio de Paraula.	 Do you want to know about another incision procedure called Parala?
E es que tu comenses am sutura de la codena, e entrometas agulha de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz.	 The incision is made starting from the tip of the finger towards the tip of the thumb
E donc cum la agulha penetra en la codena e en aquel meteys lacertz segon rectetut e en longetut de tot le cos, e layssa la extremita del ciphac en le qual has entromesa la agulha; e fay penetrar en la autra extremitat la agulha de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo en l’autra extremitat del mihat.	 The needle is inserted into the finger and progresses towards the thumb, then to both sides of the body, ending by inserting it into the other extremity from the tip of the thumb to the tip of the finger on that side.
E don cum tu auras fayta aquela penetrar, lahoras tu fay aquela penetrar autra veguada en aquela meteyssa extremitat del mihat de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz; e leyssa la extramitat del ciphac que es en aquest latz, e fay penetrar la agulha en l’autra extremitat de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo.	 "The passage refers to the procedure of using a pointed instrument or tool (such as an awl) to penetrate into certain parts of the body and hold them in place, typically for surgical purposes.
E fay penetrar am aquela la tua penetracio am la qual fas aquela penetrar en le ciphac en la extremitat del mirat la qual es en la partida de lu entro que tot aquel penetre.	 "The sentence suggests that the pointed instrument is used to penetrate into a specific area of the body, such as the groin or armpit, and hold it in place before proceeding with further procedures.
E aprop comensa de aquest meteys costat e cus aquel am la extremitat que es del ciphac en l’autra latz, e extratz la agulha de la codena la qual penetrec, e aprop redutz aquela en aquela codena e cos la extremitat del ciphac que es en l’autra costat am aquesta extramitat del mirat; e extratz aquela de la codena la qual es de part de lu.	 "The sentence refers to the procedure of first making an incision on one side, and then placing a pointed instrument in that area before performing further steps on the other side.
E fay aquo una veguada e autra, e fay aquo una veguada aprop autre veguada entro que tu cozes tot aquo que es deforo segon aquel eysemple.	 "The sentence suggests that after performing a procedure on one side, you should perform the same or similar procedures on the other side as well.
E la suma de aquesta manieyra de sutura es que tu cozes am sutura de pellicies am la qual cozo las pels, enayssi que tu cozes le ciphac una veguada de la part de la extremitat de la codena, e que leysses aquela autra veguada entro que la ajas complida.	 "The sentence refers to the procedure of making a cut through the skin and then performing further cuts on different parts of the body.
Mays la segonda specia de sutura propria la qual dieys eyssament Gualia , e aquest es de sermo de lu e per lu recomtat, es que tu cozas aquela segon semilitut am la qual alcus medicantz cozo aquela, enayssi que agreguan tota partida a la sua compar partida a lu convenient per natura; e aplican la extremitat de autre de lu e la extremitat del mirat al autra extremitat de lu, e aquo es fayt segon que yeu a tu recomti.	 "The sentence suggests that after performing the first surgery (which is described as 'cutting through skin and then making further cuts on different parts of the body'), you should perform another minor surgery in an area where doctors usually cut, while also cutting across to the other side, such as from one arm to the other.
Cove que tu fiques la agulha en la extremitat del mirat a tu propdana de la partida deforo, e fassas aquela penetrar a la partida dedintz en aquel sol, e leysses dos extremitatz del ciphac; e aprop revolveys la agulha e fay aquela penetrar de foro a la dedintz en dos extremitatz del ciphac.	 "Insert the needle in your hand's palm at the start of this treatment and proceed to penetrate it into the opening, then take two steps back from there on both sides.
E aprop revolveys aquelas cascunas, e fay penetrar quascunas de la partida dededintz entro a la partida deforo en dos extremitatz del mirat autras que so en le latz contrari.	 "Then place them [the cushions] and penetrate each one of the openings into both sides of the palm, as if you are facing towards the other.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura es milhor de la sutura comuna leugiera, e es sutura de la qual precedic rememoracio.	 "This method is superior to the common stitches used in surgery and follows a specific procedure.
Aquest es le sermo de Gualia	 This is the story of Gaul.
E mays le diyssero alcus, sutura del ventre es rectificada am dos agulhas, so es que tu entrometas en aquestas a quascunas un fiel, e comensa am intromiccio de agulha de aquo que es deves tu, e fay aquela penetrar entro al autra latz segon sutura de aquels les quals cozo les cuers engualment.	 After the belly incision is correctly made with two needles at its start, place them on each one of these in such a way that they align perfectly and begin to sew into this one which you must do first, then sew into the other sutures as well.
E sapias que quan disrupcio es en le mieg loc del ventre, lahoras la sutura de lu es pus difficil que dels autres locs del ventre.	 You know that when the incision is in the belly area, sewing there becomes more difficult than at other places of the belly.
Mays le juguament de medicacio de plagua es jutgament de las autras plaguas.	 The game of healing comes from the art of treating wounds.
La qual causa es quar quan tu consieguas la plagua recent am le sieu sanc denant que l’ayre altera aquela, e reduses le budel e cozes aquela e aptas aquela decentment, lahoras pausa sobre aquela polvera encarnativa.	 When you have recently treated a wound with the same means as before and it does not heal completely after that, then pause over this inflammatory sore.
E si le ayre ja ha alterada la plagua, lahoras pausa sobre aquela alcus enguentz les quals so a tu presens entro que fassan peyra dura e cajan les fiels, e sian consolidatz ciphac e mirat; e aprop cura aquela ayssi cum es la curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat.	 When the vein has been altered and pain occurs where you press into it, then hold tightly while pressing down on it to prevent bleeding or effusion
Mays si a tu no so presens las medicinas, lahoras pausa sobre aquela tantost, pus que comensa a getar brac, coto viel, e permuta aquel dos veguadas le dia, ayssi cum a tu e ensenhat, entro que sia sanat, quar tu no indigeysses de autra medicacio en motas disposicios quan las plaguas so simplas.	 If you are not present when the medicines pause over that place, put them on and start taking the pill, then cover it with gauze to prevent further complications if the problems are simple
Mays si tu temes que la plagua comunique en lesio als membres principals, lahoras cove que tu submergas lana leon en oli de trempada qualiditat, o en oli rozat, e pausa aquela en le circuit dels locs que so entre les angonas e dejos las aysselas.	 If you fear that the vein might communicate an injury to main body parts like the legs or the head, then hold it tightly while pressing down on it in a relaxed manner, and place it within the area of veins between the elbows and the wrists.
E si sent dolor o putrefaccio en les sieus budels, quar motas veguadas aquo s’endeve, lahoras cristeriza aquel am vi stiptic negre tebe, e majorment si la poyredura es pervenguda en le budel e es fayta exitura penetrant entro la conquavitat de lu.	 If you feel pain or putrefaction in the bowels, then seek a doctor immediately because that could be a burst vein which has entered into its cavity.
E sapias que aquela que es del budel gros es de pus leugiera sanacio que aquela que es en les budels subtils.	 You know that the one who is from the large intestine needs medical attention, but the one from the small intestines does not.
E es de dificil sanacio quar le budel le qual es apelat “gegunu” no recep sanacio de plagua que caja en lu de tot; e aquo es per la gran multitut de venas que so en lu e per la magnitut de lu que so en aquelas, e per subtilitat del cos de aquel, e per propinquitat de aquel a natura de nervis.	 It is difficult to treat when the vein that is called "gugunu" does not receive treatment from within it at all; and this is because of the great number of veins in it and its size, as well as being in those nearby areas, and for their subtlety, closeness to nerves, and for proximity to the nature of veins.
Mays si aquo que procezeys de la plagua es la tela, e conseguas aquela recent, redutz aquela segon la tua rectetut am la qual reduzes les budels engualment.	 When you cleanse the bladder is to the skin, it must be done quickly and gently, so as not to tear or damage the surrounding skin
Mays si es passat a lu spazi e ja es feyt vert o negre, lahoras que tu strenguas aquela am fiel sobre le loc que es denigrat de lu, per so que vengua fluxs de sanc, quar en la tela so venas e arterias.	 The bladder is to be cleansed with warm water or a mixture of hot and cold water, in order that it may pass cleanly through the urethra without causing any pain from the urethra passing through the skin, as there are blood vessels and arteries there
E aprop inscideys aquo que es otra aquel liament, e pausa dos extremitatz del fiel pendentz de la partida dejos de la plagua foro lu, per que sobre tu sia alleujada la atraccio de lu deves le cazement de la tela e emissio del brac de la plagua.	 After cleansing the bladder as described above, gently spread open both sides of the urethra to allow for its passage out of the body without tearing any skin or causing damage to the urethra
Rememoracio de las plaguas quan accideysso en le budel.	 Remember that these pains occur in gouty arthritis
Quan accideys disrupcio en le budel e es petita, lahoras es possibla que sia resteurada en alcus homes, per aysso quar yeu vi aquel le qual era stat plaguat en le sieu ventre am percussio de lansa et era la plagua de la part dreyta del stomac, e la plagua era antiquada e fayta fistula, e eyssic de lu gestio e ventositat.	 When there is disruption in the bladder and it is small, doctors may suspect that a ureteral stent was previously placed or that there has been a fistula caused by long-term bladder problems, which would cause urinary incontinence.
Adonc yeu pansegui la curacio de lu ja sia que no era confizat en la sanacio de lu, mays cessegui subtiliar aquel entro que foc sanat e le loc es consolidat.	 If you are unsure about whether the pain is due to a bladder issue or not and it has settled into a solid location, stop using sharp instruments when examining that area to prevent further injury.
E yeu pus que vi le loc ja consolidat, timegui sobre le malaute que endevengues sobre lu accident de mal en le sieu ventre; e no endevenc alcu per aquo mal accident e romas en las suas milhos disposicios mangant e bevent, e aprop entrec en banh e es exercitat en sos ditz.	 If you have determined that the pain is due to a bladder issue and it has settled into one location, focus on treating the problem in question while avoiding any further injuries or complications; instead, take care of your other duties and obligations.
E ja diysero alcus experimentados que quan endeve plagua en le budel, e es petita, lahoras cove que sia liada segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas fromiguas de grans caps; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua e pausa una fromigua de aquelas que aja la boca uberta sobre las doas labias de la plagua; donc quan pren sobre aquelas e strenh la sua boca, abscindeys le cap de lu, quar adhereys e no es dissolvut.	 When the pain occurs in a small intestine, it is customary to cover it with a cloth second layer: and then put your hand over the two lips of the opening and when you press on them and stretch your mouth open, close off its top so that it doesn't come out.
E aprop pausa autra formigua prop la primieyra, e no cesses aquo a far am formiguas una aprop autra segon la quantitat de tota la plagua.	 And when you are covering the opening with another cloth, do not stop doing that to make sure it is well covered throughout its entirety.
E aprop reduzeys aquela e cos la plagua; e romanguan aquels caps annexces en le budel entro que·l budel sia sanat; e no accideys al malaute degun nocument.	 Then, return the intestine or hernia back into its cavity and make sure it is safe for use without further incident.
E ja es possible que·l budel sia liat am fiel subtil lo qual es fayt del budel de bestia annexs am lu, pus que es mes en agulha; e es que tu prenguas la extremitat de aquestz fiels de budel, e sia mot descarnat, e aprop lia la extremitat de lu am fiel de li, envolopat, e aprop entromet aquel fiel en agulhas e cos am aquel le budel, e areduzeys aquel en la disrupcio.	 And when it is possible to put the intestine back into its cavity smoothly as you would remove it from a beast's body, but with more precision; and then take hold of its extremities tightly, not loose or unclean, and place them firmly over that part of the intestine, covered up, preventing it from coming out.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura am formiguas no es sino segon via de fiducia e d’esperansa.	 This method of closing is nothing more than a second way of trust and hope
Mays si la plagua es gran e ampla, majorment si es en un dels budels subtils, quar lahoras no es engen sino subtiliacio, e no es sanacio de lu de tot.	 If the opening is large or wide, particularly if it's in one of the smaller intestines where closing is delicate and not a complete healing process.
De curacio de zuchem e fistula.	 With great haste go forth from her
Sapias que tota plagua e apostema quan se envilheseys e se Antiqua, e es fayt ulcus, e no es consolidat e geta braç tot temps e no es abscindit, lahoras, en qualque membre sia, universalment es nompnada fistula e nos la apelam aquela azukem.	 When a boil and abscess occurs when they harden over time and do not heal completely and the arm remains swollen despite all efforts to heal it, this is called an abscess in general terms
E fistula segon veritat es nodacio feutrada, dura, blanqua am la qual no es dolor e a la qual es conquavitat ayssi cum es conquavitat de pena de ausel; e per aysso nompnat aquela alcus rizatz, id est pena.	 The abscess is second nature to be painful and has a white color that doesn't hurt and into which the pain of inflammation also enters; therefore it is called fistula
E es en alcus homes humida, la qual geta brac; e fort leu la humiditat es abscidida en alcunas horas.	 It is in an abscess home to the humidity that causes swelling on the arm; and as a result of high humidity, it is absorbed in certain hours.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta humiditat es mota, e es pauca, e es grossa, e es subtil.	 Certain vegetables lower this humidity, which is dry, and coarse, and subtle.
E yeu ja he denant dit en la divisio, lahoras cum yeu diyssi las plaguas, que tot ulcus que no es sanat ni no es en lu nuda carn, no es aquo sino per una de ix causas: de las quals la una es o per pauquesa de sanc en le cos; o per malicia de lu; o quar entre lu e las labias es carn dura prohibent nativitat de carn; o quar es de mota legesa; o quar aquel ulcus en si meteys es poyrit e la materia que es a lu tramesa es de mala qualitat; o quar la medicina es enconvenient en la curacio de lu; o quan corrupcio catz en la regio, e es pestilencia; o per proprietat de regio ayssi cum endeve a Saragossa , en la qual es fayta difficil degestio de las malautias, e es tardada en aquela sanacio de apostema per natura; o quar en lu es os un, o motz osses.	 Some ulcers of these causes are the result of malnutrition in the body, malice towards someone else's body or fleshiness between them and their legs being hard, preventing natural birth from happening, excessive motion, bad quality materials used for wounds, lack of medicine to heal, region property, plagues, or possession.
Ja e mostrat totas aquelas causas, e·ls senhals de aquelas e la curacio de lor am medicinas en la divisio.	 When causes are shown to him/her, he/she will investigate those causes and consider medical care in the division.
E cove assi que yeu fassa a tu saber la curacio de fistula la qual es fayta per via de operacio am ma.	 And then you should learn about the surgery that is used to treat this fistula, as it may be through an operation.
E sapias que fistula accideys en totz les membres del cos; quar de aquelas son fistulas que perveno a las venas grantz e arterias, o als nervis, o al ciphac, o al budel, o a la vesica, o ad alcuna de las costas, o ad alcu dels spondils del dos, o ad alcuna de las juncturas compostas per composicio ayssi quo de la ma e del pe; e de aquelas so que dan a lu propinquitat del membre principal e de semblantz.	 These fistulas may occur in any part of the body: they can be located on large blood vessels or arteries, nerves, veins, bowels, bladder, and/or the kidneys of one side or both sides; and these fistulas are such that they are next to (adjacent) the main part of the body.
E donc aquela de aquestas fistulas que es segon aquesta manieyra es de las malautias de dificil sanacio, e no recep curacio, e occupacio am aquela es trebalh e ignorancia.	 Therefore, if you encounter these fistulas with this condition, it is customary to seek medical care and avoid recovery attempts, as it may be difficult or impossible for the patient to recover from them due to their severity.
E si es de las fistulas alcuna la profunditat de la qual no perve ad aquestz locs que e dit, e esperas e confizas en la curacio de lu, e vols pervenir a cognicio de lu, lahoras pren tenta de eram o de ferr, e si la fistula va segon rectetut, e perquireys aquela am lu.	 If the depth of these fistulas is such that it cannot spread to those parts which are mentioned earlier and you feel anxious about the treatment process, want to prevent awareness of them or wish to become aware of them again, doctors should attempt to remove them or perform surgery if necessary for this fistula.
Mays si la fistula es tortuissitat, lahoras investigua aquela am tenta de plom subtil, quar plom am la levitat del sieu cors es alleujat e curvat deves la tortuositat.	 If the fistula is very complex and convoluted, doctors should try a subtle approach because if using force to reach it may be difficult due to its complexity or curvature.
E si la fistula es havent motz horrificis, no es a tu possible que signifiques sobre lu am tenta.	 When the fistula occurs horrifically, it's not advisable to apply pressure on it.
Adonc cristeriza le orrifici per sos orrificis, quar la humiditat per la qual clisterizas aquela va deves las autras orrificis e corr de lor.	 To control the spread of infection from one affected area to another, you need to keep the moisture content high in all areas where sores are present and apply a protective dressing over each affected area.
E aprop inquier exquisitament, segon qual manieyra a tu es possible que conoguas si aqui has os o nervi, e es la conquavitat de la fistula longinqua o propdana, o es una fistula a la qual so motz orrificis e esta sobre aquo tot am la suma de la tua fortaleza, am la tua enterroguacio, am la qual enterroguas le malaute, e la invencio de la dolor deves la tua compressio am la ma sobre le loc, e semblantz de las significacios e de las causas accidentz al apostema.	 Carefully examine the area where the fistula is located or suspected to determine whether it's a long distance fistula or an ectopic fistula. If you suspect an ectopic fistula, then make sure that your compression is keeping all tissues in place and applying pressure over the area as much as possible with your strength, endurance, and your ability to withstand pain from the patient, while also noting any significant causes or accidents that occurred at this time.
E cum tu auras stat sobre totas aquelas causas am stacio veraya, lahoras ve a la curacio segon confidencia: e es que tu consideras lahoras si es fistula apparent propinqua o en loc sal, longinqua de junctura, o de nervi, o de arteria, o de vena, o de un dels locs les quals yeu a tu e ditz.	 When you've gathered all these causes from your examination, the next step is to seek treatment: if it appears to be a nearby fistula or located near an artery, vein, nerve, or another affected area of the body.
Lahoras tu secca la fistula segon que denant es dit de la naracio de lu, e osta aquo que es en aquela filtracio e de carns corrumpudas, e aquo que es nascut en le orrifici de la carn, o de theil e de semblantz, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	 After determining this by examining it and noting its cause of contamination from outside the body, you should look for treatment that includes cleaning any wounds as well as healing those affected areas.
Mays si la fistula es de longinqua profunditat, e es segon rectetut, lahoras cove que inscidas aquela en le preon atant quant a tu sira possible, e aprop mondifica aquela de totas las suas carns corrompudas; e aprop administra calguas envolopadas en medicinas acutas, e intromet aquelas entro a la conquavitat de la fistula, la qual has conprenduda am ferr.	 When the fistula is deep and secondarily affected, the doctors have to insert it into the previous hole as much as possible, and then fill it with rotten meat; and then administer wrapped sharp waters within medicines, and introduce them into the cavity of the fistula which has been understood to be done
E fay aquo am aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la medicina acuta corroda tot aquo que es romas en la conquavitat de la fistula de la corrupcio.	 And do this by introducing sharp medicine into the cavity of the rotten meat in the fistula which has been corrupted
E aprop restaura aquela am enguentz les quals engendran carn sana entro que sia sanada.	 And then restore that with healthy flesh, so it will be healed
Mays si no es sanada per aquo, lahoras tu cauteriza aquela segon que havem recomtat.	 If not cured by this, the doctors recommend to cauterize that part again.
Mays si la causa de fistula es os e es deves tu certificat aquo, lahoras tu inquireys aquela e secca aquela segon que havem recomtat, si tu no prohibeys alcuna causa de vena o de nervi o de membre principal ayssi cum havem dit.	 If the cause of the fistula is due to veins or nerves or a main member, you should examine that and seal it if recommended by the doctors, unless there are no causes from other parts as we mentioned before.
Mays si le os es a tu descubert e es en lu alcuna corrupcio e negror, lahoras tu ratz aquel entro que la corrupcio sia hostada tota; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que lu encarne entro que sia sanat.	 If the vein is open and there is no corruption or bleeding in it, then seal that off to prevent any more damage; and apply a remedy to it as we mentioned before to make it heal.
E si no es sana e gieta brac ayssi cum fazia, lahoras sapias que tu no est pervengut a la eradicacio tota de la corrupcio; e adonc tu descuebre sobre lu segondanament e exquisitament fay la razio de lu e la mundificacio de lu am la deriera fortalasa tieua, e aprop restaura aquel.	 If it is not healed and the vein has not been properly taken care of as we mentioned before, you should make sure that you did not miss out on the complete removal of corruption; if you discover another part or reason for its damage later on, do thoroughly examine it and make a thorough decision to fix it as well. Then restore that.
E donc si es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras sapias que aquela corrupcio es en la profunditat longinqua del cors, la qual no ha conseguida, e adonc a tu en aquel no es engen sino laysar aquela.	 If the body is healthy and so it should be, if not, then you know that this corruption is in a deep cavity of the heart, which has been unsuccessful, and therefore you are going to have to do it differently.
E si le os corromput es petit, o es a tu possible atirar aquel, lahora tu le atira am forceps subtils las quals conveno ad aquo.	 If the corruption is small, or if it's possible to extract it, then you are going to use fine tweezers that fit this purpose.
E si so motz osses, lahoras exquisitament fay la extraccio de totz aquels, e de aquels no laysses denguna causa am la tua fortaleza.	 If the patient's body is exhausted and they cannot endure any more pain from this process, you must stop doing it.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat alcuna causa de las humiditatz, e en lor inscizio no ha temor ni error, lahoras inscideys aquelas liaments o carns si so aqui, e deliura les osses.	 If there is not any cause of dampness or dryness in their skin and they have no fear nor error, then let them lie down if necessary, but do not bother with ointments or creams unless absolutely needed.
Mays si a tu no es preparacio de ostar les osses de la tua hora, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua aquo que poyresca la plagua aquela, e layssa aquela entro que aquo es al enviro de aquels osses de carns e de liamentz, e guarda la plagua que no sia consolidada, e sia constrengida la seccio la qual tu has inscidida en la tua operacio.	 If you do not want to wash the patient's body at that time, then let them lie down on a cloth that will soak in water and remove it after use. Also, keep the cloth unwrinkled and tightly wound so as not to restrict the circulation of blood or lymph, and protect from drying out by maintaining a certain level of humidity during your operation.
Habantz, si temes, pausa sobre lu coto submers en sopre trissat am oli, o coto submers en anguent egipciac, o en alcu dels enguentz vertz, quar quan poyriran aquelas liaments, e les osses son de lor seperatz la ablacio, e de aquels atraccio es alleujada.	 If you fear, let the towel soak in hot or cold water as needed, or put it in a warm bath for relaxation before removing them from your hands and washing them separately.
Mays si es un gran os ayssi cum le os de camba o de coyssa o semblantz ad aquels, e aquo que de lu es corromput es la facia de lu tant solament, lahoras ratz aquela am resio tant solament derriera entro que sia ostada aquela negror e corrupcio, e aprop restaura la plagua.	 "When the space between a patient's thighs is opened and placed with cushions on their legs and chest, holding their hands to prevent it from coming out.
Mays si aquo que de lu es corrumpyt es gran partida, e la corrupcio ja ha conseguida la medulla del os, lahoras es causa necessaria cerrar aquel e aquel tot inscidir entro al loc on es pervenguda la corrupcio, e lahoras cura aquel entro que sia consolidada.	 "If the corruption of the organ is great and has reached its medulla, then closing off that area and the next one to prevent it from spreading is a necessary treatment.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc ad un home en la sua coyssa per que pausez aquela a eyssempli e adjutori sobre la tua operacio.	 "I recommend you to open up the space in their thigh so that it is simple and easy for your operation.
Foc un home jove per etat entorn xxx ans, al qual accideys dolor en la sua cueyssa, e de las partidas dedintz mauguda es sobre la materia dedintz le cors entro que la materia es pervenguda a la cueyssa, e es materia de apostema am gran apostema, e no foc a lu causa extrinseca.	 "Consider someone young around 30 years old who suffers from joint pain in their legs and whose body is showing signs of gout, as the disease has been spreading to his leg.
E adonc foc extendut le temps am aquela per la error dels metges entro que l’apostema es hubert, e acorrero de lu materias motas, e la sua curacio foc aprop pausada entro que la camba foc fistulada, e faytz son en lu motz orrificis les quals totz getavan poyredura e las humiditatz del cos.	 "To extend the time for the doctors to correct any mistakes that may have been made and then apply necessary treatments as soon as possible while keeping a close eye on their condition due to the high risk of recurrence and the humidity in the body.
E adonc le curec multitut de metges entorn dos ans, e no foc en aquels savia ma en la art, entro que yeu fu appelat.	 "To treat them for two years with multiple doctors' care without focusing on those specific treatments mentioned earlier.
E vi la camba de lu e las materias que corrian de lu aquels orrificis per gran cors; e ja le cos de aquel home era tot stabozit e la color de lu era citrina.	 "I saw his abdomen, covered with those sores that were on the great chest; and I found that he was suffering from jaundice.
E adonc yeu intromesi la tenta ad un de aquels orrificis e pervenguec la tenta al os.	 "Then you inserted a finger into one of those sores, probing it with the finger.
E aprop yeu e perscrutat tostz les orrificis e trobegui aquels pervenir a lor de totas partidas de la camba.	 "Then you examined them all carefully and searched for their origin in the abdomen.
E adonc yeu me coytegui e inscidegui sobre un dels orrificis aquels entro que descrobegui una partida del os, e atrobegui aquel corromput, e ja era terros e corrumput e denigrat; e era ja corrumpuda una partida de la camba entro que havia penetrat entro a la mezola.	 "Then you inquired and found that the sore into which you had inserted your finger was corrupt, corrupted, and stained with excrement; and it turned out to be corrupt from within.
E adon yeu serregui aquo que a mi era discubert e preparat del os descubert.	 "Then you examined the physician who was present and consulted him for advice.
E yeu cujegui que no fos en le os sino aquela corrupcio la qual abscidigui e serregui, e yeu ja havia derraziguada.	 "You found that it wasn't in his abdomen but rather from a corruption of the finger itself.
E aprop pausegui la restauracio de la plagua am medicina consolidativas per lonc temps, e no es consolidada.	 "Then you placed the poultice back on with conservative medical treatment for an extended period and it was not cured.
E aprop yeu iteregui e descubregui sobre le os segondament sobre le descubriment primier, e atrobegui continua corrupcio am le os.	 "Then you further examined the second finger into which it had spread, and found continuous corruption within.
E serregui aquo que a mi apares de aquela corrupcio, e aprop yeu fo perforsat fayre la curacio de lu e restauracio, e no es restaurat.	 "Then you advised him to seek out the cause of that corruption and place it under treatment, but it was not cured.
E adonc yeu descubri sobre lu autra veguada e no cessegui inscidir le os petit a petit particuladament e perforsa la restauracio de lu, e no es restaurat entro que inscidigui entorn un palm de lu, e aquel extraxi am la medula sua, e aprop restauregui aquel am medicinas, e es consolidat leugierament e sanat.	 "When you have opened the abdomen and do not stop inserting it slowly but precisely to perform its restoration, and never restore until you insert a finger in it, extract the brain matter, and after restoring it doctors will consolidate and heal.
E no es necessaria iteracio en la operacio de lu e seccio de lu sino per la disposicio de la freulesa de lu e per la paucitat de la tollerancia de lu e paor de lu de mort, quar a lu accidia en totas horas per superfluitat de evacuacio sincopi mala.	 "It is not necessary to repeat the operation or section of it, but only for disposing of its filth and scarcity of tolerance and fear of death, as he will endure all hours due to the lack of a proper evacuation.
E donc sanat es per sanacio entiera, e nada es en loc de os carn dura; e es fayta bona la disposicio de lu en le sieu cors e retornec la vertut de lu; e es conversat en las suas disposicios e no fec a lu contrarietat en ambulacio ni nocument en denguna causa.	 "And so health is obtained, and nothing is found in hard matter; it is good to dispose of him in his place and return the virtue of him; and he is conversed with his disposition and does not cause him any harm or illness for any reason.
Mays si es os eminent en loc del cors ja trauquat, lahoras cove que tu secces aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas liament e strenh aquel en la extremitat de aquel os eminent, e comanda ad alcu que extenda aquel en sus; e pausa aquel liament de lana pus gros del primier liament; e aprop lia aquel sobre la carn que es dejos le os, e exten la extramitat de lu per que atires la carn a las partidas dejos, e tu descuebras la carn sobre le loc le qual voles serrar per que la serra no leda la carn.	 "If the stomach is in a state of pain or disease already, then you should proceed with caution and strength to that limb; and command someone to extend it over their chest; pause for a moment while taking off some of its first part; and place it on the skin where it will be applied to cut out flesh. And stretch the extremity away so that flesh is not torn from the part where you want to cut.
E pausa fust o taula dejos le os decentment, quar quan tu fas aquo no es prohibida la serra que no secce la carn corrumpuda.	 And pause over the table of theirs to prevent it from being cut up when you do this is not forbidden for someone to cut up spoiled meat
E cove que sia la serradura sobre le loc corrumput petit a petit, quar si es en la concavitat del os corrupcio e no appar en la sua apparicio al sentiment, e forssa a serratura de lu autra veguada.	 And cover the small area of the corrupted part gradually, so that if it is in the concave part of the corrupted organ and not visible in its visibility to feeling, then proceed with cutting off this other extremity.
E si le os es corrumput e no-eminent, abantz es la una partida continuada am la autra, e la corrupcio es al mieg loc o en partida de lu, lahoras tu descuebre la carn de totas partz tota; e aprop pausa fust dejos, e aprop serra aquel de la primiera partida la on es la corrupcio entro que sia continuada la serratura del autra partida.	 If the organ is corrupted and not eminent, then continue with a continuous incision along it, and corruption will be at the edge of that part or in multiple parts, so you reveal all the skin from each part; then pause over to prevent, and proceed to cut off that first part where corruption has begun continuously.
E sia la serradura segon le loc de la corrupcio un petit, segon que havem dit.	 And cover with a small incision in the place of corruption as you mentioned earlier.
E si la corrupcio es en la junctura, inscideys aquela junctura corrumpuda, e serra le os la on es continuat del autra part.	 If corruption is in the joint, then make an incision through that corrupted joint and proceed to the part where it has been continued from the other side.
E si de la corrupcio es en la continuacio de doas juncturas, lahoras no es en lu razio sino engen.	 If corruption is in the continuation of two joints, then you are not to blame but to respond.
E si la corrupcio es en le pecte de la ma o del pe, es mot dificil; empero cove que tu inquieras la corrupcio en qual manieyra appareys a tu, e que abradas aquela, e mondes aquela segon quascuna disposicio la qual es a tu possibla, e am cascum engen sia rectificat a tu, quan no fa a tu contrarietat vena o nervi.	 If corruption is in the chest of the hand or foot, it can be difficult; but if you want to find out where corruption appears on your part, and open that one, then cover it with another available part which you have, so as to correct that, when it does not align with your opposite vein or nerve.
E sapias qual es inscididors e las serras a inscidir aquestz osses son motz segon le situament dels osses, e la preparacio de aquels, e la grosseza de aquels, e la subtilitat e la grandeza e la parvitat de aquels, e la duricia e la lor raritat; per que cove que tu prepares a tota specia de operacio estrument convenient ad aquela opperacio.	 The first sentence translates to: "You know which are the bones and what they mean in this situation.
E sapias que aquela operacio significa a tu sobre la specia del strument del qual indigeysses; quan am tu es gran studi e lonc e conoyssensa de las manieyras de aquesta art, e testimoni de manieyras de malautias, quar lahoras ja tu las avias per tu meteys aquo que es convenient a lu dels sturmentz a tota malautia.	 The second sentence translates to: "You know that this operation means through the particular instrument you use; when you are an expert and knowledgeable in phlebotomy, and witness of malpractice cases, then you will have it in your mind as appropriate for any malpractice situation.
E yeu so a tu formant en la fi de aquest capitol le nombre dels instrumentz les quals pausaras cum eyssimples am les quals proceziras a la tua prohibicio la qual experimentaras sobre las autras.	 The third sentence translates to: "You will count the instruments that you use simply, and those that you process in your prohibition as part of your trial.
Forma de serra:	 It means "Form of inquiry":
Forma de autra serra:	 It means "other form" or "another type".
Forma de autra serra:	 I'm sorry, but the phrase you provided does not have a direct translation to English. Could you please provide another sentence?
Forma de autra serra gran:	 It means "other form" or "another type", referring to various forms or types in general.
Forma de ray:	 The phrase "forma de ray" is not a valid medical term and does not have any specific meaning related to medicine, anatomy, or physiology. Could you please provide another sentence?
Sia le cap de aquest ray segon la forma de cap de clau stellat, e les puntz de lu sian segon la forma dels puntz alstefegi.	 The phrase "siais le cap de este ray segundo la forma de cap de claves estrellados, y los puntos sean segundo la forma de puntos del estel" refers to a process where the shape of a keyhole is used as an indicator for the location of a hole in a structure.
E no conveneys sino que am aquel sian confricadatz les caps de las juncturas quan so corrumpudas, o es la boca gran ampla.	 When joints swell up due to corrupted humors or are open wide
Forma de razori major dels autres:	 Another form of relief for the pain is...
Forma de razori menor:	 Another form of relief is...
Forma de razori lat:	 The most extreme remedy for relieving joint pain is...
Forma de serra autra decentment fayta: sia fayt arc de lu pus sobira e la acuitat de lu de ferr, e le membre de lu de boys punhal descentment fayt.	 The alternative way to alleviate the pain is through the use of sharp objects such as knives or pins and to gently pull away each member from one another.
Forma de lu:	 The last remedy for relieving joint pain is...
Forma de razori en la qual ha concavitat:	 One form of relief that involves a cavity in the body is...
Forma de razori autra subtil:	 Another subtle way to alleviate pain is through...
Forma de autra razori de curvada extremitat:	 The alternative remedy for relieving joint pain that involves stretching an extremity is...
Forma de rasori petit semblant a tenta:	 One form of relief that requires small objects like needles or pins is...
Forma de incisori am le qual so inscidit les osses:	 The remedy that involves cutting into the bones is...
Forma de inscisori autra minor:	 Another less extreme form of incision is...
Forma de un autra inscissori; aquest semblant a ray, e la extremitat de lu es cum serra, e es exhibit en motz locs en la razio dels osses:	 One alternative form of cutting involves the use of sharp objects such as knives or pins and to gently pull away each bone from one another.
Forma de ray lo qual conveneys a rasio de aquel que es perforat dels osses:	 The incision that is customary for relief when bones are perforated is...
E la extremitat de lu es triangulada e de aguda extremitat.	 And the extremity of the patient becomes triangular and sharp.
E es fayt de ferr de India , e semblantment cove que totas las causas que havem ditas de rasoris e de inscissoris e de serras.	 It is customary to use remedies from other categories such as incisions, burns, and abrasions.
De inscizio extremitatz e de la serratura dels osses.	 Opening of limbs and bones' joints
Las extremitatz se poyresso o per causa intrinseca o per causa extrinseca, o cum tu auras medicat aquela corrupcio per curacio de aquelas medicinas e la curacio no comfereys, o vezes la corrupcio anar deves le membre la qual no percuteys denguna causa, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel membre entro aquo la hon acossec la corrupcio, per que le malaute evasesca per aquo de mort o de malicia que es major defeliment del membre.	 The pain in the limbs may be caused by intrinsic or extrinsic causes; and if you suspect any corruption (illness) of this kind, treat it with these medicines to cure it, provided that the treatment does not interfere, or sometimes because of some cause, when the limb is corrupted, you should insert it into this hole to drain out the corruption, lest the patient die from this illness, which is greater damage than any member.
E le senhal de aquel al qual accideys, es que·l membre es fayt negre entro que sia cujat que foc la ja comburit, o se poyreys aprop la negror entro que la poyredura aquela ane entro aquel membre que siec lu e que prengua tot le cors; e donc coyta te am inscizio de aquel.	 When the patient dies, it is necessary to insert a black member into the hole which burned him or her until all the fire has been extinguished, and then sew it tightly onto that part.
E semblantment si es causa de la corrupcio percussio de alcunas causas venenosas ayssi cum de scorpio mari o de vupera o de rutela e de semblantz.	 And similarly if the corruption is caused by venomous causes such as scorpion stings, or viper bites, or rattlesnake bites and similar ones.
E si la corrupcio o la percussio es en la extremitat del dit, lahoras tu inscideys le dit e no dones spazi a la corrupcio per que ane entro a la ma.	 And if the corruption or injury is in the hand, you should insert it and not give space for the corruption to enter into the mouth.
E semblantment si accedeys a la ma, lahoras tu inscideys aquela de la razit del focil, e no dones spazi a la corrupcio entro que prengua en le focil del bras.	 And similarly if it is in the mouth, you should insert that from the fire of the finger and not give space for the corruption to enter into the finger's flame.
E si envezeys aquel, lahoras inscideys le bras entro al coyde en la junctura.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate into each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet.
E si passa otra la corrupcio e la vezes enviro le coyde, lahoras en aquel es la mort del malaute; e aministrar autra causa otra aquo en curacio es quantitat de vertut.	 If another corruption or disease occurs in the cavity, then gout is called the death of the patient; and to administer another remedy for it may take a long time.
E semblantment fay del pe quan corrupcio envezeys le dit del pe, lahoras tu inscideys aquel entro ad un dels nozes.	 Similarly, when corruption occurs in the foot, then the physician should place it into one of the holes.
E si pren en la pente del pe, lahoras tu inscideys tot le pe.	 If you remove the foot from a bed or a chair, then the physician should cut off all the toes.
Mays si pueja entro al denol, lahoras tu inscideys la camba entro a la junctura del denol.	 If the abscess occurs in the belly, then you place the abscess into the opening of the belly.
E si la corrupcio ja es pervenguda sobre le denol, lahoras en lu no es engen sino dimissio, e layssar le malaute a la mort.	 If the corruption is widespread in the belly, then it is not curable and doctors should declare the patient dead.
E la manieyra de inscidir le membre o de serrar lu es que tu strenhas le liament en la partida pus dejos la qual voles inscidir, e strenh autre liament sobre le loc; e extenda le ministre un liament a las partidas dejos, e extenda le ministra autra liament en sus; e tu separa la carn la qual es entre dos liamentz ain spatum lat entro que sia descuberta tota la carn; e aprop sia inscidit o serrat.	 The method of cutting the member or removing it is that you should stretch out your garment and choose where to cut, and then another one on its place; and extend a minister into both parts, and extend an extra minister in them too; and separate the skin which is between two cuts from top to bottom, so that all the skin may be opened up.
E cove que sia pausat drap de li de totas partidas per so que no toque le loc sa, e que vengua al malaute lesio ajustada e apostema caut.	 Cover his body with clothing so that he does not touch any of the parts, and let him adjust a treatment to soothe his pain
Mays si accideys flux de sanc quan obras, lahoras tu cauteriza le loc coytadament, o pausa sus lu alcunas polveras restrenhentz le sanc; e aprop retorna a la tua medicacio entro que sia complida.	 When the swelling occurs when working, you cauterize the affected area promptly or apply powder to restrain it; and return your medical attention as soon as possible
E aprop lia le membre plaguat am liament al u convenient, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	 Apply a bandage to the infected member in an appropriate manner, cure it when healthy
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc a un home en le sieu pe, aquest meteys accident le qual yeu e a tu recomtat, le qual es quar accidic a lu negror en le sieu pe am adustio que era asemblada a combustio de foc.	 Recommend to the patient that they avoid being in an area with a fire, and recommend caution when applying adhesive bandages
E aquela corrupcio accidic primierament en le sieu dit entro que tendec tot le pe.	 The corruption occurs first at the foot, spreading towards the rest of the body.
E adonc aquel home preparec per si meteys pus que vic la curacio anar al membre am la vehemencia de lu que atrobec de dolor e de adustrio de lu, e el inscidic aquel pe entro a la junctura, e foc sanat.	 When the patient becomes very sick due to pain and burns, prepare for them going to have medical care at their member as soon as possible.
Lonc temps accidic a lu aquela meteyssa corrupcio en le dit de la ma indic.	 The long time of corruption in this specific area begins
E adonc venc a mi, e so me perforsat repercutir aquela superfluitat am aquo que pausegui sobre la ma de las medicinas, aprop la mundificacio del cos de lu; e no es repercussa la superfluitat e comensec anar al autra dit entro que comensec en la ma.	 Do not let the excess spread to other parts of the body, and do not allow it to come out through another hole if you want to avoid coming back in at that same place.
E el apelec me a inscidir la ma de lu, e yeu no volgui far aquo sperant sobre la repercussio de aquela superfluitat, e mays que temegui deves la inscizio de la ma de lu mort, quar la vertut del malaute era sobre cazement.	 The physician cautions you to avoid spreading the excess on your body parts and does not allow you to do it hoping for no effect from this excessive, fearing that if allowed to spread then the hole in your body will be filled with more infection, as the patient had already become sicker and was dying.
E pus que el se desperec de mi, es retornat en la sua terra e pervenguec a mi que aquel home preparec e inscidic la sua ma tota, e es sanat.	 When someone has been freed from my grip, they are returned to their land and brought back to me for further treatment
E no he adhuzida aquesta narracio sino per que sia adjutori sobre aquo que catz de aquesta malautia, e que sia significacio per la qual sia significada e segon la qual sia obrat.	 I am not sure about the meaning of this sentence as it seems to be gibberish or just a random collection of words without any clear context or meaning.
De cura sinuum et qualitate clisterizationis cum medicinis.	 "With medical treatment, cure their ailments and improve their quality.
Quan accideys apostema en alcus membres carnozes e·l spazi de l’apostema es prolonguat entro que fa colleccio de sania, e aprop es romput e perforat, e es eyssida de lu la sania, e roman le loc vuoyt quays cum si era vayssel, e la codena que es desobre lu ayssi cum drap subtiliat, e no es pervengut a deriera corrupcio, e no inprimeys en le os o en nervi ni en liament, es apelat sinu, e no es nompnat fistula.	 "When the abscess comes to attack any of your members and extends into the surrounding tissue, it is first drained and perforated. The discharge from the abscess will be a clear fluid that may contain pus or other debris. You are advised not to touch this fluid directly with rough handling, as this can lead to contamination.
Mays empero si le spazi es prolonguat entro que la corrupcio enprema en alcun membre, lahoras es appelada fistula e no zukem.	 "If the abscess space extends into any other member, it is called a fistula and not allowed to heal.
E la cura de lu es que inscidas aquela codena tota ayssi cum es revolvut, e majorment quan es subtiliada e es fayta cum drap, e comfizas que no adhereys al loc per la sua corrupcio.	 "The cure for it is to administer that medication as soon as you turn it over and mainly when it's applied gently while keeping your hand away from the location of contamination.
Mays si tu speras que la codena adheresca e que aquela corrupcio no aja conseguit per deriera consecucio, e en la codena ha spassitut de cara, lahoras tu cura aquel am clisteri.	 "If you feel that the abscess is sticking and cannot be extracted through conventional means alone, then treat it with a pointed cautery.
E es que consideras al sinu, e lahoras si es gran, e·l brac que yeys es de fetent odor, lahoras clisteriza aquel am medicament egipciac le qual es de oli e vi agre e ziniar recebent partidas enguals, e sian ajustadas en un vayssel, e sian coytas sobre le foc entro que’l medicament se fassa rog e pervengua a specitut de mel.	 When joint pain is severe and widespread, the arm that you hold should have a fetid odor, then apply an Egyptian medicine with oil of vitriol and zinc sulfate to adjust it into one substance, and wash it over the focus until the medication is applied gently without causing harm or speculum damage.
E aprop tu pren de lu aquo que es necessari e dissolveys lu am aygua e mel; e clisteriza am aquel le sinu, e strenh le orrifici de lu, e layssa la medicina en lu per la quantitat de doas horas.	 Then take the amount of water and vinegar needed to make a poultice from it, then apply it to the affected area, strengthening its soothing properties, and spread the medicine over it for two hours.
E aprop extratz aquela am sprecio; e fay aquo per tantz dias entro que sia mundificat le sinu e sia remauguda la pudor.	 Then remove that poultice after a certain number of days until the pain has been made mild and the odor has been removed.
E alcunas veguadas es clisterizat am aygua de cendre, quan no es a tu prezent aquest medicament; e es que tu prenguas la cendra de vitz, e met sobre lu aygua; e aprop cola aquela e clisteriza aquel am ela entro que te confizes que·l sinu lahoras es ostat.	 When you don't have access to that poultice, then prepare a new one by mixing water and vinegar, place it on the affected area, and apply it until your fingers are burned.
E si le malaute no ha tollerancia sobre le medicament egipciac ni l’aygua de la cendre, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aygua e mel e quays sia mesclat ziniar trissat, e clisteriza aquel am vi e mel mesclat, quar de proprietat de mel es que mondifique e lave, e le vi fa adherir le sinu, e majorment quan en le vi ha superfluitat de stipticitat e de siccitat.	 If the patient does not tolerate the Egyptian medicine or vinegar to be burned, then apply a mixture of oil and vinegar as well, mixing them thoroughly, so that the oil adheres to the skin, while still allowing it to wash off.
E cum tu fas aquo alcunas veguadas e te comfizes que·l sinu ja es remaugut, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aquo que fa naysser la carn en lu.	 With you doing this, make sure the sinew has been relaxed so that it does not pull or draw the flesh in there.
E es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e dissolveys aquel am oli rozat e vi stiptic; o que clisterizas aquel am alcunas medicinas e enguentz autres que hajan las proprietatz les quals ja he yeu scritz en le tractat dels enguents.	 It is important to prevent any further inflammation and dissolve any accumulated phlegm, mucus or other substances that may have been present in the treatise on veins; it also involves using poultices (poulticing), which are compress dressings soaked in hot water and vinegar.
E si le orrifici del sinu es streyt en le qual no es recebuda la canula del clisteri, lahoras tu le amplifique aquel am ferr petit a petit, e pausa en lu calgua envolopada en enguent egipciac o en enguent basilicon entro que sia amplificat.	 If the veins in question are swollen and not receiving a tourniquet, then you should gradually inflate it with air from an ambu bag, pausing as it inflates to prevent further swelling or bursting.
E semblantment si le orrifici es ample, lahoras tu agregua las labias de lu am sutura e layssa de lu quantitat en la qual intre le clisteri ses addicio.	 Similarly if the veins are already dilated (expanded), you should increase their diameter by stitching in additional layers of skin until there is enough excess tissue around them to cover a tourniquet.
E si le orrifici de lu del qual corr le brac es elevat a las partidas desus, lahoras secca aquel en le pus bas loc que es en lu per que le brac corra entro dejos, quar quan le brac es coartat en la preondeza de sinu la carn esser en lu engendrada.	 If the veins of which arm are elevated at the top of its range (as shown in your diagram), then you should cut it off so that the arm cannot be further raised; when the arm is too close to your face, make sure there will not be any injury to the skin caused by it.
E si no es a tu possible seccar le sinu entro al enviro del os pus bas segon que voles, lahoras te perforssa que prepares le membre am preparacio per la qual corr de lu le brac leugierament segon que es a tu apparelhat e que no sia en lu retengut alcuna causa del brac.	 If you want to remove it without the use of forceps in an environment where further use may be necessary, then please ensure that the arm is prepared for handling and will not cause any injury to the arm itself; this should be ensured by checking beforehand if there are any factors causing the need to hold onto or pull from the arm.
E pren medicinas consolidativas que sian pausadas sobre le sinu convenientz ad aquo que vols exxten aquelas sobre drap de li.	 "Take preventive medications which are placed over the abdomen to this end that you may extend those on these sheets.
E le drap sia de tan gran quantitat cum fa la comunicacio de tot le sinu; e aprop inscidey am las forfexs en le dreyt del orrifici del sinu un trauc pus ample un pauc que l’orrifici del sinu; e aprop exten sobre autre drap de li dels enguentz leons segon la quantitat del trauc, e pausa le sobre aquel per posicio longinqua del orrifici del sinu per que sia aleujat le eyssiment del brac de lu e no ostes le drap gran sino aprop alcus dyas una veguada.	 "The cloth is of such a great quantity and makes communication with all the parts; so it extends the orifice in the throat, and stretches to another cloth over that part by increasing the length from which the orifice comes out, not stretching too much to prevent damage to the arms but rather pulling them slightly apart.
Mays aquel que es sobre le orrifici del sinu, le qual remauguas en tota hora per so que yesca aquo que es ajust en lu del brac.	 "That which is over the orifice of the throat should be gently pulled at all times to ensure that it is in place and does not cause any discomfort.
E per que sapias si aquo que corr de lu del brac es mot o pauc, o es digest, o es no-digest.	 "To determine if this which covers the arm has medicinal properties or just serves to cover it up, or is it digestive or not digestive.
E am aysso tu considera le loc de aquel sinu, si en lu sent le pacient dolor o no, e si es en lu apostema.	 "Do you consider that location in the patient's body, whether there is pain when it comes out of them or not and if it is used to release the pain.
E cum la tua medicacio es prolonguada en la tal manieyra, e vesas la matiera que es gitada sobre le orrifici del sinu ja adhereys, o se apropria adherencia, lahoras le mayti tu le deslia o le tertz dia, e quan deslias la plagua, lahoras muda le drap per autre e renova le enguent.	 "As your medication lasts for such a long time and the material that covers the orifice of the throat is adhered to or has adhesive properties, you may want to change it frequently, every day, or three times in a day, depending on how quickly it loses its adherence.
Mays si del sinu aprop lon spazi yeys virus subtil, lahoras no te desperes de la adherencia de li, quar la sanacio de lu se apropria, quar so alcus homes en les quals tarda generacio de carn en las lors plaguas, e de aquels so en les quals es fayt le contrari de lu.	 When you have made the space for a subtle virus to enter it will not make you lose consciousness of what is happening there as long as the healing process takes place and your body is in balance with its natural energy flow, which can bring about regeneration from the damage caused by those viruses.
E si del sinu aprop motz dias es yssit brac indigest, lahoras sapias que·l sinu no adhereys; e si es tardada la adherencia del sinu e es la causa prolonguada, lahoras tu ajusta en exsiccacio de las medicinas, e si las medicinas so humidas en lor substancia e en la sua vertut, son seccas ayssi cum enguent dyafinicon, quan es en lu ajustada superfluitat de addicio de zegi.	 If the virus has entered your body and is causing a prolonged adhesion of your joints, doctors will advise you to apply excipients with medical grade dry ice in order to correct this condition.
E le mays derier am le qual es curat, es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e sia dissout en oli rozat, e sia sobre lu vojat vi antic engual en la sua substancia, e aprop comfeys aquel am lu, e usa de aquel.	 The remedy for the condition is to prevent it from happening and stop any excessive inflammation in its substance, and use something that can help with that.
E ja fa semblant en aquela accio, quan no y a brac, enguent dyafinicon, mel quan es coyt entro que sia engrossat, e usa de lu; o que prenguas mirra e aloen e enses, e trissa tot e polveriza sobre le mel quan es sus le foc, e aprop lineys aquo sobre drap e strenh aquel sobre le sinu; e lineys aquel am le mel le qual has cuoyt entro que es engrossat, e polveriza sobre drap e strenh aquel.	 The treatment is to make an incision when the arm is not available and get it out of there if it becomes swollen, and use a towel over that area, and sprinkle some powder on top as well; or take care with mirrors and others, and try to break everything up into dust covering your hands when you have cut them off, and put that down.
E alcunas veguadas so administratz am lu aristologia longua e razitz de lili celesti (e es lili celesti) e farina de errs e centaurea, e usa de aquels simples o ajustatz, trissa aquels e cribela e polveriza sobre le mel le qual he recomtat; e husa de lu.	 Some vegetables are recommended for arthritis and joint pain of the celestial lilies (and celestial lilies) and flour of ergot and centaur's bark, and use those simple ones or adjust them as necessary, break them up and sprinkle them on top of the powder that I have advised you to take.
E si es prolonguat le sinu, e no es sanat per aquesta curacio, lahoras sapias que la corrupcio es en le preon de lu, e ja fa enquisicio en les osses o en les autres membres durs o als liaments; lahoras tu le cura am curacio fistular, ayssi cum desus es dit.	 When the vein is prolonged and not cured by this means, you know that there is corruption in it, so seek a fistula inquiry in bones or other hard parts, for doctors to cure as they say
De curacio de panarici et unguis attritae et incisione digiti additi et sectione.	 To correct the veins and fingers, make incisions on both sides of the veins and on each finger separately.
Panarici es apostema le qual nays dejos la ungla del dit pous de la ma o del pe, e fort leu nays en les autres ditz, e cum es prolonguat e la sua curacio es mens prezada, o es apostemat de apostema caut, o es corrumput, e gieta brac entro que corrodeys la razitz de la ungla, e fort leu corromp aquela tota, e fort leu perve la sua corrupcio al os entro que es a lu odor fetent, e es fayta la extremitat del dit lada, e la color de lu es fayta fusca.	 To correct the veins and fingers, you should make cuts on both sides of the veins, making a cut under each finger as well. If prolonged and its cure is considered impossible or corrupted, it's advisable to open a fistula inquiry in bones or other hard parts, for doctors to deal with appropriately. The color of the vein may turn black due to this injury.
E donc quan tu auras aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas am ferr tota la superfluitat que es romasa de la ungla e aprop cauteriza la plagla aprop aquo, quar cauteri mot es juvatiu en aysso.	 If you find out about it at the beginning of division and cannot perform your cure as described, then proceed to cauterize the affected area properly here.
Mays si le os es sa e la ungla es sana, e las addicios de la ungla vuoydas ja compremen las carns a las partidas dedintz, e comensan lu punger e ledeysso aquela, lahoras cove que tu pauses ray subtil dejos le angle de la ungla que pungeys la carn, e impelleys aquela sus e inscideys aquela carn am facilitat, e pausa sobre aquo que roman de la carn de las medicinas comburentz corrosivas entro que sia tot remaugut; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	 If the eye and finger are healthy, then cut off all superfluous parts of the finger and cauterize it immediately to prevent further damage, for cautery is corrosive by nature unless completely burned away; cure this with medicine as soon as possible.
Mays si la corrupcio ja enprem en le os, lahoras cove que tu inscidas le os aquel e le extraguas, car nul temps no es sanat que sia en lu le os corrumput.	 When the corruption has entered into one's body, then the pains are caused from this intrusion and the extracted poison, for there is never a time that it will be safe in his corrupted bowels
E si vezes la corrozio e la corupcio anar en le dit, lahoras tu inscideys aquel en un dels nozes segons que es premesa la sua rememoracio, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	 If times of corruption and contamination occur within the same part, then pains are caused from this intrusion and care must be taken to remove it in one of the bowels as is prescribed by memory, and apply a cure for him so that he may recover his health.
Mays si a la ungla endeve percussio o atricio, e endeve en aquela dolor vehement, lahoras cove que tu al comensament fleubotomes le malaute, e aprop secca la ungla am spatum agut am seccio transversa desus en jus, e guarda te que la seccio no pervengua entro a la carn que es dejos la ungla, quar tu faras accidir al malaute dolor vehement, e sira causa a nativitat de la carn ajustada superflua en le loc; e aprop cura aquel loc am aquo que ceda dolor.	 If an internal ulcer or abscess occurs and is accompanied by intense pain, then first treat the external ulcers as prescribed earlier with the transverse cuts in order to remove them from their source of pus, and ensure that these cuts do not penetrate into the flesh that surrounds it lest they cause further harm; afterwards apply care to this place where pain still occurs.
Mays dit ajustat, le qual es nat en las mas de alcus homes, fort leu es carnos tot, e fort leu so en lu osses, o fort leu es en lu ungla.	 It is written that a person of these qualities will be most blessed among all men; he is as light in heart and mind as well as body, or very light-hearted and gentle natured.
E alcus de lu son natz en la razit de la junctura, o es la nativitat de lu en alcus nozes dels ditz.	 The cause of the joint pain could be due to the nature or quality of one's bowels; it could also be attributed to defects in the bowels themselves.
Mays aquel que es nat en alcus nozes del dit no se mau, e aquest que es nat en las juncturas fort leu es maugut.	 The person who has a light and gentle nature is most blessed among all men; he is particularly blessed with the joints being very light-hearted.
E de aquels que son natz carnoses, la seccio es leugiera, e es que tu inscidas aquel deves la sua razitz am spatum lat.	 "Between those who are suffering from gout, the physician should open up a space on their thighs and place cushions underneath them; another servant to be placed on their legs as well, and another on their chest. The hands of these servants will hold onto them.
Mays de aquel que es nat en la razitz de la junctura, la curacio es dificil; e donc guarda te de la abscizio de lu.	 "For those who are not suffering from the pain caused by a joint, care should be taken to prevent its recurrence.
Mays en aquel que es nat en dit deves les nozes, cove que tu inscidas al comensament la carn de lu am inscizio redonda entro al os, e aprop serra am una de aquelas serras convenientz ad aquo, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	 "For those who are not in the grip of gout pain, you should first open up your arm as if to make a fist; then put it around their neck and hold onto them.
Mays consolidacio la qual accideys als ditz entre lor motas veguadas o per nativitat del home que nays enayssi, o per consolidacio de plagua o per combustio de foc, o per semblantz, adonc cove que secces aquela consolidacio entro que les ditz retorno a la sua forma natural.	 "In consolidation of those places between their fingers that have been burned or through the nature of the man who has never had gout, by consolidating plaga [plague] or by fire, by association, such consolidation must be made so as to bring back them to their normal shape.
E aprop pausa entre lor draps de li enfuzes en oli rozat per que no sian consolidatz leugierament, e separa entre aquels, o pausa entre aquels una lamina de plom subtil entro que sia consolidat segon que cove.	 "Then place a subtle piece of cloth between them to prevent sticking together; separate the two, or pause between the two with a thin piece of cloth that has been consolidated so.
E semblantment si accideys consolidacio en alcus ditz am la palma, lahoras tu secca aquela consolidacio segon que es preparada e conveneys a la figura del membre.	 "And similarly if consolidation is done on the palm of their hand, then afterwards you should straighten out this consolidation so that it fits in with the shape of the body part.
De inscizio de vices, so son varicas.	 "If there are two servants involved, they serve as footmen.
Vices so son varicas, e so venas envolutas grossas plenas de superfluitatz melencolicas las quals veno en motz dels membres del cors, e le major adveniment de lor en las cambas, e majorment en las cambas dels itinerantz e dels laborantz e dels portantz.	 When veins are twisted and full of melancholy phlegm, which occurs in the members of the body and most often on the calves, but also on the legs of laborers or porters
Adonc cove que tu administres purguacio del cors de colera negra alcunas veguadas am expulcio fort, e aprop sangna le pacient de la vena basilica.	 When you administer purgative medicine to remove black bile from a patient's liver, you should also help the patient drain blood from their basilica vein
Mays la curacio de lor am ferr es segon dos manieyras: la una es que sia inscizas e sia atirat aquel sanc negre, e l’autra manieyra es que sia elevada la vena e sia extrayta tota.	 The first treatment is to cleanse it of the black bile and stop its flow; the second method is to elevate it (the vein) and extract all of it
La seccio de lu es segon aquesta manieyra: embroca al comensament la camba am aygua cauda mot entro que le sanc gros sia resolvut, que es feculent de la camba, e aprop strenh la camba del malaute a la partida pus sobirana de la coyssa entro a la partida dejos del denol am una benda, e aprop secca la vena en un loc, o en dos, o en tres am seccio ampla, e aprop eleva le sanc negra am la tieua ma de la partida dejos de la camba entro en sus, e desus en jus, entro que del sanc sia yssida la quantitat que voles e que vezes habastar, e la qual tollera la vertut del malaute.	 The second treatment method is to first drain the large vein of the patient with water until it becomes full and inflamed from being clogged; then gently squeeze the vein at its source as much as possible in order to extract all of it, preferably into a separate container or onto a table, depending on your preferred location. Repeat this process as many times as you need for the quantity of black bile that is desired and how many times it will take to eliminate it from the patient.
E aprop lia aquela, e comanda a lu que abstengua de las viandas colera negra engendrantz.	 And then, command them to abstain from any foods or beverages that contain black bile.
E itera la curacio per fleubotomia quan las venas so umplidas e aquo notz al malaute.	 Then the treatment continues with phlebotomy when the veins are full and causing harm to the patient.
Mays la elevacio de lor es segon aquesta manieyra: tu que razas la camba del malaute, si en lu so motz pels, e aprop met le en banh e embroca la camba de lu am aygua cauda entro que s’enrogesesca e las venas sian exuberadas; o que sia exercitat per exercici fort, si banh no es a tu present, entro que·l membre sia scalfat.	 When the opening of the patient's legs is done in this manner: if there is pain in doing so, apply some ointment on the groin and cover it with a bandage to keep from being rubbed; or if exercise is painful because you are out of breath, do exercise very lightly until your member becomes scuffed.
E aprop secsa la codena en le dreyt de la vena per seccio en le lonc o en le derier de lu deves le denol, o en le pus bas de lu deves lo talo.	 You should apply it on the right side of the vein or at its tip or bottom depending where you want to put it.
E aprop uobre la codena am uncis e excorja la vena de tota part entro que appara al sentiment, e es deves la appericio de lu que vezes aquela roga declinant a negror.	 You should apply the ointment all over the vein, except at its tip or bottom where it can be applied to feel for warmth.
E donc cum evazeys e de la codena tu vezes aquela blanca quays sia corda.	 Then you will spread and apply the ointment as much as possible without making it too thick.
E aprop tu met dejos aquela le ray entro que sia elevada e sia gitada de la codena, e sospen aquela am onci orp leon.	 Apply the ointment in a manner so that its top is elevated and its bottom is flat, avoiding having any lumps.
E aprop secsa autra seccio aprop aquela seccio per tres ditz, e aprop excorja la codena de la partida desus de la vena entro que apparia.	 You should apply it in another section of the vein and then go to its start from the opposite end towards where you want to apply it.
E aprop eleva aquela e inscideys aquela en deriera seccio deves le talo, e aprop extratz aquela e eleva aquela entro que sia yssida per la seccio segonda, e aprop extratz aquela de la seccio que es sobre aquela.	 You should lift it up and insert into the bottom section of your veins, then place it under another section towards where you want to put it, and finally move it from that second section over this one.
E fay aquo entro que extraguas aquela de la seccio que es pus sobirana o pus auta de totas las seccios, entro que tota es yssida; e lahoras inscideys aquela.	 When joints are inflamed by phlegm that invades each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout among doctors
E si no obezeys a tu ad extrayre e elevar, lahoras intromet una agulha am fiel fort doble e ligua aquela e extratz la, o intromet dejos lu le ray e revolveys la tua ma a tota part entro qu’en sia getada.	 If the pain is severe and unbearable, it may be advisable to insert an extremely fine needle into that part of the body which is causing the pain, or place your hand over all parts involved in such a way as if you were giving yourself a shot.
E guarda te que no sia inscidida; quar si es trencada, es fayt a tu dificil elevar aquela mot e es vengut sobre le malaute per aquela nocument.	 Remember to do not cause harm or injury, as if it were broken, you may find it difficult to raise that part and feel pain in the patient from that moment.
E cum aquela tota auras fora-gitada, lahoras pausa sobre le loc de la plagua lana submerssa en vi e oli rozat e oli no-rozat, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	 When all swelling has been alleviated and pain is no longer present in that location submerged by water or covered with oil, and the wound has been treated, you can move on to the next step.
E si la vit es contrayta havent tortuositat a la qual sia envolucio a las partidas, e no es segon rectitut segon que havem dit, lahoras cove que tu fendas sobre aquela a tota partida de tortuositat de lu e als locs de envolucio de lu, e aprop suspen aquela am uncis entro que eleves aquela tota.	 If the vein is twisted and knotted in such a way that you cannot see its opening or the location of it on your body, do not force yourself to try to locate it further; instead, go directly to step 7.
E guarda te deves la tua seccio que no inscidas la vena e que no plagues aquela, quar dificil sira a tu elevar aquela; e serva la tua prudencia en aquela.	 Remember that you must not cause any harm or injury to the vein and may be difficult for you to elevate it; use your discretion in this matter.
Forma del inscident am le qual es seccada vit:	 Form a connection as follows:
Forma de unci orp:	 form of address
No es a lu accuitat ayssi cum als uncis ni es de aguda extremitat per so que no plague la vena; e es de grossa flexibilitat leon, quar si era subtil, inscidira la vena per la sua subtilitat; habantz es en lu superflua grosseza ayssi cum havem dit.	 The vein is large and flexible enough that if it were small or thin, it would pierce the vein with its subtlety; but if we add some excess fat to it as they say
De extraccio venae cruris.	 To extract a vein from the calf.
Aquesta vena es engendrada en las cambas en terras caudas ayssi cum al- Ategi en terra de Arabics e en las terras de India caudas e aridas de pauca teneritat e en las quals no nays erba ni aybre.	 This vein is generated in the calves and thighs, as well as the legs of some other peoples who are used to having little vegetation or grass.
E fort leu es engendrada en autres locs del cors otra las cambas.	 It is also generated at the elbows, but not always on the calves.
E la gestacio de lu es de putrefaccio que ve dejos la codena ayssi cum venen dedintz le cors serpentz e vermps e scarides e verms engendrantz entre la codena e la carn.	 The gesture of it is to apply a poultice, which will cause the veins and serpents and worms to come out between the flesh and the bone.
E senhal de la suscepcio de l’adveniment de lu es de aquesta vena que accideys en la camba enflammacio vehement; e aprop le loc es vesicat; e aprop comensa la vena yssir del loc de aquela vesicacio quays sembla razit de planta.	 The occasion of its occurrence is when the vein becomes inflamed in the calf, and then the place is cauterized; and afterwards it closes up like a plant seed hole that has been burned.
E adonc cum appar de lu la extremitat, lahoras cove que tu envolvas sobre aquela una pessa de plom del qual sia le pes de una drac. entro a ii drac., e noza aquela e layssa le plom suspendut de la camba.	 When you notice it, the doctor will apply pressure over that part of the body, which weighs as much as one dragon's weight, and they lift away from there and let loose the powder from the calf.
E tantas veguadas cum yeys de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, envolveys aquo em plom e noza aquel.	 And whenever you see that it has occurred at other places, apply pressure over this one as well and take away from there.
E si mot es prolonguat, lahoras tu inscideys una partida de lu e envolopa le romanent; e no inscidas aquela de razit entro que sia fora yssida, quar si inscideys aquela es contrayta e intra en la carn e fa accidir apostema e poyredura en le loc e ulceracio mala.	 When the pain extends too much, doctors remove a part of it and cover it with gauze; they do not cut off that which is superfluous inside, so as to prevent any further damage or infection.
Per que cove que sia tractada suaument e sia extrayta petit a petit, entro que sia fora-gitada del derier de lu e no remangua de lu alcuna causa en le cors.	 The treatment is being applied gradually and is gradually becoming smaller day by day, until it has been completely removed from the right side of his body without falling off in any part of the body.
E de aquesta vena es yssit en alcus homes que es en la sua longitut de v palms e de detz e ja es pervengut a mi que yssic un de xx palms.	 The vein is being held by some sort of clamp or vise-like device, and I believe it's the right one because its length matches your palm size and texture.
E si es inscidida en la hora de la sua medicacio, lahoras intromet lo ray en le trauc de lu e perfora aquela am lonc trauc am le cors, entro que sia evacuat tot aquo que es en la materia, e administra putrefaccio del loc per alcus dias am medicinas; e aprop cura aquela per la curacio de apostemas.	 If the treatment is being performed during surgery, doctors remove it from his chest and perforate that part of the body, until it has been completely removed from this material, and administer putrefaction to the area for a few days after the operation; they also provide care for the wounds.
E aquesta vena alcunas veguadas ha motz ramps, e majorment quan apar a la junctura del pe o en le pe, e veno a lu motz orrificis, e es yssit de quascu orrifici ram.	 The veins in question have been damaged and are most often located at the junction of the foot or leg, as they come out through the skin when ruptured; it is difficult to determine which of them burst first.
E donc cura aquela ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio e am aquo que es desus dit.	 Therefore, they cut that off with a division and place it where you said so.
De sectione super vermes generatos sub cute et dicitur aegritudo bovina.	 The bovine gland is located in the groin area, also known as the scrotum.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en alcuna terra deves nos malautia bovina per so quar motas veguadas endeve als bious e es verm pauc un le qual es nat entre la codena e la carn, e va en tot le cos pujan e devalan, e es mostrat al sentiment deves le sieu anament de membre en membre entro que disromp la codena e yeys fora.	 This malady is called bovine mastitis because it occurs when the veins become engorged and the tissue becomes inflamed between the skin and flesh, spreading throughout the body, and causing pain in each member one by one as they rupture
E la generacio de lu es per putrefaccio de alcunas humors ayssi cum accideysso verms e serpentz e lombrics e ascaridas en le ventre.	 The generation of it is through the putrefaction of certain humors that occur simultaneously with worms, snakes and abscesses in the belly.
E es temut per la malicia de lu, quar quan el va en le cors e es elevat al cap, e es pervengut al huel, lahoras fort leu uebre en lu e intra e destruzeys le huel, e aquo endeve motas veguadas.	 It is feared by the malice of it, when it comes to the heart and rises towards the head, and penetrates the blood, causing severe pain in the body that weakens life, and this leads to certain death.
E donc quan tu voles curar aquel e extraire lu, lahoras no se fa si no deves la sieua ambulacio e apparacio de lu al sentiment, e adonc cove que tu strenhas aquo que es sobre lu e aquo que es dejos lu am liament e constriccio fort, e aprop secca sobre lu e extratz aquel.	 Therefore when you want to cure it and extract it, the doctors do not proceed unless they have brought out its symptoms at the earliest opportunity, and must press hard on it, and apply a cold compress over it, and extract it.
E si es preondat en la carn e no le atrobes, lahoras tu pausa cauteri am foc sobre le loc entro que mora, e la major causa que es temuda es corrupcio de lu am la qual corrump le loc ayssi cum havem dit.	 If it is found in the flesh and not taken away, the doctors must then apply a pointed cautery on that part until death occurs, which is the greatest cause of fear because corruption of it spreads throughout the body as I said before.
May si tu vezes aquel esser pervengut al cap prop del huel, lahoras strenh sobre le sobrecil am fort strictura, e aprop secsa sobre lu, e extratz aquel; e cove que·l malaute use de mondificacio del sieu cors am medicinas evacuantz humors putridas malas, e guarda se de viandas generantz putrefaccio.	 If it has entered the head through a vein of blood, the doctors must then press hard on the area between the skull and chest tightly, place their hand over it to prevent its escape, and extract it; also that the patient should use medications to eliminate bad humors from his bowels, and prevent new putrefaction.
De sectione super aegritudinem nafir.	 In a large chamber or tent
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en nostra terra nafir, e es dolor la qual ve en alcus membres, e aprop es permudada de membre en membre.	 Gout is not named in our land any more, and the pain that occurs in all members, and it is spread from member to member
E yeu ja e vista aquela segon que yeu te recomtare.	 You already mentioned what you're recommending
Yeu fu apelat a una femna malauta ad una vila, e descubric le sieu bras e vi una imflacio petita en la vena funis del bras, e pus que fu romas per una hora, vi aquela imflacio anar ayssi cum va verm pujan ad aquest, mays pus leugierament que esser por, ayssi cum si fos argent viu quan corr de loc en loc.	 You called on a female doctor to the city and discovered her breasts and saw swelling in her veins of the arm, and she said that it was swelling caused by blood clots, and that it would disappear after an hour, and when you came back to where it had occurred, there was no swelling anymore.
E adonc anet s’en la dolor de aquel loc e fiquet se en le muscle, e aprop aqui stec per una hora.	 And as for the joint pain in that place, and after a while it settled into the muscles, so here I stay for one hour.
E aprop correc en l’autre cors entro que pervenc al autre bras.	 Then move to another part of the body towards the other arm.
E aprop recomtec a mi que revolvia se per tot le cors sieu segon que yeu vi; e fo trop meravelat de la permutacio de lu e de la velocitat de membre en membre.	 Then I recommend you to rotate throughout your body the second time, and also note the change in position of them and their speed movement from one another.
E yeu ja havia vist denant aquo en les mieus huels segon aquela manieyra, empero yeu he vistz motz les quals atroban dolor esser permutada de membra a membre.	 You already mentioned that in the best way to prevent gout attacks is to change position every 15 minutes or so from one member to another, but you have seen how difficult it can be for pain to move between members.
Mays no vi aquo am les huels ayssi cum en la femna.	 I see that in this case the female is different.
E yeu no cogiti esser aquo sino que es per aquo quar la femna era de viela, on so de secs cors e de venas descubertas, e en aquesta apparec al sentiment aquela ventositat permutada.	 "The woman's veins were exposed and the feeling of great warmth permeated through her body.
E es necessari que no apparesca segon aquesta retro-curacio en aquels que son delicioses e am cors humitz de venas ameguadas.	 It is necessary to avoid reappearance after this retreat in those who are delicious and have heated veins uncovered.
E cum tu voles la curacio de lu, e le pacient sent aquela dolor, lahoras no es a tu aparent al huel ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras tu strenh sobre aquel e dejos lu leugierament e secse sobre aquel entro que sia yssida aquela ventositat coartada, e cauterize le loc.	 If you want to cure the patient and make them feel that pain is leaving, then don't let it appear as if I said otherwise; continue to hold him gently and steadily onto that until the feeling of warmth subsides, and cauterize the area.
Mays si tu no la vezes am los tieus huels, alhoras tu cura aquel am excussio del cors e am aquo que expelleys ventositatz, e carmina aquelas am pillulas fetidas e am pillulas de serapi e semblantz.	 If you don't want to hear the cries of pain, then cure that discharge from his heart and expel those venomous snakes, as well as administer the fat pills and snake venom pills mentioned earlier.
De extraccio de sagetas.	 Extraction of gallstones.
Sagetas son diversificadas segon las specias, e segon les locs dels cors en les quals cazo, quar la lor diversitat es que de aquellas so que han grans puntas, e petitas, e concavas, e sordas, so es solidas; e de lor so que han tres angles, e de aquelas a las quals so que han lenguas; e de aquelas a las quals so astelas.	 Gallstones are different depending on the location and type of bile ducts in which they occur, due to their diversity: large ones, small ones, sharp ones, flat ones, hollow ones, and sound ones (solid).
E aquela que es segon les membres e las pessas en las quals cazo es segon dos manieyras: quar les membres o so membres principals concaus, ayssi cum le cervel, le cor, e·l fitge, e le pulmo, e les ronhos, e les budels, e la vezica, e a lor semblantz; e donc quan catz en alcu de aquestz membres e aparo a tu senhals de mort, la qual causa yeu recomtare aprop, lahoras cove que tu evites extraccio de aquela sageta en aquels quar la mort siec aquel en le qual en las majors disposicios, e quan a tu no appareysso aquestz mals senhals, e la sageta no es amaguada en la profunditat del membre, lahoras tu extratz aquela e cura la plagua.	 And when they occur in the limbs or extremities where there are two arteries: either the major arterial branches, as with the aorta, the heart, the chest, and lungs, kidneys, bladder, and anus; but if you notice such symptoms in these members and hear about their death, then you should recommend that you extract that gallstone from within those places where death has occurred due to its large size, and when you do not see them again, or the gallstone is not hidden at all within the member's depth, then you must extract it and cure the pain.
E dels senhals del servel es quan catz en lu sageta, e trespassa le os, e es yssit del cyphac le qual es sobre le cervel, quar accideys per lu soda vehement, e scotomia, e vertige, e rogor en les huels, e imflamacio e rogor de la lengua, e spasme e permixtio de entendament e vomi de colera, e fort leu es abscindida la paraula e es destruida la votz, e es yssit del loc de la plagua humiditat blanca semblant a pols, e yeys de lu semblant ad aquositat de la carn.	 When the veins of the liver become obstructed and transgress into the heart, causing it to swell with heat, thirst, dizziness, pain in the limbs, inflammation and burning of the tongue, spasms and confusion of thought, vomiting from anger, and light-headedness is taken away by a white fluid resembling smoke, this occurs due to the location of the dry heat.
E donc si appareyso a tu aquestz senhals, lahoras tu abste de la curacio e de la extraccio de la sageta, si non es fora.	 If you notice these symptoms, stop taking care and extracting the bile immediately, unless it's out of place.
Mays les senhals de la sageta quan catz en le cor, so que ela es prop de la mamila senestra, e sent am aquela quays sia ficada en causa dura, e no es causa vueda; e fort leu le movement de la sageta es semblant a movement del pols, e corr de la plagua sanc negra, e siec aquel fregiditat de las extremitatz, e suzor freja, e sincopi; e donc sapias que la mort descen ses tot dopte.	 The bile ducts of the liver when they reach the heart are prone to cause harm to the sternum and are accompanied by severe coldness in the extremities, weakness, dizziness, and shortness of breath. It is important to understand that death may soon follow.
E les senhals quan la sageta ha plaglat le pulmo so eyssiment de sanc spumos de la plagua, e les vayssels que so prop del col so apostematz, e es mudada la color del malaute, e expira sperit gran aut, e demanda atraccio de ayre freg.	 When the bile ducts have passed into the lungs they emit frothy spume from the fluid, and the veins that are near to the heart become swollen, and the complexion of the patient changes color, there is great weakness, breathlessness, and great anxiety follows.
E si catz la sageta en le velament le qual es en le pietz, e la dolor lahoras es prop de las costas petitas, e es fayt le ale gran am vehement dolor e am sospir, e no so maugutz totz les membres dels muscles.	 If the bile ducts enter into a cavity in the chest area and the pain occurs at the tips of the ribs, then intense pain is felt throughout the entire body, except for the muscles of the limbs.
E si catz la sageta en le stomac, lahoras fort leu yeys de la plagua vianda alcuna indigesta.	 When the cause of joint pain comes from hot humors that enter each part of the body, and when pain occurs in the foot, it is traditionally called gout by doctors
E si catz la sageta en le ventre, e es ficada en lu, yeys alcuna fenda de la plagua, o la tela, o budel le qual es disromput, e no es speransa en la curacio de lu extraccio de la sageta.	 If the cause of joint pain comes from hot humors that enter each part of the body and is located in the stomach, it should be gently pressed out through its opening without making any incision or tearing the lining or intestine, so as not to allow its escape outside the stomach.
E si la sageta catz en la vesica, e es yssida defora urina, e procesesca de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, e fort leu es dolor sobre le malaute, lahoras sapias que es mortal.	 If the cause of joint pain comes from urine in the bladder and its outlet is blocked by some obstruction or disease causing frequent urination, severe pain occurs over the patient's abdomen, doctors know that it is fatal.
Mays les autres membres ayssi cum es la cara, le col, e·l golayro, e las spallas e le adjutori, e les spondils del dos, e la furcula, e la coysa, e la camba e a lor semblantz dels membres, son salvatz segon las majors disposicios quan la sageta no atroba vena ni arteria e no es sageta venenosa.	 The other members are placed in the same way as the face, the neck, and the groin, the arms and legs, the lumbar spine, ribs, thighs, and calves, as well as on each member of the body's surface, they provide support for larger veins or arteries that do not rupture when the stomach does not leak or is not venomous.
E yeu recomtare aquo a tu que he vist del esser de aquestas sagetas, per que signifiques per aquo sobre la curacio tieua.	 If you would like to make notes about this procedure for yourself so that you can refer back to it later.
La qual causa es, quar en un home cazec sageta en le lacrimal del huel de lu en la razitz del nas, e yeu extrayssi aquela a lu del autra partida, dejos le grays de l’aurelha de lu, e es sanat, e no accidic en le huel de lu nocument.	 The cause is that there is a hole in the lacrimal duct of the eye's tear ducts at the root of the nose, and you should also extract it from another opening as well, remove the gray hairs on its outer surface and wash it gently without touching its tears.
E extrayssi autra sageta a un Juzeu la qual cazec en lu en lo grays del sieu huel, dejos la palpebra pus dejos, e la sageta ja era occultada e no so conseguit de aquela sino una petita extremitat am la qual adhereys al sieu fust, e era gran sageta de las sagetas agudas dels Turcs , am ferr leon en la qual no havia aurelhas.	 "The first servant, who is called the nurse, will enter here and cleanse in this grey area of his hands. He will then place a finger on her forehead, making it visible to everyone but keeping it hidden from another little finger nearby that adheres to his fist, which was previously small and now great, because its owner was a Turk.
E senat es le Juzieu , e no accidic en le sieu huel mal accident.	 "After the first servant has completed her task, she will not speak in the man's bad accident area.
E extrayssi una autra sageta a un home Crestia la qual era cazuta en le golayro, e era sageta arabica, e es aquela a la qual so aurelhas; e adonc yeu inscidegui sobre aquela entre doas guidegi, e ja era submersa en le golayro de lu; e adonc yeu so subtiliat am aquela, e aprop extraxi aquela, e es sanat le Crestia .	 "Another servant is entering the chest area with a pointed tool. She was hidden in his abdomen and had been submerged there. Her task was to remove her, but she herself became too small.
E extraxi autra sageta a un home la qual era cazuta en le sieu ventre, e cogitegui que moris per aquela; e donc, pus que foro passatz xxx dias e no es mudat sobre lu alcuna causa de las suas disposicios, inscidegui sobre la sageta e engenagui sobre aquela, e es sanat, e no accidic a lu accident mal.	 "Another servant took the chest area and realized that she had died from it. Therefore, for some days without rest or change in anything of her disposition, she searched for the tool and was healed, but did not mention any accidents.
E vi mays un home en le qual cazec una sageta en le dos de lu, e consolidada es la plagua sobre lu, e pus que foc aprop set ans, yssic la sageta en la razitz de la coyssa.	 "A man in whom a servant was placed on his two arms, and who was very fond of her, arranged for her to be burned at the stake.
E vi una femna a la qual cazec sageta en le sieu ventre, e la plagua es consolidada dedintz lu, e no es mudada en las suas disposicios en re, e la femna no atrobec nocument en alcunas de las suas opperacios naturals.	 "A woman in whom a servant was placed in her abdomen, and whose body was covered with gold, did not change the disposition of her servants or reveal any natural abilities.
E vi un autre home al qual cazec sageta en la sua cara e consolidada es la plagua e romas la sageta, no atrobant aqui mota dolor, e motz semblantz ad aquestz.	 When another person comes to apply a mixture of wine and sulfur on the face and rubbed with salt water, causing no pain, but relieving the same
E extrayssi la sageta del home dels princeps del rey que era cazuda en le mieg loc del nas sieu e ja havia declinat a la partida dreyta un petit, e occultada era tota la sageta.	 The face of someone from the prince's household who had been slapped on their nose and already declined to proceed with the right hand, was covered by a bandage
E yeu fu appelat a la curacio de lu aprop le cazement de la sageta entro a tres dias.	 He ordered the application of the ointment inside two days
E adonc yeu atrobegui la plagua de la sageta mot streyta; e adonc yeu inquirigui aquela am tenta subtil, e no sentigui aquela; mays el la sentia puncio dejos la aurelha dreyta, e adonc speregui que aquela punccio era per la extremitat de la sageta.	 Do not apply the paste on their face directly; and when you ask for it to be applied with great caution, do not feel that one. May cause pain in the right ear, so check if this is due to an injury to the side of the head.
E amplastregui le loc am emplaustre en le qual es vertut atrectiva e digestiva, confizant de mi que·l loc se apostemes per que appares a mi le loc de la sageta, per que secces sobre aquela.	 He ordered the application of ointment on the stomach and intestine, making sure that the place is used to prevent it from coming out this way.
E no accidic en le loc accident significant que la sageta hagues conseguit aquel loc; e yeu continuegui am le emplaustre sobre lu per motz dias e no accidic accident; e consolidada es la plagua entretant, e romas le malaute de la extreccio de lu per spazi de motz dias entro que un jorn sentic la sageta dintz le sieu nas e recontec aquo a mi.	 He did not worry about the significant location of the abscess, continuing to apply ointment over it for several days and not causing any pain; and the bandage was applied as well between them, rubbing the patient's leg from time to time every few days until one day the abscess came out through their nose and this is what we did accordingly.
E adonc yeu pausegui sobre la plagua medicina acuta corrosiva per motz dias entro que foc ubert, e am la tenta yeu assagegui aquel, e atrobegui la extremitat de la sageta subtil, la qual adhereys al fust.	 When acute corrosive medicine is applied to the ulcer quickly so that it burns immediately, and also to massage its area until, and firmly hold its tip gently, for it adheres to the skin.
E aprop yeu ajustegui en la apersio de la plagua per aquela medicina acuta entro que apparec a mi visiblament la extremitat de la sageta, e passec a mi temps am aquo per le spazi de temps entro quatre meses.	 Then firmly hold it in the area of the ulcer until the acute corrosive medicine is visible on its surface, and apply time for four months to heal.
E aprop pus que la plagua foc amplificada, e foc a mi possible entrometre las forfexs en lu, e remaure aquela, e no obezic ad eyssiment, lahoras yeu no cessegui subtiliar e ingeniar sobre aquela am manieyras de engen, entro que comensegui un dia sobre aquela am manieyras de engens pendre lu am forceps descentment faytas, segon que vindra la forma de aquelas en la fi del capitol, entro que extraxi aquela; e aprop restauregui aquela plagua.	 And after amplifying the ulcer focus, then use tweezers to gently remove it, and do not squeeze hard or squeeze it, as pain will occur if that happens; and then restore the ulcer when you finish removing it.
E alcus metges jutgavan que la cartillage del nas no es restaurada, e yeu restauregui aquela e la plagua es consolidada, e sanat es le malaute per sanetat entiera, e no noguec en lu en deguna causa.	 Doctors judge that the nose cartilage was not restored, and you will restore it to be stable, and health is maintained through it, and do not exclude from its use for any reason.
E yeu recomti a tu la qualitat de extraccio de alcunas sagetas per que pauses aquo regla e significacio sobre aquo que no he dit, quar las partidas de aquesta art e las difinicios de aquela no so conprehendudas am narracio ni no comprehen aquelas le libre.	 You recommend to you the quality of extracting some stakes for pausing this rule and significance about what is not said here that I did not understand, because the divisions of this craft and its definitions are not comprehended by the narration or do not comprehend those ones free.
E le artifexs savi compara am pauc sobre mot; e am aquo que es present sobre aquo que es absent; e atroba operacio novela e instrument novel deves le descendement de las causas extranhas del art quan accideysso.	 The artwork shows contrast with what is present, and the absence of that which is absent; and it is necessary to perform operations on strange causes when they occur.
E donc yeu dic que sagetas no son fora-gitadas dels membres en les quals son ficadas sino segon dos manieyras: o per atraccio del loc en le qual intrec; o per le contrari de la autra partida.	 The members in which the pain occurs are first divided into two parts, either by pulling on the part of the body where it enters, or by resisting the opposite side.
E aquela que es gitada per le loc don es intrada, o es sageta procedent en loc carnos, e es atirada e fora-gitada.	 The one that is divided by the location where it enters, or should proceed to a location further away, and pulled and divided
E si no obezeys a eyssiment de la hora en la qual catz, lahoras cove que tu la laysses per alcus dias entro que poyresca la carn que es al enviro de lu, e sia alleujada l‘atraccio de lu e la sua egressio.	 If you cannot find a way to relieve the pain within that day, then apply some heat externally on or near the area of inflammation and wait for it to pass.
E semblantment si es ficada en os e no obezeys a tu a eyssiment, lahoras layssa aquela per alcus dias e itera aquela am atraccio e mocio en quascun dia, e ja es fora-gitada.	 Similarly if you have it in your hands and cannot find relief immediately, apply heat externally to or near the area of inflammation every day, alternating with cold application as well, and wait for it to pass.
E si no obezeys a tu eyssiment aprop alcus dias, lahoras cove que tu perforas en le circuit de la sageta en aquel os de tota partida am taravel subtil entro que·l loc sia amplificat de la sageta, e aprop extratz aquela.	 If you cannot find relief within a certain period of time, apply heat externally to the entire area gently, alternating with cold application as well, until the location becomes more inflamed, and then extend it.
E si la sageta es ficada en le os del cap e ja ha procezit en un dels ventres del cervel, e apparo en le malaute alcus de aquels accidentz les quals yeu e ditz, lahoras abste de la extraccio de la sageta e layssa aquela entro que·l sieu esser sia equat aprop alcus dias; quar si la sageta perve al ciphac, lahoras la mort no es a lu prolonguada.	 If the gout is in the head and has spread to one of the ventricles within the brain, then stop applying heat externally and apply it instead until its symptoms become equal across days; but if the gout spreads to the cerebrum itself, doctors should not extend his life.
E si la sageta no es ficada sino en le cors del os tant solament e no passa entro al ciphac, e roman le malaute per alcus dias, e no accideys a lu denguna causa de aquels accidentz, lahoras tu engenia en la atraccio de la sageta e en la atraccio de lu.	 When the abscess is not yet fully formed but only in part of the arm and does not spread beyond the elbow, and the patient experiences pain because of these accidents, then doctors make their diagnosis by examining the swelling around the abscess and on the arm.
Mays si es mot ficada e no obezeys a tu a extraccio, lahoras tu aministra taravels en le circuit de la sageta ayssi cum havem recomtat, e aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	 Yes if it is necessary to drain the abscess and remove its contents, then doctors will administer remedies as recommended by the medical establishment, and place a bandage over that area so that there may be no infection.
Mays si la sageta ja es amaguada en le loc del cors, e es amaguada del sentiment, lahoras tu inquireys aquela am tenta, e si tu sentas aquela, lahoras atira aquela am alcus sturmentz les quals so convenientz a la atraccio de lu.	 If the abscess is already filled in that part of the body and also filled with feeling, then doctors will examine it closely, and if you feel it, they will squeeze it to drain its contents as recommended by their field.
E si no podes sobre lu per la constriccio de la plagua e per la longitut del preon, e aqui no es os ni nervi ni vena, lahoras tu fen sobre la plagua entro que sia amplificada e que sia possible extrayre la sageta.	 If you cannot see it through the tightness of the skin and the length of the protrusion, and there is neither a nerve nor a vein, then doctors will examine the area closely to ensure that it has been sufficiently amplified and can be safely extracted.
E si so a lu aurelhas am las quals sia tenguda, lahoras tu deliura la carn en la qual es ficada de tota partida am tot le engen que poyras far; e ingenia sobre aquo, si no podes sobre la evasio de la carn en la fractura de las aurelhas e en torssio de aquelas entro que obezesca.	 If you can see all the way through to the part of the body where it was completely formed until the end of its extent that you might reach, then doctors will examine closely whether or not you can see into the area around the abscess and surrounding parts in order to squeeze it gently if necessary without causing damage.
E quan tu administras la extraccio de la sageta en quascun loc on sia, lahoras tu usa am torcio de la tua ma am forceps a totas partidas entro que fassa aquela obezir; e subtilia am deriera subtilitat que la sageta no sia trencada e que sia fayta a tu dificil atraccio de lu e de aquela extraccio.	 When you administer the extractor into any location where there is, the doctors will use a pointed forceps to cut through all the surrounding tissue; and subtlety of their extraction will be such that the extractor will not break and may easily be extracted
E si no podes sobre aquela de la tua hora, lahoras tu layssa per alcus dias entro que se poyrescan las partidas que so en le circuit de lu, e aprop itera aquela quar lahoras es alleujada.	 If you can't hold the patient still during that period when pain occurs in their extremities, then the doctors will use a mild sedative to make them more relaxed
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat flux de sanc, lahoras tu administra aquo que havem dit de curacio en le sieu capitol.	 If there is an opposing flow of blood, the doctors will administer clotting agents in order to control it
E guarda la tua vertut de inscizio de vena o de nervi, o de corda, e aministra engen en tota manieyra a tu possibla de la evasio de la sageta; e fay aquo am facilitat e tranquillitat e tarditat e fermetat ayssi cum yeu e a tu recomtat.	 And when you inject into the vein or nerve, artery, and heart, and administer with all diligence to your possible prevention of the abscess; and do this in such a way as to provide ease, tranquility, and firmness, like what I recommend
E donc que fassas contrayre la sageta per so que·l malaute sia segon la figura segon la qual foc deves le cazement de la sageta en lu, quar es mays juvatiu.	 Then you should arrange the abscess such that it is in line with the figure to which I direct the cutting of the abscess into it, so as to be most youthful.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible, lahoras tu aministra aquo que es a tu possible per las figuras.	 If this is not within your power, then you administer that which is according to my figures.
Mays las sagetas que son fora-gitadas per le contrari del autra partida, o que ja de lu procezeys alcuna partida a las partidas de fora, o fa gilbositat la extramitat de la sageta per sentiment de la partida pus desus de la codena propdana e vezes aquela eminent; adonc tu secsa sobre aquela; e sia la seccio segon la quantitat en la qual prenguan las forceps; e aprop atira aquela, quar ela es fayta leugiera a eyssiment.	 If the abscess is outside of the other side or comes out through it, then you gently extract that part away from the abscess with the help of another servant who assists in holding it down securely so as to prevent anything else coming out; and when it is extracted, do so in a way such that it is easily removed.
Mays si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu tortz lama segon contrarietat entro que la sageta enprema en le os, e amplifique a si meteys, e aprop extratz aquela.	 When the gout pain occurs in the feet, it is customary to call it "gout".
E sino, layssa aquela per alcus dias, e aprop itera aquela entro qu’en yesca.	 Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity and place your hand over that area to prevent the intestine from coming out.
E si le fust de la sageta es en aquela, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am lu.	 You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
Mays si le fust es cazut e voles aministrar inpulsio, lahoras tu intromet e aquela, si es sorda, sturment concau per so que intre la concavitat de lu en la coa de la sageta e aprop impelleys aquela am lu.	 If the fist is tight and you want to administer an impulse, then press into it with your finger or hand in order that between the concavity of it and the surface of the chest a servant may be placed upon it.
Mays si la sageta es concava, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am sturment fort intrant en aquela, quar la sageta es alleujada per aquela.	 If the patient's chest is concave, then press that servant hard into that area, as the patient may be covered by it.
E si la sageta es entoxiguada, lahoras cove que tu concaves tota la carn en la qual es le vere, si es a tu possible aquo, e aprop cura aquela am aquo que si conveneys.	 If the patient's chest is upturned or arched upwards, then you should fold all of their skin into that area as much as possible and place a servant there to prevent any disturbance.
E si la sageta catz en le pietz, o en le ventre, o en la vesica, o en le costat, e es propinqua per so que tu tocas aquela am la tenta, e es a tu possible secsar sobre aquela, lahoras secsa sobre aquela e guarda te de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e extratz aquela, e aprop cos la plagua si indigeys, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	 If the chest presses onto the breast or stomach or groin or side and is close enough that you can touch it there, then put a servant on it to prevent any disturbance of vein or nerve, and return it to its place so that it may be healed.
Forma de forceps am las quals so atiradas las sagetas:	 Form of tongs are used to remove the joints
Sian las extremitatz de lor cum a bec de ausel que son faytas cum serra quan prendon sobre la sageta per so que no la layssen.	 The extremities of them, when pressed with the forceps, cause pain as they grip around the joint in order to prevent it from being removed
E de aquelas son faytas motas specias, grans, paucas e migieras, segon la quantitat de la grandeza de la sageta e de la sieua pauqueza, e de la amplitud de la plagua, e de la constriccio de lu.	 Of these painful ones are special kinds: large and small; some moderate in size and others very small, depending on the size of the joint and its thinness or thickness, and its opening and constriction
Forma de impellent concau de aquesta extremitat conquava ayssi cum pena de ausel per so que sia alleujat le intrament de la sageta en lu, e impulcio de aquela sorda:	 Form of pushing from that extremity is to use forceps in order to alleviate the distress on the joint itself and push aside the pain.
Forma de impellent de sorda extremitat:	 Form of pushing away an extremity
ayssi cum ray per so que sia alleujat le intrament de lu en la sageta concava e es impellida am aquel.	 Thus, using forceps to alleviate the distress on it and push aside the pain.
De fleubotomia de las venas.	 Treatment for varicose veins.
Las venas de fleubotomia de las quals corr costuma de fleubotomar so xxx, de las quals so en le cap xvi, so es doas venas pulsatils las quals so aprop las aurelhas, dic alhasisain; doas herbas que so en les dos templars apparentz; e doas venas que so en dos lacrimals de dos huels que son appeladas aspicientz; e la vena preparada en le mieg loc del front, e la vena que es en la extremitat del nas; e doas guidegi que so al col; e doas venas que so en la labia desus; e doas venas que so en la labia dejos; e — aquestas so las venas que so appeladas algelic —; e so doas venas que so dejos la lengua.	 Treatment for varicose veins: use of a cautery on the affected veins, those that are at the sixth joint up towards the ear lobe, are easily touched by the fingers and are called 'little veins'; two veins that appear in the temples; prepared vein under the eyelid, and one in the nose extremity; two guide veins on the collar; two veins on the lower lip of each side; two veins on the upper lip of each side.
Mays las venas que so fleubotomadas en les brasses so v; quar de aquelas es una cephalica, e es deves le latz silvestre; e le poble appela “la vena del cap”, e sorda, e es vena migiera, e es composta de un ram de la basilica, e de autre ram de la cephalica; e nomna aquela le poble “vena de tot le cors”, e basilica es vena la qual es pausada en le latz domestic, e es nomnada “citillar”, e nompnan aquela les vulguars “vena del ventre”; e funis del bras, e es pausada sobre le focil, e es aquela en la qual es fleubotomat, e es aquela que appar sobre le poutz per apparicio manifesta; e salvatella, e es la vena que es entre lo dit auricular e·l pus petit dit, e so en lu dos ramps.	 "You have already opened up the space between the patient's thighs and placed a cushion under them.
E en le pe e la camba so tres venas; la una de aquelas es que es dejos la curvatura del denolh del latz silvestre; e la segonda es sophena, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz domestic; e la vena sciatica, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz silvestre; e en la camba son autras venas semblantz ad aquelas.	 "The first vein among them is the one that opens up curvature of the left ventricle due to wild blood flow, and the second vein opens up in the same way but for domestic blood flow.
Le juvament de las venas que so aprop las aurelhas es a cataris antics e emigranea e sahafati e ulceracios del cap malas antiquas.	 "The veins that are close to the ears and exit from them have ancient and emaciated shapes, and ulcers of the head are also present.
E la qualitat de sagnar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: es que sia ras le cap del malaute, e sia freguat le cap del malaute en le occipiti en le loc de amdoas las venas am drap ample am bona fricacio; aprop strenha le malaute le sieu col am una benda entro que apparan las doas e les locs de lor so aprop las aurelhas en dos locs depremegutz del cap; e quereys aquela am le tieu dit, e si tu sentes le pols de aquelas am le dit tieu, aqui senha am tenta.	 "The quality of veins is to say that you recommend it: it should be placed on the head of the patient, and also on the occiput in the location where both arteries are located at the top of their heads; tighten the patient's neck with a rope inside so as to prevent them from coming out.
Aprop tu pren la lancea cutellar, e es aquela que es inscident, e aprop tu intromet aquel dejos la vena en la codena entro que·l fleubotomi vengua al os.	 "Hold the cautery in your hand; it is to be applied, and prevent the vein from entering through which limb.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am la vena e la codena a las partidas desus e inscideys la vena am inscizio inscident.	 "Lift your hand towards the vein on the arm and insert it into the incision, preventing any blood from entering through that limb.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio la quantitat de dos ditz ajustatz o entorn de aquo; e fay yssir del sanc atant quant voles.	 "The length of the incision should be adjusted or shortened to this amount, if necessary, and ask for the help you need.
E aprop strenh am pulvils e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	 "Hold the powder tightly and apply it in such a way that it is applied directly to where the wound is healing.
E ja e precedit en le comensament del libre la inscizio de aquelas e de lor la cauterizacio.	 "After making an incision, proceed with the cautery of those and for them.
Mays de las doas venas arterias que so als templars le juvament de la fleubotomia es a emigranea antiqua e sode malvada e obtalmia assidua e cors de superfluitatz acutas effusas als huels.	 "The veins and arteries that accompany the beginning of phlebotomy are essential to avoid complications such as arterial bleeding, which is dangerous and can lead to severe damage.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: constrengua le malaute le sieu col mot entro que apparan las doas venas al sentiment per appericio manifesta e sia demonstrat le pols de lor dejos le tieu dit; e lahoras tu senha am tenta.	 "The quality of phlebotomy is to recommend that you: restrict the movement of the patient's arm in such a way as to prevent the two veins from protruding and showing, while at the same time allowing them to be felt with your hand.
E aprop tu eleva la codena desobre la vena a las partidas desus am le tieu dit indic, e intromet le fleubotomi inscident dejos, e eleva la vena en sus; e inscidey aquela ayssi cum has fayt en las doas venas autras; e fay correr del sanc segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	 "Lift the arm containing the vein over the incision and insert it in such a way that its veins are exposed, but not directly touching the wound itself. Then remove any excess parts of the two veins as you have already done with them.
E aprop deslia la coartacio del malaute, e pausa le tieu dit sobre la vena per una hora, e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto e pulvils e strenh aquela desus am fort constriccio, e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	 The first sentence is: "Place a cushion under the patient's thighs and another servant on their legs.
E ja es precedida la rememoracio de lor, e de aquelas la inscizio, e la atraccio en le comensament del libre.	 Before remembering it (the sentence before this one), and from those who made the incision, and laying down on the table at the beginning of the free time
E donc le juvament de fleubotomia de la vena del front es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a las malautias antiquas de la cara e a emigranea e rogor e ulceracios fetidas.	 Then, after performing the frontal vein phlebotomy, you perform the phlebotomy of the cephalic veins in old cases and emigration; the forehead and the eyelids become red and swollen with ulcers
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es segon que yeu recomti a tu; so es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col am una benda entro que apparesca la vena; e aprop pren le insturment le qual es nompnat fossori del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	 The quality of the phlebotomy is second to that which you recommend it, so that when the patient strains his chest towards where the vein appears, and take out the instrument called a needle, through which this operation takes place.
Pausa la puncta eminent la qual es al cap del fossori sobre aquela vena e percuteys sobre lu am penche o am autre causa en la manieyra de lu, e layssa lo sanc correr segon la quantitat la qual voles; e aprop deslia la perforacio del malaute e strenh aquela entro que sia sanada.	 Pause at the point of the needle which is on top of the hole in that vein and pierce it from either side or another direction towards the patient's hand, and leave a second amount equal to what you want; then place the hole in the patient and allow them to recover for as long as you want.
E alcunas veguadas es uberta am fleubotomi lat, empero no cove que·l fleubotomi sia de acuta extremitat ayssi cum les autres fleubotomis, abantz sia de lada extremitat, e fleubotoma aquela segon le tranvers, quar le os es propda e fort leu trencaria en lu le fleubotomi quan es subtil.	 Some of the dangers are increased by frontal vein phlebotomy, however it should not be as severe as other phlebotomies; from any extremity, and perform the phlebotomy across them at right angles to avoid damaging the veins when performed softly.
Mays le juvament de las duas venas que so als lacrimals de dos huels per scabia del huels per rogor e sebol en les huels, e a las malautias de la cara.	 When the young people come with two veins that have run dry from tears of both eyes because they are in need of help and are desperate
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia es que·l malaute strenha le col sieu am una benda, e aprop fleubotoma aquelas, e tu sias stant sobre le cap de lu.	 The quality of the phlebotomy is that it should cause no pain to the patient, and be carried out with a needle
E sia fayta la fleubotomia segon le transvers a longitut un pauc am fleubotomi pauc, quar en le loc no es carn; e si le fleubotomi es subtil, fort leu la extremitat de lu es trencada.	 The second sentence translates to: "If the phlebotomy is performed correctly and few times in a small area where there's no skin, then it won't cause any damage; but if it's done too lightly or with excessive force on an extremity, then the extremity may be torn.
E aprop fay correr del sanc atant quant es a tu necessari, e pausa sobre aquelas coto, e strenh aquelas per una nueyt, e aprop deslia aquelas.	 When it is necessary to run through the affected area, pause there briefly, and then proceed forward with caution, and gently approach that area.
Mays le fleubotomi de la vena del nas es conferent a febre acuta e a soda vehement, e a las malautias de la cara e emigranea e rogor que accideys en la cara, e majorment quan es antiqua.	 The phlebotomy of the nasal vein causes acute fever and severe pain, especially when it occurs in the face, often being fatal.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col e aprop te le sieu nas am la tua ma sinistra, e pren le fleubotomi subtil lonc e fica aquela en le mieg loc del cap del nas segon rectitut, quar la vena no appar al sentiment aqui, e quar le sanc comensa a fluir tantost.	 The quality of the phlebotomy is that it should cause pain to the patient and be carried out with caution, placing the needle gently in the patient's nose and arm on their left side, being careful not to puncture the veins there lest they disappear from sight, as if a fistula were forming.
Cove que tu ultimes la tua ma am le fleubotomi petit a petit e fassas correr del sanc segon la tua necessitat; e aprop lia aquela per una nuoyt, quar aquela es restaurada leugierament.	 When you have finished the phlebotomy little by little and proceed from there according to your needs, gently approach that area in order to restore circulation there.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de las doas guidegui a constriccio de ale e a comensament de lepra e a motas malautias e inpetige e malas ulceracios corrosivas ayssi cum herpotromeno.	 The beginning of the treatise is describing the symptoms of Leprosy, that is a skin disease characterized by sores and ulcers on various parts of the body caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of it.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que el malaute strenha dejos quascuna en le sieu col am liament; e estia le artifexs sobre le cap del malaute, e le malaute sia sezent sobre una sezela.	 The quality of Leprosy in the patient is that they are strong and persistent on each part of their body, and there is a discharge from the head towards them, and pus discharges are also present at one end.
E aprop fleubotoma la vena al lonc am fleubotomi ample petit a petit; e aprop extratz de sanc segon temprada quantitat o segon aquo que vezes de necessitat que es ad aquo; e aprop fay semblant del autra vena.	 To administer Leprosy, the vein to be treated should gradually become smaller and smaller over time until it is necessary for them to do so. And if they are doing this already, then continue as before.
E aprop deslia le liament e strenh las doas venas am strictura migiera per so que·l malaute no sia prefocat, e laysa entro al mati quar la plagua es sanada.	 By closing the veins and tightening them up so that the patient is not favored by it, you should let this continue until the wound has been healed.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de las venas algerich, comfereys a petitas apostemas e pustulas de la boca e corrupcio de las gengivas e malas ulceracios e fissuras, e a malas ulceracios que so en le nas e en le circuit de lu.	 The onset of Leprosy in the veins is characterized by redness, small ulcers and sores on the lips and gums, bad ulcers and fissures, and bad ulcers that are present at the nostrils and throat as well.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que fases cezer le malaute denant tu, e strenh le col de lu am una benda, e aprop revolveys las labias de lu e reguarda a doas venas de las quals la una es de la dextra de la labia e la segonda de la senestra; e la demonstracio de quascuna es per la negror de quascuna de amdos, e aquo mays es quar en le circuit de aquelas so venas menudas negras; e adonc inscideys cascuna per inscizio inscident.	 The quality of Leprosy in the patient is that it causes them to lose their hair, and the neck skin tightens around a vein, and you should turn both labia around on either side, and check for two veins from which one is at the right side of the lips and another at the left. And demonstrating each one's presence can be done by looking at its color - those small black veins as well; and if you cannot find any incision there, that means it is present.
Mays si dubitacio es dejos tu, e no sabes qual es de aquelas, lahoras tu enten a inscisio de la major de aquelas, e de la pus manifesta de aquelas.	 When you are in doubt about it, do not know what to call them, the doctors tell you to give an incision of the largest one and the most evident one among those.
E fay le semblant de las doas venas que so en las labias desus.	 And place a similar vein from those veins in their labia.
Mays costuma corr mays a inscidir las doas venas que so en la labia dejos.	 It is customary to make incisions into the large veins that are located in the vulva of theirs.
Mays de doas venas que so dejos la lengua le juvament es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a prefocacios que so en le guolayro, a la malautia de la uvula, e a malautias de la boca.	 Among the large veins located in their vulva are incisions into those of the tongue, and after making them make a tracheotomy on the cricoid cartilaginous piece that they should be in front, to the vein of the auricle (ear), and the veins of the mouth.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es que segue le malaute entre las tuas mas denant le solel, e eleva la lengua de lu, e reguarda dejos la lengua, de la un latz de lu vena e del autre latz vena, e la color de quascuna es declinant a negror.	 The quality of tracheotomy is that it takes place between the patient's toes and raises their tongue, looks to prevent them from coming out with their tongue, and examines each vein separately, finding one long vein and another short vein, and the color of each changes to black.
E adonc fleubotoma quascuna; e guarda te que no ultimes la tua ma en fleubotoman aquelas, quar dejos aquelas so arterias.	 And after tracheotomy has been performed on them: and do not forget that the final touch of tracheotomy should be made to those arteries.
E las tuas venas que so fleubotomadas en le coyde so en las quals corr costuma en totz les homes, e la fleubotomia de lor es fayta segon dos manieyras, o pongen am le fleubotomi mirtilat o olivar a subtilitat declinant; o secsar am fleubotomi cutellar, e apelha si alnessil, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	 The veins that were made into tracheotomies in this location are those common to all men, and the tracheotomy of theirs is done by two blows, or through a needle with olive oil at decreasing subtlety until it reaches the skin. If it does not reach it, then it should be done through cuts on the chest, holding them tight, so that they will heal well: this is their manner
E aquest alnessil es que conveneys a seccio e de aquels so specias latz e subtils segon la amplitut de las venas e segon la strictura de aquelas.	 The first sentence means, "The severity of this pain depends on the thickness and stricture of those veins.
Forma de fleubotomi mirti:	 Method of phlebotomy (medical procedure):
sia le latz de lu ayssi cum vezes, e conveneys a obrir las venas concavas plenas procedentz apparentz grossas, e ad aquelas que conteno sanc gros torbat.	 The first sentence means: "Then, on the other hand, if veins are thick and contracted (meaning tortuous), it is customary to make an incision before opening them fully.
E aquesta es la forma de fleubotomi olivar:	 Olive phlebotomy method.
E aquest fleubotomi es de menor latitut e de pus subtil extremitat, e conveneys a fleubotomia de venas subtils que conteno sanc subtil citri.	 The olive phlebotomy method is for veins of less thickness and lower degree of subtlety, and it is customary to perform the procedure on veins that are subtly twisted (meaning tortuous).
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena basilica la qual es una de tres venas: quar extratz le sanc de las malautias que so dejos le guolayro e·l col, e de aquo que siec le pietz e·l ventre.	 The phlebotomy method of the vein called the basilica vein is one among three veins that are often used: it drains the blood from the stomach and intestines.
E conveneys al fleubotomador, quan fleubotomia aquela, que guarde be aquela e sia sobre-temor en aquela, quar dejos lu ha arteria, e si erra e ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi, inscidira aquela arteria e accidira fluxs de sanc, per so que cove que no fleubotomes aquela am fleubotomi pungent, abantz sia sectant cum alnessil.	 The phlebotomist should be careful when performing this procedure because there is an artery nearby and if he punctures it while performing the phlebotomy, he will cut off blood flow to that area so as not to perform the phlebotomy, they must hold back slightly.
E si no appar la basilica per apparicio manifesta, lahoras cove que tu laysses aquela e que tu mudes a la autre, o que cerques alcun ram sieu; o que fleubotomes en loc de lu finis del bras, quar aquela es manifesta; e secsa aquela am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit.	 If no basilica vein is visible on inspection of the arm, they should proceed to another vein or search for a third one; if performing on an arm and unable to find it, perform the phlebotomy in that part of the body instead, where it may be found (meaning if not in the arm, do it somewhere else).
Mays si tu voles la fleubotomia de lu meteyssa, lahoras cove denant la strictura del bras que toques le loc entro que conogues le loc dels pols, e aprop senha sobre lu am tencha; e aprop lia le bras e secsa la vena am seccio concava am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit; e guarda te que caja la percussio per alcu spazi del loc de la arteria.	 When you want to perform a phlebotomy, first place the patient's arm in such a way that their elbow is towards you and your hand over it; then take the needle into position so that when you strike the artery you will hit the forearm. And remember to guard against hitting any arteries during this procedure.
E quan tu vezes, cum strenhes le liament, imflacio en le loc que has senhat am tencha, lahoras aquela inflacio es inflacio de la arteria, e donc squiva aquela.	 When you inflate the balloon in the location where you have placed your hand on it, then remember that inflation is the inflation of an artery and so should be done carefully.
E si vezes le sanc fluir en la fleubotomia ayssi cum aurina de enfant, e·l sanc es subtil rog, lahoras sapias que es del sanc de la arteria; e lahoras tu coyta e pausa le tieu dit sobre aquel per lonc spazi; e aprop osta le tieu dit, e si lo sanc es abscindit, quar motas veguadas es abscindit, lahoras tu strenh le bras e layssa aquel.	 If the vein is flowing when you perform a phlebotomy that way, and it's subtle enough to be from an artery, remember that this is the sign of the artery; and then apply pressure with your finger over it if necessary in order to prevent bleeding through those fingers. And if the sign disappears entirely, make sure the artery hasn't been damaged as well.
E guardes le malaute de la moccio de lu, e sia sobre-temor de lu e no maugua aquel per alcus dias entro que sia sanat.	 Guard the patient from exposure to excessive heat and avoid exposing them to too much sun or rain as well.
Mays si le sanc no es abscindit, e vezes que deves tu no es present medicina ad aquo, lahoras tu inscideys la arteria, si appar a tu; quar la extremitat de lu es contrayta, e es abscindit le sanc; o que prenguas scorsa de fistic, e fen aquela, e pren la una maytat e strenh aquela sobre le loc de la vena am strictura descent am liament e am pulvils entro al autra dia.	 If the sign is not removed and you suspect that something else might be wrong as well, then insert a needle into position so that when you strike it with the artery, if the extremity of the patient is injured or the vein is damaged, or if there's any pus present, do this: squeeze forcefully on the area near the elbow in order to try and force out whatever was causing the bleeding.
E lahoras si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, lahoras cura aquel am aquo del qual es precedit a la rememoracio del loc de las polveras abscindentz flux de sanc.	 When the injury is healed, it is done; otherwise, apply what was previously used to prevent it from occurring again.
E la abscizio del sanc de lu es dificil en motas disposicios per le loc petit de la plagua e la possibilitat del liament del bras.	 The removal of the wound is difficult in areas with little space and the possibility of arm movement.
Mays de la vena fusca la fleubotomia es juvament que extratz lo sanc de la partida subirana del cap e a la partida dejos del cors; per aquo quar es composta de ram de la basilica e de ram de cephalica, ayssi cum havem dit.	 The swelling of the veins is often caused by phlebotomy and can occur in the back of the head or chest area.
E cove al fleubotomant aquela que sia sobre-temor en la fleubotomia de lu, quar dejos aquela es un nervi; e adonc si ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi e atroba le nervi, accidira a lu stupor, e es difficil la sanacio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot, E aquest nervi motas veguadas apar al sentiment; e si es ocultat ad alcus homes e es subtil e no es monstrat, lahoras cove que tu pauses le fleubotomi am le qual tu fleubotomas am seccio de alnessil, e evita le nervi am la tua fortalesa.	 The phlebotomist should exercise great caution in phlebotomy to prevent complications and ensure the vein is not damaged; when puncturing the vein with a needle, it can cause numbness or paralysis of the arm if incorrect action is taken without proper experience and skill, causing difficulty in treatment and severe consequences that may result in limb loss.
E si la vena es entre dos nervis, lahoras tu fen la vena en la longitut.	 If the vein lies between two nerves, you should cut it at its length.
Le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena cephalica es que atratz le sanc del cap e comfereys a las malautias dels huels.	 The recent development of phlebotomy on the cephalic vein is that it is used to treat wounds in the head area and helps alleviate symptoms from headaches.
E cove en aquest propriament, si vols que la fleubotomes pungen am fleubotomi olivar o am fleubotomi mirti; quar es la pus salva de totas las venas, quar no es dejos lu arteria ni nervi.	 In this case, if you want the phlebotomist to perform either superficial or deep phlebotomy, it should be carried out carefully so as not to damage any arteries or nerves.
Mays empero conveneys a tu deves la fleubotomia que guardes que am le fleubotomi no punguas le cap del lacert tant solament, e cerques le loc pus leugier, e no notz a lu, si no es atrobat am la percussio primieyra que sia sobre aquela am fleubotomia alcunas veguadas.	 The first sentence of the text translates to: "To prevent the bleeding from the phlebotomy (surgical incision made for blood letting), you must ensure that the phlebotomist does not make contact with your head, only touching or exploring around it, and do not touch yourself.
Mays empero fort leu es apostemat en alcus homes, quan no es fleubotomat en la primieyra percussio, mays no notz en re aquel apostema.	 The second sentence of the text translates to: "And if you are concerned about the phlebotomy (surgical incision made for blood letting), and it was not made by a phlebotomist in the first incision, then do not worry.
Mays la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquela e les accidentz de lu so motz, en les quals te cove cogitar en lor rectificacio.	 The third sentence of the text translates to: "The quality and consequences of this phlebotomy must be considered in cases where you think about correcting it.
Le primier de lu es del qual cove que sapias que fleubotomia no es aministrada sino en conservacio de sanetat e per speransa de lu e cautela de aveniment de malautias, e que sia fayta fleubotomia en la una de las venas que so en le coyde, so es: cephalica, fusca e basilica; e que sia fayta fleubotomia al comensament de primaveyra, sobre dejun en primaviera e autunppne, e en invern aprop la comestio, quan apparo significacios de replecio.	 The first sentence of the text translates to: "The first thing is that phlebotomy should be performed by a medical professional in order to maintain health and prevent complications.
E sia fayta fleubotomia e le tertz dia o al primier pus que del jorn siran passadas tres horas.	 The second sentence of the text translates to: "After phlebotomy, it should be done within three hours after the procedure.
Mays fleubotomia que es aministrada, mays quan provoca convenencia e necessitat ad aquo, o de nuoyt o de dia, en tota hora e en tot temps.	 The last sentence of the text translates to: "Phlebotomy should be administered whenever there is a need and convenience or necessity.
E cove que efant no sia fleubotomat entro que aja xiiii ans, e femna que sia prenhs no sia fleubotomada sino del quart mes entro al sete, e les viels no sian fleubotomatz les quals ja han passatz lx ans.	 When the brain is not asleep and a person is breathing in fresh air at least once every seven days (every four weeks), they are not suffering from drowsiness or fatigue but rather from the fourth month onwards to the seventh, and their sleep disturbances have already occurred for that period of time
E cum alcu vol esser fleubotomat per qualque manieyra sia, cove que mondifique les sieus budels denant la fleubotomia am clisteri leon, si en aquels ha mota fenda retenguda, per so que las venas no atiro las superfluitatz en la fleubotomia dels budels, que son puridas, e que no noguan als membres principals.	 With the aim of preventing drowsiness or fatigue from occurring in any way, when you mention the symptoms of phlebitis (inflammation of a vein), if there is evidence that it has been treated, so that blood vessels do not carry unnecessary impurities to the phlebitis of the veins, which are pure, and do not affect the main members.
E no sian fleubotomatz les pascientz naucea sacertiva e crapula, ni evasent de malautia ni de ebretat entro que aquo sia remaugut aquo de lor, ni malaute de ydropici, e mays que fleubotomia sia temuda aprop colica passio e aprop vomit, e aprop cos de ventre, e aprop multiplicacio de coyt e de trebal e de exercici de dejunis o de vigilias e de tota causa que dissolveys la vertut, o sia corpore28 o animal.	 With the aim of curing or preventing drowsiness, fatigue, and vomiting from occurring in any way; with it being necessary to cure or prevent phlebitis (inflammation of a vein), and not allowing the patient to be affected by other illnesses such as jaundice, dropsy, and madness; and moreover for phlebitis to be treated through cautery, and vomit, and belly exercises, and multiple kneadings of hands, feet, legs, arms, and exercise of the heart or vigils, with all causes that dissolve life, either in humans or animals.
E aprop considera en subtiliacio de humos denant aquo si le sanc es gros, am viandas e beures, e am medicinas si aquo es a lu possible ad aquo.	 With the aim of considering in subtlety those who have good air (pneuma), wine and food, medicine if it is possible to do so with that;
E aprop intre en banh si alcuna causa no prohibeys, o sia excersitat per alcun exercici per so que·l sanc sia subtiliat.	 Between which causes are there no prohibitions on, or exercises that can be performed for such an exercise to maintain its subtlety
E pausa la fleubotomia de lu en le pietz del dia, so es enviro la hora de tercia, ayssi cum havem dit.	 Pause the phlebotomy from this part of the body, and then move on to the third hour as we've done previously
E perforsa te que·l pietz de aquel sia guardat en aquel dia de totz mals accidentz animals, ayssi cum es angustia, ira, temor, e de totz accidentz corporals, ayssi cum es trebal e pena superflua e coyt e semblantz a lor.	 Perform tests to check if that part of the body is being protected from all animal accidents and injuries as well, including emotional distress, anger, fear, and corporal accidents, along with excess waste, cough, cold, and similar ailments.
E a la sua sezelha fassa esser presentz las causas en le us de la qual corr costuma dels homes am aromaticitat e odorament e am bals e semblantz ad aquels segon la cantitat de possibilitat.	 And the cause for which you often use in homes to have an attractive aroma and taste, as well as similar scents, will be present here according to the amount of possibility available.
E segua le fleubotomador sobre un coyssi que sia pus aut que·l coyssi de aquel que deu esser fleubotomat.	 Continue with the phlebotomist on a cushion that is prepared and which will be phlebotomized.
E aprop extragua le sieu bras, e fregue aquel am la sua ma le fleubotomador doas o tres veguadas; e aprop strenha le liament am correia e involva aquel doas veguadas.	 Remove your breasts and place them on the phlebotomist's lap with three support cushions, and then tighten up their limbs as we have done previously.
E sia la strictura temprada, quar la strictura quant no es engual, o la strictura es am superfluitat, lahoras prohibeys de fluxs del sanc; o es am mollificacio, e lahoras prohibeys le cors del sanc eyssament.	 The temporary constriction should be used if the constriction is not permanent or it's excessive, and pain results in the area of the constriction occurs due to the excess waste. If the restriction is beneficial, then a constriction can block off the body part.
E aprop la strictura, cove que aquel que deu esser fleubotomat fregue las suas mas ensemps entre lor entro que las venas sian imfladas, e sian declaradas al sentiment.	 Apply the constrictive bandage so that it covers the body part to which veins become swollen and declared by the feeling.
E aprop le fleubotomador unte le sieu fleubotomi am un pauc de oli antic propriament; e aprop pausa le sieu di indic de la ma senestra sobre aquela vena, dejos le loc del qual vol la fleubotomia, per que la vena fuja un pauc, e la percussio sia sessada quar de las venas es la qual atrobas ayssi cum corda fugent deves la fleubotomia, e de aquelas es que es plena de ventositat e quan pauses le fleubotomi sobre aquela es contrayta deves le fleubotomi, e es desceubut le fleubotomador; e le fleubotomi no uobre la vena, e si uobre, aquela es streyta.	 "Place a cushion under them and another servant on their legs as well as one more on their chest with both hands, holding the patient's hand.
E donc, per aquo cove que·l fleubotomador sia fermat e sia sollicit en totas aquestas causas.	 And then, in order to be certain that the phlebotomist is ready and solicit all these causes
E aprop depause le fleubotomi, mays si la vena es huberta en una veguada, lahoras bo es; e sino, tu itera aquo autra vaguada dejos aquel loc un pauc, o sobre lu am festinacio, si le loc no es apostemat.	 And if the vein is burst in a sudden manner, then you stop and repeat this action until the location is corrected or until the phlebotomist indicates that it has been done correctly
Et si le loc es apostemat, o le malaute se spauresca, lahoras tu le layssa per un dia o per dos, e no strenha le liament, quar fort leu atirara apostema caut, ni no intre en banh.	 And if the vein is burst or the patient becomes worse, then you lay it down for one day or two and don't press too hard because applying pressure could cause more harm than good
E aprop itera la fleubotomia si la ama.	 Then repeat the phlebotomy as needed
E si la apercio es petita e corr sanc subtilment, e temes que non yesca sanc la cantitat que voles, lahoras tu itera le fleubotomi en aquel trauc segon rectitut e ajusta en la appercio un pauc, e fay aquo am festinacio denant que·l loc sia apostemat, quar le loc es apostemat en motz homes deves pauca apercio.	 If the incision is very small and you're afraid it might not be enough or too much pressure, then repeat the phlebotomy in that vein after checking to ensure it has been done correctly, making sure only a little pressure should apply when the location is corrected, because applying too much pressure could cause harm if the location still hasn't been properly addressed.
Mays si vezes aquel ja apostemat, lahoras no iteres sobre lu, quar no escusa a tu alcuna causa; e pausa sobre aquel alcuna partida de la fenda de oli, quar alleuja le cors del sanc.	 When many times that has happened before, the pain will not cease until there is a cause to eliminate and stop it from occurring again. And you must stop any part of the opening wound in order to prevent the illness from recurring.
E es milhor en aquest loc que oli e que les autres olis.	 The worst thing about this location, as well as other things.
E semblantment aministra fenda de oli en tota fleubotomia am la qual fleubotomes las venas deves la prohibicio de cors de sanc, e fan aquo tyriaca alfadoc e sagzenea quan es pausat de la una de aquelas sobre le loc, quar le sanc es subtiliat e es revolvut quan es gros.	 The same treatment is applied to all wounds of any kind in the full scope of phlebotomia, that prevents the blood from flowing into the heart and makes the veins sick when stopped by pressing one of those on it, as it is delicate and may be rolled up when held in place poorly or roughly.
E si en le loc de la fleubotomia es engendrat gran apostema, quar motas veguadas accideys, e majorment ad aquel que no es stat sangnat sino aquela veguada, o en la apercio de la vena pauca, e lahoras tu coyta, e pausa sobre le loc sponja infuza en aygua e sal, un pauc scalfada, e strenh aquela per una hora, quar es dissolvut.	 If at the location of phlebotomia is born great pain that comes and goes often, more than from one that does not bleed only when it bleeds, or in the presence of a thin vein, and you hold tight to the area, and pause over the place sponged with water and salt for a short while, and strain it for an hour, as it dissolves.
E cove que fassa aquo aprop le yssiment del sanc de aquela vena am compliment de lu o de autra vena.	 So that you apply this to the vein of the body or any other vein.
E si roman en le loc per alcus dias alcuna negror o viriditat, no notz aquo; e si voles, pausa sobre aquel alcuna causa de aloen e de mirra dissolvut, o alcuna causa de suc de mentastre o de calament o semblant de lu.	 If there is a darkness or green appearance at the location for several days, do not apply this; and if you want to, pause over any cause of elimination or reflection dissolution, or some other causes as well.
E motas veguadas accideysso apostemas e eminencias deves fleubotomia de la basilica.	 The first sentence translates to: "The demons are vanquished by the holy water.
E donc pausa la tua ma sobre aquela, e si lahoras tu atrobas mollicia deves la tua compressio sobre aquela, lahoras aquela eminencia es malvada e mala; e adonc guarda te que pauses sobre aquela alcuna causa de aquo que havem dit, quar fort leu fluira de la arteria sanc.	 The second sentence translates to: "When you are about to perform an operation on the artery, make sure that it is not obstructed by any cause mentioned in what has been said.
E fay emplaustre am aquo en que es stipticitat, per que le loc sia endurat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	 The third sentence translates to: "And if the artery is stiff due to coldness, then apply a hot compress and another cure to make it supple.
E cove que extraguas del sanc a tot hom segon la quantitat de la sua vertut e segon la color vencent sobrc le sanc segon que appar.	 The fourth sentence translates to: "Take the length of the artery, its thickness and its color as reference points when removing it.
Quar si le sanc es negre, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia rog; e semblantment si tu le vezes gros, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia subtiliat; e semblantment si es agut, entro que sia ostada la acuitat de lu.	 The fifth sentence translates to: "If the artery is dark, it must be removed gently so that its roughness does not interfere with its smoothness. And if it is thick, it must be removed gently so as to preserve subtlety. If it is thin or has sharp edges, then care should be taken regarding its sharpness.
E cove ad aquel que es ple e fort e ha necessitat de extraccio de sanc en una veguada, que sia amplificada la fleubotomia de la vena e le fleubotomi sia lat.	 The sixth sentence translates to: "And if the artery is long and thick, requiring removal of it in one go, amplify both phlebotomy and phlebotomy should be carried out.
E en aquel que es freul, sia fayt le contrari de aquel, e cove que extragua aquel en tropas veguadas, e que le trauc sia streyt.	 The seventh sentence translates to: "And when it is short and narrow, do the opposite of what you did before, cutting it in several pieces, and make sure that the cut is smooth.
E le milhor que es administrat en fleubotomia de vena es que sia la seccio transversa, no punctura.	 The first sentence translates to: "The method of administering phlebotomy for bloodletting is by making a transverse incision, not puncturing.
E aquesta manieyra de fleubotomia es salva de flux de sanc e de inscizio de nervi, e es pus lausabla e pus salva que fleubotomia segon latitut e longitut.	 The second sentence translates to: "This phlebotomy method is safe from the flow of blood and nerve injury, and it's pushed back so that phlebotomy can occur at the appropriate latitude and longitude.
E a la qual es acostumat sobrevenir sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e cove que tu cures aquel denant la fleubotomia am un petit de pa infus en vi de milgranas o de oximel simple scalfat; e extratz a l u del sanc en tres veguadas o quatre.	 The third sentence translates to: "And when you come upon phlebotomy, it's customary to administer it with a small vein or artery puncture and then extract the blood in three or four ways.
E si es enfregiditat de compleccio, lahoras prengua denant la fleubotomia pa infus en eyssarop de mirra o en eyssarop de mel aromatizat am specias ayssi cum am pebre, canela, gingiebre e semblantz, o en eyssarop aromatizat e mot odorant.	 The fourth sentence translates to: "And if it's necessary for phlebotomy, then administer it by puncturing the vein or artery with a specific flavor like ginger, cinnamon, peppermint, and other spices, or by a flavored but non-odoriferous substance.
E si accideys sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e es causa de lu issiment de mot sanc, lahoras cove que prengua en beure aygua de carn e eyssarop mot odorant subtil; e use de aromaticitat am algualea, e sia linit le sieu pietz am aquela.	 The fifth sentence translates to: "If phlebotomy is necessary but you don't have a specific vein or artery, then administer it with the juice of flesh and the non-odoriferous substance mentioned previously; use flavor as well in order to make the extraction subtle.
E usa de las autras causas que havem ditas en la divisio en le capitol de sincopi per evacuacio.	 The sixth sentence translates to: "Use the reasons mentioned earlier for division into the capital of phlebotomy for evacuation.
E qui vol eventar le sieu bras e dissolver le sieu sanc segonda veguada, cove a lu del qual la fleubotomia es per mota evacuacio, e la vertut de lu es freol, que evacue le sanc petit a petit, so es segon la quantitat de la vertut en les dias continuables.	 When the first and second veins of blood are opened and dissolved, to let out the fourth vein for the purpose of discharging the blood, it is customary for him who has done this to evacuate or purge himself gradually by taking small doses over a period of time equal in quantity to the extent of the discharge.
Mays qui vol eventar le sieu bras, e gitar lo sieu sanc segonda vetz, e le sieu cors es fort, lahoras fassa aquo aprop vii horas o ix de la primieyra fleubotomia.	 Those who want to open the first and second veins of blood will make a big mistake if they do so without waiting for the purging or discharging of the first vein
Mays qui vol atirar le sanc del cors sieu al contrari de la partida a la qual declina, cove que sia eventat en le segon dia o le tertz.	 Those who want to open up the heart's vein against what it declines or refuses will do so only on the second day or third day.
Mays aquel cors en le qual es mot sanc ja scalfat e es acuit e fa accidir febre, cove que sia gitat de lu sanc en una veguada e sia de lu gitada gran cantitat e sia amplificada la apercio entro que accidesca sincopi, pus que tu auras conservadas totas las condicios de fleubotomia; e que pauses la tua ma sobre le pols de lu deves le cors del sanc, per que no endevengua mort en loc de sincopi, quar motas veguadas endeve aquo quan le fleubotomador es ignorant e negligent.	 Those whose heart's vein has already been cut and is bleeding or giving feverish symptoms will have to do it in a day without delay and at the greatest quantity, so that the incision between them can be closed as quickly as possible. If not done with great caution by a skilled person who knows what they are doing, it may cause death through excessive bleeding
E no cove quan tu voles desliar le bras e evacua le sanc segonda veguada, cum ja sia claus le orrifici de la vena e sia fayt difficil issiment del sanc, que tu premas subre aquel am vehemencia e encurvat sia extendut leugierament, quar aquo es trop mal.	 Do not do it when you want to open the veins and evacuate the second vein because once you have closed off the artery of the vein and it becomes difficult to extract it due to its resistance, then you must proceed with great force and make sure that the incision is wide enough, lest this be a mistake.
Habantz le layssa entro que sia fleubotomat segondament; o remau aquo am la acuitat del fleubotomi que es coagulat del sanc en le orrifici de la vena; o pausa sobre aquel de tyriaca alfarach, o de sagzenea, e comprem aquel am compressio leugiera entro que·l sanc sia fora yssit.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
E si la vena es apostemada, lahoras layssa aquela e no la toques entro que·l apostema sia sedat.	 And if the vein has become blocked, then the doctor should apply pressure to prevent the veins from collapsing.
E si necessitat te provoca a evacuar le sanc segondament, e no es excusacio, lahoras tu sagna aquel sobre aquel loc o en l’autre bras en autra vena.	 And if it is necessary to evacuate the intestine for a second time without excuse, then the doctor should put pressure on one location or another arm into another vein.
E la vena apelada “funis del bras” es fleubotomada en loc de la fusca o de la basilica, quan no so atrobadas o so amaguadas, quar es composta de aquelas.	 The blocked vein is called the "vein of the arm" if it occurs in the wrist or palm of the hand when they are not covered or protected, which consists of those veins.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intrometa la sua ma en aygua cauda entro que·l focil se enrogezesca e que la vena apparia manifestament.	 The quality of the blocked vein is that it enters into contact with the patient's hand in a downward direction, causing the veins to become inflamed and visible immediately.
E aprop sia strengut sobre aquel am liament am strictura migana; e aprop fleubotoma segon le tranvers petit, no latitudinalment ni segon la longitut.	 Then place pressure on that vein in a way such that it does not obstruct the artery or the transverse veins, but only longitudinally.
E sia la apercio ampla e sia la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas aquela sobre la junctura de la ma un petit.	 Then make an incision both wide and deep enough to make a small cut on the joint of your hand.
E si es prohibit le fluxs del sanc, lahoras tu itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e layssa le sanc correr en la aygua entro que consieguas la tua necessitat.	 If the flow of blood is prohibited, then put your hand in water and apply pressure to the vein so that the vein runs in water towards where you need it.
Mays si tu eras en les dias d’estiu, lahoras tu yest excusat de la iteracio de la ma en l’aygua cauda, e le mes es pausat le cors del sanc en aygua cauda en temps de yvern.	 When you are in the days of summer, pains occur from accumulation of bile in the heart, and it is customarily called "gallstones" by doctors.
E la fleubotomia de aquesta vena es pus salva que de totas las autras venas, quar dejos lu no ha vena pulsatil, ni nervi.	 The bleeding from this vein must be stopped, as all other veins are closed off that it is not pulsating or nervous.
E la fleubotomia de la savatella de la ma dreyta es conferent a las malautias del fetge.	 Bleeding from the right side of the liver is considered to be a symptom of gallbladder disease.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que tu strenguas la ma am liament o am la tua ma, pus que tu l’as mesa en ayga cauda, entro que la vena sia imflada e sia be demostrada al vezement; e aprop fleubotoma aquela transversan; e si inscidas aquela de tot no nozera aquo en re.	 The quality of the bleeding is that you should stretch your arm or hand towards it, pushing on it so as to make a cavity, and if the vein is swollen and can be demonstrated at once, then make a transverse incision; but if not all veins are there in this case, do nothing more.
E conserve que no ultimes la tua ma am la fleubotomi, quar dejos lu so les nervis dels ditz denudatz de carn.	 Continue to hold tight your hand against the bleeding, as it may be necessary to remove the nerve endings from the flesh of that part.
E aprop itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e laysse correr le sanc en aquela, quar si tu no iteras aquela en l’aygua cauda, le sanc sira coagulat en lo orrifici de la vena, e es prohibit de flux.	 Push your hand into the water to lead the flow away from that, as if you do not press on it in the water the flow will clot in the neck of the vein and be prohibited by flow.
E cum es extrayt le sanc segon la quantitat de necessitat, lahoras tu pausa sobre la vena oli e sal, per que no sia consolidada coytadament; e semblantment cove que tu fassas en tot ram streyt.	 As the quantity of necessity increases, pains will stop above the vein and fall off gently, so that it is not consolidated firmly; similarly you do as much in all other limbs.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de aquela de la ma senestra, es que es conferent a las malautias de la melsa.	 May I help you with something else?
E fay semblantment en la fleubotomia de lu ayssi cum has fayt en l’autra.	 Do you mean "like in the phlebotomy of this, as we did in the other"?
E le juvament de la vena sephena de la fleubotomia es a las malautias que so en la partida dejos del cos, ayssi cum so malautias de la mayre, e a retencio de mestruas, et a las malautias dels ronhos e ulceracios de coyssas e de cambas antiquas, e a lor semblantz de las malautias.	 The vein puncture in phlebotomy should be performed by the same person as did it for the other procedure; after that, proceed with procedures involving veins (sephena), ulcers and varicose veins of the legs, and make sure to examine the feet and ankles carefully.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute entrometa lo sieu pe en aygua cauda e fassa sobre aquel fricacio entro que be apparen las venas; e lia sobre la junctura del pe am correia; e le loc de la vena le talo apparent deves le dit pous, e de aquela so ramificatz en la facia del pe motz ramps.	 The quality of phlebotomy is that the patient will feel a constriction in his or her arm as they are punctured and place their hand over it to prevent the blood from flowing out; then lay on the puncture site, causing the veins to appear more prominent; examine both feet for any signs of varicose vein formation.
E donc fleubotoma le pus ample ram o dejos la camba deves le talo deves la agreguacio de lu, quar es milhor e pus sal.	 Phlebotomy should take place only once in a while; after that the veins will enlarge and become more prominent over time, which is desirable.
E si fleubotomas aquela en la facia del pe, lahoras tu te guarda dels nervis que so dejos aquela sobre la facia del pe, e pausa la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas per le travers, quays cum si tu la volias inscidir.	 If you perform phlebotomy on the surface of the foot, make sure to take precautions not to cause any damage to the nerves that are present there, and then stop your phlebotomy procedure until you feel comfortable performing it again.
E sia le fleubotomi vosil.	 The first sentence translates to "It is a phlebotomy.
Mays si es prohibit le issiment del sanc; lahoras tu itera le pe de lu en l’aygua cauda e layssa correr le sanc en aquela entro que sia evacuat.	 If you are prohibited from injecting the patient, then place a finger in their mouth and make them swallow the medication to ensure that it enters into the stomach and is expelled as quickly as possible through vomiting.
E si le fleubotomador erra en la primieyra veguada, lahoras itera am le fleubotomi en sus un pauc, quar le loc es sal; e no temes de lu malician, mays que te guardes dels nervis ayssi cum havem dit.	 If the phlebotomist is in danger of suffocation during the first attempt, then place it quickly on their chest and start chest compressions to prevent them from choking.
E semblantment fay de la sophena del autre pe engualment.	 Similarly, do the same with the other vein as well.
E de la vena sciatica, le loc ayssi cum havem dit es deves le talo dejos la cavilha de la partida silvestra.	 For the sciatic vein, place it in the area where you would normally find the femoral artery.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de lu es a dolo de anca quan es per sanc caut.	 The youthfulness of the phlebotomy procedure is crucial when there's a risk of bleeding during puncturing.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intre en banh, e festine e strenha la cueyssa de lu del latz de la ancha entro desus le talo desus quatre ditz an una benda longua subtil, quar no appar sino per aquo.	 The quality of the phlebotomy procedure is that the patient becomes pale, faints and weakens as a result of the pressure on their arm during puncturing due to the narrow artery between the elbow and wrist which is quite evident in this case.
E donc quan appar, lahoras tu fleubotoma aquela segon cascun engen que es a tu possible e segon le tranvers, e es milhor; o inscidas aquela per inscizio o secces aquela per seccio, quar le loc de lu es sal.	 Then when it appears, you will phlebotomize that second vein which is easy to find and more suitable for this procedure or if the first one does not work, then go on to puncture another vein closer to your goal.
E ela es en motz homes mot ameguada; e si atrobas aquela, e no appar al sentiment de tot, lahoras fleubotoma alcun ram de lu, e es aquel que appar en le dos del pe enves le dit auricular e le anular.	 When the patient has been laid on their side, if they are not moved gently, pain will ensue in both arms and hands, and it is that which presses upon the ear and nose.
E guarda te dels nervis, e fay correr del sanc la quantitat que voles.	 Keep your nerve tension down; do what you want to the extent of its severity.
E aprop deslia la strictura e pausa sobre le loc de la fleubotomia coto e strenh le loc, quar leugierament es sanat.	 Open up the fistula and place it gently over where the phlebotomy was made; stretch that area to prevent any discomfort or pain
De ventozacio e de las qualitatz de uzar de aquelas.	 From exhaustion and the quality of using those things.
Ventozas so de corns, o de eram, o de veyre.	 The feet are in pain, or the legs, or the soles.
E ventozacio es fayta segon doas manieyras: la una de lor es am scarificacio e extracio de sanc, e l’autra es ventozacio ses scarificacio.	 The two fingers are cut off; one cuts away the pain and extract it from there, while another simply causes scarring.
E aquesta ventozacio que es ses scarificacio es segon doas manieyras, quar o es am foc o ses foc.	 This type of cutting that results in scarring is second among two types; one cuts away the pain and extracts it from there, while another simply causes scarring
E a las ventozas que so administradas am scarificacio e extraccio de sanc son xiiii locs del cors, dels quals la un en lo qual so pausadas ventozas es alnocrati, e es la deriera partida del cap; e le mieg loc d’el de doas partz del col ensemp; e ventozas del mento dejos la mandibula pus dejos de la boca; e ventozas de doas spatulas; e ventozas de alohoster, e es sobre la fi de la coeta; e ventozas de dos focils, e so de dos brasses; e ventozas de doas cavilhas; e ventozas de doas cuoyssas.	 The areas where the ulcers are administered with incision and extraction of pain include: the forehead area, the chin, the nose, both nostrils, both cheeks (the left and right), both eyes, both ears, both elbows, both thighs, two fingers on each hand, two toes, both knees.
E ventozacio no extratz le sanc sino de las venas menudas sparssas en la carn, e per aquo no catz la vertut per aquelas, ayssi cum es cazement per fleubotomia; ni no cove que ventozacio sia fayta am foc o ses foc en alcuna malautia fayta per replecio entro que le cors tot sia evacuat.	 When the swelling of veins is seen in the skin and not through any other means, it signifies that circulation to those parts has been interrupted; therefore if you wish for them to become healthy again, immediately apply a poultice made from fresh bread soaked in honey.
Mays si necessitat provoca a ventozacio per malautia o per continua, aministrem aquela en tota hora al comensament del mes e en la fi de lu, e en le mieg loc de lu e en qualque temps sia.	 If you wish to prevent swelling from continuing or recurring, we recommend applying the poultice at any time during the month and at the end of it, in all parts where it is necessary to apply it.
La qual causa es quar dels homes es en les quals es sanc multiplicat entro que indigeys de extraccio de lu per ventozacio e atroba en le sieu cap graveza e soda; e de aquels es que atroba replecio e rogor en la sua cara e en le sieu cap, e en le sieu col; e de aquels es que atroba pruziment en la sua cara e en le sieu front e tenebrositat e hebetut en les sieus huels; e de aquels que gieta le loc de la sua ventozacio; e de aquels es que le lor ris es multiplicat; e de aquels es que atroba gustament de sanc en la sua boca, o que la lengua es apostemada e escup sanc; e de aquels es que lor dormir es multiplicat, e de aquels que vetz sanc en lo dormir rogor e antics e plaguas e autras causas a lor semblantz.	 The first part of this text mentions cases where swelling is caused by the following:  (insert list)
E donc quan vezes en alcuna causa de aquelas, e propriament si es en le tertz o miga del mes, lahoras comandam ventozacio esser fayta pus que so passadas del dia dos o tres horas.	 When swelling is caused by any of the above causes and especially if it occurs in the third or middle part of the month, doctors recommend applying heat to help relieve it quickly.
E juvament de ventozacio de la nuca es que quan aquela confereys a gravitat en le cap e ad aquo que es efondit als huels; mays cove que aquo sia aprop evacuacio de tot le cors.	 Sudden swelling of the neck is what occurs when weight is felt in the head, and this often leads to the intestine coming out through the mouth.
E aquesta ventoza es en le loc de fleubotomia de la cephalica.	 This is a medical procedure performed on the head region
E no es legut que use de lu aquel que es de frega complecio, o en le qual es catarr, quar dona ad aquel gran nocument.	 It must not be used when it has a complication, or in those cases where it causes great harm.
E per aquo no cove que uso de aquela les vielhs, e en les caps dels quals so malautias frejas.	 Do not use these methods on the parts that are inflamed, as they cause inflammation.
Mays ad aquel que sobre aquela es continuant sobre lu es fayta oblivio; e per aquo cove que tu comandes al ventozador que depause la sua ma un petit am la ventosa a las partidas dejos, temen de la generacio de oblivio.	 Do not continue to apply it excessively without stopping, and for this reason you should command the applicator to pause his hand just slightly above the areas that are inflamed, in order to prevent the generation of blisters.
Mays ventozacio de alkehel es en loc de fleubotomia de la vena fusca e de la basilica: e per aquo confereys a asma, e a la constriccio de ale e a la scissura del sturment de ale, e a tos, e a replecio.	 It is done on the area around the affected vein and the basilica, to treat edema, restrictions of the veins and the rupture of the walls of the veins, thrombosis, and varicose veins.
E cove que sia enpellida la ventoza alkehel un petit, quar si es pausada dejos, engendra debilitat en le cors e en le stomac.	 You should not apply it excessively, as if you stop doing so will cause weakness in the body and the stomach.
E la ventozacio de alhagdahan confereys a las dolors accident en le cap e a obtalmia, e emigranea, e prefocacio, e a dolors en las razitz de las dentz; e es en loc de fleubotomia de la basiliqua.	 It treats headaches and occipitalgia (pain in the back of the head), emetophobia (fear of vomiting or throwing up), photophobia (fear of light), and dental pain, and is done on the area around the basilica (the base of the skull).
E cove que comandes al ventozador que no prema la sua ma am scarificacio per que no inscida la arteria e accida fluxs de sanc.	 You should command the applicator not to apply excessive pressure, so that it does not cause bleeding and stops blood flow.
E ventozacio dejos le mento comfereys a alcola en la boca, e a corrupcio de la gingiva, e a semblantz a lor de las malautias que so en la boca, e stan en loc de fleubotomia de aliheric que so en las doas labias.	 The first sentence is: "You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them...
Mays la ventozacio que es fayta sobre las doas spatulas confereys a caphatan, le qual es fayt per replecio de caliditat.	 The second sentence is: "The numbness that occurs at the fingertips is caused by coldness.
E la ventosacio de las doas partidas dedintz dels focils confereys juvament de la fleubotomia de tres venas, so es de la basilica, fusca e cephalica, quar aquela atratz le sanc de totas aquelas venas pus manudas que so en la carn, e aquelas venas menudas de las autras venas pus grossas entro que pervengua la atraccio a las tres venas.	 The second sentence is: "The numbness that occurs at the fingertips is caused by coldness and can be due to the basilica artery, facial artery, or cephalic artery.
E comanda al ventozador que trop no procezesca en scarificacio, quar le loc es denudat de carn, e dejos lu so nervis e arterias.	 The third sentence is: "The phlebotomist must not cause the incision to bleed, as this would damage the flesh and arteries.
E es una ventoza am la qual es ventozat sobre alshosses e confereys a las emorroydas del cul e a las ulceracios pus dejos.	 The fourth sentence is: "This numbness arises from the toes to buttocks, and from hemorrhoids on the anus.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que sia gran ventoza, e que sia de eram, quar le loc indigeys de fort seccio; e fort leu so traucadas ventozas subtils e sia scarificat am scarificacio.	 The fifth sentence is: "And command the phlebotomist to make a large incision that allows for easy movement, and fine sutures are used instead of coarse ones.
Mays ventozas de las cambas minueysso per minuicio manifesta, quar atiran le sanc de tot le cors, e comfereysso a dolors antiquas dels ronhos e de la mayre, e de la vesica; e provocan las mestruas, e comfereysso a bothor e ademil; e stan en loc de fleubotomia de doas sophenas, e alahorcoben, e de doas cavilhas.	 The sixth sentence is: "The numbness extends from the thighs down to the toes and also affects the anus, bladder, and both ovaries.
Enpero mot debelitan tot le cors e fan accidir sincopi en motz homes.	 "The doctor begins by touching every part of the body in turn.
E de las ventozas alahorcoben le juvament es propda al juvament a las ventozas de doas cambas.	 "The first step is to place cushions beneath both thighs, with another servant on their legs and one more on their chest.
E la qualitat de la posicio de las ventozas es que pauses la ventoza al comensament vueda e sucguas per succio temprada, e no prolongues la posicio de las ventozas, mays pausa aquelas leugierament, e reman aquelas coytadament, e que las humors venguan al loc per adveniment engual.	 "The position of the cushions is that you place them at the beginning and remove them quickly to prevent prolonged pressure on them, especially if pain arises from their use, stop using them immediately and remain calm.
E no cesses iterar aquo e continuar entro que veja le loc ja enrojezir e inflar e que appara la rogor del sanc.	 "Do not continue repeating this until you see the affected area become numb and inflamed, and appear the sign of gout.
E lahoras tu scarifiqua e itera la succio pauc a pauc, e aprop considera en la dispozicio dels cors.	 "The pain gradually decreases and is repeated infrequently, allowing for consideration in regard to the body's position.
Quar aquel home que es de tendra carn de rars pors, cove que tu le scarifiques una veguada e no pus, per que le loc no sia ulcerat.	 "If someone has a tendency towards gouty arthritis, be cautious in removing any food or drink to prevent the location from becoming ulcerated.
E comanda al ventozador que amplifique la scarificacio e pronde un pauc, e atempre la succio am facilitat.	 "The cushion maker should gradually increase the pressure and then slowly ease it off, always making sure to apply it gently.
E si en le sanc es grossitut, lahoras cove que scarifiques doas veguadas, quar en la primieyra veguada es uberta la via de subtiliacio al sanc e a la aquositat de lu.	 "If the pain is severe, be cautious in removing two doses at once, as one should first ease off gradually then remove them quickly.
Mays en la segunda a la perscrutacio aquisida de la extraccio del sanc gros.	 "When applying the second dose of the gout treatment, it is important to pay close attention to the location where it is applied and how it affects the body.
E si le sanc es mot feculent, lahoras sia fayta scarificacio la tersa veguada per que consiegua le derier.	 When there's a foul odor coming from the bowels, do wash them thoroughly to prevent the spread of the putrefaction
E derierament, quan volem extrayre le sanc pauc a pauc o un petit, abasta a nos una scarificacio.	 And when we want to extract it little by little or just a bit, use a wash
E si volem extraccio de mot sanc, scarificam am mota scarificacio; e si nos conoyssem que·l sanc es gros, lahoras cove que scarifiquem per scarificacio preonda.	 And if we want to extract it, wash with a more vigorous wash; and if we suspect that the foul odor is large, doctors suggest washing with a stronger wash.
E le terme de scarificacio en la qual es la profunditat de la codena tant solament.	 The term 'scarficiation' refers to the depth of cleansing only.
E si aquel del qual la codena es grossa, dura, fusca, e les sieus pors so streytz, cove que les locs de las ventosas sian untatz lenitius, apertius resolutius; si es en temps d’estiu, ayssi cum es oli de aloen o oli de violat, o oli de amellas dossas, o oli de cemensa de coja; e si es en temps ivern, lahoras oli narci, o oli de liri, o oli de camamilla, o de sanc, e ad aquels semblantz.	 If that which causes the putrefaction is large and harsh, then in times of summer, it smells like rotten eggs or violets; in winter, they are more liquid-like or like damp earth; and if it's from a foul smell, you add those scents together.
E si la superfluitat es grossa, freja, lahoras le oli sia amaranti, o oli de balsamita, o oli de aloen, o oli aneti, e a lor semblantz.	 If there's too much of it, add the scents mentioned above, or any other scent that smells good to you.
Mays si le ventozador es de amples pors de tendra carn, lahoras cove que sia prohibit de oli, e cove que ad aquest les locs de ventozas de lor aprop la ventozacio sian lavatz am ayguaros o am aygua freja de solatrum, o am aygua de coja, o am aygua de bordolaguas, e semblantz ad aquelas.	 If the ventozador is made of tender meat, doctors advise to prohibit using oil and instead wash with cold water or water mixed with vinegar, or water mixed with a bitter herb; any of these scents are added together.
E aquel del qual le sanc es de mota humiditat, lava las suas ventozas am vi agre, o am aygua de mirt e sumac e semblant ad aquels.	 When someone has a fever from excessive moisture, place their hands in warm water and vinegar or wine and salt solution to cool down the heat.
E de aquel del qual las superfluitatz son grossas, lava las suas ventozas am vi antic, o am aygua de sansuc, que es majorana, o de decoccio de anet, o de camamilla, e a lor semblantz.	 For someone with excess fat in their urine, place their hands in warm water and vinegar or wine and salt solution to cool down the heat.
E cove que la ventozacio sia guardada denant de banh; habantz cove que sia aministrada aprop issiment del banh per una hora o per doas, e cove que dorma aprop la ventozacio.	 Keep their hands covered until they are given to be washed, and give them the opportunity to wash for one hour or two hours depending on how much soap is needed, and rest the hands after washing.
Quid est quo oportet ut regatur ventosandus aus phlebotomatus ante ventosationem.	 What should you do before washing your hands?
Cove que consideras al comensament: lahoras si le ventozador o aquel que·s deu fleubotomar es coleric e ventz sobre lu sanc agut e imflamacio, lahoras cove que prengua causas infrigidantz, ayssi cum milgranas acetosas, e endivia an vi agre e laytuguas, e secanabin, e julep, e a lor semblantz.	 Before washing your hands: if you are using hand sanitizer or that has been used for phlebotomy (removal of blood from the skin) it can cause burns and inflammation; in such cases, wash your hands with warm water, alcohol wipes, aloe vera gel, and lemon juice to soothe them.
E pausa a lor viandas ayssi cum poletz, e carns de auzels serbiges, e viandas conditas am agras, e a lu semblantz.	 Before drying your hands: squeeze out excess liquid from the towels, rub the towels with sandpaper, and dry them on paper to avoid leaving lint marks.
E de aquel del qual la compleccio es freja, cove que prengua en beure eyssarop almiva, o eyssarop de alsecanabin de semensas, e sumac, e vi mot odorant migier entre viel et noel; e que a lu sia comendat que use de paucitat de beure e de mangar, e pausa las viandas de lu poletz e canabir e pissers e petitz auzels e colombat.	 For someone who has fever due to fatigue: drink warm water and vinegar or wine and salt solution; also consume aloe vera gel, lemon juice between meals and not during meals; and dry your hands with a cloth that has been rubbed on sandpaper.
E cove que en lo dia de ventozacio e de fleubotomia le beure sia major que la vianda.	 On the day of vomiting and bleeding, drink more water than usual
E cove que sia donat en beure en alcunas horas ad alcus homes tyriaca alpharac, o medicamentz de musc, so es muscada, o alcelita denant la ventozacio o denant fleubotomia o aprop, per so que·ls membres principals sian confortatz e que·l sanc sia subtiliat; e no cove que prenguan aquela scalfatz.	 Drink water every hour or two during vomiting and bleeding in order to keep the body well hydrated without causing discomfort
Mays las ventozas que so ses scarificacio sian ventozas que so pausadas sus le fetge, e sobre la melsa e podagra, e sobre le umbelic, en les locs dels jonolhs, e la pixida del ancha, quar aquestz membres no suffertan scarificacio sobre si.	 The vomitings should cease when the vomiting is frequent and stops after it has been vomited up for a while (a few minutes). Avoid the use of antacids if you have ulcers or kidney problems, in the upper part of your throat especially (the larynx), as well as the umbelic artery, in the hollows of the joints, and the pulse of the foot.
E no es querit per aquelas sino atraccio de sanc de membre, ayssi cum pausam ventosa sobre mamilha en malautia de flux de sanc del sanc de las nars; e usam de aquela per que sia dissolvuda ventositat freja inviscade del membre, ayssi cum pausam sobre le ventre e l’umbelic; quar aquela rarifique le membre e scalfa lu e ramau la dolor quar resolveys ventositat.	 Do not use it on the member itself unless there is also pain in the ear from a blocked eustachian tube, or if there is nausea and vomiting of the stomach contents (gastric reflux). Avoid using it over the abdomen and umbilicus to prevent injury to those areas, as well as preventing the foot pulse.
E ja es pausada sobre les ronhos quan accideys en lor opilacio o poyra, quar per vertut de atraccio fort leu huobre opilacio e erradica le poyra de son loc.	 Place a cushion over their head when they lie down or sit up, to prevent injury from falling back heavily and remove any vomit that has accumulated there.
E semblantment fa quan es pausada sobre le fetge e la melsa deves ventositat en aquels enclausa.	 Do the same as you would when lying down or sitting up, in order to prevent vomiting from accumulating in those areas.
E aquestas ventozas so administradas vuedas amb succio tant solament; e alcunas veguadas so administradas am foc.	 When joints are affected by cold humors that penetrate every part of the body, pain occurs in the feet, it is customary to call gout on doctors
E alcunas veguadas so administradas plenas de aygua tebeza en las malautias de la melsa.	 You have already placed a cushion under them and another servant on their legs.
E aquo es per que la ventoza sia umplida e sia pus gran, so es aygua cauda sola o aygua en la qual sian cuytas herbas ad aquo convenientz.	 This is because the vein is filled and swollen, whether it's water or any other liquid that might be present in this area.
Forma de ventoza aministrada am foc: sia la amplitud del orrifici de dos ditz, segon que nos la havem formada; e la quantitat del preon sia la maytat de un palm; e sia en lo latz de lu, en le loc que es en le circuit, la maytat de lu, le trauc sia petit segon la quantitat que intre en lu una agulha.	 The way to administer venison through fire: the amount of the venison is that of a palm; and it should be given in the place where it is on its track, leaving it small as the quantity between one needle and this area.
Sia fayta de eram rog o citri, de grosses marges, leon, enguals e terses per so que no leda le membre deves la sua posicio sobre lu.	 It should be eaten raw or cooked, as long as it is well-cooked; otherwise the member of the body will not keep its place on it.
E sia al mieg de lu vergua transversa de eram o de ferr, on es pausada candela am lo foc.	 It can be cut across or diagonally, as long as it is kept hot over fire.
E ja sia aquesta ventoza gran major de aquela la qual havem recomtat; e la pauca mendre de aquela segon las malautias e la etat de aquel que usa de aquela.	 It should be that of the great one we have recommended, and less of the other for the thighs and its state when used on it.
E las ventosas dels efantz e extenuatz so autres que las ventozas dels joves e de grosses corssas.	 The veins from the extremities and those from large-sized individuals are different than those from young and thin individuals.
E la qualitat de pausar aquesta ventoza am foc sobre le membre es que extenda la meca am foc de lenha decentment denant una pauca candela de cera, e pausa aquela sobre le mieg de la vergua transversa en le mieg loc de la ventoza, per que le foc sia accendut enviro la partida dejos per que no sia comburit le cors del malaute.	 "The quality of stopping the cautery fire over a member is to extend it with fuel gently while keeping it away from the transverse vein in the middle of the venetian slit, so that the fire may be lit without burning into the heart of the patient.
E aprop sia pausada sobre le membre del malaute, e le dit sia sobre le trauc que havem dit, entro que quan tenem las ventozas e non indigem que osten le dit e que yesca la vapor sobre aquel trauc, lahoras la ventoza sira tantost dissolvuda.	 "The cautery is then placed over the patient's member and it is said to be on top of the vein mentioned earlier, so that when you have the venetian slit open and do not suggest removing the cautery or touching the vein while the steam covers the slit, the gout will be dissolved.
E prop igneys la meca segon la sua manieyra, e itera aquela si indigeyssas de aquela.	 "Then proceed to move your hand next to his/her elbow, and make sure you are away from that.
Mays en ventosa que es aministrada en la malautia de plauressi, am aygua, en la qual no ha vergua transversa ni trauc, e no es aministrada sino que sia umplida de aygua, e es pausada sobre le membre tant solament.	 "In the case of gout in the limbs, it is administered as mentioned earlier, except that there must be no transverse veins or slits and it should instead be filled with water.
E aquesta es la forma de lu: E aquesta ventoza quant plus es gran, tant es milhor, per que puya recebre gran quantitat de aygua.	 "It is as follows: The greater the gout, the more beneficial it is to receive a large amount of water.
Capitol .xcvii.	 This is the end of the medieval medical treatise in its original language and spelling.
Sanguissuguas no so administradas en motz membres sino en les membres en les quals non es possible posicio de ventosas, per la parvitat de aquels, ayssi cum le pot e gingiva e semblantz a lor; o en membre denudat de carn, ayssi cum le dit e·l nas e lors semblantz.	 Gout is not administered in the members themselves but only in those limbs where it is impossible to place the venetian slit, for the sake of these limbs they may be eaten and drunk like them; or in a member of flesh, as mentioned earlier.
E la qualitat de usar de aquelas que si has trobadas sanguisugas que so en las ayguas dossas de poyredura mundas.	 The quality of using those that if you have found veins that are in the vessels of blood
E aprop sian layssadas le dia e la nueyt en aygua dossa entro que sian famolentas, e que no romangua alcuna causa en le ventre de aquelas; e aprop sia evacuat le cors en le comensament am fleubotomia e am ventozas; e aprop fregua le membre del malaute entro que s’enrojezesca; e aprop sian pausadas sobre lu.	 The servant is to remove the bowels from the beginning of a phlebotomy and vents, and to put them in order, prevent any cause in the belly of those, evacuate the body through the incision and wounds, and place them over.
E cum son umplidas e caso.	 And when they are full and ready
E si es possible succio del loc am ventoza, es mays derier en juvament.	 If it is possible to apply a cold compress, do so immediately.
E sino, lahoras lava le loc am vi agre e aprop am mota aygua; e sia freguat e expremut.	 And if not, the doctor will remove the cloth and apply warm water.
E si es prolonguat le cors del sanc aprop le cazement de las sanguissuguas, e es aquo resudan, lahoras tu enfon un drap de li en aygua freja, e pausa aquel de sobre entro que sia abdida la resudacio.	 If the pain lasts too long and the patient is unable to endure it anymore, the doctor will put a cold cloth on them and remove another from over so that its heat can be removed.
E si le sanc es multiplicat, lahoras polveriza sobre lu vitriol trissat, o guallas e semblantz a lor de las causas stipticas, entro que·l sanc sia abscidit; o sian pausadas sobre le loc las maytatz de favas excocicadas, e sian layssadas entro que las favas aderescan al loc, e es le sanc abscidit.	 If the patient's condition worsens and the pain increases, the doctor will powder over them with a solution of tartar emetic or show symptoms of specific causes inside the body, to be removed; or they should place cushions on that part so that they don't hurt themselves.
E cove, si es necessaria, iteracio de sanguissuguas, quan es possible mudar aquelas.	 And if necessary, an application of veins when it is possible to change them.
E si las sanguissuguas son prohibidas de suspenssio, lahoras sia freguat le loc am sanc recent o fique una agulha en les locs entro que yesca sanc; e aprop sian pausadas, quar aquelas quan sento alcun sanc tantost adarysso.	 When the blood vessels are forbidden from suspension, then the pain occurs near or at a sharp point in the place where it feels as if it were a sharp one; and when those who feel any pain stop them
E quan voles que cajan, polveriza sobre aquelas un pauc de aloen trissat, o sal, o cendre, e cazo tantost.	 When you want to reduce the pain, sprinkle on top of it a little bit of alum, salt or cinnamon powder, and cover
Ayssi comensa lo prolec de la tersa partida: de restauracio.	 The beginning part of the sentence translates to "then begin the treatment for the restoration.
Aquest capitol es motas veguadas necessari en la art de medicina; e es restauracio de fractura e de dislocacio accident en les osses.	 This capital phrase is necessary in the field of medicine, and it refers to the treatment for fractures or dislocations that occur in bones.
O, filh, sapiatz que jactan se de aquest capitol les fols metges e les vulguars e aquels que degun temps no reguardero les libres dels Antics ni legiro de aquels una letra.	 Oh sonnet, say that the wise doctors and those skilled in their trade, who have long ago forgotten the rules of the ancients or those bound by them will not understand this sentence.
E per aquesta causa es fayt que aquesta manieyra dels scients in terra nostra es privat; e yeu no ho e obliat en aquo degun temps be de tot; e no he adhibit aquo que apres, sino per longitut de lectio dels libres dels Antics e studi sobre le entendement de aquels, entro que extrayssi la sciencia de aquels.	 For this reason, the study of medicine in our land is private; and you should not teach it to those who are bound by their times or who have forgotten about them or those who do not know the rules of the ancients or understand them deeply, unless they study the texts of the ancients and investigate into the meaning of these.
E aprop adirigui a experiment e studi en la longitut de la mieua vida.	 Then apply your experiment and research in the length of your life.
E yeu ja he de aquo descrit en aquest capitol tot aquo que conte la mieua sciencia e sobre le qual es passat lo mieu experiment; pus que agui abreujat aquo a vos autres e deliuregui aquo de occupacio de elonguacio; e abreujegui aquo en la fi de abreujacio; et e monstrat aquo en la fi de declaracio; e formegui en aquo motas formas dels sturmentz que so administratz en aquel, cum es fayt per addicio de declaracio, ayssi cum he fayt en dos capitols precedentz.	 Then describe in this capital everything that concerns your science and about which you have made the best experiment; put what has been added to you others, deliver it of occupation length; and bring it to an end with declaration, and form it according to forms used for administration as is done by addition of declaration just like two previous capitals.
Capitol primier.	 The First Physician
Summae et collectiones ex esse fracturae ossium, ex eis quarum praemissio necessaria est, antequam incipiamus rememorationem membrorum fraftorum et diversorum si uniuscuiusque.	 Our task is to understand the meaning of this text and translate it line by line into English, starting from here:
Cove donc que diguam en le prohemi de aquest capitol las summas del sermo; e les capitols al entendament dels quals en le comensament es forsat le artifexs e a stacio sobre la veritat de aquels; so es vos e aquels que so promptz que sapian o aprenguan aquesta art nobla autres de vos.	 Now, let us proceed to the beginning of this chapter and translate it carefully.
E donc dic que quan accideys a alcu fractura o dislocacio o torcio o cazement, lahoras cove que tu te coytes al comensament am fleubotomia o aleyar aquel, o quascu ensemps, si no prohibeys alcuna causa, ayssi cum debelitat de vertut, o es aquel al qual accideys effant, o viel en decrepitat, o es temps de vehement calor, o de vehement freg.	 If a fracture, dislocation or sprain occurs to any member of the body and you suspect an artery, vein or nerve, then it must be treated by phlebotomy or leech cupping; if not, as with a broken bone, or when affected by time, coldness, heat, humidity, or if there is evidence of gout.
E aprop sia content en vianda sieua de erbas frejas e de carns de auzels e de crabotz; e prohibem carns grossas e umplir si de viandas e de tota vianda que umple las venas de sanc, entro que siras segurat de apostema caut, e si no temes efusio de materia al membre.	 And in addition to the previously mentioned things we must also be careful with herbs and plants that fill or block the veins of the affected person, so as not to cause any leakage from the vein; if you are afraid of the discharge of matter into the member itself.
E lahoras retorne le malaute al sieu regiment primier am le qual corr costuma de lu.	 And the physician returns the patient to their first course, which is customarily prescribed by them.
E donc cum le os trencat comensa esser restaurat, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia pascut de viandas nutritivas de nutriment mot e gros e greu en les quals sia viscositat, ayssi cum so viandas faytas de froment cueyt am aygua, e ris, e caps, e pes, e ventres de vacas, e huous, e peys fresc, e vi gros e semblants ad aquels, e am aquest regiment es fayta coagulacio de fractura pus leugierament e miels.	 And when the bone is broken it begins to be restored, and a nourishing diet rich in fat must also begin which will have the following properties: moisture, fire, coldness, weightiness of animals (meat), air, warmth, grease, fresh vegetables and suchlike are all beneficial for this regimen; and along with coagulation at fracture prevention there is also a rule that it should be given to people who have gout.
E sapias que les osses trinquatz quan so en les homes que so en la primiera vilura e en los decrepitz, no es possible que sian continuatz e sian consolidatz segon lur natura per la exsiccacio dels membres de lor.	 When bones are broken when they occur in the first place and later on, it is not possible for them to continue or consolidate themselves secondarily due to the drying out of their members' parts.
E son consolidatz e continuatz segon lor natura tot temps per la exsiccacio de aquels membres, e so continuatz e consolidatz aquels que so de lor en la fi de la lenitat, ayssi cum les osses dels petitz effantz.	 They continue and consolidate themselves over time due to the drying out of those members, and they continue and consolidate them when it is the end of the treatment, just as bones from pets do.
Mays empero natura ajusta e amnecteys sobre le os trencat de tota partida alcuna causa semblant a glut en le qual es grossitut que adhereys e strenh aquel entro que so ensemps conglutinatz e liatz ensemps, entro que venen la fi de fortitut e de fermesa, ayssi cum foc al comensament, entro que denguna causa no prohibeys aquel de las suas obres.	 Nature adjusts and repairs the broken bone with great difficulty in a way that they bind together tightly once again, even if it takes a long time to heal and strengthen them, until finally at the end of strength and firmness, just like when it first happens, except for any cause not forbidden by doctors.
E per aquesta causa es necessari que pauses las viandas del malaute, viandas en las quals so gravitat e viscozitat e grosseza, ayssi cum havem dit.	 In order to prevent the swelling of a patient, bandages in which there is great thickness and viscosity as well as bulkiness are necessary, just as I've said.
Mota diversitat de fractura segon diversitat del membre.	 Various types of fractures depending on the part of the body.
E sapias que las specias de fractura son diversas segon la diversitat dels membres, quar fractura del os de la camba es diversa de la fractura del os del cap; e la fractura del os del pietz es divers de la fractura del os del dos; e semblantment totz les autres membres son diverses entre lor.	 Various types of fractures depending on the diversity of members, where a fracture in one arm is different from a fracture in the head; and the fracture in the foot is different from the fracture in both legs; and similarly all the other members are different among themselves.
E yeu venc am rememoracio de tota specia de fractura, expausada en le sieu capitol distincta del autre.	 "The patient shall remember to take a specific type of fracture, which has been explained in its own chapter.
Mota diversitat de fractura en si meteyssa.	 Different types of fractures here
E son diversificadas las specias de fractura del os en lor meteyssas; quar es fayta fractura arcuada otra aquo que accidan en lu stellas; e alcunas veguadas es fayta fractura segon la longitut del os: e so las fracturas de lu satagia e astelhas e addicios procedentz e no-procedentz, ayssi cum es fayt en la pena quan es preparada a escriure, e es fractura am plagua e disrupcio en le cap, e es fractura fissura petita.	 There are different kinds of fractures categorized into their own sections: arched fractures, those that occur in the heel; and certain jagged ones due to length; there are also saddle-shaped and compound fractures which proceed and do not proceed; and last but not least, small transverse fractures
E a tota specia es engen o turment propri en restauracio de lu segon que vindra rememoracio de lu distincta en les sieus locs.	 In all kinds of restoration, it is necessary to remember the specific instructions separately in those places.
Mota senhal de fractura del os.	 Sentence about fracture bone
E per aquo es conoguda fractura del os: es tortuositat de lu, e de aquel eminencia e appericio de lu al sentiment, e so de lu quan compremes aquel am la tua ma.	 The sentence describes a twisted bone with significant tenderness and pain when touched at the site of injury.
E donc quan no es en le loc tortuositat apparent ni so no es feyt deves le tieu tocament quan toques le os am agitacio e le malaute no atroba gran dolor, lahoras no es aqui fractura.	 If there is no visible deformity and it does not feel broken when touched at the site of injury, then the pain you are experiencing is not due to a fracture.
Habantz es possible que sia tortuositat o petita fissura, adon no cove que tu mauguas aquel am la tua ma e am compressio de tot; habantz pausa sobre lu de las medicinas de las quals ve rememoracio aprop aquel moment le qual conveneys al loc; e aprop sia streyt per strictura subtil.	 It is possible that you have a sprain or a small fracture, and the pain can be lessened by gently touching it at your touch point while compressing everything around it; take care to strain no further, pause on the medical instructions for this moment when they suggest treatment in that place; and it should proceed carefully.
E sapias que·l loc quan es arcuat e no es scindit en dos o otra aquo que no accidan en lu satagie, cum es remauguda tota partida de la sua compar, lahoras cove que comenses de la tua hora a rectificacio de lu habantz que a lu accida apostema caut.	 When the body bends and does not divide into two or more pieces (that is, when it is curved), then pain occurs in that part of the body, so doctors call it colic.
E si a lu accida apostema caut, lahoras layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que cesse le apostema; e aprop engualha aquel segon quascuna manieyra que podes de levitat e de engen.	 If the pointed cautery is applied to that part of the body, then doctors will apply it every few days until the pain subsides and the abscess heals.
E sapias que restauracio de lu e agulacio de lu es pus leugiera que del os en le qual accideysso sathagie.	 The restoration or excision of that part, depending on which is more suitable, can be done less invasively in the area where the pain occurs.
E aprop strenh aquel segon que vindra la rememoracio de lu.	 Then place another servant to assist with the memory.
Mays si en le os so satagias, lahoras es necessaria extencio de aquest membre trencat de doas partz, si es la ma o le pe; o am la tua ma si le membre es petit; o am doas cordas o am una corda e la ma.	 If that body part is torn in two, then the doctors will be necessary to extract it completely from both sides, if it's the arm or leg; otherwise place your hand on one side and hold it tightly.
E sia la tua posicio am la qual pauses le membre loc engual segon la sua figura natural, mentre que las partidas so extandudas del membre trenquat, lahoras te perforsa que fassas retornar aquelas addicios am engen e segon quascuna manieyra que poyras en lor locs.	 Position yourself as if you were holding the body part in its natural position while stretching it out, and make sure that all the parts of the body are extended from that limb.
E guarda te segon la tua forssa que no accida sobre le malaute per la tua operacio delor ni lesio; e perforsa te segon le tieu poder que tu appliques la un os am l’autre son companho segon lors milhors formas.	 Make sure you do not touch the patient's abdomen during your operation or injury, and ensure that both of your hands are placed next to each other in order to perform these tasks.
E cove que en aquela hora aprofitablament tu toques am la tua ma aquel, e si vezes aqui alcuna causa diversa, rectifiqua aquel e enguala aquel per la quantitat de la tua vertut.	 When it is convenient to touch your hand on top of that, and if there are no other causes for pain, adjust the treatment as needed based on how much you feel.
E exquiva vehement extenssio e compressio, ayssi cum fan mots fols metges que motas veguadas fan accidir apostema caut per la sua operacio, o fan accidir contraccio en le membre ayssi cum havem vist aquo per la operacio de lor motas veguadas.	 Violent stretching and compression are performed with sharp instruments to perform the operation, or they can also apply a counterpressure technique on that part of the body where the treatment was applied for the previous injuries.
E aprop annecteys, aprop equacio e decent operacio e strictura de aquel membre, e repaus e tranquilitat; amoneste le malaute sobre aquo e fay le squivar que no maugua aquel en la hora de las suas vigilias e del sieu dormir, e ves la sua revolucio e agitacio, e deves la sua egestio, e deves totz les sieus movementz am tota la sua vertut; e aguarda se que la posicio del membre sia posicio am la qual sia asegurada la dolor, la qual causa es quar quan sent en la disposicio de la posicio del membre delor o lesio; lahoras cove que permutes aquel ad autra disposicio de aquela am la qual non senta dolor; e guarda am aquo que la posicio de lu aquela sia dreyta e engual, per so que al membre non accida tortuositat quan es restaurat.	 Stretch and compress the member, and perform strictures on it to reduce its size and create quietness around it, with the help of cushions placed over that area in order to prevent any movement or injury when using the body part at rest. If a different position is needed for relief from pain or healing processes, you must change positions according to how much discomfort you feel; and make sure the position of the member remains correct so that it does not cause any pain or injury after it has been restored.
E la qualitat de la strictura del membre tranquat es aquela que yeu recomti; per que sapias que·ls membres trencatz so diversificatz en lor parvitat e en lor grandeza e en la forma de aquels.	 The quality of the member's stricture should be such that you know how different members can vary in their size, shape, and form depending on these qualities.
E de aquels que son petits ayssi cum le bras e·l dit e·l focil e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras cove que la envolucio sia de drap mol subtil.	 The people who are small should have the same type of bandage as they do on their arms and face.
Mays aquels que so grosses ayssi cum la cuoyssa o la camba, cove que en aquels sia envolucio lada e dura, quar la liadura lada connecteys le membre gran e strenh aquel de tota part am strictura engual, enayssi que en lu no intre macula.	 When large masses occur in the thigh or leg, such that they enclose and harden all around, causing the joint to be stiffened from every direction, then it is called "thrombophlebitis" by doctors
E aprop comensa, aprop la tua evacuacio de equacio, pausar liament convenient ad aquo, sobre le loc de aquela fractura am tres envolucios o quatre segon que·l membre mereys; e strenh la tua ma un petit am le liament.	 With the fracture in place and after making it convenient to apply the cautery here, on that area with three or four folds of cloth for the member will be stretched out a little bit more.
E aprop ve am aquel a la partida pus sobirana del loc de la fractura, e strenh mens que no foc la tua strictura am la qual has strengut le loc de la fractura.	 With that area of the fracture now set to its proper position and having stretched out as much as you can without burning yourself while holding the place where the fracture is, it's time for the cautery.
E aprop elongua te am envolucio del loc de la fractura un pauc, e mollifiqua la strictura petit a petit, entro que prenguas del loc sa una gran partida.	 With that area of the fracture enclosed with a few folds and having loosened it a little at a time until you can release all of its tension, it is finally time for cautery.
E aprop pren una autra benda e envolveys aquela autra veguada sobre le loc trenquat am envolucio, e aprop ve am las envolucios a la partida pus dejos de la fractura; e sia la tua operacio en la strictura de la envolucio e en mollificacio de aquela segon que havem dit en la envolucio primieyra desus.	 With one more fold and wrap it tightly around the fractured area, then remove all but a few of the folds from the fracture; and your operation will be in tightening up that area while loosening the others as you described earlier for this particular area.
E aprop pausa entre las volucios de stopa leon o drap am le qual sia engualada la tortuositat de la fractura, si en lu es tortuositat; e sino, no pauses en lu alcuna causa.	 With the folds between the two ends or strips around that area being as tightly wound as possible while ensuring it is smooth and without any wrinkles, if there are any; otherwise, you should not pause in applying pressure to this particular area.
E aprop pausa sobre lu autra benda, e aprop enguala sobre aquestas envolucios stelhas decentment faytas tantost, si en le loc no es imflacio o apostema caut, e lahoras pausa sobre lu aquo que sede le apostema aquel e que oste la imflacio; e layssa aquela per alcus jorns; e lahoras tu strenh sobre lu las stelhas.	 When you have already placed a cushion under the patient's thighs, another one on their legs and another on their chest while holding their hands, now comes the first sentence to translate: And place the second cushion gently above these blankets so that it covers both ends of them if there is no swelling or discharge in this area.
E sian las stelhas de la maytat de canna lada raza, e be formada saviament; o sian de fust de pi; o de ramps de palma ; e sia le ample de quascuna stelha segon aquesta forma e aquesta figura:	 The cushions of the mattress are to be made so that they have a certain thickness. Alternatively, you can form them out of felt or cloth. Or, if preferred, from palm leaves; and each cushion is to have its own width in proportion to this shape and size
Empero cove que la astelha que es pausada sobre aquela fractura sia pus grossa e pus lada un petit que las autras astelhas, e la longitut de la stela segon qu’es legut al membre en magnitut e parvitat; e aprop strenh sobre las astelhas am autra benda segon la tua primieyra strictura; e aprop lia desus am fiel decentment segon que havem dit de strictura, e es que sia la tua strictura segon le loc de la fractura mes, e quant mes es alonguat de la fractura, es mendre la strictura.	 However, the cushion placed on that fracture should be thicker and smaller than those of the others, as well as proportional in length to the size and width of the member being treated. And place them evenly over each other according to your first suggestion, keeping it firm as you've suggested; and let it remain firmly pressed against whatever is there at the time when treating that particular fracture, with its pressure gradually reduced along the way as the treatment progresses.
E cove que les fils sian migiers en grossesa e subtilitat, e sian de li mol; e si les fils so grosses, ayssi cum yeu he vist per la operacio de alcus fols pausantz les lors fils de cordas de li tort, e es error gran, quan catz la strictura fora equalitat.	 And the wires should be thinner and more delicate in both thickness and subtlety; as well as lighter if they are too heavy, so that during the operation of placing them over any tendons or ligaments it is necessary to gently stretch these strings separately from those of the hand, which can cause mistakes and incorrect positioning.
E eyssament fils subtils no so convenientz, quar tu no consaguiras per strictura am aquels aquo que voles, e no cove que entre astela e astela haja mens de un dit.	 When very small, they are not very comfortable to wear because you cannot tightly tighten them and there will be a space between one finger
E si le malaute es ledit per las extremitatz de las stelas aprop la strictura en les locs sas, lahoras pausa dejos aquelas de stopa leon o lana carmenada entro que aquo no li fassa lesio.	 If the patient is being treated in their extremities of the legs and arms, do not loosen the restraints too much because it could cause injury to them.
Alcunas veguadas fractura es am plagua, e accideys disrupcio en la codena, e yeu vindre am rememoracio en aquela en le capitol segon singularitat.	 Some breaks may be fractured and cause disruption in the dialogue, and you will remember it as a single entity.
E sapias que ges tot membre trencat no es streyt am stelhas al primier dia; la qual causa es quar le membre, quan es gran, no cove que pauses sobre lu stelhas sino aprop v dias o vii o mays, segon la tua seguratat de adveniment de apostema caut.	 If a member is broken and the cause is known, it should not be dressed with stitches from day one; rather, as it grows, you can remove them gradually over time or weeks depending on your safety concern for avoiding infection of wounds.
E aquesta es la manieyra dels emplaustres am les quals les Antics restauravan, les quals so pausatz sobre fractura e dislocacio e torcio.	 This refers to the plaster cast that ancient physicians used when fractures and dislocations occurred; they would be placed over a break or dislocation and twisted.
Manieyra de emplaustra comu abruejat de restaurament de fractura, convenient a motas compleccios e majorment a las femnas e als efantz, quar es de aquo sobre le qual no ventz calor ni freg: e es que prenguas de polvera de moli, e es la medula de la farina que pen deves le movement de la mola en las paretz del moli.	 The cast for fracture restoration is designed to be both rigid and flexible; it's more suitable for the hands, feet, and extremities because it does not cause heat or sweat, while allowing freedom of motion in the joints.
E comfeys aquel ayssi cum es, sino que cribelles aquel am album de huou, e pausa la comfeccio de lu no-spessa ni subtil; e aprop usa de aquela.	 When you use it this way, do not loosen its grip or flexibility, and leave the adjustable part unchanged to maintain its effectiveness.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre restaurant fractura e dislocacio e torcio: recipe de assafetida, de lapdanum, de acacia, de enula, e migrach, que es razit de milgraner salvage, de totz ana drac. x; de mirra e aloen ana drac. v; alochil ana drac. xx; totz sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian mesclatz am aygua alichil o am album de huou si la compleccio del malaute es scalfada; e aprop usa de aquest emplaustre, quar es de bona composicio e restaura les osses trencatz leugierament, e confereys a motz homes.	 Another method for broken bones and dislocations is to use acid or alkaline substances such as lapdunum (a type of linden fruit), acacia, enula, migrach, and more: these are remedies that help heal the wounds quickly. It should be applied immediately after the injury occurs; and in case the completeness of the patient's wound has been broken apart, it is appropriate to use this method because it provides a good composition with healing properties and restores the bones torn apart by accident.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre le qual comfereys a fractura e torcio: recipe migrach e met de altea blanca ana drac. x; de mirra e de aloen ana drac v; de acacia drac. vi; de bol armenic drac. .xx.	 Another method to use when fractures and dislocations occur is a mixture of migrach and white alum (potassium aluminum sulfate) applied with a pointed cautery, such as: apply the mixture to the fracture or dislocation by pressing gently on it using the pointed cautery; perform this action after applying the remedy immediately following the injury occurs.
Totz sian trissatz en mortier am mota contricio, e sian cribellatz, e sian comfitz am aygua o am album de huou e sia administrat.	 In case of wounds that are infected or have become contaminated with dirt and filth: wash the wound thoroughly by pouring water over it; after doing so, treat the wound using a remedy containing alum (potassium aluminum sulfate).
Manieyra de emplaustre a juncturas e osses separatz de lors locs, e seda dolor accident en aquels e a fissuras e fractaduras: sia presa lana sutza e sia submersa en vi agre e oli cuyt e sia pausat sobre le loc.	 A method to separate the joints and bones from one another is by using sutures or by submerging them in warm oil; also place a cushion over the area where it has occurred.
Mays en aquest emplastre no es vertut de restauracio, de apostema caut e expelleys dolors propriament.	 In this location, it is necessary to make a restoration of the incision, carefully stitching up and removing pains immediately.
Autra manieyra de emplastre que restaura os trancat: pren fuelas de figuier sort e fuelas de papaver salvatge; contereys tot e fay emplastre de lor.	 Another way to restore the incision which has been made: use fig leaves and wild poppy seeds; cover it all over, sealing up the incision
Manieyra de emplastre abreujat aministrat deves la restauracio de fractura de os e quan tu voles resolucio del romanent de apostema: recipe razitz de altea, de camamilla e flors de violes, de farina de ers, de totz ana partida i; sian totz trissatz e sian cofitz am vi, si·l membre no es scalfat.	 Another way to restore an incision that has broken open: take a piece of thread from another person and sew it up while covering with camomile flowers, violet flowers, and flour of iris, carefully making sure the member is not cut
Mays si es scalfat, lahoras comfeys aquel am aygua de coliandre humit o am aygua e usa de lu.	 If you have been cut, then soak that with cold water or any other liquid
Autra manieyra de emplastra pus fort en resolucio que aquest primier, quan accideys apostema dur deves la restauracio del membre: recipe de razitz de altea e de semensa de li, e de balaustia, e mellilot, majorana, flors de viol, de camamilla, de totz ana partida i engual; totz sian trissatz e sian cofitz am aygua de sauze o am aygua dousa o am vi, tot aquo segon la qualitat del membre e le repaus de la color de lu.	 Another way to restore the member when pain occurs after the first incision: use iris flowers and violet flowers, as well as poppy seeds, flax seed flour, and all the parts cut up; sew it together tightly and then cover with cold water or any other liquid, making sure that the quality of the member is not damaged
Mays Ypocras no diyssec en le sieu libre que sia pausat sobre le membre trenquat deves la restauracio de lu sino cerot fayt de cera e de oli e no autre causa; e recomtec que sia migier entre grossitut e subtilitat.	 Another way to restore the member when pain occurs after the first incision: you should leave a cushion over it, and not allow anything else to touch or press against it, except for oil, so that it is gentle between thickness and subtlety.
Mays a Gualia es vist que sian pausatz sobre le membre trencat deves la restauracio de lu e las causas en las quals es exsiccacio am petit de caliditat so ayssi cum mirra, enses e semblantz a lor de aquelas causas que havem recomtadas.	 "The bone is broken; its restoration and the causes that led to it drying out are being attended to by our experts.
Manieyra de emplastre que comfereys a lesio e dolor: recipe migat, de cezes, de pels de home inscizes o pena de auzel, e de altea, e sal, partidas enguals; sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian cofitz, e sia fayt emplastre.	 "The measures for the injury and pain: rest, cold compresses or ice packs to reduce swelling or discomfort, elevate the affected limb and cushion it with a pillow.
Mays la quantitat segon la qual cove que romangua la liadura e aprop sia disliada, es que consideres si no es accidit dolor ni pruziment ni le os es trencat no es maugut de son loc, lahoras tu no deslies de motz jorns.	 "If the wound has not caused pain or swelling and it is unlikely that any of your bones have been broken, then you do not need to rest for more than a day.
E si accideys al loc dolor vehement o prusiment o imflacio, lahoras tu te coyte o deslie aquel en la hora, e osta le emplastre de lu.	 "If there is severe pain or swelling at the site of injury, then you should seek medical attention immediately and apply a compress.
E pren drap de li e spongia marina leon humida, e submergeys aquela en aygua tebeza, e am aquela lava le loc entro que cesse aquel pruziment e la dolor sia sedada; e aprop layssa repausar le membre per una hora; e aprop pausa sobre lu lana sutza submersa en vi agre e oli o oli rozat, e lia sobre lu per una nuoyt entro que sias segur de apostema caut, e que repause la imflacio del membre, e sia remauguda la dolor de lu.	 "Soak a sponge in saltwater and place it on the inflamed area to reduce swelling; rest the affected limb for an hour; soak the bandage soaked with vinegar into water or oil and apply it to prevent further swelling, ensuring that you do not burn yourself.
E aprop itera aquela strictura subtil e emplastre petit e no·l strenhas per la tua constriccio primieyra, e subtilia am aquel entro que sia sanat.	 "Then gently and carefully apply a small bandage to the affected area without causing undue stress on your first aid kit; subtly adjust it so that it is comfortable.
E si vezes que le apostema e la rogor e la dolor e la imflacio e tots les accidentz ja so remaugutz de tot, e indigeysses de emplastre e de strictura, lahoras tu itera aquel ayssi cum has fayt al comensant engualment.	 When the swelling and pain become too severe to bear, and all other symptoms are gone, then your treatment should be a sharp incision.
E si no accideys al membre alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no deslies aquel sino aprop tres dias o quatre o v o vii; e alcunas veguadas tot aquo es layssat per xx dias segon que a tu appar per la desliadura del membre, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que la fractura adhereys, e se acosta a la coagulacio de la carn sobre aquel.	 If no cause is found for the swelling and pain mentioned above, then in three days or four you will not use that treatment anymore; but if fractures occur, you should approach coagulation of the flesh over that area.
E lahoras ajusta en la strictura mays que en la tua strictura primieyra tota, e ayusta en la engrossacio de la vianda del malaute, segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu.	 The doctor adjusts the incision in order to make it as large as possible, and also to increase the swelling of the patient's body after its first stricture has been done.
Mays si tu vezes le loc de la fractura ja desiccar e extenuar mays que no cove, lahoras sapias que·l nutriment es prohibit pervenir ad aquel; e donc embroca aquel am aygua tebeza deves tota veguada que delias aquel; e sia aquo en totz tres dias; e alleuja la strictura un petit, e per aquesta operacio corr al membre le nutriment, e es sanat leugierament.	 The nutrition is prohibited to prevent further fracture occurrences, and you must wrap the area tightly with tape until healing occurs in three days.
Mays aquo que fan les fols restauradors de la fractura del membre autra veguada quan no es restaurat al comensament, segon que cove, e es restaurat segon tortuositat, es error segon la operacio de lor, e temor gran, e si fos dreyturier aquo agrandit les Antics en lors libres e agueran am aquo obrat.	 The restoration of the fractured member must be done by restorers after another treatment if it is not restored at first attempt, and should continue until all tortuosities are dealt with; there will be error in healing second time through surgery, and great pain, as those who have undergone this procedure before can attest.
E yeu no he vist ad alcu de lor aquo far, per que es pus razonable que aquo no fassa.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
Capitol segon: De fractura quan accideys en le cap.	 If a fracture happens to the head
Las specias de fracturas son motas, e las figuras de lor son diversas, e las causas son distinctas, quar de fracturas alcuna es fayta per percussio de spaza, e la percussio osta tot le os entro al ciphac, le qual es dejos le os, ayssi cum fay ayssa en le fust, e per aquo aquesta specia es nompnada ascial; o la spaza inscideys alcuna partida del os, e inscideys la carn de lu e no passa la inscizio entro al derier de lu; e aquesta specia de fractura es nompnada levatio absoluta.	 Absolute fracture
E la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca, e de fractura que es contricio o atricio; e causa de lu es percussio am poyra o cazement sobre peyra, e a lor semblantz.	 The severity of these two fractures can be great or small, and the fracture that is crooked or twisted; and their cause is a blow to the bone or its vicinity, in accordance with tradition.
E aquesta fractura o es penetrant que ja apropinqua al pannicol le qual es dejos le os; o es en la facia del os, e la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca.	 This fracture may be a penetrating one near the nasal cavity where it is lodged in the bone; or it may be on the surface of the bone itself, and the severity of these two fractures can vary greatly.
E de fractura es que es ameguada en le os, en la subtilitat del cabel petita, e per aquo es nompnada aquesta specia fractura capillar.	 The fracture that is accompanied by a small needle in the bone is called capillary fracture.
E es fractura que es fayta o per cazement o per percussio de peyra e a lu semblantz, que fa intrar alcuna lamina del os a las partidas dedintz, e es fayta en le loc concavitat ayssi cum accideys als payroles de eram quan accideys a lor percussio e es partida de lor intrada a las partidas dedintz.	 The fracture that is caused by blow or pressure to the bone and its vicinity, which causes a thin lamina of tissue around it to tear off, so that it enters the cavity as when impact occurs and is torn out from the site
E majorment es fayt aquo en les cors de osses humitz, ayssi cum so caps de efantz.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, then seek medical help
E so a totas aquestas specias fracturas satagias, so son pessas ayssi cum stelhas separadas.	 And if there are fractures in any of these parts, they should be separated with care.
E yeu vindre am reremoracio de tot aquo en son loc.	 You must make the necessary arrangements for everything here
E conoyssem totas aquestas specias de fractura per deteccio sobre aquelas e per inquisicio de lor am tentas e ostament de carn corrumpuda que es sobre lor.	 All the fractures of these parts should be examined and tested to determine their cause, as well as searching for any evidence of corrupted flesh that may cover them.
E specia capillar es conoguda per aysso que es descubert sobre le os, e es abstergit, e linit sobre lu am tentha, quar la fractura appar negra.	 One specific capillary is used to find out what the cause of it was and remove any evidence of attempted healing where the fracture has already healed.
Mays en la curacio de fractura considera al comensament les accidentz del malaute, e lahoras si tu vezes per los accidentz que signifique per significacio manifesta sobre paor, ayssi cum es vomit de colera, e extencio, e perdement de entendament, e abscizio de votz, e sincopi, e febre acuta, e eyssiment dels huels e rogor de aquels, e semblantz a lor dels accidentz en las majors disposicios, ses dopte no es sanat.	 In the treatment of fractures, consider first the injuries that accompanied it, such as bruises or cuts, and any other symptoms like vomiting or loss of consciousness, as well as sudden illness and dizziness from them, and numbness in certain areas, as well as any other accidents occurring simultaneously with it, and look for these symptoms together.
E si vezes accidentz no-correntz tu speras salut, lahoras tu comensa la curacio de lu.	 If there are no injuries or cuts that accompany the fracture, you should start treating the injury right away.
La qual causa es quar si es vengut a tu le plaguat en le comensament cum es plaguat e aquo es en les dias de ivern, lahoras cove que tu studias en le ostament del os denant le dia xiiii segon tota disposicio.	 The cause is what if you find the injury in its first days and this happens during winter months, then consider studying it from morning to evening on that day and every other day for a total of 14 days.
E si es en les dias d’estiu, lahoras cove que te coytes ostar le os denant le vii dia, habantz que aquo que es dejos le os sia corromput del pannicol, e que accidescan les accidentz que havem recomtatz.	 When it is hot outside and the pain strikes one day after eating oily food, you must ensure that its cause has been cured completely and look for any accidents which may have occurred during this time
E si la fractura ja es pervenguda al pannicol cubrent le cervel, e es am partidas menudas e atricio, lahoras cove que inscidas la partida conminuta e atrita, segon que yeu recomtare a tu.	 If the fracture has been caused by the gallbladder entering through the colon, and is accompanied by small and frequent bowel movements, doctors advise to examine thoroughly and find any accidents that may have occurred during this time.
E es que tu razas le cap del malaute plaguat, e descuebres sobre le os segon costuma e manieyra a tu possible segon la figura de la plagua, e que sia leugier sobre le malaute.	 If you suspect the gallbladder is causing problems and examine the abdomen thoroughly as well as look for any ulcers or other signs of an ulcer on the body, it would be wise to consult with doctors about this matter.
E si accideys a tu deves la deteccio del os, fluxs de sanc o apostema caut, lahora tu te oppausa a lu am aquo que cove, e es que huemplas le loc de draps infuzes en vi e oli rozat, e fassa repausar la plagua entro que sia sedat le apostema, e sies segur de fluxs del sanc; e aprop comensa en la circuicio del os e en la ablatio de lu.	 If you suspect appendicitis may be causing the symptoms or pain, take a rest and look for signs of fluid accumulation in the abdomen and around the gallbladder, also make sure to prevent fluid from coming out while the gallbladder is swelling down by taking rest as well as ensuring that the pain has been reduced enough.
E aquo sia segon una de dos manieyras de operacio.	 This would be one of two options for surgery.
E la una manieyra es que tu inscidas le os am inscisori de streyt tal, e aquesta es la forma de lu: E aprop administra un autre inscissori aquest, un pauc pus lat que aquel; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	 The first option is to cut into the abdomen and perform a laparoscopic cholecystectomy, which includes making a small incision below it. Another way is to make an incision above it as well.
E aprop administra mays le inscissori pus lat que·l segon.	 The servant brings a second cushion
E cove que sia deves tu nombre de inscissoris diverses, dels quals alcus so pus latz que alcus autres; e alcus de lor so pus breus que·ls autres e sian en le derier de acuitat de las suas extremitatz, e sian de ferr indi o felod.	 The servant will take you to various cushions of different hardness, which are placed at the edge of your bed, and they must be soft enough for others who may sleep there as well
E usa de lor am facilitat en percussio sobre le inscissori per so que no concutesca le cap e leda aquel.	 The servant will use a pillow made of soft fabric to prevent the head from touching or being injured by the cushion.
E si le os es fort, dur, lahoras cove que perfores en le circuit de lu denant que tu administres los inscissoris am les taravels, les quals so nomnatz taravels no-profundantz.	 If the cushion is too firm or tough to administer in a manner that does not allow for administering of other cushions during your stay, then they are called shallow cushions.
E no so nomnatz ayssi sino quar aquels no pausan le terme de l’os del test ad aquo que es aprop lu, per so quar al taravel es redonda extremitat o marge sobre aquel que es dejos le cap de lu agut semblant a marge o a cercle petit, le qual prohibeys esser submergit e passar la spissitut del os.	 The cushions are not called shallow but rather those that do not allow for the insertion of one's foot into their cavity or margin in such a way as to prevent it from passing through them and being swallowed up by the bowels.
E es convenient que tu prenguas de aquestz taravels gran nombre dels quals quascu convenesca a la spicitut de quascun os, entro que sia a tu present en tottz testz del cervel la extremitat del qual sia aguda, la quantitat en longitut e brevitat sia segon la quantitat de spicitut de aquest test.	 It is advisable to choose from a large number of cushions that cater to the size and shape of each individual anus, so if you are in front of a testicle with an acutely pointed tip, the length and width should be adjusted based on its level of spiciness.
E aquesta es la forma de tres specias de teravels: La qualitat de perforar en le circuit del os trencat es que pauses le teravel sobre le os e revolvas aquel am les tieus ditz entro que sapias que l’os ja es penetrat; e aprop permuda le terevel ad autre loc, e pausa aquo que es entre tot trauc la quantitat de la grosseza del ray o enviro aquo.	 The three types of cushions are: Perforating the broken anus is to place a cushion over it and press down firmly until you know that the anus has been penetrated; in addition, allow another location for when needed, between which all of its bulk will be inserted.
E aprop inscideys am inscissoris aquo que es entre quascun trauc del os, e fay aquel pus subtil que podes sobre aquo en fi de levitat, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que erradiques le os, o am la tua ma, o am alcuna autra causa per alcus sturmentz les quals auras apparelhatz ad aquo, ayssi cum tanalhas e forceps subtils.	 When the opening between a patient's thighs is complete and you have made them comfortable with cushions, place your hand over their abdomen to prevent any spillage, or if there are any other causes for concern that require attention near here, use fine tweezers.
E cove que tu guardes am tota cautela que l’inscissori no toque alcuna causa del ciphac.	 Be very careful not to touch anything that could cause harm.
E donc cum auras circuit le os perforan, e sira separat del ciphac si es continuat am lu, e auras aquel extrayt, cove que razas e enguales aquel en la asperitat de lu de aquo que es en le os am autra sturment semblant a inscissori, mays empero cove que sia pus teon e pus subtil que les autres inscissoris.	 When you have completed the incision and it is separated from the cavity if there was any, you will remove that, be careful not to touch anything else similar in shape or size near the opening of the abdomen area as well.
E si roman alcuna partida dels osses petitz e satagias, lahoras pren aquela am facilitat am aquo que es deves tu dels sturmentz; e aprop aquo cura la plagua am lichinis e enguentz les quals havem ditz.	 If you encounter no difficulty in removing the bones or ribs and they are easily taken, then place them gently on a cloth as directed.
E l’autra manieyra de operacio es leugiera, longinqua de paor, la qual diyssec Gualia e la lauzec per gran lausor; e aquest es le sermo de lu: necessari es a tu en le comensament que comenses descobrir la partida del os del loc en le qual es la fractura pus vehement e pus manifesta, entro que quan auras descubert aquela partida e auras pausat dejos lu la extremitat de aquest inscissori lent e alegre del qual aquesta es la forma:	 The other procedure is easier and less frightening. It consists of making a small incision in the location where you suspect the fracture to be, and then when it has been opened and closed, place your hand gently over their limb as directed.
E es que la partida lenticular es leon e no inscideys alcuna causa, e la partida aguda es de lu en dos latz avantz en longitut, ayssi cum vezes; que la partida lenticular sia ajustada al ciphac am la facia de lu inscident aguda en le os.	 If the small incision is successful and no complications occur, and if you suspect that it was at the top of the limb as directed, then adjust your smaller incision to match the one made in the abdomen area.
E aprop percuteys sobre le inscissori de una partida am un petit malhet entro que inscidas tot le os am facilitat ayssi cum es revolvut, e tu sias segur del pannicol que no accida en lu accident que temas en denguna manieyra, e si le medicant14 era le pus fol de totz les homes e le mays ignorant de lor; certament, e si era dorment.	 When you have opened up the space between the thighs of a patient and placed a cushion underneath them, another attendant is positioned on their legs, and another is located on their chest holding their hands, ready to assist in any way necessary as they wake up from being sedated.
Lahoras si romania alcuna causa annexa al os del pannicol en alcus locs de os, inscidira aquel de lu am la extremitat del inscissori aquel lenticular, e deliuraria aquel de lu am facilitat, quar es deliurat de lu ses nocument e ses paor.	 There should be no additional causes for the pain in the limbs, except for that of an inguinal hernia near the femoral region, or any other location on one of the legs, which would cause pain from the relief and warmth applied to facilitate movement and circulation.
E si fractura del os no penetra entro al pannicol, e aquo que es abscidit o es ostat del os es la facia de lu, e roman en lu asperitat e satagias subtils, lahoras cove que razas aquela asperitat e erradiques aquelas satagias am razoris subtils per les quals tu has preparat le nombre, de diversas quantitatz per que sia a tu possible administrar de aquels en tot loc les pus convenientz de lor e le pus dreyt de aquels segon aquo en que te perduzeys la tua operacio aquel os trencat e la figura de lu.	 If the pain is not caused by an inguinal hernia near the femoral region, then this may be a result of that which has been removed or replaced with artificial substitutes in its place, and these are applied gently and discreetly to facilitate movement and circulation.
E cove que administres en la tua razio am la qual razes le os al comensament le pus lat de aquels razoris, e aprop usa aprop lu del pus subtil de lu, e no cesses far aquo segon continuitat entro que pervenguas ad aministrar le pus teon e·l pus subtil de totz aquels.	 When administering the medication to begin with the most gradual phase of these medications, and be sure to use the least subtle part first, ensuring that you do not cease doing so until all phases are complete.
Mays en quascuna de las autras fracturas petitas capillars e fractura subtil, cove que administres cura segon aquo que perduseys ad rectificacio de lu.	 With any of the other small capillary fractures or subtle fractures, you should administer the treatment as soon as possible after the correction has been made.
E es causa que no es ameguada sobre totz les quals han studi en aquela art.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body
E stec sobre aquo que nos scriut havem mostrat en grans fracturas.	 And it is customary to show fractures in large breaks.
E si le pannicol es retangut quan tu erradiques le os, lahoras cove que prenguas drap de li segon la quantitat de la plagua, e submergeys aquel en oli rozat, e pausa aquel sobre le orrifici de la plagua; e aprop pren autre drap doblat o triplicat e submergeys lu en vi e oli rozat e pausa aquel sobre drap prim e fay aquo al pus leugierament que podes sobre aquel, que no graves le ciphac; e aprop administra sobre aquel liament lat, e no strenhas aquel sino per quantitat que tengua la plagua tant solament.	 If the patient has a hernia, it is customary to place another bandage over the area and hold their hand over the abdomen to prevent the intestine from coming out.
E layssa aquel am aquesta cura per un dia o per dos entro que sias segur de apostema caut; e aprop deslia aquel e aprop aministra medicinas am las quals es superflua siccitat, ayssi cum razitz de lin e farina de errs, e polvera de enses e de aristologia, e de semblantz ad aquels.	 Do this cure for a day or two until you are sure to prevent pain; and then remove it and give them the necessary medicines such as those made from flaxseed and barley flour, along with mustard oil, and all these and their kind, in order that they may help heal.
E es que tu fassas de aquestas medicinas polvera que sia pulverizada sobre la plagua, ayssi cum son secas; e universalment, administra en aquel tota medicina de proprietat de la qual es que abstergesca e no mordique.	 Do you want the medicine to be sprinkled on the wound as well?
E guarda te segon la tua vertut que la plagua en la tua curacio sia neta; e no sia en lu surdicia de enguent ni autra; ni no layssas agreguar virulencia en lu; quar quan es ajustada sobre le pannicol del cervel, corromp aquel e poyreys aquel, e accideys sobre le malaute aprop aquo malicia maligna.	 Be sure to keep the wound clean during your care for it; and do not add any harmful substances or viruses; nor should you be adding more virulence into it; when adjusted over the hernia of the belly, cover it with a bandage that is good enough and prevent it from falling out, and apply on top a bad malicious illness.
E accideys en le ciphac del cap, cum de lu es mondificat le os e majorment quan es menspresada la cura de lu, e es negror en la superficia de lu; e donc considera lahoras si accideys al malaute les accidentz que havem ditz, sapias que es parnicios ses tot dopte.	 When the abscess of the head appears, if its symptoms are felt and experienced by the treatment given to it, it is darker in color than any other spot; therefore consider that these pains are very dangerous.
E si no accideys negror sino de la medicina que es pausada desus, e es en vertut de aquela medicina que fassa aquela negror, lahoras cove que tu prenguas de mel una partida e de oli rozat partidas iii, e am aquels linieys un drap, e aprop pausa aquel sobre le ciphac; e aprop cura aquel am las specias de curacio que conveneys entro que sia sanat.	 If the abscess does not become darker or if its treatment is interrupted and it returns to being lighter in color, consider that you must apply heat regularly every three hours, and cover with a cloth over the abscess; and maintain care for the specific area of treatment until he becomes healthy
Capitol .iii.	 And so on
De restauracio del nas quan es trincat.	 When the nose is broken
Sapias que no es trencat del nas sino doas partidas ensemps pus sobiranas, o una de aquelas alcunas veguadas, per so quar en lu has dos osses, quar la partida dejos es cartillaginosa, e no es trencada e no accideys a lu sino atricio e tortuositat e sinuitat.	 If it is not broken in the nose but rather happens twice, and one of them may be caused by something stuck inside (such as a piece of food), for which you need to remove both the obstruction and prevent further complications such as pain, difficulty breathing, and vomiting.
Mays si es trencada la una de las doas partidas de lu, lahoras cove que tu intrometas le dit petit en le sieu nas, e que engualhas aquela fractura dedintz am le tieu dit indic, e am le dit pous defora, entro que retorne le nas segon la sua figura natural.	 If one of the two parts is broken and you manage to insert a small object into the nose, so that it touches the bone inside (such as a toothpick), and hold this position until the nose returns to its normal shape.
E sia fayt aquo per tu am facilitat, e guarda te que no caja per aquela tua operacio sobre le malaute delor.	 Do this for your own convenience, but remember not to touch it while performing an operation on a patient.
E si la fractura es en la pus sobirana partida del nas, e le dit no perve ad aquela, lahoras cove que sia equat am la extremitat del ray en le qual sia petita grossitut.	 When a fracture is at the top of the nose and it goes down to that point, then doctors call it a greenstick fracture.
E si la fractura es en doas partidas, lahoras tu fay le semblant de aquo.	 If it's a double fracture, they say something like this:
E coyta te am restauracio de lu en le primier dia de la fractura, si es possible; e sino, lahoras aprop le vii o·l x deves le repaus del apostema caut.	 After the first day of a fracture if it is possible to do so:
E aprop entromet en la extremitat del nas una meca de drap de li, si la fractura es en una partida, o metz doas calguas, si la fractura es en doas partidas, e sia en la calgua grossitut de tanta quantitat que umpla le trauc del nas.	 If the fracture is in one part of the nose or if it's a double fracture and large enough to block the nasal passage.
E diysso alcus dels antics restauradors que las calguas sian enfundudas en boder, e sian permudadas en tot dia, mays no es vist a mi; habantz cove que la meca sia enfunduda en album de huou comfit am polvera de moli; e aprop layssa la qualgua entro que l’os sia fermat e sia endurazida la cartillage.	 The ancient restorers say that the bandages should be soaked in water, and changed every day if they are swollen, but you can also keep them moist with a compress of cotton wool.
E alcunas veguadas sia entromes en le nas, en loc de calgua, pena de auca pus que es envolopada de drap de li leon; e sia que ja te la fractura del nas pus vehement e que le malaute no sia prohibit de inspiracio.	 Some gauze should be inserted into the nose in place of a bandage to prevent any loose cloth from being stuffed up there, and it is also recommended that you not inspire deeply while having a broken nose as this could make breathing difficult.
E aquesta causa no es a tu necessaria; e si voles, fay aquo, e si voles, fay calguas.	 However, if necessary, have them anyway and if desired, use gauze.
E si accideys autra veguada apostema caut, emplastra le nas am cerot o am coto enfus en vi agre e oli rozat, o am diaquilon.	 If any other kind of bandage is required to be inserted into the nasal cavity, it can either be inserted through a nostril or by having an incision made and oil poured in, depending on preference.
Mays si no accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que emplaustres aquel defora am farina de sizami e am polvera de enses cofitz am album de huou; e aprop pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e no lies le nas am alcuna causa.	 When a patient's bowels stop working properly and the body is covered in excrement, it is customary to apply oil made from sesame seeds and pepper to prevent such cases of inflammation on the outside of the anus, and not let the nose be affected by any cause.
Mays si so trencats les osses del nas am fractura petita o so conminuitz, lahoras cove que scindas sobre aquels, e extraguas aquels am insturmentz que conveno ad aquels; e aprop cos la scissura, e cura aquela am aquo que encarna e consolida, e am emplastres ad aquo convenientz.	 If the bones of the nose are broken or there is a small fracture, doctors will cut them and extract what they contain, using an instrument for that purpose; then close it with oil to bind up the wound
E si accideys plagua dedintz le nas, lahoras cove que cures aquela am calguas e administra canulas de plom entro que sia de tot sanat.	 If a patient has a bleeding nose, doctors will treat that by applying cold water and using tubes of lead to stop the bleeding.
Capitol .iiii.	 This sentence does not make sense in English because "capital" is an adjective meaning important or significant, but there are no nouns following it that would provide further context for its use as a noun.
De restauracio de la mandibula quan es trincada.	 When the lower jaw is broken
Quan la mandibula dejos es rompuda e la fractura de lu no es am plagua, reguarda lahoras si la fractura es deforas tant solament, e no es trencada en dos e es curvada a las partidas dedintz, lahoras la sua cognicio es leugiera.	 When the lower jaw is broken and the fracture is not too severe, doctors will have it fixed as soon as possible, without splitting it in half and straightening its ends.
E cove donc, si la fractura es en la part dreyta, que tu intrometas le tieu indic senestre en la boca del malaute; e semblantment si la fractura es an la mandibula senestra, lahoras intromet le dit indic de la ma dreyta; e impelleys am aquel la gilbositat de la fractura dedintz am facilitat a las partidas defora, am la tua autra ma de la partida defora del os; am aquel decentment equa aquelam.	 In both cases, if the fracture is on the right side of the mouth, you should tell them to insert a small stick into their right ear; and similarly if it's on the left side of the jaw, doctors will ask for that same sign from your left hand. Then they tie up the mouth in order to facilitate its treatment, making sure not to do harm to either part.
E si la fractura de la mandibula ja es separada en doas, lahoras cove que administres extensio de doas partz segon rectitut entro que sia possibla la equacio de lu.	 When a fracture of the mandible is separated into two parts and doctors administer extensions to both sides in order to allow for its reduction?
E si accideys conmocio de dentz a disrupcio, lahoras strenh aquelas de las quals speras que romandran am fil de aur o de argent o de ceda; e aprop pausa sobre la mandibula trencada cerot, e aprop pausa sobre lu drap duplicat, e pausa sobre le drap gran stelha decentment fayta, o una pessa de sola engual a la longitut de la mandibula; e aprop lia aquela desus segon que a tu es apparelhada la liadura de lu e que conveneys la applicacio, entro que no es destruida.	 When a concussion of the teeth disrupts chewing and doctors strengthen those that can be removed by gold or silver or iron; then place a restraint over the fractured jaw bone, another on the duplicate jaw strap, one over a large cloth to prevent it from being torn away, or if necessary only use one at the length of the mandible; and then apply this in such a way that you put your hand on the side where the dislocation took place, and arrange the application
E comanda al malaute que use de repaus e tranquilitat, e pausa la vianda de lu sorbicios leons.	 Command the patient to use rest and tranquility, and pause swallowing of food.
E si extimas que ja es alterada la figura en alcuna manieyra, lahoras tu te coyta e deslia aquel al tertz dia; e aprop rectifica aquo que ja es alterat de lu e emplaustra aquel am polvera de moli, am album de huou, o am farina de cisami, pus que tu auras ostat le cerot de lu, e pausa sobre le emplastra lana leon.	 If the form is altered in any way, then put it down on the third day; and correct this alteration of his clothing by placing a small piece of wool, or cotton album, or flour for rice paste over the cloth sores.
E adonc cum sta annex e ajustat aquel emplastre sobre lu, e la disposicio del os no es alterada, layssa aquel, que no le deslies entro que sia sanat e strenh la fractura; quar motas veguadas aquesta fractura es streyta en tres sempmanas.	 After putting the cloth on him and ensuring there is no alteration in its placement, let it be, so that this fracture may be healed within three days.
E si autra veguada accida apostema caut, lahoras administra aquo que havem dit motas veguadas en la sedacio de lu entro que sia sanat, e sia remaugut aquel apostema.	 If any other illness occurs at the same time, doctors administer this so that he is healthy and cured of this ailment.
E si la fractura es am plagua, lahoras considera si es pessa del os separada o satagias, lahoras tu te subtilia que ostes aquelas satagias am aquo que conveneys ad aquo en la remocio de aquelas dels sturmentz.	 When a fracture is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body and pain occurs in the feet, doctors consider separating it or cauterizing it, they gently advise you to open those satagias here where this happens and then close them at the end of the treatment
E si le orrifici de la plagua es streyt, lahoras tu le amplifique am le fleubotomi segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	 If the rupture is severe, doctors recommend intensifying it with phlebotomy based on the amount of need for treatment
E aprop quan tu auras ostat aquelas satagias, e de aquelas no sira remaugut re, lahoras tu cos le orrifici de la plagua si es ampla; e sino, pausa sobre aquela un dels emplaustres que conveneysso ad aquo e encarnan aquela, entro que sia sanada.	 When you have opened those satagias and all of them are not completely closed, doctors recommend cauterizing the rupture if it is wide; otherwise, put a poultice on that one of the dressings covers up to prevent further damage until it is healed.
Capitol .v.	 I'm sorry, but I cannot provide any further assistance with this text as its meaning and translation seem unclear or incorrect based on my knowledge of these languages.
De restauracio de la furcula quan es trinquada.	 When the clavicle is fractured.
Motas veguadas es trencada la furcula de la partida denant deves le muscle, e aquela fractura es fayta en una de tres manieyras.	 Damaged tendons may tear the clavicle on impact and this fracture can be treated in one of three ways.
Quar o es trencada, o seperada, o es seperada en doas partz otra que no accidan satagias; e es leugier a la restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que accideysso en lu satagias, e es dificil a restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que la fractura es am plagua.	 If torn or separated, it may be treated separately with sutures if the two parts can be held together by tissue, and this is recommended for healing. Alternatively, if they cannot be held together, it will require surgery to repair them; or thirdly, in case of severe damage that requires both parts to be removed, it must also be repaired surgically.
E la operacio en aquela, quan la fractura es ses plagua, es que tu fassas esser present dos ministres, per so que la un tengua le adjutori e siegua la furcula trencada, e l’autre extenda le col ves aquela partida.	 When the fracture is severe enough that it requires surgery, you should make two ministers present in order to have one assist with holding the broken rib down and the other extend on top of the wound so as to prevent any further damage
E aprop enguala la fractura am les tieus ditz entro que sia fayta la forma de lu segon que cove, e no sia en lu eminencia pauca ni concavitat.	 After placing a cushion beneath them and positioning another on their legs, the patient should have both hands held by a minister so that one can assist in holding down the broken rib while the other extends towards the wound to prevent further damage.
E si indigeysses mes de extencio, lahoras cove que pauses dejos le titillic del malaute spera de drap o de lana, e sia la grandesa de lu segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat; e exten e eleva la furcula e coarta la spera am la tua ma entro que enguales la frectura segon que cove.	 If the severity necessitates a second minister, you should gently place a blanket or cloth on their chest and adjust it to the size required based on your assessment of need; then extend and lift the rib downwards towards the wound so as to hold it down securely while preventing further damage.
E si no podes atirar la extremitat de la furcula a las partidas defora, per so quar es pervenguda al preon, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e pauses sobre le muscle de lu un coyssi migier en grandeza.	 If you cannot place one hand on the broken rib and another above it to avoid injury in passing by, the patient should lie flat on their back with a minister placed under their elbow to support them gently while they are being passed over.
E le ministre prema le muscle de lu a las partidas dejos entro que l’os de la furcula sia elevat que es en le preon en sus, e lahoras tu rectifique la fractura e enguala aquela am les tieus ditz.	 The minister should place their hand on the patient's shoulder to support them as they pass by; afterwards you will correct and hold down the fracture.
Mays si sentes satagias de la furcula e so maugudas, lahoras cove que fendes sobre aquela e extraguas aquelas satagias am facilitat.	 If you feel a lump on the rib and suspect that it might be a tumor, have them lie flat to ease their discomfort while you attend to removing any lumps with great care and precision.
E si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu ingenia inscisio de lu am un dels inscissoris les quals has apparelhatz ad aquo, pus que havias pausat dejos la furcula le sturment que serve le ciphac; e es sturment de fust o de ferr del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	 "If the patient vomits while undergoing treatment with a laxative, then you should quickly insert an enema of one of the solutions that have been applied to this, and make sure it is in the small intestine. The purpose here is either to remove or kill whatever has caused the fistula; and doing so will be necessary for curing.
E es semblant a culier del qual aquesta es la concavitat; e sia la sua latitut segon aquo que has necessitat de lu, segon la grandeza del os o la pauqueza de lu.	 "It is similar to ulcers that form in this manner, and for which there is need of him, the great size or scarcity of his bowels.
Mays la longitut de lu sia segon que es a tu possible a la operacio; que haja doas extremitatz ayssi cum vezes, e la una extremitat sia ample e l’autre streyta.	 "The length may be shorter than the operation is possible; and if both extremities are affected equally, or one extremity is more extensive than the other.
E si la disrupcio de la plagua la qual has inscidida quan has extraytas la satagia del os es ampla, e yest segur de apostema caut, lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura.	 "If the rupture of the sac that you have opened when removing the appendix is extensive, and you are sure it is necessary to close two or more layers of the sac with sutures.
E si la disrupcio es pauca, o temes apostema caut, lahoras tu uemple la plagua am draps e pulvils segon la quantitat de la scissura de la plagua.	 "If the rupture is small or you are not sure whether to close with sutures, then you should cover and sprinkle powders over the incision according to the amount of tear in the sac.
E si accideys apostema caut, lahoras infon drap en vi agre e oli rozat e vi, e pausa sobre aquel.	 "If you decide to close with sutures, then apply a wet dressing and oil or powder over it, and place something over that.
Mays la strictura del os quan es ses plagua e ses seccio, es que pauses emplastre fayt de farina de moli am album de huou, e pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e aprop pausa la spera dejos le titillic de lu, si indigeyssas de aquela, e aprop pren humemate, so es torca la qual teno les Sarrazis , que sia mot longua, e sia latitut de lu de un palm o entorn aquel; e aprop pausa pulvils duplicatz sobre la stopa e l’emplastre; e aprop pren una stela de taula subtil de la qual la latitut d’ela sia de tres ditz e en longitut semblantment; e aprop envolopa aquela en drap, e aprop envolopa aquel drap am la stela en lo loc sobre le loc de la fractura; e aprop pausa humemati ayssi cum es revout, e revol aquela sobre le col de lu e dejos le titillic de lu sa e dejos le titillic de lu malaute, e reduzeys aquela sobre tota partida, e quan vezes que la strictura de la fractura am strictura descent, e es aquo que no es occultat sobre tu.	 "The closure of the sac when its membrane and sections are separated is to apply a powder from white flour mixed with albumen over it, place something over that, and then apply a fine mesh over this too.
E tot, que no sia mauguda la stelha desobre le os trencat; e per so cove que tu vejas le malaute quascun dia, que quan le liament es mollificat o vezas la stela ja esser remauguda, lahoras tu rectifica aquo e strenh la liadura.	 When the tooth has been broken open and you want to see inside the patient's mouth, if when it is softened or when a stone is removed from the tablet already, then the doctor corrects this and straightens his jaw
E aprop pausa le dormir del malaute sobre le col de lu, e pausa dejos le titillic de lu deves le dormir de lu en la nueyt un petit coyssi; per so que am aquel sia elevat le adjutori de lu del latz de aquel, e donc es elevada la la fractura de la furcula a elevacio del muscle; o sia le bras de lu liat al col de aquel.	 Then place the pillow on the patient's collarbone and above their chest, so that both will be elevated by an assistant from below them. And then raise the fracture of the hyoid bone to elevation of the muscles; or if you have hands available, they can hold their collar as well.
E no deslies le liament si no accideys en le loc prusiment o apostema, entro a xii dias.	 If there is not bleeding from the location mentioned above or below, then within 12 days
E aprop renovelha le emplastre si has vista la facia de lu ad aquo, e ajusta en la strictura e restaura aquel e layssa entro que sia restaurat e sia coagulat la fractura de la furcula.	 If you see the injury to that area and adjust it by tightening and restoring that part, then leave it in place while ensuring it is restored and has clots formed for the fracture of the hyoid bone.
E es strenguda e comfortada segon le mes en xxviii dias, e alcunas veguadas en alcus homes es fayt en mens de temps de aquel.	 It becomes harder to breathe after 28 days, and sometimes people are sick from lack of air in those days.
Capitol .vi.	 Capitulation .viii
De restauracio de fractura de la spalla.	 Restoration of the fracture of the shoulder.
Spatula tart es trencada en le loc lat de lu e no so trencatz de lu sino les marges.	 The spatula has been broken in that location and cannot be removed, but can only be trimmed off its edges.
E donc quan es trencat le loc de lu — e es trencat en le mieg loc de lu — e no es conogut sino per tocament, lahoras segon que es la figura de la fractura sforsa te la preparacio de lu e reduzir aquela segon la figura natural en tota manieyra de engen la qual es a tu possible.	 When the place of it is torn - and when the seat of it is torn - if you do not know, but by touch alone, then the pain second that it is the fracture itself which prepares for this and reduces to the natural figure in every way as long as it is within your power.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc polvera de moli am album de huou e stopa leon; e aprop pausa pulvil de drap duplicat; e aprop pausa sobre lu stela lada de taula subtil segon la quantitat de la spatula tota o mays un pauc.	 Put a cushion under the patient's buttocks and put another one on their lower back, and place another one over the table gently in proportion to the size of the spatula completely or more than a few.
Mays si dejos la stela es concavitat en alcu dels locs de la spatula, lahoras tu enguala aquela concavitat am stopa leon, e aprop pueja la stela segon equalitat.	 If the spatula's place is concave and on the cushion of the back, then you will fill that concave space with a finger, and put it over as an even proportion.
E aprop strenh desus am humemati longua ab constriccio decent e am fermesa de la stela entro que no sia remauguda del sieu loc.	 Make the arm movement gently against the body's wall, and firmly press down on the spatula until it is not raised from its place.
E considera le liament en quascun dia; e totas veguadas que sia mollificat, lia autra veguada e stren le e equa la stela si es remauguda del sieu loc.	 Consider the movement daily; and all ways that it is softened, another way to do it gently, press down firmly on the spatula if it is raised from its place
E jagua le malaute sobre le sieu latz sa.	 Place the patient's back flat.
E la spatula es restaurada en xx dias o en .xxv.	 The spatula will be restored in 20 days or less than that time
E donc quan es complit aquest nombre, lahoras tu dissolveys le liament, e que tu scias ensegurat quar aquela es dels osses dels quals la cominicio no es temuda ni lor dissolucio.	 When you have completed this number of movements, then the pain will be dissolved and you shall know that it is from the bones whose beginning was not to be feared or dissolve away.
E si procezeys del loc del os pessa e pongeys dejos la codena, lahoras tu scindeys sobre lu, e osta le, e fay segon que havem dit en la fractura de la furcula de sadacio de apostema caut si accideys aqui.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
Capitol .vii.	 Section seven of book one.
De restauracio de la fractura del pietz.	 Restoration of the fracture of the chest.
Le pietz alcunas veguadas es romput en le mieg loc de lu e aquo tart endeve; mays las extremitatz de lu mot endeve que so ciccadas e comminuidas.	 The ribs may be pulled out from their place and broken, causing great damage to the extremities of the body, which should be treated with care and urgency.
E dels accidentz de lu quan es trencat le mieg de lu es que declina a las partidas dedintz e accideys a lu gran dolor, e dificultat en lo hale, e tos, e fort leu e vomeys sanc; e es declarada en lu cavitat en le os trencat e no es occulta al sentiment.	 Accidents involving the breaking of their ribcage may result in great pain and difficulty breathing, weakness, fatigue, severe low blood pressure, and may also lead to fainting spells; this is declared at the site where the ribcage was broken and not hidden from sight.
E la restauracio de lu es que sia resupinat le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa entre las spallas de lu un coyssi; e aprop prem als muscles de lu, e ajusta las costas de lu am las mas de dos costatz, e subtilia te en la operacio de lu e en la equacio segon tota manieyra que es ad aquo possibla e que conveneys ad aquo, entro que retorne la figura del os segon que cove.	 The restoration of it is that the patient should be placed on their back and a cushion between their legs; and gently press the muscles of them, adjust the spine to support the most prominent two ribs, and pay close attention in the operation and balance throughout any movement that may occur during or after this.
E aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e estopa e pausa desobre astela de taula subtil de sauze o de caligi e de a lor semblantz en levitat, pus que tu envolopas aquela en drap; e aprop subtilia te en lian aquela sobre le os trencat que no sia maugut; e vay am liadura segon retonditat al dors alcunas veguadas, e strenh aquel am strictura decent; e aprop considera la liadura en tota hora, e quan es mollificada strenh aquela.	 After placing them on their back and a cushion between their legs gently press the muscles of them, straighten the spine to support the most prominent two ribs, and pay close attention in the operation and balance throughout any movement that may occur during or after this; place it gently over the fractured area so as not to be blunt.
E si necessitat provoca a desliament de aquela deves corrossio o pruziment, o dolor, o apostema que accideysso en le loc, lahoras tu coyta e deslia aquela e erradica le emplastre e rectifique aquo que accideys per aquo am manieyra de curacio de lu; e aprop reduzeys le emplastre, si vezes ad aquo la facia; e ajusta a lu strictura entro que sia sanat.	 When joints cause pain due to cold humors that spread throughout the body, and when there is pain in the feet, it is customary for doctors to call this gout.
Capitol .viii.	 And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery.
De restauracio de las costas quan son trincadas.	 When the backs are damaged.
Sapias que fractura de las costas no catz sino en locs grosses que siegon le dos; e de las extremitatz de lor de la partida denant no accideys ad aquelas contricio sino per aquo quar so cartillaginosas.	 If the fractures occur in parts of the body other than those mentioned, then they do not cause damage to both sides but rather only to one side; and the extremities from being affected by this are protected because they can be protected with a shield.
E cognicio de lu no es amaguada al sentiment deves la inquisicio de lu am les ditz.	 And knowing about him does not mean you have forgotten to ask questions of him, the details.
E la restauracio sia ayssi que enguales la fractura am les ditz segon la manieyra possibla, entro que sia engulhat segon que cove, e aprop emplastre e strenh le os trencat am stela, si indigeys de aquel.	 The restoration should also include breaking the bones in two if possible and placing them inside a splint to support their fracture until they can be healed by another method, if necessary.
E si la fractura de las costas es declinant a las partidas dedintz, lahoras accideys al malaute dolor vehement e punctura, ayssi cum punctura que accideys ad aquel que ha pleureci, e per aquo quar le os ponh le velament; e accideys a lu difficultat de hanelit, e tos, e vomit de mot sanc; e aquesta es de dificil curacio.	 If the fracture of the back is declining towards death, then the patient will experience intense pain and puncturing wounds, as well as vomiting due to the difficulty in breathing.
E ja les Antixs so engeniatz en aquela am motz engientz.	 And start making incisions in that manner.
E de lor so que diso: cove que pauses viandas del malaute que engendro imflacio e ventositat, per que le ventre sia imflat e sia extendut, e la fractura sia impellida a las partidas defora.	 Do this way that it says: cover the wounds of the patient with a cloth to prevent further infection and swelling, so that the belly is flattened and extended, and the fracture will be pushed back towards its original position.
Mays nos avoreyssem aquo per so que no sia causa leugiera a generar apostema caut, si no accideys; e si ja accideys, lahoras ja ajuda ad aquo.	 If this is the case and it does not cause a hernia to generate an abscess, if it happens anyway: then doctors will help with that.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia pausada desus ventoza e aprop que sucque am fortitut; e es semblant a ratiocinacio, mays empero es temut que la ventoza atire las superfluitatz al loc per la debilitat.	 They would do this in order to prevent the wind from blowing off their food and keep them well-fed, but they fear that it will blow away all the excess fat for weakness.
E diyssero alcus de lor: cove que·l loc sia cubert am lana que ja es submersa en oli caut, e sian pausatz pulvils entre las costas entro que sia umplida, que sia la liadura engual quan envolopas aquela segon retonditat; e aprop sia curat le malaute am curacio de pleuresi de vianda e de medicina.	 They would do this in order to cover the spot where it has been burned with a hot cloth, and sprinkle powders between the buttocks so that they are full, that is when you put your second hand on top of those buttocks; and make sure the patient's wounds get cleaned properly from bandages and medicines.
E si causa vehement constrenh le malaute la qual no sufferta, e le os punh le velament am punctura ledent, temem sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que fendam sobre le loc, descubram de la costa trencada, e aprop pausem desobre aquela instrument que conserve le ciphac, la rememoracio del qual es precedida, e que inscidam le os am facilitat, e extraguam aquel.	 If the patient becomes violently inflamed and the wound is not able to be treated, they cover it with a cloth, uncover the broken limb at its point of injury, place the cauterizing instrument on top of that spot, making sure the mind is remembered beforehand so as to make treatment easier, then remove the eyes.
E aprop que ajustem las doas labias de la plagua, si es gran, am cozidura, e curem aquela am emplastres entro que sia sanada.	 The first sentence translates to "Then adjust the two flaps of the blanket if it is large enough.
E si accideys dedintz apostema, lahoras tu coyta e enfon pulvils en oli rozat e pausa sobre le loc, e que sia curat le malaute am aquo que cove a la apostema dedintz.	 If the patient vomits after taking medicine, place soft powder in their mouth and wait over there until they swallow it, so that you can treat them for the vomiting.
E sia ressupinat sobre le latz sobre le qual dorm, entro que sia sanat.	 When breathing is returned to normal, return to the area where he was sick
Capitol .ix.	 This seems like a fragment of text from a medieval medical treatise on respiratory conditions. The sentence "When breathing is returned to normal" could be part of a description or instruction for treating someone who has recovered from an illness that affected their respiration, such as pneumonia or bronchitis.
De restauracio de fractura del spondil del dos e del col.	 Restoration of the spine of the second and third lumbar vertebrae.
Alcunas veguadas endeve fractura als osses del col, e tart endeve a lor atricio, e semblantment als spondils del dos.	 Restore fractures in the bones of the hips, and treat the affected areas with traction, similar to the vertebrae of the second pair.
E cum aquo accideys ad alcu e voles saber si sara sanat o no, lahoras considera, quar si vezes las sieuas mas ja mollificadas e stupefaytas e mortas e no pot maure aquelas ni extendre ni strenher aquelas e quan constrenges aquelas am les tieus ditz o punges aquelas am agulha e no sent en aquelas dolor, lahoras sapias que no es sanat, e en las mes de disposicios es mortal.	 When you consider that and wonder if it is healing or not, the doctor considers several things: whether the swelling has been excessive and swollen to death, and unable to breathe on their own; whether they are in a position where they can no longer extend or straighten them, when holding them with hooks or tongs cannot cause pain or distress, but only send those who hold them to death.
E si mau aquelas e sent en aquelas constriccio am les ditz e punctura, lahoras sapias que la nucha de l’os es salva e que le malaute guereys am curacio.	 If the bone has broken in such a way as to cause pain and restrict movement of its joints or extremities, you can say that the healing process is ongoing and the patient will continue treatment.
E si ve als spondils del col le semblant ad aquo e voles saber si sira sanat o no, lahoras considera als pes de lu.	 When the pain arises from the bowels of the body, do you want to know if it is serious or not? The physicians consider these pains in the body.
Lahoras si tu vezes que so ja mollificatz, accideys ad aquels aquo que es accidit en las mas, e aprop quan jatz sobre le sieu dos, yeys ventozitat e egestio ses la sua volontat, e alcunas veguadas es resupinat sobre le sieu dos e vol urinar e no pot, lahoras sapias que es mortal, e adonc no trebales en la curacio de lu.	 If you have already taken medication and the pain continues to worsen or occurs in multiple areas of your body, seek medical attention immediately, as it may be a serious condition that requires immediate care.
Mays si no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, la causa es milhor e pus leugiera.	 If there is no other cause found for the pain and its origin is unknown or unclear to you.
E la curacio de lu es que te perforses a la sedacio del apostema caut que pauses sobre le spondil atrissat oli rozat sol, o am mugols de huous asatz; pausa sobre aquela aquel alcunas veguadas le dia entro que sia sedat le apostema caut.	 The treatment of the patient involves placing a pointed cautery on the sore and inflamed area of their thigh or buttocks, or applying cold compresses to cool down any hot areas where the cautery is applied; wait until all sores are treated before using any other medication.
E lahoras pausa un dels emplastres confortantz e exsitans, e strenh sobre aquel am liament; e comanda al malaute que use de repaus e de tranquillitat e que no dorme sobre la partida am la qual atroba dolor entro que sia sanat.	 The physician will pause one of the cushions and place it on top of that inflamed area, and command the patient to stay calm and not fall asleep over the part where they are experiencing pain until it is relieved, as this may be a serious condition if ignored.
E si accideys deves la atricio del os satagias o alcuna causa que ja es seperada de lu, lahoras cove que secces sobre la codena e que ostes aquel os; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua, am sutura si es gran; e aprop cura aquela am alcu encarnatiu dels enguentz, entro que sia sanat.	 If the cause is separated from you and there are no other causes found for your pain, then seek medical attention immediately, as this may be a serious condition that requires immediate care.
Mays si es trencat le derier del os alhoses, e es la fi de la coeta, lahoras cove que tu entrometas le dit pous de la ma senestra en le cul, e que enguales le os trencat am l’autra ma segon que es possible per equacio segonda; e aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e astelha, si indigeysses de aquels, e aprop strenh aquel.	 When the lower part of the anus is torn off and it's the end of the course, pain occurs in the buttocks, and when you enter through the woman's vagina into her buttocks, then remove the anus from the second hand if possible, and hold it with the first one to prevent its rupture.
E si sentes satagias trencadas en lu, lahoras tu fen sobre aquela, e osta aquel, e cura la plagua am la curacio que es precedida entro que sia sanada.	 If you feel that the disease has been torn apart and it's at its end, then take care of yourself before doing anything else.
Capitol .x.	 Which is a common abbreviation for "capitulation," which means to give up or surrender completely.
De restauracio de la ancha.	 Restoration of the anus
Les osses de las anchas tart so trencats, e si trencan, lahoras la fractura de lor no es sino communicio en las extremitatz de aquelas e son inscidas en la longitut e declinan a las partidas dedintz; e accideys al malaute dolor en le loc e punctura, e la camba es stupefacta quan es fractura.	 When bones in the rectum are broken and they do break, then the fracture of their is only communicated to the extremities and is incised at length and decline from the cuts; and when the abscess becomes painful and ruptured, it happens that the anus is cut off.
E la restauracio de lu es que tu extendas la tua ma sobre aquel entro que sia sobre la fractura qual es la figura de lu.	 The restoration of it is to stretch your hand over it so that it is above the fracture, which is its form.
E si fractura es en la extremitat de lu tant solament, lahoras tu enguala aquela segon que a tu es apparelhat per equacio engual entro que sia asemblat a la sua figura natural.	 If it breaks in only one extremity, then stretch it so that both hands are together to form its natural shape.
Mays si la fractura es en le lonc o que ja declina a las partidas dejos, lahoras tu fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu ventre entro que sia preparada a tu la restauracio de aquela fractura.	 If the fracture is in the abdomen or decline from the cuts of it, then take care of yourself so that you are prepared to restore that fracture.
E donc quan auras engualada aquela, pausa sobre lu emplastre, e aprop pausa sobre aquel astela de fust o de codena, e strenh per strictura sobre la qual no temas punctacio de fractura ni remocio de la stelha.	 When you have opened that place, pause above the platter and another above the cover, holding it tightly so as not to worry about any breakage or damage from the plate
E enguala la concavitat am aquo que uempla aquela entro que aquela prengua la strictura segon equalitat, e comanda al malaute que dorma sobre le sieu dos o desobre le sieu costat sa.	 You've placed it in the hollow where you put that into place as soon as possible so that there is no pressure on both sides or above one side
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu cessa de extencio de lu e de la sua restauracio entro que sia sedat le apostema caut, e pausa sobre lu aquo que sede aquel segon que es precedit; e aprop retorna a la restauracio de lu, e strenh aquel ayssi cum cove.	 If there is an abscess that needs to be cauterized, stop the extraction of it and its restoration until you have cooled down the cautery, then resume it as soon as possible; and return to the restoration of it, holding it tightly like this.
E si accideysso en le os satagias o son comminuidas, lahoras tu las tratz.	 If there is something stuck in his mouth or throat, you should treat it.
Capitol .xi.	 Chapter XI.
De restauracio de la fractura del adjutori.	 Of the restoration of the rib fracture.
Adjutori es aquo que es entre le coyde entro al cap de la spalla.	 The ribs are located between the shoulder blade and the top of the shoulder blade.
E si es trencat, lahoras la restauracio de lu es en una de doas manieyras, de las quals es la una que tu prenguas fust pla de migiera groceza segon aquesta forma:	 If it is broken, the restoration of it is done in two ways, one of which you must apply as soon as possible with a gentle touch so that healing may occur rapidly like this.
E sian liatz en doas extremitatz dos liamentz, e aprop sia suspendut del loc elevat.	 If it is located in both extremities or hands, and if you are holding one of them, then put a cushion on the elevated limb.
E segua le malaute sobre una sezela; e aprop gieta fora le sieu bras trencat sobre le fust entro que pervengua al titillic de lu en le mieg loc del qual sia annexa la curvitat del fust.	 The patient is being positioned so that the broken arm lies flat on the chest, with the elbow bent at an angle to prevent it from getting in the way of breathing while maintaining its natural curve
E aprop suspen sobre aquel alcuna causa greu, o·l minestre extenda aquel a las partidas dejos; e aprop le metge eque la fractura am las sieuas mas ensemps, entro que la fractura retorne segon que cove.	 The nurse is applying pressure to the broken arm in order to prevent further damage, while also ensuring that it does not interfere with breathing by keeping its natural curve.
E l’autra manieyra es que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sieua cervitz e suspen la ma del col de lu am liament; e aprop comanda a dos ministres que la un de lor tengua aquo que es desobre la fractura am las suas mas; e l’autre tengua le pus dejos de lu; e quascu de lor extenda a la sua partida.	 The other nurse is pressing the patient's head down while holding their arm to prevent further injury, and asking two assistants to hold onto their hands in order to ensure that they do not interfere with the healing of the bone, one assisting from above the break, and another helping from below it.
E si voles que la extencio sia pus fort, lahoras tu strenh sobre la fractura am liament e sobre aquela am autre liament, e quascu dels dos ministres extendan a doas suas partidas.	 If you want to press hard on both the broken bones at the same time, hold down the patient's head and place pressure simultaneously on both arms while having two assistants stretch out their limbs.
E donc si la fractura es propinquada a la extremitat del muscle, lahoras cove que sia pausat la mitat del liament sobre le citillic e l’autre dejos la fractura deves le coyde.	 If the broken bone is close to a joint, hold down half of each arm on top of it and let the other assistant hold onto the fractured limb.
E semblantment si la fractura es propdana al coyde, lahoras cove que sia pausat le liament sobre aquel loc e sobre aquel coyde.	 Similarly if the broken bone is close to a joint, hold down half of each arm over it and let one assistant hold onto the fractured limb.
Enguala aquela am facilitat e ses trebal, e aprop quant sira engualada segon que cove e es applicada per bona applicacio, lahoras strenh aquela si no accideys apostema caut.	 When pain occurs in the feet
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras layssa la strictura entro al vii dia, e pausa sobre lu lana sutza enbeguda en vi agre e oli rozat entro que repause le apostema, e lahoras tu stren aquela.	 If pain occurs through the nail
E la manieyra de strenher aquela es que pauses emplastre sobre la fractura, e aprop pausa envolopament de drap nau sobre le emplastre; e aprop ajuste le bras sobre aquel adjutori, e pause la sua ma uberta sobre le sieu muscle.	 And if the pain occurs through the nail
E pausa le drap e strenh sobre le adjutori le bras per so que·l bras sia en loc de stelhas, si no prohibeys de aquo alcuna causa del os trencat.	 Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out.
E lahoras usa de stelhas.	 The servant will be used for stitches.
E es que pauses sobre la fractura aquela stela que sia pus lada e pus fort de las autras stelas; e pausa entre quascuna stela la latitut del dit, e sia la longitut de las stelas segon la trencadura am addicio de tres ditz de tota partida.	 And it is customary to place a cushion under them and another on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
E aprop strenh sobre las stelas am la strictura la qual he dita al comensament del capitol.	 Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out.
E es que la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura sia pus streyt.	 The servant is used for stitches.
E quant pus es alonguada la fractura sia la strictura menor.	 And when the smaller fracture has healed, then the larger one will also heal.
E donc si vezes le situament de las stelas e la strictura ayssi cum havem dit en la hora en la qual restauras le membre al sieu assituament, lahoras tu fay.	 Then if the situation of the bones and fractures is such that it has happened at the moment when you restore the member to its position, then do so.
E si temes apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la strictura e las stelas entro al dia vii ayssi cum havem dit.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customary to call it gout for doctors.
E aprop considera le liament en totas partidas per tres dias per so que no accida en le loc pruziment o imflacio; o es prohibida la vianda pervenir al membre per disposicio de superfluitat de strictura; e donc rectifiqua tot aquo segon que havem dit.	 The treatment for this condition involves keeping the affected area elevated above the level of the heart, applying cold compresses to reduce inflammation and prevent effusion or swelling, restraining the bowel so that it does not protrude from its cavity, and correcting any other relevant issues as mentioned earlier in the text.
Mays si tu yest sobre confizanssa que no accida alcuna causa de aquo, lahoras no deslias la liguadura sino aprop tres dias o mays.	 If you suspect there is another underlying cause for this condition, doctors would advise treating it with a cold compress for three days or more as mentioned earlier in the text.
E sia la sua dormicio del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e las sieuas mas sian sobre le stomac.	 Place your hand over their abdomen and chest to prevent them from coming out, placing a cushion under their thighs as well.
E pausa sobre le adjutori cocena plena de lana engualment, e considera en tota hora de la nueyt o del dia que no sia deliada ni dissolta la figura del membre trencat, o que sia le liament mollificat, donc rectifica aquo tot am la tua vertut.	 Pause the attendant and consider it every time you start or end your work day to ensure that there is not any bleeding or softening of the torn member, or if there is a soft bandaging, correct this as well according to your expertise.
E pausa la vianda del malaute segon le orde le qual havem denant mes, enayssi que la vianda sia subtil en le comensament entro que es comensat strenher; e lahoras cove que egrossas la vianda de lu.	 Pause the bowel movement after you've already mentioned this earlier in the order to ensure that the bowel movement is soft and starts gently, avoiding any straining; and doctors recommend adding a laxative as well.
Quar de constuma del adjutori e de la camba de lu es que sian strengutz en xl dias; e lahoras cove que sian desliatz e sia administrat banh e sia medicat am enguentz los quals rectifican aquel.	 In the meantime, while keeping the attendant and patient's leg bandaged for a long duration of days, it is customary to administer laxatives and apply ointments as needed in order to correct this issue.
E si la fractura es layha atrita, lahoras tu no deslies de aquela le liament e las stelhas entro a l dias o entro a dos meses.	 When there's a fracture like that of an ankle, then doctors say it won't mend within one day or two months
Capitol .xii.	 Chapter 12
De restauracio de fractura del bras.	 Restoration of fractures in the arm.
Bras es compost de dos osses les quals so appelatz dos focils; dels quals la un es petit, e es aquel que siec le dit pous, e l’autre es gran e es aquel le qual es pausat dejos le petit dit, de la partida pus dejus.	 The arm is composed of two bones called the humerus and radius. Of which one has a small end, that being the proximal end, and the other with a large end, that being distal
E fort leu es trencat le focil major solament, o le petit, e fort leu son trincatz ensemps.	 If only the larger bone is fractured, or if it's just the smaller one, and both are broken, then they must be treated accordingly.
E quan es trencat le focil petit desus, lahoras la restauracio de lu es leugiera, e la sanacio de lu es pus leugiera.	 When the smaller bone is fractured, and its restoration would not work, then healing must be faster.
E quan es trencat le focil de lu dejos la fractura de lu es mala, e la sanacio de lu es dificil.	 If only a small piece of bone is broken, the fracture may heal poorly, and healing would be difficult.
E pus mala de aquela es quan son trencatz dos osses essemps.	 When two bones are broken at once.
Donc si l’os le qual es trencat es le focil petit desus, lahoras es convenient al metge, deves la restauracio de lu, que pauze petita extencio am facilitat entro que aquel sia engualhat.	 If the bone that was fractured is the smaller one of them, then it is advisable for a doctor to restore it as quickly as possible so that it doesn't get in the way.
Mays si le focil gran es aquo que es trincat, lahoras cove que pause extencio pus vehement.	 If only the larger bone was broken, then healing must be more intense.
E si les dos focils so ensemps trincatz, lahoras cove que tu pauses la extritura mot pus fort.	 When both bones are broken, it is necessary to move very quickly with intense treatment.
E cove que pauses la figura de la ma deves la restauracio de lu e la extencio de lu estenduda sobre un coyssi, e sia le pols de la ma a las partidas desus, pus aut que totz les autres ditz, e le dit auricular sia pus bas dels autres ditz, e le malaute sia cezent sobre una cezela cayrada.	 "Place the limb on top of another cushion so that its bottom does not come into contact with anything hard.
E sia un coyssi denant lu en la altetut o endreyt de lu, per so que·l malaute no encorra trebalh.	 "If there is a very high or heavy limb on the patient, place another cushion below it to prevent injury.
E aprop le ministre extenda le bras de la partida pus dejos am la sieua ma o am liament, e autre ministre extenda desus semblantment.	 "The first minister extends one arm of his body and the other servant does so as well.
E aprop le metge engualhe le os entro que redugua aquel segon la milhor figura que pot.	 "The surgeon turns towards that second most prominent limb to reduce it.
E si en la factura del os so satagias, lahoras te perforsa raduzir tota pessa en le sieu loc am la tua vertut.	 "If there is a swelling in the arm, do not drain all pus from that location as well as your own.
E si appar en lu satagia separada que punh la codena e no es a tu speransa en la restauracio de lu, lahoras tu fen sobre lu e osta aquela segon la manieyra la qual havem dita desus.	 "If the abscess is separate and you cannot reach it to drain or remove it, then leave it alone and apply another bandage on that side.
Mays si la fractura es am plagua, yeu ja he fayt ad aquo capitol singular, e donc pren la curacio de aquel.	 "If the fracture is a compound one, do not simply close up the wound with a single dressing, but rather seek medical attention for it.
E si accideys apostema caut al comensament de la tua restauracio, lahoras tu lineys un drap am cerot fayt de oli rozat e cera blanca, e sia migier entre specitut e subtilitat, e strenh drap sobre aquel am strictura subtil entro que le apostema sia cedat; e lahoras remau le cerot e pausa emplastre preparat de polvera de moli am clayre de huou, e aprop pausa stelhas; e sia la stela la qual es pauzada sobre aquela fractura pus lada e pus fort.	 "If you begin to see signs of infection during the wound's care, use a dressing with a mix of red and white, varying in thickness and subtlety, covering it over the subtle incision until signs of the abscess are seen; after that, remove the gauze and apply a sterile pad soaked in povidone-iodine solution. If there is pus on the sterile pad, then apply another sterile pad over it.
E sapias que·l nombre de las stelas del bras so vi en las majors disposicios, o sia la fractura en un focil o en dos focils ensemps.	 The name of the bones in your arms are shown in the larger compartments or fractures in a single compartment or two compartments
E aprop pausa la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura pus fort e pus vehement, e quan mays sira la extrictura a las partidas desus de la fractura o a las partidas pus bassas de lu, pausa la strictura un pauc pus molh segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu en le comensament del capitol.	 And if it is necessary to make the incision strong and violent in order to reach out to the fracture parts or weak parts of the body, pause the incision for a short while so that you remember this at the beginning of the chapter
E les draps que so envolopatz sobre la fractura sian draps mols humitz, e no sian durs ni aspres, e·l fiel am le qual es strenhut sia de li propriament migier entre subtil e gros, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	 The bandages that cover the fracture should be moist and not too tight or too harsh, so that it is firmly held between subtle and thick, as we have recommended.
E considera le membre e·l liament aprop alcus dias.	 Consider the member of which to apply a poultice.
E si accideys alcuna causa de la qual rectificacio es necessaria, ayssi cum prusiment le qual accideys al membre, e lahoras cove que tu enbroques le membre am aygua cauda entro que cesse aquel pruziment.	 If any cause for correction is necessary, so that you cover the member with a poultice as soon as possible to prevent that issue.
E leysses le membre no costreyt entro que repause, e aprop torna la strictura.	 Do not put the member back together until it stops hurting and then resume the incision
E si la extrictura ja es mollificada e l’os ja es remaugut e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras rectifiqua tot aquo am la tua vertut.	 If the incision has already been softened up and the wound is ready to be dressed and such like that, then dress it as your custom instructs.
E considera mays si le nutriment es prohibit pervenir al membre per superfluitat de strictura, quar lahoras cove que mollifiques aquel un petit e laysses aquel per alcus dias entro que corra ad aquel le nutriment, e aprop strenh aquel.	 Consider if the nutrition is prohibited due to excess of incision, so that you soften it a little and leave it for some days until running towards it the nutrition, and then tighten it again.
Mays si al malaute no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no cove que sia desliat entro aprop xx dias o enviro de aquels.	 When the patient has no complaints about any cause that you've mentioned, do not be concerned with this ailment between now and tomorrow
E aprop sia suspenduda la ma del malaute per la sua vertut de movement agitatius, e fay aquel dormir sobre le sieu dos.	 Place the patient's hand on his chest to prevent any sudden movements, then place them on their back for sleep
E sapias que aquesta fractura es restaurada en xxx dias o en xxxii dias, o fort leu es restaurada en xxviii dias, e tot aquo es segon la disposicio de las compleccios e las disposicios de la vertut.	 You should know that the fracture is healed in 30 days or less, and very light ones heal within 28 days. This depends on the complexity of the fractures and the state of health of the patient.
Capitol .xiii.	 [No translation provided]
De restauracio de fractura de la pinche de la ma e dels ditz.	 The restoration of fractures in the arm or leg.
Sapias que a la pinche de la ma e als nuzes dels ditz tart endeve fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio motas veguadas.	 You should know that an injury to the arm and legs needs special care, and it is not advisable unless there are severe symptoms.
E quan accideys a la ma fractura o atrissio, lahoras cove que·l malaute segua cayrat e denant lu lies cezent segon equalitat, e aprop pausa la ma de lu sobre aquela extenduda.	 When an injury to the arm occurs or sprain happens, it is customary for the patient to continue using their hand and placing it on a surface after applying ice to reduce swelling and inflammation.
E aprop le ministre extenda les osses trencatz e·l metge engualhe aquels entro que sian congongitz am bona congoncio.	 The minister extends the bones that have been broken, and the surgeon works together with them to ensure proper alignment.
E lahoras cove que pause emplastre e estopa, si no accideys apostema caut; e aprop pausa stela desus segon la quantitat del loc, e tu ja has envolopada aquela en drap de li.	 When the pain increases or there is a swelling, if you do not apply cold compresses, and place a cloth soaked in something warm on it instead.
Mays si la trincadura es en las partidas dedintz deves le ventre de la palma, e lahoras fay semblant de spera de drap, e comanda al malaute que strenha aquela am la sua palma trincada; aprop sia strenguda am drap lonc.	 When the pain of joints occurs in the belly, and pain arises from the palm, it is customary that the patient lies on his side with a hand extended to support their belly.
E sia la stelha de cuer am drap en le qual sia levitat, per so que le cuer sia aplicat a la palma; e strenh aquela segon que cove.	 And if you want to extend your arm in the way that it is lifted, for that reason to apply the chest on the palm; and stretch that second one as well.
Mays si la fractura es a las partidas defora, lahoras cove que pauses desus stela e autre estela de la partida dejos en la palma, per so que la ma sia uberta e dreyta; e aprop pausa la strictura, ayssi cum es revolvuda la ma a la rateta entre les ditz am liamentz.	 If the fracture is on the surface of joints, then tell the patient to place another strap and strap it tightly with their hand extended in all directions, for that reason to hold the finger between them.
E si accideys fractura a alcu dels nozes dels ditz, lahoras si es le dit pous, sia engualat segon que cove e aprop sia strenhut am la palma e si·t voles, pausa a lu astela petita dreyta per so que sia elevada la fractura e no sia mauguda.	 And if the fracture occurs in the palm of one's hand, tell them to place another strap and tighten it with their hand extended all directions, for that reason hold the small strap tightly while elevating the fracture without allowing it to be loose.
Mays si la fractura es en les autres ditz, ayssi cum en aquel del mieg loc, o en le indic, o en le auricular, o en le anular, lahoras sia engualhat e liat am le dit sa le qual siec aquel; o sian totz liatz segon continuacio, e es milhor; o pausa sobre aquel stela petita, ayssi cum havem dit en le pous.	 If the fracture occurs in any of the other fingers or toes, tell them to place another strap and tie it tightly with their hand extended directly towards that one, or at its side, or on its earlobe, or on its ankle; or continue tying another strap along the way as well, whichever comes first. Or pause briefly over the small strap if you wish so, just like in the wrist.
E considera, en la tua restauracio, e aprop aquela, la disposicio de apostema caut e oppose — am la tieua operacio — am aquo que cove quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, segon que es iterada la narracio de lu.	 "In your treatment and care for the patient, make sure that there is a cushion under their thighs, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
Capitol .xiv.	 "Chapter fourteen of the Capitularia
De restauracio de fractura del os de la coyssa.	 Restoration of a fracture in the femur bone
Le os de la cueyssa motas veguadas es trencat e es declarat al sentiment segon que es convertit a la partida denant e a la pus sobirana.	 The leg bones are broken and declared as such after they became worn out and experienced excessive wear.
E la restauracio de lu se fa enayssi que·l liament es strenhut sobre la fractura e autre liament dejos la fractura, e le malaute sia prostrat sobre le sieu ventre e sobre la cara.	 The restoration is made by placing a strap over the fracture and another to hold the fractured part, while restraining the patient's stomach and face with restraints.
E aprop le ministre extenda tot le liament a la sua partida segon la qualitat, quan la fractura es en le mieg loc del os.	 The minister extends the restraint by tightening it to its maximum extent after the bone is in position on the leg.
Mays si es propdana a la razitz de la cueyssa, lahoras sia le liament propda al denolh a la partida del pentenilh, per so que la extencio caja en sus, e le autre liament dejos la fractura.	 If you are to amputate the leg bone, the doctors will tighten both restraints for support and protection of the patient from falling out or being moved during recovery.
E semblantment si la trencadura es propdana al denolh, lahoras sia fayt le liament propda al denol, e sia la extencio a las partidas dejos.	 Similarly if the fracture is to be amputated, then the doctors will place both restraints as mentioned before.
E aprop le metge enguale le os am amduas las sieuas mas entro que reduzesca aquel segon la semblansa natural e l’os es conjungit per bona conjunccio; lahoras cove que pauses emplastre e strictura, si no accideys al membre apostema.	 The surgeon places the bones together again after the injury has healed naturally and both bones are united by a good connection; make sure to fasten them tightly if they do not fuse properly.
Mays si accideys en lu apostema, lahoras tu layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que l’apostema caut sia cedat, e aprop retorna a la tua curacio.	 If you see an opening in it [the patient], the pain will cease within a certain number of days provided that the abscess is cured and you return to your duty
La strictura de lu sia ayssi fayta: cove que envolopes sobre la fractura una benda dura, e dobla aquela dos o tres veguadas, e remaugua de lu superfluitat; e aprop envolopa la camba entro que pervengua al talo e a la razitz de la cueyssa.	 The stricture is as follows: when you apply something hard over the fracture to immobilize it with three or four supports, and remove any excess fluid from it; then you bandage up the leg in such a way that its toes point towards the heel of the foot.
E intromet lonc fiel entre la cueyssa e la camba prop del denol a las partidas dejos, e venguan las extremitatz del fiel de la partida pus sobirana de las doas partz, e aprop revolveys sobre la camba e la cueyssa aquo que superflueys de la benda.	 Place the patient on their back with the feet elevated, and turn one leg up so that it is below the level of the head; then roll them over onto the same side as the affected limb to place both extremities in a position which allows the bed to be seen from underneath.
E aprop pausa sobre la cueyssa en le loc de aquela fractura astelhas, e pausa de aquelas una stela sobre le os de la camba.	 Then apply a pad over the foot near the fractured area and place another pad under their knees.
E aprop uempli las vacuitatz entre la camba e la cuoyssa am draps mols, per so que sia coagulada la extrictura.	 Ensure that there is no gap between the bandage covering the foot and the thigh to ensure proper compression of the stricture.
E aprop comensa am strictura fort del mieg sobre le loc de la fractura am tres envolucios o quatre, e quant mays tu te alonhas am liament del loc de la fractura, la tua strictura sia menor e pus leugiera e pus molha.	 The stricture should be placed tightly over the location of the fracture with three or four supports; and as long as you maintain your position there, your compression will be greater and more uniform.
E aprop exten a doas extremitatz del fiel a las partidas dejos entro que pervengua a la cavilha del pe, e strenh amdoas las extremitatz de las stelhas del autra part per so que·l liament no sia remaugut del sieu loc.	 Make sure both of the patient's limbs are elevated above their head to prevent them from bending towards it; and ensure that the hands of each arm rest in a position such that the bandage does not slip off its own position.
E aprop leyssa la strectura sobre aquel, don esta ayssi que no accideys al membre corrosio ni apostema caut ni emflacio e semblantz ad aquels; e si accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, adonc cueta te am desliament de lu, e rectifica aquo que accideys tot aprop, segon que havem dit motas veguadas.	 When the first sentence is caused by a space over there, so that no harm occurs to the member from coldness or frostbite and the like, if any cause of these exists then treat with care this part here
Mays si en le os es pessa del os la qual pongua, lahoras cove que tu engualhes aquel segon que a tu es possibla; e sino, fen sobre lu e remau aquel, e cura am aquo del qual es precedida la rememoracio entro que sia sanat.	 If the passage is from the mouth that one has passed through, then pain occurs in it and if not, apply something to him and remove this part
E alcunas veguadas es strenhuda aquesta fractura de la coyssa otra aquo que sian ajustadas a lu stelhas, ayssi cum havem dit en le adjutori e·n le bras.	 Some veins are strengthened with this fracture of the thigh and to it adjusted are also in the arms
Mays empero en la restauracio de lu en tal manieyra fayta no accideys al malaute claudicacio; e si es restaurada sola, otra aquo que li sia applicada l’autra camba, lahoras es necessari que claudique aquel del qual es tostemps.	 However, in the restoration of it by this way will no cause pain to a patient with claudication and if it is restored alone then another from it must be applied separately.
E sapias que la coyssa es strenhuda en xl dias o un pauc mes o un pauc mens, e tot aquo es segon la diversitat de las compleccios e de las autras dispozicios.	 You know that the thigh is strengthened in days or a few months or less and this also depends on the variety of complications and other dispositions.
Capitol .xv.	 Chapter XV
De restauracio de la fractura de la rodela del denolh.	 Of the restoration of the fracture of the ankle bone.
Sapias que fractura de la rodela del denol tart endeve, mays accideys a lu motas veguadas atrissio.	 You know that the fracture of the ankle bone is very painful and may cause pain in legs.
Mays si accideys a lu fractura, lahoras no es sino fissura o trauc en las suas partidas, e aquo es am plagua o ses plagua, e sobre aquo tot es estat am le sentiment.	 When a fracture occurs in the body, pain is merely a fissure or tear of the parts, and this is called a sprain, and about it everything is in agreement with the feeling.
E la restauracio de lu es enayssi que sia engualat aquo que es romput de las partidas de lu am les ditz entro que sia agreguat e conjongit segon que es possible per equacio e facilitat e fabricacio.	 The recovery of it is such that its return to the body's parts, which means taking and placing them back into place as easily as possible through arrangement and connection with the help of skilled workers or craftsmen.
E aprop pausa emplastre e pausa sobre aquel stela redonda, si indigeysses de aquela; e strenh desus am strictura ad aquo convenient.	 Then place a cushion on top of that round stone if necessary and stretch out the opening to it as much as you can with your hand extended.
E aprop considera totas las disposicios las quals havem recomtadas en las autras fracturas, ayssi cum es apostema caut e semblant ad aquels enaissi que se oppause a tot accident am aquo que a lu es convenient entro que sia sanat.	 Then consider all the arrangements that are recommended for these other fractures as well, so too with the same caution and similar to what was done in the last injury mentioned above if necessary, because it is very important to do this correctly.
Capitol .xvi.	 Chapter Sixteen
De restauracio de la fractura de la camba.	 The recovery of the tibia fracture
Sapias que en la camba so dos osses dels quals la un es gros, e es le nompnat per nom de la camba; e l’autra es subtil, e es nompnat focil.	 You know that in the leg there are two bones of which one is large and bears the name tibia; while the other is subtle, and named fibula.
E accideys a quascus de las specias de fractura aquo que accideys als dos osses del bras, e per aquo es fayta restauracio de lu ayssi cum restauracio del bras engualment, e la operacio de lu es una.	 When both bones of the arm are fractured in this way, and for that reason it is necessary to perform recovery on them equally as well, and surgery is required on him.
E si so trincatz dos osses ensemps, la camba es convertida a totas partidas.	 When two bones are fractured in one's arm or leg, the cavity becomes filled with all parts.
E si es trinquat le os pus subtil, la camba es convertida a las partidas Denant.	 If the bone is broken only slightly, the cavity fills up gradually.
E si es trincat le os pus gros, atrobas aquel dejos, e es de aquelas causas que no so a tu ameguadas.	 If it is a large bone fracture that causes this, you must leave those alone as they are not the fault of the physician.
E aprop aministra extencio e equacio e liguacio de las astelas segon aquel engualment.	 Then apply compression and elevation and leg raising to that part after all other things have been done.
Mays empero cove, si la fractura de la camba es laja havent motas satagias, que la extencio sia mendre e pus leugiera, e alleuja am la tua vertut.	 If the bone fracture is only a small one that has not moved much, then you should compress it gently and elevate its head to help relieve pain and swelling at your own risk.
E en la camba es alcuna causa de operacio sobre le bras, e es quan tu engualas las stelhas e que comples tota la tieua operacio, lahoras tu prendras pessas de fustz de pi le qual es pausat dejos las cauzas las quals so pausades en solies, e so faytas eyssament de brancas de palma; aligeys de aquelas a las quals es petita groceza, e no sia ges de las manudas, e sia la longuesa de aquelas segon la longuesa de la camba, e del denol entro al pus dejos.	 If the bone fracture is not the cause of surgery on that arm, and you have already applied a tourniquet to complete your tourniquet application throughout all the body's limbs, then you should apply gentle pressure on those areas only if they are very small, without using both hands but instead with one hand. Also measure their length against the bone itself, from which of them is shorter and whose swelling has decreased more.
E aprop envolopa sobre quascuna drap en doas envolucios segon la longitut de lu, e pausa la una sobre la partida de la camba de la una part e l’autra del autra part, e sian del denol entro al pus bas loc del pe.	 Then wrap around each limb in two different wraps following its length, placing one on the part of the bone from that side and another over the other side, and place the remaining ends at both sides of the foot's base.
E aprop lias las doas stelhas en tres locs de doas extremitatz e al mieg loc, quar am aquesta strectura la camba es prohibida de clinar a la partida dextra e sinistra, e sta per bona stacio.	 "You have already placed cushions between the patient's thighs in three different locations and to their legs, where this stretch is forbidden from touching either side of the chest, it should be avoided.
E ja es aministrat un brasset de fust segon la longuesa de la camba; e sia pausada en lu la camba per so que conserve aquel de movement.	 "Then administer a pessary second to the length of the intestine, and hold it in place for that purpose.
E majorment cove que tu fassas aquo en fractura, e quan am aquela es plagua propriament.	 "Furthermore, please be careful when doing this; if any such thing should happen, immediately call a doctor.
E aprop considera en quascun jorn la camba e studia am aquel per derier studi, e tu le guardes de apostema e de imflacio o de autres causas semblantz; e cum accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, lahoras opausa te a lu am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	 "Take into consideration each day the intestine and study it over time, keeping an eye out for any swelling or other causes similar to these mentioned; if anything like this happens, stop applying this remedy until you determine that the condition has improved.
Capitol .xvii.	
De la fractura del talo e dels osses del pe e dels ditz.	 "Of the fracture of the heel and bones of the foot and fingers.
Al talo no accideys fractura de tot; mays als osses del pe accideys fractura alcunas veguadas; e als ditz del pe pauc accideys fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio en las mes de disposicio.	 "The heel does not usually fracture completely; the bones of the foot sometimes break, and the fingers rarely break, unless they are crushed.
E si als osses del pe endeve fractura e vezes aquels osses esser elevatz sobre si entre lor, lahoras le malaute pause le sieu pe sobre la terra preparat ayssi cum anant.	 "If the bones of the foot suffer a fracture and it occurs that those bones are elevated between them, doctors usually place the patient's feet on the ground like this so that they may prevent slipping.
E aprop pausa la un pe sobre aquo que es elevat de aquels osses, e aprop calca aquels, e prem, e engualha aquels entro que torno en los locs.	 "Then place one foot on top of those bones, lift the other, and press them together in that position.
E aprop pausa emplastre e stopa desus, e pausa dejos le ventre del pe una petita taula a la qual sian dos caps plas.	 When you have already positioned yourself between the patient's thighs, place a cushion beneath them, another servant on their legs, and yet another on their chest, holding their hands.
E aprop strenh aquela am le pe am strectura descent, pus que tu has envolopada aquela am draps e am autres causes de las quals indigeys.	 After positioning yourself between the patient's thighs with a cushion beneath them and another servant on their legs, ensure that you have covered them completely and also apply other remedies to relieve any pain they may be experiencing.
E cum a lu passan tres dias o quatre, lahoras tu deslia le liament, quar tu atrobaras les osses engualatz, o sian trincatz o sian dislocatz, e la operacio en aquels es ayssi co coneysses.	 After three or four days of treatment with the gout remedy, if you observe joints swelling or dislocations, perform surgery to remove them immediately.
Mays si alcus ditz son trincatz, lahoras restaura aquels, e enguala aquels ayssi cum yeu e recomtat a tu en la restauracio dels ditz de la ma.	 If you see joints that are swollen or dislocated after treatment with the gout remedy, then restore them and adjust their position as recommended by your doctor in joint restoration procedures.
E aprop pausa al dit trincat stela segon la longitut del dit, e sia pus lada de lu un pauc; e aprop dejos le pe aquesta taula la qual e a tu recomtada, e strenh aquela am strictura decent.	 After positioning yourself between the patient's thighs with a cushion beneath them and another servant on their legs, ensure that you position one leg at an angle slightly below horizontal level; then place your hand over this area to administer treatment as recommended by your doctor in joint restoration procedures.
Mays si aquo que es trincat dels osses so dos o tres o mays, lahoras tu pausa sobre quascun dit astela de la sua quantitat envolopada en drap leon, e strenh la taula en le pus bas del pe, e sia stant sobre la un dels caps de la taula foro le ventre del pe per que la tengua am bona retencio.	 If the joints are swollen or dislocated for two or three days, after positioning yourself between the patient's thighs with a cushion beneath them and another servant on their legs, place one hand over each leg to support it securely; then position your other hand over their abdomen so that they have good support.
E es convenient a tu que no oblides que no consideres totas las causas las quals que e ditas a tu en las autras fracturas dels accidentz que havem dit; e opausa te a tot accident am aquo que cove.	 When the joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and when pains occur in the feet, it is commonly called gout by doctors.
Capitol .xviii.	 The first sentence translates to: "It's important not to overlook all the causes mentioned earlier for fractures or accidents, especially those related to cold humors.
De fractura del conh de la femna e del os del pentenilh e de la vergua del home.	 Fracture of the thigh bone and the femur, and from the vertebra below
Quan le conh de la femna es trincat, lahoras fay aquela ceser en cezela cayrada, e aprop enclina aquela a la partida del dos un petit, e sia tenguda detras.	 When the thigh bone is broken, pain occurs at its fracture site and should be treated with care.
E aprop la matrona umpla le conh de coto, e sia fayt en le conh de lu ayssi cum spera; e aprop la femna sia concutida, e eleva le dos de lu petit a petit, quar tot aquo es fora-getat entro que sia denant la partida del conh ayssi cum spera e l’os trincat retorna.	 When the thigh bone is cut through, pain occurs at its fracture site and should be treated with care as you try to move it back into place.
E aprop pausa pulvils sobre le dos de lu, e quan vol urinar remaugua le coto am facilitat e aprop urine, e reduzeys e retorna aquel segon la manieyra segon la qual mezist aquel al comensament, e aprop retorne al sieu pulvil primier.	 After applying powder on the hands and when it is desired to urinate, it facilitates urination by using a small funnel and reduces or returns that same powder as you would use at the beginning, and after returning there return first powder to its place.
E fassa ayssi per vii dias o enviro aquels, quar aquel es restaurat.	 It should be repeated for 7 days or more until it is restored.
E si voles, pren una vezica de ovela e strenh sobre le trauc de lu una canula de canavera; e entromet tota la vesica en le conh de lu, e aprop ensuffla en la canula am vertut entro que la vesica sia imflada dedintz le conh, quar la fractura retorna.	 If you want to, take a syringe and stretch it over the thigh bone with a cannula of straw; enter completely into the bladder through the urethra by pressing into its cavity until the bladder is inflated due to the femur, from which the fracture returns.
E aprop sia umplida de coto e estia per alcus dias segon que havem recomtat, entro que sia sanat.	 The first sentence translates to: "Here comes a cushion placed under their thighs for support during recovery.
E quan le os del pentenil de home o de femna es trincat, lahoras aministra en la restauracio e agulacio de lu aquo que havem recomtat en l’os del anca.	 When the penis or vagina is torn, doctors provide treatment in the area recommended by us
E aquo que es dreyt no es occultat en aquestas fracturas proprinquas e que pauc endeveno, majorment ad aquel al qual es alcun studi e us e enten aquest meu libre mot; quar aquela fractura significa a tu en las majors disposicios via dreyturiera en la restauracio e en la strictura de lu, e donc enten be.	 These fractures are usually not serious and hardly occur at all, except for those involving the penis or vagina which require treatment in the recommended area by us
Mays en la vergua del home quan es trincada, pren guarguamela de auca, e met la vergua en aquela; e aprop pausa sobre lu envolucio de drap, e sia envolopada, e aprop sia layssada per tres dias o enviro aquels, e sia sanada.	 When the man's penis is torn, take a bandage and place it in that area; and if necessary, cover her vagina with another bandage, placing one over each shoulder for three days or until healed
Capitol .xix.	 Chapter 20
De restauracio de fractura dels osses quan es am plagua.	 Treatment of bone fractures when it is already broken.
Convenient es ad aquel al qual accideys fractura am plagua, e majorment si le os es gran ayssi cum es le os de la cuoyssa o de l’adjutori, o semblant ad aquel, que tu te cuoytes e fleubotomes aquel tantost si las condicios de fleubotomia a tu o testifican ayssi cum desus havem dit.	 If the bone is broken and you are unable to move it without causing further injury, then treat that fracture as if it were a dislocation or any other joint injury
E si la plagua eflueys sanc, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la retencio de lu enayssi que tu polverizes sobre lu zegi trissat, si a tu autra causa no es present.	 If the fracture is open and bleeding heavily then doctors may advise to stop moving it, cover it with gauze or cloth that has been soaked in a solution of alcohol if there are no other causes of bleeding.
E aprop comensa restaurar la fractura en aquel meteys dia, e no prolongues aquo, si no accideys apostema.	 Restore fracture in that way day, do not extend this one if it does not happen to be broken
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la restauracio de lu entro al ix dia, entro que sia cedat le apostema, e no apropinques a lu en le tertz dia e·l iiii de tot, quar tu faras accidir mals accidentz.	 If pain occurs as an aftereffect of the cautery, then the restoration will be done on day one, unless it is broken by the abscess, and do not try to fix it again on days two or three, else you risk causing more accidents.
Mays si le os trencat es eminent sobre la codena descubert, lahoras cove que te perforses reduzir aquel e engualar aquel am las tuas mas am facilitat e am pauca extencio.	 If the bone is broken and it becomes apparent to you on inspection, then do as follows: reduce one of them [bones] easily and quickly, while leaving the other unchanged, in order for both of them to be equally able to support you equally well.
Mays si extencio no es a tu preparada e la equacio de lu am las tieuas mas, lahoras tu reduzeys aquel am las tuas mas am aquest sturment; e es sturment le qual es fayt de ferr, la longitut del qual es de vii ditz o de viii e la latitut del qual es segon la quantitat de la plagua; e per aquo es necessari al metge que prengua de aquels tres o quatre segon la quantitat que indigeys ad aquo en la curacio en tota specia de fractura.	 If the reduction is not ready and balanced, then you reduce one of them (the bones) to its length of seven or eight digits, while leaving the other unchanged; this latter bone should be measured for length, which will usually be equal in amount [to] the surface area, but if they are not, it may require a physician who has four or five measurements taken so that you can know how much reduction needs to occur at this point of treatment with any specific type of fracture.
E sia redon, e sia en lu pauca groceza per so que no sia doblat deves la comprecio sobre aquel en la hora de la operacio.	 And remember that it is necessary to perform a small incision over this bone during the operation in order not to damage it at this point.
E sia de aguda extremitat al qual sia marge en las sieuas extremitatz; e sia le desus de lu a grossetut tendent, e de la maytat de lu entro a las partidas.	 And the extremity that is closest to which of your extremities should have an edge on its sides; and also make it thicker than the other one in terms of thickness towards their ends.
E aquesta es la forma de lu:	 This is how it should be done
E es nompnat en grec “labre volentz atelarem”, so es paleta pauca.	 "The process is called 'levolatatelabres' in Greek, and it involves a small plate.
Per que cove que sia pausada la extremitat de lu acuda elevada sobre la extremitat del os eminent.	 For when the extremity of one person comes to touch another person's face, raise your hand over that part of their body.
E inpelleys aquel en una veguada entro que retorne le os, e sia engualat am alcuna equacio.	 When the person is lying down and it returns back towards them, then gently place both hands on any part of them.
E donc esforsa te engualar las extremitatz de la fractura entre lor, e si la extremitat de lu trencada es subtil, e no pren aquela le sturment per bona axcepcio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas la extremitat de aquel os entro que l’insturment haja poder de aquo.	 When you are trying to put the two limbs together and if a part of one limb is broken but not badly enough that it needs stitches or glue, then hold onto their arm so that they can feel when your instrument touches them.
Mays si no podes reduzir le os de tot am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras enscideys aquel am aquo que coveneys a lu dels inscizoris les quals havem ditz; o serra aquel am una de las serras en qualque manieyra sia a tu possible.	 If you cannot reduce the swelling in that way, then try cutting off that part of their skin where we advised to remove it and put one of those stitches into place or use whichever bandage is available to your advantage.
E aprop ratz aquel que roman en le os de asperitat e de scorsas menudas.	 And after you have made the incision in that part of their body, gently squeeze out any pus and then sew up the wound.
E cum le os es reduzit, e aprop la reduccio le malaute atroba dolor vehement ledent, lahoras sapias que le os no es retornat al sieu loc natural; e adonc fay aquo quar tu confereyses al malaute gran juvament.	 When the wound has been reduced and after removing the excess tissue around it, then you can see if there is a return to its normal location and if so, go ahead and apply an incision above or below that part of their body as needed to prevent any excessive bleeding from occurring.
Cum es complida la tua restauracio la qual fas al os, e lahoras submergeys drap en vi stiptic negre, e propriament si es en estiu, e no pauses sobre la plagua cerot ni autre causa en la qual sia oli, per so que no fassa en lu accidir poyredura e corropcio.	 When you have completed your restoration procedure and the wounds are covered with black gauze, make sure that there is no obstruction or other cause for bleeding in which it could occur, to prevent any accident from occurring.
E aprop aministra stelas en la hora del tieu compliment de la restauracio de l’os, e layssa la plagua descuberta enayssi que inscidas le trauc am forfexs e uses de envolucios segon la quantitat de la plagua.	 After performing the procedure of restoring the eye socket and uncovering it as much as possible without damaging the surrounding tissues, you should apply additional bandages in proportion to the size of the exposed area.
E guarda te am tota cautela que no strenhas la plagua am la fractura, quar motas veguadas an fayt aquo les fols metges, e fero accidir sobre les sieus malautes mort o malautia corrodent o zuthement, so es sania.	 Be extremely careful not to stretch the bandage over a fracture, as even if it is gently removed by doctors and caused any internal injuries or damage to vital organs, it will be very bad for you.
E si la tieua strictura leugiera, molli, diversa de la strictura de las autras fracturas.	 If the restriction of your eyelids is milder than that of other fractures.
E si la plagua es gran o es plagua mala, e temes sobre aquel alcus accidentz mals les quals havem recomtatz, e atrobas dolor en le loc, lahoras no cove que pauses sobre aquel astelas, mays fay ad aquel envolucio de draps durs en loc de stelas e strenh lu am aquelas.	 If the bandage is large or if it causes discomfort and you worry about any accidents that may occur, do not leave it in place; instead, apply a stronger dressing over the gauze to prevent any accidents from happening.
E cum aprop un dia o dos vezes ja la plagua comensar, que en lu sia engendrat brac, lahoras tu osta desus le drap le qual havias pausat sobre aquel am vi, e aprop aministra calguas, enguentz am les quals de nostra constuma es que mediquem las plaguas, ayssi cum enguentz tetrafarmacon e semblantz ad aquel.	 If you have already applied the bandage once or twice and it has begun to tear from the arm, remove the gauze that was previously in place over this area, and apply cold compresses as well as any other compress that our custom is to use when treating wounds.
E conveneys a tu que deslias le liament e considera la plagua en quascun dia mati e vespre entro que sia consolidada e fermada, e cove que·l membre sia preparat en tal manieyra que la poyredura corra de lu a las partidas dejos am facilitat.	 When you've finished making the incision and consider that it has been sewn up tightly during the day and night, so that the member is ready in such a way that the erection can occur easily
si a la plagua passan motz dias, e no es consolidada ni es abscindit de lu le brac, lahoras sapias que aqui so satagias de las petitas per que cove enquieras la plagua am tenta.	 After the bandage has been put on for a few days and it is not consolidated or tightened around your arm, you should seek advice from a doctor to remove the bandage
E de aquelas satagias aquelas que so separadas remau e extratz, aquelas que de lor no so separadas e pongen le membre e fan accidir dolor, perforsa te a inscidir aquelas segon que a tu aquo es possibla.	 If the stitches are separated and pulled apart or if they cause pain to your arm, you should consult with a doctor to determine whether it is possible to remove them.
E si accideys a la plagua zuchem o eluchen, so es stiomenios, o autra specia de corrupcio e de putrefaccio, lahoras cove que pauses a quada un de aquels am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio del qual es precedida narracio en le sieu capitol.	 If the bandage becomes infected or there is putrefaction and corruption of it, you should seek advice to determine when one of these procedures precedes the healing process in its chapter.
E de aquo en le qual cove que stia lo mieu sermo e tu fassas present la tua pessa: quan os gros es trincat, emineys sobre le membre ayssi cum le os de la coyssa e del ajutori e semblantz ad aquels dels membres grans, e que no presumas atraccio de lu, ni la extraccio de lu quar motas veguadas accideys per aquo la mort; habantz layssa aquel entro que poyresca, quar fort leu cayra per si aprop xx dias o xxx; e lahoras cura la plagua si a tu es vist, e si no layssa aquela.	 When you make the incision and present your piece: when large parts of it are cut off, place them on the thighs along with their assistants and similar ones for the other members, and do not remove any part that could cause suffocation or death; allow those to be held in until they can serve well after a certain period has passed, which is very painful if you remove them early. And when you have taken care of it and see that, either take care of the bandage if necessary, or leave it as it is.
Capitol .xx.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
De la curacio de nodacio que accideys en le vestigi de alcuna fractura.	 And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery.
Motas veguadas accideys aquesta nodacio en le vestigi de sanacio de fractura, e majorment que es prop de las juncturas, e es orrasada per lu la figura del membre; e fort leu prohibeys le membre de la sua operacio natural.	 And when joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
Adonc considera si la nodacio es recent e aministra en aquela medicinas que han stipticat ayssi co es aloen, e enses, e mira, e sercacollo, e acrassia, e semblantz ad aquels; enayssi que prenguas de aquela alcunas o totas, e comfesiys aquelas am vi stiptic, o am album de huou, o am vi agre, e pausa aquela sobre la nodacio en estopa, e constringeys aquelas sobre lu per bona constriccio.	 If the pain caused by cold humors has recently arisen and is accompanied by those listed above, examine them carefully, inquire about them in detail, and search for their cause; if necessary, remove these cushions or altogether, place others where they are needed to maintain good control over them.
E leyssa extrictura que no deslies aquela per motz dias; e aprop deslia aquela e itera autra, entro que sia remauguda la nodacio; o strenh sobre aquela lamina de plom descentment, quar plom ha proprietat de remaure tot aquo que es imflat en les membres.	 Do not restrict the use of these cushions for a long time; rather remove them and place another one in its stead if it becomes injured or swollen; or stretch out that sheet tightly over it, as it has the property to return everything to this part where it is located on limbs.
Mays si nodacio ja es en peyra convertida e streyta es e nessessitat provoca a ostar aquela coytadament, e lahoras scindeys aquela per la partida pus sobirana de lu, e inscideys la superfluitat e eminent, o ratz aquela am alcus rezoris entro que sia remauguda; e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	 If the pain caused by cold humors has recently arisen and is necessary to remove it promptly, loosen that cushion from its place beneath him and find another one for his feet, rid the superfluity and excess, or take away that cushion if it becomes injured; and cure what needs it.
Capitol .xxi.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, it is customary for doctors to call this gout.
De restauracio de fractura quan es restaurada e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul no segon la sieua natura.	 After a fracture has been restored and properly aligned, you gently remove any swelling that may remain after the injury.
Quan fractura de os es restaurada, e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul, lahoras aquo no es fayt sino per motas causas: de las quals la una es multitut de solucio del liament e de la liguacio de lu fayta no segon que cove; o per superfluitat de strictura dels liamentz entro que·l nutriment sia prohibit correr al membre; o per multitut de embrocaccio superflua; o per movement superfluent no en la sua hora; o per pauquesa de sanc en le cors del malaute e per debelitat de lu.	 After a fracture has been properly restored and aligned, you should avoid applying any swelling remedies such as multiple ligament or joint sprains that may worsen the injury, or excessive restriction of movement to prevent nourishment from reaching the affected member, or excess application of unnecessary lubricants, movements not at the right time, or poor health in the patient's body.
E curacio de aquo es dar a mengar al malaute e far le cor de lu tendre entro que·l sanc sia multiplicat en lu; e aministra banh; e entromet gaug e leticia sobre lu.	 To treat this, you should feed the patient and apply compresses to reduce swelling.
E aprop pausa pegua sobre le membre, per so que la pegua atire a lu mot nutriment, o continua embrocacio de lu am aygua tebeza, entro que·l nutriment corr e retorne a la sua figura natural.	 You should place the bandage gently over the affected member to prevent the bandage from interfering with nourishment or continuing excessive lubrication after the body has recovered its balance and strength.
Capitol .xxii.	 I am not able to provide any translation for this sentence as it seems incomplete, missing some important context that is necessary for a complete understanding of its meaning.
De curacio dels osses trincatz quan so restauratz tortuozament e prohibeys la operacio de lor de aquo que cove.	 When bones are properly aligned after being restored but the operation should be prohibited to avoid further complications.
Quan accideys al membre ja restaurat aprop la sanacio de lu de tortuositat e eminencia al os trincat e nodacio, e es per aquo fededa de forma del membre, mays empero le membre no es prohibit de la sieua operacio natural, lahora no cove que tu recipias la paraula de aquel que exsistima aquel membre sia de novel trincat.	 When a member that has already undergone proper healing from tortuosities and alignment is fed with its normal nourishment but the member should not be operated on if there are signs of an additional fracture in it, so as to prevent further complications.
Mays ja so statz motz fols metges e restauradors les quals han fayt aquo en nostra tera; e aquesta operacio es mot vituperable perduzent a gran temor le senhal de la qual es mortal.	 When doctors and restorers have done this in our time, the operation is very painful and frightening to those who undergo it because of its deadly consequences
Mays si claudicacio e nodacio son recentz, lahoras cove que sian enbrocatz am aygua tebeza en la qual so coytas erbas mollificantz, ayssi cum son fuelas de altea e razitz de lu, e mellilot, e semblantz ad aquels; e sia fayt a lu emplastre am emplastre mollificatio ayssi cum dyallaquilon ben fayt; o que sia preza mucillage de razit de altea e sia contucida am gray de gualina o am oli de cirami, e sia emplastrat am aquel; o que sian prezes figuas grassas e sian trissadas am fems de colom, e semblantz ad aquels de las medicinas que son nompnadas amermans consolidacio.	 When a patient has sudden weakness or paralysis in the affected area of their body, doctors and restorers will apply lotions that increase blood flow to alleviate pain, such as those from olive oil or almond oil, and place them on the affected part; or prescribe fig leaves and tie them around women's colons.
E alcunas vetz es dissolvuda am assidua fricacio leugiera que sia am las mas humidas, e sia administrat movement del membre a tota partida en totas horas.	 Some vegetables dissolve in the wetness of tears and are administered to move the affected member completely at all hours.
Mays si tortuositat ja es anada denant e es fayta fort e convertida es en peyra e provocada es necessitat a curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que sia le pus desus cecsat e la continuacio del os sia dissolvut, e sia inscidit aquo que superflueys de nodacio de aquel meteys am le os am inscissoris subtils, e sia aministrada facilitat en aquel am sollicitut e studi.	 When tortuousness arises and is painful to endure, doctors will recommend remedies that dissolve the obstruction and continue the urine flow; they may also prescribe medicines for relieving the pain of the affected area, making it as comfortable as possible, with subtle incisions on the delicate parts, and administering them easily in a way that suits their condition.
Capitol .xxiii.	 The end of the text.
De sermo en dislocacio.	 Farewell.
Dislocacio es eyssiment de alcuna de las juncturas del sieu loc, per que es prohibida de movement, e es orrezada la figura del membre, e fa venir sobre le malaute dolors e lesios grans.	 "Joint dislocation occurs when a joint is forcibly moved from its place and becomes restricted in motion, causing severe pain to the affected area.
Donc quan accideys ad alcu dislocacio, lahoras cove tantost perforsar que sia reduzit, e no tarde aquela reduzir, quar si es tardada, le loc es apostemat e fort leu am aquo es fayta dificil la reduccio de dislocaccio.	 "When a joint dislocation occurs, doctors must take immediate steps to reduce it, or risk worsening the situation and making reduction more difficult.
E per aysso no cove que sia maugut ni stendut en la hora de la apostemacio, quar motas veguadas fa venir spasme e dolors ledentz.	 "Do not perform any harsh actions at the time of reduction, as it may cause spasms and further pain.
Mays quan aquo accideys, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la flaubotomia del malaute, e aprop sia layssat entro que repause le apostema; e aprop le membre sia embrocat am aygua cauda e oli, e aprop sia reduzit am facilitat.	 "When this occurs, doctors may perform an incision on the patient's thigh and insert a tube to drain pus, and then apply cool water or oil and reduce it easily.
E tot membre sia curat am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra en son loc.	 "In all cases, ensure that the affected member is properly cleaned in its location before proceeding with treatment.
E yeu ja e ordenatz les capitols de dislocacio segon que es precedit en fractura; de la partida del cos pus sobirana entro a la partida pus dejos.	 "After joint dislocation, the affected part of the body should be cleaned from pus to prevent infection.
Capitol .xxiiii.	 "Chapter 24
De curacio de dislocacio de la mandibula dejos.	 "The treatment for jaw joint dislocation is as follows:
So dislocadas las doas mandibulas si no tart; e la dislocacio de amdos es fayta segon una de dos manieyras: que o son remaugudas de lurs locs per pauca remocio, e so mollificadas un petit; o so dislocadas per entiera dislocacio e complida, entro que sian mollificadas a la partida de la junctura entro que corro saliva del malaute e que no puesca tenir aquela ni puesca claure la sua boca, e la lengua de lu sia envolopada en sa paraula.	 "For jaw joint dislocation, there are two ways to proceed: either gently reduce it back into place with slight force, or perform a complete reduction by inserting the tongue and pulling saliva out of the mouth so that no damage is done to the mouth itself.
Mays quan la dislocacio de lu es pauca, lahoras en las majors disposicios retorna per si an pauca causa.	 When a dislocation occurs in someone's body, the pain returns to more prominent areas if there is little cause for it.
Mays si la dislocacio es entiera e complida, lahoras cove que sia administrada reduccio de lu leugierament, e no sia tardada de tot.	 If the dislocation involves a complete tear of tissue, doctors recommend reducing and not delaying treatment.
E es que·l ministre tengua le cap del malaute, e entrometa lo metge le dit pous de la una sieua ma en la razit de la dislocacio de la mandibula dedintz la boca de lu, si la dislocacio es de la una part; o que entrometa les sieus dos pouzes ensemps, si la dislocacio es de doas partz, e les autres ditz de las mas de lu sian defora am les quals enguale; e comanda al malaute que cesse las suas mandibulas e absolva aquelas anar de quascuna partida; e le metge engualhe la mandibula e enpellisca la mandibula entro que retorne al sieu loc.	 If the dislocation is of one side, a minister or doctor enters through his mouth to check for damage and then commands the patient to stop biting and open their jaw. If the dislocation is on both sides, two fingers are used to enter each side; other doctors place themselves further back towards the middle as required by the situation. The doctor then inspects the joint before ordering it back into its correct position again.
E si dificil es la reducio de lu, e majorment si amdos las mandibulas so essemps dislocadas, lahoras aministra evoporacio am aygua cauda e oli, entro que sia fayta leugiera la reduccio de amdos e no tardes la reduccio de amdos de tot, ayssi quo havem dit.	 If reduction is difficult and both sides are dislocated at the same time, doctors provide anesthesia to the hands before attempting any reduction, as such actions should be done carefully without delay, according to medical procedures.
E donc cum retornam e so engualadas, e es clausa la boca del malaute e no es mollificada, lahoras pausa sobre aquelas polvils de drap am cerot, e sia fayt de cera e oli rozat; e aprop sia liat am facilitat am liamens mols.	 If both sides are reconnected and the mouth is sealed shut, doctors place a dressing on top of those pads as described, to help it dry off properly; and if this reduction goes easily for most patients.
E sia le dormir del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e·l cap de lu sia stant entre dos aurelhes, per so que no maugue aquel a la partida dreyta ni a la sinistra; e no li fassas per forsa masteguar alcuna causa; habans la sieua vianda sia forbicio leon, entro que quan las dolors sian remaugudas e las mandibulas so nozadas, lahoras maugue aquo que vol.	 If the patient's body is in a position between two pillows with its head between them, so that it cannot turn to one side or the other; and if no further cause for pain is found when the pains have subsided and the mouth has been opened again, doctors may say as much.
E aquo sia aministrat am facilita, e no trebalhe sobre la apercio de la boca deves la comestio e beure e ocitatio, entro que la mandibula sia nozada e sanada.	 This first sentence translates to "Here it is administered easily and does not disturb the opening of the mouth so that eating, drinking, and breathing are allowed, as long as the mandible remains open.
E si es dificil la reduccio de duas mandibulas quan so dislocadas en alcuna hora e no so convertidas als lors locs, lahoras motas veguadas accideysso febres e soda assidua, e fort leu es alerguat le ventre del malaute, e fort leu e vomeys colera pura.	 If it is difficult to reduce both mandibles when they are dislocated at any time and do not return to their normal positions, then the gouty pains become acute, severe, and pure, making the patient's belly swell with cold and strong thirst, causing them to lose control of their anger.
E quan tu vezes aquo, lahoras sapias que es perdicio; e motas veguadas mor aquel al qual accideys aquo en x dias.	 When you use it, the doctor knows that it will not work in a certain number of days.
Capitol .xxv.	 Chapter 55
De reduccio de la dislocacio de la furcula e de la extremitat del muscle.	 Reduction of dislocation and the extremity of the muscle.
Furcula no es dislocada del latz dedintz per la sua continuacio am le pietz; e alcunas veguadas es dislocada a la partida defora, e aquo es declarat al sentiment.	 The furcula will not be dislocated by its continuation towards the chest; and some of them are dislocated at their beginning, this is what is declared.
E la restauracio de lu es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos e extenda les sieus brasses.	 The restoration is that the patient should lay on his back and extend his limbs.
E aprop coarta le loc am la tua palma am fort coartacio, quar ela retornara.	 Then place your hand there with a strong pressure, until it returns.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre e pulvils e strenh aquela.	 Then place the pad over that surface and dust it off vigorously.
Mays la extremitat de aquel que siec le coyde e·s continuat am aquel, no es dislocada en alcun dia; lahoras cove que sia reduzida e engualhada segon que havem dit e segon que es a tu aparelhat.	 The extremity of that person who carries it and continues to use it will not be dislocated in any day; the doctor knows that it should be reduced and straightened after having said so and when using it.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre, e pulvils, e extrictura, e comanda al malaute adherir a trenquilitat e a repaus entro que sia sanat.	 When you have positioned yourself above that area, sprinkle some powder, make incisions, command the patient to adhere to tranquility and rest so that they may recover
E am aquesta meteyssa curacio es reduzida la extremita del muscle quan es separada del sieu loc.	 The size of this incision is reduced when the muscle separates from its location.
Capitol .xxvi.	 This is a continuation of a Latin text discussing Roman architecture and construction techniques, specifically focusing on the use of vaults in building design.
De la reduccio de la dislocacio del muscle.	 From the reduction of separation from the muscle
Sapias que·l muscle no es dislocat sino segon tres manieras, de las quals es la una que sia dislocat a la partida del titillic a la partida dejos.	 The muscle is not dislocated but in three ways, one of which it moves at the start and end of the titillum.
E la segonda es que sia dislocat a la partida desus del muscle, e aquo es fayt tart; e no es dislocat a las partidas detras per la spalla; e no es dislocat a las partidas denant per les nervis.	 The second is that it moves at the start from behind the muscle and also at the end of the titillum, but not at the back through the shoulder blades, nor at the front through the nerves.
E majorment es dislocat e defora eyssit a las partidas dejos deves le titillic, e majorment en aquels dels quals las carns son paucas, leugierament es dislocat; mays en aquels en les quals so motas carns, es eyssit fora am dificultat.	 The third is that it moves at the start from behind the titillum in cases where the flesh is thin, and also from those where the moving parts are few, but it is difficult; on those with plenty of movement, it's hard to move.
E fort leu accideys ad alcus homes percussio o cazement, e le muscle de lu es apostemat de apostema caut, e es cujat per aquo que ja sia dislocat.	 If the heavy blow strikes near that place and the muscle is positioned properly, it will be pulled away from the other muscle with a sudden jolt, so causing separation.
Adonc cove que tu sproes aquo entro que estias sobre-sertetut de lu, e lahoras procesiscas en la curacio de lu.	 When you're on top of him as he lies down, the doctor applies the cautery in this process.
E es conoguda la dislocacio de lu quan es a las partidas dejos deves le titillic; per so que distingescas entre le muscle dislocat e·l muscle sa, quar tu atrobas entre aquels diversitat manifesta; e atrobas en le cap del muscle concavitat e dejos le titillic deves le tocament del cap del muscle ayssi quo un huou, e al malaute no pot redusir la sua ma a la sieua aurelha, ni maure aquela per totz movementz.	 When the dislocation occurs in joints that have become inflamed through cold humors and causes pain in the feet as well, it is commonly referred to as gout among doctors.
Si es dislocat deves le pietz o ensus, e tu lahoras atrobas manifest tocament, e no es amaguat.	 If you have opened up the space between the thighs and placed a cushion underneath them, another servant on their legs, and one more on their chest holding their hands, then proceed to gently examine it for any signs of dislocation by feeling around its cavity with your hand while attempting not to touch the dislocated muscle itself.
E de aquesta dislocacio es fayta leugiera reduccio quan es fresca e le malaute es enfant.	 The reduction in severity when fresh and inflamed can be observed, as it is common for gout pain to lessen over time due to inflammation.
E la reduccio de lu es que·l ministre eleva la ma de lu a las partidas desus; e aprop pause les tieus pouses dejos le titillic de lu, e eleva la junctura am fortaleza en sus al sieu loc, e·l ministre eleva la ma de lu, e extenda aquela en sus; e aprop pausa aquela dejos quar ela retorna leugierament.	 The minister will raise the hand of the patient to the parts being treated and place a cushion under it as well. Afterward, he will gently stretch the joint towards its fullest extent while holding the other hand extended in front, then gradually lower both hands back down after each movement.
Mays si per aquo que havem dit no retorna, e so del comensament que accidic la dislocacio, motz dias, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia banhat en aygua cauda e sia aministrada enbrocacio que mollifique e liniesca ayssi cum si so coytz razitz de altea, e fenugrec, e melillot en aygua, e sia administrada.	 If we have not finished discussing the dislocation and you wish to proceed with its administration as well, remember that both gout and inflammation should be treated simultaneously by administering medications to alleviate both conditions at the same time.
E aprop le malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu dos e sia pausat dejos le titillic de lu espera de lana que sia engual entre levitat e strictura, e aprop le metge pause le sieu talo sobre la spera, e eleva le cap del muscle am vertut, e atire la ma del malaute per que no sia mauguda a las partidas dejos, e autre ministre tengua le cap del malaute, que no sia maugut a las partidas dejos, quar aquela tantost retorna al sieu loc.	 Then the minister will raise the patient's head onto its chest and place his hand on it to prevent the dislocation from further extending itself while gently stretching the other arm forward and lifting its elbow upwards towards the ceiling as well.
E si voles, reduzeys aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu fassas esser prezent un home le qual sia pus lonc que·l malaute, e estia de la part de aquel latz, e entrometa le sieu muscle dejos le titillic del malaute e eleve le titillic de lu a las partidas desus entro que·l malaute sia suspendut en ayre, e autre ministre tire la ma del malaute de las partidas dejos del sieu ventre.	 When you want to reduce this second one of these remedies: it is customary that you make the patient present a man whose length may be longer than his own, and place him in front of the part of the body where he lies, between the muscles of the patient, placing his genitals on the openings through which the patient is held fast.
Mays si le malaute es leugier, lahoras cove que am lu que autre causa sia suspenduda, per so que grave aquel, quar la dislocacio retorna tantost.	 If the hernia is lying down, it is customary that you put a pillow under them to prevent its prolapse as much as possible.
E es reduzit eysament segon autra manieyra: e es que sia ficat en terra un fust lonc le cap del qual sia redon de figura, ayssi cum pilo de mortier, que no sia gros ni subtil, e aprop sia pausat dejos le malaute; pus que so pausatz sobre·l cap del fust draps leons, e·l malaute sia stant segon la longitut del fust, e aprop sia extenduda la ma de lu a las partidas dejos del autra part; e sia extendut le cos de lu del autre part am fortaleza, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	 The second one is to put the patient on his stomach with a pillow under their head to prevent the hernia from coming out while lying down, ensuring that it is stretched out along the length of the pillow and placing both hands over the other part.
E si es dificil reduccio de lu per totas las causas que havem ditas, lahoras usa de aquesta cura: e es que tu prenguas un fust la quantitat del qual sia en le lonc de dos brasses, e latitut de aquel sia de quatre ditz, e la grossetut de lu sia aleujat en le preon del tittilic segon aquesta forma:	 If it is difficult to reduce the hernia due to all of these causes mentioned before, then use this remedy: and take a pillow that measures two palms long by four spans wide.
E aprop sobre le cap redon sian liatz drap leons per so que·l fust no ledesca le malaute.	 And place the patient on their back with a cushion under their head to prevent the hernia from coming out as much as possible.
E aprop sia pausat dejos le titillic del malaute, e sia extenduda la ma o le bras sobre·l fust entro a las partidas dejos, e sia liat le fust sobre le adjutori e le bras e la extremitat de la ma.	 When the space between the patient's thighs has been prepared and cushioned, place both hands on the chest, covering the arm and extending the forearm towards their joints
Aprop sia pausat le bras sobre un scalo de scala segon la latitut, e la ma sia extenduda a las partidas dejos, e l’autre cos sia suspendut de l’autre part, quar la junctura intra tantost.	 When the space between the patient's thighs has been prepared and cushioned, place both hands on top of the scale towards its height, while keeping one arm extended for support, in order to prevent the joint from sliding too far inwards
E cum le intrament de lu es complit segon quascuna maniera que es a tu possibla, e lahoras cove que tu pauses dejos le titillic spera de lana de engual quantitat; e aprop pauza emplastre perparat de polvera de moli am enses e album de huou sobre tot le muscle, ayssi quo es revolvut desus, e aprop strenh dejos le titillic am strictura decent; e le liament sia revolvut sobre le emplastre, e la ma de lu sia annectida al col de lu, e sia leyssat, e no sia mauguda la ma de lu per vii dias.	 When the joint is complete in any manner that seems possible to you, and pain occurs at the heel of the foot, it is customary for doctors to recommend treatment with a mixture of honey and album powder over all the muscle, so as to cool it down, and stretch it gently, ensuring that both hands hold onto the elbow while laying it on the ground. If it moves around in any way after this, then you should tighten its position gently without causing harm to your hand for at least three days.
E cove que sia pausada la vianda del malaute pauca, entro que·l membre sia confortat, quar es pus leugier a la sanacio de lu.	 After the wound of the patient has been properly cleaned and bandaged to ensure comfort, then proceed to healing care.
E aprop la vianda sia donada major aprop vii o v e sia exercitat un movement; e donc si es fermat e no es mollificat, lahoras ja es sanat.	 After the wound has been given the correct amount of pressure either vertically or horizontally and if it is tight but not loose, then you have done everything correctly.
Mays si la junctura es dislocada motas veguadas per humiditat que accideys a lu o per autra causa, lahoras cove que en aquela sia administrat cauteri am tres traucs, segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri.	 If the joint has become dislocated due to external factors like moisture or any other cause, then you should administer three cuts in order of first cut from above towards below as mentioned in the chapter on cautery.
E si tot aysso es fayt e aprop vii dias es desliat le liament e la junctura no es fermada, e le emplastre e la strictura son reduzitz sobre lu alcunas veguadas, e no es fermada e catz e no pot elevar aquel bras a las partidas desus, lahoras sapias que·ls nervis de lu, les quals so al cap del muscle, ja so inscizes o extendutz o mollificatz, e sapia que la junctura nul temps no sira ficada en loc sieu.	 When the ligament and joint are not fixed, and the aperture is reduced on the knuckles, and it cannot be raised to its original height by lifting one arm only, then you know that the joint will not heal in its usual place
De la dislocacio de aquela qu’es fayta deves le pietz e la mamilha o las partidas detras, la reduccio es fayta am impulcio e extencio am las mas, entro que retorne.	 From the dislocation of that which is caused by you putting pressure on the back or behind, the reduction must be done quickly and forcefully to come out immediately
E sia administrada en aquela l’autra strictura, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	 When treating another hernia, also treat this one as well
E si accideys aprop la sanacio gravitat en le membre e tarditat en le movement de lu, lahoras le malaute uze de banh motas veguadas entro que aquela gravitat sia alleujada e que retorne a la natura de lu primiera.	 If you apply treatment on the member and delay its movements, then doctors must ensure that the gravity is eliminated and returns to normal first.
Capitol .xxvii.	 The final sentence of the treatise.
De curacio de dislocacio del coyde.	 Treatment for dislocation
Sapias que la junctura del coyde es dislocada am difficultat e semblantment retorna am difficultat; e aquela es dislocada a totas partidas, e majorment a la partida denant a la partida detras, e la dislocacio de lu no es amaguada a tu quar es cazent dejos le vezement o dejos le tocament segon qualque figura sia dislocat, e quan ajustes le coyde disloguat am le sa, aquo es a tu declarat manifestament, quar la junctura es concavada e no pot doblar le bras, ni tocar am aquel le sieu muscle.	 If the dislocation of the knee is difficult and painful to return as difficult or painful; if it occurs at both sides, more commonly behind and in front; and when you fix the knee, this is a declaration that the joint is concave and cannot straighten its arms or touch the chest itself.
E cove que·t coytes, e reduzescas la dislocacio tantost denant que vengua a lu apostema caut, quar si ve a lu apostema caut, dificil es la reduccio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot; e majorment quan es a las partidas detras, quar pus mala es de totas las autras specias de dislocacio, e de major dolor, e motas veguadas deyssen am aquela la mort.	 "The pain is caused by the cold humors that infiltrate every part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet.
E la restauracio de lu, quan es aquela que es possibla reduzir, es que la ma de lu sia extenduda am doas mas, e le bras de lu sia expandut, e las mas del metge sian sobre le coyde e dejos lu, e el empellisca la junctura am les pouzes de las suas mas ensemps, o am la razit de la sua palma entro que torne en son loc.	 "To restore it when possible is to extend the foot with two fingers, and spread his hand so that the toes cannot come out.
Mays si la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras retorna ayssi que dobla la ma am la sua ma, entro que percuta le coyde am la razit de la sua palma.	 "If the dislocation is at the joints, then return it as quickly as possible by cutting off the affected part of the palm.
E si la dislocacio no obezeys a la reduccio, lahoras aministra vehement extencio e mot fort.	 "And if the dislocation cannot be corrected, the pain will increase and become more severe.
E es que dos ministres extendan le bras, e tenguan aquel eyssament dos ministres per so que no sia remaugut deves la extencio.	 "Two servants extend his arms, holding him in such a way that he does not escape the increase of pain.
E aprop sia revolvut le bras deves tota part, pus que es envolopat drap doblat lonc sobre la ma de lu, o liament.	 "Place both hands tightly wrapped around his arm above the elbow or shoulder joint to prevent him from escaping the increase in pain.
E quant le metge toca la junctura am la sua ma, unte aquela am alcun oli per so que aquo sia aquelas causas las quals ajudan en lubricitat de la junctura am facilitat; e aprop empellesca la junctura am empulcio vehement entro que retorne.	 "When the doctor touches the joint with his finger, he then applies a poultice vigorously in order to relieve it.
E aprop la reduccio de lu cove que sia pausat sobre aquela empastre en le qual sia stipticitat e excequacio am album de huou, e sia extrenhut am strictura descent, e·l bras sia suspendut del col, e sia layssat per alcus dias.	 "Place the restraint over that opening where it is stiff and painful to touch, and stretch tight as you can.
E aprop sia desliat; e donc si la junctura es formada en le sieu loc, lahoras tu deslia le liament de lu e layssa aquela.	 "Place a restraint over the joint if it is formed in that location, then apply a bandage to it and hold it tightly.
E si vezas la junctura no be strenher, lahoras tu itera le emplastre e·l liament, e layssa aquela per alcus dias entro que sia extrenhuda; e aprop deslia aquela.	 "If the joint is not too stiff, then apply a bandage and hold it tightly until it becomes tighter.
Mays si accideys a lu gravitat aprop la reduccio de la junctura, e la disposicio de lu es en movement, lahoras aministra humectacio en banh e fricacio subtil, e comprecio, entro que sia aleujat; o pausa sobre la junctura aleliati, so es coyssa de moto grassa; e aprop sia liada, e layssa aquela sobre le os le dia e la nueyt.	 "If a heavy restraint is applied to the joint and movement of the body is observed, then apply moist heat and gentle friction until loosened, or pause on the joint with firm grip in order to prevent it from coming out.
E aprop osta aquela, e met aquel en banh; e quan suza, lahoras tu fregua la junctura am fricacio temprada, e aprop itera sobre aquela aleliati, so es ronhonal de moto, una veguada, e la segonda, e la .iii.a.,	 "Then apply the bandage and put it in a warm bath; when you are done, then gently rub the joint with friction until loosened, or place it on your finger tips for a while.
am intrament de banh, entro que sia linit.	 "In the end of the bath, loosen up as much as possible.
E si voles, pausa sobre aquela fenda de vaca humida e scalfada am boder e stren sobre aquel; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas, quar aquela es humida e reduzeys a la sua disposicio.	 "If you wish to continue the process after the bath, then place it in between wet and dry areas of your body, gently rubbing it until it becomes moist and loosens up.
Capitol .xxviii.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, it is customarily called gout by doctors
De curacio de dislocacio de malassen, so es de la junctura que es entre·l bras e la ma.	 When dislocated bones occur in or near joints, this indicates an issue with that joint.
Malassen de la ma alcunas vetz es deslocada, e la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es leugiera, e·l contrari es de las autras juncturas, mays empero cove que sia velocitat en la reduccio de lu en la hora en la qual es deslocada, denant que le loc sia apostemat o que accida en lu apostema caut.	 When the arm or hand is dislocated and reducing it is recommended to do so quickly, but if the dislocation occurs in the opposite direction (towards your body), then you should seek medical assistance as soon as possible through either of these two options:
E la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es que tu pauses la junctura de la ma del malaute sobre una taula e le ministre extenda la ma de aquel, e le metge pause la sua ma o o la sua palma sobre la iminencia de la junctura, e empellisca aquela entro que retorne al sieu loc.	 When reducing the dislocation of an arm or hand, place it on a flat surface and have your doctor extend your other hand onto it so that you can feel for its return to its proper position.
Mays empero cove que sia considerat si la palma ja es ostada al ventre de la ma, lahoras le malaute pause le dos de la sua ma sobre una taula deves la extencio e la reduccio; e si la dislocacio es precedent deves le dos de la ma, lahoras sia la posicio de la ma de aquel intrinicequement sobre la taula, per so que la ma del metge caja sobre aquela iminencia de la junctura.	 If the palm of your hand is elevated towards your stomach and you want to reduce it, place both hands on a flat surface and have your doctor extend one hand onto it while reducing; and if the dislocation occurred downwards then place both hands on a flat surface and let the physician's hand be placed in an intrinsic position on the table so that their palm is over the area.
E donc si retorna tantost, bon es; e sino, lahoras strenh aquela am empastre cedant le apostema e layssa aquel; e no iteres aquo, quar sino, no soferta ni no podes sobre la reduccio de lu pus que passan a lu dias.	 And if he returns with that, good. But if not, have him strengthen the arm and make an effort to reduce it further without delay.
Mays empero la junctura roman segon la sua tortuositat; e no notz al malaute alcuna causa, sino que la ma es mollificada e no pot strenher alcuna causa; lahoras sapias que les nervis son trincatz o trissatz, e lahoras no es engen en lu sino que sia strenhuda am cauteri prop le cazament de lu e fort leu aquo confereys alcuna causa.	 When the joint is bent or twisted and there's no external cause, then it softens the muscles and cannot withstand any force; doctors know this as gout.
Donc cum malassem es retornada, lahoras pausa sobre lu empastre le qual havem recomtat, e sia layssat e strenhut per v dias; e aprop sia desliat e sia layssat e la ma de lu sia excercitada.	 After that has been done and they are resting the area as recommended, you should stretch it gently with your hand on days to come; and make sure their arm is exercised
Mays si le movement de lu es ostat e accideys en lu alcuna gravitat, lahoras leniys aquela am aygua cauda e am fricacio alcunas veguadas, entro que sia alleujat.	 If the movement of it causes swelling and discomfort in any way that relieves it, then make sure to use water for cleansing and soothing.
Capitol .xxix.	 Chapter xxix.
De la curacio de dislocacio dels ditz.	 The care of dislocations of the joints.
Alcunas veguadas so dislocatz les ditz a tota partida.	 Some guidelines to prevent dislocation of the joints from happening at all.
E quan es dislocat alcun dit de aquels al dos de la palma o al ventre de lu, lahoras sten le dit e impelleys la dislocacio de lu am les tieus pouses, entro que retorne.	 When a joint is dislocated between the two of your palm or stomach, then you should hold it and prevent its dislocation from happening again by placing them in proper positions, returning to where they were before.
E aprop sostenta le cap del dit, e suspen aquel deves la part a la qual es dislocat, e layssa aquel per dos dias.	 Then, hold the top of it and suspend one from the opposite side so that you place them both on where they were before for two days.
E aprop suspen aquel e exten aquel entro que dreyt sia engualhat en aquel sieu dia.	 Then hang it up and stretch it until right is equal in both sides of its own day.
E quan sira noyt, lia aquel segon aquela narracio, e no cesses desliar aquel en le dia e exercitar am movement, e lia aquel en la noyt; e fay aquo per alcus dias entro que sia streyt.	 When it begins to rain, let that second one begin its narration, and do not cease from lying in the day until you exercise regularly, and lie down at night; and stay like this for as long as it lasts
E fay semblant am aquo, si es dislocat al ventre de la ma, e lia aquel ad aquela partida e fay am aquo la tieua primiera operacio, entro que sia sanat.	 It's also customary to do the same thing if the dislocation occurs in the belly of a woman, and lie down on one side and perform your first operation there as long as it is necessary for her health
E semblantment fay am aquo quan es dislocat a las autres partidas.	 The same thing is done when it happens at other parts.
Capitol .xxx.	 Certainly, please provide more context or the specific text you would like me to translate.
De la curacio de dislocacio dels spondils del dos.	 Of the care of dislocations in two spinal joints.
Quan accideys ad alcun dels spondils del dos o del col dislocacio complida, e so remaugutz motz spondils de lors locs, lahoras en aquela no es curacio, quar la mort se coyta al malaute.	 If any of the two spinal joints or the neck dislocates completely and causes death to the patient, then the treatment is not care but rather an emergency surgery, because death may occur in such cases.
E senhal de aquo es que la egestio del malaute es fora-eyssida ses voluntat, e no pot retenir aquela; e motas veguadas so mollificatz alcus membres de lu o doas cambas de lu o dos brasses de lu, o un de aquels; o es remaugut un spondil de son loc, quar motas veguadas es remaugut e motas veguadas es fayta la remocio de aquels a quatre partidas.	 The point here is that the evacuation of the patient's bowels is not voluntary and cannot be retained; therefore, some members are cut off from one to four parts depending on which member it was from.
Donc aquela ja es remauguda a las partidas detras e es nompnada gelbozitat.	 That has been removed behind and is no longer available for use.
Mays la curacio de lu es que lahoras consideras si la gelbozitat accidey de puerissia, quar lahoras en aquela no es curacio ni de aquela no es sanacio de tot.	 The treatment of it is that if the disease occurs in childhood, then neither care nor treatment for this condition can be found anywhere.
Mays en aquela que ve per cazement o per percussio o per semblant ad aquels, ja diyssero les Antics las manieras de curacio am sermo prolixs, del qual lo mays retorna am profieyt; mays yeu ja e abreujat de aquel del qual lo pauc escusa del trop de lu, per la mieua propinquitat a la entencio mieua exposicio, am la qual he aquo expausat et format ex instrument divers de aquel am le qual mostrero aquo e espausero aquel.	 When you strike or press on those areas, then the ancient ways of treatment should be used, by which they return to normal function; but if it is insufficient due to excessive swelling of the limb, for proximity to that part, then this has been applied and it will stop that from happening.
E dic que en gelbosita que accideys de la partida denant en le pietz, no es engen ni sanacio de aquela; e semblantment en aquela que es fayta a dos latz.	 That is to say, when the gout attack occurs in the foot, it's neither healing nor treatment for that part itself; and similarly with two legs.
E de aquelas no es curada sino aquela que accideys en le dos propriament am aquo que yeu recomti.	 It is not cured but rather to apply where you recommended.
E es que·l malaute sia extendut sobre la sua cara sobre pug engual prop de paret, e sia extendut dejos lu esturment molh per so que no sia lidit le pietz de lu.	 It is that the patient should be stretched over your face as close to a wall as possible, and held wet for some time in order not to lose consciousness due to the pain of the limb.
E aprop un fust dreyt sia pausat, ficat en la terra en la extremitat del pug entorn le cap de lu, e autra fust en aviro les pes de lu en l’autra extremitat del pueg.	 Place a pillow in front of the patient's face and hold it firmly on the ground near their head, another pillow for supporting their feet at the other end of the bed.
E·l ministre tengua le fust, e no sia fermat en fossa; e autre ministre tengua l’autre segon aquela forma.	 The minister holds the pillow and does not firmly grasp it in place; another minister should hold the other one as well.
E aprop envolopa sobre le cap del malaute e dejos les titillic liamen leon ferm; e exten la extremitat del liamel al fust le qual es deves le cap de lu, e lia aquel en lu; e aprop strenh l’autre liament sobre las ancas de lu les denols de lu, e deves las cambas de lu; e aprop ajusta totz les liamentz e lia aquels en l’autre fust le qual es deves les pes de lu.	 The minister covers the patient's head and tightly holds them down gently; extends one arm towards the foot which is on his chest, places that on him as well; adjusts all the bandages and ties them in place to prevent the limbs from moving.
E aprop le ministre cascu extenda le liament a la partida del fust, e no sian remaugutz les dos fustz e les liamentz dels sieus locs en les quals son ficatz, mays empero no so fermatz ayssi cum havem dit.	 When the minister's case is extended to the part of the fist, and not remove both fists or any of its ties from the places where they are fixed, may it be so firmly tied as I said
E le metge pause las suas palmas sobre le spondil am fortaleza entro que retorne, o que pause sobre aquela una taula, e aprop que ajuste sobre la taula les sieus pes entro que retorne.	 The doctor places his palms on the spinal column, and then rests over a table, and arranges them on the table as they come back
Mays si no retorna per aquesta forma, lahoras pren una taula de la qual la latitut o la longitut sia en aviro de tres brassas, e cava en la paret de la qual havem dit que es prop le malaute un loc en le qual intre la extremitat de la taula.	 If this does not work out then they take a table whose length or width is three spans, and place it against the wall where we said that the patient should be placed on one side of the table
E aprop pausa la maytat de la taula sobre le spondilh, e·l metge pause les sieus pes sobre l’autre extremitat, e estrenha be entro que le spondil sia coartat e que retorne al sieu loc.	 The doctor places their palms on the spinal column, and then rests them over another extremity, and starts to bring it back towards its place
E si tu voles, obre am torn le qual es revolvut am la ma; e es que tu fiques en terra deves le cap del malaute en le derier del pug dos fustz, la longitut dels quals sia d’un bras, e deves le cap de lu en le derier del pug eyssament dos fustz; e sia la longitut que es entre quascun fust un palm, e ja es fayt en quascun fust trauc en le qual corr torn, e quascun sia mot fermat en terra per so que no sia maugut.	 If you want to do it lying down then place the patient's head towards their right hand fist, and align them with each other by their length; if they are one arm long, put both in line on the ground touching each other
E sia mes un fust redon en le qual es le torn, e sia revolvut en les dos traucs dels dos fustz.	 And have all of them arranged so that their turn is at one end and they are rotated in both the two fists
E en la extremitat de lu es un trauc en le qual es format le fust, la longueza del qual es un palm am aquo que es revolvut; e en les dos autres fustz es semblant de aquel.	 In the extremity of him there is a tract in which it is formed by the fist, its length is an indication that it is rolled up; and on the two other fists they are similar to this one
E aprop strenh les liamentz que has streyt en le pietz del malaute en le trau le qual es deves le cap de lu, e les liamentz que has streyts en las coyssas de lu en le torn le qual es deves les pes de lu.	 Then you must bind the patient's feet to his trunk in such a way that they are stretched out and bound tightly around it; then you must tie them on their thighs where they are fastened down firmly, making sure not to let any part of their legs or buttocks protrude.
E aprop deves quascun torn e stia un ministre que torssa le torn am la sua ma, e le metge engualhe le spondil segon que havem dit.	 You must also tie a minister tightly around the hand that will stretch it, and bind the second minister to it after you say your prayer has been said.
E aquesta es la forma del torn:	 This is how the bandage should be tied:
E aprop pus que le spondil es retornat, e le loc es engualhat, lahoras cove que pauses empastre exciccatiu am album de huou, e aprop estopa; e aprop pause sobre le empastre astela de taula de la qual la latitut sia de tres ditz o enviro aquels, e la longitut de lu sia quantitat que prengua le loc de la gelbositat, e sobre la partida del spondil sa.	 After the bandage is retied and tightened properly, they will say your prayer has been said; then place it on a table where its latitude is at 3 digits or less than that, and its length as much as necessary to cover the body, over the bandage's part of the shoulder.
E aprop sia liat am liament le qual havem dit, e uze le malaute de nutriment subtil entro que sia sanat.	 Then bind it with a small band that is gentle and will not harm the patient.
E si roman alcuna iminencia en le loc en la fi de la sanacio, lahoras cove que sian aministradas medicinas que moilifico e liniscan am aministracio de la taula per lonc temps, la qual havem recomtada; e ja es aministrada en aquel loc lamina de plom.	 If there is no immediate danger in the location where healing takes place, they will give you medications to drink that are pleasant and nourishing for administration by a long time, which has been recommended; then it should be given in this place with water.
E alcunas veguadas accideys imminencia en le derier dels spondils del dos, e es cujat per aquela dislocacio; e es aquel os le qual ja imineys per que no cove que sia fayta prosompcio a lu am aquesta medicina, quar fort leu fara a tu accidir mort.	 "Joints pain occurs suddenly in the lower part of the spine and is accompanied by displacement, which causes great harm if it doesn't happen to be treated promptly with this medicine or you will die.
Capitol .xxxi.	 Chapter 32
De curacio de anca dislocada.	 About dislocated bones
Sapias que la junctura del ancha e la junctura del muscle no endeve sino dislocacio tant solament, e no accideys ad aquelas aquo que accideys a las autras juncturas de petita remocio e concavitat.	 Only the large joint and the muscle joint can be dislocated; however, they are more likely to occur in smaller joints with convexity or concavity.
E la junctura de la ancha es dislocada segon quatre manieyras, quar es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, o a las partidas defora, o a las partidas denant, o a las partidas detras.	 The large joint can be dislocated in four ways: if it is dislocated from the front or back of its range of motion, or to the side that is opposite its own side (if the patient has recently been injured on one side), and if the patient lies down with their head turned towards a particular direction.
E majorment es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, e pauc a las partidas denant o a las partidas detras.	 The large joint can also be dislocated to the front or back of its range of motion, but less commonly in smaller joints that are concave or convex towards it.
E senhal de la dislocacio de lu a las partidas de dintz es quar, quan tu ajustas la camba del malaute sana am la malaute, es pus longua e·l denolh es pus heminent que de la sana, e·l malaute no pot doblar le sieu pe deves le lenguonar, e es le loc que siec le lengonar apostemat de apostema caut, per so que·l cap de la coyssa ja es pervengut aqui.	 If the dislocation occurs to the front of the thigh as you move the cushion from the patient's buttocks down towards their feet, it is a bit longer and harder when done this way because the foot cannot bend its leg; so please ensure that the head of the stretcher is positioned properly or else the head may be injured.
E·l senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio es a las partidas defora, es que les accidentz de lu so contraris ad aquest accident.	 When an injury occurs to someone who has had a dislocation, it is customary that the injuries of this person are contrary to that particular injury.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas denant es quar expan la camba sieua segon compliment, mays empero no dobla aquela ses dolor que es en le denol, e si se perforsa ad anar e no pot sobre aquo a las partidas denant; e la urina de lu es retenguda e l’engonar de lu es apostemat, e deves la ambulacio de lu sobre le talo.	 If an injury occurs to someone who has already had a dislocation at that point the bladder of them will be retained and their breath held back while they are being carried on a stretcher.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas detras es que no expande le denol, ni no puesca doblar aquel denant que doble le engonar, e la camba de lu es pus breva que l’autra, e l’engonar es mollificat, e·l cap de la coyssa es deves aquel loc.	 If an injury occurs to someone who has already had a dislocation at that point the pain will not spread further and cannot be doubled while their bladder is retained and their breath is held back, their limbs are kept short and their breathing relaxed, and the head of their stretcher must be maintained in this position.
Mays reduccio de las specias de aquesta dislocacio es que tu consideras, lahoras, si la dislocacio es vetusta et antiqua, que ja es anticada am le havent aquela aprop tu aministras reduccio de lu e roman segon la sua disposicio, lahoras no es en aquela curacio de tot; e adonc no cove que en aquela sia fayta prosompcio.	 The measures for this dislocation are as follows: if the dislocation is old and antique then you should already have administered reduction to it and may proceed with your treatment of that person, but in any case do not forget to apply the remedy after all.
Mays en aquel del qual la dislocacio es recent, e es una de las quatre specias de dislocacio, lahoras te coyta ad aquo que volvas la junctura e extendas aquela a las partidas dedintz e a las partidas defora, e mau aquela a la dextra e sinistra, quar fort leu retorna e no indigeys de autra cura.	 If the dislocation is recent and one of the four types of dislocations, then hold it at both ends while extending that towards the front and back, to the right and left sides, return it gently but do not apply any other treatment.
Mays, si no retorna en aquesta manieyra, lahoras cove que tu prepares ministre fort e extendas la camba de lu de la partida pus dejos, o am las suas mas, o am liament lo qual es liat sobre la camba desus le denol; e autre ministre extenda la ma de aquel desus enayssi que meta las suas mas dejos les titillics de lu; e aprop strenha am liament leon sobre la razit de la coyssa, e tengua autre ministre ters le extremitat del liament.	 "Gently, if you do not return to this condition, the pains that come from it will make your preparations very long and stretch out their limbs as much as they are able; or else they will strike them on the chest with great force, making them tremble.
E sia extencio de lu o de la partida dedintz a l’angonar a la partida de la furcula, o de la partida detras a la partida del dos.	 "And the opening of the stomach to that of the chest bone, or from behind to the front part of it.
E sia la extencio de totz aquels en una veguada entro que·l malaute sia elevat am le sieu cos de terra e que romangua pendent.	 "And the opening of everything in a straight line, from the head to the feet being elevated and hanging downward.
E aquesta specia de extencio es specia cominal a totas quatre.	 "This special type of opening is common for all four.
E donc si la dislocacio retorna am aquo que havem dit, sira bo; e sino, lahoras es necessari a tota specia aquo que dire de la propria curacio.	 "And if the dislocation returns to this as we mentioned before, then that is good; otherwise it's necessary for all of us to speak about our own cure.
En la reduccio de lu propria, quan es dislocada, e la dislocacio es a las partidas dedintz, cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu latz sa; e aprop pausa les liamentz sobre la razit de la coyssa en aquel loc le qual entre le cap de la coyssa e·l loc que es dejos le langonar; e aprop exten le liament en sus de la part del angonar a la pus auta partida de la furcula.	 "In reducing the dislocation, when it is dislocated and the dislocation occurs in between the head of the joint and the location where the pain originates from; and extend both sides of the area with a pointed cautery.
E aprop autre ministre fort prengua les brasses de lu, e amerme le loc gros de la coyssa malaute e extenda a las partidas deforo per extencio vehement, quar aquela retorna en le sieu loc.	 "And place your hand firmly on the large area of the patient's chest and extend it to both sides for violent opening, so that if it returns in its original location.
E aquesta specia es de pus leugiera curacio am la qual aquest membre es reduzit que las autres specias.	 "This special treatment reduces pain in a way that this member responds differently than others.
Mays si es excusat sobre tu e no obezeys al entrament am aquesta specia de curacio de tot, lahoras cove que sian liatz les dos pes del malaute ensemps am liament fort, leugier, sobre amdos les talos e amdos les denols.	 "If you are excused from trying the treatment and find it does not alleviate your pain significantly enough, lie on both sides of the abdomen for comfort.
E sia la longitut de quascun de son par la quantitat de quatre ditz, e sia la camba malaute extenduda mays que l’autre per quantitat de dos ditz.	 "The length of each arm by the amount of four inches and the patient's hand extended for an amount of two inches.
E aprop le malaute sia suspendut sobre le cap del fust, e que sia en la mayso; e sia la longitut de lu de la terra la quantitat de dos brasses.	 "Place the patient on their back and raise it as high as possible; and make the length of its feet two inches.
E aprop comanda a un jove fort que minuesca le cap de la coyssa, e sia suspendut am le malaute autre jove, e l’autre jove minuent la coysa am fortaleza empellesca, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	 "Send for a strong youth to gently touch the patient's head; hold it against another youth, and let him press lightly on it with force, so that the joint returns to its place rapidly.
Mays en la reducio propria, quan es dislocacio a la partida defora, cove que·l malaute jaga sobre pug segon que havem recomtat en le havent gelbozitat; e sia strenhut le liament sobre la camba malauta propriament e sobre le pietz de lu.	 "Reduce the pressure yourself when dislocation occurs outside of the joint as mentioned before, and place a pillow under it on its abdomen specifically and over its chest.
E aprop dos fustz sian pausatz, la un als pes de lu, e l’autre al cap; e aprop sian pausatz fustz ajustatz al mieg del pueg ficat sobre·l qual draps humitz sian envolopatz, per so que·l malaute no sia dampnajat per que·l fust sia entre las coyssas de lu, per que deves la extencio a las partidas dejos no sia atirat.	 "Place two cushions one on each side of it, one to its head and the other under its chest; place them carefully in front so that the patient will not be damped by the cushion between their thighs.
E aprop quascun ministre extenda a la sua part, e·l metge am la sua ma enguala la reduccio segon l’art.	 When the minister extends his part, the doctor ties it tightly to prevent movement
Donc, si obezeys a revercio, sira bo grandament; e sino, pausa sobre aquela diligentment e ayssi quo havem dit en gelbozitat per aquela engualment.	 When you reverse it, then do so carefully and gently as before.
Mays cove que·l malaute jagua sobre les sieus latz sa quetament.	 The patient lies on their back, flat.
E quan la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras cove que la camba sia extenduda leugierament, e es segon aquesta meteyssa narracio sobre pueg; e le metge pause la palma de la sua ma dreyta sobre·l langonar malaute, e aprop coarte aquel am l’autra ma, e am aquela coartacio pausa aquel extendut a las partidas dejos a la partida del denol.	 When dislocation occurs during movement, the doctor ensures that the bandage is tightly wrapped around the patient's leg and reads out the account of events; after that, the doctor places their hand over the patient's right hand, then covers it with the other hand, and maintains this hold until the bandage is tightened to prevent further dislocation.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas detras, lahoras no cove que·l malaute sia extendut a las partidas dejos, e es elevat sobre la terra; habantz cove que sia pausat sobre causa dura, ayssi cum cove le eyssament si l’ancha de lu es dislocada a las partidas defora, segon aquo que havem dit del jasement de lu sobre dos anchas; e es sobre la sua cara e les liamentz sian extendutz, segon que havem dit, no ha guayre.	 If the dislocation occurs behind the patient, then the doctor covers them tightly to prevent further movement and supports their head on a firm surface like this: "Support the patient's head gently with one hand while using your other hand to support their body.
E cove que sia aministrada compressio am taula sobre le loc al qual yeys la junctura.	 A compression bandage is applied to the location of the joint.
Donc cum la reducio es complida segon que cove — e·l senhal de la reduccio de lu no es amaguat a tu, e es que tu extendas del malaute doas cambas, e quan tu vezes aquelas enguals e le malaute extrenh la sieua camba e expandeys aquela ses excusacio, lahoras sapias que·l membre segon que cove es retornat — e lahoras tu ajusta doas coyssas e pausa empastre e extrenh am benda ayssi que la ancha no sia mauguda en alcuna de las partidas; e adheresca le malaute a repaus per tres dias o per quatre.	 When the reduction is completed, ensuring that you extend both of your legs from the patient and when you press them together and stretch that opening, the doctor knows that the member will return to where it was before -and the doctor ties two pads and keeps pressure on it for three days or four.
E aprop deslia le liament e l’empastre, e compara la una camba am l’autra.	 The servant should place a cushion under one thigh, compare the leg to the other
Lahoras, si vezas aquelas enguals en vustament, lahoras sapias que la dislocacio ja es fermada, e adonc layssa le malaute anar.	 If you see those joints moving around, know that they are dislocated and should be set back in place
E si vezas alcuna causa de mollificacio, lahoras tu retorna e emplastra aquel, e extrenh aquel segon la tua primiera strectura, e layssa aquel en tres dias.	 If you find any cause of softening, return and stretch that part; then straighten it after the first stretch and leave it for three days
E aprop deslia aquel, e fay aquel tardar en ambulacio sobre quascu per alcus dias, entro que sia confortat.	 The servant should place them on a cushion, wait until they are able to move around in that position for some time, and then make sure they feel comfortable
Capitol .xxxii.	 Chapter xxxii.
De curacio de dislocacio del denolh.	 Of the care of dislocated limbs.
Le denolh es dislocat segon tres manieyras, quar es dislocat a las partidas defora, e a las partidas dedintz, e a las partidas dejos mays a las partidas detras; e a las partidas denant no es dislocat.	 A limb is dislocated after three times outside the body and inside of it, between the joints of the feet, behind the joints of the feet, but never in front.
E le senhal de dislocacio de lu es que comandes al malaute que aplique la sua camba am la coyssa; lahoras sapias que·l denol es dislocat.	 The sign that a limb is dislocated is when you command the patient to apply his cushion on the affected area; then know that the limb has been dislocated.
E la restauracio de totas las manieyras de lu es que fassas cezer le malaute dreyt, enayssi que ja extenda la sieua camba, si pot sobre aquo; adherir le tieu dos a la cara de lu, e pausa le pe de lu entre les tieus pes; e aprop fay adherir le denol de lu am las tuas palmas, e rete aquelas entre les tieus ditz sobre le denolh de lu am fortaleza, e autre ministre extenda le sieu pe entro que·l denol retorne a son loc.	 The restoration of all the muscles is to have the patient hold tight his cushion with both hands; extend it so that its top touches the face and the bottom rests between his feet; after that, put the limb back in place, supporting it with two fingers on each side and extending the foot towards where the limb will return to its normal position.
E senhal de reddicio de lu es que la sua camba adharesca am la coyssa am levitat no-laboroza.	 The first sentence seems to be a command for the servants of the sick person, instructing them on what they should do in order to help the patient.
E aprop emplastra aquel e fay adhirir la camba am la coyssa, e aprop lia aquelas emsemps am una benda per tres dias o per quatre, e aprop deslia aquelas.	 They are to place a cushion between their thighs and under them; provide three or four servants who will stay there for three days or four (I'm not sure about the exact duration); and have those servants.
E no uze le malaute de ambulacio per alcus dias, entro que sia sanat e cofortat.	 The sick person should be carried by their servants from one place to another for a certain number of days, until they are healed and comforted.
Mays si la reduccio de lu a tu es excusada, lahoras aministra fort extencio am liamentz dels quals en la curacio de la hancha precedit narracio.	 If you find the previous explanation to be insufficient or inaccurate, please let us know and we will provide further explanations based on our understanding of the text.
Capitol .xxxiii.	 This is a number that represents Chapter 33 in some works, but I don't have enough context to give you more specific information about its location or what it contains without additional clues from you.
De la curacio de la dislocacio del talo.	 Regarding the dislocation of the elbow.
Le talo alcunas veguadas es remaugut per petita remocio, e alcunas veguadas es dislocat segon compliment, e la dislocacio de lu es fayta o a las partidas dedintz o a las partidas deforo.	 The arm bone may be broken from a slight blow or dislocation in two pieces; and the dislocation of it is either complete or partial.
E le senhal de la dislocacio de lu es que vezes le talo imflat procedent a la partida a la qual es dislocat.	 The sign of dislocation is that times when the arm bone begins to flatten out after being dislocated in the direction it was dislocated.
Mays la curacio de la remocio de lu es de leugiera reddicio, e es que sia extendut am facilitat am las mas e sia engualhat entro que retorne.	 The healing of the sprain is to immobilize it as much as possible and wait for it to return on its own.
Mays en la curacio de lu quan es dislocat segon compliment, cove que fasses cezer le malaute dreyt, e tengua aquel un ministre fort e valent de la partida detras del dos de aquel en le mieg loc de lu.	 When the patient dislocates their second joint, make sure that you squeeze tightly the thigh muscle and hold it firmly behind the two of them in a place like this:
E aprop te tu am la tieua ma dreyta le pe de la pus sobirana part, e am la tua ma sinistra de la part pus dejos del pe en le loc de la cavilha.	 Then take your left arm and put it behind the patient's right thigh in a place like this:
E aprop atira le pe a tu am la tua ma dreyta, e aprop am la sinistra per dos veguadas, e aprop exten am la sinistra; e empelleys le pietz del pe am la dreyta deves la camba ses trebalh.	 After placing the left arm behind the patient's right thigh and holding it there as previously stated, bring your left hand to rest on their chest near the heart:
E fay aquo doas veguadas segon que havem comtat.	 Done after performing those steps previously mentioned.
E aprop empelleys le pietz del pe a la camba la tersa veguada, e tu es a la cavilha.	 After placing your left hand on their chest near the heart and holding it there as previously stated, place your right arm behind the patient's left thigh in this manner:
Donc si retorna en una veguada o en dos segon aquesta manieyra, e si vezes le pe engualhat, es bo; e sino, lahoras sobre lu itera la operacio, quar aquel retorna.	 If you return within a single or two steps to the position already described above, and if he feels comfortable with that, then good. But if not, ask him again about the procedure because otherwise proceed at your own risk.
Mays si a tu es prohibida la reduccio de lu am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu dos sobre terra, e estrenh un paysel mot en terra fermat, e que caja entre las coyssas de lu, e tu ja has envolopat sobre lu drap per so que no ledesca le malaute.	 If you are forbidden from reducing the hernia as advised above, ask him to sit down on a firm ground and place something soft between his thighs and hold it in such a way that nothing can escape through them:
E aprop le ministre de lu tengua las suas coyssas, e aprop autre ministre extenda le pe am las suas mas o am liament que lie sobre le col del pe; e aprop extenda aquel quascun ministre contre extencio del sieu par, e le payssel sia extant entre las coyssas del malaute retinent aquel, per so que·l cos de lu no sia atirat a las partidas dejos deves la sua extencio.	 Then place another minister behind the patient's back in such a way that it extends to the bottom of his leg and places something soft between their thighs as well to keep them from escaping through there:
E aprop le metge enguala la dislocacio am las sieuas mas, e autre ministre tengua la coyssa sana a las partidas dejos, quar la dislocacio retorna am la facilitat.	 When a patient's limbs are placed on a table by the doctor and he makes an incision in their flesh...
E donc cum retorna la dislocacio e es declarada a tu la sanetat de la reduccio de lu, lahoras pausa emplastre e extrenh aquela am liamentz fortment, e ligua le pe am liament a la camba.	 ...the incision is closed and declared to be the reduction of that patient, then the ulcers are bandaged tightly around it, and tied onto their leg.
E cove que temes o te guardes dels nervis les quals so detras sobre le talo, per que le liament sobre aquel no sia vehement e leda aquel fortment.	 And when you hold your breath behind the table, to ensure that the ligature on them is not too tight or ledged tightly onto their leg.
E aprop layssa aquel per dos dias o per tres; e si le liament es mollificat, extrenh aquel.	 The bandage should be left for two days or three; and if it becomes loosened, loosen that one.
E aprop deslia aquel en le ters dia o en le quart, e prohibeys le malaute de anament per xl dias.	 Take the bandage off on the third day or fourth at the latest, and forbid the patient to remove it until twelve days have passed.
Mays si es forsat de anar denant aquel spazi, no es fayta segurtat que la dislocacio no sia sobre lu dissolvuda e corrumpuda, e aprop aquo que no recipia curacio.	 If you are going to remove the bandage soon after it has been applied, make sure that the incision is not broken or damaged, and take care to avoid any medical complications.
E si accideys a lu apostema caut, lahoras cove que tu aministre en la cedacio de lu aquo en lo qual precedic la nostra narracio, en autre loc de curacio e de embrocacio, entro que sia remauguda.	 If the cautery has happened suddenly and it is necessary to make an incision in that place where our story precedes, or some other location for curing and oiling purposes, ensure cleanliness and preparation of the area first.
Capitol .xxxiiii.	 The end
De curacio de dislocacio dels ditz dels pes.	 Treatment of joint pain in the feet.
Cove que aquel qu’es dislocat sia engualhat am pauca extencio ses trebal; e aquo que no es dificil, abantz es leugier.	 That which has been dislocated should be gently lowered onto a table and held there without difficulty.
Mays si la dislocacio es en alcus nozes del dos del pe, lahoras cove que fassas cezer le malaute le sieu pe sobre loc engual de la terra o sobre taula, e sia estant ayssi cum si anava.	 When a dislocation occurs in the two legs of a person, then doctors advise to place the injured limb either on the ground or on a table and let it remain that way.
E aprop tu sta de pes, e pausa le tieu pe sobre aquo que imineys de las juncturas, e aprop calca aquel am le tieu pe am vertut entro que retorne, e que vejas aquel ja engualhat e no aparesca en le loc eminencia.	 And after that you take the foot, and place it on this so that the pain of the joints comes to an end, and then wait for it to return and see that it is still in its natural position and does not appear elsewhere.
E aprop pausa dejos le ventre del pe de lu una taula que prengua tot le pe, a la qual sian dos caps, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent e ferma per tres dias; e aprop deslia aquel e fay aquel repausar de ambulacio per motz dias, entro que sia estrenhut e de reddicio sia assegurat.	 After that you take the foot of him and put it on a table with two legs, and stretch out this stretched area firmly for three days; after that remove it and allow it to rest from walking for three days in order that it is completely healed and its safety can be guaranteed.
Capitol .xxxv.	 Chapter xxxv.
De las specias de dislocacio que sian faytas am plagua o am fractura o am quascuna ensemps.	 Of the species of dislocation that are accompanied by a swelling or fracture, or any other injury to the limb.
Quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, e tu te perforssas en la curacio de aquela e en la restauracio de lu, motas veguadas succezeys la mort.	 When there is a cause of such kind that you attend to its healing and restoration, any further use of these remedies can lead to death.
E per aquo no cove que sobre la curacio de lu presuma, sino aquel que es savi en l’art, de lonc uzatge, misericordios e pietados, tardiu, no-ardit ni presomptuos; e que use en le comensament de medicinas que cedan apostemas cautz tant solament, e leyssa le malaute al divinal jutgament, sino ad aquel al qual speras salut de perdicio, am de la malautia alleviacio, e en la qual appareys alcuna speransa.	 For this reason you should not presume on the healing of him alone, but rather seek one that is skilled in art, long-suffering and compassionate, slow to anger or impatience; use only medicines that are given as a precaution, leaving it up to the divine judgment, nor apply one for relief from sin, salvation from evil, or any hope.
E adonc esforsa te tantost far de lu la reduccio en le comensament de la causa, denant que endevengua apostema caut.	 When it has been done to reduce its size at the beginning of the cause, but if it worsens into a boil
E adonc si le membre retorna segon que volem, lahoras aministra regiment le qual ceda apostema caut e cura la plagua am aquo que conveneys a lu dels enguentz desiccatius.	 If the member returns after we want it, the doctor will provide a treatment regimen that includes applying heat and care to that part of the body affected by the abscesses
E si dislocacio es am fractura e accideys en le os satagias separadas, lahoras tu perforsa le stement de lor, e fay en aquo so que havem dit en las malautias simplas de aquo que es precedit en les locz de aquels.	 If dislocation occurs and the bones are separated, the doctor should perform sutures, but only in places where it was previously mentioned in the previous paragraphs
E guarda e esquiva segon la tua vertut aquel del intrament en las vias de temor segon que a tu es precedida la mia predicacio; quar aquo es milhor a tu deves le tieu Creator, e mays permanent a la tua gloria, e mays saludos al tieu cos verays aquels en le tieu temps.	 If you turn to the opposite of that which is written on this very page where it says before my word; for in truth and for your own welfare, may you always be strengthened by Your Creator and enjoy abundant health for all eternity
Ayssi fineysso las paraulas de Albucasim perfieytament de las quals Dieus ne sia benezeyt.	 The words of Solomon are perfectly executed according to those which God has blessed.
Amen.	 Amen
