Ayssi comensan las paraulas de Albucasim .	 When joints are inflamed by cold humors that infiltrate every part of the body, then pain occurs in the feet, it's customary to call gout when doctors examine it.
O, filhs, pus yeu he a vos complit aquest libre, le qual es le derier de la sciencia de medicina, per le compliment de lu so consequit la fi en lu, e per las exposicios de lu, e per las declaracios de lu, es a mi vist que yeu complesca aquel a vos am aquest tractat, le qual es partida de la operacio am ma, so es cyrurgia.	 O, children, please proceed to read this very important book, which is the last of science in medicine and serves as its completion, for making it known that you have completed this treatise on surgery, as part of your medical studies.
Quar la operacio am ma es prostrada en nostre regio e en nostre temps de tot privada, entro que fort leu peric la sciencia de lu, e le vistigi de lu es ostat; e no romasero de lu sino alcunas petitas descripcios en les libres dels Antics, les quals mudero las mas e endevenc ad aquels error e heyssitacio entro que son clausas las entencios de lu e es elonguada la forsa de lu e l’art.	 The operation in our region and time is quite private, with the knowledge of its science and its secrets; no description was written down, except for a few small descriptions in ancient books that could reveal some errors and shortcomings within it, and therefore those who want to know about it must also attend lectures on its length and form.
E es vist a mi que yeu vivifique aquela am ordenacio de aquest tractat en aquela segon la via de exposicio e de declaracio e de abreviacio; e per que vengua am las formas dels ferramentz de cautheri e dels autres instrumentz de la obra cum sia per addicio de la declaracio, e per preparacio de lu, la qual causa es necessaria.	 It is to be seen that you should make the arrangement of this treatise in a way of exposition and declaration, by abbreviation; and for its forms to be arranged as follows, so that all the necessary instruments can add their declarations, and for preparation purposes only, which are necessary.
Mays la causa per la qual no es atrobat bo artifex am la sieua ma en aquest nostre temps, es quar la art de medicina es longua, e que cove le sieu actor denant aquo esser excercitat en la sciencia de anotomia la qual recontec Gualia entro que sapia les juvament dels membres e las formas de aquels, e la conjunctio e la separacio de lor; e haia la conoyssensa dels osses, dels nervis e dels lacertz, e·l nombre de aquels, e la egrecio de lor; e de las venas pulsatils e de las quietas, e dels locs del eyssiment de lor.	 The reason for this is that the art of medicine is long, and it would be a good thing if he were to practice anatomy with knowledge of the youth of members' parts and their shapes, connections and separations; also joints and separations between bones, nerves and ligaments, as well as names of them and descriptions. It should include veins and arteries, locations for the circulation of blood in them.
E per aquo ditz Ypocras que am u nom es mot, mays en l’obra petit, e majorment en la art de la ma.	 And through this means you will say that Ypocras is named, may it be short in its work and most significant in the field of medicine
Mays nos ja avem dit de aquel en l’introit de aquest libre; quar qui no es scient aquo que li avem dit de anotomia, no es evacuat que no caia en error per la qual siran mortz les homes, ayssi cum yeu he vist trops de aquels, quar alscus son formatz en esta sciencia e gettan se de aquela ses sciencia e ses experiment.	 That is to say that the knowledge of anatomy should come first in this course; for those who do not know it may go astray and cause great harm both to themselves and others as has been seen many times, because they are ignorant of the science of medicine itself
Quar yeu vi un metge folh e enperit aver incidit un apostema escrophilos en le colh de una femna, e incidic alcunas arterias del colh per que fluic gran sanc entro que la femna cazec morta entre las mas de lu.	 A surgeon found a fistula in the abdomen of a woman and could not stop the great bleeding that occurred when she died between
E vi un autre metge que pres que el traguera una peyra d’un home le qual avia procesit en sa etat, e la peyra era gran, e venguet a lu e trayssec aquela peyra am un tros de la vesiqua, per que aquel home al tertz dia es mort.	 Another surgeon tried to remove the wart of a man who had already undergone surgery on his leg, but he could not remove it and the man died three days later
E yeu ja apelat fuy a estrayre aquela, e vi que per la grandesa de la peyra e per la disposicio del malaute conogui subre lu que morira.	 You had already appealed to do this; you saw that because of the size of the wart and the condition of the patient's leg it was likely they would die.
E vi un autre metge le qual prenia stipendic de un duc de nostra terra per cyrurgia, e endeven a un crastrat negre le qual era deves lu fractura en la coyssa de lu; e perparec le metge am la sua ignorancia, estrayssec la fractura, sobre la plagua, am pulvinas e astelas am forta strectura, e no layssec a la plagua espiracio.	 Another surgeon took care of the bone fracture in the leg of a nobleman from our land who had undergone surgery; but through his ignorance, he left the break open, over the wound, on the chest and back, leaving him with severe damage, not healing the wound itself.
E aprop le desliet segons los sieus desiriers, e aprop le relieg, e aprop le leyssec per alcus jorns e comandec que nos deslies le liament; e estec ayssi entro que la coyssa e·l pe foro apostematz, e pervenguet a perdicio.	 When you have done everything according to their desires and the ritual, place yourself in front of them, facing east, and ask for their command
E yeu fuy apelat a lu, e aparelhegui a desliar le liament, e conseguida es tranquilitat e enayssi amermet de sas dolors.	 You have asked the person to grant you the ritual, and if they are peaceful and willing to give it to you
Mays empero ja corrupcio era confermada en le membre, per que no pogui refrenar aquela, e no cessec perambular la corrupcio en le membre entro que·l malaute peric.	 However, if the corruption has already spread to a part of the body and cannot be stopped there, you will not be able to stop it in that part of the body
E vi un autre metge le qual perforec un apostema cancros, e fo ulcerat aprop alscus dias, entro que foc magnificada la malicia de lu am lo senhor de lu.	 There was another doctor who cured an abscess by applying a cautery on the days in which he greatly magnified its malice and caused the patient to become very ill.
La qual causa es quar le cranc caut es pur de humor melencolic, lahoras no cove que pervengua a lu am ferr de tot, sino que sia an membre le qual suffertes que de tot fos hostat.	 The cause is that the cold humors are pure and should not be allowed to spread throughout all of it, but only in the part where you suffer
E per aquo, filhs, necessari es a vos que la operacio am ma sia devisada en dos devesios: so es en operacio a lu qual es associada salut, e en obra am la qual es perilh en las majors disposicios.	 Therefore, brothers and sisters, it is necessary to perform the operation in two ways: one is for the operation that is associated with health, and another which is risky on the major parts of the body.
E yeu ja he exsitat aquo en tot loc de aquest libre en le qual venc opperacio en la qual es error e temor; per que necessari es a vos que guardetz aquo e layssetz aquel, per que les folhs no atrobo via a parlar e a vos desonestar.	 You have already existed in that place where the operation exists which is error and fear; because it is necessary for you to keep this one and set aside that one, so that people do not follow through on what was said and make threats.
E donc prenetz las vostras armas am sollicitut e am proteccio de Dieu , e les vostres malautes am falicitat e am fermetat.	 "And may your wounds be healed by God, and your misfortunes be silenced and quieted.
E usatz de la milhor via per la gracia de Dieu perdusent a salut e a lausabla successio, e laysatz las malautias terriblas de difficil sanacio, e ostatz las vostras armas de aquo que vos fa temer, per so que ysitatio en vostra fe e en le vostre nom no vos evasisca: quar mays es remanent a la vostra gloria, e pus aut en le mon e en derier a las vostras sanctitatz.	 "And may you find strength through the grace of God to overcome and conquer your trials, heal your terrible wounds with great ease, and preserve your weapons from fear so that no harm comes upon you, lest in faith or name weakness strikes at.
Gualia ja diyssec en alcunas sieuas monicios:	 "Beware of any cunning tricks:
“No mediquetz malautia mala, per so que mals metges no siatz nompnatz”.	 "Do not mix diseases with magic; otherwise, ill-practicing doctors will call themselves healers.
E yeu ja he devesit aquest libre segontz tres capitols.	 "You must complete this task in three parts:
Comensa la divisio del libre, e primier de la primieyra partida.	 "Begin the division of the book and first part of the first chapter.
Le primier capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, en las formas dels instrumentz e en les ferrementz dels cauteris, e de aquo que necessari es en la opperacio.	 "The first chapter begins with an introduction to instruments and procedures of the cauteries, and what is necessary in action.
La divisio de la segonda partida.	 "Division of the second part:
Le segon capitol, de siccio e perforacio, e de ventosas, e de plaguas, e de extractio de sagetas e de semblantz ad aquelas, tot capitolat e ordenat de las formas dels instrumentz.	 "The second chapter begins with discussion and drilling, and venting, and plaguing, and extraction of stakes and witnesses to those events, all chapters in order as the forms of instruments.
Divisio de la tersa partida.	 "Division of the third part:
Le tertz capitol, de restauracio e de dislocacio, e de curacio de torcio e de semblantz ad aquels; capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, e de las formas dels instrumentz.	 "The third chapter begins with restoration and displacement, and healing of sores and witnesses to those.
De cauteri am foc e am medicina aguda e rememoracio de la opperacio.	 The patient's pain has been caused by cold humors that have infiltrated each part of his body, so there is severe pain in the feet as well.
Am aquel comensa le tractat de tot le libre.	 This text suggests a beginning to a medical treatise on gout and its causes, symptoms, diagnosis, and treatment options.
Cove que yeu digua la qualitat dels juvamentz de aquel cauteri e dels noccumentz de lu, e en qual compleccio sia prohibit cauteri.	 What qualities should be examined of the cautery and its surroundings, and in what circumstances it is prohibited to use cautery?
Donc dic que·l sermo de la qualitat del juvament de cauteri e del noccument de lu es sermo lonc e prolixs, e subtil per sciensa, e secret amaguat; e ja de lu a parlat gran multitut de savis, e de lu se son desacordatz, et a mi abasta un petit dels sermons de lor, temen perlonguacio.	 The qualities of the cautery and its surroundings should be long and complex, subtle to learn from, secret in nature, with plenty of secrets, making it difficult to explain briefly; but there are many subtleties related to it that cannot easily be explained.
E donc dic que cauteri comfereys a tota compleccio universalment la qual es am materia o ses materia, exceptat dos compleccios, las quals son compleccios caudas ses materia .	 The cautery is connected universally to all subjects that belong to it or its material, except for two kinds of subjects: the caddy and the hernia.
En la compleccio cauda e secca am materia se desecordero; quar alcus dyssero que cauteri es juvatiu ad aquela, e les autres dyssero le contrari de aquel, que cauteri no es convenient en malautia la qual es per qualiditat e per siccitat, quar natura del foc es qualiditat e siccitat, e enconvenient es que malautia cauda e secca am aquo que es caut e sec sia sanada.	 In the strict caddy and hernia materials the cautery is connected; but for the other subjects that it should be used in the opposite way to its nature: cauterizing cures coldness, dryness, and is convenient when the body part is cauterized dry or tight.
E diysec aquel que ditz le contrari de aquel, que per cauteri es fayt juvament en tota malautia cauda e secca que ve en les cors dels homes, quar quan tu comparas le cors de home e las humiditatz de lu a la compleccio del foc, atrobas le cors de home freg.	 The opposite of the cautery's nature is that it causes coldness in all bad tightness and dryness when used on the body parts of humans, as compared to the body parts of humans with their moistures; but you will find that the body parts are burned by this cautery.
E yeu dic per le sermo de aquel, que esperiment aquo ja a mi alscunas vetz a descubert.	 And you say by way of that same word to him who has been given over to me for discovery.
Mays empero no cove que vengua sobre aquo aquel que ja es exproat e excersitat en le capitol de cauteri per derier exercici, e a conogut la diversitat de la compleccio dels homes e la disposicio de las malautias en lor meteyssas, e las causas de aquelas, e·ls accidentz de lor, e l’espasi del temps de aquelas.	 But perhaps you should warn that man who has already practiced and exercised in the field of cauteries for his own benefit, and to know the diversity of human anatomy and the disposition of illnesses within them, as well as their causes and accidents; also mention the time span of those things.
Mays en las autras compleccios, no es sobre vos temor, e majorment en las malautias fregas e humidas, quar ja totz les metges se son acordatz sobre aquels, e no so desecordatz en le juvament am cauteri en aquelas.	 And in those complications, do not worry; instead of being afraid and anxious, the doctors are unanimous in those cases, and do not recommend it for young people practicing cauteries in those conditions.
E sapiatz, filhs, que del secret de curacio per cauteri am foc e de la bontat de lu, so sobre cauteri am medicina comburent, es quar le foc es simple, la accio del qual no perven sino al membre le qual es cauterizat e no notz al autre membre am lu ajustat sino am petit nocument.	 And sons remember that in order to cure cauteries with fire and the benefits of it, cauteries by means of medicine are what is used when the goal is simple, whose aim is only on the member treated and does not extend to another part of the body, but instead to a small extent.
Mays la accio de medicina comburent perven ad aquel en les membres le qual de lu alunhat, e fort leu fa venir en le membre malautia de dificil sanacio e fort leu ausit.	 The aim of medicine is that the member that suffers from it will come to an end in a short time, while another member with difficulty may be cured more easily.
Mays le foc, per la sua sublimitat e de la sua substancia bontat, no fa aquo sino que superfluisca E ja es a nos conogut per experiment e per longitut de servitut de studi am l’art sobre le veritat de las causas; e per aquo yeu so excusat de la longitut del sermo E si no fos que no es legut al mieu libre en aquest pausero a vos secret amaguat am le foc, e la qualitat de la operacio de lu en les cors e de la sieua expulcio per la qual expellis las malautias, am sermo philosophic demostratiu, le qual siria acuit en las vostras pessas.	 The fire with its sublimity and substance, cannot be done except superfluously; therefore you should know by experiment and the length of servitude to study the art on truth regarding causes; through this you should excuse for the length of discourse and if not it is useful at all in your free time, do as follows: explain about the quality of operation within the body and its expulsion due to which diseases are expelled.
E sapiatz, filhs, que els se desacordan del temps en le qual es convenient far cauteri e pausan le milhor temps de primaveyra.	 It seems that you are referring to a medical procedure called "cautery." This method involves burning away diseased tissues with fire or other hot substances applied directly to the affected area, typically using a pointed instrument like a cautery probe. The timing of this procedure is crucial and must be done when it's most convenient during menstruation.
E yeu dic que cauteri es convenient en tot temps, per so que le nocument per le temps accident es submergit en le juvament de aquo que am le cauteri es atirat, e majorment si le cauteri es per dolors o de dolors necessaries, fortz e fistinas, las quals no suffertan tarditat per so que es temut de aquelas que vengua malicia, que es major que petit nocument entrant per lo temps.	 You've said that cautery is convenient at all times to prevent the passage of time from interrupting while performing it in a situation where pain is necessary or essential, as those who don't suffer the delay may regret later due to regret and remorse for not being careful enough, which is worse than missing out on the opportunity.
E aysso no catz en vostras pessas, o, filhs, aquo no estiman sino le poble vulguar e les fols metges, so es que ad aquela malautia que es sanada per cauteri no es redicio tot temps, e pausan aquel consequen.	 So you mean that if someone is not used to the vulgar terms and slang of the common folk, it means they don't understand what those words mean when referring to physicians or surgeons as well, so that remedy made by cautery isn't available all the time, and it has consequences.
E la causa no es ges ayssi quo els cuydan per aquo, quar cauteri no es sino en loc de medicina la qual altera la compleccio e esicca las humiditatz las quals son causa per que veno las dolors.	 The cause is not because the one who causes it by that means does not consider surgery or medicine as an alternative to changing the composition and reducing the humidity which are causing pain.
Mays empero cauteri superflueys sobre la medicina per volicitat de la sua valitut e vertut de la sua operacio e grandesa del sieu senhor.	 However, cautery should be used instead of medicine for the sake of its value and usefulness in performing operations and improving its owner's health.
E es possible que la sua malautia retorne en alcuna hora del temps, segon la compleccio del malaute e la locacio de la sua malautia, e la vertut de lu, e aquo que es preparat en le cors de lu de la agreguacio de las superfluitatz en lu, e aquo que es pervengut a lu en la sua acquisicio en viandas e semblantz de aquelas causas; sino que la malautia en la qual sia aministrat cauteri sia malautia subtil en membre de paucas superfluitatz e humiditatz, ayssi cum cauteri de dent per dolor e semblantz ad aquel, possible es que en lu no retorne aquela dolor, mays aquo se fa en petitz.	 It is possible that this malady may return at any time due to the composition of the patient and its location within the body as well as their usefulness in reducing excessive fluids and humidity; so if cautery has been administered it will not come back, but if cautery was not used these symptoms will reappear.
E mays sermo vulgar es que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, e es sermo dreyturier, no ad aquo que els entendo en lu, quar els crezo que no es curacio que aprofieyta am medicina ni am autra causa aprop cauteri.	 When the vulgar language is spoken by a doctor of medicine and it seems to him right, then he does not understand that there is nothing curative in it or any other cause mentioned above
E la causa es en contrari de aquo; e la entencio que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina no es sino quan administram las manieyras de curacio en alcunas malautias, e aquelas medicinas no conferieysso, e aprop en la fi de la causa aministra hom cauteri, e aprofieyta ad aquela.	 The cause is contrary to what I mentioned earlier; and the intention that cautery is a remedy of medicine only when administering the cures of some diseases, which do not cure them, and at the end of the reason they give someone cautery, so as to avoid it
E lahoras de aqui cat16 que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, no segon la entencio la qual entendo les vulgars e trops dels fols metges.	 The pain of the joints is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet
E diyssero les antics que cauteri am aur es milhor que cauteri am ferr, e no diyssero aquo sino per la equalitat del aur e sublimitat de la sua sustancia.	 The old ones who call for caution are those who say that cautery is the best, and they do not do this unless there is an equality of effect between it and its strength.
E diyssero que le loc de cauteri no fa brac, cum aquo no sia absolutament vertat, quar yeu ja he aquo proat e he atrobat que aquel no fa aquo sino en alcus cors ses les autres, e cauteri am aquel es bo e milhor que am ferr ayssi quo els diyssero; mays empero quan tu fas cauteri am foc am de aur, no es a tu declarat, quar es egnit segon la quantitat que tu vols per la rugor de l’aur, e quar prepara a recebre freg; e si ajustas sobre lu ignicio se fon l’aur per le foc, e caso en le foc alcunas laminas per que le artifex catz per la occupacio de aquel.	 Those who do cautery without restraint are those who say that the place for cautery is not to touch, but rather in some other places of the body; and cautery on this part is good and better than any other way they know, except when you make it with fire by touching the flesh directly, then it burns through the flame, causing damage to the surgeon as well.
E per aquo es fayt cauteri am ferr deves nos pus leugerament e pus propdanament a rectitut de operacio.	 With this injection you should feel somewhat lighter and more comfortable, after all, it's operation day
E yeu ja he ordenat aquest capitol en le cauteri segon capitols, et he ordenat aquels del cap entro les pes, per so que aleugo le demandant aquo que vol de lu.	 You have already ordered the second cavity and also ordered those of the head into the feet, in order to guide this one who wants it towards you
De cauteri de dolor de cap per frigiditat e humiditat.	 For gout caused by cold and dampness
Le capitol primier.	 The first cavity.
Aquesta cauterizacio confereys a la humiditat e frigiditat sobre le servel accident de la qual so doas causas, so es causa de soda e multitut de flux raumatic, apelat corissa, del cap a las partidas dels huelhs e de las aurelhas fluent, e multitut de dormir, e de dolor de dentz e del guolayro, e universalment de tota malautia que ve per fregiditat, ayssi cum paraliticament, sodo e apoplexio, e semblantz en aquelas malautias.	 This cautery treatment is used for all the illnesses caused by cold and dampness from head to toe: headaches, neck pain, flu symptoms, sleep disturbances, dental pain, gout and generally for any illness caused by coldness, in an acute way or in a chronic one, apoplexy, stroke and alike illnesses.
La forma de aquesta cauterizacio es aquesta, que primieyrament comandes al malaute que sia evacuat am medicina lacsativa le cap mondificant, per tres o per quatre nueytz, segon que exhigeys la vertut del malaute e la edat de lu e la sua costuma.	 The manner of this cautery is to first order the patient to evacuate his head by means of a lancet: three or four times depending on their situation, while also inquiring about their health and age.
E aprop comanda li que raza le sieu cap am razor, e aprop fay aquel sezer entre las tuas mas sobre una banca cayrada e que pause las suas mas sobre le pietz sieu.	 And the next command is to place your hand over a raised bank and hold onto their chest respectively.
E aprop pausa la razit de la tua palma aprop le pous sobre la razit del nas entre les huels sieus.	 And then, after having held on to their chest, you should hold the back of their neck between your hands respectively.
Mays empero, cum le tieu dit del mieg loc es pervengut, signa aquel loc am tenta, e aprop igneys le cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma:	 This suggests that a certain location is being affected by gout, which the doctor intends to treat with an olive-shaped cautery.
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le loc senhat am tenta, a manieyra que descent, am la qual la tieua ma sia constrengida petit a petit, e tu revolveys aquel.	 The physician pauses there for a moment and then applies the olive-shaped cautery gradually over the affected area in order to tighten it slowly but surely.
E aprop leva la tua ma leugerament e reguarda le loc, e si veses ja del os esser descubert alcuna quantitat del cap, ayssi cum la quantitat de gra de errs, lahoras eleva la tua ma, e si no torno la tua ma am aquel ferr, am autre de aquel, si es enfrigidat, entro que sia vist del os aquo que yeu he dit a tu.	 The physician then loosens the hand gently and looks at the area again to ensure that some portion of the head has not been revealed. If so, it raises his hands, tightens them up if necessary, and then applies more force as needed in order to keep the intestine or hernia inside the body cavity.
E aprop pren un petit de sal e disolveys aquel sobre le loc e leyssa aquel per tres jorns.	 The physician takes a small amount of salt and dissolves it into the area, leaving it for three days.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto enbegut en boder e leyssa aquel sobre lu entro que sia destrusida la scara del foc.	 The physician pauses there briefly in order to release a small amount of pus from the affected area and leaves it on for three days.
E aprop cura le loc am anguent tetrafarmacon entro que sia sanat.	 The physician cares for the affected area using four-legged poultice in order to heal it.
E ja diyssero que quant la plagua roman uberta, tant mielhs geta le brac, per que es milhor e mays juvatiu.	 It is customary that when a patient's thigh ulcerates as much or more than the elbow joint, they seek help from doctors immediately.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia cauterizada la codena entro al os, e sia tengut le cauteri entro que sia adhurida alcuna partida de la specitut del os.	 It is customary that the affected area should be cautorized within the body and any cautery marks on the surface of it should not exceed a certain degree.
E aprop sia ras aquo que es adhust del os, e aprop sia curat.	 When pain in joints is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body...
E diyssero autres que am lo cauteri pervengua al derier, entro que enprema en le os forta enprecio entro que le os caga, e aquesta es la forma de alphecati petit:	 When there is pain in joints caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body...
E estiman de aquel loc expiran la vapors del cap.	 They are trying to expel the vapors from the head area.
E sia tenguda la plagua uberta per lonc temps, e aprop sia curada entro que sia consolidada.	 The bandage should be kept in place for a long time and must be carefully maintained thereafter.
Mays a mi no so vistas aquestas doas specias de cauteri de tot, sino en alcus homes segon via de temor; e layssa aquel, deves mi, milhor es am salut, quan es; quar le cap es develitat per solucio de continuitat de lu ayssi cum havem testificat en les autres membres, e majorment quan le cap del malaute es de freul natura.	 These cauteries are used to treat a variety of ailments but should not be feared by anyone; and if they fail the remedy for continued life is sought in seeking its solution as well with other members, especially when the head of the patient is naturally troubled.
E la specia de cauteri primieyra es mays salva e milhor deves mi; e de aquela husi e am aquela obra am salut.	 The primary cautery to use first and foremost should be... and from that point and in regard to which work best for health.
Capitol segon.	 The second one.
Del cauteri del cap.	 The head cautery.
Quan en tot le cap accideys dolor cronica e longua e aquo es en le malaute prolonguat, e usa de gerras e de cochias e de capipurges e de emplaustres e de guatz e de cadels e de gualinas e de semblantz, e majorment si ja es cauterizat am un cautere le qual recontam e no aprofieyta a lu deguna de aquelas causas, lahoras considera quar si le cap del malaute es de fort creacio en la sua natura; e no es freul et atroba mot gran freg, lahoras aquel cauterisa am autra cauteri dejos aquel un pauc.	 When the pain in the head becomes chronic and prolonged and this is experienced by a patient who has been suffering from long-lasting illness use cauteries of various types such as those for purging the head, ears, nose, eyes, mouth, and face; it is especially important if the head cautery is one that was previously used without profitting from the causes of the pain. The doctor considers whether or not there are strong indications in nature to suggest that the patient's head is very sensitive due to its illness, but does not recommend using another cauterization unless absolutely necessary.
E aprop cauterisa aquel sobre le corn del sieu cap am cauteri entro que la codena es partida.	 "Then put a pointed cautery over his forehead to open up the channel that has been sealed.
Incisa la codena e sia descuberta del os la quantitat la qual havem recontat e cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en la partida deriera del cap en le loc le qual es apelat vas, — e es aquel loc en le qual es pausada ventosa.	 "Seal the channel and uncover its amount which has been recounted and cauterize it with a pointed cautery at the location that is called 'ventosa' [unclear], where there was once a hole.
Et alleuja la tua ma en aysso, e no descobras le os, quar le malaute per aquo atroba mot gran dolor diversa de la dolor de totz les autres cauteris del cap.	 "And take your hand away and uncover it so that you can see the opening where the patient is currently experiencing great pain different from the pain experienced by all other cauteries on the head.
E yeu diyre aquest cauteri en son loc, quar cove que·l cauteri am le qual so cauterisatz les corns del cap e le occiput es pus subtil cauteri que aquel am le qual es cauterisat le mieg loc del cap; e aquesta es la forma de lu.	 "Then you direct this cautery to its location, where the cautery on the head and temple is a more subtle one that was applied at the place of the scalp; and that's how it should be done.
Capitol ters.	 "Done with care.
De cauterisacio de emigranea no-antiqua.	 "The cauterization procedure is not an antique one.
Quan endeve en la partida del cap dolor sodo, o es stenduda dolor entro al uelh, sia evacuat am medicinas le cap mondificantz, e sia aministrada l’autra curacio, la qual yeu he dita en las devesios de las malautias; e tot no aprofieyta, lahoras cauterisacio en lu es en dos manieyras: o cauterisacio am medicina acuta comburent, o am ferr.	 "When endowing on the forehead pain occurs or it is sudden and intense, then he/she evacuates from the head and receives other care, which you should give to them in the treatment of their ailment; otherwise, the cauterization procedure will be done in two ways: either by a quick cure with medicine or through surgery.
Mays cauteri am medicina comburent es que tu prenguas una dolsa de alh, e escorgas aquela e abcindas las extremitatz de lu de amdos les caps.	 "The cauterization method using medicine is that you should apply a balm to it and cover the extremities of its head with both hands.
E aprop incideys le loc de la dolor en la templa am una lanceta lada entro que sia en lu feyt loc dejos la codena, entro que sia occultada.	 When joint pain infiltrates each part of the body, especially in the feet
E aprop strenh sobre lu am stopada per descent constreccio, e layssa aquel per le spazi de tres horas; e aprop deslia le e tratz le alh, e laysa la plagua per dos o per tres jorn, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto submergit en boder entro que le loc fassa brac.	 Then place the cushion under their feet to relieve the pressure and have it stay for three hours; thereafter, lay the sponge on them, and wash them every two or three days, and put a pad over the spot to prevent leakage into the bed.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	 Then care for that by healing
E si tu voys, fe aquo am alcunas medicinas comburentz las quals yeu he scriutas en le douse tractat de medicinas comburentz.	 And if you have them, use the remedies written in this treatise on medicinal remedies.
Mays la cauterisacio am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: igneys per cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	 The cautery should be performed as follows: insert a probe
e es apelat claus clavilhs, quar le cap de lu es ayssi cum forma de clavel en le qual es alcuna curvitat, e·n le mieg loc de lu es eminensia petita.	 The needle is inserted into the cavity in such a way that its tip resembles the shape of an arrowhead with a slight curve; and when it reaches the opening of the body part, it is gently removed.
E aprop pausa sobre loc de la dolor, e rete la tua ma — per que no sia adhurida la arceria la qual es dejos — e revol le ferr petit a petit am velocitat.	 Then place your hand over the area of pain to prevent touching any other parts; and return it slowly but surely in speed.
E si la quantitat de lu que es adhurida per la specitut de la codena ayssi quo la maytat de lu, e elava la tua ma per so que la arteria no sia adhurida la qual es dejos, per so que no vengua flux de sanc.	 If the amount of blood flowing through that vein is as much as in the head artery and you put your hand over it to prevent touching any other parts so that the artery does not touch anything else; for fear there would be a flow of blood.
E aprop enbibeys coto en aygua de sal e pausa aquel sobre le loc, e layssa aquel per tres dias; e aprop pausa coto mulhat am boder, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	 When the body is treated with a mixture of salt and water for three days, then rest on that spot until it heals completely.
E si voys, cauterisa am la extremitat del cutellari segon cauteri, e guarda te de incisio de arteria en aquesta emigranea propriament no-antiqua.	 If you are performing a cautery to the extremity of an artery, then make sure not to accidentally cut into the nearby vein
Capitol quart.	 The fourth quarter
De cauterizacio d’emigranea antiqua.	 Cautery on the adjacent artery.
Quan tu curas emigranea am aquo que havem dit de la curacio precedent, e aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias, e no aprofieyta la curacio, e vezes per la malautia que no abasta a lu aquo que havem dit del primier cauteri am medicina o del cauteri am foc, lahoras cove que tu igniscas le cauteri cutellar entro que sia albificat, pus que significas sobre le loc de la dolor am linha de longuesa de la qual sia la maytat del dit, o quays aquel; e depausa la tua ma per una veguada e strenh aquela entro incidiscas la arceria e pervengua entro al os.	 When you perform the cautery on an artery next to a previous one and in the veins' divisions as well, do not miss out the cautery; but rather check that it is white before proceeding to the location of pain along its length or breadth if necessary, and prevent your hand from entering the artery while holding back.
Empero necessari es a tu que guardes de la continuacio de la mandibula, la qual es mauguda deves la masticacio, e que le lacert no sia adhurit e le nervi le qual mau aquela, e que no s’endevengua espasme.	 However necessary it is to keep the continuation of the mandible intact, for fear that chewing may be lost; and also not to apply heat or electrical stimulation in case of nerve damage.
E si es sobre la custodia e cautela de flux de sanc de l’arteria que es abciza, quar en la abcizio de lu es temor, e majorment ad aquel le qual ignora aquo que fa e no es studios e esproat; e layssa la operacio en lu al comensament.	 If it is about the caution and care of the flow of blood to an artery that has been blocked, where in its blockage there is a fear, and more so on that one who does not know what he is doing and does not study or investigate; then proceed with the operation at the outset.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio del regiment de flux de sanc accident de la arceria segon la sieua manieyra, en le sieu loc de aquest libre.	 When a patient experiences a sudden accident on his lower abdomen after defecation, in the place where he had just defecated
E si veses de aquesta malautia que no abaste aquest cauteri e veses le cors del malaute tollerable, cauteriza aquel en le mieg loc del cap ayssi cum havem recontat, e cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	 If you find this condition unbearable and cannot bear the cautery on the patient's chest, cauterize it in the location closest to the head as mentioned above, and cure the wound by applying a bandage
E si voys, aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le capitol de streccio de arceria am cauteri havent dos cotels, e es milhor cauterizacio aquesta e mays conferent.	 If you find yourself administering the cautery mentioned in the capital of stroke treatment on both arms, and prefer a more gentle cautery method.
Capitol .v.	 The previous sentence was misspelled as "capital".
De cauterisacio de las dolors de aurelhas.	 Treatment for gout.
Quan en la aurelha ve dolor per freg e es curat am causas lacsativas e am l’autra curacio la qual he dita en la divisio, e no es remauguda la dolor, lahoras igneys le cauteri, e es aquest le qual ha nom puncta, del qual aquesta es la forma:	 When a joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body and does not subside with the usual cures mentioned in section 1024, then apply a pointed cautery and this is the method called:
E aprop puncta aprop la ignicio, e sia menat al enviro de tota la aurelha ayssi cum roda es revolguda, o en le circuit de quascuna essemps si la dolor es en quascuna.	 And after that, place it in the environment of the entire body as much as possible, or around each attempt if the pain occurs on any part.
Alonga te am le cauteri de la razit de la aurelha pauc a pauc pus que aias senhat le loc am tenta.	 After applying the pointed cautery gently, place it in the area of the joint for several minutes to allow time for the wound to heal.
E si le cauteri de detz puntz en tota aurelha, e quays aquela, e aprop cura les locz entro que sian sanatz.	 If you apply the pointed cautery all over the joint and in that way, then cure any wounds around it as they occur.
Capitol .vi.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
De cauterizacio de turtura.	 Cautery
Turtura la qual es curada e am cauterizacio no es sino de las specias las quals veno per flecma, segon que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias.	 The gout is cured with cauterization because of the veins that come through the incisions mentioned earlier in the parts of gout patients.
Esquiva cauterizacio de la specia que endeve per siccacio o per spasme del nervi.	 Cautery is used to cure the vein that becomes obstructed due to either dryness or spasm of the nerve.
Quan tu curas aquela specia de turtura am jerras e capipurgi e guarguarismes, e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas le malaute am tres cauteris: la i deves la razit de la aurelha, e·l segon un petit dejos le sieu templar, e le ters deves la conjunccio de doas labias.	 When you cure this vein of pain and inflammation with cautery and prevent the discomfort, it is customary for doctors to apply three cauteries: one on the auricle, another in a small area behind the ear, and the third over both eyebrows.
E pausa lo tieu cauteri per le contrari de la partida malauta, quar mollificacio no ve sino en la partida que apar sana.	 Wait for the heat of the cautery to heal instead of just applying it in a part that is already inflamed.
E la forma de cauterisacio es que cauterizas aquel am le cauteri en le dreyt de la extremitat de la aurelha pus sobirana un petit sobre le corn del cap, e en le templar autre, la longuesa del qual sia segon la longitut del dit pous, e depausa la tua ma am cauteri entro que sia comburida la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena.	 The form of cauterization is that you apply the cautery on the right side of the ear lobe gently towards the top of the head, and then over another part which corresponds to a little further than the ear, and wait for your hand to become burnt through as much as possible.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri, e es specia del cutellari, la forma del qual es denant mesa.	 This is the form of cautery, or in medical terms a vesica piscatoria.
Mays empero pus subtil es que aquel un pauc ayssi co vesas; e cove que cotel en lu de superflua groceza un pauc.	 This first sentence translates to: The more subtle thing is that one who wants this should not have too much of it, and he must eat a small amount.
E aprop cura le loc am aquo que es denant procezit entro que sia sanat.	 The second sentence translates to: And they put the patient in such a position so that his illness is helped.
Capitol .vii.	 I'm sorry, but there doesn't seem to be any additional meaning or context provided for this sentence. It appears to be an incomplete thought or phrase rather than part of a larger medical text.
De cauterizacio de apoplextia antiqua.	 This sentence translates to: The cautery of ancient apoplexy.
Quan apoplextia es antiquada e curas aquela am aquo que havem dit e no confereys la tua medicacio e le malaute no ha febre, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris: sobre totz les corn del sieu cap; e am cauteri e le mieg loc del cap, ayssi cum havem dit; e am cauteri en le coguot.	 When ancient apoplexy is cured and does not give fever to the patient, doctors use four cauteries: on top of the head of his head; above the eyes; over the eyebrow; and under the chin.
E la manieyra del cauteri es fayta segon que es desus dit.	 The second sentence translates to: And the hand used for the cautery should be changed after it has been described.
E ja es cauterizat sobre la boca del estomac; e es mays derier; e aprop sia curat am aquo que procezeys.	 It was cauterized on the mouth of the stomach, and may go to the liver after that.
Capitol .viii.	 I'm sorry, but there doesn't seem to be any additional meaning or context provided for this sentence. It appears to be an incomplete thought or phrase rather than part of a larger medical text.
De cauterizacio de obblivio fayta per flacma.	 This sentence translates to: The cautery for the palsy's stroke is used as a remedy for palsy.
Cove que sian donatz al malaute en le comensament jerras grans e pilulas le servel mondificantz.	 You should give the patient in the beginning large and frequent meals, mixed with meat and vegetables.
E aprop ras le cap tot del malaute e pausa sus le coguot de lu emplaustre de cetre descrit en le tractat dels emplastres.	 The first sentence translates to "Place a cushion under their thighs, another on their legs, and the last one on their chest.
E pausa aquel alcunas veguadas, quar aquel es manieyra de cauteri.	 "And after placing them there (cushion), put some kind of pointed instrument for cautery.
E fay aquo segon aquel meteys orde le qual ja he dit.	 "Now that you have done what I said before.
E donc si per aqueles sanat bo es; e sino, lahoras fay a lu tres cauteris en la deriera partida de sieu cap, les quals sian deysendentz de la partida pus sobirana del cap entro a la partida pus dejos del col.	 "Do it if their health permits, and otherwise, apply three points of the cautery in the back part where I mentioned earlier, between the head to the buttocks.
E pausa entre quascun cauteri la grossetut del dit, e aprop cura lo cauteri am aquo que es procedit.	 "After applying each point individually and checking that they are done correctly, proceed with the application of this one which has just been applied.
Mays si tu vos addicio e le malaute es aquo tollerant, lahoras fay a lu cauteri en le mieg loc; e si voys major addicio, lahora cauteriza aquel sobre les dos corns.	 "If the patient tolerates this application well, apply it in that location. If you have more addition to make, burn both of those points.
Aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat; e sia le cauteri olivar segon la forma denant donat.	 "Apply it so long as their health permits and after applying the other cautery in a manner that is being given.
Capitol .ix.	 "Conclusion.
De cauterisacio de parazili e de mollificacio de tot le cors.	 "Of cauterization of parasites, and soothing all over the body.
Cove que tu procesiscas en mondificacio del cap am jerras e am aquo que havem dit; e aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap, e am cauteri sobre totz les corns del cap, e am cauteri sobre la deriera partida de lu, e am tres cauteris sobre les spondils del col.	 "Do it as I mentioned earlier with soothing the head and doing this too, apply a cautery to the back of the patient's head, and apply three points of cautery on the buttocks. And then apply them on the ears, and apply all over the horns of the head, and apply three points on the bottom part of it, and apply three points on the spine of the buttocks.
E si es necessari en la malautia de mollificacio del cors de trops aquel e les malautes tollerantz e la malautia es fort, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e dererament am cauteri entro que sia comborit de la codena mot de lu, e aleva la tieua ma.	 When there is a swelling of the groin due to excessive warmth and pain in the joints becomes severe, doctors burn it with four cauteries on both sides near the spine, and immediately after burning apply something that relieves this pain.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat, e aquest sia cauteri olivar.	 The swelling should be treated right away to prevent further complications, so do not wait for healing but burn it with olive oil.
Capitol .x.	 I am sorry, this seems like a typo or incomplete sentence. Could you please provide more context?
De cauterisacio de epilemcia.	 The doctor is performing an incision to remove the gallbladder
No es cauterizat le epilemtic sino aquella epilemcia es per flecma.	 The doctor is not performing a cautery on the gallbladder, but it is being removed through surgery
E donc cove que mondifiques le cervel de lu al comensament de lu am yeras e am l’autra curacio la qual havem dicta en la divisio quan le malaute es gran e es tollerant la exceperacio de las medicinas.	 And once you open the bowels of the patient, do a thorough cleansing with another treatment to be applied when the condition is severe and requires medical intervention.
E si es enfant le qual no sufferte las medicinas, lahoras aministra guarguarissmes e mastiguatoris le servel mondifican, denant aquo per motz dias, am bonifficacio de las viandas.	 And if the patient does not respond to medical treatment, doctors administer purgatives and provide a balanced diet to support their healing process, starting from here on days.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en le mieg loc del cap segon la manieyra precedent, e am autre cauteri en le occiput de lu, e sobre quascun corn del cap sieu cauterisa.	 Burn the patient's head with a pointed cautery near the previous point of entry on their forehead, and also burn another in the occipital region, above each ear, and burn through all the hair on the head.
E si le malaute es fort e es tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteris les quals he ditz, en havent paraliticament e mollificacio del cors sobre les spondils del col e les spondils del dos.	 If the patient is severe and tolerant of pain, doctors burn it with all the cauteries mentioned before, without causing paralysis or weakening of the body over the spine and legs.
E sia cauteri olivar segon qu’es precedit.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
Mays si le malaute es enfant, lahoras pausa cauteri subtil segon aquesta manieyra.	 If the patient is a child, then pause the pointed cautery gently so that you do not hurt them.
Capitol .xi.	 You are missing one more sentence in this text. What could it be?
De cauterizacio de melencolia.	 Cautery for melancholia.
Quan las causas de melencolia so humiditatz corrompudas e flacma gros, lahoras cauteriza aquel am les cauteris les quals havem ditz en le havent paralisi.	 When the causes of melancholy are damp and heavy, doctors cauterize those parts that they mentioned in the previous sentence to prevent paralysis from occurring
E si la causa de melencolia es superfluitat declinant a melencolia, e le cors del malaute es humit, lahoras da ha beure aquo que mundifica le cervel de lu segon aquo que ha precedut en la divisio.	 If the cause of melancholy is the decline in melancholy and the patient's body is damp, doctors pour water over their head to prevent paralysis from occurring after what has preceded in division.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop fay tortora decentment fayta de li sobre le cercle, e aprop depausa aquela en le mieg loc del cap.	 Then place a cushion on the patient's head, and cover them gently with a towel over their circle, then place a pillow behind their neck to prevent their head from falling back
E le malaute sia sesent cayrat, e sia tengut de tota partida.	 The patient is now ready for cauterization, and the incision has been made throughout the entire body
E aprop pausa liniment; et es pus digne de boder antic de ovelhas.	 Then apply a poultice of warm damp cloth to cool down, and put on suitable cold compresses
E escalfa aquel sobre le foc per calefaccio temprada per mesura, le qual le dit sufferta quan es mes en lu.	 Place it over the fire to warm up gradually until it reaches the desired temperature, which is when you need it most.
E aprop vuo’ aquel en le mieg loc del cap de lu en le cercle, e leysa lu entro que sia enfregidat.	 Then place a cushion in front of their head and circle them with a towel to keep them warm
E fay aquo am le malaute en tota semmana una veguada, am le autre regiment de lu bo entro que sia sanat; o si vols, cauteriza aquel fazen petitz puntz segon lo mays de lu, sino que tenguas la ma am un cauteri ayssi ordenat: aquesta es specia de cauteri la qual humecta le cervel am equalitat.	 When a patient is to be treated for gout every week on Sunday, the attendant should make an incision and cauterize that part of the body second time after cleaning it; unless you want, cauterize another place at the same level as this one, but keep your hand over it so nothing comes out.
E aprop pausa aquel coto enbegut en boder o en grays de gualina.	 Place a cushion under them and another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands
Capitol .xii.	 The twelfth book of the Capitularia
De cauterisacio de aygua descendent en le huel.	 When water descends into the vein
Quan a tu es declarat le comensament de aygua en le huel per les senhals les quals yeu he ditz en la divisio, lahoras comensa e dona en beure al malaute aquo que mondifique le cap de lu, e guarda aquel de totas humiditatz.	 When you declare the beginning of water in his ears according to what has been said on division, the doctor starts by giving him something to drink that will make his head clear and he keeps it from all humidity
E fay aquel suzar en banh en degu per alcus jorns.	 Then give him bread soaked in vinegar for a few days.
E aprop comanda a lu que raza le sieu cap, e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap; e aprop cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre dos templas si es le comensament de ysement de aygua en dos huels, o de la un latz si es comensamen de l’aygua en un huel.	 Then command him to raise his head and cauterize that part of the skull with a pointed cautery at its location; and if it's the beginning of water in two ears, or one ear, cauterize another place on top of the temples.
Incideys am cauteri totas las venas e arcerias las quals so dejos la codena; e sian les cauteris en aquela lonh en la latitut de las templas.	 Cauterize all veins and arteries in that area, making them into one long line at the latitude of the temples.
E guarda te de fluxs de sanc quan es cauterizat; e si veses de lu fluxs de sanc, osta le am alcuna medicina, la qual es a tu possible.	 When you are cautorized, guard your breath until it passes away; if you see the flow of blood still present, apply no medicine at all, for none is available to you
E yeu vindre am savieza la qual es en extraccio de arcerias e am abscizio de aquelas e cautela de fluxs de sanc.	 You should remove any food that causes an attack and stop doing activities that cause blood flow (such as vigorous exercise)
E alcunas vetz es cauterizat en le cervitz dejos dos osses am dos cauteris dererament produzitz.	 After being cautorized, the first two vessels are cautorized to prevent further attacks.
Capitol .xiii.	 The thirteenth chapter of Capitols
De cauterizacio de lacrimas antiquas.	 Treatment for ancient cataracts.
Quan lacrimas dels huels so antiquas assuduament e per las venas e arterias las quals so en le loc manifest del cap defora e es verificat que aquo es superfluitatz frejas flecmatiquas, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri le qual havem recontat en le capitol de comensament de aygua cazent en les huels, e am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos templas, e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos osses.	 When cataracts are ancient and penetrate the veins or arteries which show clearly on the forehead, it is found that this is unnecessary; doctors cautorize the eye by cautorizing an artery in the temple of one eyelid, another in the other eyelid, both in the bridge of the nose, and both in the carotid artery at the back of the neck.
E si indigeyses de addicio, lahoras cauteriza aquel en tot latz de la coa del huel sobre la extremitat del sobrecilh am petit cauteri.	 If there is any need for adding a new vessel, doctors cautorize it at the end of the cornea on the side of the forehead and add another one to the eyelid below the eyebrow.
Capitol .xiiii.	 The fourteenth chapter of Capitols.
De cauterizacio de fetor de nas.	 Treatment for nasal discharge
Quan tu medicas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no aprofieyta la tua medicacio, lahoras tu aparelha e dona en beure al malaute las cochias per tres noytz; e aprop ras le cap de lu, e cauteriza le am cauteri migier am cauteri olivar.	 When you are giving treatment to someone who has already told you the name of a remedy but does not take your medicine immediately, doctors have you give them three doses over three nights; and after that place your hand on their forehead, and cautorize above the eye and below the eyebrow.
E aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri clavelh am dos cauteris sobre les dos sobrecilhs dejos les cabels un petit.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
E guarda te de la arceria que no incindas aquela.	 And if you want to prevent further spreading
E del cauteri clavilh aquesta es la forma.	 That's correct, the cautery is applied in this manner.
Capitol .xv.	 The fifteenth chapter.
De cauteri de mollificacio de palpebras dels huels.	 Cautery for softening of the eyelids
Quan la palpebra del huel es mollificada per malautia o per humiditat, lahoras cauteriza aquela palpebre1 am un cauteri am aquest cauteri lunar; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	 When one eyelid becomes softened by illness or moisture, doctors apply cautery to that eyelid.
E si vos, cauteriza aquel sobre les dos sobrecils un petit am dos cauteris en tota partida, e sian elonguatz de las timporas.	 If you want to prevent further spreading, cautery may be applied to both eyelids in one go, and the procedure will take less time.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la quantitat del sobrecil.	 The length of each Cautery is proportional to the size of the eyelid.
E no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri, mays segon la quantitat que la tersa partida de la palpebre sia adhurida.	 Don't apply too much Cautery, as it may damage the eyelid.
Capitol .xvi.	 The sixteenth chapter.
De cauteri de la palpebre del huel quan les pels so convertitz a las partidas dedintz e punho le huel.	 Cauterize eyelids when hairs turn into patches and cause itching of the eyelid.
Quan les pels del huel son convertitz a las partidas dedintz ayssi que pungo le huel, cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, quar cauteri o es am fer o es am medicina comburent.	 Cauterize eyelids when hairs turn into patches and cause itching of the eyelid.
Si am cauteri de lu am foc, comanda al malaute denant aquo que leyse les sieus pels ayssi cum aquels les quals les mundan, entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz; e si punho aquel deves le lor naysement, lahoras tu strenh les huels de lu am una benda per so que no sia maugut entro que·ls pels sian nascutz.	 If you apply Cautery to the forehead, do not forget to remove any hair that may grow back; and if you burn them with Cautery, make sure they are completely removed before applying another treatment.
Donc cum siran nascutz e engualhatz, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop senha sobre la palpebre dels huels de lu am tenta, am senhal le qual sia segon la figura de fulha de merta, e sia le comensament del senhal prop dels pels.	 The patient's head is raised and held by the attendant, while a cushion under their thighs serves as support; an attendant on their legs is also present to help prevent them from moving too quickly away from you.
E aprop pausa coto enbegut en album de huou o en mucillatge de ptilli sobre le huel.	 The cushion or pillow upon which the patient's head is resting should be soft, and an attendant stands by to support them as needed; also, if possible, a person skilled in massage may be present to help with any additional comfort measures that could be required.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu.	 An attendant holding the pointed device should administer it according to its intended use.
E aprop cauteriza sobre la figura la qual as senhada, petit a petit, em motas veguadas, entro que sia comburida la superficia de la codena la qual es ayssi cum fuelha de mirta, tota aparent propriament.	 An attendant should gently apply the pointed device to the intended area in small increments while making sure it does not burn or cause any discomfort; this should only be done if necessary and is meant for superficial areas of the body.
E senhal de sanetat de la tieua obra es que tu vegus la palpebre de l’huel ja esser contrayta e·ls pels de lu esser elevatz deves la punctura del huel.	 The attendant should gently pull back the eyelid of the patient and lift their head so that they can see clearly, making sure to avoid any injury or damage to their face in doing so.
E donc eleva la tua ma e laysa aquel per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eredicada la scara.	 Do this for three days and then place a cushion beneath them to keep the head from moving too much as needed; if necessary, you can also make use of a pillow that covers their body at all times.
E aprop cura aquela am enguent entro que sia sanat.	 An attendant should take care not to burn it or injure themselves in using this device for treatment purposes.
Mays si retorna per les pels alcuna causa aprop lor naysement e la palpebra es mollificada, lahoras fay autra vetz le cauteri sobre aquel tot ayssi cum avias fayt primieyrament.	 If the eyelid gets burned or injured while using this device for treatment purposes, stop immediately and use it again only if you've done so correctly before.
Mays si les pels so en la palpebra dejos, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que sia elevada al sieu loc natural e sia engualhat e que les pels no punhan le huelh.	 When a gout attack occurs on the eyelid
Mays le cauteri am medicina comburent aquest es que comandes al malaute que leyse les pels entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz, e aprop sia fayta de carta de drap la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	 "The doctor commands the patient to gently pull the eyelid down and keep it that way until the pain subsides, then apply a compress of cold damp cloth.
E aprop pren de sabo conogut e de caus viva ana unc. i, o quays aquo, e aprop mescle3 aquelas causas be, e fay aquo am festinacio per so que no sia enfregidat; e aprop expandeys de aquo sobre la carta la qual es fayta ayssi cum forma de fulha de mirtra, e pausa aquel sobre la un huel od amdos; e pausa dejos le huel coto enbegut en album de huou, e el cap del malaute sia en le tieu se.	 "Then gently draw the eyelid down and hold it there until the pain is relieved, then apply a compress of cold damp cloth to the affected area in order that it may not become inflamed; spread this out so as to cover all its parts, placing one over each eyelid, pausing both eyelids closed for a moment, and place another over their nose.
E pausa le dit sobre le medicina e prem aquela un petit e no la mauguas entro que lo malaute senta la mordicacio de la medicina, quar mordicacio es en lu ayssi cum de foc.	 "Pause for a moment while the patient feels the application of medicine gently and does not feel any pain from it, as the medicine is applied so gently that no sensation occurs.
E donc cum percevera aquo que el atrobo mordicacio, lahoras leyssa la medicina e mau aquela am le tieu dit; donc cum cessa la mordicacio, lahoras remau la medicina he lava le huel am aygua; e lahoras considera si vezes la palpebra ja es levada ayssi cum es lavada deves la costriccio am foc o am incisio, quar lahoras esta be; e si no torna sobre aquela de la medicina sobre le loc en le qual no ha empremut la medicina e no se denigra entro que sia engualhada la tua operacio e sia contrayt le huel.	 "When the pain subsides from this, then gently apply the medicine and hold it there until the pain is relieved; when the application of the medicine ceases, then remove the medicine with warm water and consider whether to reapply on a spot where you did not administer the medication or if it was not covered by the operation.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eradicada la codena de la adhustio, e aprop cura aquel am enguent deafinicon o am autre entro que sia sanat.	 When the pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate into every part of the body and the pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors
E es necessari a tu, deves la tua operacio que guardes am pervigil diligencia que en le huel no caia re de la medicina, e si la palpebre aprop alscus dias es mollificada e alcuna causa dels pels punh en le huel, lahoras itera la tua medicina sobre aquel loc le qual de la palpebre es mollificat, e propriamen ayssi quo as fayt al comensament, e aprop enaviro lu entro que sia sanat.	 You should be very careful when administering the medicine in this case because if there is any cause for concern on applying it to that area where the eyelid has been softened, then you must repeat your treatment at that location as well and proceed with caution
E aquesta es la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	 This is how to administer the medicine.
E sapias que les huels dels homes son diversificatz segon la magnitut e la parvitat, e donc segon aquo es fayta la tua contraccio.	 You should know that people's hands come in different sizes and shapes, so this is how to perform your treatment accordingly.
E no sira amaguada la via de rectetut ad aquel al qual es studi en aquesta art.	 Do not seal up the passage for treating him in this art.
Capitol .xvii.	 This is the seventeenth chapter of the work.
De cauterizacio de fistula que es en le lacrimal de l’huel.	 Cautery on the tear duct.
Quan tu curas fistula am aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquela segon aquesta manieyra: comanda al malaute que pause le cap sieu en le tieu se, e tengua le cap de lu alcun ministre entre las tieuas mas en tal manieyra que no sia maugut ni agitat am le sieu cap.	 When you cure the fistula in this way as I have described it above in the chapters on diseases and if you do not trust your treatment, then call upon another surgeon to perform cautery on that area; command the patient to raise his head so that only the top of his head is exposed, and have a hand placed between the two so that no hair is pulled or torn.
E aprop pausa coto enfus en album de huou o en mucellage de ptilli sobre le huel de lu.	 When one of these servants is placed on their legs beneath them a cushion has been put, another servant lies on their chest underneath them as well.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	 And the type of cautery used in this case is:
le qual sia conquau, ayssi cum es forma de cana o de pena de voltor, de la una extremitat am la qual es fayta lo cauteri.	 The cauterizing tool that will be used for it can be of two types - the one in which a flame is applied to only one part of the body, or the other where heat is supplied from all sides towards a specific area of the body.
E si voys, sia penetrant entro a la autra extremitat.	 If so, it will be done on another extremity as well.
E si vols sia sort ayssi cum tenta.	 And if you prefer that type also.
Mays empero aquel que es concau es milhor a la tieua obra.	 However, the one used should be most suitable for your work.
E aprop prem la fistula si es uberta, e tra de lu sania et exsicca aquela.	 Place it at the fistula if it has been opened; and take care to keep this area moist and dry as much as possible.
E si no es uberta, lahoras obre aquela e extratz la poyredura de lu.	 If not, you will use an incision in that place instead.
E aprop pausa sobre lu le cauteri le qual sia be ignit, e te am aquel la tieua ma un petit deves le cauteri del huel a la partida del nas, per so que no erre la tua ma o le malaute sia enquietat, e lahoras pausa le cauteri en le grays del huel e corrompas aquel.	 When placing the cautery tool on your body if it's to be ignited: take care not to burn your hand as well when applying it at the beginning of the nose to prevent burns and also place a cushion over the area that you are applying the cauterizing technique to, so that neither your hand nor the patient will get burned.
E donc si al comensament del tieu cauteri perve entro al os, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera le cauteri una veguada o dos, si mestiers era; e layssa aquel ayssi per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre aquel coto am boder e enviro lu am enguent exsiccatiu entro que sia sanat.	 When the cautery is applied to begin at the nose: yes; otherwise repeat it one or two times depending on necessity, and place a cushion over that area as well so that neither your hand nor the patient gets burned.
Mays si eran passatz xi dias e no es sanat, lahoras pausa sobre lu medicina aguda corrosiva entro que l’os sia descubert e sia ras segon que conveneys en le sieu capitol.	 "If ten days have passed without relief from the acute corrosive medicine then pain has taken control and it is necessary to remove its hold on the body, holding onto its capital.
E es autra manieyra de cauteri de fistula la qual alscus primiers diysero: enten al loc de la fistula e fen aquela e aprop pausa en aquela fissura camaen subtil del qual es la forma de lu: E fon en aquela la quantitat de i unc de plom fundut; e te la tua ma am camaem am bona retencio, e no sia maugut le malaute per so que le plom fundut no pervengua al huel de aquel; e cove que pausas sobre le huel del malaute coto enfus en album de huou o en aygua, quar plom adhureys le loc de la fistula e sana aquela per sanacio meravilhora.	 "Another way to cauterize the fistula is as follows: first cauterize that location and then apply a band aid over it in order to prevent any discharge of blood into the wound; also ensure that the bandage does not stick to the sore or burn, but instead covers the entire area of the fistula.
E si la fistula es sanada am aquo que havem dit del cauteri e de la curacio, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari aministrar trauc del nas e reduzir la fistula al cors del nas segon que vindra en son loc propri.	 "If the fistula has been treated with cauterization and cure, then it's done. But if not, doctors will need to administer a tourniquet from inside the nose and reduce the size of the fistula in the nose after it appears at its location.
Capitol .xviii.	 "Chapter 18: [The end]
De cauterizacio de la fendedura des potz.	 "Of all cauteries described, this is the one that is recommended for the fistula.
Motas veguadas accideysso fissuras en las labias, e majorment en las labias dels enfantz.	 "Blisters will often occur in these areas and most commonly on a child's thighs.
Donc cum tu curas aquelas fissuras am aquo que nos havem dit en las divisios e no aprofieyta la tua cura, lahoras igneys le cauteri petit cutellar segon aquesta forma que s’ensiec:	 "Then if you don't follow the advice given in these sections and do not apply your treatment, then doctors will recommend a small surgical incision to accomplish this goal.
E sia la conquavitat de lu segon la subtilitat de cotella.	 The second cavity from below.
Aprop pausa aquel init cuytadament en aquelas fissuras entro que·l cauteri pervengua al preon de las fissuras.	 Place a cushion under them, so that the cautery does not come into contact with their thighs.
E aprop cura aquel am cerotz entro que sia sanat.	 Prepare for it to be done.
Capitol .xix.	 Chapter nineteen.
De cauterizacio de fistula en la boca.	 Cautery of a fistula in the mouth.
Quan en la razit de uvula o en le paladar o en las razitz de las dentz endeve apostema e aprop fa brac, e aprop es rompuda, e aprop es antiquada, e corr brac e es fayta fistula, e aprop tu curas aquela e no aprofieyta a curacio, lahoras cove que tu igniscas cauteri segon la quantitat que sia receubuda en la fistula, e aprop met aquel ignit en le trauc de la fistola, e te la tua ma entro que pervengua le ferr ignit al preon de lu, e al derier de lu fazen aysso una veguada o dos; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que nos havem dit de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	 Cautery of fistula in the uvula or palate, and if it is necessary to place your hand over them, then remove, burn away and close the fistula, and afterwards apply cautery on that part, do not miss it, so as to prevent any injury caused by this cautery; for you must know how much of this cautery was received in the fistula, and also put out what is ignited at the fistula, and make sure your hand does not come into contact with the flame at the body's surface.
E donc si la sania es abscindita e es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari de descubrir le loc e hostar le os corrumput segon que vindra en son capitol.	 And if this is a fistula that has been burned away and healed, then do so; otherwise you need to investigate the location and check it thoroughly before it comes up in Chapter nineteen.
Capitol .xx.	 Chapter twenty.
De cauterisacio de las dentz e de mollificacio de las angivas.	 Cautery of teeth, and mollification of veins.
Quan las angivas son mollificadas per humiditat e las dentz son maugudas, e curas aquelas am medicinas e no confereys, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra aprop aysso, enayssi que tu pauses la quanula sobre la dent e entromet en aquela le cauteri ignit festinantment, e te la tieua ma un petit entro que·l malaute cente la calor del foc a la razit de la dent esser pervenguda.	 When the veins have been mollified by moisture and the teeth have been burned, apply the cautery in the manner that will come up at Chapter nineteen, so as to prevent the heat of the flame from touching the face or mouth of the patient.
E aprop leva la tua ma, e aprop itera le cauteri alcunas veguadas segon que vols.	 Then take your hand, apply some cautery blisters as needed to cover all wounds you want
E aprop le malaute huompla la sua boca de aygua de sal e tengua aquela per una hora, e pueys stupa aquela, quar la dent mauguda es fermada e la gengiva mollificada es strenguda e la humiditat corrompuda es exsiccada.	 Then take the patient's hand and place a mouth full of water and salt and hold it there for an hour, then repeat with another one as needed. For those who have bad teeth or gums that are soft and wet and the moisture is corrupted, you should wipe them dry.
Capitol .xxi.	 This seems to be the end of a medieval medical treatise in Latin. I'm not sure what "Capitol .xxi." means though.
De cauterisacio de dolor de dent.	 Cautery for toothache
Quan dolor de dent es per fregiditat, o en lu es freg o verm, o no comfereys la curacio am medicina, lahoras cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am boder de vacas, o cauteri am foc.	 When toothache is due to coldness or frostbite, or if it interferes with medical treatment, then the doctors will apply cautery on that part of the face; or cautery on the forehead.
Cauteri am boder es que tu prenguas boder de vacas e bulhas aquel en culhe de ferr , e aprop pren coto e envolopa le sobre la extremitat de la tenta, e aprop enmergeys aquel am boder bulhit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolorosa festinantment entro que sia enfregidat.	 Cautery on the face is that you should press against the cheekbone and hold it there to make sure it doesn't move around; cover your hand with something soft so that when you place it on the painful tooth, it won't freeze against its coldness.
E aprop itera aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la vertut del foc pervengua a la razit de la dentz.	 Then apply some cautery blisters as needed to cover all wounds around the face in order to prevent any burns from happening on the tooth.
E si voys, submergeys lana o coto en le boder desus dit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolent, e pausa sobre aquel ferr ignit entro que·l ferr pervengua al preon de la conquavitat de la dent.	 If you do, put a cloth or something on the forehead as well; then place it over the painful tooth and cover that with something to prevent burns from happening around your eye.
Mays empero la cauterizacio am foc es que tu atendas a la quannula de eram o de ferr, e sia en le cor de lu alcuna grocesa e la acuitat del foc no pervengua a la boca del malaute.	 When you have done the cautery on his chest, make sure to attend carefully to any cuts or burns that may occur there, and ensure that the heat from the fire does not come out of his mouth.
E aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra, e pausa aquel sobre la dent e te la tua ma entro que·l cauteri sia enfregidat; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas quar la dolor sira remauguda o en aquel dia o en l’autre dia.	 When you have done the cautery in its shape, pause it over his teeth and place your hand inside to cool it down; and if the pain is relieved or not on that day or the next day.
E cove que per empressio de aquel cauteri que·l malaute umpla la sieua boca de bon boder e tengua aquel per una hora e aprop scupa le; e aquesta es la forma del cauteri.	 When you have done the cautery, make sure he does not spit out anything bad and holds it in his mouth for one hour, then remove it. This is how to perform a cauterization.
E cauteriza am qual que tu voys extremittat segon que a tu es possible.	 Cauterize with caution whenever you can.
E aquesta es la forma de la cannula:	 This is how the cautery should be performed:
Capitol .xxii.	 Chapter xxii of the Capitularies
De cauterizacio de extrophulos.	 Cauterization of extrophy
Quan extrophulos so de flecma e de humors fregas e no so hobedientz a digistio per medicinas e tu voys la digistio de aquelas leugerament, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri conquau la forma del qual es aquesta seguen, havent dos extremitatz hubertas per que yesca le fum deves le cauteri per l’autra extremitat, e pausa aquel ignit sobre aquel apostema una veguada, e autre si indigeyses de aquel, entro que pervengua al preon del apostema.	 When extrophylae occurs and cold humors infiltrate it but the pain is not severe enough to require medication, you perform cautery in the shape as described above, having two hands so that they are always ready to apply the cautery on either side of the patient's chest, pausing it over the first finger until it has cooled down slightly. If desired, place another hand under the patient's chin and cover his mouth with the other hand.
E si l’apostema es pauca, lahoras pausa le cauteri segon la quantitat del apostema, e aprop leyssa le per tres jorns e pausa sobre lu coto enfus en boder entro que sia remaugut aquo que·l foc ha comburit.	 If the patient is fasting, hold back the cautery according to the amount of fast, and let it be used for three days with a gauze over it so that the heat does not burn into the body where the fire has burned
E aprop cura aquel am enguent e tentas e draps entro que sia sanat.	 And make sure they are covered well to prevent any injuries
E la forma de la cannula o deu cauteri a tal es comveyter.	 The manner of the cannula or cautery is as follows.
Capitol .xxiii.	 Chapter 23
De cauterizacio de rauquiera de votz e de constriccio de ale.	 Cauterization for closing wounds and constriction of vessels
Quan las humiditatz veno sobre le quanal del pulmo, e majorment quan aquo es am fregiditat de compleccio, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia evacuat al comensament am medicinas laxativas, e aprop cauteriza aquel deves la razit del golayro en le loc depremegut.	 When the humidity comes near to the nasal cavity, and especially when this is a case of coldness in the chest, doctors advise that the patient be evacuated immediately with laxatives, and apply cautery on the depressed area of the chest.
E guarda te que no pervenguas am le cauteri al golayro ni no comburas de la codena de lu sino un pauc.	 Be careful not to pour the cautery into his lungs or burn him unnecessarily, but a little only.
E cauteriza aquel am autra cauteri deves la junctura del col en le derier espondil de lu.	 Cauterize that part of the body where it is connected to the back of the lower leg.
E·l cauteri de lu sia clavilh sego la maniera precedent.	 The manner in which this cautery should be applied follows the previous pattern.
E aprop cura aquel am aquo que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	 And make sure they are covered well to prevent any injuries.
Capitol .xxiiii.	 Chapter 24
De cauterizacio de malautia del pulmo e de tos.	 Cauterization for the treatment of phlegm in the lungs and cough.
Quan tos e malautia de pulmo so de humiditatz fregas e le malaute no ha febre ni tisic e es malautia antiqua, lahoras cauterisa aquel am dos cauteris sobre la furcula en les locz depremegutz leontz e buoytz; e am autra cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz entre dos mamillos; e sia le cauteri clavilh segon la forma precedent.	 When the pleurisy of the lung is caused by cold humors and the patient has no fever nor chills, it is an ancient gout which the doctors will treat with two cauteries on either side of the rib cage in these locations; another cautery between the two breasts for between the nipples; and a second cautery following the precedent manner.
E si vols, sia la tua cauterizacio punctan am le cauteri que es apelat puncta, la forma del qual precedeys en la ponctacio de dolor de aurelhas.	 If you wish, then let your cauterization be made in the manner of the cauteries which are called points on pain of joints.
E sian puntz entro cays ad aquels; e aprop cura aquel am aquo meteys que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	 And when those points enter into this, then apply that to where it was previously mentioned as a remedy for the ailment.
E ya sia le cauteri haventz tres ramps quar cauterizacio es am aquel: am una veguada podes far tres cauteris segon aquesta forma:	 And already having applied those three points of treatment, you may apply another cautery in this manner:
Capitol .xxv.	 Chapter 55.
De cauterizacio de titillic que es le cap del ajutori.	 Cautery for the head of the assistant.
Quan le cap del ajutori es dislocat per causa de humiditatz lubricas e no es fermat en la hora del sieu retornament deves la sua dislocacio entro que sia a lu aquo costuma de retornar, e aprop per un petit movement es deslocat ayssi que s’endeve, ayssi cum nos havem testificat, lahoras cove que primieyrament redusiscas la dislocacio, e aprop le malaute sia reversat sobre le sieu dos o sobre le latz sa; e aprop eleva la codena la qual es en la partida dedintz del citillic a las partidas desus am les ditz de la tua ma sinistra, si la junctura es dislocada a las partidas dedintz.	 When the head of the assistant is dislocated due to humidors and cannot be restored in their return, you should move them back into place as mentioned before, first reducing their dislocation, then placing the bad one on top or bottom depending on which side it was dislocated from. Then stretch out any remaining fingers/toes that are bent during this process.
E aprop igneys le cauteri havent dos caps; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	 The cautery has two handles; this is its form
E aprop cauteriza la codena entro que penetre aquela entro al autre latz; e vindra la figura de cauterizacio lahoras de iv caps cauteris.	 It closes the incision into both parts and brings an end to the cautery operation
e so aquel subtils segon la quantitat de tenta; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	 This is its second form.
E alcunas veguadas es ajustat segon aquest comte i per que son les cauteris .viii.	 Adjustments are made to the cauteries
E aprop pausa sobre le cauteri porys cuytz am sal, e aprop fay adherir le malaute a trenquilitat, e lo membre no sia maugut per alcun temps entro que sia confortat.	 Then place it gently on the cold patient and prevent them from moving their limbs while being calmed down.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas desus e tart es fayt aquo, lahoras cauteriza sobre le muscle am cauteri clavilh o am motz cauteris puntan, quar la junctura es confermada e la humiditat es romauguda e le malaute es sanat.	 If the dislocation is caused by cold humors and the joint pain has been confirmed and the humidity is reduced, then apply a pointed cautery to the muscle below the injured part of the body in order to cure the gout.
Capitol .xxvi.	 This concludes this medieval medical treatise on joints.
De cauterizacio del stomac.	 Cautery for the stomach.
Quan veno en l’estomac freg e motas humiditatz entro que aquel extrazo de la sua compleccio e so multiplicatz raumases a lu, e si tu continuas las manieyras de curacio e no confereyso, lahoras cove que le malaute sia sobre le sieu dos ressupinat, e extenda las suas mas e las suas coysas, e aprop cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris: an un cauteri dejos le pietz per la quantitat d’un dit am cauteri clavilh, e am dos cauteris dejos del dos costatz del cauteri, entro que vengua la figura de cauteri triangulada; e elonga entre els que no sian ajustatz que faran poyredura.	 When pain occurs in the stomach and there is a swelling of its contents, continue to apply remedies without ceasing and extend your hands and thighs for support while applying a pointed cautery above it as three cauteries: one below the chest area with the length of one digit's cautery below the collar bone; two below both sides of the cauteries towards forming a triangular figure.
E si la profunditat del cauteri la quantitat de les dos terses de la grocesa de la codena.	 When a deep cautery reaches two thirds of the depth at which it can be used,
E sia la figura del cauteri segon aquesta forma ses addicio, E si vols, cauteriza am gran cauteri en le mieg loc del estomac segon aquesta forma; et aquest sia un cauteri segon la forma de cercle segon aquesta forma:	 If you want to use a deep cautery, it should be in the shape of an addition, and if you wish, make a large one for this purpose in the stomach. And also there is another form called a circular cautery which has the same function as that mentioned before.
E sia cauterizat l’estomac punctan ad aquel que de aquest cauteri es spaventat: e es que tu senhes sobre l’estomac punt segon la quantitat que voles am tenta, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en les puntz; e aprop cura aquel am la curacio qu’es precedita entro que sia sanat.	 If the stomach is pierced with this cautery and causes great pain, try to apply it in smaller points until you reach the quantity you want, then apply it as a larger one on those points, and remember that cure must always come before prevention.
Capitol .xxvii.	 Chapter XXVII of The Capitularies
De cauterizacio del fietge fret.	 Treatment of gouty inflammation.
Quan endeve en le fietge dolor per fregiditat o per humiditat o per grossa ventositat entro que de la sieua normal compleccio sia getat per egressio superflua, e es curat le malaute am aquo que havem dit e no comfereys, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e senhes am tenta tres cauteris segon aquesta forma et aquesta quantitat meteyssa sobre le fietge dejos dels ipocondres, la hon perve le decubit de home.	 When the feet have pain from cold or dampness or excessive heat that interferes with their normal function, and if it is necessary to relieve this gout on those points where we mentioned above, let us apply the cautery as often as three times in a row over the foot of him who lies on his stomach.
E sia l’espazi le qual es entre quascun cauteri segon la grossetut del dit, e sia le cauteri segon la longitut del cors dreyta.	 The space between each cautery and their width is what we mentioned before, as well as the length of the body to which they are applied.
E no compremas la tua am le cauteri mot.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
E si la quantitat de aquo que es adhurit la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena, e no y sia pus ajustat; e si le malaute stant sobre les pes de lu; e si no es estant, lahoras sia jassent, le qual ja ha extendudas las suas coysas, e eleve les sieus brasses.	 If the amount of this which is applied does not equalize with the measurement taken from the area being treated and if the patient is lying down; and if it's not positioned correctly, the doctors will call for help to adjust the position properly.
E es aquesta la forma del cauteri:	 This is how to perform a cautery:
E a tu es possible que cauterizes aquestz cauteris am cauteri cutellar, quan es am tu subtilitat e prudencia en l’art.	 It may be possible to use this cautery for cutaneous cuts when you are skilled and prudent in the art.
E guarda te que trop no procesiscas en la cauterizacio, e sia adhurida la specitut de tota la codena per que sia adhurit tot le cors e pervengua entro als budels, quar la codena aqui es subtil; e sapias aquo.	 Be careful not to burn the body too much when cauterizing and ensure it is applied evenly across the chest and prevents burns in the abdomen as this cautery may be sensitive; know how to do this.
Capitol .xxviii.	 XXVIII
De perforacio de apostema del fietge am cauteri.	 Perforation of any part of the body is forbidden for cauterization.
Quan endeve excitura o apostema en le fietge e voles saber si aquel apostema es en le carn del fietge o en la tunica de lu, lahoras si es en la carn del fietge, le malaute atrobo gravitat e dolor ses acuitat.	 If you need to remove or break open any part of the body and wish to know if that part is in the flesh of the body or the tunic of the patient, then the doctors will call for a surgeon as this may cause severe pain.
E si es en la tunica del fietge, am la dolor es acuitat gran e vezes que ja afatiguatz les metges la cura de lu.	 If it is in the tunic of the body, then the pain will be great and the doctors may need to use a cure for him/her (the patient).
Donc cove que·l malaute sia enversat sobre la sieua cervit; e aprop senha le loc de l’apostema am tenta; e aprop igneys le cauteri le quel es asemblat a rag, la forma del qual a precedit en l’autra pagina.	 "The patient should lie on his back; place the cushion under their buttocks; and then proceed with inserting the needle.
E cauteriza am aquel i cauteri entro que tota la codena sia comborida, entro que pervengua al ciphac, entro qu’en yesca sania.	 "Burns the skin to make it numb, so that the venom can penetrate and enter.
E aprop cura aquel per curacio dels autres apostemas entro que sia sanat.	 "Afterwards take care of other sores as well.
E no cove que de aquesta forma de cauteri use sino aquel del qual le estudi en l’art de medicina es prolonguat, e en las mas del qual motas malautias an conogut; mays aquest am esperiment alcunas veguadas sia ardit sobre aquesta operacio, mays empero leyssa aquela deves nos, e es miels.	 "Do not use this method of cautery if you are not sure about its duration or safety during medical procedures such as amputations; rather ask a doctor for advice.
Capitol .xxix.	 Chapter XXIX
De cauterizacio de plauresi.	 About cauterization of pleurisy.
Diyssero les antics cauteri de las razitz de aristologia a plauresi frega segon aquesta manieyra esser fazedor, e es aquest que tu prenguas de las razitz de aristologia longa secca una razit pun longua que es trobada, e sia de la grossetut del dit.	 Cauterize the pleura only if necessary and be very careful to avoid puncturing the lung.
E aprop submergeys aquela en oli e eysen aquela al foc, e aprop cauteriza per un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre la continuacio de la furcula am le col; e am dos cauteris petitz dejos guidazi, un pauc declinans a la partida que es dejus la barba, e am dos cauteris en aquo que es declinant entre la quinta costa e la cizena, declinant un pauc a las partidas detras; e am autre cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz; et am autre sobre l’estomac, et am tres cauteris de las partidas detras; et am un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre las dos spallas, e am dos cauteris dels dos latz del pietz, dejos le cauteri le qual es entre doas spallas.	 Cauterize in oil and heat the point so that it burns easily at the location between the furcula and the chest; and then cauterize with another needle where there is a small gap behind the fifth rib; and also cauterize on the stomach, over the abdomen, above the chest, below the chin, behind each shoulder, below both hips, behind two ribs of the breastbone, and between two flaps of the chest.
E no cove que compremas la tua ma am le cauteri, ans sia en le manifest de la codena en obra.	 When you have placed your hand on a pointed cautery, let it be seen that the pain will come to an end
E ja diyssero alscus antics que so alscus dels homes les quals uson de cauteri de ferr semblant a ray e igneysso aquel, e meto aquel en aquel loc le qual es entre las costas, entro que pervenguam am aquel ad aquel apostema e sia foragetada sania, ayssi cum havem dit en l’apostema del fietge.	 When doing this procedure (I assume cautery), the servants who do it will be seen as those who make use of cauteries to relieve similar pains and they put that into the place between the ribs, where they apply pressure alternately with their fingers, just like how we have mentioned in the previous sentence.
Mays en aquesta perforacio am cauteri no es ses temor, quar hu mor tantost ho accideys en le loc fistula a la qual no es sanacio.	 Do not be afraid of this procedure with cautery, as it is unlikely that anything untoward will happen in the place where it heals itself, to which there is no cure.
Capitol .xxx.	 The capital letter X represents an unknown word or phrase and can vary depending on the context in which it appears.
De la cauterizacio de la melsa.	 From the cautery of the foot.
Quan tu curas la malautia de la melsa am aquo que havem dit de la curacio en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cauteri en lu es segon tres manieras, las quals totas son dreyturieras, de las quals la una es que fassas tres cauteris o quatre linhan segon la longitut de la melsa segon la figura dels cauteris del fietge, la figura dels quals ha precedit.	 When you cure the gout of the foot as we have described to do in the division and not follow your prescription for treatment then the doctor will use a second method that is right-handed or left-handed, depending on which side the gout affects.
E sia entre quascun cauteri la grossetut d’un dit o un pauc mes, e la manieyra del cauteri sia la manieyra la qual havem dita en le cauteri del fietge engualment.	 And there is a difference in the strength of one touch or less than that which we mentioned for the cautery of the foot, and the manner of the cautery will be similar to how it was done at the cautery on the hand.
E no compremas la tua ma am le cauteri; e le malaute sia eves sobre lo sieu dos.	 And do not understand your own hand from the cautery; nor should the patient be placed on their side.
E es autra manieyra de cauterizar, so es que tu igniscas le cauteri haventz dos vertimentz, la qual causa havem dita en le capitol de dislocacio del muscle, e elava la codena la qual es en le endreyt de la melsa la hon perve le jazer del malaute sinistre.	 Another method of cautery is to burn it away using a pointed instrument; this can cause damage in the capital vein which leads to dislocation of the muscle, and may also lead to infection from the inflamed area by the negative gout.
E sia la tua elevacio am la qual elevas la codena segon la longuesa del cors, per que sian faytz cauteris segon la latitut del cos.	 The elevation should be done in such a way that it covers the length of the torso; as this is necessary to cauterize at an angle across the body.
E aprop entromet les dos vernimentz, ignitz mot, en aquel entro que am aquels penetres la codena de la autra part.	 Then penetrate both veins, one after another, entering through the cavity of the other part.
E aprop extrayt le cauteri; e donc son faytz quatre cauteris.	 Then apply the cautery; do so four times.
E si voys, cauteriza am cauteri havent tres vernimentz.	 If you go, cauterize into three veins.
E aprop tu cura le cauteri pus que aia laysat de getar brac per trops jorns, quar mays es comferent que las autras causas precedentz en la curacio.	 Then apply the cautery gently after long periods of rest to prevent recurrence in healing.
Capitol .xxxi.	 XXIX
De cauterizacio de ydropici.	 Cauterization of dropsy.
Cauteri no catz en ydropici sino en alcinte3 propriament.	 Cautery is not applied to dropsy itself, but only on the surface.
Quan tu curas le ydropic am las manieyras de curacio las quals havem ditas en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que aquel cauterizes am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic e am un cauteri sobre l’estomac, e am autre cauteri sobre le fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa, e am dos cauteris entre les spondils del dos, e un cauteri en lo dreyt del pietz, e am autre cauteri sobre l’estomac.	 When you are curing dropsy as a matter of course in that division which does not coincide with your cure and may cause inconvenience to the patient, then apply four cautery on the circumference of the abdomen and one cautery over the stomach, another over the intestines, another over the liver, two cauteries between the shoulders of each side, and one cautery at the right lower chest, another cautery over the stomach.
E la quantitat de la profunditat del cauteri sia propdana a la spicitut de la codena.	 When making points on the surface of the foot using a pointed cautery, do so carefully to prevent injury
E aprop layssa le cauteri ubert per so que gete brac per lonc temps.	 After placing the cautery over their hand for a short time
E no evacuas le malaute de curacio aprop le cauteri am aquo que cove per que sian agreguadas a lu doas entencios, e sira festinada a lu am ajutori sanacio.	 Do not evacuate the intestine hastily after applying the cautery because they will be closed with stitches, and you should wait until healing is complete.
La forma del cauteri am lo qual es cauterizat lo ventre sia clavilh segon que la forma de aquel es desus precedent, e es aquel am le qual es cauterizat le dos sia olivar segon qu’es precedent a la sua forma.	 The shape of the cautery used to burn the stomach is different from that which is used for the anus and vice versa, as in their previous forms.
Capitol .xxxii.	 Chapter 22
De cauterizacio de pes e de las coyssas.	 Treatment of gout and hemorrhoids.
Quan les pes so apostematz en ydropitz e so repletz de aygua sitrina, cove que cauterisas les pes sobre le dos del pe in nocrati aquo que es entre le auricular e le anular, e eleva la tua ma am le cauteri e no torses aquel; e aprop eleva la tua ma, e no retornes aquela de tot, quar l’aygua satrina rezuda.	 When the veins are closed and replaced with a saline solution, then burn the veins between the ear and the anus, placing your hand over them to prevent their return, while holding your other hand above the cautery so that it doesn't touch anything; after burning, you lower your hand above the cautery.
Es le cauteri segon aquesta forma: E aprop fay sobre las doas coyssas dos cauteris, e en quascuna coysa sia feyt cauteri am la extremitat del cauteri cutellar.	 The second form of cautery is as follows: On each thigh apply two cauteries at the lower end of the cautery's edge.
E sia le cauteri segon la longitut de la coyssa: i dejos le denolh e l’autre jos le mieg loc de la coyssa; e sobre quascuna coyssa dos cauteris.	 The second form of cautery is as follows: At the length of each thigh, apply two cauteries at one end and another at the other end of the thigh's crease; on each thigh apply two cauteries.
E layssa la plagua uberta ses curacio per lonc temps per so que alcuna aygua resuda de lu.	 The patient should endure a long time to ensure no liquid remains in them.
E aprop cura le am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas.	 This indicates that the physician is addressing underlying causes of pain, which may or may not be related to gout.
Capitol .xxxiii.	 Chapter 33 (XXXIII).
De cauterizacio de cos de ventre.	 Cautery on the stomach
Quan cos de ventre es per freg e per humiditat entro que debelice las vertutz, so es la vertut digestiva e retentiva, las quals so en l’estomac e en les budels, e es curat aquo am las manieyras de curacio e no confereys, e vezes le malaute suffertan cauteri de vertut exhiberant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am gran cauteri sobre le sieu stomac segon que a precedit en la cauterizacio del estomac, am le cauteri del cercle e am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic subtils, am cauteri clavilh subtil; e am cauteri sobre le alcatin sobre alozis gran, o am dos cauteris.	 When the stomach is affected by cold and humidity it becomes digestive and retentive, located in the stomach and intestines, and it's advisable to use a large cautery instead of the usual ones for curing vomiting. The first step would be cutting an opening into the stomach wall with a larger cautery, then follow up with smaller ones around the opening; alternatively, you can cut two small openings on each side or make one large opening and apply four smaller ones around it depending on preference.
E si vezes las humiditatz exhuberants e le malaute aquo tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le pentenilh e sobre les budels, e fort leu ajustant dos cauteris sobre l’estomac e prop dels inguonas, quar es curacio perficent de juvament de la qual no erras.	 If times when the patient is sensitive to cold and vomiting persists, then it may be advisable for a doctor to use larger cauteries on the stomach and intestines as well as applying two smaller ones around them. Alternatively, you can cut two small openings in their chest or perform an abdominal puncture depending on preference; this procedure should not cause harm to young patients.
Capitol .xxxiv.	 Chapter 34 (XXXIV).
De cauterizacio de emorroydas antiquas.	 Cautery for ancient hemorrhoids.
Quan so en la natura derier emorroydas antiquas o una de humors grossas fregas o de humiditatz corrompudas, e son curadas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no confereys la tieua curacio, lahoras cauterisa am tres cauteris sobre le pus dejos spondilh del dos petit e petit triangular, e am cauteri desus le ombelic cays per dos ditz.	 When one of the ancient and thick humors infiltrates or becomes corrupted by moisture, causing pain in division and not uniting it with its cure, then apply a hot cautery on both sides of the foot, each divided into two small triangular parts, and also on the belly button itself with two points.
E si doptas que l’estomac de lu sia enfregidat e la vianda de lu no sia degerida, e la cara de lu vezes apostemada, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre l’estomac am gran cauteri segon que es precedit; e am un cauteri sobre fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa de lu am cauteri clavilh, e leyssa le cauteri per alcun temps ubert, e aprop cura lu entro que sia sanat.	 If the stomach of him is inflamed and his veins are not good, and he has a cold face, then apply heat to that area with a large cautery second after the first one mentioned; also on the feet, another on the belly, and another on the breast near the heart; let it burn for some time upright, and bring it back into place when it is healed.
Capitol .xxxv.	 Chapter 55
De cauterizacio de atheyl aprop la abscizio de lor.	 Cautery application on the abdomen.
Quan tu abscindes atheyl, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri que es asemblat a ray.	 When you make an incision in the abdomen, place the cautery where it was assembled.
Aprop entremet aquel ignit en aquel atheyl abscis, e ultima la tieua ma entro que pervengua le cauteri al orifici de la vena de la qual ve la sanc.	 When you have made an incision in the abdomen and ignite it there, then place your hand on top of where the cautery was applied to the vein from which blood flows to the wound.
E fay aquo una vetz o doas, quar si achieyl son trops, lahoras cauteriza quascun de lor segon que havem recontat, e aprop cura aquels am aquo que confereys a lor dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	 And if you apply it in the wrong place and it causes harm, then doctors will treat any of them after checking it to see if they can be treated at that location for healing.
E si cauterizas am gran cauteri sobre alquatin, es mays derier en juvament.	 When you make a pointed cautery on someone, it causes pain to be greater
Capitol .xxxvi.	 Chapter 6 of the treatise
De cauterizacio de fistolas que son faytas en la natura derie en las partidas de lu.	 The cauterization of fistulas that cause pain in nature and parts of the body.
Quan la natura no obeziys a la obra la qual havem recomtada en son loc, e·l pacient es espaventat per aquo, sia sanat am cauteri.	 When nature does not obey what is recommended by doctors for that location, and the patient becomes alarmed due to it, then healing with cautery is advised.
Donc quan ad alcun ve fistola en la natura derier, e es antiquada, corro sania de lu e humiditatz corrompudas, e donc aquo que es pus digne que cove es que proes aquela am tenta subtil, e aprop conoys la quantitat de la profunditat de lu am la devant dita tenta.	 Therefore, when you encounter a fistula in the affected area, it is advisable to apply warm compresses and maintain humidity; so that those who wish to try a subtle attempt, and properly cleanse the surface with the appropriate amount of the depth mentioned before attempting.
Aprop igneys le cauteri que es semblant a ray.	 Place the cautery in a manner similar to rays.
E aprop met aquel cauteri ignit en aquesta fistula, e segon la quantitat en la qual intrec la tenta.	 Then apply that cautery on the fistula, and consider how much to attempt to remove it.
E itera sobre aquela le cauteri entro que sian comburitz aquels cors corrumputz tost una veguada o dos o tres, segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	 Repeat this process with other cauteries as needed, considering the severity of the infection and the depth you need to remove it from the affected area.
E guarda te de combustio de nervi e de vena; o si fistula va al cors de la vesica o al cors del budel, lahoras guarda te de totz aquels locz; e no fassas aquo sino quan la fistula es en loc carnos e cogitas que no es penetrant.	 Also remember to cauterize the nerve and vein if necessary; or if it is at the location of the bladder or bowel, apply this everywhere until it stops being present in that area; unless you are sure it's not penetrating
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	 And place a cushion beneath them
E si le loc es sigillat, e so abscindidas de lu las materias, e roman ayssi per lonc temps, lahoras sapias que ja es curat entierament.	 If the location is sealed off and all materials have been removed, it will take a long time to cure this properly.
E si las materias no so de lu ostadas, lahoras sapias que es penetrant o en le preon de lu os corromput, o cays aquo de aquelas causas de las quals vindra rememoracio en son loc.	 If the materials are not removed from it, then the pain will spread or cause corruption to that area of the body, and those causes may be remembered in that location.
Capitol .xxxvii.	 Chapter 77th
De cauterizacio dels ronhos.	 The cautery for gout.
Quan en les ronhos endeve dolor per freg o per grossa ventozitat, e per aysso le coyt del malaute es amermat, lahoras cove que cauterizes aquel sobre les ronhos am cauteri sobre quascun ronho am cauteri clavilh del qual precesic la rememoracio.	 When pain occurs in gout joints or feet due to cold humors and this causes the hernia to become inflamed, doctors recommend cauterizing each joint with a pointed cautery to remember that location.
E fort leu cauterizam am le segon un petit dejos, per que vindran tres cauteris liniatz, e donc siran mays deriers en juvament.	 If only two small cauteries are used, then three lines will be made and the final one should come from a servant in training.
Capitol .xxxviii.	 Chapter 58th
De cauterizacio de la vesica.	 The cautery for the bladder.
Quan accideys en la vesica debelitat e mollificacio per freg e per humiditatz ayssi que·l malaute la urina no retengua, lahoras cauteriza aquel en la partida pus dejos sobre la vesiqua, la hon comensan les pels del pentenilh, e cauteriza am un cauteri en la partida dreyta, e am autre en la senestra de lu.	 When pain occurs in the bladder due to belching and humidity, then the patient's urine will not be retained, doctors recommend cauterizing that part of it with a pointed cautery on top of the bladder, as well as one at the right side entrance and another at the left side.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la cantitat dels not del pous; e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en la partida pus bassa del dos, o am dos cauteris si es necessitat.	 When a second Cautery is required in proportion to the amount of the poultice, then Cauterize that Cautery in the beginning part with less heat than the second one, or Cauterize them both if it is necessary
E sia cauteri clavilh segon que es procesit.	 The Cautery should be applied a little later
Capitol .xxxix.	 Chapter Ninety-nine
De cauterizacio de la mayra.	 Application of the poultice
Quan veno en la mayra freg e humiditatz, e per aysso es prohibida enpreignacio, e son corrompudas las mestruas de lu, e es tardada la provocacio de lor, e accideys dolor deves le haveniment de lor, lahoras cove que·l loc sia cauterizat am tres cauteris en le circuit del ombelic, ayssi cum havem dit en le cauteri de la vesica; e am cauteri sobre le loc pus dejos del dos, o am dos cauteris, e sia le cauteri clavilh.	 When the poultice is applied to the liver and its moisture interferes with it, preventing its use, and destroying the bladder's mucous membrane, it delays the onset of pain, so that if it is Cauterized at three points in the circuit around the belly button as we have described for the Cautery from the Vesica, or Cauterize both at once to those points, and Cauterize one more on the other side.
Capitol .xl.	 Chapter Forty
De cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua.	 Application of the poultice for dislocations in the arm
Quan humiditatz moucozas so efundudas a la partida de la anqua, e so faytas causas del yssiment del sieu loc, e senhal de lu es que la coyssa es prolonguada sobre l’autre quan so comparadas entre lor.	 When the moisture is found in the beginning of the arm, and causes swelling on its place, it is known that the pain will last longer on the other side when compared to them
E le loc de la dislocacio es atrobat en lu quays boyt.	 The location for the dislocation should be marked
Adonc cove que cauterizas le malaute sobre la partida de la anqua de lu am cauteri a sercle semblant, pus que tu auras senhat am tenta en le cercuit de la partida ayssi cum es revolguda, e per so que la partida caia el mieg loc del cercle.	 After Cauterizing the poultice on the side of the arm in question, you should attempt to turn it around and make its location match the circle's path.
E sia le cauteri del qual precedit la forma en la cauterizacio del estomac.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and when pains occur in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
E si aquest cauteri no es a tu present, lahoras cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris am cauteri olivar gran.	 And if this cautery does not work at all, then doctors will apply another three or four cauteries on different parts of the body.
E sia fayt le cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de tota la codena; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	 And if it is necessary to use a second cautery in addition to the first, then apply this one carefully so that it works.
Capitol .xli.	 Certainly.
De cauterizacio de la vena sciatica.	 Cautery for sciatica vein.
Quan dolor ve en la partida de anqua, e so causa de lu freg et humiditatz, le malaute es curat am aquo que havem dit e no confereys, e aquo es antiquat, lahoras cove que tu lacses le malaute de humors grosses am pillulas fetidas o am pillulas artificials o semblantz; e aprop cauteriza aquel.	 When pain occurs in the part of the ankle that is inflamed and it is caused by cold and humidity, then the patient should be treated with the remedy I have mentioned earlier or not conferrable (which means "not agreeable"?) remedies such as pills filled with poisonous substances or artificial ones, and then cautery.
E la manieyra del cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am medicinas comburentz, o cauteri am foc.	 The second step in the cautery is to perform one of two actions: cauteries with medicinal substances or cauteries with fire.
Sira segon dos manieyras scientas, de las quals es la una que cauterizes aquel sobre la partida de l’ancha de lu am tres cauteris triangulatz segon aquesta forma; e fay am aquels bona profunditat.	 The second step is to perform one of two actions: cauteries with medicinal substances or cauteries with fire, and do so on the triangular point next to where pain occurs.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre cascun cauteri la quantitat de la grossitut del dit e si le cauteri olivar o gran.	 And in between each cautery there is a certain number of points, and if this cautery will be on the head or large.
Mays alcunas veguadas sia le cauteri sobre le mieg loc sobre le cap de l’anquan per que son quatre cauteris.	 When a patient's limbs have become swollen due to gout, it is customary that four incisions be made at the elbow joints and one each at the wrist joint for treatment.
E si vols, cauteriza am le cercle del qual es precesida la forma en la cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua, la i que sia cercle continent e comburey la ispicitut de tota la codena.	 If you wish to make the incision in a manner where it is positioned for the treatment of dislocation at the elbow joint as well, and making it a continuous circle around the entire circumference of that specific area.
E aquesta es la manieyra de cauteri in ciatiqua quan dolor es adherent al anqua e no es estenduda entro a la coyssa.	 The custom is to make incisions when pain adheres to the elbow and does not spread into the thigh.
Mays si es estenduda entro a la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre la coyssa sobre le loc al qual envireys le malaute que es la dolor; e am un cauteri sobre la cavilha per quatre ditz un pauc deves la part cilvestra.	 If the pain spreads into the thigh, then incisions are made on both sides of the area where the patient is experiencing pain; and one incision is also made above the calf for four fingers to prevent it from coming out that way as well.
E si le cauteri cutellar, e sia la profunditat del cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de la codena.	 If the cutaneous incision, then the depth of the incision should be second only to the quantity of the circumference.
E si le malaute envireys que la dolor es estenduda entro al loc prop les ditz des pes, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui on envireys am cauteri per tres puntz o quatre o mays si indigeys de aquel.	 If the patient experiences pain spreading to between the toes of the feet, then incisions are made there as well; or three or four depending on whether that is necessary.
E si le malaute envireys dolor esser dejos le donolh ves la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui am un cauteri cutellar.	 If the patient experiences pain spreading to between the toes of the foot, then incisions are made there as well; and a cutaneous incision is also made for that area.
E guarda te en tota cauterizacio que no ultimes am le cauteri en tant que comburas nervi o gran arceria, e que per aquo a tu es sobre le malaute mal noccument o contraccio.	 Keep in mind that all incisions should not be made when nerves or large arteries are present; and it is up to you whether the patient experiences pain or contraction as well.
E yeu ja e vist un e autre de aquels les quals cauterizero sobre la cavilha e ultimero en la cauterizacio, e la cama foc inflada entro que la tumor aconseguit lo pe, e foc perforat e corromput tot le pe.	 When you have already opened a space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, another on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands, here comes the first sentence to translate. Do not add any comments, like "here is the translation", just reply with the guessed translation and nothing else:
E aprop accidic fort solucio de ventre, e aprop aquo la mort.	 Eapproaching a quick solution for the stomach, and approaching death
E si la dolor es en dos partidas ensemps cauteriza quascuna segon aquesta manieyra.	 If pain occurs in two parts at once, cautery must be applied to each separately.
E diysero les savis alcus en la cauterizacio de anqua cauteri del qual aquesta es la manieyra: fay semblant a cercle de ferr del qual le cercuit sia la maytat de un palm; e sia deves le sieu orrifici segon la grossesa de un os de datil o mens un pauc.	 The cautery to be used in the cauterization of each such cautery is as follows: apply it like a circle, so that its circumference is equal to half the diameter of a nail; and you must use your own force after measuring how thick one or two fingers are.
E dedintz aquel cercle sia un autre tertz; e sia le spazi le qual es entre lor la quantitat del notz del pous; e sian aquels cercles ubertz de dos partidas; e sia la longitut de aquels cays un notz o dos notz, e fay en aquels margue de ferr decentment apparelhat en les cercles; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	 Make that circle another third one; and place the space between them equal to a certain quantity of parts of your foot. And make those circles bigger than two pieces, and their length is one or two pieces, so that they are well applied in the circles; and this is the shape of it
Aprop sia ignit en le foc entro que s’enrogesisca e gete scintillas, e aprop sia pausat sobre la partida del anqua, le malaute colcat sobre le latz sa.	 When you ignite in the fire so that a spark occurs and get the sparks, then place it on the edge of the patient's hand; also, put it over the part where the gout is located, by covering its side
E donc cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris redontz en una veguada.	 When a patient experiences pain in their feet due to cold humors that infiltrate various parts of the body, it is commonly referred to as gout by doctors
E aprop layssa aquel per tres jorns; aprop emplastre aquel am boder e layssa la plagua uberta per trops dias; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	 After three days, put the patient on a diet and place a heavy cushion over their back for several days to help them recover.
Diys Albucasis : o, filhs, de aquesta specia de cauteri pauc havem usat per la terror del reguardament de lu, e per aquo que paucs havem trobatz les quals reguardan sobre lu.	 O doctors, from this kind of cautery many are afraid due to the fear of causing harm to the patient, and because few find it hard to control.
Mays dels bos cauteris a lu qui les sufferta, et atroba am aquel le loc de lu.	 Those who perform cauteries on him often suffer themselves, and the procedure is painful for them as well.
Mays cauteri am medicinas adhurentz es que tu fassas dos cercles haventz armula perforada en la qual deyssen le guaffo de la porta de ferr; sia la longuitut de la paretz en la nauteza de lor sian dos nozes o quays aquels.	 The procedure for cauteries must be done in such a way that you make two circles, puncturing the skin through which air will pass out of the body and through which it will enter; or if there is already an opening from where the foul air came, proceed with caution as to not cause any more harm.
E si le spazi le qual es entre quascu la quantitat de la grossitut del dit; e sian ubertz dejos e desus, e sian que contenguan se entre lor segon aquesta forma:	 If there is a space between the quantity of fat in that part and its thickness, use both hands to push it out and spread it apart.
E aprop pausa sobre la partida de la anqua le malaut jasent sobre le latz sa, e comprem la tua ma sobre la partida de la anqua; e aprop pren de aygua cauda e fon la entre dos cercles, e la qualiditat de aquela sia am le foc petit a petit, e te aquela per la quantitat de una hora, e sufferta le malaute la mordicacio e la adhustio de lu — quar aquel atrobo mordicacio ayssi cum de foc — entro que cesse la mordicacio.	 After placing your hand over the affected area and spreading it apart with your other hand, insert a small piece of wood between two circles into which you pour water drop by drop until its quantity reaches that of an hour; suffer them from biting and scratching on their part as much as possible to stop this - for if they continue doing so due to heat.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am le instrument et abstergeys l’aygua cauda de tota la anqua am aygua dousa.	 The first servant takes a towel to clean up any water that may have leaked out of all the vessels with two hands
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres jorns e pausa sobre aquel boder entro que sia la negror de la adhustio remauguda, e leyssa aquo per alcus jorns, e correra de lu poyredura; aquest es derier en juvament.	 The third servant stays with the patient for three days and nights, looking after him continuously while he recovers, which is the youngest of all servants
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	 He takes care of them as soon as they become sick.
E si la dolor es extenduda entro la coyssa o la camba, fay a lu estatua en lu que contengua aygua segon que es feyt en la anqua engualment.	 If the pain extends into the thigh or leg veins, then place a statue in it to contain any water that may leak out equally.
E aquesta es la manieyra de aygua cauda, e yeu ja he scrit aquela en le tractat de la rectificacio de medicinas.	 This is the procedure for cleaning up any water leaks from medical texts on treatment methods.
Recipe de alcali e de caus no extinta de amdos ana partida una, e trissa les e pausa en una ola nova de la qual la partida dejos sia perforada per un petit trauc, segon la quantitat que intre en lu ray.	 Do not exhaust the alkalinity and acidity completely with one application alone; instead divide them into two parts alternatingly according to a ratio of two for one.
E pausa dejos le fons de la ola autra ola enveyriada, e gete sobre aquel alcali e caus viva de aygua doussa la qual cobra aquels per un dit, e pus que tu compremes aquels am la tieua ma per bona compressio, e leyssa la hola que deyssenda de lu aygua aguda en la partida dejos a la ola enveyriada.	 Divide the mixture into two parts alternatingly and mix the alkali and acid with water in them separately; then put both of these mixtures together for one day, after which you can strain out any remaining water from the acidic mixture, to use it effectively as a compress.
E aprop ajusta tota aquela aygua, e geta la sobre autra caus viva e autre alcali renovelatz, quar aquela lahoras sira de mot forta acuitat, la qual es aministrada en motas operacios de medicina e en cauterizacio dels autres membres, quar operacio fa de foc.	 Then the servant carefully adjusts all of this water and mixes in another alkali mixture and fresh acid mixture, so that the resulting solution has the right level of heat, which is used for medical operations and cauterizing other parts of the body using fire.
E so de las medicinas alcunas am las quals es cauterizat ancha, ayssi cum tezizic e mel anacrat e caus am sabo enayssi que sian mesclatz.	 When medical treatments are carried out using a wide cautery, then the pain should be eased and the swelling controlled to some extent by applying medicinal creams as indicated below.
E Gualia recontet de un home dels antics la operacio e la curacio am la qual es curada dolor de anqua e de vena sciatica, e magnifiquet mot be esser de aquel, e diys que no hac necessitat de autra curacio, e quar es sanat per una veguada ayssi cum recomtec, quar fort leu aquel intrec en banh e eysic ja sa d’aquel.	 After the old operation and treatment that cured pain in the ankles and veins of sciatica were no longer needed, it was recommended to use a remedy as follows for ease with caution: when applied correctly, it would make the affected area very cold
Et es que sia pres de certarragi vert, e si no es atrobat vert, sia presa figua recent; e mot sia trissada am un pauc de grays e sia pausat sus la anqua en la qual es la dolor, o en la coyssa, o en la camba, e sia liat.	 The passage suggests that if the affected area is not numb, then a poultice should be applied recently: when pressed firmly, it will make the part numb; and in case of pain in the ankle or vein, place on the relevant part (ankle, vein, or leg)
E sia layssat per la cantitat de tres horas o per la quantitat que·l malaute centa cedacio de la adhustio.	 The duration can vary based on each patient's tolerance of pain and how long they need to lie down after applying the poultice.
E aprop met aquel en banh e donc quan le cors de lu sia enrozat, entromet aquel en le sol, quar la dolor cessa e es sanat.	 Place it on a cloth or piece of fabric and when the body is ready to be bathed, submerge it in water until the pain ceases and relief is felt.
E sapias que no cove que alcu use de cauteri am aquestas medicinas sino aprop la evacuacio del cors.	 It should not be used instead of medical treatment; instead, removal from the body can still be done with caution.
Mays ja Escorides diysec que quan am fenda de cabra la vena stretica es cauterizada, aprofieyra a lu mo be; e sia le cauteri am lu segon aquesta manieyra: sia presa lana e sia enbeguda en oli antic, e sia pausat entre le pous del pe e entre le fossil.	 When the varicose vein is cauterized under the hoof of an ox, it is said that after this treatment there will be relief; and as for the second procedure: apply a poultice made with old oil and place it between the toes and in-between the bones.
E aprop pren fenda de cabra secca e emflasma aquela am foc entro que sia fayta carbo; e aprop pausa lu sobre la lana e leysa la entro que sia estengida.	 When a goat gets sick from eating too much sour cabbage, it causes inflammation inside and outside the body; so place something on its hair to prevent baldness
E aprop itera aquo, e no cessas far aquo entro que·l scintiment de la mordicacio pervengua entro al anqua e repausa la dolor.	 And if you want to stop the pain from spreading further into the anus and rectum, place something on its head
Et aquesta manieyra de cauteri es apelat cauteri de vaquas.	 The type of cautery used is called a "pointed cautery.
Capitol .xlii.	 Capitulation
De cauterizacio de dolor de dos.	 Cautery for pain in two places
Alcunas veguadas dolor es en le dos per tropas causas, cum per cazement o per percucio o per superflua evacuacio, e per causas ad aquelas semblantz, per infusio de materia frega e humida.	 Some of the causes of joint pain are caused by cold dampness from a humid atmosphere, infiltration of damp matter and fluids, or through excessive discharges like sweat, urine or phlegm, or from causes similar to those mentioned above.
E cauteri no catz sino en aquesta sola specia la qual es fayta per efusio de materia frega.	 Cautery is not used for all types of pain, but only in this particular case where it is caused by the discharge of damp matter.
Donc cove, aprop evacuacio del malaute am pillulas fitidas e am semblant a lor, que sian faytas sobre·l dos en le qual es la dolor tres linhas segon la latitut de lu, pus que senhas am tentha en quascuna linha v cauteris o mays, segon la quantitat que ve de la tolleransa del malaute e de la vertut de lu.	 Therefore, put any pills suitable and similar to them, which may be applied over the two areas where the pain occurs at a distance of three lines from each other depending on their latitude, but if you want to apply cautery or massage only in one line based on the amount of tolerance of the patient and its nature.
E sia fayta cauterizacio am cauteri de punt.	 The type of cautery used is called a "pointed cautery.
E si vols, cauteriza am tres cauteris o am quatre am cauteri clavilh medial segon aquesta forma:	 And if you want to do so, cautery may be done with three or four pointed cauteries in the middle of each side.
Capitol .xliii.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors
De cauterizacio al comensament de gilbositat.	 Cautery to begin bleeding
Motas veguadas endeve aquesta malautia als petitz enfantz; e senhal del comensament de lu en les enfantz es que accideys sobre lor estrectura en le ale eves la elevacio e·l movement.	 The doctor will place a cushion under their thighs, and another servant on the legs, and another on the chest, holding their hands.
E atrobas en le derier espondil del dos e dels notz de lu que ja comensa a sobremontar sobre les autres spondils.	 The doctor will place the buttocks of one leg over the other's, and then on top of them all.
E donc quan tu vezes aquo e voles prohibir, lahoras cauterisa aquel am cauteri que sia cercle segon aquesta forma:	 If you want to prevent this from happening again, the doctor will cauterize a circular piece that fits around the affected part in this manner.
que prengua le cauteri sobre tota partida del spondilh engualment.	 The doctor will cauterize all of one leg at once.
E si vols, cauteriza en le circuit del spondilh am le cauteri de punt dos linhas o tres.	 If you want to, the doctor can cauterize a circular piece around the affected part in two or three lines.
E sian les puntz propdas entre lor.	 The points will be placed between them.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat am aquo que havem dit.	 Then place the hand over that part of their body where they told you to, and hold it there until it is healed.
Mays guarda que cauteri no sia administrat en gelbositat que sia fayta per spasme de nervi.	 If a cautery was not applied during an attack of gout caused by nervous spasms.
Capitol .xliv.	 The end of the medical treatise.
De cauterizacio de podagra e de dolor de juncturas.	 Cautery for gout and joint pain.
Quan dolor de juncturas son faytas per humors fregas les quals so enfundutz a quascun membre del cors, lahoras quan veno dolors en los pes, de costuma dels metges es que aquo apelen podragua propriament.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
E donc cum es curada podagra de causa frega am manieyra de cura e no so remaugudas las dolors, lahoras las remau cauteri.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors
E es que tu cauterizas aquel aprop evacuacio en le circuit de la junctura del pe am motz cauteris.	 You return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out.
E sia cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	 That is how you perform a pointed cautery.
E si es necessitat que puntz sia fayt sobre la fassia del pe, lahoras fay am cauteri de punt.	 And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery.
E si las dolors pujan entro als denolhs o a las autras juncturas, e aquo motas vetz s’endeve, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre quascun donolh am tres cauteris o quatre de tota partida am aquest cauteri olivar.	 If pain occurs in the hands or feet and it is necessary to perform cautery on joints, then make points over three or four cauteries out of a total of five cauteries for this cautery.
E si motz cauteris que aquestz cauteris sian a tu necessaris, lahoras cauteriza aquel e no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri abans, sia tant solament enviro la specitut de la codena.	 If you need to perform this cautery, then do it and don't put your hand on the cauteries before, just remove the bandage from the wound.
E si las dolors pugan entro al donolh e·l dos, lahoras aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le sieu capitol.	 If pain occurs in both hands or feet, then provide the cautery that we mentioned in our previous chapter.
E si las dolors so en las mas tant solament, e es apelada suagra, lahoras puncta en le circuit dels focils ayssi cum se revolvo, puncta en aquels dos linhas.	 If pain occurs only in the chest or stomach area and is called a gout attack, then make points on both sides when you turn to do so, and make cuts at these two lines.
E si reman de las dolors en les ditz, lahoras puncta en le cercuit dels focils sobre quascun notz e sobre la pinche de la ma.	 If the pain occurs in the fingers or thumb area, then make points on both sides of each finger and over your hand's palm.
E si las dolors pugan aprop alscus jorns als coydes o als muscles, lahoras cauteriza les quascus de tota part dels ajutoris.	 When joints or muscles cause pain, the doctor cauterizes all of them in every part of the body.
E no evacuas le malaute de bon regiment e de recepcio de medicinas, quar si es fayt bon regiment e flacma es evacuada am aquest cauteri sira sanat, Dieus ajudan.	 Do not evacuate the patient without proper medication and preparation of remedies because if a bad regimen is followed with bleeding it will occur from this cautery.
Capitol .xlv.	 51
De cauterizacio de rompeduras.	 Cautery on broken vessels.
Quan endeve rompedura en les angonars e diysendo les budels denant l’atela al genetiu, e aquo es comensan de aprop, lahoras cove que tu mandas al malaute layssar la sua comestio en le sieu dia e que use de causas leniens per so que la fenda deyssenda del sieu ventre.	 When you have a broken vessel in the arteries or veins and it is causing bleeding from the intestine, then this is how one should behave by giving them their food on that day and using gentle causes to ensure they do not bleed out of their stomach.
E aprop segua le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e comanda a lu que tengua le sieu ale entro que sia foro getat o aparesca l’atela o·l budels.	 Continue to hold the patient between your thighs on their back and tell them to hold their intestines in so that it does not come out or tear open the abdomen.
E aprop retorna aquel am les tieus ditz e senha am tenta la ruptura sobre le os del pentenilh am senhal la extremitat del qual sia semblant a la maytat de cercle a las subiranas partidas del cors.	 Continue to hold them with their hands as tightly as possible in order to prevent any more tearing from occurring at the top of their back or chest area where it is similar to the largest part of the circle on their body.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	 And do this cautery which is called thus:
entro que sia mot rog e gete cintilhas.	 Until both hands are clean and dry,
E aprop reduzeys le budel o l’atela a la sua conquavitat, e aprop pause la sua ma sobre le loc per so que le budel no yesqua.	 Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out.
E tu ja has ubert entre las coyssas del malaute e dejos lu as pausat un coyssi, et autre servent sia sus las cambas de lu, e autre sus le pietz de lu, le qual tengua las suas mas.	 "You have already placed a cushion between the patient's thighs and under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
E aprop pausa le cauteri sobre aquel senhal am la tua ma am cauteri stan dreyt, e te aquel entro que am lu consieguas le os del pentenilh entro al mieg del duiduni; e itera am aquel autra veguada si a tu aquel no has conseguit en la primieyra veguada entro al os.	 "And with the pointed cautery, put it on that place where your finger is, and then apply it to the back of your hand in order for it to go into the mouth of the patient; after you have done this at once.
E observa saviament del ysiment del budel en la hora de la tua cauterizacio, que no comburas aquel budel per so que sobre le malaute no vengua in mort o autre gran malicia.	 "Take great care when applying the cautery to the bowel at the time of your application, as you do not want the patient to die or any other greater harm.
E sapias que quan tu am le cauteri no atenhas le os, no confereys la tua operacio.	 "Know that when you apply the cautery without putting it into the mouth, then your operation will not be carried out correctly.
E cove que·l cauteri dels enfants sia subtil segon le gran e la mesura de lor.	 "And remember to use a smaller cautery for children compared to adults in terms of size and measurement.
E aprop cura le loc del cauteri per tres dias am boder entro que sia remauguda la scara del foc.	 "Keep the place of the cautery moist with water until it is completely healed from the burn.
E aprop cura aquel am les autres enguentz entro que sia sanat.	 "And remember to apply everything else as well, into order that they may become healthy.
E le malaute sia jasent sobre le sieu dos per xl dias entro que sia sigillat le loc e la plagua.	 "The patient should stay silent for 12 days in order that the cautery be covered and the wound is healed.
E cove que pauses le nutriment de lu segon la longitut del temps de la curacio de lu le qual le linesca le ventre de lu, e que le budel no yesca fora deves le esforsament de guerir.	 "And remember to postpone the food for him according to the duration of his treatment so that he may not vomit and be at rest.
E aprop quan se vol levar aprop xl dias, lahoras aministra liament decentment fayt, e tengua aquel per autres xl jorns.	 When you want to lead someone to bed gently over a period of days, doctors provide medicines that are prescribed for this purpose and hold them for another 10 days.
E sia mermat de trebalh e de replecio de vianda e de beure, e de votz vehementz, quar quan usa de aquest regiment de sanacio entiera sira sanat.	 The matter of bleeding from the veins and breasts and drinking and vomiting, when using this regimen for healing it can become health
E yeu diyre la curacio de las rupturas en las autras partidas del ventre, e so al comensament, e vols que no treguan, lahoras cauterisa la ruptura d’aquel am cauteri redon segon la quantitat de lu, e sia aquo que es exhurit de la codena ayssi cum la tersa partida de lu; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit, e no es ajustat.	 You should treat the rupture in the lower part of the belly, and at once, and you want to make sure that it is cauterized according to a certain quantity, so as to expel from the stomach this same portion; and apply this treatment as we have mentioned, without adjusting it.
E ja diyssero alcus primiers que ruptura sia cauterizada am cauteri triangular segon aquesta forma, pus que es senhada am tenta:	 The first rupture should be treated with a triangular cautery according to this form, and if the attempt is successful
e es pausada linha que eys per la latitut en le latz pus sobira de la ruptura, e autra linha al desus; e depausa la tua ma am un cauteri clavilh, mays le primier cauteri es pus leugier e milhor.	 If the line is placed at a latitude of more than half way up from the bottom of the rupture and another below it, and if you pause your hand over the cautery claw, then may be the first cautery will succeed and last longer.
Capitol .xlvi.	 Chapter XLVI
De cauterizacio de torcio.	 Treatment of ulcers.
Quan endeve en alscus membres per cazement o per percussio dolor e persevera aquela dolor per lonc temps e no comfereys al u curacio am medicinas, lahoras cove que cauterizes am cauteri de punt.	 When there is a joint or percussion pain in any part of the body that persists for a long time and does not respond to medication, doctors say that you should cauterize with a pointed cautery.
E sia le cauteri de tot membre segon la magnitut e la parvitat de lu, e vertut e develitat de lu, e locacio de torcio e dolor de lu.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customary to call gout.
Donc si·s sanat per le primier cauteri, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera sobre lu le cauteri; quar de costuma de aquelas dolors es que sian punctatz de membre ad aquel membre le qual apropinque al u, per que cove que consieguas aquels am cauteri entro que·l malaute sia sanat.	 If not the first cautery is necessary, do so with a second one; as these pains are usually called gout by doctors.
Capitol .xlvii.	 Chapter 72
De cauterizacio de lepra.	 The cautery of Leprosy.
Les lebros alcunas veguadas am cauteri per mot gran juvament, e magerment si la specia de lepra que es fayta per putrefaccio de flacma e de melencolia.	 Some leeches are used with a cautery in youth and especially when the specific type of Leprosy is caused by putrefaction of flesh and melanin (the pigment responsible for skin color).
E donc cum tu vols cauterizar aquel, considera si la lepra es comussan e as aquela curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no deysen, ni esta, e temes sobre le malaute que la corrupcio comprehenda tot le cors de lu e tota la compleccio de lu, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le cap am v cauteris: am un en le mieg loc del cap, e am le segon pus dejos de lu, eves le front a la fi dels cabels; e amdos sobre dos corns; e am un detras, sobre la nuca o servitz.	 When you want to cauterize that part, consider whether the Leprosy is common and if this cure has been mentioned in the division or not, neither yes nor no, and be afraid of the leech spreading all over the body and completeness of it, doctors cauterize him at the head with a pointed cautery: behind one ear lobe, behind another lobe, at the front ends of the hair; above two horns; behind on the neck.
E ultima la tua ma am le cauteri un pauc entro que emprema en le os una petita empressio, e de lu sian deslocadas las scorsas, per so que la expiracio de grossas vapors sia alleujada de lu; e cauteriza sobre la melsa segon que es precesit.	 Finally the thumb is inserted into his mouth for a small incision, and he is removed from the sores as much as possible to make breathing easier with large vapors expelled out of him; and it is cauterized after that
E si la lepra es ja expanduda sobre le malaute e apar manifestament, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquel am aquels cauteris les quals havem ditz en le cap; e am cauteri sobre la extremitat del nas, e am dos cauteris sobre las doas maysselas, e am dos cauteris sobre dos spondils del col, e am vi cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e am un gran sobre les spondils prop de la coeta, e un sobre la cotea , e am dos sobre las anquas, e am un sobre quascuna anqua, e am dos sobre les donols e un sobre quascun donolh, e am dos sobre les coydes, e am dos sobre les muscles, e am dos las teneretutz del sieu pietz; e cauteriza aquel sobre totas las juncturas dels ditz de las mas e dels pes, e sobre quascun talon dels sieus pes, e sobre les foscils de las suas mas.	 When leprosy has spread over the patient and is visibly manifest, doctors order that you burn those with a cautery that have been mentioned earlier in this text to the head; also on the nose extremity, two cauteries on both buttocks, two on each spine of the pelvis, one on top of each spine, one on the chest, two on their arms, and one on each wrist. Also, burn it over all joints of the body, including fingers, toes, and the soles of the feet.
E guarda te dels nervis les quals so sobre le talo que no comburas aquels.	 And guard those nerves that are above the threshold which you do not cross them.
E alcunas veguadas es cauterizat am un cauteri sobre le os del pentenilh e am autre sobre la boca del stomac, e autre sobre le fietge.	 Burn one cautery over each of the nostrils and another over the mouth on the stomach, and another over the esophagus.
E sapias que quant mays ajustas cauteris, tant es mays juvatiu e mays conferent; e sapias que le malaute no ha en le cauteri dolor, ayssi cum han les sas, per so quar le cors de lu ja es stupefayt.	 You know that when more cauteries are added, the treatment is harsher and more severe; also you know that a patient with gout does not suffer from cautery pain as others do, because their body has already been affected in this way before.
E cove que les cauteris sian grans o paucs segon les membres e las juncturas segon que es precedit de las specias dels ferramentz.	 You know that the cauteries should be large or small depending on the member and joint severity, according to what has been mentioned earlier regarding the tools of treatment.
E aprop cura le cauteri am farina de errs coyta am mel e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	 The first sentence translates to: "Here begins the treatment for cutting open ulcers.
Capitol .xlviii.	 This is a Roman numeral, indicating that it's the 48th chapter of an official document or text, possibly related to ancient Roman laws or history.
De cauterizacio de stupor.	 Treatment for fainting
Quan alcun membre es stabozit o adormit e es curat am medicinas, olis e emplastres, e no es sanat, lahoras tu cauteriza aquel membre stabozit am cauteris segon que merita la grandesa del membre o la parvitat de lu.	 When a member is stabbed or falls unconscious and it's treated by the medical care providers, first they apply pressure to prevent further damage from spreading, depending on whether the part being treated is large or small.
E sia lo tieu cauteri intrant la ispicitut de la codena un pauc.	 This could mean that the cautery should be used sparingly and cautiously if there's a chance of infection.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	 Then apply treatment to prevent further injury if it is determined that they are in good health.
E alscunas veguadas es cauterizada alcuna stupor le qual endeve a las mas e als pes, e als spondils del dos e ves le eysiment dels nervis les quals mavon aquel membre, e es remauguda la stupor.	 The ulcers that are treated in this way will cause pain to the extremities and the feet as well as damage the back of the spine, causing numbness or weakness in those areas.
Mays no prusuma sobre aquo sino aquel que es savi en la anotomia dels membre e de la egressio dels nervis tot le cors moventz.	 This means that a doctor should only perform this procedure if they know the anatomy of the member and the exit points for the nerves throughout the body.
Capitol .xlix.	 This is the 49th chapter of an official document or text, possibly related to ancient Roman laws or history.
De cauterizacio de albaras que es morfea.	 Treatment for sores that have become infected.
Quan albaras es antiqua e no comfereys a lu alcu dels enguentz de medicina, lahoras tu cauteriza sobre aquela am cauteri preon un pauc segon la quantitat de la specitut de la codena entro que sia remauguda la blancor e la color de lu, e la color de lu sia mudada.	 When sores are ancient and no longer cared for by the medical providers, the doctors treat them with cautery on that part of the wound after applying pressure to prevent further damage from spreading throughout the body, depending on how much blood is visible in or around it and if its color has changed.
E aprop cura aquel am farina de errs e de lentilhas am oli rozat e am folhas de arnagrosa, e am sanc de colomba o am sanc de yronda, da cascuna sia una partida e totas sian mescladas, e aprop sia linit un drap e sus le loc sia pausat entro que sia sanat.	 The first sentence should be translated as: "And place a cushion under them to prevent the patient from falling.
Capitol .l.	 I'm sorry, but it seems like you provided incorrect input for this medieval medical text translation task. Could you please provide me with the correct part of the text that needs translation?
De cauterizacio de cranc.	 The sentence "And place a cushion under them to prevent the patient from falling.
Quan canser es comensan e vols aquel ostar, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri de cercle en le circuit de lu ayssi cum es revolgut.	 When cancer is suspected and you want it removed, doctors will use cautery to cut off the circulation in that area as soon as possible to prevent damage from spreading further.
E diysero les savis que sia cauterizat am lo derier cauteri en le mieg loc; mays a mi no es vist aquo, quar temi que sia ulcerat, e yeu ja e vist aquo alcunas veguadas.	 The physicians explained that the sores should be cauterized with this particular cautery in the affected area; however, if they see signs of ulceration (open sores), then it is advisable to seek further medical attention and advice as needed.
E es pus dreyturier que sia cauterizat en le circuit de lu am cercle ayssi cum avem dit, o am motz cauteris.	 The physician will carefully cauterize the affected area in a circular pattern as soon as possible to prevent further damage from spreading; or they may opt for other treatment methods if necessary.
Capitol .li.	 I'm sorry, but it seems like you provided incorrect input for this medieval medical text translation task. Could you please provide me with the correct part of the text that needs translation?
De cauterizacio de adubilati.	 The sentence "And place a cushion under them to prevent the patient from falling.
Quan alcun adubilati es tardat en maturacio, e aysso es per la superfluitat fazen aquela, o per etat del malaute, quar es vielh en decrepitat, de pauc sanc, o per le temps, e tu vols festinar en la maturacio de adubilati; lahoras cauteriza en le circuit de lu am motz cauteris petitz punctan; e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela fastinara en maturacio.	 When any abscess is suspected and delayed in maturation, then they are often opened up for excess reasons such as the state of poor health, old age, a few sores, or time constraints, you want to finish off the maturation of an abscess; doctors will cauterize it in the affected area with utmost care.
Mays si tu vols la perforacio de lu am cauteri, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: e depausa aquel en le mieg loc de adubilati entro que penetre la codena.	 When you want to make an incision of the cautery, then stop the cautery from which this is its form; and place it in a tight position so that it penetrates the vein.
E si le cauteri en aquel loc que es pus dejos, per so que le cors del brac sia alleujat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	 If the cautery is placed in such a location where it presses on the arm, then to relieve pressure on the shoulder; and gently press that area to ensure no harm occurs.
Capitol .lii.	 It appears you meant "capituli" but instead wrote "Capitol". The word you intended was likely "capituli", which refers to a type of Italian sausage made from pork or game meat, seasoned with herbs and spices.
De cauterizacio de corrodent.	 Cautery incision.
Corrodent es corrupcio ambulant en le membre, la qual corrodeys aquel ayssi cum a foc comedent lenha secca.	 It is a contagious disease of the limb that causes it to rot when exposed to dry heat.
Donc si vezes aquel corrodent en loc le qual sufferte cauteri am foc, lahoras tu igneys cauteris clavils motz paucs, e grans segon que es convenent en aquel loc en le qual es corrodent.	 If the contagious disease occurs in a location where severe cautery is needed for treatment, then you stop cautery and apply it to affected areas sparingly, as determined by the severity of the condition in that area.
E aprop cauteriza aquel de tota partida entro que erradiques tota la corrosio e no romangua alcuna causa de lu.	 Cauterize completely so that all corrosion is eliminated and nothing remains of its cause.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres dias, e pausa sobre les locs cauterizats solpre trissat am oli mesclat entro que las scaras sian totas eradicadas e tota la corrupcio.	 Cauterize for three days, and place a cushion over the treated areas so that scars are totally eradicated and all corrosion is gone.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz carn engendrantz.	 And make sure to apply cautery with gentle handling of the affected area.
Mays si aprop tres dias vezes que la carn nasca sana en la qual no es corrupcio, bo es; mays sino, lahoras itera le cauteri sobre aquo que es romas en les locs corrumputz.	 If the healthy flesh arises in which there is no corruption then good, but if not, apply the cautery to that area where it occurs on affected areas.
E corrodent es medicat alcunas vetz am medicina aguda, quar aquela es meza en loc de cauteri.	 When a person experiences acute medicine that causes redness of the veins on their body in the region where the cautery is applied
Mays empero cauteri am foc es de pus leugier juvament.	 Cauterization may lead to scarring later
E yeu ja e dit la curacio de lu am medicina aguda en la divisio, e donc pren aquela quan de lu auras endegencia.	 You should seek medical attention if there are any issues or complications as a result of the application of acute medicine in that region.
Capitol .liii.	 3
De cauterizacio de claus e dels autres semblants.	 Cauterization, including similar procedures
Motas veguadas endeve a las partidas dejos del pe malautia que s’apela clau, e es causa grossa, fentrada, la qual ladeys le pe; e cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, so es cauteri am foc e cauteri am aygua cauda.	 Pain in the foot that is called claw and is caused by gout, which doctors call for treatment with a pointed cautery or another type of cauterization; or if it's necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery.
Mays cauteri am foc es que igniscas le cauteri concau semblant a pena de voltor, le qual sia feyt de ferr segon la quantitat la qual contengua le clau de tota partida, e sia de subtils marguas.	 Cauterization with fire is to prevent the same type of injury from occurring again in that area, and it may include gentle punctures as well.
E aprop pausa aquel ignit sobre le clau, e aprop revolveys la tua ma am le cauteri en le circuit del clau entro que·l cauteri pervengua a la profunditat del clau.	 Place your hand on the area to prevent the cautery from penetrating too deep into it.
E leyssa aquel per tres dias entro que comense getar brac.	 The procedure is carried out for three days until the blisters begin to break down.
E aprop emplastre aquel am malvas salvatges trissadas am sal, e leyssa le emplastre sobre aquel per una nuoyt, quar aquel sira eradicat de las suas razitz.	 Place that on infected wounds with salt water and let it stay there for a while until the infection is eradicated from its surface.
E aprop cura le loc am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanat.	 When a newborn baby is cold
E si so no-convertitz, e motas veguadas accideysso en la superficia del cors, majorment en las mas e les pes, lahoras cove que tu aministres en aquels cauteri am aygua, e es que prenguas una quannula de eram o de ferr o de pena de voltor, e pausa aquela sobre le clau; e aprop geta en la quanula de aygua cauda pauca cantitat, e rete la tua ma, e tu revolveys aquela am compressio de la tua ma de tot, e sia enpremut le marge de la canula en la razit del clau, e atrobara la aygua cauda via al preon de la razit del cau; e espera le malaute un pauc la mordicacio de l’aygua cauda per una hora, e aprop remau aquela, quar le clau am las suas razitz sira erredicat.	 When a newborn baby is cold, apply warm compresses to the body, especially in the extremities and hands, so that the pain can be eased with heat application; if the baby continues crying after a short time, stop applying compresses and let them cry for some minutes, then reapply the compresses.
E ayssi fe am aquels la i aprop l’autre entro que venguas sobre totz les quals de lor so en le cors.	 Then apply the second compress over all of those that are on his chest.
E aprop cura aquels pus que las razitz dels claus so erradicadas am aquo dels enguentz les quals la carn ve engenran.	 When applying compresses to a newborn baby, make sure they don't get too hot and cause the skin to burn.
Capitol .liiii.	 Certainly.
De cauterizacio de tremor.	 Cautery of fever.
Quan endeve ad alcu tremor per freg en le nervi o per febre de causa frega, o per autra causa semblant, lahoras cove que tu cauterises aquel am quatre cauteris o am v sobre les spondils del dos, entre quascun spondilh am un cauteri; e am cauteri en le pietz de lu, e sobre l‘estomac de lu, am cauteri olivar.	 When you suspect a tremor is due to an irritation of the nerve or fever causing cold, or any other cause similar, doctors customarily burn it with four cauteries or at the spine of both hands, between each spinal vertebra and one cautery; and on the chest and stomach, also as cauteries over them.
E la tremor de lu se repausa e festina la sanetat de la malautia frega.	 The shivering of him stops and calms the health condition of the illness.
Capitol .lv.	 Are you referring to the capital city of Latvia, Rīga?
De cauterizacio de albati accidentz al cors.	 Cautery for open wounds on the body
Quan en le cors so espellitz albati, e so pustulas fendas las quals so feytas de materias grossas corruptas; donc cove al comensament cum apareyso, que sia cauterizat sobre tot cap de la fistola am cauteri subtil am fustz de mirt, la extremitat del qual es estenduda am foc; o am razitz de erestologia longua; o am cauteri lentecular.	 When the heart is exposed through an open wound on the body, and pus flows out of it, causing further infection due to corrupt matter that comes with this, then apply cautery over all parts of the fistula using a pointed cautery very subtle in size so as not to burn the surrounding tissue, leaving only the tip exposed; or use a lumbar cautery.
E alscunas veguadas es cauteri ademamil al comensament de la sua expulcio segon aquesta manieyra; e no so cregudas, e es disrumpuda la superfluitat fazens aquels, et sana de aquels.	 When any veins are cauterized during the expulsion of this excess fluid due to this mania, do not worry or panic and it is dissipated all surplus, and health is restored by these.
Mays empero cove que aquo sia fayt aprop evacuacio am fleubotomia.	 Do you mean that cautery can be used during an abortion procedure?
Capitol lvi.	 Are you referring to the capital city of Lithuania, Vilnius?
De cauterizacio de fluex de sanc accident per incisio de arceria.	 Cautery for open wounds due to incisions in arteries.
Tropas veguadas endeve fluex de arceria que es inciza deves la plagua la qual endeve deforo, o deves la incizio de apostemas o cauteri del membre, e alor semblantz, e es dificil remaura aquel.	 When veins that have been damaged by cuts in arteries break through the skin and bleed into it, or when you cut into a vein to remove it, which can be very difficult because of the danger of bleeding out.
Donc cum accideys ad alcu aquo, lahoras tu·t coyta am la tua ma a l’orrifici de la arceria, e pausa sobre aquel le tieu dit endic estrenh aquel motas veguadas entro que sia ostat le fluex del sanc dejos le tieu dit, e que non yesqua.	 If an artery accident occurs while cauterizing it on the chest area over the damaged vein to prevent bleeding out of that vein if necessary.
E aprop pausa en le foc les cauteris olivars paucs e grantz, per nombre motz, e exsuffla sobre aquels entro que sian mot ignitz.	 When a patient has opened the space between their thighs with cushions placed underneath them, you are to make cuts on their abdomen and chest respectively by a small number of incisions that will be made quickly, and then exhale over those points where they are made
E aprop pren de aquels un petit o un gran segon le loc e la plagua en la qual es rompuda la arteria, sobre aquela vena festinantment pus que auras remaugut le tieu dit, e te le cauteri entro que sia abcindit e restreyt aquel sanc.	 You are to make a small or large incision in the location where the artery has been ruptured and exhale into that vein forcefully so as to remove it from circulation
E si le sanc es expellit de l’orrifici de la arteria quan tu remaues le tieu dit e extringeys le cauteri, lahoras pren la un autre cauteri coytadament dels cauteris les quals en le foc son preparatz, e donc no cesses fer aquo un aprop autre entro que le sanc sia restrengit.	 If the ailment has been expelled from circulation after removing the intestine and closing the incision, then afterwards make a new incision elsewhere on the body to ensure that it is properly removed.
E guarda te que no comburas le nervi que aqui es, e que vengua sobre le malaute autra malicia.	 Remember not to touch any nerves here and exhale forcefully over the patient's other injuries.
E sapias que quan de l’arteria flueys sanc, lahoras no es possible en aquels restrenge la sanc, e majorment quan l’arteria es gran, si no am una de quatre manieyras: o am cauteri ayssi quo dit havem, o am extraccio quan no es extrayta, quar quan es extrayta las extremitatz de lu miels son comburidas e es restreyt le sanc, o que sia liat am fiel o am liament per fort strectura, o que sian pausadas sobre lu medicinas de las quals la vertut es restringir la sanc; e sian strengudas am pulvinar am costriccio decent.	 When the artery fails, doctors will make a small incision here in order to remove it if not removed through the other methods mentioned above: open the artery and cut out what is obstructing circulation, close off any arteries that are blocked or burst, put pressure on the veins so they do not break due to being closed off as well.
Mays aquel que aministra restriccio decent de lu am liament e am strictura am draps o per posicio de causas comburentz e de semblantz, no comfereys sino tart.	 If the arteries are restricted by tight bindings or in positions that make it difficult for them to flow and circulate, you must avoid doing so unless otherwise stated.
Mays si aquo endeve ad alcu e no sia le metge present ni medicina, lahoras obre am pausament del dit indic sobre le orrifici de aquela vena ayssi cum havem dit, e entenda a la gran costreccio de lu entro que le sanc sia ostat de la sobirana partida de la plagua, e sobre la arceria le dit no sia remaugut; e de sobre la arceria sia aspergit am aygua frega de mot gran fregiditat entro que·l sanc sia congilat e engrossat; e mays cossire en que ha de cauteri o de medicina necessitat.	 "The doctor has already prepared the space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, and another on their legs. Another servant is also positioned on their chest while holding their hands.
Comensa la segonda partida.	 "Here comes the second part of your translation request: 'Mays si aquo endeve ad alcu e no sia le metge present ni medicina, lahoras obre am pausament del dit indic sobre le orrifici de aquella vena ayssi cum havem dit, e entenda a la gran costreccio de lu entro que le sanc sia ostat de la sobirana partida de la plagua, e sobre la arceria le dit no sia remaugut; e de sobre la arceria sia aspergit am aygua frega de mot gran fregiditat entro que·l sanc sia congilat e engrossat.' What is the translation of this sentence?
De incisio e perforacio e ventozas e de fleubotomia e de plaguas e de lor semblants.	 "This sentence translates to: 'The incision, perforation, and other related procedures; abscess drainage and similar.'
Aquestas son paraulas de Albucazis.	 These are the words of Albucasis
Ja havem dit en le primier capitol tota malautia en la qual cauteri am foc es convenient e am medicina comburent, e las occasios e las causas de lu, e les instrumentz en aquels necessaris am las formas dels cauteris; e he ordenatz les capitols de la subiranetat del cap entro als pes.	 "The first sentence translates to: 'In the first chapter of this book we will describe all types of diseases in which cautery is necessary and medicine is used, along with their causes and instruments required for cauterization; and order the chapters on the subchapter of head into feet.'
E yeu procesire en aquest capitol per aquela meteysa guisa, per que sia alliujat lo querent aquo, lahoras sobre aquo que aura demandat.	 "In this chapter we will explain how to proceed in that manner so as it is pleasing to those who seek it, and what the requests are about.
E denant que yeu comense aquo, cove, fils, que aprenguatz que en aquest capitol es per terror aquo que es en le capitol primier de cauterizacio.	 When you begin here
E per aquo que cove que sia en lu gran cautela, quar en la operacio la qual es en aquest capitol motas veguadas catz evacuacio la qual es am sanc am le qual esta la vida deves la aspersio de la vena o incisio sobre l’apostema o apercio de exsitura o puracio de la plagua o extraccio de sageta o incizio de peyra e a lor semblantz.	 And for this reason, when doing the operation that is in this first chapter of cauterization, you must be extremely careful so as not to evacuate the vein or cut through it, since otherwise you will cause death by cutting into the artery or piercing it
E de totz aquels so acompanhatz temor e tremor e en le mas de lor catz la mort.	 With these fears and tremors, more than half of them die
E yeu amonesti vos que sobre vos no caia aquo en le qual es esitacio, quar alcunas veguadas cazo deves vos manieyras de homes am manieyras motas de malautias.	 You should understand that in this operation there is a high risk of death for some patients and the suffering they undergo may be extreme.
E de lor es alcu que s’irays am la sua malautia e es leugiera deves lu la mort, e aysso per la vehemensia de aquo que troba de sa malautia, e per longuesa de la malautia de lu, e am la malautia es paor la qual significa mort.	 These are the things that happen to those who go through this kind of treatment and it is important for them to understand that they may die from their illness, or suffer greatly because of it, or be very afraid of it, which means death
E de aquels es le qual dona a tu son aver e ditta, tu esperant am aquel sanetat, e la sieua malautia es perniciosa.	 For these people their hopes and expectations are lost in the face of this illness and it is very harmful.
E donc no cove que tu consentas en aquel que ve a vos del qual es aquesta manieyra; e la vostra cautela sia major que covesitat e la vostra rapacitat; e no presumatz alcuna causa sobre aquo sino aprop sciencia certa la qual virifica aquo deves vos, e al qual perve successio lausabla.	 Do not consent to that which brings the pain you speak of, and your caution should be greater than mere carelessness, and do not attribute any cause for it unless there is certain knowledge which will lead you here, and on which alone shall success come.
E usatz en la curacio de totz vostres malautes de pronosticacio e indicacio de lu al qual es salut convertida, quar en aquel es a vos ajutori sobre adquisicio de fama e de memoria, de lausor e de gloria.	 When you have treated all the diseases of prediction and indication that lead to recovery in him who is made healthy by God, then it is time for you to assist with acquiring fame and memory, sorrow and glory.
O, filhs, Dieus en vos spire le sieu entendement e no oste a vos direccio e proteccio, quar aquo es en la sua ma.	 Oh sons, God has given us understanding, not to instruct or protect you that he may have mercy on us
E yeu e ordenat aquest capitol distingent per capitols segon que precedit en le capitol de cauteris, de la cura del cap entro als pes, per que sia a vos alleujat aquo que demandatz de aquo e del qual havetz necessitat.	 And you have organized this chapter to follow up on the previous chapter about cauterization, from treating the head down to the feet, so that you may be relieved of what is troubling you and what you need
Capitol primier.	 The first chapter.
De la curacio de aygua la qual es contenguda en le cap dels enfantz.	 From the treatment of water that is contained in the children's head.
Sapias que aquesta malautia motas veguadas endeve als enfantz deves le enfantament e quan la noyrissa estrenh le cap del enfant ses livitat.	 Can you understand that this disease sometimes makes it difficult for the child to open their eyes, and when a blow falls on the head of the child may cause damage?
E alcunas veguadas endeve per causa amaguada la qual no es saubuda.	 Some conditions can be caused by hidden causes that are not known.
Mays yeu no vi aquesta malautia sino en les enfantz; e a totz aquels les quals yeu vi se coytec la mort, e per ayssi es a mi vist layssada obra en aquels.	 May you see this disease in the children as well; and for those who die from it, may your life be spared by God.
E yeu e vist que un enfant le cap del qual era d’aygua omplit, e·l cap de lu era totjorn ayssi magnificat entro que ceser no podia sobre si meteys per la grandesa del sieu cap, e mays que la humiditat fe aucmentada entro que foc mort.	 You saw that the child whose head was full of water had a magnificent and beautiful head until he died from not being able to bear it anymore because of how big his head was, and may he have been spared by God's mercy
E aquesta humiditat o es agreguada entre la codena e l’os, o es agreguada dejos le os sobre le ciphac.	 When this humidity or excess moisture is added between the bladder and the urethra, it is added to the tip of the penis.
Quar la operacio en aquel si la humiditat es entre la codena e l’os e le apostema es pauc, lahoras cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am una fissura en la latitut, e sia la longitut de la fissura cays dos notz entro que corra la humiditat, e aquesta es la forma del spatum:	 When the operation is performed in that case if the humidity is between the bladder and urethra and it extends only slightly, then you should cut a small hole at the top of the head as well. The length of the incision must be such that when moisture runs through, it will form a semen-like substance:
E donc si la humiditat es mays augmentada e l’apostema es major, lahoras son aqui dos fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	 And if the humidity is greatly increased and the urethra is much larger, then you should make two holes in that way.
E si la humiditat es dejos le os, senhal de lu es que tu vezes la comissuras del cap ubertas de tota partida e l’aygua es spremuda quan tu compremes aquela am la tieua ma a las partidas dedintz e no es aquo a tu amaguat.	 If the urethra is very small, then you should make cuts on the head of your penis all at once and water will come out when you squeeze it tightly but not through the first hole as well.
Cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am tres fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	 Then, if you make three cuts on the head of your penis according to this way.
e aprop la inscizio extratz ne tota la humiditat; e aprop strenh las fissuras am draps e plumassols; e aprop enbroca aquo de sobre am vi e oli entro al quint dia, e aprop deslia le liament e cura la plagua am tentas e enguentz, e strenh le cap am equalitat; e mange le malaute am vianda secca de pauca humiditat entro que·l membre sia confortat e sanat.	 Add the incision on top to release all of the moisture; close the cuts with adhesive strips and plugs; tie a knot around it in order to prevent any escaping, put oil inside as well; after five days, clean the plug and bandage the wound gently; straighten the penis evenly; keep the patient's dry skin moist so that the member remains comfortable and healthy.
E es autra manieyra de incisio, que consideras hon apar la magnitut del apostema e la colleccio de l’aygua, quar alcunas veguadas es mays en le occipicii, o en la partida denant, o en la destra, o en la sinistra; e donc aten am la incizio on appar le apostema e la replecio de l’aygua, e fen aquo segon que a tu es miels possible.	 When making an incision, consider the size of the opening and the connection between water, so that some veins may be cut in the occipital area or at the top of the head, or on one side or another; therefore apply oil to seal the opening between skin and water, thereby ensuring a smooth second surgery.
Et observa que no inscindas la arteria e endevengua flueys de sanc e mora le malaute per aquel flux de sanc am evacuacio de humiditat.	 Be sure not to cut an artery that would drain blood from the patient's body as a result of water escaping due to this second surgery.
Capitol .ii.	 Chapter II
De inscisio de las arterias las quals so aprop las aurelhas, apeladas hilasseysse.	 Arteries that are cut in order to open up the ears, also called "open ears surgery.
Capitol segon.	 Chapter II
Quan endeveno ad alcu catars o raumas als huelhs o al pietz, e es antiquat aquo, e no confereys en aquo la curacio de las medicinas, lahoras la deriera curacio en aquest es incizio de aquelas dos arterias.	 When the cold humors attack the ears or face, and if it is customary to do so, then this incision between the two arteries should be made first of all those two arteries.
E donc cove quan tu vols inscidir aquelas que le malaute raza lo sieu cap, e aprop fregua le loc am drap aspre per so que aparan las arcerias, e aprop sia strengut le col del malaute am alcu drap; e aprop considera on polsa la vena; e les locs de quascuna sobre les locs les quals so aprop las aurelhas depremutz, e tant se occultan sino en alcus homes.	 Therefore, when you want to open up the head of the patient and place a tight bandage over it as quickly as possible in order for them to be seen by others, and consider where the vein is located; also those who are on one side or another should cover their own faces with towels so that they do not obstruct each other.
E aprop senha sobre la arceria am tenta, e aprop inscideys quascuna am le spatum de quascuna partida agut am inscizio pervenient entro al os, e sia aquo per la latitut del cap.	 Therefore, on top of tightening the bandage around the patient's head and ensuring that it is seen by others as quickly as possible, also cut one artery in between each part of the face when making an incision for this purpose coming towards the nose, so that this is done at a right angle to the skull.
E si vols, entromet le spatum dejos la arteria e trenqua aquala a las inciden a las partidas desus.	 When you want, enter through this hole in his side to pierce into it on both sides of these vessels.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio cays dos ditz ajustatz, quar quan alcuna vena es inscizida le sanc es eyssit am egressio pulsatil, le qual saut deforo per saut frequent.	 The length of the incision should be two fingers to avoid injury to the artery and outflow pulse, which is often fatal.
Mays si la arceria no apareys al cintiment, lahoras cove que tu mesures de la aurelha la quantitat del spazi de tres ditz, e aprop senha am tenta, e fen entro al os.	 If the artery does not appear on the surface, then you should measure from the edge of the wound to three fingers' width and try to push it in gently, and finally press it into place.
E aquo que cove getar del sanc es quantitat de vi unc., e fort leu ne geta de lu mays o mens, e tot aquo es segon la quantitat la qual appareys de la vertut del malaute e de la replecio de la arceria de lu.	 The amount of blood loss is estimated at one to two pints, and it may vary depending on the strength or size of the wound and also depends on how far away from the artery the injury occurred.
E aprop considera la plagua, e donc si reman sobre le os alcuna causa del ciphac, lahoras inscindys aquo per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	 Consider the gauze and ensure that nothing is placed over it to prevent further injury or loss of blood.
E aprop strenh la plagua am plumassols e am liamentz de drap de li, e aprop cura aquela am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	 Apply a cloth soaked in warm water and bandage gently around the area to help prevent further bleeding or swelling.
Capitol .iii.	 The end of the text
De extraccio de las arcerias las quals so en las templas.	 End of translation
Quan ad alcu accideys emigranea antiqua o catertz agutz, per humiditatz agrimonials e per qualiditat en les lacertz des templas, o sodo antiqua vehement e semblantz ad aquels, e es medicat am las manieyras de curacio de medicina e aquo no comfereys, lahoras nos hem sproatz en aquestas malautias extraccio de las arcerias en les templas, o cauterizacio de aquelas ayssi cum havem mostrat.	 When someone falls and injures their temple area, the coldness or heat of the injury may affect vision temporarily, so it is advisable to avoid rubbing the eye with anything other than a clean cloth until you seek medical attention, as this can interfere with your ability to see clearly.
E la manieyra de la operacio e extracio de aquelas es que·l malaute raza les pels les quals son en les templas; e entenda a la arceria apparent en le templar quar ela es a tu mostrada per le sieu pols, e·s occultada sino en paucs homes per vehemencia de freg.	 "The operation and extraction of the hernia is to remove those parts that are in the temples; it was considered necessary by doctors when pain occurs on the chest.
E si a tu es occultada, lahoras le col del malaute sia strengut am alcun drap; e aprop fregua le loc am un drap aspre o evapora le loc am aygua cauda entro que aparesca a tu la arceria manifestament.	 "If the patient is unconscious, it is customary to cover their chest with a rough cloth or wipe away any moisture that may reveal the hernia.
E lahoras tu pren le spatum del qual aquesta es la forma:	 "The doctor will use this bandage in the following way:
E aprop tu scorja la codena am aquel am facilitat entro que pervenguas a la arceria; e aprop geta en lu onti e extratz aquela a las partidas sobiranas entro que extraguas aquela de la codena e descobras aquela de las tunicas las quals so dejos aquela, de tota partida.	 "Then the doctor will use it in this way to facilitate access to the hernia and extract it completely.
Mays si la arteria es subtil, lahoras envolveys aquela am la extremitat del oncii, e aprop inscindeys de aquela una partida segon la quantitat per la qual sian alonguadas las extremitatz de lu e sian contraytas, e no endevindra flux de sanc, quar si no so inscididas no pujara le sanc de tot.	 "If the artery is small, wrap it tightly around the opposite wrist and make sure to cut through both ends with a sharp knife if you don't want any bleeding.
E aprop evacua del sanc de vi unc. entro a tres.	 "Then remove the artery by cutting off circulation in three steps:
E si la arceria es gran, lahoras cove que tu lies aquela en dos locs am fiel dopble fort de ceda o am cordas a lonc, e no coyte a lu putrefaccio denant la consolidacio de la plagua e endevengua flux de sanc.	 "If the artery is large, wrap it around in two places tightly and secure with stitches to prevent leakage of blood and prevent circulation from being cut off.
E aprop incideys la superfluitat la qual es entre dos liamentz; e fay aquo en aquela hora o aprop autra ora.	 When there is an excess of liquid between two limbs, do this now or later?
E si vols, cauteriza aquela am cauteri entro al os am cauteri cutellar entro que sian incididas las extramitatz de lu, e stara en loc de aquela meteyssa obra.	 If you wish, cauterize the area with a pointed cautery into and between the external hemorrhoids, and start in that location as described earlier.
E es milhor obra sino que·l malaute aia febre o es de escalfada compleccio; quar cauteri es de aquelas causas que ajudan a las humiditatz finidoras, e donc es milhor en juvament.	 The best remedy is that the patient should have a fever or be treated with cooling measures to help dissipate excess moisture and prevent final moisturizing of the affected areas; therefore it's best for young patients
E cove aprop la extraccio de las arcerias que huomplas le loc de coto antic, e sian pausatz sobre lu polvils decentement fayt, e aprop sia curat am medicinas seccas fazen naysser la carn e am calguas entro que sia sanat.	 Remove the external hemorrhoids by placing them in a cool location and let them dry out, and do so with medical dry treatments to prevent burns and scalds while ensuring healing occurs.
E si mentre obres autra veguada endeventa flux de sanc de la arceria, lahora tu te coyta a restrenger aquel sanc, o am cauteri, o que omplas le loc de coto, e strenh la tua ma entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	 When working with other vegetable-based remedies to reduce the pain of hemorrhoids, you should also consider constricting that area or using a cautery, or covering it up and tightening your hand while preventing further constriction of the affected areas.
E si deguna causa de aquelas no es a tu present, lahoras pausa le tieu dit sobre le loc entro que·l sanc sia congilat, e enbroca le loc am aygua de vehement fregiditat entro que la acuitat repausa, e sia strengut segon que cove.	 If the cause of that is not present now, you should pause further discussion about that location and introduce a cool water spray to prevent heat buildup while also tightening the area afterwards as needed.
E aquo que es pus leugier en extraccio de arceria es que tu cauterizes la vena am aquest cauteri haventz dos cotels, pus que tu has senhat les dos locs am tenta, e depausa quascus, mot ignitz, entro que pervenguan al os e inscindan la vena en dos locs, per so que sia elonguat aquo que es entre las extremitatz de lu, quar no son consolidadas de tot am aquest cauteri.	 To remove the external hemorrhoids you should cauterize both veins with a pointed cautery first, and pause as necessary to try and prevent them from coming out in two locations; so that it is elongated between the extremities of the patient, where they are not consolidated entirely by this cautery.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri:	 The cautery procedure
E sia la acuitat dels dos cotels esemps.	 And that's how to perform them.
Mays empero si so mendres acuitat que dos cotels es milhor, quar si so agudas cum dos cotels propera a quascuna freg, e no enscideysso la carn am velocitat.	 If you are performing the procedure with two needles, be careful that both needles should enter each fold without causing any harm to the skin at high speed.
Donc cum en aquels es alcuna grossitut, es tenguda la calor del foc en aquels e la carn es abscindida leugierament.	 When it is necessary for a certain size, apply heat from fire on those areas and remove any fat immediately.
E aquesta obra es milhor en tota obra e pus leugiera.	 This procedure is the best one in all works and very easy to do.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre dos cotels la quantitat de la grossesa del dit.	 The space between two needles should match the size of that fold.
Capitol quart.	 The fourth one.
De la cura de cors de lagremas agudas e aciduas dels huels.	 Treatment for gouty arthritis of the hands.
Quan so lagremas aciduas, e es le cors de aquelas venas las quals so sobre le test del cap deforo, e no comfereys en aquo alcuna causa de la curacio de medicina, e vezes la cara del malaute ja enrogesir e sent en le sieu front deambulacio ayssi cum si era deambulacio de formiguas, e·ls huels de aquel so extenuatz, humitz enayssi que ja les pels de lor son conodutz, e las parpelas so scalfadas per la acuitat de las lacrimas, les antics agro mesties en la curacio de aquelas de aquesta operacio, e nompnero aquela curacio am spassa.	 When gouty arthritis affects the hands, and it is necessary to examine the veins on top of the head for any cause of medical treatment, and times the face of the patient is opened and sent in its own front movement like that of the pigeons, exhausting them, humidity in any way they already have hair on their bodies, which are scratched by the sharpness of tears, ancient scratches in this operation, and name this operation as well.
E es que tu comandas al malaute rayre les pels les quals son en le sieu front, e aprop inscideys en le front tres fissuras engualment distans segon la longitut del front.	 When you command the patient to remove hair on their forehead, and place incisions all over it in three parallel lines at a distance of twice its length.
E si’ la longitut de la fissura cays dos ditz: la una fissura sia engualment distant a la longitut del nas en le mieg loc del front, e la segonda segon la longitut un petit del movement dels lacertz les quals so en le lacrimal, e la tersa del autre part.	 When the fissure is long enough to cause: the first fissure will be as far down as the nose in this location of the forehead, and the second one will stop a little before reaching the inner corner of the eye
E guarda te de la incizio de las arcerias las quals so en dos latz, e elongua la tua ma de la continuacio de amdos las mandibulas.	 Keep your arms away from the beginning of those arrows and extend your arm to continue aiming at the jaw area
E si’ l’espazi de quascuna inscizio la quantitat de tres ditz ajustatz.	 When each incision is three inches long
E si’ a tu una pessa d’espongua apparelhada o draps seccatz motz am les quals exsiccas le sanc.	 If you apply a damp or wet cloth to the burns that will cause them to dry up and shrink
E aprop entremet le spatum de dos agudas extremitatz, del qual aquesta es la forma de la inscisio de lu:	 Then place both pointed extremities in such a way as this is the form of incision:
que es de la partida des templas entro a la segonda inscizio.	 From the beginning to the second incision.
Exxcorja am aquel tota la codena la qual es entre dos incizios am le ciphac le qual es sobre le os, e aprop fay aquo de la inscizio migera entro a la segonda inscisio.	 Remove all the words between two incisions, over and above it place this on the incision, move it forward to the second incision.
E aprop stratz ne aquest spatum e entromet en la primieyra inscizio autra vetz un autre instrument le qual es apelat cutellar, agut de una part e del autre no agut.	 Then take this cloth and insert it into the first incision, another tool which is called a scalpel with one side of it and not the other.
E pausa le latz de aquel agut deves la carn annexa deves la codena, e le latz de lu leon dintz le os, e empelley aquel entro que pervengua a la fissura migera, e abscindeys am aquel totz les vaysels que descendo del cap als huels.	 Pause the length of that which you have inserted into the skin and extend it to reach the eye, then insert it into the fissure so that it may penetrate and leave all those hairs descending from the top of the head at their feet.
Mays que sia continuada la inscizio ad aquo appar de la codena, e aprop fay aquo en la fissura migana entro al autra fissura.	 That is to continue cutting in this direction towards the opening of the wound, and then place it inside through a small slit into another slit.
E pus que corr del sanc quantitat engual, exprem les locs de las pessas del sanc congilat.	 And push out with strength equal on both sides, press down on the areas below the swollen part of the limb.
E aprop pausa en quascuna fissura calgua de coto vielh, e pausa sobre aquels polvils enbegutz en vi e oli e vi agre, e vegas que no endevengua apostema caut.	 Then place a cushion over each slit and pour cold water into the pillows in view and oil as well, ensuring that it does not freeze.
E en le tertz dia deslia le liament e aministra gran enfusio de aygua cauda o tebeza, e aprop cura aquo am enguent bazilicon am oli rozat e autres entro que las plaguas sian sanadas.	 Then apply a large amount of cold water and aloe juice or cream to the affected area, making sure it is well spread out and other areas are treated as necessary for healing.
Capitol .v.	 The end of the text.
De la cura de lagramas per catartz e als huels descendentz de las partidas dedintz del cap.	 From curing the illness and the suffering of those who died from the disease.
Quan ad alcu veno catartz agutz e continuantz, e vezes les huels del malaute extenuatz petitz, e ja le reguardament de lor es debelitat, e las palpebras ulceradas e de lor cazo les pels, e en le preon del cap es dolor aguda ledent e extrenutacio consequent, lahoras sapias per aquestz accidentz que las materias e catartz no veno sino de motas venas de las partidas dedintz procedent.	 When the pain of the joints becomes severe and continues for a while, and they start to feel the pains in their feet as well, doctors are aware that this is gout caused by cold humors infiltrating each part of the body, which causes inflammation and ulceration on the skin, causing ulcers and sores. The intense pain at the top of the head indicates an imminent rupture of a vein from the disease's progression.
E la milhor curacio en aquels es aquesta: que comandes al malaute que raza lo sieu front, e aprop inscideys en aquel una fissura al mieg loc del front, un petit per la latitut (e comensa am la fissura del templar senestre entro al dextre templar; e sia inscisio entro al os; e eslongua la tua ma dels lacertz del templas lesquals son maugutz deves la mastigacio), entro que sia le os descubert.	 The best cure in this case is to command the patient to bring their forehead forward, and then cut a slit into that area right behind it, small enough for you to extend your finger through it (and come out on the other side) so that when the slit reaches their temple, they can open it.
Exsicca tot le sanc am espongua o am drap secc e aprop repleys entre las doas labias de la fissura am coto vielh o am draps de li.	 "The first servant takes off his clothes and lies between the two thighs of the patient, holding them apart.
E aprop estrenh desus am polvils enbegutz en vi e oli per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	 The first attendant removes their own clothing and lies gently down there in such a way that nothing is visible to the patient, except for his hands holding them apart.
E quan deslias aquo e veses que l’apostema ja es diminuit, lahoras cove que fregua le os entro que comensa en lu nayser carn, e aprop cura aquel am regiment exsiccatiu le qual fassa neysser la carn, ayssi cum si tu prenes de farina de froment dos partidas e de colofania quatre partidas e mescla o, e de lor sia fayt emplastre e sia aministrat en aquestas plaguas a de la carn nativitat.	 When the servant has finished and sees that the pain is decreasing, the doctor advises to apply ice cold water or compress as soon as possible on the affected part of the body, in order to help prevent any further damage from occurring, so long as you are taking two parts of flour and four parts of vinegar mixed together, and place it there where it will cool down the patient's skin naturally.
Capitol .vi.	 "Caput vi
De la cura de aquo que catz en las aurelhas.	 The cure for gout involves heating and applying warmth to the affected area
Tota causa que catz en las aurelhas es una de quatre specias, quar o es peyra mineral o causa semblant a peyra, ayssi cum ferr e veyre, o es de planta ayssi cum ceze o fava, o es causa fluxtibla ayssi cum aygua e vi agre e a lor semblantz, o alcuna bestia.	 The four causes of gout are: uric acid crystals, similar to those found in the urine, or causes similar to those that lead to it; plants like urines and grains, or water-based causes similar to those seen with alcohol consumption; or any cause related to fluids, including those caused by excessive fluid intake.
E donc quan peyra catz en l’aurelha o autra causa semblant de aquelas causas que no ajustan ne creysso en l’aurelha, e pausa la aurelha al solelh, e si vezes la peyra, lahoras distilla en aquela alcuna causa de oli violat o sizami, e aprop aministra la extraccio de lu, e fay le stornudar am condizi, e oppila las nars deve le aveniment de stornutacio.	 If the cause of gout is not in one of those causes that are present on or near the affected area, pause it by sun exposure and if needed repeat the treatment, taking care to avoid causing further damage while applying the extract; then apply the remedy with a moist cloth, covering all the skin, to prevent the pain from spreading any further.
E aprop pausa en le circuit de la aurelha alscunas pessas de drap o lana, e dextendas la aurelha a las partidas desus, quar motas veguadas es foro-getada am aquestas causas.	 Place cushion under patient's thighs, another on their legs and another on chest to prevent the intestine from coming out
E si no n’es getada, lahoras aministra extraccio de lu am le instrument apelat gesti epicicarios subtil del qual aquesta es la forma:	 If it is not available, doctors administer an extract taken from a delicate instrument whose name is the gesture of the cicatrices, which form this way.
E si es foro-getada am gesti, bo es; e sino, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am onci subtil de pauca duplicacio.	 If it's not available, doctors administer an extract taken from a delicate instrument whose name is the gesture of the scars, which form this way.
E donc si no es foro-getada per aquo, lahoras fay una canula de aram e entromet la extremitat de la canula en le trauc de la aurelha e claus a l’enviro de la canula am cera e am oli mollificada per so que no sia ubert sino la canula.	 If it is not available, doctors will use a needle and insert the end of the needle into the track of the patient's thighs and close off the environment around the needle with oil to prevent leakage from the needle itself.
E aprop extratz am le tieu vent am fort atraccio, quar tropas veguadas cum aquo que havem recontat.	 Then extract it through a strong artery where there are many veins that come close together.
Mays si no es foro-getada en aquesta manieyra, lahoras pren de halka alumbat o de vecz aparelhat am le qual son preses les ausels una patita quantitat, e pausa aquel en la extremitat de ray, e aprop envolopa sobre aquel coto decentment pausat.	 If it is not available in this way, doctors will take from a flexible tube or instrument that has many outlets near one vein, and place it at the end of the artery, and cover it with oil gently to prevent leakage.
E aprop entromet aquel en le trauc de la aurelha am facilitat, e aprop excicca la aurelha de la humiditat.	 Then insert it into the track of the patient's thighs easily, and apply heat around the vagina with moisture.
E donc si no es foro-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recontadas, lahoras tu coyta a talhar aquela denant que endevengua apostema caut o espasme.	 If not all causes are treated or eliminated, doctors will use a cold application to the affected area to prevent cramps or spasms.
E la manieyra de talhar aquela es que tu al comensament sancnes le malaute de la vena sephasica e extratz del sanc segon la mannieyra de la vertut de lu, e aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas e converteys l’aurelha a las partidas desus, e fen am petita fissura en la razit de la aurelha deves lo greys de lu en le loc be premegut de lu.	 When you have opened up the space between the patient's thighs and placed cushions under them, then apply the first servant to touch both the right hand and left hand of the patient, and place a cushion at their head with two servants holding it in place so that no hair can escape from it.
E sia la fissura de figura lunar entro que pervengua a la peyra, e, la peyra atrobada, osta aquela si podes am instrumentz apropriatz; e aprop cos la fissura en aquela hora am velocitat, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	 And if the lunar sign appears on their finger, and they are wearing rings, then that person should have an appropriate servant to apply it; also place a cushion over this area during that time, and cure what may occur in haste as quickly as possible.
E si la causa cazent en la aurelha es un dels gras que creysso e so inflatz, lahoras aministra la curacio e la extraccio de lu; mays si no obezeys a tu ad eyssiment, lahoras tu pren spatum teune subtil segon aquesta forma:	 And if the cause is in their head, then treat it with care and extraction. If you are pregnant or menstruating, do not apply this treatment at all.
e aministra am aquel la abscizio de aquel gra lo qual es cazut en l’aurelha.	 Treat that fat which has been cut off from the head.
E no fassas aquo quan cogitas que aquel ja es humectat per la vapor del aurelha, e pausa aquel en motas pessas, e prop extratz ne aquelas am les oncis o am gesti subtil, o ab inscizio ayssi co dit havem, quar es alleujada la extraccio de lu.	 Do not do this when you suspect that it has already been moistened by the sweat of the head or in a place where there is no air circulation, and do not remove them from their fingers gently or abruptly as well because they will be removed anyhow after extraction.
Mays en l’aygua la qual es intrada en l’aurelha cove que·l malaute use de sternutacio am condizi al comensament, e omple la sieua aurelha am alcu coto vielh, e jagua sobre aquela aurelha en la qual es l’aygua, e si per aquo es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, lahoras pren tropas peyras teunas e leons segon la longitut del dit, e calfa aquelas en le foc un pauc, e le pacient entrometa una de aquelas en le trauc de la sua aurelha e saute sobre la un pe sieu de aquela partida e percussia am una autra peyra sobre la peyra la qual es dintz la aurelha.	 Also wash the place where the patient uses it, fill with warm water and gently massage them until they are rubbed off; if this occurs naturally, do nothing else. If not, apply more powders on top of that, heat up these in a fire for some time to make them burn off, and cover both hands over their head, pressing firmly onto the other hand at the same spot as well.
Donc no cesse aquo am peyra entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada.	 Therefore cease from applying any more cold water.
E ja l’aygua sira foro-getada enayssi que tu prenguas de papier o de gonc i, e met la una extremetat de lu en l’aurelha e estendas l’autre extremitat am foc entro que sia comburit le may de lu.	 And when the water is thoroughly removed, you should take paper or cloth and place one extremity in a warm area to dry it off while the other is kept at room temperature so as not to cause burns on your hand
E prop met i autre gonc e fay aquo tantas veguadas entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada, e stratz aquel am canula ayssi co desus es dit de la peyra extrasadora.	 After this, you should put the other cloth on and proceed with removing all of it as thoroughly as possible so that the water is completely removed. And start making a poultice with some of these herbs according to your doctor's instructions for removing warts.
Mays en la extraccio de bestia intrant en aquela aurelha, si es a petit cos, ayssi piussa e a lu semblant, cura aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio; mays si es de gran cos la qual causa apar al sen del vezement, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am gesti e oncis, e la causa de lu es pus leugiera de totas las autras causas que cazo en l’aurelha.	 After inserting the needle into that area, if it is a small hole, proceed with applying pressure and holding onto the area until bleeding stops; but if the hole is large enough to cause blood to come out of the vein, apply a dressing and go for medical help as soon as possible; because the reason for insertion should be determined by medical experts.
Mays en la extraccio de verm engendrat en la aurelha, quan tu curas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e en le tractat de distillacios e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu reguardes la aurelha al solelh.	 After removing the needle from that area when you've done what was instructed in the division and treatment process but it doesn't help your pain, have a doctor examine the area to see if there is any other reason for your pain.
E donc si apar aqui alcuna causa dels verms, lahoras extratz aquel am gesti o am onci subtils, mays si no apar deguna causa, lahoras pren una canula dejos streyta e desus ampla de la qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	 And if there is no other reason for the worms, you should remove that needle or a smaller one and place gauze over it to cover it; otherwise, go to your doctor.
E entromet la extremitat subtil en la aurelha segon la quantitat la qual suffertar puesca le malaute; e aprop sucgeys am aquela per succio fort, e fay aquo motas veguadas, entro que totz les verms sian foro-gitatz.	 "The doctor inserts the subtle extremity into the patient's anus as much as suffocation permits the patient, and then applies a strong suction to remove the worms that have entered.
Mays si no obezeysso a tu al ayssiment, lahoras tu opila e claus en le circuit de la canula am cera ayssi cum havem dit; lahoras aministre distillacios las quals han ja esproadas les antics en la curacio dels verms, e atrobaras aquo en le tractat de distillacios.	 "If the abscess is not drained through the catheter as mentioned before, then the doctor shall apply a distillation treatment to remove the worms that have already been expelled from earlier in their worm removal procedure.
E sia la tua efusio am la qual efundas les olis medicinas en la aurelha am aquest strument del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	 "This is the physician's orifice, which they use to enter this instrument for this purpose:
E fay aquela de argent o de eram, dejos streyt, en le qual sia un petit trauc, e am pla desus.	 "Or when using silver or copper strips, then apply them, in the manner described.
E donc sia cum empellent a que es en la conquavitat de la canula de continent aqui on sira necessari.	 "Then do so by placing them inside the catheter's exit opening where necessary.
E si vols, pren le ray e envolveys en la extremitat de lu decentment coto, e aprop gieta oli en la concavitat del auziment, o suc de alcuna herba, o aquo que vols de aquestas medicinas en la canula — e aquela es en la aurelha —, e aprop entromet le ray am coto desus e exprem am la tua ma aquel am compressio temprada de lu entro que l’oli sia expellit en la concavitat del auziment e le malaute senta le oli dedintz.	 "If you want, take the ray and insert it into the patient's rectum gently, and put oil into their anus opening or use any other medicine in the catheter as well - that is into the urethra-and then place the ray into their hand to compress it inside until the oil has been expelled from the anus and worm expulsion occurs.
E aquo que sia enfundut en la aurelha sia ja scalfat am foc un petit.	 "This must be inserted gently into the patient's rectum, already slightly burned by contact with fire.
E guarda te que la causa la qual distillaras en l’aurelha no sia trop frega, quar las medicinas de aurelha no suffertan aquo.	 The cause of which you will discover in the water does not have to be cold as long as it is not too hot; because the medicines for gout do not work well under these conditions.
Capitol .vii.	 Chapter VII
De curacio de opilacio de aurelhas.	 The cure for gout in chapter VII.
Alcunas veguadas alcus enfantz yeysso dels ventres de lors mayres no-perforatz, e aquo ja accideys en alcus homes, opilacio en le meat de la aurelha per plagua o per carn nada en aquela; e aquesta opilacio alcunas veguadas es fayta en le preon del trau de la aurelha la qual no consiec le vezement, e alcunas veguadas es en las partidas defora.	 Do not perforate the belly of the gout sufferer with any sharp instrument such as a knife or a lancet; and this treatment must be performed gently on the surface of the foot by applying it either with a warm poultice made from herbs, or with warm lard.
E aquela que accideys en le preon de lu, la qual no comprehen le vezement, es en las majors disposicios de dificil sanacio.	 The one that occurs in the heel of the gout patient is considered to be more difficult and challenging than all others.
E en aquela en qual consegueys le vezement, cove que tu pauses la aurelha del malaute al solelh e reguarda en aquela.	 When you achieve relief from your treatment, make sure the gout sufferer stays in a warm place to prevent any further attacks.
E donc si vezes oppulacio apparent, obre aquela am espatum subtil del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	 If this happens more than once, apply something very subtle that is considered its treatment; which is the way of doing it:
Si’ la extremitat de lu en la qual sia petita la latitut, del qual la una partida sia aguda e l’autra no; e le spatum sia de dos latz leon per so que no fassa lizio al aurelha.	 If the foot part that is small and has a narrow area where one attack was acute and another was not, then you should apply something with two parts to prevent any further attacks by putting it in such a way that it does not touch the gout sufferer's foot.
E donc si la opilacio es per carn nascuda en la aurelha o en le meat de lu, lahoras te aquela am oncis subtils e incidiys aquela vehement facilitat entro que sia ostada tota la carn.	 If the treatment is applied to a naked foot or on the skin of the patient, then apply something very subtle and gently so that it does not cause pain when it touches all the skin.
E si opilacio es en le preon de la aurelha, lahoras pren ray subtil leon e escalfa aquel am foc un pauc, e aprop met aquel en le meat de l’aurelha.	 When the patient has had a fever for a long time and shows signs of approaching delirium, it is customary to gently move him into a cool place, fan him with a soft feather, and lay him down on his chest
E donc si as scentit oppulacio am aquo que le malaute atroba am facilitat, per gravetat de ausir, esforsa la oppressio de lu am facilitat; e guarda te que no plagues les nervis del aurelha.	 If you suspect that the patient is having difficulty breathing due to a swelling of their throat, gently press down on the swelling and make sure it does not put pressure on the nerves of their neck.
E aprop pausa en l’aurelha drap de li segon la quantitat del ample del trauc lo qual tu as envolvutz en l’enguent egipciac; e fay aquo per alcus jorns entro que sias segur de la consolidacio de la plagua; o que prenguas qualgua e enfon aquela en ayguaros e pulveriza sobre lu segi trissat e usa de lu; e si vezes la aurelha ja esser apostemada, lahoras cove que tu estraguas la qualgua e permutes aquela am autra qualgua la qual tu envoloparas en cerot que sia fayt am oli rozat, entro que sia le apostema caut cedat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	 If the patient's chest is covered in a thick layer of foam that has not consolidated properly after being rinsed with cold water for some time, gently press down on it to drain off any remaining fluid from it, and if necessary, cut away part of it and apply a new one over the exposed area.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras submergeys esponga o drap en aygua frega e pausa sobre la aurelha, e usa del autra curacio la qual restrengeys le flux del sanc, la qual es dita en le tractat de distillacio.	 If a bleeding occurs after the patient has been washed with cold water and laid down on their chest, it is customary to apply pressure over the wound using a dressing soaked in a substance that constricts blood flow, such as alcohol or vinegar (vinegar is mentioned in some medical treatises).
Capitol .viii.	 The eighth chapter of this medieval medical text discusses the diagnosis and treatment of various diseases related to blood circulation, including conditions affecting the feet and hands.
De cura de athezil le qual endeveno a las palpebras.	 To cure the swelling in the eyelids.
Athezil les quals endeveno a las paupebras dels huels alcuna veguada so humitz, alscunas veguadas son secs.	 When one or more veins in the limb become swollen due to cold humors that infiltrate the body, they are dry and hard
Donc cove que tu tenguas aquels am tenhalhas o am onci, e inscindas aquels am espatum de las suas razitz, e aprop pausa sobre les locs segi trissat.	 Then you must apply something over the swollen veins or arteries and press them to harden up.
Mays si dolor am flux de sanc veno, lahoras tu cauteriza aquels am cauteri lanticular subtil.	 If joint pain is caused by hot humors that enter through a vein, then apply a cold cautery
E la milhor cauterizacio es aprop las inscizios e tropas veguadas retornam quan reman alcuna causa de sas razitz; e quan so cauterizadas am foc, aquelas razitz son comburidas e no retornan.	 The milder cautery is applied to the swollen veins and vessels when there are no other causes of swelling, after which they become burned and do not return
Capitol .ix.	 Thank you for helping me with this medieval medical text! I really appreciate it.
Cura de grandeyssa que veno a las palpebras dels huels.	 Treat the veins of the limbs carefully.
Motas veguadas endeve en las palpebras dels huels alcuna causa la qual es asemblada a grandissa en sa fortalicia e duricia, e per so grandissia es apelada.	 Swollen veins that have no cause and are associated with great strength, hardness, and pain are called varices.
E es agreguacio de humiditat grossa en la palpebra dejos e desus.	 The accumulation of large amounts of wetness in the eye's eyebrow is called rheum.
Donc la opperacio en lor es que consideras lahoras si la grandissia es procedent en lu en aquo que apar de la palpebra e es mauguda a tota partida; e la causa de lu es leugiera.	 The remedy is to examine the cause of the swelling in this situation where it appears from the eyebrow and causes pain all over, which may be caused by cold humors.
Donc fen sobre aquela am fissura per la latitut, e aprop escorga aquela de tota partida am facilitat entro que evasesca, e aprop suspen aquela am onci e abscindeys aquela.	 Therefore, if there is a small hole in the membrane, it should be closed to prevent further spread and absorb that which came out
Mays si a tu no es apparelhada la incizio de lu si no pus que penetras la palpebra am inscizio pauc a pauc, lahoras aquo no notz en deguna causa.	 When you have entered into the patient's body without their consent and penetrated his eyelid barely slightly, the doctors say that this is not the cause of any ailment.
E si la figura es gran, lahoras tu l’ajusta am sutura; e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	 If the patient is fat, you will adjust it with stitches and treat those wounds as they arise.
E si es pauca, a tu no sobrevindra mal per aquela quar l’anguent de lu restaura aquela e encarna.	 If he has little strength, do not worry about the part of his body that remains uninjured, but rather tend to it and care for it.
E si la grandissia es declinant a las partidas dedintz de la palpebra deves la superficia dedintz, lahoras evesa la palpebra e suspen la grandissia am onci, otra que tu indigescas de incizio, e prem aquela de tota part, e si la palpebra per inscizio es alonguada, aquo no notz en deguna causa.	 If the size is decreasing to the point of threatening the eyelid itself, treat the eyelid and support its large area on one side, while you attend to it from another.
E aprop la incizio, lava le huel am aygua salada; e cura le loc am aquo que encarna entro que sia sanat.	 After inserting a needle into him (the patient), splash the hole with salty water and tend to that area where it has been damaged.
Capitol .x.	 This is the end of the text.
De la cura axcirnah en la palpebra desus del huel.	 After curing them, wash off the solution from around their eyes.
Axcirnath es grays le qual es engendrat en las tunicas de la palpebra desus, e majorment endeve als enfantz, agrava les huels de aquels et accideyso a lor catartz le mayti; e no podon reguardar la claror del solelh per aquo quar lagremas se coytan ad aquels.	 The grains that are generated in the eyelids's linings, especially for infants, worsen their eyes and cause them to be swollen. And do not look at direct sunlight through this, as it may make one's eyes more sensitive towards such things.
E per so tu vezes aquels jaser sobre les lors caras tot temps, e sobre les lors caras dormen; e so a las palpebras de lor dejos les sobrecils humidas, las quals ja ha cuberta imflacio, e iminencia de accernac apparent es en l’uelh; e que quant tu premes le loc am les tieus ditz, tu centes accernac entro aquels.	 To prevent this from happening frequently, over the course of time and while they are sleeping, it is important to keep their eyelids moist with moisture, which can help prevent swelling that may appear in such cases; as well as when you press against their temples at times, pressing them into those places causes them to become inflamed.
E alcuna manieyra de opperacio es en aquel que le malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop pausa drap de li e de lu fay calgua, e fay de lu cercle segon la quantitat la qual contena arthernach de tota partida, e aprop pausa aquel sobre aquela e prem am les tieus ditz de tota per que sia agreguat arcernac en le mieg del cercle, e aprop fen en le mieg de aquela humiditat am spatum inscident am fissura per la latitut, e la fissura no sia major que la fissura que es fayta en flaubotomia.	 "No opening incisions are made on the patient's head in this procedure; instead, a cushion is placed under their buttocks and another servant to hold them with their hands.
Mays en le preon cove que tu fendas la codena tota entro que pervenguas ad arcernach, quar en las mays desposicios proceseys arcernach per fissura segon la forma de grayseza blanca.	 "After the procedure is performed to prevent leakage of urine or feces from the anus.
Donc extratz aquela am draps los quals tu as envolopatz entre les tieus ditz a las partidas deforo e revolv entre la ma dextra e sinistre entro que sia dispargut.	 "Then wrap the bandage tightly between your right and left thumbs, leaving enough space to prevent constriction.
E guarda te que no ajustes en la fissura per so que am le spatum no pervenguas al huel e ladescas aquel.	 "Remember not to adjust the bandage into or over the incision, as that may cause it to leak urine and feces.
Mays si no apar a tu arternach en le comensament de la fissura, mays que tu ajustes en la fissura un petit am fecilitat entro que procesisca arternach; e aprop extratz aquela ayssi quo havem dit; e aprop submargeys draps de li en aygua e vi agre e pausa les sobre le loc e estrenh aquels am polvils.	 "Don't apply the bandage to your abdomen immediately after making an incision, and instead adjust it slightly with flexibility around the incision site; then wrap it tightly as shown in the instructions provided.
E so alcus que trissan sal e pausan aquel en la conquavitat de la fissura per so que aquo que es remas de aquela humiditat.	 "And place a cushion over that to prevent any further leakage from it.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	 "Finally, treat the wound as necessary with appropriate care and attention to promote healing.
Mays si accideys en le loc apostema caut, lahoras cura aquel am emplastres cedatils entro que sia sanat.	 When a patient's belly button becomes inflamed due to heat, doctors prescribe a compress of cold water.
Capitol .xi.	 The capital city of X
De manieyras de tactimi del huel.	 Many years ago
Quan en las palpebras dels huels so natz pels ajustatz dejos les pels naturals e so antiquatz, lahoras aquels noso al huel e fan endevenir manieras de malautias ayssi cum lacrimas assiduas e mollificacio de palpebras e tela entro que aquo sia causa de destruccio del huel que s’apela tactinir del huel, e cura se en quatre manieyras: o per cauteri am foc; o am medicina acuta segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri; o es fayt atactini per inscizio e sutura; o per cannas segon que yeu diyre.	 When the eyelids naturally shrink and become old, doctors treat them with remedies that make their eyes moist and tender, so that the cause of tearing is called "tactinir del hül," and they cure it in four ways: by cauterizing with fire; or by acute medicine if the doctor says it's from the capital of cautery; or by incision and suturing; or by compresses according to what you say.
E donc cove que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se; aprop converteys la palpebra del uelh am la tua ma sinistra, e si es convertida, bo es; e sino, entromet agulha en aquela en la qual sia fiel de la partida pus dejos de la palpebra, e fay penetrar la agulha am fiel desus, e aquo sia — prop del marge de la palpebra en le qual naysso les pels — prop dels pels, e tira le fiel a las partidas desus am la palpebra, e converteys aquela am le ray.	 You place the patient's head on this pillow; then move your left hand to the eyelid of his left eye, and if it is moved, yes; otherwise, introduce an incision at where there are hairs, penetrate that with a needle as true, so that this is-- the edge of the eyebrow by which side
E aprop fen en la partida dedintz de la palpebra dejos les pels ajustatz am spatum inscidentz del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal mendre; e aprop extratz le fiel e pausa dejos la palpebra polvilhs petitz de coto o de drap, e aprop senha sobre la palpebra am tenta, e sia ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirt.	 Place the patient's head on this pillow; then move your left hand to the eyelid of his left eye, and if it is moved, yes; otherwise, introduce an incision at where there are hairs, penetrate that with a needle as true, so that this is-- the upper edge of the eyebrow by which side
Mays empero cove que sia la figura segon la quantitat de helevacio de la palpebra, quar aquo ja es diversificat en les homes, quar de aquels es le quals indigeys que sia inscidit de la palpebra gran quantitat segon la quantitat per la qual la palpebra es mollificada.	 "The amount of elevation of the eyelid is proportional to the heaviness of it, which varies in men, because those who are heavy eyelids tend to be more pronounced than light ones.
E aprop fen am le spatum sobre las doas linhas las quals has senhadas, e comensa del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal menor.	 "Then place the speculum on the two areas where you have already placed it, and start from the greater tear duct to the lesser one.
E si’ la tua fissura prop dels pels naturals ayssi cum es la grossetut del rey.	 "If your wound is deep enough, as in the case of a gunshot wound.
E aprop met le onci en un dels dos angles de la codena, e aprop excoria aquela tota, e aprop ajusta am la scitura las doas labias am gula o fiel de lana subtil, e abstergeys le sanc, e fay adherir aquo que superflueys dels fiels sobre dos sobrecils am alcunas causas enviscans, si voles far aquo, e sino, non cures.	 "Place the needle in one of the two angles at the elbow, and pierce it completely through, then adjust its direction so that both arms lie flat on a table or surface.
E aprop leyssa la sutura dels fiels entro a tres dias o quatre, e aprop cura aquo.	 "Then suture it inside three days or four, as necessary.
E si vols, layssa la plagua ses sutura, e cura aquela am aquo que exsicca e constrenh, quar la palpebra es alevada deves la sigillacio de la plagua e la agreguacio de lu; mays sutura es milor E donc aysso diysso les antics de taxanir.	 "If you want to remove the sutures, and cure this so that it heals and tightens, as the eyelid is swollen may need closure of the lid and its aggregation; sutures are better done earlier and especially in the past.
Mays empero en lu sia sollicitut sobre le malaute, e es de bona operacio, e no es en lu temor.	 "May it be well received by the patient, good surgery, and not in fear of it.
E es autra manieyra en taxmir, e es que senhes sobre la palpebra figura ayssi cum fuelha de mirt, e aprop eleva la palpebra am tres uncis segreguatz e congreguatz segon aquesta forma:	 "And another thing to consider is that sometimes when the eyelid figure is heavy, and appropriately elevate the eyelid at three inches away and hold it there for a while in this way:
Mays si no es possible aquo, tener les uncis, e aquo no es engualhat, lahoras pren una agula en la qual haia fil e met aquela en le mieg de la figura, e entromet le autre fiel prop le lacrimal major, e·l fiel segon prop le lacrimal mendre, e ajusta entre les tieus ditz les fiels am equalitat, e aprop am aquels eleva la tua ma am elevacio engual, eleva tota la codena sobre la qual es senhat ayssi cum havem recomtat.	 "If it is not possible to do so, the incision must be taken, and then this incision must enter into the eye of the figure [the patient], and then go into the inner corner of the same eye with another needle; adjust between both eyes in such a way that they are equal, and when elevating the arm, elevate everything above which we have recommended.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	 "Then apply the two strips of cloth on either side of the wound, and close it as well as you can.
Mays si accideys apostema deves la tua inscizio o la tua fissura, seda aquel apostema am cerot e a lu semblantz, e am enguentz.	 "If someone's nose or ear has been injured and pierced through, let it be dressed as best you can with the other part of the body.
E alcunas veguadas endeve a la palpebra que·ls sieus pels sian convertitz, adonc cove que tu uses en aquela de aquo que havem dit de inscizio; mays sutura en quascus es mays artificial.	 "You should also sew up the eyelid as best you can with the incision that was mentioned earlier; make a more artificial one if necessary.
Ataxinir am cannas es segon aquesta forma:	 Here's how to do it in this way:
e es que tu convertas la palpebra e scindas la figura qu’es dedintz segon que he recontat; e aprop per art fay doas cannas o doas astelas subtils de las quals longitut sia segon la longitut de la palpebra e la latitut de lor sia mendra de la latitut del spatum.	 "And after cutting the eyelid and separating the figure, put two small stitches or strips of cloth at right angles to each other, their length being slightly shorter than that of the eyelid and a little wider than that of the space between the eye and the forehead.
E tu ja has inscidit en las extremitatz de quascunas partidas, la on tenes les fils.	 "You have already cut into the extremities of each part; where you hold the threads.
Aprop agregua quascuna am subtilitat subre aquo que superflueys de la palpebra del huel, e constres las cannas de quascunas partidas am fort strictura, e layssa aquela per alcus jorns, quar la codena per la strictura morira e sira denegada e se poyrira entro que per si meteyssa cayra.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout among doctors.
Mays si es tardat, lahoras trenca la am las toroyras, e aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanat.	 If necessary, place a cushion under their thighs, another servant on their legs and another on their chest, holding their hands.
Donc cum es solidada, la palpebra es elevada e les pels no pungo.	 Then with the eye open, the eyelids are lifted up and the eyelashes do not itch.
E aquesta es la forma de doas cannas las quals faras segon aquesta forma:	 This is how to apply bandages for use in this way:
e haia la quantitat de la longitut e de la latitut ni mays ni mens.	 The length and width of the bandage should not be less than a certain size, nor more.
Capitol .xii.	 Chapter 12.
De elevacio de pels pungentz en le huel am agula quan le pel es dur.	 Elevate your eyelids gently when the eye begins to itch.
Quan son pels no-naturals, durs e aspres e pungentz les huels, lahoras la operacio en lu es que tu prenguas agula subtil e pauses en aquela fiel de ceda subtil e leon, e aprop que tu ajustes las extremitatz de lu e nozes quascu en manieyra mot subtil.	 If the eyelids are not natural and dry and itchy, it is customary to perform surgery on them, you must carefully remove any hairs that might cause itching and gently close with a delicate bandage, being sure to adjust the extremities of the patient and do not worry too much about subtlety.
E sia la longitut dels fiels de quantitat de una palma.	 The length should be equal in both hands.
E aprop tu compon2 autre fiel subtil dejos lu en breu, e nuza las extremitatz de aquel si tu·t vols.	 Then you apply another delicate bandage over it quickly and remove the extremities if desired.
E aprop pause le malaute le sieu cap en le tieu se, e sia prop del solelh per que la tua obra sia declarada, quar es operacio subtil e menuda.	 Then place a small incision at the top of his back and near the spine to ensure it is visible so your work is declared and the surgery must be subtle and small.
E aprop intromet la agulha en la razit del pel ajustat la qual ha necessitat de engen, e fay aquela penetrar en la palpebra festinantment entro que extraguas aquela desus le pel natural.	 "You must gently insert the needle into the furrow of the patient's leg and feel for it to penetrate through the tear of the eyelid so that you extract it from its natural place.
E aprop tire le pel entro desus e intromet aquel en alixati, e sian les pels un o dos o tres e no mays.	 "You must gently pull out the fur in order to remove it by making slits one or two or three of them and not many.
E aprop tira la tua ma am aquel entro que·l pel sia fora-gitat am alixolati en la palpebra am le pel natural.	 "You gently pull your hand away from the fur that is removed in order to extract it from its natural place by making slits through the eyelid and then remove the fur.
Mays si es atirat alixalati e non es gitat le pel, atiraras alixati a las partidas dejos am le fiel le qual tu has compost am aquela, entro qu’en sia gitat alixalati del trau sobira.	 "If it is necessary to slit the fur and not remove it, then remove the slits from your hand in order that you may continue removing fur from its natural place.
E vegas aquela am la visio del huel, quar lahoras tu gitaras alixati e lo fiel, e grotan quascu e clautz le huel, e laysse le claus per dos dias o tres, entro que·l pel adheresca al sieu loc e nasque sobre aquel bona carn.	 "You must slit it in the vision that you may cut and sew it up tight, making cuts as deep as necessary, so that the fur adheres to its place and is not lost upon the ground.
E si es mays breu le pel, lahoras tu ajusta un pel lonc dels pels naturals, e es elevat am aquel, o que·l leysses entro que sia alonguat aprop alcu spazi, e lehoras tu eleva aquel.	 "If you remove little fur, then you adjust the needle to a length of natural fur and hold it there or let it go down when necessary so that you are able to lift up this part.
Capitol .xiii.	 "Chapter 13
De la cura de ehacratir la qual ve en la palpebra desus.	 "Of the cure for removing the fur that is in the eyelid.
Quan ve en le huel ehacratir, e es contraccio de la palpebra quan es contrayta en sus, o a dextra o a sinistra partida, per mala consolidacio de plagua o de seccio o de cauteri, e es apelada leporina, e aquesta ahercrati o es natural o accidental, e es fayta per consolidacio de plagua o de seccios o de cauteri, o per semblantz a lor malcuratz.	 "Joint pain caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body and causes pain in the feet is commonly called gout.
May la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que tu fendas aquela consolidacio e que separes las labias de lu, e pauses en lu en aquo que es entre aquelas una meca de drap de li, e ligues aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	 "The surgeon should make an incision and separate the layers of skin over it, so that any adhesions between them are separated as well.
E no cove que tu uses de curacio de lu de las causas las quals exsiccan, constrenho; quar si tu fas aquo retorna alixacratir pus mal que nulh temps no foc habantz.	 "If you use cautery to remove the causes that cause constriction, be careful; otherwise, if you do this, it will return a similar pain which may not go away in time.
Usa en aquela de causas que mollifico ayssi cum es fenugrec, e embroca am la aygua en la qual son coytz altea e semensa de li, o enguent dyaquilon, le qual sia liquefayt am alcu dels olis, e submergeys en aquel la meca, e cura am aquel.	 "Use the causes that soften like this; put the water in a container where its temperature is constant and steady.
E lo tesaur de la tua curacio es que tu perforsses am tot engen que no sia consolidat segon la forma que foc al comensament.	 "The purpose of your operation should be to preserve everything as it was before the operation, except for its form.
E aquesta operacio la qual havem dita, no es sino alcuna rectificacio de ehalixacrati que no retorna la forma del loc segon que foc denant.	 "This operation is nothing but a rectification of that which does not return to the shape after it has been performed.
Capitol .xiiii.	 "The end of the text.
De la cura de ehacrati le qual es fayt en la palpebra dejos.	 "The cure for which is applied to the surface where it has infiltrated, such as the eye.
Aquesta alxacrati la qual es fayta en la palpebra dejos, la qual es nompnada vertadierament alxacrati; e es de lu alcuna natural, autra accidental.	 This is a type of ulcer that arises on the eyelid or anywhere else accidentally
Mays accidental es fayta per plagua o per scissura o per cauteri o per autres semblantz.	 It can arise from burns, cuts, cautery, or any other similar injury
E la via de la operacio de lu es que tu prenguas una agula en la qual haga fil doble, e fiques aquela en la carn, e que la fassas passar del lacrimal de senestre entro al lacrimal dextre, entro que·l fil pervengua en las doas extremitatz de la carn.	 The procedure of the operation is to prick a needle that makes two holes, and fix it in the skin, then make the needle pass from the inner corner of the eye towards the outer corner through which the thread will go into both sides of the body.
E aprop exten la carn a las partidas desus am la agula e cus aquela am la agula, e inscideys am spatum ample.	 After removing the needle and thread from the skin, make an incision in the same place as before.
E donc si retorne la figura de la palpebre segon que cove, bo es; e sino, pren le ray e pausa aquel en la figura fenduda, e am aquel converteys la palpebra, e fen las doas fissuras en le latz de la palpebra dejos.	 After removing the eyelid figure after it has been seen or not, take a line and place it in the split figure, then close the eyelid, and make two incisions on each side of the eyelid.
E sian las extremitatz de las doas fissuras de dos angles de la inscizio, la qual has fayta entro que concurren, e sia de lor fayt angle entro que quan se congreguan sia fayta figura de lor.	 The two incisions on both sides of the incision should be made at an angle that is towards each other, and if there are two angles in one way or another, then it should make a figure from them.
E aquesta figura es letra greca: la landa.	 This Greek letter is called lambda (Λ).
E aprop osta la carn aquela per la quantitat que es le latz de lu agut dejos de lu, aquo que siec la palpebra.	 After placing the skin over a certain amount of space on each side as it was in this case with the eyelid.
E aprop ajusta las partz seperadas e cos aquelas am le fil de lana; e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit de las medicinas mollificativas e de las calguas entro que sia sanat.	 "Adjust the separate parts, making sure they are lined up with the thread of wool, and take care to apply those that were mentioned by the healing remedies and waters necessary for health.
E si alxacrati endeve per fissura o sutura o cauteri, lahoras cove que tu fendas am fissura plana sobre les pels de la palpebra segon que es precedit.	 "If an incision or stitching is needed due to a wound, make sure the point of incision is made on the outer edge of the eyelid after it has been mentioned.
E aprop separa am la calgua entre doas labias segon que havem dit.	 "Make sure to separate the cavity between those lips after it has been mentioned.
En la suma del sermo de la cura de alxacrati quan es desus o dejos, que corra en lu operacio, segon que es preparat de la forma de alxacrati, e aquela es en forma de motas diversitatz.	 "In the sum of the medical treatment when it is finished or removed, run through the operation procedure after it has been prepared in the form mentioned above and that should be done with various forms.
E le artifexs savi totz temps prepara engen en quascuna manieyra la qual es possibla a lu entro que fassa retornar la figura a la forma natural, o prop de aquela, e aquel malaute segon que a lu conveneys de la operacio e dels strumentz en las majors disposicios.	 "The surgeon will perform every possible variation of the procedure in order to return it to its original form or close as much as possible to that form after they have prepared and have made all necessary arrangements for the operation and use of equipment.
Capitol .xv.	
De la adherencia de la palpebra am la conjunctiva o am la cornea.	 "Attention given to the adherence between the eyelid, the conjunctiva or the cornea.
Quan accideys aquesta consolidacio a motz homes enayssi que sia solidada la palpebra pus desus am le album del huel, e sia prohibida de la facilitat del movement e de las suas obras naturals, donc cove que tu entrometas la extramitat del ray dejos la palpebra, e eleva en sus aquela, o exten aquela am le unci.	 "If this adhesion occurs on the outer side of the eyelid when it is solid and prevents ease of movement or natural works, enter the area in between the eyelashes, lift it up to that extent, or extend it towards one's own eye.
E aprop tu inscideys la adherencia am spatum subtil, le qual no sia am acuitat de las inscisios, habantz obtus un petit per so que·l malaute no sia inquietat deves la operacio, e remau le spatum que no ledesca le huel am la sua acuitat.	 When you apply a bandage of a subtle material that is not too tight and does not cause irritation to the incisions, you must place it in such a way so that the patient is not disturbed by the operation, and smoothen out the bandage if necessary.
E sia la tua inscizio quays excorjan aquela adherencia am facilitat entro que sia retornada la palpebra segon la sua forma natural e que sia sanada tota la adherencia.	 The bandage should gently conform to the shape of the eye, and then be pulled back into its natural form once it is healed completely.
E aprop tu met en le huel aygua salada am la qual tu laves; o distilla en lu de zunia dissolvut en l’aygua.	 You should apply a saline solution or distilled water, depending on the situation.
E aprop separa entre la palpebra e l’huel am calgua de li, e pausa sobre le huel lana infuza en album de huou, e aprop le tertz jorn usa de causas consolidativas entro que sia sanat.	 Then separate from the skin of the eye and place a soft pad to prevent any further infiltration or use conservative measures to heal it if necessary.
Capitol .xvi.	 [No answer]
De inscizio de ungla e de eminencia de carn dels lacrimals.	 Treatment for an eyelid and surrounding skin of the tear ducts
Sapias que ungla es segon dos manieyras, quar o es nervosa, e es semblant a ciphac dur subtil; o es no-nervosa, semblant a humiditat blanca congilada, la qual quan ferr la toca, o es forsat aquela prendre am onci, es abscindida e le onci no es ficat en lu.	 If it is the former (dry), then apply a mild and gentle touch; if not (wet), simply leave it as it is and do not press down on it.
E amdos las specias no comensan sino del lacrimal major entro que va petit a petit que cobre la vista e prohibeys le lum e·l movement de huel.	 The smaller tear ducts that surround the eye gradually become larger as they cover the view and prevent any movements of the eyelid.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en la inscizio de lu es que·l malaute pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop obre les huels de lu, e eleva la palpebra am la tua ma, e aprop colligeys la ungla am onci de pauca duplicacio e exten aquela a las partidas desus.	 The eyelid should be lowered and the hand applied to it gently, then the eyes of the patient, lifted up at your fingertips so that you can see it well; after this apply a small amount of oil or ointment on the eyelid itself to relieve its itching, prevent scratching, reduce redness, and soften skin.
E aprop pren una agula e entromet en aquela un pel de cavalh o de buou o de vaqua, o de semblantz, o de fiel fort, o duplica la extremitat de la agulha petit a petit e fica aquela en le mieg de la ungla, e penetra aquela am la agulha, e lia am fiel la ungla; e exten aquela a las partidas desus, e excorja am le pel le latz de la ungla lo qual siec la pupilla.	 "Take an arrow and insert it into the patient's arm or leg, or chest, or shoulder, or any other part of their body you choose; take one step at a time to go through its length, then enter with your hand inside.
E ayssi tu sieguas aquela am le pel entro al derier de lu.	 "Once done inserting the arrow into their arm or leg, chest, shoulder, etc., put it into the other [side].
E aprop tu inscideys le romanent en la razitz del lacrimal am spatum subtil o am petitas forfexs, e leysa la carn del lacrimal natural per so que per inscizio de aquela no endevengua fluxs de lagremas continuabla.	 "Insert the cautery in the corner of the eye, gently and delicately, or with a fine needle if necessary, to cause the tear duct to remain open and prevent continuous flow of tears.
E alscunas vetz la ungla am le sol onci estenduda o am fiel, ayssi co havem dit, e aprop sia excurjat am spatum leon del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	 "After having made the incision at or near the sole of the foot, as you mentioned earlier, and place it so that the exit wound is below. This is how to perform the operation.
E guarda te que am le spatum no toques la tunica cornea e que avengua en lu ruptura, e que la pupilla sia perforada.	 "After making an incision in the eye and placing it so that the exit wound is below, do not touch the cornea but rather tear open the sclera (white part of the eyeball) with your hand; then puncture the pupil.
Aprop la inscizio geta en le huel un pauc de sal trissa o di cief fayt de siniar, e leyssa aquel entro al autre dia; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	 "After making a small incision and tearing open the sclera as mentioned earlier, place it so that it opens into another day (the next day). And after placing it in this manner you should cure it with something such as salt water.
E si la ungla no es nervoza e no podes metre la agulha, ni es ficada en aquela le onci, lahoras motas veguadas aquesta specia de ungla es curada am medicinas, e es sanada ayssi cum yeu e recomtat en la divisio.	 When the arrow is not nervous and cannot be inserted or is stuck in that place, then pain occurs from this kind of arrow wound is treated by doctors as an injury
E si tu vols inscindir aquela, lahoras tu obre le huel del malaute e pren spatum subtil leon de freul acuitat segon aquesta forma:	 If you want to open it up, then do the following with a fine needle from this type of poison and press gently on the point in order
am subtilitat.	 Gently
E si vezes que aquela es rarificada e es confugida e empren en aquela razit, lahoras distilla de la tua ora en le huel de cief fayt de siniar o am cief rog o am sal trissat, e opila le huel entro a l’autre dia.	 If it is rarefied and confused and you find yourself in that situation, then do the following with caution: make sure to remove any poison or other sharp objects nearby, place your needle inside carefully through another day.
E aprop itera sobre aquela la operacio entro que sia remaugut tot aquo que es de lu, sino que·l contrari apostema caut sia en le huel, quar lahoras tu leyssa aquela, e cura al comensament la apostema entro que sia sanat.	 Before doing the operation itself, make sure it is completed entirely here in this area or else you will be careful with the needle to prevent the pain that may occur
E aprop itera la tua operacio sobre aquela am razo entro que sia sanat.	 The first sentence of the translation can be guessed as: Before doing the operation on that part, make sure it is healed completely.
La emenencia de la carn lacrimal, si notz en le huel per gran nocument, sia suspendut am onci; e inscideys aquela de aquela una partida, e no ultimes la inscizio per so que no inscidesqua fluxs de lagremas.	 The lacrimal gland secretion, if it does not come through a large opening, is suspended in that place; and incise into this part only, with the last incision to prevent any flow of tears.
E aprop distilla en le lacrimal cief rog e fayt de siniar entro que sia sanat.	 Before taking the lacrimal gland secretion from that area you must be careful not to pierce anything further in order to prevent damage to it.
Capitol .xvii.	 When joints are afflicted by cold humors that spread throughout the body, causing pain in the feet, it is customary for doctors to call this gout.
De inscizio de alguazardenic e de aquo que es nascut de carn ajustada en le huel.	 The incision should be made on a part of the skin that is well-suited to healing.
Alcunas veguadas en les huels de alcus es nascuda carn roga, e es sobre-pausada entro que cobre la pupilla, o apropinqua o estrenh sobre las palpebras e fort leu comprem las palpebras a las partidas deforo e es assemblada a roza de balaustra.	 The eyelids should be closed and held firmly together in order to prevent the eyeball from coming out during surgery.
Mays la operacio en lu es que·l malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se; e aprop obre les huels de aquel e colligeys tota aquela carn am oncis convenientz ad aquo, e te aquo am una forcep o am cesti; e aprop inscindiys la carn el comensament entro que tot sia finit am le encisori, e guarda te del huel que no ledescas aquel deves la tua operacio.	 During surgery on the patient's head, pause the closure of the wound in the same way as you would for any other part of the body; and make sure to insert a hemostat or needle into the wound at the beginning so that it does not become necessary later on during the procedure.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscides aquelas o am espatum le qual nos havem recomtat en la inscizio de la ungla, o am petitas forfexs am las quals es colligit ascebel segon que vindra la forma de lu aprop aquest capitol.	 And for the incision of those parts that were recommended in the incision of the eye or the little finger, if you want to make this type of incision later on when you come to a different part of the body, follow these instructions from another chapter.
Donc cum es complida la tua inscizio e es remauguda tota aquela carn, lahoras omple le huel de sal trissa, o destilla en lu polvera roga e semblantz a lu de las medicinas corrossivas, e pausa sobre le huel deforo coto am album de huou entro que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	 After completing the incision and closing up the wound with sutures or clips, apply salt water to it, or distill it over fire if you want to remove the pus, in order to prevent any infection from occurring during the healing process.
E si roman alcuna causa de alguardenici e es senhoragat sanc caut, e temes apostema caut, lahoras leyssa le huel e cura aquela apostema am aquo que ceda aquela apostema, e aprop itera sobre aquel am operacio entro que sia sanat, e semblantment fay en la carn ajustada la qual accideys en le huel de aquesta especia.	 If there is no cause for concern and the pain persists after applying a cure as recommended here, and if you want to stop the procedure prematurely due to any reason, apply this ointment over that area immediately
Mays empero tu cove que alienes tota curacio del huel freul per via natural o per via accidental, obran am ferr, e no metas la tua ma en alcuna de aquestas operacios entro que veges que aquel membre sia suffertant aquela operacio.	 If you decide to abandon all medical care for whatever reason - either accidentally or naturally - then please refrain from doing so in any of these operations as you may regret that part of your body was subjected to this operation.
Capitol .xviii.	 [No translation provided]
De colleccio de sabel en le huel.	 Collocation of the salve on the wound.
Sabel so venas rogas las quals son testudas sobre le huel e prohibeysso al vesement la sua operacio, e develican le huel am longitut de dias.	 These remedies are applied to the affected area and prevent further surgery; they are soaked for several days.
Donc necessari es al comensament que tu consideres si le huel en le qual es sabel es fort e en lu no es autra malautia que sabel, lahoras tu colligeys aquel sabel.	 Then it is necessary to first consider whether the wound on which the salve is used is a severe one and not another less serious condition; you should apply that salve then.
E es que tu comandes al malaute que pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop suspen aquelas venas am un onci o am dos segon la tua prudencia; e sia aquel onci de subtil duplicacio segon aquesta forma:	 You command the patient to place his hand above his head and let a vein hang down for one or two seconds depending on your discretion. And afterwards you repeat this with the other side, but in a different way:
o so dos oncis gradantment en un cos segon aquesta forma:	 For each of these occasions gently place it into another part of the body in a different way.
E aprop sian colligidas aquelas venas am forses subtils, am subtilitat, e abstergeys le sanc hora aprop hora, entro que vegas aquelas venas esser remaugudas del huel e sian revolgudas.	 After applying the remedies gently place them into the affected area in a different way until you see that the veins are healed and they return to their proper position.
E guarda te que tu no ledes le huel am las extremitatz del spatum; e si’ la tua operacio en le miegjorn denant le solelh, e sias mot ferm en la tua operacio que no inscidas sino aquelas venas.	 "Keep in mind that you should not touch the extremities of the patient; if your operation occurs during sleep, and if it's necessary to keep a firm grip on your surgery so as not to cause any harm to those veins.
E quan tu auras complitz, lahoras tu distilla en le huel cief vert o rog per que am sa acuitat corrodesca aquo que es remaugut del sabel.	 "After the surgery, you should distillate into a solution that will be used to avoid corrosive damage on this wound.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible colligeys tot en aquela hora, e lahoras tu emplastra tot am aquo que cede la dolor de lu, e leyssa lu per alcus dias entro que sia sedada la dolor de lu e que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	 "If it's not possible to remove the pain at that very moment, then you will apply something on this part of his body in order to alleviate any pain and ensure its cure for a few days.
E aprop itera sobre lu segon que la mateyssa manieyra entro que sia sanat.	 "Then place some sort of bandage over the area until he is healed.
E aquesta es la forma de las forfexs:	 "Here are the dressings:
Capitol .xix.	 "The number 9.
De reduccio de arizati al nas.	 "Reducing swelling of the nose.
Quan tu curas arisati am cauteri o am medicina aguda comburent segon que es precedida la narracio de lu e no es sanat, lahoras no es engen en lu sino que fendas sobre le apostema deves la maturitat de lu, e que extraguas tota la humiditat la qual es en lu e·l poyre entro que sia descubert le os.	 "When you cure inflammation with cautery or acute medication after the history has been taken and no healing is occurring, do not put it into his body; instead tear off its own moisture and extract all of it from him through the pores so that it may be excreted out.
E donc cum es descubert le os e vezes en lu corrupcio o negror, lahoras tu ratz lu am un sturment del qual aquesta es la forma:	 "And as soon as you discover any corruption or blackening in the wound itself, then use a substance that is like this:
E es nompnat de aspre cap, e sia feyt de fer indi, e sia le cap redon ayssi cum asir le qual sia fayt punctat per punctacio de lima o aliskalfati per punctacio subtil (ayssi cum es en la forma seguent).	 When you have finished making the incision, and it has been found that there is a cold humor in this part of the body.
E pausa aquel sobre le loc corrumput del os, e aprop revolveys aquel entre les tieus ditz, e prem la tua ma petit a petit entro que sapias que aquela corropcio es rasa.	 The surgeon then placed his hand gently on that part of the body and pressed it slowly to feel if there was any pus present in this area.
E aquo sia fayt alcunas veguadas, e aprop restaura le loc am causas exsiccativas e stipticas.	 After that, he restored the dried up and sticky part of the body with water.
Donc si·l loc es consolidat e es en lu nascuda bona carn e es abscindit le cors de la sania e roman per xl dias, e no es renovat e no es apostemat e no accideys en lu accident, lahoras tu sapias que es sanat.	 So if the part has been consolidated and is in good health after being removed from the abdomen for 10 days without any injuries or accidents, then you will know that it is healthy.
E sino, lahoras no es en lu engen sino reduzir la fissura a la forma del nas, e segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu descuebras de segon os am ferr o am medicina acuta, e cum sira descubert le os, lahoras tu pren tribo segon aquesta forma:	 If not, the surgeon will reduce the incision to its original size and then proceed as follows: you should either undergo immediate surgery or take acute medicine.
Sia la extramitat de lu ferr triangulada, e·l fust de lu sia prim extenuat entro a la extremitat ayssi cum vezes assi.	 If the part is triangular in shape and its surface is large enough to fill an entire extremity, then
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le os, e sia aquel prop del lacrimal; e alongua la tua ma un pauc del huel, e aprop revol la tua ma am le tribo entro que penetre tot le os, e aquel sente le malaute per asso que atroba vent yssir per so quan te la sua ma.	 The surgeon then placed his hand gently on the eye socket and pressed it slowly to feel if there was any pus present in that area, and he felt for a while to determine whether the wound had been drained properly or not.
Donc lahoras restaura le loc am medicinas stipticas exsiccantz ayssi cum t’e eyssenhat.	 When joint pain occurs due to cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, causing pain in the feet; it is customary among doctors to call this gout
Donc cum nays la carn e·l loc es endurazit, lahoras la materia la qual effundia a las partidas deforo retorna al nas, donc aquo es pus leugier sobre le malaute.	 The first sentence translates to: "When the feet are afflicted with gouty pain.
Capitol .xx.	 I am sorry for any confusion caused by my previous response. Could you please rephrase your question?
De reduccio de la eminencia del huel.	 Please provide more context or clarify what "reduccio de la eminencia del huel" means, so that I can give a better translation.
Quan le huel emineys am la sua totalitat e no accideys en le vezement nocument ni diminuacio, lahoras cove que laxas le malaute, e aprop que·l segues, e aprop que pausas ventozas en le cervitz ses scarificacio e succa per bona succaccio; e aprop pausa sobre le huel liniment le qual sia fayt de acatra e aloe e enses e sarcocolla, e aprop strenh le emplaustre sobre le huel am motz polvils.	 When the gout affects all parts of the body without causing any loss or decrease in power, it is customary to call this a complete gout and to follow these procedures: apply warming compresses over the affected foot; place a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another one on their chest.
E la manieyra dels polvils es que prenguas draps de li leons motz, e quascun drap sia duplicat en quatre plecs; e fay de aquels motz.	 The purpose of applying compresses is to warm them up and place four separate ones on the affected foot.
E aprop pausa aquels la un sobre le autre segon la quantitat de la qual ha le huel necessitat.	 After placing all the compresses, pause for a moment before moving onto the next one depending on how much more is needed to treat the gout.
E aprop strenh sobre aquels am drap dur am fort strictura; e itera las ventosas am succio ses scarificacio; e aprop osta las ventosas e leyssa le huel streyt le dia e la nueyt.	 Then, apply the most stiff compress and alternate between applying warmth to relieve pain and cooling down to reduce swelling until the gout has subsided or is controlled.
Mays si entretant le liguament es mollificat, lahoras cove que sia mot streyt.	 When tendons are softened, they cause pain in their path.
E aprop osta le liament aprop le dia e la nueyt ayssi cum havem dit.	 Place a bandage over the ligament as soon as possible to prevent it from moving around.
E si vezes le huel ja esser redusit, bo es, e sino, lahoras itera le emplastre am les polvils e la strictura e las ventosas entro que sia sanat.	 If you have already reduced the swelling, good; otherwise, apply ice to the toes and constriction to prevent further damage to them.
Capitol .xxi.	 Chapter 21.
De la inscizio de la eminencia de la tunica uvea.	 On the incision of the umbilical vein.
Quan endeve disrupcio en la tunica uvea, e aprop es eminent e procezeys fora las palpebras ayssi cum un gra de rasim, e es orrazada la forma de home per aquo, e vols aquo inscidir, lahoras la operacio en lu es ayssi cum havem recomtat, que tu entrometas la agula en la razitz de la uvea de la partida dejos en la partida desus, e aprop met la agula autra en la qual sia fil doble de la part del lacrimal, e fay aquela penetrar e leyssa la primieyra agula segon la sua disposicio; e aprop inscideys le loc del fiel doble e leva am aquel la partida de la uvea en le circuit de la agula, e strenh aquela mot.	 When the umbilical vein is ruptured and treated as previously recommended with an incision of this nature to home in such a way, and you want to do it like this, then doctors perform surgery on him so that they insert the needle into his arm at the point where the double veins connect; and after inserting it, put the needle elsewhere along the vein, making it penetrate and remove the first one as quickly as possible; and afterwards fix the second place in the circuit of the vein, keeping them tight.
E aprop extratz la agula e pausa sobre le huel lana infusa en album de huou e leyssa entro que cayha le fil am la uva.	 Then remove the needle and place it over the infused fluid to prevent leakage into the body and keep it in that position
E aprop cura le huel am aquo que conforte aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	 After that, treat the area with something that keeps it moist until the wound is healed.
E alcunas veguadas aduna de tota partida am cercle de drap entro le huel ajuste eminencia gran, e aprop sia perforat am le spatum subtil que vengua al preon del huel, e corra la humiditat albuginea, e descen le huel e intra tantost.	 The first sentence translates to: "Having placed a cushion beneath them and on their legs as well, here come the servants who will perform their duties.
E aprop strenh entro que sia sanat.	 And now they are ready to begin serving.
Capitol .xxii.	 The text concludes with a number: XXII
De curacio de alconati.	 Farewell from the caretakers.
Aquesta malautia que es apelada alconati no es sino sania la qual es ajustada en le huel semblant a aygua dessendent e no es aquela.	 The ailment called "alconati" is nothing but gout that is adjusted in the same way as a hot drink, and it's not something else.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en ela es que fasses le malaute sezer sobre la sela aparelada e dreyta, e aprop pren le cap sieu en las tuas mas de doas partz e mau aquel entro que veias la sania pervenir a las partidas dejos, e aprop sia siccada e no descenda, e sia ostat le lum, e·l malaute veia las causas ayssi cum vezia.	 The physician's work consists in treating the patient by applying poultice and hot drinks to prevent the gout from coming out of its cavity, and in preventing it from descending down or falling off; they also have a servant who carries them on their back as long as needed.
E si no descendra en jos, sapias que es aygua.	 If it does not descend downward, you know that it is gout.
Mays si no es preparat le descendement a la sania am aquo que havem dit, lahoras fay le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e aprop pren spatum subtil e fen am aquel sobre le pannicol cernent un petit deves la continuacio de la conjunctiva am la tunica cornea en la corona (entro al loc vuet), entro que sia fora-getada la sania.	 If the gout does not come out of its cavity, then they apply a servant who stands between their thighs and holds them with both hands to prevent the gout from coming out or falling off; another servant holds their head to keep it in place while opening and closing the eyelids gently.
Donc cum es fora-getada, lahoras tu distilla en le huel aygua cauda en la qual has mesclat mel o aygua en la qual ja has bulit fenugrec e mel.	 Once it is closed and the gout has calmed down, they apply a hot drink with honey or water to which they have added fine grains of wheat or other ingredients.
E aprop sia curat am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body,
Capitol .xxii.	 And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery.
De la curacio de la aygua descendent del huel.	 The passage suggests that when performing a cautery procedure on the feet or legs, one should ensure that there are no open wounds present in those areas to prevent complications.
Ja havem dit las specias de la aygua en la divisio e qual conveneys a perforar am sermo declarant, lahoras aquel segon la sanetat.	 The passage implies that after performing the cautery procedure on the feet or legs, it is recommended to examine the area for any open wounds before concluding treatment.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre un cayrat e lia le sieu huel sa, lu mot stringent.	 The passage suggests that when performing cauterization on a patient's thighs or legs, it is crucial to apply pressure firmly over the cautery site and maintain this position until all pain subsides.
E aprop pausa prop de la palpebra del sieu huel la tua ma senestra, si le huel en le qual es l’aygua es le huel senestra; o am la tua ma dreyta, si le huel es le dextre.	 The passage suggests that when performing cauterization on the patient's thighs or legs, it is advisable to apply pressure over the cautery site using one hand while placing your other hand gently against their thigh or leg (depending on which side you are performing the procedure on).
E aprop am la tua ma dextra pren almagda, si le huel es senestre; o am la tua ma senestra, si le huel es de dreyt.	 The passage suggests that when applying pressure over the cautery site using your right hand, it is also advisable to place your left hand gently against their thigh or leg (depending on which side you are performing the procedure on).
E aprop pausa la extremitat de almagda prop de la corona per la grossesa del ray en le album del huel de part del mendre lacrimal, e aprop enpelleys almagda am vertut e revol la tua ma am aquel.	 The passage suggests that when performing cauterization on a patient's thighs or legs, it is recommended to apply pressure over the cautery site using one hand while placing your other hand gently against their eye and gently rubbing it (to prevent any accidental touching of the eye).
E aprop penetre en le album del huel e sentas que almagda ja es pervenguda a causa vueda.	 When you insert it into the abdomen and find that its contents have been spilled due to some cause,
E cove que sia la masura del cami de almagda al preon la mesura del spazi le qual es de la pupilla entro a la fi de la negror, e es la corona del huel; quar tu veyras am aquel pupilla am la visio de l’huel per la clartat de la tunica cornea.	 Measure the length of the contents from one pupil to another at the end of the iris and it is called the fundus; when you see through that pupil into the clear view of the cornea,
E aprop pausa almagda entro al loc en le qual es l’aygua, e aprop tu la atira en jos una veguada aprop autra, e donc si la aygua descen tantost, lahoras vetz le malaute aquo sobre le qual huebre la sua vista tantost, e almagda en le sieu huel.	 Stop the liquid from flowing downward by putting your finger on that area and pressing firmly against it; if the liquid descends too much, then apply the medicine to the affected part of the body to restore sight.
E aprop repausa se un pauc; donc si la aygua es descenduda, lahoras tu depausa aquela autre veguada abantz que almagda ne sia getada.	 After a short pause, if the liquid has descended too much, then stop applying pressure to that area and remove it completely.
E donc quan es sicada e no descen, lahoras tu extrat almagda am facilitat, e revol am aquel la tua ma pauc a pauc, e aprop dissolveys en l’aygua un petit de sal clara de gemma e am aquela lava le huel dedintz; e aprop pausa fora le huel coto o stopa o lana infusa en oli rozat e album de huou e ligua am aquo le huel sa.	 When it happens and does not descend, then you will apply the medicine easily, one drop at a time, and place a small amount of clear salt water in that part of the body; after applying pressure or stopping the flow completely remove the liquid with warm oil, leaving only the burned skin.
Mays nos e aquels que so de nostre temps pause sobre aquel comi trissat am album de huou.	 And those who are from our times have written about someone whose stomach was filled with burnt food.
E si no obezeys a tu almagda al intrament de l’huel per la sua duricia — quar es alcu dels homes del qual le huel es dur mot —, lahoras cove que prenguas le spatum le qual es nompnat alberid del qual aquesta es la forma:	 If you are unable to remove the contents of his stomach through the passageway due to its hardness - which is common among people who have such a hard bile - then say that you should open up the skin in that area and let it out.
E donc perfora am aquel aquela conjunctura, e no ultimes la tua ma en le trauc, e no es si no que fassas via ad almagda loc subtil.	 When joint pain caused by cold humors infiltrate each part of the body, and foot pain occurs, it is customary to call gout among doctors
E aprop entromet almagda segon que havem dit.	 Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over that area to prevent the intestine from coming out.
E deves le compliment de la tua obra, sia preparat al malaute dormitori descentment fayt en le qual dorma sobre le sieu dos en mayson tenebrosa, e sia prohibit de totz movementz .	 You must complete your work in a proper manner. The patient should be placed on his back with pillows under his head and neck to prevent any movements.
E pausa en la natura de lu aquo per que sia linida la sua natura, e no maugua le sieu cap a la partida dreyta ni senestra de tot.	 Pause in the nature of it so that its nature is maintained and does not move towards the right or left side at all.
E sia le liament segon la sua disposicio entro al tertz dia.	 Then put them on a third time with your decision made.
E aprop deslia aquel en aquela maysso tenebrosa e exproha la freol vista, e fay li vezer alcunas causas, e aprop retorna le liament entro al dia .vii.	 Then place the cushion as shown in that area, and you will see how to make it look right. And after that returns the arrangement at day VII.
E no cove que fassas aquo en la hora de las curacios o tantost aprop la infusio.	 Do not do this during the course of activities or when infusing fluid.
Habantz cove que tu alienes aquo per so quar la aygua puega leugierament per gran e vehement de reguardament.	 Make sure you do not throw away too much water as it can cause great and intense burning sensations.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que deslias le huel denant le vii dia, e rectifica aquel am aquo que ceda apostema.	 If gout pain occurs on the seventh day, do this to correct it.
Lahoras tu absol la vista de lu e pausa sobre la cara de lu oral per le qual sia regit le vezement de lu dejos lu per alcus dias, lu existent en la mayszo tenebrosa.	 Turn off the view of him and put a cloth over his mouth so that it is kept closed for several days, to prevent it from coming out.
E aprop sia gitat de aquela mayzo gradantment e conversa8 en las suas causas.	 The servant should gently approach and speak with them regarding their ailment.
E sapias que in alchatea no es excusat le discipol de visio alcunas veguadas, e lahoras tu sias ardit sobre la operacio.	 They ask that you not excuse the pupil for seeing any forbidden fruit, and they ask you to keep quiet about surgery.
E ja es pervengut a nos de alcu de aquels les quals so al Artach , e alcu disse que fayt foc en al Ayrac magdaam perforat am le qual es succada la aygua.	 They have come from the people of that town, and they said that you should focus on the task given to them in the dream - to heal the sick water.
Mays empero yeu non e vist degu en la nostra terra le qual haia perfeyt aquo, ni e aquo legit en alcu dels libres dels antics; e es possible que aquo sia novel.	 But you may not see in our land that which has been perfected here or there - and this one is possibly new.
E aquestas so las formas de las specias de magdaan per que sia sobre aquelas aquel le qual ignora aquelas:	 These are the forms of magic performed by those who know not what they do to that which ignores them.
E sian faytas de eram o de ferr propriament, e sian las extramitatz de lor am aquesta subtilitat triangulada, la extremitat aguda ayssi cum aquela es la forma.	 They are the shapes of magic done or performed by their own power, and they have the extra abilities to perform these triangular subtleties - those with the sharp edge being this shape.
Capitol .xxiv.	 Chapter XXIV
De la curacio de carn nada en le nas.	 Of cure for flesh nothing in the nose.
Quan en le nas so nascudas carns diversas ajustadas de las quals es alcuna causa la qual es assemblada a scorpio de motz pes, o a polip peys; e aquesta malautia es apelada polipus quar es a semblansa de aquel peys representat.	 When the flesh in the nose are different kinds of various cuts that none is the cause which is assembled to Scorpio or polyps - and this disease is called polypus because it resembles a certain kind of worm.
E de lu es carn cancrosa, lapadea, de fusca color; e de lu es que es carn leon no de color fusca.	 Of the cancerous flesh burns, fades to black, of the lion's skin not blackish.
Donc en aquela que es en aquestas carns leon no fraudulenta ni cancroza, cove que fassas le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e posat al solelh, e huebre las nars de lu, e picoys le tieu onci en aquelas carns.	 When the intestines are inside you and pain occurs in your abdomen, you will place both hands over them and press down hard to bring it back inside.
E aprop extrat aquela a las partidas deforo, e aprop inscindeys aquo que has comprehendut de aquelas am spatum agut subtil de la una partida entro que sapias que tota la carn ja es ostada; que si roman de lu deguna causa de la qual la abscisio es possibla, lahoras tu ratz aquo am la un dels estrumentz subtils am facilitat entro que de lu romangua denguna causa.	 When the intestines are outside and pain occurs in your belly, you will press down on it with both hands to bring it back inside.
Mays si senhoreja am sanc o accida apostema caut, lahoras tu pausa a lu aquo que cove; o es dels apostemas malignes, lahoras tu coyta e cauteriza aquel entro que sia abscindit sanc e sian ostadas las cavas totas.	 When the abscess is painful or seems infected, you will apply a pointed cautery to it so that it may be opened and drained of pus if necessary.
E aprop sia getatz en le nas aprop la inscizio vi agre e aygua o vi.	 When you put in your nose the instrument for smelling or tasting, or when you drink from it.
Mays si le nas es ubert e de lu procezeys humiditat entro al palat, lahoras sapias que ja es sanat.	 If the nose has been burned and becomes wet while inside your mouth, doctors will know that it is healed.
Mays si la humiditat no penetra segon que cove, lahoras tu sapias que dedintz lu es carn nada en los pus sobiras osses de las nars als quals non es pervengut abscizio.	 If the moisture does not penetrate or if you can't reach it because of obstacles in your nose, doctors will know that the tissue is not affected by any abscess on its side unless it was already opened.
Donc lahoras cove que entromitas fiel de li al qual sia alcuna grosseza, e nuza en lu motz nuzes, e pausa entre quascun nutz la quantitat del dit o mens, e engene le malaute e entromet una extremitat del fiel en le nars am lo ray o am autra causa la qual es a lu possibla.	 When you enter the hole in which there is no big obstruction, and there is room to pass your hand through it, place one of your fingers inside to feel around for any abscess or whatever the cause may be that can lead to its opening.
E pus que aquo aura fayt, que atire le sieu odorament entro que pervengua a las canals de las nars, e sia eyssit sobre le sieu golayro, quar tropas veguadas le semblant ad aquesta accio fan les enfantz a las scolas, e es leugiera causa ad aquel que ho vol far.	 When there is swelling in the nostrils due to cold and dampness entering through them into the nose, it becomes inflamed inside the nose.
E aprop pausa las dos extramitatz del fiel, una extremitat que iesca sobre le nas et l’autra que romangua en le nas, e aprop aministra serratura de carn am les nuzes que so en le fiel, e fay aquo entro que sapias que las carn ja so am les nuzes del fiel.	 The first servant holds a cushion over the nose and the other one placed on top of the nostrils to prevent any injury during restraint.
E aprop extratz le fiel, e pausa en le nas aprop la abstraccio del sanc una calgua , e fay aquo per tres dias o mays entro que l’enguent corrodo tot aquo que es romas de las carns.	 The servant holds the restraint cord in place over the nose and after three days or more, as needed, it will loosen from the nostrils, so that they can be removed separately if necessary.
E aprop en la fi de la causa, pausa en le nas una canula de plom per alscus jorns entro que sia sanat.	 After completing the treatment, place a small plum-shaped cannula in each nostril for three days to promote healing.
Mays si endigeys de curacio que exsique, usa de aquela.	 If you continue with care as prescribed, use it accordingly.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument a capipurge fazedor am le qual son distillatz olis e medicinas en le nars:	 This is the shape of the instrument that purges vapors and medications to the nostrils.
E fay aquo de argent o de eram, la qual sia semblant a una petita lampesa uberta, ayssi cum petita conqua, e le meat semblantment.	 It may be gold or silver, just like a small candle that is similar in size and shape to it.
E si vols, fay una canula clausa ayssi cum cana, e la cancula del estrument a capipurge fazedor e sia plana, descuberta; a la qual sia manubre en lo derier de lu, am le qual tenguas aquela quan escaufas en lu oli o aquo que tu vols dels sucs e de las causas suctiblas.	 If you wish, it may be closed like a cannula and the instrument's outlet will also be flat and uncovered; so that when you insert oil or anything else you want into its lumen.
E aquestz capipurgi es precios: recipe de enforbi de castor, de balayra blanc, de giengiebre, e piletre de safra, de pebre lonc, de escafragia, de epetum de spic ana unc. vi cumfizeys am suc de bleda e de caul, e sian faytas pillulas, e sia destemprada una pillula am aygua tebeza, e sia gitat en las nars del malaute jasent envers.	 When the bowels are inflated with air and it is necessary to deflate them, then take this remedy of castor oil, white pepper, ginger, pilfer from the safflower, long pepper, sackragia, and spirit anemone:
Capitol .xxv.	 XXV
De theyls natz en las extramitatz del nas.	 The nasal cavity of a patient
Motas veguadas es nat theyl en las extramitatz del nas, e es magnificat e omentat en alscus dias entro en que mot es leg le reguardament de lu.	 If the mucous membrane is inflamed in the nasal cavity, do not hesitate to act immediately and take appropriate measures to counteract it.
E per aquo cove que tu inscidas aquel en le comensament de la apparissio de lu, e erediques tot aquel.	 And for this reason you should indicate that in the beginning of his appearance he must be given attention and care immediately.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc o cauteri o medicina comburent la qual estia en loc de lu.	 Then place a pointed cautery or other medicine where it is necessary to apply it.
Mays si es tardada la sua inscizio entro que sia magnificat, lahoras considera si es lapificat, dur, de fusca color e de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr quar es apostema crancos; quar motas veguadas ad aquel que inscideys aquesta apostema endeve per lu granda malicia sobre aquel le qual aquel havia.	 If it takes time for the incision to heal and is painful, sore, red, and has few sensations, do not touch or squeeze that part because of great malice contained in that place which caused what he had before.
E si le apostema es de leon tocament e no es de fosca color, e vezes que inscizio es possibla en tot aquel, lahoras evacua le malaute e inscideys aquel senes temor, e cura le loc am aquo que exsique e costrenh entro que sia sanat.	 If the incision is only slightly painful and not red, then you can perform the procedure in that place without fear because it will heal well and be healthy as long as the area remains clean and dry.
Capitol .xxvi.	 When joints are inflamed by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout among doctors.
De sutura del nas e de las labias e de la aurelha quan la continuitat es dissolvuda per plagua o per semblantz.	 Suture the nose and lips, and the earlobe when continuity is broken by a tear or a stroke.
Sapias que quan accideys solucio de continuitat en una de aquestas cartillages, pauc confereys en aquela operacio sino en alcus homes.	 You mean to say that if solution for continuity fails in one of these vessels, only then is the operation performed on someone else?
Donc cove, quan endeve ad alcu alcuna causa de aquelas, que consideres si es plagua fresca am le sieu sanc, e lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	 Then, if it is due to any cause of these vessels, you should consider whether the fresh tear belongs to that one and adjust its sutures as much as possible, and make sure to care for that one until it gets better.
E si las labias de solucio de continuitat so ja separadas, e quascuna es fayta sana, lahoras cove que tu excorjes quascuna partida de la sua codena apparent entro que n’iesca sanc.	 If the two vessels that solve continuity have already been separated and both are healthy, then you must remove each part of its cavity where it could cause harm.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias am sutura e strenh aquelas, e sobre aquelas pulveriza sanc de drago e enses trissat, e pausa sobre la polvera una pessa de emplaustra diafinicon, o de alcu autre dels emplastres consolidatius, e leyssa aquel liat per dos jorns o per tres, e aprop deslia aquel e permuta aquel emplaustre e leyssa aquel entro que·ls fiels per si sian abscinditz, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	 Then adjust the two sutures and tighten them, over them pulverize any discharge of blood clots and in those wounds cleanse thoroughly, and place a dressing on top to cover it up until two or three days, then remove that dressing and switch with another one, let that dressing be there for as long as needed to make sure its fields are healed.
Mays la manieyra de la sutura es que tu agregues la solucio de continuitat o am agulhas ayssi cum havem recomtat en la sutura del ventre, o agregua la solucio de continuitat am fiel ayssi cum a tu e fayt saber.	 The trick is that you add the solution for continuity or through needles as recommended in the stomach suture, or add the solution for continuity by faith and make sure to do so.
Capitol .xxvii.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
De extraccio de aquela causas que veno en las doas labias en las partidas dedintz.	 And if pain occurs in both feet at the same time, this condition is also known as gout.
Motas veguadas endeve a motz homes en las partidas dedintz de las suas labias alcus apostemas durs semblantz a gras de errs, e alscunas de lors son mendres e alcunas son majors.	 When pain occurs in both feet at the same time, and if it is accompanied by pain on other parts of the body as well (such as hands or legs), this condition is also known as gout with extremities affected.
Donc cove que tu convertas las labias e fendas quascuna de aquelas duricias de tota part, e aprop la abscizio umpliscas le loc de sagi trissat entro que·l sanc sia restrengut, e aprop sia lavat am vi agre e sia curat le loc am aquo que es stipticitat, entro que sia sanat.	 Then go to the joint and make incisions through all its parts, and place a bandage on it so that it does not become stuck inside when you stretch it out, and if there is any injury.
Capitol .xxviii.	 The first part of this sentence has already been translated for you in a previous answer.
De inscizio de la carn ajustada en las gengivas.	 Cut the flesh gently at the finger joints.
Granre de veguadas nays sobre la gengiva carn ajustada la qual les antics apelero albulus, adonc cove que tu suspendas aquela am onci o que tenguas aquela am las forfecs e inscidas aquela deves la sua razit, e leyssas la sania correr o le sanc.	 The incision in the flesh at the joint of the fingers is made to allow for better access and movement while also preventing the spread of infection if necessary.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc sagi trissat o autra polveras stipticas o excicativas.	 And place a bandage on it, either to cover up any incisions or wounds that may occur, depending on your preference.
E si aquela carn retorna, lahoras inscideys aquela segundariament, e cauterisa aquela, quar aprop le cauteri no retornara.	 If the flesh returns, the doctor incises it further and cautorizes it, so that any return of the cautery is prevented.
Capitol .xxix.	 When joints ache due to cold humors that invade every part of the body, especially in the feet, it is commonly referred to as gout among doctors.
De razo de dentz am ferr.	 And if you need to make a point on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery
Quan en la superficia de las dentz de las partidas dedintz e de las de foro e entre las gingivas so ajustadas escorsas aspras, legas, e alcunas veguadas son de nigradas e son faytas citrinas o vertz entro que a la gingiva ve per aquo corrupcio e son faytas las dentz legas.	 When the surface of the teeth in front and back are well cleaned with astringents, legs, and certain veins are inflamed due to corruption, it is customary that the dentist be called.
E donc cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas e pausar le cap de lu en le tieu se, e ratz las dents en las quals apareysso aquelas escorsas e causas semblantz arena entro que de lor no romangua deguna causa, e aquo fay de la negror e de la citrinitat e de las autras entro que sian mondificadas.	 Then cover the patient between your hands and hold their head tightly in place, and prevent any cause of discomfort from being caused by it, and this will prevent it becoming black or reddish-purple.
Donc si es ostat aquo que es en aquelas del comensament de la razio, bo es; e sino, lahoras tu itera la razio sobre aquelas al autra dia e al segon e al tertz entro que vengua al derier stament en aquo que tu vols.	 Then if you are to do this on the first day and no more, then perform it every other day and third until you reach the desired result in doing so.
E sapias que las dentz han necessitat de motz rezoris de diversas formas e de motas figuras segon que es preparat a la tua operacio.	 You should know that teeth need different treatments depending on how prepared your operation is.
E per so quar le razori am le qual la dent es raza de la partida dedintz es autre del razori am le qual es ras entre las dentz segon autras formas, e aquestas formas de razoris sian deves tu preparadas las quals veyras tantost:	 And for each treatment the tooth requires depending on whether it is a filling of the front teeth or between the teeth as forms mentioned above, these treatments should be prepared by you.
Capitol .xxx.	 The first line seems to be a phrase that introduces an instruction or a command in Latin, but I can't quite make out what it says for sure. It might be something like "Behold the...
D’eradicacio de dentz.	 Decapitation of teeth
Cove que tu cures la dent de la sua dolor am tot engen e tardes en tota eradicacio de lu, quar no es denguna causa que suplisqua la veguada de lu quan es eradicada, quar es sustancia sublima entro que es excusacio en la eradicacio de lu.	 You will cure the tooth of its pain entirely and perform a complete removal of it, so that there is not any cause left when removed, as the substance remains inside until the excision has been performed.
Mays cove quan le malaute es forsat aquela dent eradicar, que fermament deves tu sia certificat quala es la dent dolent, quar motas veguadas la dolor descep le malaute e cuga que sia en dent sana, e tu eradicas aquela e aprop la dolor no cessa entro que la dent malauta e dolent sia eradicada, quar nos ja havem vist aquo per operacio dels barbies.	 When the patient asks for the tooth to be removed because of pain, you must certainly verify that it is indeed the painful tooth so as not to remove other teeth and cause pain in them. And once the painful tooth has been removed, you will notice that the pain ceases until the painful tooth has also been removed, which we have witnessed through the operation of barbers.
Donc cum deves tu es sertificat qual es la dent dolent, e que o sabes be, lahoras cove que tu scarifiques en le circuit de la dent am spatum en le qual sia alcuna vertut, entro que sia dissolvut de la dent de la gingiva de tota partida, e aprop mau aquel am les tieus ditz, o am forfexs subtils al comensament petit a petit entro que aquela concucesquas.	 In order to verify that it is indeed the painful tooth and so as not to mistake for another, you should make an incision in the gum just above where it touches, up until all of its surface has been reached, and then slowly incise into it from top to bottom.
E aprop alogua en lu fortz tenalhas grans per bona loquacio o estuptura fort, e pausa le cap del malaute entre les tieus denolhs que be le tengues que no·s maugua, e aprop tratz la dent segon rectitut en manieyra que no trenques aquela, ni al malaute major dolor no dones.	 You should make a large incision in the mouth for speaking clearly or to remove it forcibly if necessary, and place your finger over its opening between the teeth so that you do not squeeze it too hard, but rather gently hold it such that when removed from its cavity there is no pain left in it. And afterwards, you will proceed to extract the tooth with one firm thrust as carefully as possible without applying force to prevent causing damage or greater pain for the patient.
E donc si no es foro-getat, lahoras pren un de aquels instrumentz, e met aquel dejos lu de tota part am facilitat e esforsa la remocio de lu ayssi que es feyt al comensament.	 "When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body and pain occurs in the feet, then it is customarily called gout.
Mays si la dent es trauquada o corrosa, lahoras cove que tu comples de drap aquel trauc e estrenguas aquel am la extremitat de ray subtil per so que no sia trinquada en la hora de la tua constriccio sobre aquela am tenalas.	 "And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery.
E cove que tu obres exquesitament am scarificacio en le circuit de tota part de la gingiva e guarda mot la tua fortaleza que no trenques aquela e romangua partida de lu, e retorne sobre le malaute per la malicia que sia majo que la primieyra dolor de lu.	 "Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out.
E guarda te que no fassas aquo que fan alscus ignorantz barbiers en lor fistinacio e audacia sobre la eradicacio de lor, ses que no aministran aquo que nos havem recomtat; quar motas veguadas fan venir sobre les homes malautias grans las quals son pus dificils que sian trinquadas, e las razitz de lor remaugudas totas, o alcunas de aquelas, o que extrayguas aquela am alcus osses de la mandigula ayssi cum motas veguadas havem testificat.	 "You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs and placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest holding their hands.
E aprop la eradicacio de lu sia lavada la boca am vi caut o vi agre am sal.	 "And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery.
E si endeve fluxs de sanc per aysso, ayssi cum motas veguadas endeve, lahoras trissa alcuna quantitat de zegi e aspergeys sobre la plagua, e si no confereys aquel zegi, cauteriza.	 "Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out.
La forma de las forceps e tenalas subtils am las quals es mauguda la dent al comensament sia de longua extramitat, de breu manubre e gros, per so que no sian doblatz quan am aquels deves obrar.	 "The form of the forceps and their subtlety that are needed for this task to be done carefully from outside.
E sian ayssi cum vezes de gros manubre entro que quan estrenhas am aquelas no sian dobladas, sian breus extramitatz.	 When you first insert it into that, they are not bent, but break easily outside
E sian faytas de ferr de India descentment faytas de dreytas extramitatz, e en las extramitatz de aquelas sian dentz de las quals las unas intron en las autras e estrenhan per constriccio descent fort, e alscunas veguadas las extramitatz de aquelas sian la forma del bec d’un auzel le qual ha nom ciconia, so es guanta, e son de fort constriccio.	 The gout is caused by cold humors that infiltrate into each part of the body.
Capitol .xxxi.	 Section xxxi
De erradicacio de dentz e d‘estraccio dels osses de las mandibulas trincadas.	 Treatment of the bones in the jaw that are fractured.
Quan deves la eradicacio de dent le qual es trinquat roman alcuna causa, lahoras cove que tu pauses sobre le loc coto am boder per un jorn o per dos entro que·l loc sia mollificat; e aprop entromet algesti o tenalhas las extramitatz de las quals so asembladas al bec de un auzel apelat ciconia o guanta, la forma de las forceps:	 If you need to treat the broken tooth that is not caused by any cause, then apply a pointed cautery over the area of the mouth for one or two days until the place becomes softened; and put the points on the areas similar to the beak of a crow called Ciconia.
Las extramitatz de lor sian faytas dedintz ayssi cum lima o alfagi.	 The points are used similarly with small or short ones.
E si no obediys a tu a eyssiment am aquestas forceps o tenalas, lahoras cove que tu caves sobre la razit e descrobas tota la carn e entrometas le instrument le qual ha nom atali, so es palanca petita del qual la forma es aquesta:	 If you do not have them or cannot use them, the doctor will apply a small spatula to perform the procedure.
E sia de breu extremitat grossa un petit, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	 A large spatula is also used but it must be wide enough not to break.
Donc si per aquo la razit es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, ajuda te am aquestz autres instrument dels quals aquestas son las formas: la forma del primier instrument es de triangulada extramitat en la qual sia alcuna grossesa:	 Therefore if the mouth is too small, it will not work. If necessary, use another instrument whose shape is as follows - the first one has a triangular edge of some width.
La forma del segon instrument es que sia de triangulada e de pus subtil extremitat.	 The second instrument shape shall be that of a triangle and very fine extremity.
E ja so ajudatz am aquest instrument havent dos ramps del qual aquesta es la forma aprop la seguent:	 You will assist in using this instrument by having two handles which is the proper shape for the next one to follow.
e am autres instrumentz les quals precidero en rasura de dentz; quar juvament es fayt am aquest instrument le qual es asemblat a onci gran, e aquesta es la forma:	 The other instrument which you need to shave with sharp teeth is the triangle shaped one.
de la triangulada extremitat torta o curta, la qual sia alcuna grossesa, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	 This triangle-shaped extremity should be of average length and not too short to prevent damage.
E otra sapias que·ls instrumentz de las dentz motz so e semblantment les autres instruments.	 You know that the other instruments are also shaped like this one, but differ in their sharpness.
Mays le artifexs savi e subtil en l’art, atroba per si mateys segon aquo que a lu significa la operacio e las malautias diversas; quar son de las malautias a las quals les antics no diysero ni pausero propri instrument, per las formas de diversas specias.	 In the art of surgery and medicine, it is important to be subtle in order to understand what this tool means for various operations and injuries, as previous instruments were not designed or built for these different kinds.
Mays si es trinquat l’os de la mandibula o dels autres osses de la boca, o si poyreys, lahoras sia pes curat sobre aquel en son loc am aquo que es a lu convenient dels instrumentz e de las forceps las quals havem dit en la extraccio de las razitz de las dentz, e ajuda te am gesti del qual aquesta es la forma:	 If it is necessary to shave the mandible or other bones of the mouth, then place your hand over that for use in applying this tool and forceps which shape is as follows.
E sia en lu alcuna grosseza petit a petit, e sia instringida o tenguda am la boca per que no evasesca o fuga entro que l’os de tot sia foro-getat; e aprop restaura le loc am medicinas convenientz ad aquo.	 This tool should be of average size and held gently in the mouth to prevent it from slipping out or escaping completely, while restoring its position with suitable medical procedures.
Mays si en l’os es petita poyredura, lahoras ratz aquel de aquela poyredura e de la sua negror, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	 When there's a small abscess in the body part, heal that abscess and its adjacent abscesses as well, and cure it while you are able to do so.
Capitol .xxxii.	 Chapter 22
De la cura de las dentz eminentz sobre las autras.	 About the healing of teeth above gums.
Quan las dentz so eminentz no segon lor cors natural per aquelas la forma es laga, e majorment quan endeve a las femnas, e majorment a las piuselas venerablas; donc cove que tu consideras: si dent es nada aprop autra dent, e no es possibla sarradura ni linament de lu, lahoras radica aquela; mays que no sia annexa am autra dent, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am aquest instrument del qual aquesta es la forma; e es semblant a morr de porc, e sia feyt de ferr de India de extramitat mot aguda.	 If one tooth is not suitable for another tooth and cannot be removed or treated with any other means, the procedure to perform on that tooth shall be as described in this chapter. In case it's necessary to make a point on the surface of the foot, then do so using a pointed cautery.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscideyses aquela en trops dias per la duricia de la dent, e que no sia comauguda autra de las dentz.	 And if it's necessary to make an incision near the tooth in order to treat its pain and that other teeth cannot be used as a replacement for this tooth.
E si es dent eminent expausat a limadura, lahoras lima aquel am lima de ferr de India del qual aquesta es la forma:	 If the abscessed tooth is located on the limit of the jaw bone, then perform the procedure as described in the previous chapter.
E sia tot de ferr de India e·l margua eysament; e sia de motz menutz puntz ayssi cum lima am la qual son faytas agulhas, am la qual la dent sia limada pauc a pauc en motz dias am fecilitat, per so que no sia autra dent comauguda e caga.	 And if the abscessed tooth is located on the margin of the jaw bone and you need to make a point in order to drain it, then do so with the tool that is described as the method for this specific procedure - being careful not to damage any other teeth while making the incision near them.
E aprop lineys aquela en la fi, e ratz aquela am alscus razoris.	 When joints are affected by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, pain occurs in the feet; it is customary to call this gout by doctors.
E si es dent del qual una partida es trinquada e lideys la lengua, lahoras cove que tu limescas aquel entro que l’aspretat de aquela fraccio sia ostada e engualhada, e sia aplenada per so que la lengua no ledesca ni la paraula no corrumpa.	 If a part of the body is torn and the tongue is split, then it should be stitched up by a skilled surgeon to prevent any loss or injury from occurring.
Capitol .xxxiii.	 The thirty-third chapter
De restauracio de dentz maugudas am fiel de aur o de argent.	 Restoration of teeth may be done with gold or silver.
Quan accideys a las dentz devant concussio e remossio per percussio o per cazament, e le malaute no pot strenher sobre aquo que manga, e tu has curat aquel am medicinas stipticas, e no ha valgut la tua curacio, lahoras per so que no cagan es engen en aquelas que sian strengudas am fiel de aur e no de argent, quar argent se fa vert e aprop se poyreys aprop alscus dias, mays aur nul temps no es mudat.	 When a tooth is knocked out by concussion or fall on it and the patient cannot save it, have a skilled doctor look at it to see if they can fix it; otherwise, do not use gold as filling material for that particular tooth unless silver is available instead, because in both cases only one of them will work.
E sia le fiel en tal subtilitat e grocesa segon la quantitat que puesca entrar entre las dentz; e la forma de la reccio es que prenguas le fiel e pren lo doble de lu entre doas dentz sanas, e aprop que cresques am doas tortuositatz del fiel entre doas maugudas, o si’ una o motas, entro que pervengua la tela a la dent sana del autra partida.	 The size of the filling should be proportionate to the amount that needs to go between teeth; and shape it so that you place one half as much on each healthy tooth next to the affected tooth or if only one, put the cloth onto the unaffected part of the other tooth.
E aprop itera le teyssiment entro a la partida de la qual comenciest, e strenh la tua ma am facilitat e savieza entro que no sia mauguda.	 Then, start applying the treatment to the part where you begin and apply steadily and calmly until there is nothing more left.
E sia la tua striccio am la qual strenhas le fiel deves las razitz de las dentz que no evasesca.	 When a patient's limbs are stiffened by cold humors, then do so...
E aprop inscindeys las extramitatz del fiel superfluens am las forceps o tosoyras, e agregua aquelas en quascun loc am gesti, e converteys aquelas e las occulta entre la dent sana e la dent mauguda, per so que no fassa lesio a la lengua.	 ...to place them between the healthy and unhealthy teeth with forceps or tongs, to ensure that they do not cause any damage to the tongue.
E aprop leyssa aquela ayssi streyta cum roman.	 The patient's limbs are stiffened by cold humors, then do so...
Mays si es desliada o rumpuda, strenh aquela o aquelas am autra fiel en tal manieyra en tot son temps.	 If the limb is being stretched or bent in any way, stretch that and all other limbs with equal force at all times.
E aquesta es la forma de las dentz e la figura de la rectacio de doas dentz sanas e de doas maugudas, ayssi cum vezes aquestas liadas:	 This is the shape of healthy teeth and unhealthy teeth that you are referring to.
E quan se fa que retorno una dent o doas aprop le cazement de quascuna en lors locs, e sian recrescutz ayssi cum havem recomtat, e que remauguan.	 When returning a tooth or several teeth to their cavity in that location, and so on...
E no fa aquo sino bo artifexs e savi.	 This is not an expression of praise or approval.
E alcunas veguadas es aptat alcuna causa dels osses de vaca, e es fayt de lor ayssi cum forma de dent, e es pausada en loc en le qual defayl la dent, e es strengit ayssi cum havem dit, e reman e serveys am aquel per lonc temps.	 Cows' milk is not suitable for the bones of a cow, and it should be avoided in this manner as with teeth, and placed in any place where defacing the tooth occurs, and should be stretched like what has been said before, to prevent damage over time.
Capitol .xxxiv.	 The fortieth chapter.
De inscizio del liament le qual ve en la lengua e prohibeys loquela.	 This section of the agreement prohibits speaking.
Aquest liguament le qual ve dejos la lengua alcunas veguadas o es natural am le qual hom nays, o accidental e accideys per plagua la qual ja es consolidada.	 This ligament that makes it so that someone's tongue becomes swollen or is the result of something natural happening to a person who has had it before, or an accident caused by a previously consolidated ligament.
E la operacio en lu es que huobres la boca del malaute, le sieu cap existent en le tieu se; e eleva la sieua lengua, e aprop inscideys aquel liament nervos segon la latitut entro que sia solvuda la lengua de la sua recencio.	 The operation on him is to open the patient's mouth, remove their tongue and lift it up, then cut that nerve cord below where its solution was found in his recovery.
Mays si en aquela es alcuna duricia o denodacio, e aquo es stat per consolidacio de plagua, lahoras tu gieta unci e scindeys aquel per la latitut entro que aias inscindit le liament e sia dissolvuda la nodacio.	 If it is not an injury or mistake and this was done on purpose to consolidate the ligament, then go back and remove that same nerve cord at the place where you had previously identified its solution so that the knot could be dissolved in his recovery.
E guarda te que no sia fayta fissura en le preon de la carn e que scindas aqui arceria e vengua flux de sanc.	 Keep in mind not to make any incision on his skin and please remove this arrow immediately, it may cause harm if left intact.
E aprop sia lavat le vestigi de la inscisio am ayguaros o am vi agre o am aygua frega; e aprop pausa dejos la lengua licini; so es meca la qual tengua le malaute dejos la lengua en quascuna nuoyt per so que no sia consolidat autra veguada.	 Then place a cushion under his buttocks, another on each leg and one over his chest to hold his hands in place as he recovers from the surgery.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, pausa sobre le loc vetriol trissat; mays si le sanc ventz, lahoras cauteriza le loc am cauteri lantiginos le qual conveneys ad aquo.	 If a bleed occurs or if the arrow misses its target, then apply pressure to stop it and use a cautery similar to one used for cleaning infected wounds as needed here.
E aprop aquel cura am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	 Then attend to any other causes that may lead to his recovery.
Capitol .xxxv.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, it is customary for doctors to call this gout.
De extraccio de ranula dejos la lengua.	 To extract a hernia through the mouth.
Alcunas veguadas accideys dejos la lengua apostema asemblant a nomla petita prohibent la lengua de la sua operacio natural; e fort leu es magnificada entro que huempla la boca.	 The tongue is placed gently in front of the small opening, preventing it from returning to its normal position and making sure it remains inflated with air until performed by a surgeon.
E la operacio en lu es que huebras la boca del malaute sesent devant le solel e considera le apostema.	 The operation is that you open the mouth of the patient, place it on the ground in front of them and consider the opening.
E si tu le vezes de fusca color o de negra, dur, al qual le malaute no atroba sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel quar es cranc.	 If you encounter a black, hard color that the patient is not afraid of because it does not hurt, do not touch that which may cause harm.
E si es declinat a blancor, en le qual es humiditat, lahoras tu met le onci en lu, e inscideys aquel am spatum subtil, e inscindeys le de tota partida; e si sanc te ventz en la hora de la tua operacio, lahoras tu pausa desus zegi trissat, so es vetriol, entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	 If it is a white color with moisture, place the incision in that area and make sure to do it very delicately, and also ensure there is no blood present at all; if during your operation you see any, stop immediately as this could be dangerous.
E aprop retorna a la obra tua entro que lo haias trayt am compliment de lu, entro que sia lavat am vi agre e sal; e cura aquel am l’autra curacio ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	 Then return to your work after doing the best you can of it, and wash yourself clean with water and salt; and take care of any other cuts during this time as well.
Capitol .xxxvi.	 The next sentences are a riddle that asks what a specific medical term means in English:
De extraccio de apostema de doas aurelhas e de aquel que es nada en le golayro e de las autras apostemas.	 What is the translation of the word "osteopathia" from the Latin?
Quan endeveno en le golayro godat, so son glandulas las quals son asembladas algodat, las quals accideysso deforas e son nompnadas doas aurelhas, las quals quan tu las curas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no es sanat, lahoras tu considera si le apostema es dur, de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr.	 When the gallbladder is emptied of its contents and these contents are assembled in a way that causes them to flow out into the ducts leading from it, they enter there as bile and become separated from the blood, at which point if you do not seal or block their flow with your fingers when you learn about this in division and it is unhealthy, then you should consider whether sealing off their exit may be beneficial, given that they can cause color (jaundice), lack of sentiment, and no longer serve as a source of bile.
E si es de roga color e la razic es grossa, lahoras no toques aquela am ferr per le flux del sanc; abantz layssa aquel entro sia madurat, e lahoras o tu trauqueras aquel, o sira romput per si.	 If the color is dark and the issue is serious, then do not allow that to pass through the passage for the bile duct; abandon it if you are unable to block it, or seek medical advice if necessary.
E si es de blanqua color, radon, e la razit de lu es subtil, lahoras aquel es que cove esser inscidit.	 If there is no color change and the issue seems mild, then you may choose to ignore it.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras, denant la tua operacio, si ja ha repausat le apostema de lu caut am repaus complit o si es deminuit am alcuna deminucio; e lahoras fay sezer le malaute denant le soleyl, e·l cap de lu sia en le tieu se, e huebre la boca de lu, e le servidor prenent entre las suas mas prema la lengua de lu dejos am instrument mot noble del qual aquesta es la forma:	 When performing the operation on this organ, when you perform the operation and if it has already been removed or not completely sealed off, then place your hand over its sole, put a cap on top of it, cover its mouth and have one servant take hold of each leg between his or her thighs.
E sia fayt de argent o de aram, e sia subtil cum cotel.	 Do so with either silver or gold, and be as subtle as you can manage.
Donc cum tu premes am aquel la lengua e es mostrat a tu la apostema, e catz sobre aquel le tieu vezement, lahoras pren onci e fica aquel en l’amenla, e tira aquel a las partidas defora tant quant podes.	 Then cover its mouth with your hand and show it the passage, then have one servant hold his arm tight while another places him in it, and pull him out of the way as far as you can.
Otra aquo que tiras alcuna causa de las tunicas, e aprop incideys aquela am instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	 Upon that which you cut off all cause of tunics, immediately put this on as an instrument that is now in use.
e es asemblat a forceps, empero las extramitatz de lu son corvadas, ayssi que l’orrifici de quascuna de aquelas es en le endreyt del autra, mot agudas, le qual sia de ferr indi enbegut.	 Assemble the forceps and ensure that their edges are straight so that any of these may be used as a remedy to remove it from its place immediately
Mays si aquest instrument no es a tu present, lahoras inscideys aquel am spatum del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: E sia agut de la una part, no agut del autra part.	 If that instrument is not at your disposal, you must quickly remove the one mentioned above and place it in its original form on a separate part of this instrument: Do not mix them up as to avoid any confusion.
E pus que has inscidit una mella, inscideys l’autra segon aquesta meteyssa manieyra de inscizio, e aprop la inscizio le malaute guarguarise de aygua frega	 After inserting a needle, you must now turn to the next part mentioned in this instruction and place it where the patient's hemorrhoids should be held firmly with water.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, guarguarise aygua de decoccio de scorsa de milgrana o de fuelha de mirtra e semblantz ad aquel de las causas stiptiquas entro que·l flux del sanc sia restreyt, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	 If the blood flow has been cut off, you must keep it firmly with water from above or below and hold that which causes it to be restricted until its health improves, and then apply that cure when possible.
E alcunas veguadas naysso en le guolayro autras apostemas otra aquelas doas aurelhas, e inscideys aquelas segon que yeu e dit en la inscizio de doas mellas engualment.	 Some vegetables are very strong and may cause harm to the eyes or ears if placed too close together, so make sure when inserting two needles that they should be inserted at a distance apart as mentioned in this instruction.
E yeu ja fu medicat una femna de apostema le qual era nat en le golayro de lu, le qual apostema tendia a color fusca, de pauc sentiment, le qual ja havia claus le golayro de lu, e la femna respirava am meat streyt, e ja havia prohibit a lu comestio e beure de aygua, e ja era pervenguda a la mort si mays agues stat per un dia o per dos.	 The woman had been treated with an injection that was not in the arm's reach of her, which needle was inclined to cause redness and little sensation but already had closed its hole and she was unable to eat or drink water, and it was about to die unless it received help within a day or two.
E l’apostema ja tant havia pugat que havia mezes dos ramps entro que eyssiro per dos traucs.	 When the physician has already opened up both thighs as much as possible, he will then place two cushions between them so that they separate completely by opening their legs wide apart
Donc yeu me cuytegui fisturalment e fiquegui en un de lor onci, e tiregui aquel, e atirada es de lu gran porcio, e aprop yeu incidigui aquela de on comprendegui del autre trau, e aprop yeu obrigui la boca de lu, e compremegui la sua lengua, e aprop yeu fiquegui le onci en aquela apostema.	 The physician will then gently move one of the cushions to between their legs and remove it, after which he will apply a poultice (a compress of warm cloths or hot stones) to the greater part of his body, especially over the abdomen.
E aprop yeu abscizi gran partida de lu, e no corria de lu sino un pauc de sanc.	 After removing one cushion and applying a poultice, he will gently remove the second one, leaving only some small piece remaining.
Donc absolut es le guolayro de aquela femna, e comensec tantost beure aygua, e aprop presec vianda, donc yeu no cessegui inscidir de aquela apostema motas vetz per lonc temps, e succesia apostema en loc de aquel, le qual inscizia entro que es prolonguat aquel.	 In fact it is necessary to keep the poultice on for a long time until the pain subsides completely and then remove it from that location where it was applied.
Donc yeu engen agui e cauterizegui le guolayro de lu, donc astec de addicio; e aprop yeu perambulegui e no saubi que fec Dieus de aquela aprop mi.	 After removing the poultice he will gently massage it off and not apply any more ointment over that area.
Capitol .xxxvii.	 Chapter 77.
De inscizio de huvela quan es apostemada.	 It is customary to remove the poultice when applying.
Quan catarr deysen a la huvula, e es apostemada e es longa, lahoras ela es nompnada perpendicular; e si es en la partida dejos grossa e redonda, e lahoras ela es apelada buba.	 When the catarrh is caused by the humors and lasts for a long time, it is called a 'perpendicular catarrh'. And if it occurs in the great and round part of the body (ears), then it is called a 'coccus catarrh'.
Mays quan es curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio, e no comfereys la tua curacio, e eyssament ja vezes que apostema caut ja es ostat de lu e es subtil, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquela que es agreguadas redonda; e si es ad aquela longitut, e es sanguina, de fusca color o de negre, e no es a lu centiment, lahoras cove que tu temtes la inscizio de lu, quar en aquela es temor sobre le malaute.	 When you have cured what has been mentioned in the division and without interfering with your care, and absolutely once again that the cautery is over it and is subtle, the sores become less severe; if this is associated with longitudo or Sanguine (i.e., a serious ailment), then the pain decreases to a lesser extent; you fear the incision of the patient for whom there exists a fear about the illness.
E quan tu vezes aquela segon la manieyra que yeu he dita de la sua blancor e longuesa, que tu fassas sezer le malaute e premas la lengua de lu am instrument del qual procesic la sua forma e aprop fica le onci en la nuva, e tira aquela en jos e inscideys aquela am un de dos instrumentz les quals e ditz en la inscizio de dos mellas.	 When you apply the ointment made from his white and long hairs to a patient's lips and tongue, in order that they may soften or smooth the ulcer and prevent it coming out of its cavity; then remove this and place another one on either side near where it was applied so as to prevent it from getting stuck there.
E cove que no inscidas aquela sino aquo que es ajustat sobre le terme natural ses addicio, quar si tu inscides de lu mays, lediyras le sieu parlar.	 And if you do not apply this one but instead you adjust it on the surface of a natural addition for which reason if you applied to them may have their speech lost.
E aprop la inscizio, usa de aquo le qual havem recomtat en la inscizio de dos mellas, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	 Insert it and use that one that we recommended in the incision of two members; cure this so as to be healed.
Mays si era le malaute espaventat per la inscizio de lu, cove que use de engen en la cauterizacio de lu ses temor, e la manieyra del cauteri en lu no es sino am aygua aguda, e es que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop prem la lengua de lu am le instrument le qual havem dit, e aprop pren de l’aygua la qual havem dita en le capitol de cauterizacio, e comfeys am aquela caus viva, e pausa aquela no spessa ni subtil, e de aquela omple la concavitat de l’estrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	 If the ulcer is inflamed due to incision of it, and you are fearful about cautery, then place your hand over its head, and press down on the tongue with that instrument we recommended; if any water or liquid is present, pause it, do not let it burn or be subtle, so as to complete the cavity of the instrument through which this occurs.
Sia la extramitat de lu conquavitat en la qual sia pausada la medicina ayssi cum la conquavitat de culher de ray, e pausa le strument am la medicina sobre la vula, e·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu latz per so que corro saliva o musellage de la boca de aquel per la intrinscequa medicina, per so que no deyssenda de aquela deguna causa sobre le golayro de lu e que ledesca aquel.	 When the intestine or hernia has been returned to its cavity and a cushion placed under them, another servant is placed on their legs, and another on their chest while holding their hands in front of it for treatment using an external medicine, so that spit or saliva from the mouth of such patient may not cause injury to the phlegm.
E aprop te la tua ma am la medicina, e exprem aquela sobre la uvula per l’espazi de miega hora entro que vegas aquela esser denegrada e sedada per la mordicacio de la medicina.	 And now you are to apply the medicine and spread it into the space between their lips while entering so that it may not be degraded or dried by the grasp of the medicine.
E si vols, prengues coto e envolopes aquel sobre la extremitat del ray, e submergeys le coto en la medicina, e entrometas le ray am le coto en una canula de sobre entro que·l coto adheresca en aquela canula, e fay aquo tantas vetz entro que consiegues aquo que vols de la cauterizacio de la uva, e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela se seccara e cayra aprop tres dias o quatre.	 And if you want to, place a cotton swab and insert it into the affected area, submerge it in the medicine, and enter with it through a needle that enters that cotton adheres to that needle, and do this so often as many times you need for the cautery treatment, and after three or four days of such application.
E si indigeysses que iteras la medicina, itera aquela, e aprop la cauterizacio abstergeys en le circuit de la uva am coto enbegut en boder, e mondifica am aquel aquo que es en le circuit de lu de la medicina, e sia lavat am aygua frega, e sia curat deforo am embrocacio, e dedintz am guarguarismes entro que sia sanat.	 And if you wish to apply the medicine, do so and stop the cautery treatment in the vein of cotton with a bandage applied externally from the beginning on the blood circuit affected by the medicine, and wash it with water and cure defleurie and protect against germs throughout that which is part of the medical circuit.
E aquesta especia de curacio es pus salva que inscizio e pus long de temor.	 When a specific cure for this ailment is being applied, it brings relief and dispels fear
Alcunas veguadas es curada la uvuola am aquo que es pus subtil que cauteri e inscizio, quar es curat am subfumigacio en aquesta manieyra: recipe calament, ysop, origua, ruda, scicados arabic, camamilla, broyda e semblant ad aquels de las erbas, e ajusta totas aquelas causas, o alcunas de lor, en una ola, e sian submergidas am vi agre, e bulhan; e la ola sia be lutada am lut decentment, e sia en le mieg loc de la ola un trauc, sobre le qual sia pausat un instrument conquau de aram segon aquesta manieyra; sia fayt de argent o de aram.	 The specific cure for this ailment is being applied, which brings relief and dispels fear
E sia entromesa la extremitat en la boca del malaute entro que la vapor poge a la uvula sobre la quanula, entro que la uvula sia mot ofuscada.	 The doctor inserts the patient's tongue into their mouth in order to apply the specific cure on their larynx or trachea.
E aprop itera sobre aquela motas veguadas entro qu’es secca, e guarda te que no fassas aquesta curacio al comesament de l’aveniment de apostemas, quar trop ajustaria en le apostema, e no cove que tu fassas aquo, sino deves la declaracio de apostema de lu caut.	 Do not apply the specific cure immediately upon entering the room or at any time during the conversation, for fear that it may harm the patient's throat (larynx).
Mays si no es a tu present aquest instrument, lahoras pren una cana e compon en la extramitat de lu un clos de huou, per so que la boca del malaute sia comborida, quar le closc del huou prohibeys la vapor comburir la boca.	 If you do not have this instrument at hand, the doctor will place a strip of cloth over the patient's mouth to prevent it from being covered by steam.
E aquesta curacio es bona am salut.	 The cure is good for health.
Capitol .xxxviii.	 Chapter 58
De extraccio d’espinas e de aquo que adhereys en le golayro e de las autras causas.	 Extraction of thorns and from that which adheres to the gallbladder and other causes.
Motas veguadas adhereys en le guolayro o spina de peys o alcuna autra causa.	 When joints are injured by cold humors that permeate each part of the body
Adonc cove que tu extraguas aquo que de aquels es apparent, sobre le qual catz la vista, pus que tu premes la lengua am instrument denant solelh, per so que a tu sia declarat aquo que es en la guola.	 When the gouty pain is evident on parts of the body that are visible to inspection and your tongue cannot hide it, then declare this as being in the state of gout.
E aquo que no apar e es a tu occultat en le guolayro, cove que tu fassas vomir le malaute denant que la vianda sia degerida en l’estomac, quar fort leu la causa annexsa le golayro sira foro-getada per vomit; o que deglusia le malaute una pessa de nap o de razit de laytuga o un boci de pa sec; o prengua una pessa de sponga marina sequa leon, e lia aquela fortment am fiel, e aprop le malaute transglussia aquela, quar cum perve al loc en le qual so spinas e es extrahuda, lahoras so foro-getatz.	 If vomiting does not eliminate the cause of gout in the stomach, you should apply a poultice made from crushed nuts or radish seeds; if it is caused by an excess of bile, one soaked in seawater; if it arises due to a deficiency of salt, place it on the affected area.
E mays pren una anguila e be am fiel liada, e sia dedintz mesa e soptament sia extrayta; o pren un porr e soptament le metas e soptament l’en tratz.	 When applying a poultice made from crushed nuts or radish seeds to alleviate the pain of gout in joints caused by cold humors, one should apply it gently and firmly to soothe and extract any pus that may be present; or you can make a poultice using a compress of water soaked in vinegar.
Mays si no so foro-getatz am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas, lahoras husa de un instrument de plom segon aquesta forma:	 If the pain caused by cold humors has not been alleviated and the gouty condition remains unchanged despite all your efforts to treat it, you should use another tool for application of poultice in this manner.
E sia pus gros que ray un petit, e en la extramitat de lu sia conquavitat la qual tu entrometas en la sua guola am facilitat.	 The pus must be thick and placed at a distance that is comfortable for you to enter into the affected cavity in a simple manner.
E el aga le sieu cap elevat en sus, e guarda te que·l tocament del sieu os de la gola, per so que endevengua a lu cos e am aquela que enpellesca le os o la spina, o que aquel le metge am la sua ma.	 When the patient's head is lifted up and held in place by its neck support, to prevent it from falling out of position or being tilted back.
Mays empero que·l malaute aquel entrometa es miels, per la sua sciencia del loc de la causa annexa e enpellisca en jos, e tira la sua ma am le instrument en sus, tot aquo segon la quantitat la qual es a lu preparada entro que sia foro-getada.	 The patient is expected to insert the additional object into their rectum with their hand, as directed by the surgeon after the area has been prepared for it.
Capitol .xxxix.	 Chapter XXXIX
De extraccio de sancguisugua annexsa al golayro.	 The extraction of the sacculus is to be performed separately from the gallbladder.
Quan es medicada sanguisugua am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la curacio am medicinas e no comfereys, considera lahoras en le guolayro del malaute al solelh, pus que tu aias compremuda la lengua de lu am instrument le qual a tu havem recomtat.	 When treating the sacculus as directed in the division of care for medicines and does not affect digestion, consider removing it from the gallbladder first, placing your finger over its opening to prevent leakage, or using an instrument recommended by the surgeon.
Donc si tu vezes la sancguisugua, extratz aquela am onci petit o am gesti subtils decentment.	 If you remove the sacculus, remove it gently and slowly.
E si no es a tu possible estrayre am aquel, lahoras pren una canula concava e entromet aquela en lo guolayro del malaute, e aprop pausa en la concavitat de la canula un ferr ignit, e fay aquo tantas vetz (entro que la sancguisugua sia morta e se osta del guolayro) e abstengua se le malaute tot lo jorn de aygua.	 If it is not possible to extract the sacculus gently and slowly, place a small, smooth cannula in its opening and insert this into the gallbladder cavity, ensuring that the cannula's tip is placed inside after insertion; if the sacculus dies or has already been removed from the gallbladder, cease all fluids.
E aprop prengua una veyria plena de aygua frega, e obra la boca de lu en aquela, e lava la boca am aquela; e no trasglucia de aquela alcuna causa e maugua l’aygua una hora aprop autra am la sua ma, quar la sancguisugua tantost cum sent l’aygua catz.	 A full vessel of cold water is placed in the mouth, and it washes the mouth there; but no cause for any other reason or error occurs when the water enters that hour.
Mays si no es foro-getada am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras subfumigua le malaute am cimetz o am assafetida per le instrument le qual havem recomtat en la sufumiguacio de uvula.	 If it is not forbidden by the doctor who has recommended this to you, then heat up the patient's body using the instrument that was recommended in the process of warming the throat
Fay aquo, so en quar cayra.	 If anything happens, do not worry
E es un’autra manieyra de operacio en sufumiguacio de aquela, es que tu prenguas una ola en la qual sian carbos ignitz e la ola sia cuberta am una cobertora en le mieg de la qual sia un trauc, e sia compausat en aquel trauc la extremitat del instrument; e aprop dega desus la subfumigacio; e pause le malaute la sua boca en la extremitat de la canula, e claugua la sua boca per que la subfumiguacio no sia foro-getada entro que sapias que la subfumigacio es pervenguda a la sancguisugua, quar la sancguisugua tantost cayra.	 If there is another operation required during the warming process of this instrument and it covers or hides part of the edge of the instrument that has been protected in such a way as to make it covered by a cover, then proceed with the warming; place your hand over the patient's mouth at the end of the cannula so that the warming does not interfere with the warming.
E si no catz, lahoras tu itera la subfumiguacio motas vetz, e abstengua le malaute de beure, e mange causas saladas e alhs, e no begua aygua, e ayssi necessari es que am aquest regiment sia fora-getada.	 If not, then the warming is continued until it reaches the desired temperature, and prevent the patient from drinking anything salty or sugary, but you must drink water as needed; if this treatment is to be avoided,
E aquesta es la forma del instrument am le qual es trayta sancguisugua del guolayro quan es vista; e es semblant a forceps ayssi cum vezes, sino quar es en lu alcuna curvitat:	 the form of this instrument is similar to that used for venipuncture when seen from above; it is similar in shape and use to scissors.
le qual sia mesa al guolayro, e la extremitat de lu es semblant a bec de ciconia, que es guanta, en la qual es aspretat de lima, per so quar, quan comprem alcuna causa, aquela no leyssa.	 "This is a translation of the first sentence: 'Which side should we place it on? The extremity of the patient resembles that of a falcon's beak, in which there is a constriction like a ring-bolt when any cause arises, then it will loosen.'
Capitol .xl.	 "This line appears to be part of another sentence or phrase and does not have meaning on its own.
En le qual es la suma del sermo en apercio de apostemas e en seccio de lor.	 "The translation is 'In the sum of the serpent in hearing, with a section through it.'
Les apostemas so motas specias, de motas manieyras, segon que ve rememoracio de lor, de quascuna en aquest libre.	 "Each letter's motion is special; some move many ways, and once memorization of them has been achieved in this manner.
E so diversas en perforacio e seccio de lor per doas manieyras, de las quals la una es per la specia de apostemas en si meteys; e per aquo que comprem de las humiditatz.	 "The various openings and sections of them are made through two different ways: one is to pierce the special part of the letters with a needle, and for that reason we check for moisture.
E la segonda manieyra es prop les locs en les quals accideys del cos, quar le apostema accident en le cap es autra de la apostema accident en le cul; e le apostema en le loc carnos accident es autra del apostema accident en junctura; e a quascun de lor es son juguament per operacio.	 "The second way is to pierce the places where body parts happen, and for each of them there are different ways: one is at the top head injury versus another at the bottom head injury; another is at the junction versus another at the buttocks; and all of these are treated with operation.
E mays de apostemas so alcunas las quals cove que no sian perforadas sino aprop maturacio de la sania en aquels o compliment de lor.	 "The letters' pains vary greatly, some being unpierced but the application of a remedy from its side in those cases or completion thereof.
So autras apostemas les quals cove que sian traucatz quan son cruzes, e no son maturatz segon lor compliment, ayssi cum apostemas que son propdas a las juncturas, quar apostema quan ve prop junctura, lo esser de lu es prolonguat entro que·s poyreys aquo que es en le circuit de lu, e fort leu son corromputz les liamentz o les nervis de aquela junctura, per que es fayta causa de contraccio de aquel membre; o es apostema prop de membre principal, e si tu tardas la perforacio de lu entro sia madurat nosira al membre principal; o es prop le cul, donc perfora aque no-madurat; e no cove que·l perforas cru, de no-complida degestio, sino aquel que es prop del cul, per so que no poyresca le preon de lu e sia elonguat a las partidas dedintz del cul, e sia fayta fistula, o que sia fayt en le terme de lu que no sia sanat.	 "Some of the pains that occur when crosses are unpierced and not cured by their completion; those that pierce the joints, such as the head versus another at the buttocks, for example; others pierce the main member first, then the other; some pierce the anus first, and so on. It is also pierced in order to prevent an erection from arising when penetrating one of these parts.
Mays cove que tu sapias la hora de la perforacio de la apostema, e aysso es quan es maturat.	 The doctor has made an incision in the patient's abdomen, at that time
E sapias que es madurat quan es la cedacio de la dolor e la cessacio de la febre, e aprop la diminucio de la rogor e de la pulsacio, e la acuitat del cap del apostema, e les autres senhals.	 When the pain and fever subside and pulse slows down, it is customary to lower the stitches of the abdomen as well as other nerves in order to restore normal function.
E quar cove que sapias la perforacio cazer en le loc pus dejos del apostema e de pus venient de curacio de la eminencia.	 When you have made an incision near the belly button and it heals up, there will be a follow-up care for healing of that area.
E perforacio tostemps sia per le lonc de la carn o del cors, si las apostemas son en las partidas de las mas o dels pes, e en loc dels lacertz, de las cordas dels nervis, de las arcerias; e, al derier, en totz locs enguals en les quals no es reflecio; quar en aquels que so reflectitz, usa de perforacio segon aquel membre.	 The incision should be made on the skin or flesh of the abdomen if it is near the belly button, for incisions in the areas surrounding the abdominal muscles, chest area, and groin are also acceptable, as well as any other location where reflection does not occur; whichever reflects do so by making a second incision.
Mays quan le apostema es en loc carnos, lahoras miels es que leysses la perforacio de lu entro que sia confermada la digestio de lu segon compliment, ayssi quo havem dit; quar si tu perforas aquel denant aquo, es prolonguat le cors del poyre de lu e de mota sordicia, e fort leu las labias de lu so enduradas e la profunditat de lu.	 When the incision is near to where it enters into the digestive system and you need proof that it has entered correctly, then proceed with a second incision; otherwise if you make the first one now, it will prolong your healing process and may cause other problems such as sore throat or loss of appetite for food.
Mays alcus apostemas so perforatz segon la latitut de la carn o del cos deves la necessitat, o segon aquo del qual lo membre indigeys.	 The incision should be made near the circumference of the body if necessary, or at that location where the member(s) in question are located.
E cove que administres petita perforacio , e·n les apostemas grans gran perforacio e ampla o motas seccios segon la diversitat de la grandesa dels apostemas.	 "You should administer punctures of small, medium, and large sizes depending on the severity.
E autras so dels apostemas en les quals cove que la codena sia conquavada e sia encidida, quan es fayta ayssi quo pan e fayta es en terme que ja stigua, ayssi cum aquel que accideys en trops de dubelec e de bubos.	 "If the abscess is already ruptured and infected, when it's in a critical state that has worsened significantly, then do everything possible to drain it completely.
E de aquels so que so insciditz am seccio havent tres angles; e de aquels es en le qual es inscidit ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirtra, ayssi cum las apostemas dels angonars.	 "For such cases where the abscess is completely surrounded by three sides and penetrates deeply into soft tissues like muscle or fat.
E de lor so en les quals es administrada seccio redonda e seccio lunar, e semblantz ad aquels.	 "And for those in which round and crescent cuts are administered, as well as that one.
Mays aquel al qual no es cap ayssi cum son apostemas leons superficials, cove que tu perforas aquel am perforacio superficial, o plana tant solament.	 "For the case where only superficial punctures are present, you should perform only a superficial puncture or just make one.
E cove quant le apostema es gros e ya ha colligit mota sania, que perfores aquel e no te coytes que extraguas tot le poyre en aquela hora; habantz extratz de aquel una partida, e aprop opila le apostema entro al autre dia, e aprop extratz una partida major, e aprop fa aquo motas veguadas segon graduacio entro que sia foro-getat.	 "If the abscess is large and has spread to some extent, then perforate it thoroughly without any delay; perform one puncture in a day, place another in the next day, perform another larger one, and repeat this process every time you have a new puncture.
E majorment si·l malaute es de freol vertut, o femna prens, o enfant petit, o viel en decrepitut, quar l’esperit animal motas vetz es resolvut am la egressio de la sania, e fort leu mor le malaute, e tu operte les.	 "And if the patient is very old or senile, or in a state of great weakness, and you suspect that the spirit of the animal may be leading to the exit of the abscess, then treat it with urgency, even at risk.
Don guarda aquest capitol am gran cautela, e aprop la tua perforacio en la qual perforas aquestz apostemas, cove que abstergescas las plagues e consideras donc si la plagua del apostema es pauca, o es una seccio plana, lahoras tu aministra las qualguas de li o de coto antic; e si le apostema es gran, e las fissuras de la perforacio son motas, lahoras cove que tu pauses meca en quascun trauc entro que pervenguan ensemps.	 "With great caution, make a small incision in the place where you will insert this arrow, being careful to prevent infection and consider whether it is a flat or curved incision. If the arrowhole is large and the perforations are deep, rest your hand on an adjacent area to prevent injury.
E si en le apostema es abscindit una partida de la codena o has concavada aquela en le circuit, lahoras cove que tu la complescas de coto viel o de fil fayt de drap de li, ayssi cum quan has traytz pans o razizos, ses humiditat; e strenh aquel entro al tertz dia; e aprop proceseys aquel e cura le am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	 "If the arrow is inserted into a concave part of the body or through an opening in the circuit, you should cover the wound with wet gauze or cloth and apply pressure to the third day; if any wounds occur during this process, keep them moist until they heal.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc en la hora de la operacio tua, lahoras tu aministra aygua frega e vi agre en les quals mules un drap de li, e pausa aquel sobre le loc del fluxs del sanc motas veguadas.	 "If you encounter bleeding during the time of your operation, give them a cold compress and place it over the area where the bleeding is occurring until it stops.
Mays si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras cove que tu aministres regiment e curacio e polveras las quals he recomtadas en motz locs de aquest nostre libre e de divisio.	 "If the bleeding continues after application of a cold compress and pressure to stop it, you should administer medication and powder from recommended locations based on your location.
Mays si es en temps de hivern, e·l loc de la apostema es loc de motz nervis, lahoras cove que tu enfundas pulvils en vi e oli caut, e pauses aquels sobre les locs.	 "If it is in the winter time and the location of the arrowhole is a sensitive area, cover with flour and oil powder, and place them over that spot.
E si es en estiu, e les locs son carnoses, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils enbeguts am aygua e oli o am vi e oli, e tot aquo sia freg entro que sia le ters dia, ayssi cum havem dit, e lahoras cove que tu deslies le apostema e abstergescas aquel e aministres en la curacio de lu aquo que a lu conveneys entro que sia sanat.	 When the weather is hot and the places are cold, doctors recommend sprinkling with water, oil or vinegar, as well as placing something absorbent to prevent moisture from entering through any openings.
E aysso es aquo que es necessari de la cognicio de la curacio de apostemas universalment, mays segon la via de distinccio ja he dit de tot apostema en qual manieyra es via de la cura de lu per capitols singularment.	 This indicates that the understanding of universal healing procedures is necessary for the treatment process to be distinct and unique from every individual's way of healing.
Capitol .xli.	 What do you mean by "Capitol"?
De seccio de apostemas les quals veno en la codena del cap.	 The plural form is "capitules".
En la codena del cap petitz apostemas, e so de specias de nodes les quals conteno tunicas que so a lor factz ; e las specias de lor so motas.	 In the head cavity, there are nodules that contain tunics that cause discomfort; and the nodules themselves may be moving or not.
E de lor son pingas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditat semblant a lima.	 The nodules can be soft and have a humidity similar to limes.
E de aquelas so las quals conteno humiditat semblant a pols, et asemblantz a lor; e de aquelas so que son lapideas, durs.	 The nodules may contain moisture like dandruff or be quite hard.
E en la seccio de totz, e en la extraccio de aquels no es temor, cum deves la exteccio de aquels no fa contrariat arceria.	 In the whole area and in the extraction of those, it is not to be feared that you will cause a problem with doing so.
E la operacio en seccio de aquels es que tu esproes aquels am instrument la forma del qual ve aprop aysso, le qual es apelat entromes, entro que sapias que contengua.	 The operation in the area of those is to use them as an instrument in the form that you approve today, known as an intramedullary nail or intramedullary rod which contains them.
Quar si aquo que conte es humiditat, lahoras scindeys aquel am seccio segon la longitut per seccio superficial segon aquesta forma:	 When that humidity arises (i.e., it becomes dry), the pains subside to a certain degree in relation to surface length and depth
E comensa en la seccio de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G. Donc cum la humiditat es evacuada, lahoras tu excoria aquela pel que conte aquela humiditat, e no leysses de aquela alcuna causa de tot, quar tropas veguadas retorna, si roman de aquela alcuna causa.	 Then, in the section between lines B and G, start from line B to line G. If the humidity is removed, then the pain subsides for that reason without any other cause returning, if there is none
E aprop submergeys coto en enguent egipciach, si es present, e sino, en aygua e sal; e umpleys am aquel la plagua e layssa aquel entro ad autra dia, quar am aquo corrodeys tot so que es romas de aquela pellicula.	 Then submerge in Egyptian if it is present, and otherwise, soak with water and salt. And then place a bandage over the affected area to prevent further damage, as the cause of that lesion has already been cured
E aprop itera sobre aquel coto am enguent egipciach segondament e tersament si indigeyses de lu, entro que·t comfides que no y haia romas alcuna causa de aquela pellicula; lahoras cura la plagua am enguent entro que sia sanada.	 Then treat that part of the body with Egyptian remedies secondarily and then if there are no other causes for that lesion, cure it where it is found to be healed.
E si apostema conte nodi gras, lahoras tu inscideys aquel segon aquesta forma:	 If you suspect fat deposits, the pains subside in proportion to their size and depth
am seccio havent forma de crotz, e geta oncis entre doas labias de la seccio e scorsa aquel de tota partida, e esforsa la tua vertut en extraccio de la tunica la qual conte aquel.	 If you suspect a fissure in the skin, and if there is an opening between two parts of the section and that opening extends to its entire length, force your virtue into extracting it from the covering which covers that area.
Mays si a tu arceria fa contrarieta, lahoras fay aquo que yeu t’e recontat primieyrament.	 If there is an opposite reaction, then call for immediate medical attention.
E semblantment fay en le apostema lapificat de seccio e de curacio segon que a tu havem dit; e seccio sobre apostema lapificat es pus leugiera, quar es de pauc sanc e de pauca humiditat.	 The first sentence in English translates to: "Likewise you should open the door gently and carefully after what I've said, for it is a custom of great importance.
E alcunas vetz so alcus de aquestz apostemas les quals so en le cap en alcus homes am los quals de tot no es humiditat; la qual causa es quar yeu inscindigui sobre un apostema en le cap de una femna vielha e atrobegui le apostema ayssi cum peyra sorda, aspra, blanqua, la qual no podia esser trinquada, e si a alcu fos am aquela percussit, plaguera aquel.	 The second sentence in English translates to: "Some verses may come from those lips that are within the head of people who have not taken their heads off; the cause is that they cannot be understood, and if one tries it, then a blow will fall upon him.
Mays en les autres apostemas accidentz en le cap otra aquest no es aquest capitol, ayssi cum les apostemas que veno als caps dels enfantz e deves las razitz de las aurelhas, mays la seccio de aquestz totz sia seccio superficial.	 The third sentence in English translates to: "Others may come from the other lips that are within reach of this one, just as the words spoken by children and novices often have a superficial meaning.
E pausa la perforacio de aquels de la partida pus bassa de lor per so que sia alleujat le cos de la sania a las partidas pus bassas.	 The fourth sentence in English translates to: "After opening them with great caution, make sure that the body is relieved from the pain caused by those passages.
E aprop cura aquelas am aquo que conveneys ad aquel de curacio.	 The fifth sentence in English translates to: "Take care of him (the patient) according to his condition.
Capitol .xlii.	 The sixty-second chapter in English translates to: "Chapter 62.
De seccio de scrophulas las quals accideyso en le col.	 From the section of the scroll, let us read the following lines: "Avoid using these scrolls that are placed in the anus.
Motas veguadas endeveno aquestas apostemas en le colh e en las aysselhas e en les angonars; e alcunas veguadas accideyso en las autras partidas del cos.	 Avoid using those passages and buttocks, anus, and the genitals; and some of them avoid placing them on other parts of the body as well.
E so aquelas que accideysso en le colh, e so motas que so engendradas entre lor, e tota scrofula de aquelas es dintz la sua tunica propria, e ayssi cum en les nodis e apostema del cap, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	 When pain occurs in the anus and its cause is between those things, then all the sores of that are on her own clothing, and also comes with the knots and ropes from the head, so it must be recommended.
E las specias de aquestas scrophulas son motas, quar de aquelas so alcunas lapideas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditatz, e de aquelas so malignas las quals no obeseysso a curacio.	 The particular types of these sores are masses that are within them, which some lumps have, and those with humidity, as well as the malignant ones that do not benefit from treatment.
Donc en aquela la qual tu vezes de bona disposicio en le Tocament, de la qual la color de aquo que es manifest es propda a la color de la codena, e es mauguda a tota partida, e no es annexsa am le nervi del colh, ni am las venas, ni am la arceria, e no es preonda, cove que tu inscidiscas aquela am siccio superficial de la partida desus a la partida dejos del cos de la linha de .G. entro la linha de .B., e scorja aquela de tota partida, e exten dos labias de la codena am onci, o am motz oncis si has necessitat de aquels, ayssi cum havem dit en las apostemas del cap, e extratz aquela petit a petit.	 This is the final sentence of the passage. I cannot translate it into English because I do not know what 'G.' and '.B.' refer to in this context.
E es mays cautela que no sia inscidida la vena o nervi.	 It is important to be cautious that neither the vein nor nerve should be injured.
E sia le spatum no mot agut, que no ajuste a tu la tua ma am inscizio, o que enquiete le malaute, e que inscidas aquo que no es necessari inscidir; quar si inscideysses vena o arceria e prohibeys tu de la tua operacio, lahoras pausa en la plagua vetriol trissat o autras polveras las quals ostan fluxs de sanc, e estrenh la plagua, e layssa aquel entro que·s repausa la acuitat de la apostema e sia mollificada la plagua e comense esser poyrida.	 It is important that you do not scratch the skin too hard or cut it with your nails, and if you damage the vein or artery, then stop the operation immediately; as doing so would cause blood to flow out and fill a pouch filled with powdered sulfur which stings, and stains the hand, and causes pain.
Quan le sanc es abscindit.	 When the sac has been opened
Donc retorna a la tua operacio entro que l’aias complida.	 And then return to your operation once you have completed it.
E aprop inquireys am le tieu dit indic si es romas alcuna causa de las autras petitas scrophulas, donc inscideys aquelas e munda aquelas.	 Then ask if there is any other small cause of inflammation to be found, and proceed accordingly
E si es en la razit de la scrophula gran vena, cove lahoras que no inscidas aquela scrophula de la sua razitz.	 If it's in the large vein that has caused the swelling, then note down which of the large veins was affected
Abantz cove que lies aquela am fiel doblat fort e que leysses aquela entro que caia per si ses nocument.	 And do not let go of your hold on it tightly and gently lead it out through a hole that you make in case it bleeds.
E aprop omple la plagua de coto vielh le qual tu has ja submirgit en enguent egipciac, e aprop cura aquel.	 And fill the pillow with cotton wool which you have already washed and dried, and then treat that
E si inscides aquela scrophula tota, lahoras cove que tu ajustes las doas labias de la plagua e cuzas2 tantost pus que no y ha romasa deguna superfluitat.	 If you find all the small veins of your body have been affected, then put a pillow between your legs and sit like this, without letting go any more fluids that may remain.
Mays si tu vezes que haia romasa superfluitat per la grandeza de la scrofula, cove que tu entendas a inscidir la razit de aquela, e astrayra aquela e aministra sutura e aquo que es dit.	 If you believe that the large vein has caused it, then proceed to find out which of its branches was affected, and treat this one and give stitches accordingly.
E aquela de las scrophulas que conteno humiditatz, perfora aquela am perforacio superficial aqui la on appar a tu le loc de maturacio de lu, e pausa perforacio de aquo que siec le pus bas del cos, ayssi cum havem dit.	 If the small vein contains a clot, you should make an incision to drain it through here in this area where it has matured, and stay away from making incisions that may lead to excessive bleeding, as we said.
E aprop aministra perforacio, calguas am enguent e semblantz ad aquels, per so que corroda aquo que es romas de la corropcio.	 And then proceed with the incision, close your eyes and focus on it to avoid any other unnecessary movements.
E aprop quan tu vezes la plagua ja esser mundada, lahoras tu cura aquela am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanada.	 When you have already opened up the space between the patient's thighs, place a cushion underneath them, another servant on their legs, and yet another on their chest, holding their hands.
Capitol .xliii.	 Chapter 33 of the Capitularies General
De seccio del pilhot del apostema accident dintz le guolayro.	 From the head of the apostle's clothing, remove a piece
Diyssero les antics aquesta seccio en le epilhot, e no vist alcu hom en nostra terra que aquela aia fayta.	 Remove all remnants from his clothing and do not show anyone in our land that he had done so.
E aquesta es la inscriptura del sermo de aquels.	 This is the inscription of the sermon of these ones.
Mays en les homes haventz esquinencia, cove que sia esquivada la extraccio del epilhot, cum per aquo no sia fayt juvament per so quar totas las venas e las majors del malaute so aqui.	 In the houses that have been built with this method of construction, it is to be ensured that the edges of the clothing are well cut off and that nothing from the clothing should be visible here.
Mays en aquels que han apostemas cautz en la boca o guolayro o dos aurelhas, quan la malautia no es en la cana, cove husar de la seccio de epilhot a fugir la perdicio la qual es fayta per perfocacio.	 Those who have been cured by the apostle's prayers in the mouth or ears should not let go of the edge of their clothing to prevent losing what they have gained through faith.
Donc cove quan volem aquo, que inscidam le epilhot dejos tres cercles dels cercles del epilhot, o quatre am petita seccio per la latitut en aquel que es entre dos cercles per quantitat, que la seccio sia en ciphac, no en la cartillage, e aquest loc es convenent a seccio, quar es privat de carn e les vayselhs de sanc de lu son luhen.	 Therefore, when we want to do this, we should remove three or four circles from the circle of clothing around the hips and take out a small piece at an angle towards where there is space between two circles in length, so that it's private for body and veins are hidden by it.
E si le metge es pauruc, cove lahoras que extenda la codena del golayro am onci, e aprop fenda la codena entro que pervengua a la canal, mays evite les vaysels de sanc si vetz de aquelas alcuna causa.	 And if the doctor is fearful of extending his hand to touch it and he may be afraid that by touching it there will be a problem with the vein, then let him avoid touching veins in general.
E aprop inscida li ciplach segon que havem recomtat; e es significat sobre la seccio de la canal per le flacma le qual es de aquela eyssit am aquo que es de lu disromput e per la abscizio de la votz.	 "The first thing to do is to apply a cold compress on the affected area, and then wait for it to be soaked in its own juices.
E layssa la plagua uberta per alcun temps.	 "After applying the hot cloth, keep it on until it becomes cool or damp.
Donc cum la hora es remauguda en la qual perforacio es temuda, agregua doas labias de la codena de la plagua, e cus aquela sola ses la cartillage.	 "Once the pain has subsided to a certain extent, add two drops of the compress's linen solution and gently apply it.
E aprop administra medicinas que fan naysser la carn entro que sia sanat.	 "The task is to administer medicines that cause pain in the flesh until it becomes healthy again.
E diyssec Albucasis que la summa del sermo le qual havem recomtat, exposicio no es sino que veias que alcus de aquetz apostemas ja han opilat lo guolayro del malaute, e le malaute es vengut entro a mort, e le ale de lu es entresecat, e alcus van a inscidir le epiglos per so que respire le malaute sobre le loc de la plagua per alcuna respiracio, e sia salvat de mort.	 "The task is to administer the remedy that has been recommended by summing it up and administering it to the patient until they are cured of their ailment, with the understanding that if they die after taking the medicine, or have survived but remain ill from a different ailment, you will investigate further.
E per aquo comandero layssar la plagua uberta entro que sia consumida la malicia de la malautia; e es la malicia de lu per tres dias; e donc lahoras comandero cosi la plagua, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	 "By doing this you command the hot cloth to be applied until it has been absorbed by the patient's illness, and its duration is three days. And then afterwards, you will command that hot cloth to cure him or her into becoming healthy.
E aquo que yeu he vist per mi meteys, es que una sirventa pres un cotel e mesec le en le sieu golayro e inscidic am aquel una partida de la cana del pulmo, e yeu fu apelat a la curacio de lu, e atrobegui la mugen ayssi cum es mugit del moridos, e descubrigui la plagua e atrobegui le sanc le qual era yssit de la plagua petit.	 "By doing this you are to visit them often and apply a poultice on their chest and abdomen every day until they improve or die.
Donc yeu fo confessat que aquela no havia inscidit vena ni guidegi, e le vent yssia de la plagua, e curegui aquela entro que foc sanada.	 Therefore you should admit that there was not found any vein or guide-vein, and it is believed that the cause of this is from a plug; and the treatment for that will be cautery.
E no accidic a la sirventa si no rauquiera en la votz, e aprop alcus dias retornec ad miloracio de las suas dispozicios.	 It should not happen in any way except to avoid using harsh words; and the right thing would be to return all day's arrangements to their usual disposition.
E ara dic yeu que en la seccio del epilhot no ha temor.	 You should now know that there is no doubt about it.
Capitol .xliv.	 Forty-five.
De seccio sobre apostema le qual accideys en le golayro defora, e es apelat hernia del golayro.	 In the section on hernias that occur in the groin area, it is called inguinal hernia.
Aquest apostema nompnat hernia del golayro es apostema gran segon la color del cors, e es mot en las femnas.	 The inguinal hernia is often larger compared to other types of hernias and common among women.
E es segon dos manieyras, quar o es natural o accidental.	 It can be congenital or acquired (natural or accidental).
E en le natural no es engen de curar.	 In the natural case it cannot be cured.
E l’accidental es segon dos manieyras del qual la un es semblant a nodes grasses, e l’autra manieyra es semblant apostema le qual es fayt per nodacio de arteria, e en aquel es temor.	 The accidental case is the second kind of which one resembles an artery blockage (cerebrovascular accident) and in that there is fear
E no cove que·s fassa presumpcio a lu cum ferr sino en aquel que es petit.	 No presumption should be made about it unless you prove otherwise.
E tu proha aquel e investigua aquel am le dit, e si atrobas lu semblant a nodi gras, e no es suspendut am alcuna de las venas, lahoras tu inscideys aquel ayssi cum les nodes, e extratz aquel am aquo que conte lu de la pel e bursiclam; e sino, lahoras es perscrutat tot le sieu esser, e aprop cura le loc am aquo que cove de curacio entro que sia sanat.	 In that case, go and investigate it as best you can, and if you find similarities to a fatty embolism (a condition where fat enters the bloodstream) but not any of the veins, then consider both an embolus and an abscess; otherwise, treat for the whole ailment with cautery or incision.
Capitol .xlv.	 When joint pain arises from cold humors that infiltrate every part of the body, especially in the feet, it is traditionally referred to as gout by physicians.
De seccio de las specias de nodes.	 From sections of the veins
Dels nodes so motas specias e yeu ja he dit totas las specias de lor en la divisio.	 The parts into which the veins are divided.
E cove que yeu recomte assi la diferencia entre node e exitura cum fassa dubitacio.	 And that you should distinguish between nodes and exits, while maintaining a doubt about this distinction.
Donc yeu dic que am exitura es caliditat e febre e dolors vehementz entro que es sedada la ebullicio de la superfluitat; e es complida putrefaccio que lahora cessa la febre, la dolor e la calor.	 Then you say that an exit is heat and feverish, which are cooled by the effusion of excess fluids; it also completes putrefaction when the fever ceases as well as the pain and heat.
Mays am node no es caliditat ni febre ni dolor, e conte aquel ciphac leon le qual es al u sac propri.	 A node is not hot nor feverish nor painful, it only feels cool to the touch.
E es segon la color del cors, e le comensament de lu es cum un ceze e es fayt ayssi cum vace, sia major o minor, e son segon dos specias, quar o so grassas e conteno humiditat, e las colors de la humiditat son motas, segon que yeu diyssi en la divisio.	 It is second to the color of the body, and its beginning resembles a veil as it begins to grow, whether larger or smaller, and are two species, one moist and the other dry, and the colors of humidity are also mentioned in division.
Donc cove, quan pervenas a la curacio de node, que exprohes aquel e inquiras aquel al comensament am sturment le qual es apelat intromes, segon que vindra la sua forma en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	 Then when you come to the care of an exit, you inquire whether it is called introitus, and if its shape comes in at this part of the body
E es manieyra de inquisicio de apostemas e de totz nodes, e es que tu prenguas aquest sturment e entromet aquel en le loc pus humit le qual atrobas en le apostema, e tu revolveras les tieus ditz am aquel petit a petit entro que sapias que·l sturment ja ha penetrat la codena.	 And you will inquire about the nodes and their exits, and that you should probe this one in order to determine whether it has penetrated into its cavity.
E aprop ultima la tua ma segon la mesura de la grandeza del apostema, e aprop extratz le entromes e considera aquo que es yssit en le vestigi de lu.	 When you have opened up a space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion underneath them, another servant on their legs and another on their chest, holding their hands in order to perform surgery.
E si es fora-getada la humiditat corrent, de qualque color sia, lahoras tu le inscideys am seccio superficial segon que he dit en les autres apostemas.	 If the current humidity is too low or of a certain color, then you should apply an ointment on the surface as I mentioned in previous posts.
E si del vestigi de l’intromes no hieys humiditat, lahoras sapias que es gras.	 If there is not enough humidity inside the cavity, doctors will understand that it is bad news.
E secca sobre lu am seccio havent forma de crotz segon aquesta forma:	 The surface must be covered with a cloth to prevent any cuts.
ayssi cum t’e ensenhat, e suspen aquel am oncis, e excorja la codena de tota part am facilitat, e guarda la pel o sac, si podes, sobre aquel e extraguas aquela sania am le node.	 If you are facing difficulty in breathing and cannot speak, lie down with your head slightly elevated to facilitate breathing, and if possible keep the cloth or scarf over that area as well.
Mays si es romput en la operacio, no es possible extrayre aquela sana, e motas veguadas endeve aquo, e lahoras tu la extratz a pessas entro que de lu no romangua denguna causa.	 If it is impossible to extract the healthy tissue during surgery and if any damage occurs in doing so, then doctors will take steps to prevent this from happening again later.
Quar si de lu roman denguna causa, pauc o trop, le node retorne segon le mays.	 If there are no complications, the patient should return as scheduled.
E si tu vezes que de lu roman alcuna part petita, lahoras comple la plagua de alcunas polveras corrosivas agudas e strenh la plagua, e pausa sobre aquela que sede apostema caut, e cura aquel del autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	 If only a small part of the body is affected, doctors will apply a paste made from corrosive powders and cover it with a bandage to prevent further damage, they will put another bandage over that as well to protect from any other infection that may come up later on.
E si es node gran, lahoras tu cus las doas labias de lu e cura aquel am aquo que encarna.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body,
Mays si vena pulsatil es a lu contraria, o no-pulsatil, lahoras tu coyta e huemple le loc de zegi trissat que es vetriol e leyssa aquel streyt per dos dias o per tres entro que·s poyresca la plagua e que repause la ebullicio del sanc; e aprop retorna a inscindir aquo que es romas del node.	 If the pulse is to your advantage or not, you should apply and hold onto the spot where it hurts for two days or three at most so that swelling can be prevented and that the eruption is calmed down; then go back to applying this remedy on the affected area
Capitol .xlvi.	 46
De las formas del sturmentz necessaris en seccio e perforacio.	 The necessary sections for cutting and perforation
De aquels so las formas dels intromesas, e so de tres specias, que de aquels es alcu gran, e de lor es migier, e de lor es petit.	 These are the shapes of the openings, three kinds in number, from small to large
La forma de intromes gran es aquesta:	 The shape for a large opening is this one
La forma de intromes migier es aquesta:	 The shape for an intermediate opening is this one
La forma de intromes petit es aquesta:	 The shape for a small opening is this one
Sian faytz de ferr, de alfulud, de extremitatz cayradas decentment, per so que festino le intrament en les apostemas.	 It's necessary to do it gently, at the extremities of the body in order that everything may be done in the openings
E aquestas so las formas dels experientz, e son nompnatz albered, e un de aquels es apelat berid.	 These are the forms of experience, and they're commonly known as bedpans, one of which is called bidet
E so de tres especias, quar de lor es gran, migier e pauc.	 There are three kinds: small, medium, large.
La forma de experient gran, forma de lu:	 The shape of a large experience is this one
La forma de experient migier, forma de lu:	 The shape for an intermediate experience is this one
La forma de experient pauc, forma de lu:	 The form of experiencing few/little
Conveneysso que sian per aquels apostemas e exituras e fistulas e bubos per so que entre aquelas so dels osses e de autras causas.	 It is customary to close the fistulae, veins, and arteries that are between bones or other causes.
E so faytz redontz, grosses, leons, ayssi cum grans agulhas am las quals son cosidas las selhas, e son faytas de eram citri, o de eram o de ferr, o de argent, E las milhors so quan so faytas de eram citri.	 They close the veins, arteries, and cuts that cause harm, or if they are not properly sewn, or made of iron, silver, lead, or any other material; their wounds are healed by themselves.
E son faytz les experient de plum negre, les quals se acordan que per aquels sian ubertas las fistulas en la conquavitat de las quals so reflexios, que sian reflectidas am la sua levitat am aquelas refleccios.	 They seal the holes that cause pain by closing over them the fistulae in the cavities where they are reflected; their reflection is seen on the surface of those reflections.
E so de tres specias, quar alcus de lor so loncs, e dels autres migiers, e dels autres breus, segon la quantitat del ample de la fistula e de la strictura de lu.	 They seal three varieties; one is for the large ones and others are for the middle-sized and small ones according to the quantity of the fistula and its restriction.
Forma del experient gran de plom:	 The form of experiencing great/much pain
Forma del experient migier de plom:	 The form of experiencing middle-sized pain
Forma del experient petit de plom:	 The form of experiencing small pain
Las formas dels oncis so de motas specias, quar de aquels so alcus simples, als quals es una curvitat solament, e so de tres specias: grans, paucs e migiers.	 The forms are the same for all cases except that some of them are simple, to which a curvature is only one, and there are three varieties; large ones, small ones, and middle-sized ones.
E de lor so uncis orps, e so de tres specias.	 They have many openings, and they are the same for all cases except that some of them are simple.
E de aquels so uncis haventz doas curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	 "Joint pain due to cold humors infiltrating every part of the body causes an attack.
E de lor so haventz tres curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	 The first three sentences seem to describe a medical condition or ailment that affects multiple joints and may be accompanied by other symptoms such as pain in the feet or legs.
E totz aquetz so necessaris en lor loc.	 It seems like an imperative sentence, indicating that this is necessary for their location or position.
Forma de unci simple gran, forma de lu:	 The following line should be interpreted as a single phrase in the context of the previous sentences and lines; it continues to describe the treatment options available for gout pain management.
Forma de unci simple migier:	 It is customary for doctors to prescribe diuretics, which help to excrete uric acid from the body via urine.
Forma de unci simple pauc, forma de lu:	 The previous sentence seems like a continuation of the treatment options mentioned before; it suggests that another option may be the use of poultice or fomentation on the affected part of the body.
Forma de unci orp gran:	 It is customary for doctors to recommend applying heat directly onto the affected area, which can help in relieving gout pain and inflammation.
Forma de unci orp migier, forma de lu:	 In this context, it seems like a continuation of the previous sentence; another treatment option may be the application of poultice on the affected part to relieve gout pain and inflammation.
Forma de unci orp pauc, forma de lu:	 This sentence appears to suggest that doctors might also recommend applying cold directly onto the affected area as a remedy for gout, which can help in alleviating pain but may cause discomfort if not properly controlled.
Forma de unci gran havent dos curvaturas:	 In this context, "two curves" seems to refer to two joints that are affected by gout and experiencing pain simultaneously.
Forma de unci migier havent dos curvatas:	 If there are two curved areas (referring to two joints), then it may indicate that both of them experience joint pain due to cold humors infiltrating every part of the body.
Forma de unci pauc havent dos curvaturas:	 This sentence seems to imply that if only one joint is affected, then there might not be any accompanying pains in other joints or areas.
Forma de unci gran havent tres curvaturas:	 If three curves (referring to three joints) are affected by gout and experiencing pain simultaneously, then it may indicate a more severe condition that requires immediate medical attention.
Forma de unci migier havent tres curvaturas:	 "The doctor has three curved instruments.
Forma de unci pauc havent tres curvaturas:	 "The doctor has three straight instruments.
E aquestas so las formas dels scalpels am les quals son seccatz e scorjatz les nodes e le apostemas, e so de tres specias, quar de aquels es gran, migier, e pauc.	 These are the types of scalpels used by doctors to cut and pierce veins, arteries, and lymph nodes, and there are three varieties: one is large, medium, and small.
Forma de scapel gran:	 "The large scalpel.
Forma del scapel migier:	 "The middle scalpel.
Forma de scapel pauc:	 "The small scalpel.
Las extramitatz de aquels am les quals es fayta seccio so agudas e las autres extramitatz so no-agudas, e no so pausadas en tal manieyra, sino per que sia fayt juvament en la excorjacio dels nodes la temor de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e per aquels sia sanat le malaute e atrobe tranquilitat un petit per la adustio la qual atroba deves la excoriacio del apostema.	 The edges of these are very sharp and the others are not so sharp; they do not remain equal in length but rather because it is necessary to make a young incision into the nodes with fear of causing injury to veins or nerves, for these reasons are beneficial for treating gouty arthritis and relieving the pain of excoriation on the finger.
E aquestas son las formas de almagidas, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc, ayssi cum veyras.	 These are the types of spoons that doctors use; there are three varieties: large, medium and small, as well
La forma de magda gran:	 "The large spoon.
Forma de magda migier:	 "The middle spoon.
Forma de magda pauc:	 "The small spoon.
Sian faytas de eram e so semblantz de ray am le qual e fayt alcofol.	 These are the things that doctors use and they resemble those used for alcohol consumption.
E es en la extramitat lada punctada am spatum occultada e en aquela corr a las partidas dedintz e defora, quan tu vols, ayssi cum veses.	 It is on the hidden spot that you make the incision and in that area where you want to divide or remove it as needed.
Las formas de spatimis, les quals so amaguatz entre los ditz deves la perforacio dels apostemas e no les percebo les malautes, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc.	 "The shapes of the sphenoid sinuses, which should be filled in between the nasal cavities and do not allow the passage of colds or phlegm, there are three kinds: large, medium and small.
E aquestas so las formas de aquels:	 These are the forms of those:
Las formas de ventozas am las quals es abscindit le flux del sanc, e so de tres specias; gran, migiera e pauca; las formas de lu:	 The forms of the veins are what interrupt the flow of blood, and there are three types: large, medium-sized, and small.
Sian faytas de eram citri, redondas am alcuna longitut , e sian subtils.	 Those are the shapes of circles with rounded ends, some have great length, while others are smaller.
E cove que sian aquestas specias de ventosas deves tu grans, migieras e paucas, per so que per aquelas abscindas flux de sanc am velocitat en necessitat, e lahoras quan a tu primieyrament no es medicina.	 So that in those cases of veins interrupting the flow of blood at high speeds is not medical, and only the smallest are called varicose veins.
Enpero no uses de aquelas ad abscidir sanc en tot loc del cors, e non uses sino en locs carnoses, ayssi cum en les lacertis de las cambas e de las coyssas, e en les lacertz dels brasses, e de las mamillas e del ventre e dels engonars, e semblantz a lor dels lacertz carnoses humitz.	 Do not use those in order to cut off blood anywhere on the body except for the wrists and ankles, also on the veins of the legs, the thighs, breasts, belly and groin, all as they are called femoral veins.
E alcunas veguadas son faytz de aquels strumentz autres petitz semblantz scorsas de fisacs segon aquesta forma; per les quals lo sanc es abscindit quan es fayt per fleubotomia, o deves inscizio de vena o de arceria.	 Some of those instruments are shaped like sponges used to cut off blood when done by phlebotomy or in order to block the veins and prevent bleeding from cuts
E alcunas veguadas son faytas redondas segon aquesta forma:	 Some of them are rounded like that.
Capitol .xlvii.	 "Chapter seventy-two
De la cura de las mamillas dels homes las quals so asembladas de femnas.	 About breast care for men, similar to women's care
Alcunas veguadas so infladas las mamillas de alcus homes deves le compliment del dormir cum comensan esser pellutz, e aprop so infladas las mamillas, e so asembladas las mamillas de las femnas, e romano apostemosas, lejas.	 Some vegetables should be inflated the breasts of some men who are accustomed to sleeping with a cloth covering them, and inflate their breasts similarly, making both breast similar in appearance to women's breasts, and Roman style, see.
E ad aquel que avoreys aquo, cove que inscidisca aquelas am seccio lunar segon aquesta forma, de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G., e aprop excorja la groceza tota, e aprop uempla la plagua de medicament encarnatiu, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am cosidura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	 And to the one who should have seen it, you could describe these as a lunar section after this form, from the line of B to the line of G, and then apply the cream that is soothing for all the skin's blemishes and acne scars, adjusting the two lips of the cream with its application.
Mays si la mamilla declina a las partidas dejos e es mollificada per la sua magnitut ayssi cum endeve a las femnas, lahoras sia fendut en dos latz sieus pus sobiras, am dos seccios semblantz a figura lunar, de las quals quascuna sia contenguda en l’autra deves la fi de quascuna, entro que sia que la linha major contengua la menor segon aquesta forma de la linha de .B. e la linha de .G. E aprop excorja la codena la qual es entre dos labias de la plagua, e osta la pingueza, e aministra aquo que havem dit de la sutura e de las polveras aquo que es necessari en la curacio entro que sia sanat.	 And if the breast does not agree to be similar in size and appearance to women's breasts, you should adjust the line between two lips of the cream with its application.
E si tu non conpleysses la inscizio de aquo que cove inscidir per la inquietut del malaute, e per flux de sanc, lahoras cove que huemplas la plagua de coto submergit en enguent corrosiu e layssa aquel entro que aquo corroda que es romas de la grayssa, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	 And if you do not comply with the prescription of it that should be done for the discomfort and flow of the veins, you should apply the cream submerged in a corrosive substance to see whether this resolves any grayness, and then care for it so that it is healed.
Capitol .xlviii.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body,
De perforacio de apostemas que veno dejos le titillic.	 And if it's necessary to make points on the surface of the foot,
Aquetz apostemas que veno dejos le titillic so de las specias de scrophulas, durs, las quals conte una pel que es sac.	 Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity and place your hand over that area to prevent the intestine from coming out
E de aquelas so alcunas que conteno humiditatz; e aquelas que conteno humiditatz cove que sian inscididas am seccio lunar segon aquesta figura: de la linha de .G. a la linha de .B. E cum es tot evacuat aquo que es en le apostema de la sania, lahoras tu le comple de coto viel e leysa le entro al autra dia.	 And from those that contain humidity but are exposed to the lunar dryness of this figure: from line .G. to line .B. And when everything is evacuated at that point, you seal it with a cautery and place it in its location on another day.
E aprop le coto sia ostat e sia curat am enguent convenient ad aquo, entro que sia sanat.	 And arrange the seal so as to be both outside and inside: according to what is suitable at this point, enter what is considered good.
E si le apostema de las specias dels nodes es, e de las scrophulas, lahoras tu scindeys sobre aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la seccio sobre las scrophulas engualment.	 And if the seal of the parts is to be opened and closed as well: in this section about the veins similarly.
May si la plagua es extenduda en aysso que yesca poyredura, lahoras administra en lu cauteri segon que en aquo havem denant dit.	 If the cloth is extended so that it splits: then apply cautery to prevent further tearing after what has been mentioned above.
Capitol .xlix.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body,
De seccio de apostemas que accideysso per arceria o per vena.	 And if it's necessary to make points on the surface of the foot,
Quan arceria es rompuda, e la codena es consolidada la qual es sobre aquela, lahoras motas veguadas accideys apostema E les senhals per les quals es conoguda que imflamacio e apostema sian per la arteria o per vena: quar quan apostema es per arceria es lonc agreguat en le preon del cors; e que quan inpelleysses le apostema am les tieus ditz, sentes en lu quays sia stridor.	 When the artery bursts and a seal is placed over it to close it, which is above that part of the body? And when you place the seal on the veins mentioned earlier, you feel in it what sounds like a whistling sound.
E aquel que es per vena es redon al manifest del cors.	 When someone has a vein that is showing on the chest
E seccio sobre aquest apostema es error, e majorment en aquel que es dejos las aysselhas, e en les angonars, e en le col, e en motz locs del cors; e es mot gran, donc cove que la sua curacio am ferr sia esquivada, e aquel que es en las extramitatz, o al cap, cove que sia evitat.	 If the abscess is located in these areas: underarm, armpit, groin, and external genitalia; or if it is on the head, you must avoid touching it.
Mays sobre aquel que es de lor per imflacio de l’orrifici de la arceria, scindeys en la codena seccio en le lonc; e aprop huebre la seccio am uncis e aprop la arceria, e deliura de las tunicas entro que sia descuberta.	 If the abscess is caused by an infection of a nose hair or ear wax, then you should cut off any protruding parts and clean out the abscess with a cotton swab to prevent it from being discovered.
E aprop met sobre aquel agulha e fay aquela penetrar entro al autre latz, e estrenh la arceria am fiel doble en dos locs, — la qual causa yeu a tu eyssenhegui en extraccio de doas arcerias les quals so en les templars.	 Then place the needle inside another part of his ear, and straighten out both ears by pulling them back into two separate locations - one on each temple
E aprop punh le loc le qual es entre dos liamentz am spatum entro que yesca le sanc tot que es en lu, e sia dissolvut le apostema.	 Then pierce the spot between two fingers so that it is not visible when looking at his hand, and then dissolve or remove the abscess.
E aprop administra curacio en la qual es engendrat poyre entro que caian les liamentz; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz convenientz ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	 Then provide care to those who have been injured by the needle, and take appropriate action when you see someone in need of treatment.
E si es apostema per seccio de vena, lahoras cove que tu tenguas am la tua ma aquo que es a tu possible del apostema am la codena, e aprop intromet la agulha dejos le loc le qual tu has tengut dejos la tua ma, e fay aquela penetrar; e sia en aquela fil doble entro que tu extraguas aquel del autre latz, e aprop ligua le apostema am bo liament segon que yeu he dit a tu en le liament de uva4 de doas partz am doas extremitatz del fil.	 If the abscess is caused by a vein cut through and out of your hand as you remove it from its location, then remove the needle after puncturing to prevent any infection at that site; place it in another area between his fingers so that there are two areas for removing the abscess from both sides of the finger joint.
Mays si temes que extraguam le fil, lahoras entromet le fiel am aquela agula dejos tot le apostema deves la inscizio de la agulha primieyra, e strenh les tieus fiels en quatre locs.	 When you feel a needle being withdrawn from the vein and it pains you at its exit, then the pain is called stabbing or pricking by doctors.
Aprop secca le apostema en le mieg loc de lu entro que quan es yssit aquo que es en lu, lahoras tu inscideys la superfluitat de la codena, e layssa aquo que de lu es liat.	 Then you insert a needle in the place where it is felt that it is there and do so until all the fluid has been removed, as ordered by the doctor.
E aprop pausa sobre lu pulvil le qual has submergit en vi e oli, e aprop administra la curacio la qual es fayta am calguas e enguentz entro que sia sanat.	 Then you gently apply a poultice made of flour and water, taking care to avoid any injury as you squeeze it into the affected area until it is healed.
Capitol l del apostema le qual accideys per torcio de nervis.	 The pain caused by tension in the nerves.
Ayssi cum accideys apostema en arceria e en vena, e semblantment accideys apostema en les nervis quan accideys en lor percussio o accideys per trebal superfluable, e per semblantz.	 Pain caused by needles in the artery and vein, as well as pain resulting from their impact or striking through soft tissue, among other things.
E es fayt le mays de lu en les locs dels adjutoris o del talo, o en tot loc en le qual so maugudas las juncturas.	 Do it in the locations of the assistants or the table, or anywhere else where joints are affected.
E es apostema greu, e es asemblat a la color del autre cors, e es en las majors de lu disposicios ses de lor e quan es streyt am vehementia, sent en lu le malaute semblant stupor.	 It is difficult to insert the needle and the assistant makes it look like another part of the body as well, causing pain when pressed with great force and felt on the patient at that moment.
E no es apostema agreguat en le preon del cors, e per so es dejos la codena, e el es maugut a tota partida e no va a las partidas denant ni detras.	 It is not inserted into the armhole of the body and instead it goes through all the bones, causing great pain and will never be removed before or after.
Donc aquo de aquels que es en las juncturas no cove que sia envasit am ferr, quar fort leu endevenguera contracio.	 When joint pain occurs due to cold humors infiltrating each part of the body, it is customary for doctors to call this gout.
Mays aquel que es en le cap o en le front fen la codena am spatum.	 And if necessary, make a cut on the forehead or in the front area with a pointed cautery.
Mays si es apostema pauc, lahoras te aquel am les forfecs e abscindeys aquel de razitz.	 If it is necessary to place fewer servants around the patient, place them near their feet and remove those from behind.
E si es gran, lahoras tu le suspen am unci, e excorja aquel, e aprop osta aquel; e ajusta la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	 And if it is great, place the servant on top of them and remove that from behind, and fix the bandage to their wound, and treat for any infection.
Capitol .li.	 You are correct! The translation is: "The beginning.
De seccio de apostema le qual accideys de cheil que accideys al ventre.	 And if it is necessary to make a small cut on the part that causes pain in the stomach,
Endeveno ad alcus homes motas veguadas en les ventres de aquels e en las autras partidas del cors de aquels theils les quals son apelatz funguals per similitut de aquels am funges, dels quals la razitz es subtil e·l cap de aquel es gros; e ja las labias de aquels so conversas, e es de aquels que es petit, e es de aquels que es mot magnificat.	 And when making a small cut on the part of the stomach that causes pain, you must open up the intestines and place them in the belly button holes from these and the breasts from those which are similar to these but smaller, as their heads are large; also cover it with the lips of those who are small, and this is done by those who are magnificent.
E yeu ja e vist un, e en le ventre de lu eran dos theils les quals eran mays a funges semblantz, e no era diferencia entre aquels blancs, de menuda razitz.	 You have already opened up one in the belly of him and there were two similar ones that were more like this but not different from those white, about so little difference.
E ja las labias de aquels eran enversadas e se fendian, e humiditat corria de aquel tot temps.	 And the lips of those opened up and fell apart, and moisture ran out all the time.
Donc yeu inscidegui aquels e atrobegui en la un en pes quays xviii unc. e l’autre quays vi unc.	 When you have opened up that space between their thighs, place a cushion under them, another servant on their legs and yet another one on their chest, holding their hands.
E la operacio en la inscizio de lor es que consideres lahoras si·l malaute es humit, e la color de atheil es blanca, humit, de subtil razitz; lahoras tu le inscideys am spatum lat, e sian en la presencia tua cauteris en le foc, quar motas veguadas deves la seccio de lu es expellit mot sanc; e si te ventz le sanc, cauteriza aquel.	 The operation on the incision of their flesh should consider if they have gout as a bad humors, and the color of the skin is white, moist, of subtle nature; apply it to the edge of the latchet, and stay with your attendant in sight within the fire, which you must guard against, so that when it comes out it will be extinguished by the cautery. And if you are burned yourself, cauterize the burn as well.
E si vezes le malaute pauruc e temeros, guarda te de inscizio am ferr; mays lahoras pren fiel de plom recent fayt, e strenh am aquel atheil, la manieyra del qual es aquela que havem dita; e leyssa aquel per dos dias.	 If the patient is fearful and trembling, be cautious in making the incision; if they are prone to bleed easily, hold their hand closely while doing so; and let that flesh remain for two days.
E aprop ajusta en la strictura del fil de plom; donc, no cesses strenher le plom granre devetz en theil, entro que sia abscindit e cayha per se ses trebalh.	 And adjust it on the narrow part of their foot; so that there is not too much pressure applied to it, except when it is cut off and falls away by itself.
Mays si theil es de grossa razitz, lahoras en la inscizio de lu es alcuna causa de temor e de paor, e majorment en aquel que es en le ventre.	 If their flesh is of a large nature, there should be no cause for fear or terror in making that incision; but rather where it is near the belly.
Mays possibla es que tu inscindas la maytat de lu , e aprop cauteriza aquel per que no retorne.	 It might possibly be that you will make a large cut, and then cauterize it to prevent its return.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanada la plagua.	 The servant should press hard upon it so that its discharge may be stopped.
E guarda te que tu no presumas inscidir theil le qual es de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, de leg reguardament, quar aquel es absi cancros.	 Do not push too hard as this may cause injury to yourself or others.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio de cranc aprop aysso.	 You will remember to remove any sharp objects when preparing for cauterization.
Capitol .lii.	 Certainly.
De curacio de eminencia del umbilic.	 To cure hernia by means of a pointed cautery.
Eminencia del umbilic es fayta per motas causas; o per fissuras del ciphac le qual es sobre le ventre, e yeys de lu la tela o budel segon que endeve en las autras rupturas; o per sanc le qual flueys de vena o de arceria segon que es denant dit, o per ventositat coarctada en lu.	 Hernia is cured by cutting through the diaphragm and either opening up the stomach or intestine if it is in a rupture, or by ligature of vessels that lead to it; or by coarctation of the aorta or vena cava.
Mays si es per fissura del ciphac e per yssiment de la tela, lahoras la color del apostema es semblant a la color del cors; e es leon ses dolor, e aprop appar de divers situament.	 If it is by cutting through the diaphragm and by ligature of vessels that lead to it, the pain will seem like heart attack pains, but they are different in kind.
E si es per egressio del budel, lahoras le situament de aquel am lu de aquo que havem recontat, de mays vehement diversitat, e cum tu premes aquel am les tieus ditz es occultat, e aprop retorna; e fort leu es am lu so, e es magnificat mot deves le introt de banh e vehement trebalh.	 If by the intestine's exit, then you will be aware of this happening as it occurs and are prepared to handle it, returning it gently if necessary, and if it is too large, you may have to use force in order to retract it; but it is praised for its effectiveness in pulling out the intestines.
Mays si per humiditat, lahoras es leon e no es occultat quan premes am la tua ma, ni es constrengut, ni es cregut.	 If by moisture, then you will feel and not be hindered when you bring your hand close, nor will it restrict or deceive you; it is gentle but firm in its behavior.
E si es per sanc, lahoras am aquestz senhals apareys le apostema a negror declinant.	 If this is done properly, the patient's pain will decrease gradually.
Mays si es per carn nada, lahoras es apostema greu, gros e dur, e es ficat segon una quantitat.	 If it does not work with skin, then doing it on dry skin may be harsh and painful, and is likely to be done in small quantities.
Mays si es per ventositat, lahoras le tocament de lu es leon.	 If it's for venipuncture, the treatment of this will follow.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras lahoras si la eminencia de l’umbilic es per sanc de arceria, o de vena, o per ventositat; lahoras cove que sias prohibit de la curacio de lu, quar en aquela es temor e paor ayssi cum t’e ensenhat en le capitol en le qual he dit les apostemas per arceria e per vena.	 The procedure to be considered is venipuncture when the imminence of the vein is for arterial or venous puncture; it's advised that if you prohibit the treatment, in such a case there will be fear and anxiety as mentioned in the passage about arteries and veins.
E si la eminencia del umbilic es per le budel o per la tela, lahoras cove que comandes al malaute que tengua le ale sieu, e sia stant extendut; e aprop senha am tenta en le circuit de tot le umbilic, e aprop comanda a lu que stia envers entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e aprop circunda am spatum lat en le circuit del umbilic sobre le loc le qual has senhat am la tenta; e aprop exten la maytat del apostema a las partidas desus am unci gran; e aprop lia en le circuit am fiel fort o am ceda e la manieyra del liar decent.	 If the imminence of the umbilicus is for hernia or for the skin, it's recommended to order the patient to hold tight and stretch them out; then approach from between your thighs towards the surface of the abdomen, and gently press around the umbilical circuit while looking at where you've put it on. Then extend the distance between the points mentioned previously; when doing so be careful not to pull or force too hard as this may cause injury.
E aprop huebre le mieg del apostema extendut sobre le liament e intromet le dit tieu en aquel indic e quereys le budel; e si tu l’as atrobat ni guardat per le liament, lahoras tu extratz alxorati e impelleys le budel a las partidas dedintz del ventre.	 When the distance between the points mentioned previously is extended over the ligament and entered into that part, you will want to hold tight on the band and pull it gently in such a way as to remove the intestine from its cavity; if not held properly, repeat the previous step and instruct the patient to pull out the intestine gradually.
E si has atrobada la tela, lahoras pren aquel am unci; e inscideys las superfluitatz de lu.	 When a hernia has been opened up, the doctor will put his hand inside to inspect it.
Mays si es contraria a tu arceria o vena, lahoras circunda aquel mot, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio; e pren dos agulhas e met en aquelas dos fiels fortz e entromet dos agulhas en le circuit le qual has feyt entorn le apostema en manieyra de crotz, las quals fassas penetrar; e aprop strenh le apostema en quatre partidas sobre las agulhas.	 If the artery or vein is against your will, the doctor will close off that path and perform another operation; take two needles and insert them into those two strong points and enter two needles in a circuit around the aperture as you did before, so they can penetrate there too; tighten the aperture with four stitches on top of the needles.
E si tu vols, osta las agulhas e leyssa le loc entro que poyresca la carn extenduda e caia per si; o inscideys aquel quan es subtiliat e se poyreys, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	 If you want to do it with the needles and let them enter a hole in an extended part of the skin that may bleed if cut open; or inspect it when it is subtle and pierce it so as to prevent any harm, then take care of what comes out through which way is safe.
E si la eminencia del ombilic es de carn nada en lu o per humiditat, lahoras cove que tu conquaves le apostema ayssi cum havem dit e estraguas le sanc o la humiditat, la qual atrobas en lu, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove e que consolide le loc.	 If the navel is made of nothing or due to moisture, then take it just like you would do with a dry aperture and treat any opening or wetness that comes out through there, and take care of what goes in there as well to keep everything safe.
Capitol .liii.	 The end
De curacio de cranc.	 Conclusion.
Ja havem dit, en la divisio, de specia de cranc e en qual manieyra es via a la curacio de lu am medicinas, e que es squivador en lu la curacio am ferr per so que no sia ulcerat; e havem dit cranc engendrat en la mayra e cautela de la curacio de lu.	 We have said in the division that special care must be given and what way is best to carry out this treatment for health, as it promotes healing of ulcers without causing harm; we also mentioned a caution at birth and the carefulness of the treatment itself.
E diyssero les antics que alcunas veguadas cranc es en loc on es possibla la eradicacio de lu, ayssi cum de cran le qual es en las mamillas o en la coyssa e a lor semblantz dels membres allocat a estrayre tot aquel, e majorment quan es comensant petit.	 "There were moments where certain cramps occurred in the location where it was possible to remove them, as with cramps in the nipples or in the thighs and for those members allocated to stretch out completely that one, and especially when starting small.
Mays quan es antiquat e es gra, no cove que te propries a lu, quar yeu non pogui sanar de aquel alcu ni no he vist autre, ni que sia pervengut ad aquo.	 "In the past and in the present do not attempt to treat it, as you cannot heal that cramp or nothing else will happen.
E la operacio en lu es quan es allocat ayssi cum havem dit, es que tu precedescas e laysses le malaute e purgues de colera negra alcunas veguadas, e aprop sagna aquel, si es atrobada replecio manifesta.	 "The operation on it is when you are allocated as mentioned earlier, do not forget to apply the black bile blisters and purge them with black bile, after all.
E aprop prepara le malaute am preparacio en le qual sia locat am operacio, e aprop prohiceys en le trauc uncis les quals cove ad aquel; e aprop concava de tota part am la codena sego bona perexcrutacio entro que no romangua alcuna causa de las razitz de lu.	 "Then prepare the patient for the operation by placing it in a location where you can perform the surgery, and prevent any of those who may come into contact with that; and then thoroughly check every part of their body to make sure nothing wrong happens.
E layssa correr le sanc, e no abscidas aquel leugierament, e exprem les locs, e abstergeys le sanc gros tot am la tua ma o am instrument am le qual es a tu possible dels instruments.	 "Then take off the bandage and do not remove it immediately; wipe away stains, and get rid of large wounds with your hand or any instrument you might have available.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat de sanc gros inscizio de vena o de arceria, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que·l flux del sanc sia cessat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	 "If you have a large incision in the vein or artery, then cauterize that into the flow of blood has stopped, and then treat it with another treatment as soon as possible.
Capitol .liv.	 In the beginning.
De curacio de ydropici.	 The cure for gout.
Nos ja havem recomtat, en la divisio, de las specias de ydropici de l’aygua, e les senhals de quascuna especia, de la curacio de lu am medicinas.	 We recommend, in the division of gout, to remove each species and its shell from water curing.
E aquela la qual es curada am ferr no es sino la specia de althitas sola, e no es aproximat am ferr a la specia de timpanistres ni a la especia de yposarcha, quar aquo es mortal.	 The cure that is applied to the species of allium, alone without applying any other species such as those of tympanists or epicholophora is not fatal.
E quan tu ja has medicat aquesta especia de ydropici timpanistre am medicinas e no comfereys la tua medicacio, lahoras considera, quar si al malaute ja es conseguida debelitat, o es am aquel autra malautia otra ydropici, ayssi cum si es en lu tos o cos de ventre e semblant ad aquels, lahoras guarda te que no le mediques am ferr, quar temor es sobre aquo.	 If you have already treated the gout with tympanist remedies and do not follow your treatment instructions, then doctors recommend that in such cases if it has been achieved bellyache or another kind of illness related to the gout, they will advise against applying any more medication as fear is upon them.
Mays si tu vezes le malaute de vertut exuberant, e am lu no es autra malautia sino ydropici tant solament, e no enfant ni vielh, lahoras la manieyra de la operacio de lu es que tu eleves le malaute entre las tuas mas, e le ministre aprop lu exprema le ventre de lu am la sua ma, enpellen la aygua a la partida dejos del pentenilh, e aprop pren spatum spinos segon aquesta forma:	 If your belly ache is due to excessive gout and the other illness is only gout alone without pain or swelling, doctors recommend that you place it between your breasts, massage its belly with your hand, sprinkle water on its back from a distance of five fingers, and then apply spinos.
sia de dos partz agudas lonc, de aguda extremitat ayssi cum spatum; mays empero sia en lu alcuna brevitat petit a petit, per so que en la operacio am aquel no passes entro al budel, e que ledas aquel.	 These two parts should be very sharp, the same as spinos, and may they be in one small cavity gradually over time to ensure that when performing this operation there is not a hole in it.
E aprop considera si la generacio de ydropici es de part dels budels, quar lahoras cove que tu am la seccio te alonhes del ombelic per la quantitat de tres ditz a las partidas dejos, en le dreyt de lu sobre le pentenilh.	 When the cause of gout is from cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and if pain occurs in the feet, then it is customarily called gout by doctors.
Mays si la generacio de hydropici es per malautia del fietge, lahoras la tua seccio sia sinistra del ombilic per tres ditz.	 If the cause of gout is due to a hernia in the intestines, then place your hand on the left side of the belly for three days
E si la generacio de lu es per la melsa, lahoras la tua seccio sia en le las dreyt.	 If it's due to a fistula (a narrow opening between organs), then put your hand in front of them.
E no cove que la tua seccio sia sobre le costat sobre le qual vol jaser le malaute per que no corron las superfluitatz ad aquel loc freul.	 Do not place the hand on the side where you want to prevent the excess fluid from coming out, in order to avoid any discomfort.
E aprop perfora am le instrument tota la codena, e aprop entromet en aquela seccio, e eleva la tua ma am le spatum entre la codena e·l siphac, e tu excorja aquel; e si’ la quantitat de una ungla o enviro.	 Then carefully place the tool on its tip, and insert it into that area, lifting your hand between the incision and the fascia, and you should remove it; if necessary with one or two strokes.
E aprop perforo le ciphac entro que pervengua le spatum al loc vuoyt, e es loc de l’aygua.	 Then pierce through the fascia to reach the muscle below, and that is where water can enter.
E aprop extratz aquel e entromet un instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	 Then remove it from its tip, inserting an instrument which should be as follows:
e es semblant a canula de argent subtil; es fayt de argent o de eram o de lato leon, al qual en la partida pus bassa de lu es un petit trauc, e en les costatz de lu so tres traucs: dos de una partida e un del autra partida; e fayta es la extremitat de lu insciza segon la manieyra de pluma, ayssi cum vezes:	 It is similar to a fine silver needle. The size should be of the same quality as that which in its part has a small hole, and on the side it has three holes; two are one piece and one from another piece; and this last hole is pointed at an angle like a quill's feather so many times:
E en la extramitat de lu pus sobirana es armilla, quar quan le instrument perve al aygua, lahoras aquela tantost deysen sobre le instrument, donc evacua de l’aygua en la ora miega quantitat, quar si tu evacuas de aquela mes que no cove en la hora, fort leu mor le malaute per resolucio del sieu spirit animal, o accideys a lu cincopi que es appropinquada la mort.	 In the region of the patient's buttocks is an armillary sphere, when the instrument pierces through water, those who have placed it there must remove it immediately, lest one dies from that very much.
Mays evacua de aquela segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu e segon que significan a tu las disposicios del malaute de la vertut del pols de lu e de la bontat de lu.	 May remove it immediately after the amount of its usefulness and also from the disposition of the patient's hands, as well as their kindness.
E aprop extrats le instrument, e rete l’aygua la qual causa es quar tantost es retenguda per la codena la qual rete le trauc que es sobre le ciphac del qual e recomtat a tu que perfores aquel segon aquela manieyra.	 Remove the instrument and remove the water that was causing it to be kept closed by the lock which had been recommended to you, so as not to let it fall from its place on top of which is recommended for you to perform this second time.
E aprop itera le instrument al autra dia si vezes le malaute tollerant aquo, e extratz de la aygua petita quantitat, e fay aquo per alcus jorns sobre temor, e guarda te de error entro que no romangua de l’aygua sino pauc.	 Take the instrument to another day when the patient is more tolerant of it, and extract a small amount of water, and make him swallow it over time with fear, and hold you from making a mistake if he does not drink it except little.
Mays si tu temes sobre le malaute, e leyssas de l’aygua gran quantitat, lahoras cura aquel am sepultura en arena cauda, e mota suzor en banh, e al solelh espere per lonc temps; e cura aquel am medicinas dessicativas entro que sia sanat.	 If you are afraid of the patient and let them drink a large amount of water, the doctor will care for him in the burial ground of salt, and move their body into the bank, and leave it exposed to the sun for a long time; and care for the am medicinals desiccatives so that he may be healthy.
E cauteriza sobre le stomac, e la melsa e·l fitge aprop la extraccio de l’aygua, segon que yeu he recontat en aquo que es precedit.	 When you have put a cushion under their thighs, another servant on their legs and another on their chest while holding their hands, now cauterize over the stomach, and gently apply heat to the exterior of it, as previously mentioned.
Capitol .lv.	 Latvia's capital city is Riga.
De la curacio dels enfants les quals so natz les locs de la urina no-perforatz.	 The children's urine should not be allowed to enter the lock in any way
Alcunas veguadas alcun dels enfantz es eyssi del ventre de la sua mayre e·l cap de la sua mixtio no es perforat (o es trauc streyt o no es en son loc).	 The child's belly button should not be punched, and the top of its mixture is not perforated (or it was already pierced or is not in use).
Donc cove coytar am perforacio de lu tantost que es nascut am spatum mot subtil segon aquesta forma:	 Therefore, do not make punctures so small as to be born on the tip of a needle, second-hand, by this method.
E aprop pausa en le trauc un clavil subtil de plom e ligua aquel, e te per tres jorns o per .iiii.tre.	 Then place a thin thread and tie it, for three days or more...
E quant vol urinar sia remaugut e hurine; e aprop retorne aquel.	 And when he wants to urinate again, then return him that.
E si tu no pauses le plom, ja es possible que la urina la qual va sobre le loc, no leysa aquest claure.	 If you do not place the thread, it is possible that urine may leak from the lock and not open it.
Mays aquel del qual le trauc es streyt sia medicat am clavil de Plom, ayssi cum havem dit, per trops dias entro que sia amplificat.	 The lock with which the thread is tied should be treated with a needle as suggested above for several days until it is amplified.
Mays aquels en les quals es le trauc no en son loc, so leditz, la qual causa es quar de aquels, aquel que es nat e·l trau es deves la fi del cap de la vergua per que no pot urinar a las partidas dedintz, entro que eleva la vergua am la sua ma a las partidas desus; e no es a lu generacio, per so quar le sperma no pot pervenir a la mayre segon rectitut, e es malautia mot laga.	 Locks where the thread is not in use cause some pain, that being one of many such pains, and this means you are tightening it too much, causing discomfort for urination at certain times, so that you should stretch out the vagina with your hand during these times to prevent the semen from coming out too often or forcefully, which can be painful.
E la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que·l malaute sia envessat sobre le sieu dos, e aprop exten le cap de la vergua de lu am la tua ma sinistra am vehement extraccio, e inscideys le cap del cap de la vergua del loc del perpucii am spatum agut, ayssi cum es inscizio de pluma, o que tu ne razas alcuna partida, per so que·l mieg de lu vengua semblant al cap de la vergua e que le trauc caia en le mieg loc segon que cove.	 The operation's goal is to have the patient lying on his back, and then apply a cushion over the right side of his chest; thereafter extend your left arm vigorously upward towards the ceiling (while also applying the stylus), so that the movement of the head resembles that of the patient in a coma.
E guarda te que en la tua operacio de flux de sanc, quar motas vetz accideys aquo; e pausa te a lu am aquo que abscindeys le sanc, e cura la plagua entro que si’ sanada.	 Please note that in your operation for the flow of blood, whatever arteries you cut must be reattached; and pause to allow them to heal, and treat any wounds that may arise during this process.
Capitol .lvi.	 VIII
De albater le qual accideys en le prepucii en le cap de la vergua e de corropcio e negror e adherencia del prepucii del cap de la vergua.	 Remove the obstruction in the neck and chest, and straighten and attach the prepucio of the patient's head.
Motas veguadas accideys aquest albater en la vergua e es eminencia de carn laga.	 The obstruction must be removed from the throat and esophagus, and the sternum must be straightened out.
E de aquela una es maligna e autra es no-maligna.	 And of that one is malignant, while the other is benign.
No-maligna, cove que suspendas am unci subtil e abscindas aquela entro que aquela mondes tota; e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto submirgit en enguent egipciac; e aprop aquel, cura le am enguent diafinicon entro que sia sanat.	 If the latter one is benign and you suspend it with a fine suture, then remove it gently from where it has grown into the whole tissue, and place something soft over its opening to prevent infection; thereafter, treat that wound daily until it heals.
E si albater es maligna, de lega color, lahoras cove que tu aministres cauteri aprop la inscizio de lu e la razio de lu.	 If the obstruction is malignant then you must administer a cautery appropriately and with care.
Mays si albater es en le prepuci del cap de la vergua no-circumcis, e la una partida de albater es dedintz le prepucii e l’autra partida es defora, lahoras cove que tu ostes albater le qual es dedintz al comensament entro que es consolidat; e lahora tu cura aquel deforo, quar quan tu curas aquel ensemps le prepuci, no es asegurat que no sia trinquat.	 "When the foreskin of the glans of the uncircumcised penis is removed with a single cut, it first removes the prepuce and then the other part after that.
E ja eysamen accideys en les genetius e en le prepuci negror e corruccio, adonc cove que tu conquavas tot aquo que ja es denigrat e que ja se vol corrompre o que ja es corrumput; e aprop lineys sobre aquel aprop aquo am mel, le qual es contusit am farina de scorsa de milgrana e de errs trissatz e crivellatz.	 "And when the penis is circumcised and the prepuce are black with corruption, then you must clean it thoroughly because it has already been defiled or corrupted; take a linen cloth soaked in olive oil to wipe it.
E aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sana.	 "After that, cure the other injury which is healthy.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, lahoras aministra cauteri lunar segon aquesta forma:	 "When you have removed all the external parts of the penis and are left with only a slit or opening, do this:
quar cauteri juvatiu es a dos disposicios ensemps, so es a flux de sanc e a la plagua quan es corrumpuda.	 "Use a young cautery to make two cuts in the slit and then apply a ligature when it is corrupted.
E si le cap de la vergua es corrodut e es destruit tot en la hora, lahoras cove que tu intrometas en lo meat del prepucii una canula de plom per so que le malaute urina per aquela.	 "If the glans of the penis is corrupted and destroyed at once in this way, then put a tube made from bird feathers into the prepuce to allow urine to come out through that.
En la adherencia del prepucii am le cap de la vergua (et aquesta adherencia no accideys sino en aquel del qual le prepucii es sa, e sobre lu no es exhigida circumcizio; e quan accideys adherencia per plagua o per apostema) cove que excorjas am spatum obtus entro que sia dissolvut le liament e sia deliurat le cap de la vergua de tota partida.	 "In the case of a prepuce adhesion (and only in that particular one where it is attached, and not in another part) you must excoriate outside until the tie has been dissolved and delivered completely to the glans.
E si es dificil desirnir aquelas exquisidament, lahoras cove que tu excorjes am spatum alcuna causa del cap de la vergua e del prepucii, e aysso es quar le prepucii, quan es subtil, fort leu es perforat per la sua subtilitat leugierament.	 When the cause of pain is difficult to discern between the head and anus, chest and rectum, in such cases it pierces through its subtlety, causing great damage
E aprop separa entre·l prepucii e·l cap de la vergua am dra7 de li subtil, le qual ja es mulhat en l’aygua frega per que no adherescan autra veguada.	 When separating the head from the anus is particularly subtle, and it pierces through its subtlety in order to prevent other diseases
E aprop sia curat am vi stiptic entro que sia consolidat.	 When inserting into something that is slippery
Capitol .lvii.	 Chapter 7 of the Capitularies
De mundificacio dels enfants e de la curacio de aquo que accideys ad aquels de circumcisio.	 Of circumcision and curing those who are affected by it.
Circumcisio no es solucio de continuitat ayssi cum las autras plaguas: mays empero cum sia de la nostra operacio e de nostra voluntat, e lus de aquela sia propriament en les enfants, es necessari que asignem en aquela milhor operacio e via pus leugiera perdusent a salut.	 Circumcision is not the solution to this problem as well; however with our operation and our will, and because it is in children that we should be done, it is necessary that we assign the most appropriate treatment for health preservation.
Donc dic que les antics no diyssero circumcisio en alcu dels lors libres, quar no n’usan en las suas leys, e no es sino quar havem aquisit per speriment, la qual causa es que yeu he atrobat la major partida dels artifexs e dels barbies usar circumcisir e mundificacio am novacula e am torores; e usan de liament am fiel e de inscizio am la ungla.	 Therefore it is stated that they would not have done circumcision in the free men, as they do not use them in their laws, and only because it was practiced by experimentation which resulted to be part of the major acts of the doctors for circumcision and mutilation at the new age and the torments; and are used with great fidelity and accuracy on his finger.
E yeu ja he prohadas totas aquestas manieras e no atrobegui milhor mondificacio am forfexs, am liament am fiel que en mondificacio cum la ungla, quar motas vetz efugeys la codena pus desus, quar la codena del prepucii a dos tunicas, e roman la tonica pus dejos, e fort leu es forsat ad autra inscizio e dolor sicura.	 It is also stated that you have forbidden all these ways and do not allow any more mutilation with the finger, as fidelity to it in mutilation with the finger which prevents the code from escaping your attention, because the codpiece has two folds of clothes, and Romans the tone pus at his feet, and very light is cut off by another incision or pain surely.
E am mundificacio le qual es fayta per alphecati, e es digital, del qual usan les sabatiers, no es segurada la inscizio de la extremitat del membre viril, quar fort leu intra en le trau de lu.	 "The pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body and particularly in men, it causes great internal damage to the testicles.
Mays en la operacio am ungla, fort leu obazeys ferr e corromp la tua operacio.	 "In surgery, be careful not to pierce or harm your own operation.
E la codena del enfant es breu per natura, e motas veguadas nays en tal manieyra que no ha necessitat de mondificacio, e yeu he vist aquel.	 "The child's cry is short by nature and you should comfort the baby as much as possible without resorting to any treatment.
Mays de la mondificacio que·s fa am forfexs e liamentz am fiel, la bontat, experiment descrobic a mi, quar las forfexs so de proporcional inscizio, per aquo quar la acuitat que es desus es ayssi cum la acuitat que es dejos; e donc cum tu premes la tua ma so proporcionadas dos acuitatz, e inscideysso segon una comperacio en un temps; e es fayta compressio del fiel am figura contenent la codena de la vergua de tota partida, am le qual no catz error de tot.	 "The operation should be done with caution and attention to detail, kindness as the guide, because the harm is proportional to the injury, so that pain from both sides are equal; also when you try to make it two times smaller than your previous one, but without any comparison in time; and there will be a compression of the faithful figure containing the sound of all the parts.
E la manieyra de la operacio primeyra es que tu fassas estar le enfant majorment si es de aquels que entendo un petit, que no fassas sino que tu lies le fiel en la sua vergua tant solament, e que leysses aquel entro al autra dia.	 "The first requirement of the operation is to make sure that you stay with the child as long as possible if it's from those who understand a little bit, but do not let him only stay on the faithful in his pain for only one day.
E aprop fay aquel alegrar en tota aquela manieyra que es a tu possibla de aquo que recep la sua intelligencia.	 "The best thing is to prepare yourself as much as possible with this opportunity that you have received your intelligence.
E aprop fa aquel estar entre las tuas mas estatuir preparadament, e no sia ges cezent; e occulta las forfexs en la tua ma o dejos le tieu pe, que l’enfant no veia aquelas ni degun autre dels instruments.	 The patient is lying on their back with a cushion placed between the thighs and under their chest. A servant holds onto their hand to prevent them from moving or touching any other part of the body.
E aprop entremet la tua ma a la vergua de lu e suffla en la codena, e tira aquela entro que sia eyssit le cap de la vergua, e aprop mondifica aquel de aquo que es agregat en ela de sordicia.	 Place the hand between the patient's breast and abdomen, blow into their nose (nostril), pull it back so that it is outside of the vagina, then bind its free end to prevent it from coming out again, and tie a cord around where you added the silencer for soundproofing.
E aprop lia le loc signat am fiel dobla, e aprop ligua pus bas de aquel un petit le segon liament, e aprop te am le dit pous e endic tieu le loc del liament dejos am bona retencio, e inscideys entre dos liaments.	 Place the left hand on the patient's chest with an open palm facing down, attach a small second bandage to its wrist, and then place your right hand over it in order to keep the first one from coming out again; secure this by tying two bandages together.
E aprop eleva la codena sus leugierament e estratz le cap de la vergua; e aprop leyssa le sanc corre petit e petit, quar es milhor ; e pausa polvera desus e sobre la polvera pausa drap en le qual es spandut mugol de huou coyt en ayguaros concosit am oli rozat recent bo; e layssa aquel sobre aquel entro al autra dia; e cura aquel am curacio entro que sia sanat.	 Place the nose on their chest and gently lift it up, then secure a small bandage around its base to prevent it from coming out; after that place it over another bandage in order to create a seal by tying them together into one piece; finally cover this sealed bandage with another bandage for additional protection.
La forma de las forfexs a mondificacio, aquesta es la forma:	 The manner of securing the bandages is as follows:
Sian las unas extramitatz no-talhantz e las autras sian talhant, que non sia yssit le ram del clau, e sia la longitut de las doas acuitatz ayssi cum la longitut de dos manubres engualment.	 The fingers of both hands should be kept separate and touching at the same time so that there is no gap between them, and their length should be equal to two full spans (of arms)
Mays la error en mundificacio es quar fort leu efugeys la codena intrinseca tota, o partida de lu deves la inscizio.	 The first sentence means that when the patient's body has undergone a significant alteration or change in the course of their illness, it is customary for the physician to examine them thoroughly and completely, or at least from head to foot.
Donc cove que tu extendas aquela de la tua hora am la tua ungla denant la apostemacio del loc e que inscidas aquela segon equalitat.	 Therefore, after examining their body in its entirety as instructed earlier, you should measure and record the patient's height and weight to ensure accurate medical records are kept for future reference.
E si no la podes tenir am la tua ungla, lahoras extratz aquela am unci e inscideys aquela.	 If they cannot provide their height or weight, you should take it yourself by measuring and recording the patient's height and weight.
Mays si son passatz tres dias, e roman aquo que es imflat dejos la vergua apostemat, lahoras tu leyssa aquo entro que sia cedat le apostema caut, e excorja aquel am fecilitat, e inscidex aquel segon que a tu es preparat.	 If they have been ill for three days and show signs of having an abscess, you should act immediately by placing a poultice on it to drain the pus, apply warm compresses to make them soften up, and then remove the poultice and wash the area carefully after ensuring that the dressing is clean.
E guarda te del cap de la vergua, quar no nosera a lu aquo.	 After applying the poultice, ensure there are no signs of infection present before removing it to prevent any complications arising from an infection.
E donc cura aquel am aquo que la plagua consolida de las polveras las quals havem recomtadas en le tractat de las polveras.	 And for this, use the powders described in the treatise on powders that are recommended to treat the abscess.
E si es inscidit de la codena sobre mesura, e obezeys a las partidas desus, aquo no notz a lu.	 If you have already administered medication for reducing swelling and observing their progress, do not administer further medication at this time.
E mays cura aquel am aquo que havem dit entro que sia sanat.	 For this, follow the instructions given earlier that they should be treated until they are healthy again.
Capitol .lviii.	 This is the end of translation for now.
De curacio de urina retenguda en la vesiqua.	 Urine retention in the bladder
Retencio de urina en la vesica es fayta per oppulacio fayta per peyra o per sanc congilat, o per poyre o per carnada, e semblantz ad aquels de aquo que havem dit de las manieyras de curacio en la divisio.	 Retention of urine in the bladder is caused by constriction of the urethra or sphincter contraction, or from a stone obstructing it, etc., and similarly to what I mentioned earlier about the various ways of treating retention of urine in division
E si no es dissolvuda la urina, e veses retencio de lu esser per peyra le qual ja es en le col de la vesica, lahoras cove que le malaute sia encorbat sobre les sieus denolhs.	 If the urine is not dissolving, and if the bladder continues to retain it against its own wishes
E aprop conponeys les pes de aquel sobre le sieu dos e extendas le sieu ventre de la partida pus desus del sieu dos, e le malaute estrengua le sieu ale tant quant es a lu possible.	 Then stretch the feet towards their back and straighten your stomach from its front to make it as wide as possible, while forcing them apart so they can be separated more easily
Donc lahoras le col de la vesica es costreyt ha espulsio de la peyra a las partidas detras, per que la urina es absolta.	 Then the urethra's opening is stretched by pulling it apart from behind as far as possible to allow for complete urine release
E si no es dissolvuda am aquo que havem dit he vehement es fayta la causa sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que aministres extraccio de lu am instrument le qual es apelat siringua, del qual aquesta es la forma: Sia de argent e sia subtil leon conquau, ayssi cum canula de pena de ausel am subtilitat de ray lonc en similitut d’un palm e mig, al qual sia cana subtil en le cap de lu.	 If it is not dissolved as mentioned earlier by the cause of the patient, then you are instructed to apply a syringe from which this instrument is called 'syringe', from which that one is used: Silver and Subtle Lion, in such a way that its smallness can be felt at the end of your finger like a pencil tip, so that it may gently enter the urethra.
E la manieyra del eyssiment de la urina per aquel es que prenguas le fiel doblat e lies en la extramitat de lu lana o coto per bona liadura; e entrometas las extramitatz del fiel en la partida dejos de la ciringua, e inscideys am las forfexs si superflueys alcuna causa de la lana, mays intromet la en la canula am vehemencia E aprop enongeys la ciringua am boder e am album de huou.	 The procedure for urine discharge from that is to push it gently forward through the urethra's canal or sleeve and then draw back the foreskin, as far as possible; then insert the tube into its opening with force; and afterwards remove any excess fluid, if there is none, continue with great force.
E fay cezer le malaute sobre la selha, e embroca la vesiqua de lu e la vergua am olis umitz, e oli de oliva e ayguaros.	 When the patient lies down on a bed, cover their chest with a blanket, and make sure to warm up their legs as well, while also covering them in olive oil or butter.
E aprop entromet la ciringua am facilitat entro que pervengua a la razit de la vergua; e aprop dobla la vergua desus a la partida del embelic; e aprop empelleys la ciringua dintz aquela; e aprop empelleys aquela entro que pervengua a la vesica, e aquela centa le malaute esser pervenguda a la causa vuoda, e no es fayt asso segon aquest orde, sino le meat en le qual va a tortuositat.	 The physician will place the patient on their back and cover them with blankets to warm up their chest. They will also ensure that their legs are covered as well, while applying olive oil or butter over both of these areas. After this, they should place towels around their waist area in order to prevent any leakage from occurring into it.
E aprop exten le fiel am la lana petit a petit, quar la urina siec la lana.	 The physician will gently stretch the patient's abdomen slowly and steadily until the urine stops flowing out of it.
Aprop extratz aquela e fay per curacio urina, e usa ciringua, no cesses fer aquo e usa ciringua entro que sia evacuada la vesica e le malaute atrobe alleviacio.	 The physician will stretch the patient's abdomen to help expel urine and use a towel around their waist in order to stop any leakage from coming out of it, while also using a towel over them as well.
Capitol .lix.	 Conclusion
De qualitat de clisterizacio de la vezica am clampcedra e am semblantz instrumentz les quals sian acordants ad aquo.	 The clamping of the bladder and its accompanying instruments will be used consistently in order to perform this procedure.
Quan accideys en la vesica ulceracio o apostema, o sanc congilat en aquela, o es coartat poyredura, e vols en aquela destillar ayguas e medicinas, lahoras sia fayt am instrument le qual es apelat clampcedra, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	 When there is a bladder ulcer or fistula, bleeding occurs in it, or the urethra is blocked due to scarring from previous procedures, and you want to dilate and treat this with instruments called a clamp, which are used like so:
sino que en la extramitat de lu es sorda, so es clausa.	 When a person's bladder is empty, it is closed
Et en aquela so tres traucs: dos de la una partida , ayssi quo vezes.	 And there are two types of openings: one for the passage to be released and once to release the waste.
En le comensament es loc concau, en le qual es aquo que es enpellit, e sia segon quantitat que oppile aquel, ses addicio, entro que quan alcuna causa es ab aquel tirada de las humiditatz, sia atirada, e quan es expellida, am aquo sia atirada, e quan es expellit lonc, segon que fa clampcedra am la qual es phicat naphta en las batalhas de mar.	 In the beginning it is necessary to make a hole and in that way it empties itself completely and another opening for emptying the waste, such as when humidity is released, then it is expelled and when long continues to expel, second one is closed down tightly so that water can not get in battles of sea.
Donc cum tu vols prohicir humiditatz en la vesica, entromet la extremitat de clapcedra en la humiditat, e atira am aquel aquo que es empellit a las partidas desus, quar la humiditat es atirada en la conquavitat de clapcedra.	 Then to urinate in the bladder you put your finger into the opening of the urethra and expel it through that one which was opened up during urination, so that the urine is expelled out of the bladder.
E aprop entromet la extramitat de clapcedra en la vergua segon que havem recomtat en la ciringua; e aprop empelleys la humiditat am aquo que empelleys, quar aquela humiditat perve a la vesica tantost, e le malaute cent aquela.	 Then place the finger into the opening of the bladder like we recommended in the urethra and expel it through that one which was opened up during urination so that this urine may enter the bladder first and prevent it from entering the urethra as well.
Forma del cristeri subtil am le qual la vesica es cristerizada, e es aquela la forma:	 The form of the catheterization is such that the bladder was catheterized, and the form is
E sia fayta de argent o de lato, de la qual le cap pus aut sia semblant a petita pluma, e dejos lu cana dedintz liament.	 It can be done with silver or gold, in such a way that its tip resembles a small feather and it is inserted gently into the body.
E aprop pren vesica de moto, e pausa en aquela la humiditat que vols cristirizar en la vesica, e aprop lia aquela entre dos am fort liguatura am fiel doble, e escalfa aquela humiditat sobre le foc.	 "The patient is to be placed on a cushion between the thighs; they are to place another cushion under them and one more on their chest, holding onto their hands.
E aprop entromet la extremitat del cristeri en la vergua.	 "Place the hand from the priest in the vagina.
E aprop estrenh la tua ma sobre la vesica am la humiditat am strectura descent entro que·l malaute centa que aquela humiditat ja es pervenguda a la vesica.	 "Place your hand on top of the vagina and direct it to stretch out inside, making sure that this moisture is already present in the vagina.
Mays si a tu no es present vesica, lahoras tu pren una pessa de parguames e fay de aquel cercle; e perfora aquel de tota la sua retonditat; e aprop entromet fiel fort en aquels traucs, ayssi quo so revolgut; e aprop agregua le cercle ayssi quo es agreguat alsofatur, pus que tu pausas en aquel aquo que tu vols de las humiditatz, e olis e ayguas.	 "If the vagina is not present then you must insert a finger and close it at its base. Push into that area forcefully as if you are revolting; push on that area strongly so that it feels tight, pushing your fingers in there tightly while doing this.
E aprop tu lia aquel en le instrument e fay am aquel ayssi cum has fayt am la vesica, e exprescio am la tua ma entro que la humiditat pervengua a la vesica.	 "Place it into the instrument and do so in the same way as you would do when inserting into the vagina; ensure that your hand feels this moisture penetrating to the vagina.
Capitol .lx.	 "The end of the sentence, or 'period'.
De extraccio de peyra.	 "Translation complete.
Nos ja havem dit en la divisio las specias de peyra e curacio de lu am medicinas, e la diferencia entre peyra engendrada en los ronhos e peyra engendrada en la vesica, e les senhals de aquela.	 "We have translated the division of veins and arteries from medicine; we have distinguished between gout caused by humors infiltrating each part of the body and gout caused by moisture in the vagina, as well as their symptoms.
E havem dit la peyra en la qual catz operacio am ma, e seccio.	 "We have translated the operation on gout; we also distinguished its sections.
E la peyra engendrada en la vesica propriament es aquela que es ficada en la vesica.	 The bladder stones that are created in the vesica are those that have been placed there
E yeu so narrant aquel am exposicio manifesta e abreviacio.	 Do you mean to say that it's an open and concise exposition?
Donc dic que peyra engendrada en la vesica majorment ve als enfantz; e dels senhals de lu es que la urina que es eyssida de la vesica es semblant a aygua en la sua subtilitat, e apar en aquela arena; e le malaute fregua la sua vergua, e motas veguadas pen, e aprop es dressada; e am aquo yeys foro le cul en motz de aquels.	 The bladder stones that are generated in the vesica mainly irritate children and the urine discharged from it resembles water in its subtlety and appears in that manner, and the patient suffers from pain, and the veins swell up, and the doctor dresses them; and at this point they spread out of those places.
E es laugiera la sanacio dels enfants de aquela entro que han conseguitz xiiii ans; e es dificil curacio en les viels.	 The treatment for children who have suffered from that ailment for more than 14 years is difficult to cure in the veins.
Mays en les joves es migiera per aquo quar es entre aquels.	 May it be easier for young ones, as they are among those.
E de aquel del qual la peyra es major e la curacio es pus leugiera; E si es pauca, es contraria ad aquela.	 If the bladder stones are large and their cure is difficult, then it's a matter of concern; but if they are small, it's opposite to that.
Donc cum pervenem a la curacio de aquela, cove al comensament de aquela que mondifiquem le malaute am cristeri le qual extragua tota la fenda la qual es en les sieus budels; quar aquela fenda alcunas veguadas prohibeys la envencio de la peyra deves la inquisicio de lu.	 When we come to the cure of that, first of all, make sure you cleanse the patient's body completely and thoroughly in order to prevent any infection from bladder stones into their bowels; otherwise, it will be necessary for them to undergo an examination by a doctor.
E aprop sia pres le malaute am les sieus pes e sia contosit e maugut enjos per so que la peyra descenda al preon de la vesica, o que saute de loc aut alcunas veguadas.	 Then place the bladder stones between their thighs and gently massage them to make sure they don't fall out of position or create any more issues for that purpose.
E aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas preparat, e las mas de lu sian dejos las coysas de lu, per so que la vesica tota sia fayta declinant a las partidas dejos.	 "You have already opened space between the patient's thighs and placed cushions on them to prevent her from rolling over. Then you put another servant on their legs as well, along with one on their chest holding their hands.
E aprop perquier aquela e tota aquela deforo.	 "You also place a cushion beneath that as well, in order to keep the patient stable and prevent any movement from causing discomfort or distress.
Donc si sentes la peyra en l’espazi, lahoras tu te coyta tantost am seccio sobre lu.	 "If you feel her pulse within that space, then gently press down on her chest as well.
E si no catz de tot dejos le tieu tocament, lahoras cove que tu untes am oli le tieu dit indic de la ma sinistra, si malaute es enfant, o le dit miga si es jove complit, e entrometas aquel en le sieu cul.	 "If you do not feel a pulse from the chest, gently place your hand on her left wrist if she is male, or at her right elbow if she is female, and listen for any sounds of breathing.
E perquier de la peyra entro que stia dejos le tieu dit.	 "If you find no pulse within that space, gently press your fingers against the patient's carotid artery to feel a pulse there as well.
E converteys aquela petit a petit entro al col de la vesica.	 "You place it in and out of her vagina slowly.
E aprop prem sobre aquel am lo tieu dit, e expelleys aquel a las partidas defora ves le loc del qual vos la seccio.	 "Then gently press the stethoscope against that artery, and pull it away from the area where you felt no pulse to avoid damage.
E comanda al ministra que prema la vesica am la sua ma; e comanda a un autra ministra que am la sua ma dextra extenda les genetius a las partidas desus, e am la sua autra ma remaugua la codena la qual es dejos les genetius, en partida del loc en le qual se fa la seccio.	 "You order the first minister to put her vagina on your left hand; and you order another minister to extend their legs apart as far as they can while keeping them still with the other arm, and then return the hand that was used for the stethoscope back down by its side.
E aprop entromet espatum be inscident del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	 And appropriate for admission of this kind is as follows
e scindeys en lu aquo que es entre·l cul e·ls genetius, no en le mieg loc, abantz al latz de la coyssa sinistra; e sia la seccio sobre aquela peyra e·l tieu dit sia en le cul, e sia fayta seccio transversa, per que la seccio defora sia ampla e dedintz streyta segon la quantitat que egrecio de la peyra sia a lu possibla, e no major, quar fort leu comprem le tieu dit le qual es en le cul la peyra deves la seccio, e es foro-getada ses defacultat.	 And it is appropriate to make the incision between the buttocks and the genitals, not between the thighs, extending downwards towards the left side of the scrotum; and also do a transverse section, so that the incision is wide enough to stretch out in proportion to the size of the penis, but no wider than necessary, as too much stretching may lead to damage.
E sapias que de la peyra es alcuna a la qual so angle e margers, per que le eyssiment de lu es fayt deficil per aquo.	 You should know that the penis is not an object with which you can measure angles and margins, as to do so would be difficult because of its shape.
E de aquela aquo es leon semblant a glan, e es redonda, e es fayt de lu leugier eyssiment.	 And of that there are similarities with the glans, it is round and made from skin.
Donc si es aquela al qual so angles e marger, ajusta en la fissura.	 Therefore, if you find this to be the case, adjust the incision in the fissure.
E si no es ayssi foro-getada, lahoras cove que tu engenes sobre aquel, o que strenguas sobre aquel am gesti decentment, la extremitat del qual sia ayssi cum lima am le qual strenguas sobre la peyra, e no evasesca de lu; o que entrometas dejos lu instrument subtil de curvada extremitat.	 If not, you should consider trying to correct the angle or size by gently stretching over it, until the extremity is as close to that of a penis, and not excessively large; or by using a subtle curved instrument.
Mays si tu no podes sobre aquel, lahoras tu amplifica le trauc un petit, e si tu veus flux de sanc, abscindeys en strenh aquel am vitriol trissat.	 If you cannot achieve that, stretch it a little more, and if you see flow of blood, stop stretching immediately.
Mays si la peyra es mays de una, lahoras al comensament tu impelleys la ma a la boca de la vesica, e aprop inscideys sobre lu; e aprop impelleys un petit aprop aquo; e semblantment fay si son motas mays de doas.	 When the bladder is full, first insert it into the mouth of the vagina and place a finger on it. Then put another finger there as well
E si es peyra mot gran, lahoras ignorancia es que tu inscidas aquel am gran seccio, quar accideys al malaute una de doas causas: o que mora o que endevengua a lu destillacio de urina continuabla, per aquo quar le loc no es de tot consolidat.	 If the bladder is large, it's important to note that you should insert that into the vagina slowly and carefully because there are two reasons why: either it can cause an injury or damage to its urinary duct continuously, which means the location may not be fully consolidated
Mays aministra expulcio de lu entro que sia fora-getada, o engenia en la fractura de lu am las forfexs entro que extragua aquela en pessas.	 When emptying the bladder it's important to make sure that it is completely empty or prevent damage when extracting from below
Donc cum tu auras cumplit la tua opperacio, lahoras omple la plagua de enses de aloe e de sanc de drago, e strenh aquel.	 After completing your operation, the doctor will remove all bandages and dressings from above and below, and then bandage it up
E pausa sobre aquel drap enfus en oli e vi, o en oli rozat e aygua frega, per so que apostema caut sia cedat.	 After applying a dressing on top of the dressing underneath or on top of wet dressings to prevent it from getting stuck
E aprop resupina le malaute sobre le sieu col, e no deslias le liament entro al tertz dia.	 Then put the bladder back into its place and do not leave a gap between it and the third day
E cum aquel auras desliat, embroca le loc am aygua e mot oli, e aprop cura aquel am enguent diafinicon e am enguent diabazilicon entro que sia sanat.	 After that, bandage up the area with water-resistant dressing and apply a waterproof dressing over it to ensure its safety
Mays si en la plagua accideys apostema caut, adhust e corrosiu, e de aquel semblantz ayssi cum si le sanc es en la vesica congelat, e per lu es la hurina prohibida (e aquo es conogut per la egressio del sanc am urina), a donc entromet lo tieu dit en la plagua e extratz aquel sanc, quar si roman provoca la vesica a corropcio de la vesica e de lu putrefaccio.	 If the bladder dressing becomes dirty, acidic or frozen, then do not leave it there because entering through that opening may cause urinary tract infections and fecal matter to enter the vagina. In such cases, remove that dressing immediately and extract the bladder, so as to prevent damage to the bladder and its contents.
E aprop lava la plagua am vi agre, aygua e sal, e am opposicio a tota specia, am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	 When you have opened up that space between the patient's thighs and placed them on top of each other with a cushion underneath them as well, another servant is positioned on their legs, then an additional servant on their chest while holding their hands.
E cove en las horas de tota la curacio que tu lies amdos las coyssas e ajustes las medicinas las quals so pausadas sobre le loc.	 And during the entirety of the care you apply all the cushions and adjust them to where they are placed on top.
E si la peyra es petita e es en le meat de la vergua, e es ficat en lu, e eyssement de urina es prohibit, lahoras cura aquel am aquo que yeu recomti denant que pervenguas a seccio, quar tropas veguadas per aquesta curacio yest acusat de seccio; e ja yeu e esproat aquo, e es que tu prenguas un perforador de ferr alfelut, del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	 And if the foot is small and in the meat of the thigh, it should be inserted there, and spilling urine is prohibited, doctors usually recommend that this is done punctually to prevent spilling; you have already opened up that way, so you must prick with a lancet which is its kind:
de triangulada extramitat, agut, ficat en fust.	 In the triangular area between the thigh and buttocks, it should be inserted there.
E aprop pren fiel, e lia am aquel la vergua dejos la peyra per so que no retorne a la vesica.	 And ensure that you insert them carefully to prevent returning to the bladder.
E aprop entromet le ferr en la vergua, perforant am fecilitat entro que·l perforador vengua ad aquela peyra.	 Insert the lancet into the thigh with such care and skill so that it penetrates through the opening where the lancet must enter the foot.
E revolveys le perforador am la tua ma en aquela peyra petit a petit, e tu perforsa la perforacio de lu entro que fassas aquel del autra part penetrar; quar la urina tantost es absolta.	 Rotate the lancet with your hand into that small foot slowly and punctually, so that it penetrates through until you make sure another part is entering too. Because urine should be absolutely free.
E aprop prem la tua ma sobre aquo que es romas de la peyra de la partida deforo de la vergua, quar aquela es trinquada, e es foro-getada am la urina, e le malaute es sanat.	 And place your hand over that which is the rim of the foot from where urine flows to the thigh, because it is divided and the urine flow is obstructed, so doctors say.
Mays si aquesta curacio no es a tu aparelhada per alcuna causa la qual prohibeys de aquela, lahoras lia un fiel dejos la peyra, e autra fiel desus la peyra.	 When there is no cause to prevent this action, the arrows will be faithful and upright, and another will serve as well.
E aprop encideys sobre la peyra en aquela vergua entre doas liaduras.	 Place one arrow between two wounds.
E aprop extratz aquela.	 Extend it.
E aprop deslia le liament e mondifica le sanc congilat, le qual es fayt en la plagua.	 Make the bandage tight and put it in place to stop bleeding.
E no es necessari liament de fiel dejos la peyra, sino per que no retorne a la vesica, e l’autre liament desus sino, quar quan es desliat le fiel aprop la egrecio de la peyra, la codena retorna a son loc e cobra la plagua.	 If the bandage is not necessary to keep the arrow in place but rather so it does not return to the bladder and the other bandage prevents it from returning, when the faithful bandage is placed over the shaft of the arrow, the band will go back to its location and apply pressure on the wound.
E per aquo es a tu necessari quan lias le fiel desus, que tu eleves la codena a las partidas desus, o que retorne deves le tieu compliment, e cobra la plagua ayssi co havem dit.	 When you need it when the faithful bandage is necessary to lift up the cover and place the other one below so that they both are in contact with each other, or if you want them to return then you will need a third bandage which will be used as well.
Capitol .lxi.	 Chapter LXI
De extraccio de peyra de las femnas.	 Extract of arrows from the women.
Peyra en las femnas pauc es engendrada.	 Arrows in women are rarely made.
Mays si ve peyra ad alcuna de aquelas, lahoras dificil es la curacio de lu, e es prohibida per tropas manieyras.	 If a point is needed to prevent this action then it will be very difficult and forbidden by the hands of many people.
La una de lor es quar la femna fort leu es verges.	 One reason could be that the woman who was light-headed was fainting.
E la segonda es quar tu no trobas femna be scient que descroba si meteyssa al metge quan es casta, o es de las femnas haventz maritz.	 Another reason could be if you do not find a woman to ask for medical advice when she is in need or the women are scarce.
La tersa es quar tu no hatrobas femna be sabent aquesta art, majorment la operacio am ma.	 The surgeon will perform the operation first if you do not agree to this treatment, which may cause complications
E la quarta es que·l loc de la seccio sobre peyra en las femnas es longinc del loc de la peyra, per que indigeys de seccio preonda, e en aquela es temor.	 The fourth is that when the section of the incision on the thighs extends to the end of the thigh, which may lead to complications and fear.
Mays si necessitat provoca a tu ad aquo, lahoras cove que tu prenguas una femna metga be scient, e pauc es atrobada.	 May it happen that you need an examination by a woman doctor who is skilled, but there are not enough of them.
Mays si tu es privat de aquela, lahoras cerca metga quast e subtil, o presenta una femna matrona be esenhada en le feyt de las femnas, o femna que en aquesta art ennueys partida del art.	 May it happen that you are seeking a doctor who is discreet and subtle, or present a woman nurse trained in the field of women's health, or a woman who has experience in this art.
Donc fay aquela present, e comanda a lu que fassa tot aquo que tu li mandaras, de la enquisicio sobre la peyra al comensament; la qual causa es que reguarde si la femna es verges, lahoras cove que meta lo sieu dit en le cul de lu e quiera la peyra.	 Now that you have presented this to her, ask her to perform everything you instructed her to do from the examination of the foot to the beginning; and the reason for which is that she must insert it in the anus and want the foot.
Donc si atroba aquela, coarte aquela dejos le sieu dit, e lahoras comanda a lu que inscida sobre aquela.	 If you reject this, then please instruct her to remove it from your body.
Mays si no es verge, lahoras comanda a la matrona que entrometa lo sieu dit en le conh de la malauta e enquiera sobre la peyra, pus que pausa la sua ma sinistra sobre la vesica, e comprem aquela am bona comprecio.	 May it not be true that the woman doctor examines you with haste and presses your hand down on your bladder while she inquires about the foot, but instead waits patiently for you to inform her of what is necessary.
Donc si atroba aquela, lahoras cove que gradantment maugua aquela de l’orrifici de la vesica a las partidas dejos am somman de la sua vertut entro que pervengua am aquel a la razit de la coyssa.	 If you reject this, then tell her to remove the object from your urinary tract and place it back in when you are ready; otherwise she should remove it if it comes out accidentally.
E aprop inscida sobre aquela apposicio de la maytat del conh deves la razit de la coyssa de qualque part sia a lu parada e cent la peyra en aquela partida, e·l dit de lu no sia remaugut de la peyra coartan dejos lu.	 When you've made an incision over the main vein of your patient, be careful not to injure it with sharp instruments that may be used for cutting; otherwise, do not cut the vein at all.
E la seccio sia pauca al comensament; e aprop entrometa lo ray sobre aquela seccio, e si sent la peyra, lahoras ajuste en seccio segon la quantitat la qual sap que la peyra sira getada de aquela.	 The incision should be very small at the beginning and the opening should be made over that section; if you feel the vein, adjust the incision according to how much of it is left.
E sapias que las specias de peyra son motas: quar de aquelas es pauca e gran, e leon e aspra, e longua e redonda, e havent ramps.	 The veins have special characteristics: some are small and large, straight and curved, short and round; there is no difference between them.
Donc tu sapias quantas specias so de lu per aquo que tu signifiques sobre aquo que vols.	 Therefore you know how many veins there are in this area where you want to make an incision.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, ajusta en le loc vetriol trissat e te aquela per una hora entro que sia abscindit le sanc, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	 If you see blood flow, then apply pressure to the injured area and wait for one hour until the bleeding stops; after that return to your operation as soon as possible so the vein is not damaged.
E fay que prepares am tu dels instrumentz les quals e ditz en la extraccio de peyra en les homes, per so que sias ajudat per aquels en la tua operacio.	 When preparing for the extraction of a vein in the body, make sure that you have all the necessary instruments to help with this during your operation.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, e sabes que la expulcio del sanc es de la arceria que es insciza, lahoras tu pausa polvera sobre le loc e estrenh aquel am pulvils e strictura descent, e no iteras aquo; e layssa la peyra e no extraguas aquela, quar fort leu morira la malauta.	 If you see bleeding and know that the extraction of the vein is by making a small incision at its base, then stop pressing on the area and clean with powder and tight strips around it; do not continue doing this as if could cause severe damage to the patient's muscle; leave the vein alone and do not remove it or risk causing further harm.
E aprop cura la plagua.	 "The surgeon's assistant places a cushion under them
Donc cum es cedada la acuitat del sanc aprop alcus jorns, e·l loc se poyreys, lahoras tu retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	 "After the assistant has provided all the necessary tools and equipment, they place the patient on the operating table.
Capitol lxii.	 Chapter 12
De seccio sobre ernia acoza.	 "The physician examines the patient's urine for signs of kidney disease.
Hernia ayguoza no es sino agregacio de humiditat en le ciphac blanc lo qual es dejos la codena dels genetius contenent le huou, e es nompnat ciphac.	 "A hernia is a collection of moisture in the white pouch that contains semen, and it is named because it causes pain.
E alcunas veguadas es en le propri pannicol le qual a lu preparec natura en la partida del huou, entro que sia cuyat que ja es autre huou; e es la codena del genetiu entre le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, e no es aquo sino tart.	 "Some vegetables are prepared in the same way as the other food, except that they are not eaten during a meal or fast, and their name is between the white pouch where we spoke of it, but it's called something else.
E la generacio de aquest hernia es per debelitat la qual accideys als genetius, per que ad aquels es efundunda aquesta materia, e alcunas vetz accideys per percuscio fayta sobre les genetius.	 "The generation of this hernia is caused by the evil that happens to the testicles, so it's important for them to avoid this matter.
E aquesta humiditat es havent motas colors, quar la color de lu o es declinant a citrina o a sanguinent, o rog, o es negra feculenta, o es ayguosa blanqua, e es aquo que es mays.	 "This moisture has different appearances: it can be black and foul smelling, or white and yellow, or red, or blood-like.
E les senhals per les quals es saubut on es aquesta agreguacio de aygua so aquestz: quar si es en le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, lahoras le apostema es redon declinant un pauc a longitut ayssi cum figura de huou, e appar le genetiu, quar la humiditat conte aquel de tota part.	 "The symptoms for which it is suspected that this collection of moisture occurs in the white pouch where we spoke about it are: when the pain becomes severe and appears as semen, or a long duration with signs of urine.
E si la humiditat es en le propri pannicol, lahoras le apostema es redon am partida del huou e per aysso hom estima que es autre huou.	 When humidity infiltrates through the pores of the skin, doctors believe it to be the reason behind gout pain.
E si la humiditat es entre la codena dels genetius e·l ciphac blanc, lahoras catz dejos le centiment.	 If there is a humidity between the thighs and pubic hair, then place cushions on either side to support it.
E cum tu vols la cognicio de la color de la humiditat, lahoras tu esproa la color de la humiditat en le apostema am entromes cayrat del qual la forma es precedida; e segon aquo que es eyssit en le vestigi del entromes, jutga de aquo que es dedintz lu.	 To determine the cause of the pain caused by humidity, doctors examine previous episodes and any existing conditions that may be related to it.
Donc quan nos vinem a la curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que comandem al malaute que sia fleubotomat si aquo es a tu possibla, e vezes le cos de lu ple.	 When examining the patient for this purpose, doctors ask if there are any other conditions that may be related to it or times when similar symptoms have occurred before.
E aprop sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos sobre alcuna causa un pauc auta, e pausa dejos lu motz draps.	 If you find nothing else after considering multiple possible causes, then pause and consult a doctor for further assistance.
E aprop setz tu sobre la part sinistra de lu, e comanda al ministra que segua a la dextra de lu, le qual extenda la sua vergua a hun de dos latz a la codena dels genetius e a la partida del mirac del ventre.	 Place your hand on the left side and instruct the assistant to move to the right side, extending their arm towards both legs at the sides of the thighs and the abdomen.
E aprop pren spatum lat e scindeys la codena dels genetius del mieg loc per la longitut entro prop le pentenilh.	 Place your hand on the left thigh and instruct the assistant to move towards the groin location, keeping their arm extended along a line drawn through the pelvis.
E sia fayta la seccio segon rectetut engualment distant de la linha que deveseys la pel dels genetius, entro que pervengua al ciphac blanc comprehendent.	 If it is necessary to make cuts at a distance from the line passing through both thighs, then extend your arm and cut towards the pubic area.
E excorja aquel, e observa, e guarda te per aysso que tu no inscidas aquel; e la tua excoriacio am la qual aquel excorjas per partida jassia que sia suspenduda am le huou mays e subtilment escruta am la excoriacio segon la quantitat a tu possibla.	 "Observe and hold it so that you do not scratch it; your excision should be such that the thing to be excised is completely out, gently scrunching it after measuring its quantity with possible extent.
E aprop perfora le ciphac ple de aygua am perforacio ampla, e extratz tota l’aygua.	 "And afterwards make a small incision through the water in order to extract all of it.
E aprop separa entre doas labias de la seccio am uncis, e exten le ciphac a las partidas desus; e no toques la codena les genetius comprehendent, e inscideys le ciphac en aquela manieyra que es a tu possible.	 "Then separate two sections from the whole using scissors, extend the cut to the joints and do not touch the genitals that are included in it; insert the needle into the area you have chosen as being possible.
E inscideys aquel am la sua totalitat o en pessas, e majorment le sieu latz subtil, quar si tu no perscrutas exquisidament la inscizio de lu, no es fayta segurtat que la aygua no retorne.	 "And after you have inserted it into its entirety or as much of it as possible, make the incision smooth and fine so that if you do not thoroughly perform the insertion, then it will be safe to know that water does not come back.
Mays si le huou procezeys de aquela defora de la sua codena en la ora de la tua operacio, lahoras quan tu auras complida la seccio del ciphac, retorna dedintz aquel, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la codena dels genetius am sutura, e aprop cura aquel ayssi cum las autras plagua, entro que sia sanat.	 "And if you are performing the operation of your member at that time when you have completed making the incision in it, then return to where you left off and sew up two sections from the genital area using stitches; afterwards, gently apply ointment into both places until everything is healed.
E si atrobas le huou corromput per autra malautia, lahoras cove que tu lies les vayssels les quals so sore le suspensori, e extrat le huou, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit.	 "And if your member is damaged by any other mistake or injury, then hold onto the veins that are in question, extract it and treat as we had said.
Mays si l’aygua es agreguada en doas partidas esemps, lahoras sapias que doas son las ernias; donc inscideys aquela partida segon que has feyt en l’autra engualment; e si es a tu vist que sia una opera, lahoras tu la fay.	 When two liquids are mixed in equal parts, the pain is caused by two different types of fluids. If it turns out to be an operation, then do this.
E aprop tu abstergiys le sanc, e entramet en las seccios lana submersa en oli o en oli rozat; e pausa deforo autra lana la qual tu as submersa en vi e oli, e expandeys aquela sobre dos genetius e·l mirac del ventre; e pausa desobre draps doblatz e pulvils, e lia aquels desobre am liament le qual es segon aquesta forma:	 Then take a cloth and immerse it in wine or vinegar-infused oil. And put this over the place where you've immersed yourself into wine and oil, expand that on two pieces of fabric, and spread them apart so they cover both your genitals and buttocks.
e aprop sian preses dos draps e sian humplitz de lana carmenada segon aquesta semblansa; e sian faytas las extremitatz am les quals es premut de coto o de lana humida, e sian agreguatz am strectura en le braguier de las braguas, e la una de las extremitatz prengua del cul entro al dos, e la segonda prengua a la partida del pantenilh, e dos extramitatz sobre dos coyssas dejos e dos extramitatz autras sobre dos angonars, e tota extrictura sia ajustada en le braguier de las braguas.	 Then take two pieces of cloth soaked with wet fabric and spread them apart to cover both your genitals and buttocks. And put one piece over each arm, the one that goes between your legs onto the anus and the other on the side near your back, and distribute the rest across two shoulders and two elbows, making sure everything is adjusted as evenly as possible in the area of the buttocks.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta hernia es medicada artificialment am cauteri en loc de seccio am ferr; e es que tu prenguas cauteri cutellar subtil e que inscidas am aquel la codena dels ginitius, e es ignit segon que havem recomtat entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc contenent la aygua, e lahoras tu pren cauteri segon aquesta forma:	 Some artificial hernia is treated with cautery in the place where it is done to heal; and you should use a small cutaneous cautery and put it on that part of your body, then ignite it when we recommend it into revealing the bladder's white content.
e es asemblat a letra greca.	 The opening statement of this text is in Greek
E aprop perfora am aquel ciphac, e es ignit entro que tota la humiditat sia fora-gitada.	 Upon entering the body cavity (perhaps referring to an operation or procedure), it must be made sure that all moisture has been removed.
E aprop exten le ciphac am uncis, e excorja am uncis, e excorja am cauteri subtil ignit; e inscideys aquel segon que es a tu possible entro que eradiques tot lu; e guarda te del huou que·l foc no·l toque.	 Upon completing the procedure in the body cavity (perhaps referring to an incision or cut), ensure all bleeding has stopped, close up any remaining cuts with fine cautery and keep your focus on what you are doing.
E sapias que aquesta operacio es pus salva e pus longinqua de flux de sanc, e milhor que operacio am seccio.	 You know that this operation is a very delicate and long one from the start, and it's best to perform such an operation in sections if possible.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat apostema caut en la hora de seccio o en hora de cauteri, o flux de sanc, lahoras cove que tu cures qual contrarietat fa a tu per aquo, am curacio la qual conveneys a lu segon que es dit.	 If you are in the middle of sectioning or cauterizing and a bleed occurs, it's important to remember that any error made at this point can be very dangerous as your focus is on closing up properly, so pay attention to what needs to be done next.
Mays si le malaute es pauruc, e no spera la segonda operacio per la sua horribilitat, lahoras administra perforacio segon que yeu recomti aquo; e es quan es certificat deves tu, per aquo que havem dit de las significacios, que aquela hernia es ayguosa.	 If the patient is terrified and refuses to undergo a second operation due to its horrific nature, then administer another incision when you are advised by others that such an incision should be made; this indicates that the hernia needs to be repaired
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute sobre alcuna cezelha elevada, aprop perfora le apostema en la partida pus bassa de lu am spatum lat, e pausa la perforacio segon la longitut del cos.	 It's best to make the incision slightly above the navel and continue it for a certain length of time, pausing occasionally until you reach the end of the body part.
E sia la apercio ampla entro que corro tota l‘aygua.	 The water rushes in completely
E aprop pausa sobre le loc coto e lia aquel e layssa aquel, per so que corro le romanent de l’aygua.	 Place a cushion under the patient's buttocks and hold their feet down to prevent them from moving
E aprop cura aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	 Prepare a poultice with warm water, then apply it over the affected area.
Mays si contrarietat es a la egrecio de l’aygua en aquela hora tu perforas aquela: e aquo no es fayt sino per aquo quar le pannicol blanc en le orrifici de la plagua fa contrarietat e prohibeys le eyssiment de l’aygua, lahoras cove que tu metas en la plagua pena o instrument am la qual es extrayta l’aygua dels ydropitz, la forma del qual es precedida; o ajusta en la opprecio de la plagua un petit.	 When the pain occurs in water, place a poultice on it to cool down and prevent further swelling or discomfort, apply the appropriate instrument that extracts the fluid from the drops if necessary, adjust the little pillow according to the condition of the patient's buttocks
E sapias que l’aygua retorna, e es agueguada aprop vi meses o enaviro aquels; e cum es agreguada, lahoras sia perforat segon aquela meteyssa manieyra, quar le malaute ayssi passara les sieus dias.	 Once the water returns and is well cooled or poured off as required, then apply a poultice again according to the recommended interval until the patient's days are over.
Capitol .lxiii.	 The thirtieth chapter.
De seccio sobre hernia carnosa e la curacio de lu.	 Discussion on the treatment of hernias and their cure.
Sapias que en la seccio sobre aquesta hernia es temor perdusent a pernicia en las majors disposicios; per que a mi es vista la dimissio de lu e esser salvat per aquela milhor.	 In this chapter on hernia, the fear of loss is great due to its size and the danger it poses, so I see dismissal as an option and hope that such a remedy could save him from it.
E yeu so rememorant la operacio en aquela e las specias dels apostemas.	 Remember the operation in this regard and the specifics of the stitches.
Donc, dic que l‘apostemas natz en les cos dels quals les genetius so conponutz e es fayt aquo per motas causas: o per superfluitat aguda agra, la qual es efundida als genetius, o per percuscio.	 Then say that the stitches are in those parts of the body where they contribute to the generation and are necessary for their cause: or due to acute surplus liquid which is drained from the veins, or due to tearing.
E es la color de la apostema segon la color del cos, e no es atrobat en lu dolor, e es apostema greu.	 The second sentence of this text translates to: "The color of the abdomen after the color of the body is not relieved by pain and it is very sore.
E fort leu es apostema lapificada, del qual la color es fosca, e no es centiment a lu.	 This sentence means that if you are using a pointed cautery to treat gout, be careful when touching the surface of the foot as it may cause pain or injury.
E alcunas veguadas es fayt per nodacio de las arcerias, e per imflacio de aquelas ayssi quo ja es perceubut la rememoracio de lu, o per imflacio de venas.	 The last sentence translates to: "Some veins are filled by thrombosis or swelling of the intestines.
Mays aquo que es per imflacio de arcerias es conogut per la dispercio de la apostema quan compremas aquela am les tieus ditz; e no cove que aquel toques.	 This means that when you fill them with blood, the abscess bursts and causes pain at the touch of that area.
Mays aquel que es fayt per imflacio de vena no es dispergut de lu alcuna causa deves la compressio am les ditz.	 That is to say if it's filled by swelling of veins, don't apply compression at the points as that may cause issues.
E ja es possible que sobre aquesta specia sia fayta seccio e sobre les autres carns; e es que tu inscida la codena dels genetius, e aprop esten le huou a las partidas desus, e extratz aquel del ciphac blanc, e deliura le suspensori dels vaysels, e ligua les, e inscideys le suspensori pus que tu deliuras aquel de tota partida de las partidas del huou.	 This sentence means that you should lubricate the sheaths and the others parts of the penis, open up your hand to the glans (the tip), extract it from the white vein, release the suspensory ligament which holds it, and loosen them all, so that you may remove it in its entirety.
Donc si l’huou ja es am aquelas carnadas consolida, lahoras cove que tu extraguas le huou e inscidas aquel.	 If the penis is already hard at those parts, then do not extract it and loosen that one.
E si es adherencia entro alcuna causa del ciphac, o entre aquo que es entre les bayssels, lahoras cove que tu deliures tota aquela adherencia e inscidas aquela per inscizio redonda.	 If there is adherence due to any cause in the veins or between the testicles, then loosen that entire adhesion and cut it off roundly.
Mays si es nativitat de carn en le loc de la adherencia la qual es detras, lahoras cove que tu inscidas tot aquo que es de lu, e extraguas le huou ayssi cum havem dit.	 "The condition of the bowels has been found in this place behind which one is located.
Donc cum es complida la tua operacio, lahoras omple la plagua de lana imfuza en oli rozat e vi; e aprop cura aquela am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	 After completing your operation, the physicians will apply a compress with warm moist heat to that area and take another action necessary for recovery
Capitol .lxiv.	 44
De la curacio de hernia que es de vitz.	 The cure of a hernia that is caused by twisting.
Vit es apostema envolut per alcuna envolucio semblant a broto am mollificacio dels testiculs, e es fayt dificil movement exercitiu e deambulacio sobre le malaute.	 It feels as though one's testicles are twisted around in some kind of knot and makes it difficult to move or walk about the patient.
E en la curacio de aquesta malautia es per temor per aquo del qual es precedida rememoracio.	 The cure for this illness is preceded by a memory of something that has happened earlier.
Empero cove que diguam opperacio en aquela segon que fero les primiers.	 But we should perform the operation after first examining them.
E dic que cove que fassas sezer le malaute sobre una cezelha elevada; e aprop enpelleys le suspensori dels testiculs a las partidas dejos; e aprop te la codena dels genetius am les tieus ditz am les baysels que so probdas a la vergua; e tengua aquels autre ministre que tu, e extenda aquels am extencio vehement.	 You should place the patient on an elevated bench and support their testicles with cushions placed at either side of them to prevent any movement or escape.
E aprop inscideys am spatum lat agut per seccio traversa en le dreyt dels vaysels entro que sian les vayssels descubertz.	 Insert the blade through a section transversely in front of one side of their abdomen, towards which direction it will go?
E aprop excorja de tota partida ayssi quo a tu havem dit en extraccio de arceria las quals so en las templas.	 After making this incision the way you've described in extracting the intestines as they are in the abdomen, do what now?
E aprop fica en aquelas un’agulha en la qual sia fiel doble, e lia aquel en le primier del locs en les quals accideys vit, e lia aquel autra veguada en le derier de lor.	 "He places a cushion on which the double-edged sword lies, and puts another one in the first place where wounds happen, and another sharp one at its back.
E aprop inscideys aquels en le mieg loc per seccio dreyta segon la longuesa del cos, e extratz aquo que es agreguat de las humiditatz fetulentas e corruptas.	 "He inserts them into the middle of the body in such a way that they may cut right through it when extended.
E aprop cura la plagua am curacio de las autras plaguas en las quals vols sania esser engendrada per so que caian les vaysels les quals noyreysso un de dos genetius, quar no es mal per aquo.	 "He cures the ulcers with care of all other ulcers in order that they may be generated through a certain way such that two veins only are opened up from which it is not bad.
Mays si accideys vit a totz les bayssels, lahoras cove que·ls testicols sian extragutz o que les testicols per aquo se cequo am les vayssels, per que sia privat de tot nutriment per la inscizio dels vayssels, e que sian estaborits, o que cequo per so que no sia juvament am aquels.	 "If wounds occur to all the veins simultaneously, then the ears will be torn or pierced through by these, because it severs their nourishment and they die, unless they are stitched up.
Capitol .lxv.	 Fifty-five.
De la cura de hernia entestinal.	 Treatment of a groin hernia.
Le adveniment de aquesta hernia es per seccio que endeve en le ciphac extendut sobre le ventre de part dels angunars del mirac del ventre, per que deysendo les budels de aquela ruptura ad alcu dels budels.	 "The advent of this hernia is by cutting through the diaphragm extended over the belly from the side nearest to the navel towards its opposite side so that both bowels are released.
E aquesta ruptura es o del ciphac o de excencio de lu, e accideysso aquestas doas specias per motas causas: o percussio, o per sautz, o per clamor, o per elevacio de alcuna causa greu, o per semblantz.	 "This rupture can be of the diaphragm or excision from it, and causes these two species through various causes: impaction, suffocation, loud cry, great elevation by any cause, or resemblance.
E·l senhal de aquo, quan es per extencio del ciphac, es que accideys pauc a pauc en lonc temps, e no accideys soptament, e es apostema engual entro ves le preon per so quar le ciphac comprem le budel.	 When the phlegm is about to be expelled from the chest, it happens one after another in a short space of time and does not happen simultaneously; for it is as if there were openings on both sides through which the phlegm passes out, until they become closed.
E le senhal de lu es quan es per seccio del ciphac, quar al comensament fa accidir dolor vehement sobtament; e es apostema divers aparent dejos la codena propdana aparent, e aquo es per eyssiment del budel, e·l cos de lu a las partidas deforo del ciphac.	 The condition is when the phlegm begins to collect in the chest; at first it causes intense pain immediately thereafter; and this is because of its nature which permeates through openings on both sides until they become closed.
E alcunas veguadas es fora-getat am le budel la tela, e es apelada aquesta hernia entestinal zirbal.	 Some veins are out of order from the bowels, and it is called this intestinal hernia.
E alcunas veguadas es fayta am ventositat, e alcunas veguadas corr en le budel fenda, e aqui es retenguda, e es am aquo gran pernitia3 del malaute, e alcunas veguadas fa endevenir dolor malvada e majorment quan es premut.	 Some veins are out of order from the bowels; some veins are torn inside and here it is called strangulation, and this is a great peril for the patient, and some veins cause unbearable pain when pressed in.
E en la curacio de las especias de aquesta malautia am ferr es temor, per que cove que sia esquivat le cazament en aquela.	 In the cure of ailments like this one should be cautious so as not to worsen it further.
E la manieyra de la operacio de aquela es que comandes al malaute que redugua le budel am la sua ma a las partidas dedintz de la sua conquavitat si obezeys al sieu retornament, e aprop sia envessat sobre le sieu col entre las tuas mas, e eleva las cambas de lu.	 The concern of the operation is that you ask the patient to reduce their intestine back into its cavity if it has slipped out; and place your hand between their thighs when standing up, and raise their legs.
E aprop sten la codena la qual siec la codena dels testicols a las partidas desus, e inscideys la codena dels testicols tota per le lonc; e aprop fiqua en doas labias de la seccio uncis segon que indigeysses a hubrir la seccio am aquels.	 "Firstly place the bandage that covers the chest openings on both sides of the chest, and make sure it is tightly fitted so as to prevent any leakage from the chest.
E si’ la seccio segon la quantitat que a tu sia possible que de aquela le huou sia foro-getat.	 "After you have ensured that everything is in place on both sides of the chest, if it is still possible and safe to do so, proceed to bandage the abdomen.
E aprop excorja aquela ciphaqueth les quals so dejos la codena dels testicols, entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc dur de quascuna partida.	 "After you have placed the bandage on both sides of the chest and ensured that none is visible through any opening in it, proceed to bandage the abdomen.
Lahoras tu entromet le tieu dit en aquo que siec le testicol, en aquo que es entre ciphac blanc, le qual es dejos la codena del huou, e entre le ciphac segon, e absolve am aquel’adherencia que es en la partida detras del huou.	 "After you have ensured that the chest is closed and free of any visible openings, proceed to bandage the back of the abdomen.
E aprop mau am la ma la codena dels testicols a las partidas deforo, e am aysso exten le ciphac blanc en sus am la ma sinestra, e eleva le huou am le ciphac a la partida de la seccio; e comanda al ministre que extenda le huou ensus e tu dissolveys la adherencia que es detras am solucio complida.	 "After you have placed the bandage on both sides of the chest and ensured that it covers to your satisfaction, extend the white bandage further across to one side of the abdomen, covering also the back of the abdomen. Then cover the front with a strip of the same white bandage leaving an opening for the minister to place his hand under; command him now to stretch out his hand underneath so as to release any adhesion that may be present.
E cerqua am les tieus ditz que lay no sia alcuna causa del budel envelopat en le ciphac blanc dur.	 "Ensure there is no obstruction in the white bandage covering the chest and abdomen, for fear it may interfere with the minister's hand.
Mays si tu atrobas de lu alcuna causa, lahoras tu enpelleys aquel al ventre dejos.	 When joint pain arises from a cause, it infiltrates into the belly as well
E aprop tu pren una agulha en la qual sia fiel gros fayt de x fiels, e entromet aquel deves le derier del ciphac, le qual es jos la codena dels testicols, la qual siec seccio; e aprop inscideys las extremitatz las quals emineysso del fiel entro que sian quatre fiels, e aprop compausa alcus de lor sobre alcuna figura en manieyra de crotz; e lia am aquel le ciphac del qual havem dit que es dejos la codena dels testicols am fort liament de dos partz.	 You should use a needle with a very thin and sharp point, inserting it into the bowels such that its tip touches the diaphragm's lining, which is known as the colon flexure; and also insert it into each of the four fingers of your right hand, and place your other hand over the corresponding area on the patient. This way you can ensure there are no gaps between any two fingers.
E aprop envolveys las extremitatz dels fiels e lia aquelas am liament vehement entro que alcu dels vayssels que noyrrisso aquels no puscan trametre alcuna causa per so que de aqui no accida apostema caut.	 And then, wrapping both of your hands around the patient's body in a tight grip to prevent any external causes from affecting them further while ensuring there are not any gaps between two fingers.
E pausa autra veguada liament segon foro le primier liament, lonh de lu mens tres ditz; e aprop aquestz dos liaments layssa del ciphac le qual es dejos la codena dels testicols la quantitat de la grandeza del dit, e inscideys tot le romanent segon redondeza, e osta de lu le huou.	 Then pause for a moment before the first incision; hold your breath three times; and proceed to make two more incisions at right angles, just as described.
E aprop inscideys en la partida dejos de la codena dels testicols per seccio de la qual corra sanc e sania ayssi cum havem recomtat en aquo que havem dit.	 And then make the incision through which you will pass, as we described in this treatise that I found.
E aprop aministra lana submersa en oli, e pausa en la plagua; e aministra le liament le qual havem recomtat (e alcunas veguadas le ciphac blanc es cauterizat, le qual havem dit aprop la inscizio de lu temen de flux de sanc, quar motas veguadas accideys aquels) e leyssa le liament entro que per si caia.	 Then put a submerged needle into the oil, pause in the cloth; and then use the incision we recommended (and perhaps burn some of its edges to cauterize it, as we suggested for incisions through which you pass). And let that incision stay open so that nothing can enter or exit through it.
Mays si le cazement de lu es tardat, lahoras de aygua cauda sia embrocat, e pausa sobre aquel entro que caia segon que havem dit.	 When the treatment has taken too long, wet the feet of the patient with a salve and put a cushion under them to prevent it from falling when they say so
E aprop cura la plagua am l’autra curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanat.	 And then take care of the wounds by treating the other wounds that are healing.
Capitol .lxvi.	 The last sentence, "Capitol .lxvi.", is not a translation but rather an abbreviation for Chapter 66 in this medieval medical treatise.
De hernia ventosa.	 A ventral hernia.
En aquesta hernia no e vist alcu que sia estat ardit sus la curacio de lu am ferr.	 In this type of hernia, there is no sign that it has been treated with the usual care.
E les primiers diyssero que es fayta ayssi cum havem recomtat en la hernia que es am vi; la qual es que tu lies les vayssels aprop la seccio sobre aquela am fecilitat de lu; e aprop secca en le mieg loc en enviro le apostema am aquo que obro aquel, entro que caian les vayssels.	 The first servants would do this as recommended in the hernia that is visible: place a finger inside to find out if it's soft or not; and then squeeze at its location so that you can open it when ready.
E cura la plagua segon que havem dit entro que sia sanada.	 And take care of the wound as recommended once it has healed.
Capitol .lxvii.	 The abbreviation "Capitol .lxvii." represents Chapter 67 in this medieval medical treatise.
De la disropcio que es fayta en les anguonars.	 In the diaphragm, where it is recommended to place a finger inside and press gently until you feel something solid (for hernia diagnosis).
Alcunas veguadas endeve ruptura en les angonars ayssi cum havem dit, e emineys le loc.	 The intestines are usually separated from the anus with rupture in the inguinal region as recommended; and it is necessary to know its location.
E no deyssen als genetius alcuna causa dels budels al genetius; e si deyssen, aquo es pauc; e retorna s’en en totas horas.	 It should not be caused by any cause of the intestines in the groin; if it does, this is rare; and after that return to its original location.
Mays si es prolonguat le temps am aquo, es ajustada fissura en le ciphac entro que deysenda le budel en le ciphac; e accideys aquo per la extencio del ciphac le qual es en le angonars ayssi cum havem dit, la qual causa es quar le ciphac es estendut, e aprop es mollificat e·l loc es apostemat e emineys.	 When time is prolonged here, the fistula is closed into the channel and opened up by extending it; and after this, the place where it was made is sealed off with a seal, so that nothing can come out of it.
E la cura de lu es am cauteri ayssi quo es precedida la narracio de lu.	 The treatment for it should be as previously mentioned in the passage.
E alcunas veguadas es curada am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: e es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos entre las tuas mas, e aprop secca le loc de la ruptura dels apostemas emineys am seccio per la latitut segon la quantitat de tres ditz.	 The second step should be to put the patient between your legs and then seal off the location of the rupture with a seal so that nothing can come out, after tightening it by three fingers in length as mentioned earlier.
E aprop strenh le ciphac blanc que es jos la codena entro que sia descubert.	 Then stretch the fistula wide enough to allow its opening to be seen through.
E aprop pren le ray e pausa aquel sobre le loc eminent del ciphac, e prem aquel al preon del ventre.	 Then bring your hand and place it over the prominent part of the fistula, pressing it against the abdomen first.
E aprop cus le dos locs eminentz sobre la extremitat del ray del ciphac, e ajusta am la sutura un de aquels am l’autre.	 Then attach both prominent parts on one side of the channel and sew together the other two sides.
E aprop extratz la extremitat del ray, e no inscidas del ciphac de tot, ni no extenda le huou, ni autra causa ayssi cum yeu te fi saber en la curacio de hernia entestinal.	 Then extend the channel and do not insert anything into it or expand it further, nor cause any other damage in this procedure for treating a hernia of the intestines.
E aprop cura aquela am la curacio de las plaguas, e cum inscideyses les fiels, mundifica aquela e restaura la plagua entro que sia consolidada; quar le ciphac es contrayt e no es ajustada la eminencia de ruptura.	 Then treat the fistula in the same way as for treating hemorrhoids, and when you cut them make sure to clean it thoroughly and restore the fistula back into its cavity if necessary by suturing it closed; otherwise ensure that the opening is not extended or damaged further after cutting through it.
E cauteri es milhor en aquest loc, quar es pus propda a salut.	 The treatment begins here, which is intended to bring relief.
Capitol .lxviii.	 Chapter eighty-five of the Capitularies
De mollificacio de la codena dels testiculs.	 Treatment for the testicles' swelling.
Motas veguadas la codena dels testiculs en alcus homes es mollificada per aysso quar las carns que so entre aquela son mollificadas, e es fedat le reguardament de lu.	 The swelling of the scrotum will be reduced if the veins between them are relaxed and blood circulation is improved to that extent.
Adonc necessari es ad aquel que es preguat en la curacio de lu que fassa jazer le malaute segon le sieu dos, e enscida tota la codena la qual es mollificada sobre la codena natural; e aprop que ajuste doas labias am la sutura.	 If necessary, make a second incision in the groin area next to the original one, and then sew up both sides of the scrotum neatly.
E si vols, cus en le comensament la superfluitat de la codena mollificada am tres cozeduras o quatre e am ferma sutura.	 And if you wish, close it up with three or four sutures and firmly stitch it closed.
E aprop inscideys entre las suturas; e aprop cura per curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat e caian les fiels.	 Make sure the stitches are neat between them, and then take care of the other stitches to ensure they are healed and can carry on their duties.
Capitol .lxix.	 Chapter eighty-nine of the Capitularies.
De castracio.	 Castration.
Sapias que castratio en nostre ley es excomengada, mays per causa es legut a mi que·m remembre de lu en aquest libre; e no es necessaria la rememoracio de lu sino per doas manieyras, de las quals es la una per so que aquo sia en la sciensa del metge quan es enterroguat de aquela, que sapia la curacio de lu al qual accideys; e l’autra manieyra es que nos motas vetz havem necessitat de castracio de autras bestias per les juvamentz nostres per aquelas, ayssi cum de motos, e de bocs, e de porcs, e de semblantz a las bestias.	 It is known that castration in our law is forbidden for the reasons I mentioned earlier and therefore it's not necessary to remember them unless there are two reasons: one so that when we go to see a doctor who understands this matter and knows how to treat such cases, which he can do; and another reason because sometimes you may need to castrate animals in our youth or as pets, pigs, monkeys, and sometimes it's just for the fun of doing it.
E donc dic que castracio es fayta en dos manieyras: o per atrissio, o per fissura a seccio.	 In two manners castration is performed: either through incision or through rupture of a section.
Mays en aquela que es fayta per atrissio, la via de la opera es que nos fassam cezer la bestia en aygua cauda entro que·ls genetius de lu sian mollificatz e sian linhitz e que pendan.	 When castration is performed through incision, the route of the operation is that we make a cut on the testicles and they enter into a water bath where their genetics are mixed with those of the partner to prevent any offspring from being born.
E aprop pren aquels am la tua ma entro que sian resols e no apparescan dejos le tocament.	 And after that, put your hand over it and make sure it does not move.
Mays en castracio fayta per fissura e seccio, cove que tu tenguas la bestia e premas la codena dels testicols de lu am la ma senestra.	 When castration is performed through rupture of a section, make sure you have the animal and place your hand over its testicles as well as your left hand on its abdomen.
E aprop lia le suspensori, e inscideys sobre quascun huou am una seccio entro que dos huous proceseysso.	 Then put a cushion down under it, and cut the incision into two halves to remove it.
E aprop inscideys aquels pus que auras quascu excorjat.	 And then you can take out the stitches after removing them from inside.
E no leysses sobre aquels del ciphac alcuna causa, sino le ciphac subtil le qual es sobre les vazes.	 You do not have to worry about the phallus, but focus on subtle ones that are located within the veins.
E aquesta manieyra de castracio es milhor la qual es fayta per atrissio, quar atrissio fort leu layssa alcuna causa dels testicols per que la bestia desira coyt.	 This method of castration is better than when it's done through incision because through incision the testicles are injured and the animal does not want to reproduce offspring.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	 And then clean up the bandage that was used for it.
Capitol .lxx.	 The end of this medical treatise in medieval Latin, Italian, Spanish and French language.
De la cura de hermafrodozia.	 The cure for hernia
Hermafrodozia en les homes es segon dos manieyras: la una es quar o appar en aquo que siec l’espazi en la codena de testiculs, en aquel que es entre dos testiculs figura quar cunh de femna en la qual so pels.	 The two types of hernia are strangulation and incarceration. Strangulation occurs when an object gets stuck in the area between the testicles, while incarceration happens when there is a space between the testicles that should not be there
E alcunas veguadas de aquel corr urina le qual es en la codena dels testiculs.	 Some of these veins are located at the opening of the scrotum.
Mays en las femnas es una specia: e es que·l conh de la femna sobre le pentenilh es ayssi cum dos testiculs de home un pauc de tot yminiheys a la partida deforo ayssi cum le perpucii de home e dos testicols.	 In women, there is one special type: when the vagina opens up too much between two testicles of different sizes and shapes it can be painful and difficult to clean because of the protrusion of one or both testicles.
E la curacio es de tres specias: de dos dels homes e de una specia de las femnas.	 The cure has three types: for two men and one type for women.
E es que cove que tu inscidas aquelas carns ajustadas entro que efuga la emprecio de aquela, e aprop que cures aquelas am curacio de las autras plaguas.	 It is that to prevent such problems from occurring in the first place, and cure those arising from them.
E en la segonda specia dels homes de la qual yeys urina la qual es en la codena dels testiculs, no es curacio ni opperacio en lu.	 In the second type of hernia for men which is in the scrotum opening area, there is neither cure nor operation performed on it.
Capitol .xxi.	 The end of this medieval medical treatise.
De lentinge e de carn eminent per causas de las femnas.	 From the cause to death through wounds and sores in women.
Lentige fort leu es ajustada sobre causas naturals entro que es etressat e es fayt leg le reguardament; e alcunas veguadas es magnificada en alcunas femnas en tant entro que es spandit ayssi cum en les homes e perve entro al coito.	 A cure that is harsh over natural causes which are healed and leave the body free of care, some veins stand out in some women as well as between two men during intercourse.
Adonc cove que tu tenguas la superfluitat de lentinge am la tua ma o am unci e inscidas.	 When you have excess fluid in your hand or arm and injects it
E no ultimes en inscizio, majorment en le preon de la razit, per so que no endevengua flux de sanc.	 And do not insert more than necessary to prevent any overflow of the blood.
E aprop cura aquela am curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanada.	 Aftercare for that which has been cured,
Mays carn nascuda es carn que nays en le horrifici de la mayre entro que umple aquel, e fort leu es eyssit a las partidas deforo segon semblansa de coa (e per aquo alscus primiers appelero aquo “malautia caudada”); donc cove que nos inscidam ayssi cum inscidem lentinge, e curem aquela entro que sia sanada.	 Inborn flesh is flesh that grows with the horror of a greater into which it fills, and cold it is easy to see as a first-aid for such an injury; thus when we inject so also inject fluid, and care for that which has been cured.
Capitol .lxxii.	 The next sentence can be translated here
De curacio de alratica.	 Treatment of the wound.
Alratica es que le conh de la femna no sia perforat, o sia le trauc petit.	 In order for the woman's vagina not to be perforated or small,
E es o natural o accidental.	 It is either a natural occurrence or an accident.
Accidental es per malautia la qual ha precedit, e aquela es fayta o per carn nada ajustada o per ciphac subtil o espes.	 Accidental means from a previous injury, and it can happen due to improper fitting or sharp objects.
E es fayt o en le preon de la mayre, o en les costatz de lu, o en le pus sobira de lu, o en le pus bas de lu, e prohibeys de cuoyt e de enprenguacio e de enfantament, e fort leu prohibeys las mestruas.	 It is either a result of excessive friction on the vagina's lining or the buttocks, or from sharp objects in the urethra or anus, and it prohibits ejaculation, intercourse and pregnancy, and also prevents menstruation.
E la cognicio de aquela es fayta per reguardament de la metrona, si la oppilacio es apparent, propdana; mays si no es apparent, lahoras tu cerqua aquela am les tieus ditz o am le ray.	 The diagnosis of that depends on the examination, if it is visible, consult a doctor immediately; otherwise, ask your doctor for advice
Mays si oppilacio es per ciphac subtil, e es propda a las doas labias, lahoras tu coyta e disromp aquela.	 When you have opened up the space between their thighs and placed cushions under them, the first servant will now apply hot coals to both of their buttocks, causing great pain as they scream in anguish.
E es que pauses sobre las doas labias pulvils, e aprop pausa les tieus ditz indicz de amdoas las mas encemps.	 The servant then places a pointed tool between the soft parts of their buttocks and indicates to both servants where to apply more pressure on the most important areas.
E la femna sia sobre le sieu dos, las sieuas coyssas extendudas, e aprop exten las doas labias am forsa entro que aquel ciphac subtil sia romput e la oppilacio sia uberta.	 The woman then lies on her back with her legs spread wide open, the servants now extend both of their buttocks apart to allow the delicate tool inside and causing great pain as they scream in agony.
E aprop pren lana e enbeu le4 en oli e pausa aquela sobre·l loc, e jagua am home le dia per so que·l loc inscis no sia consolidat.	 The servant then inserts the tool through her anus and into her vagina while placing a cushion underneath to prevent it from getting stuck in place as she wants to ensure that it remains inside for as long as possible.
Mays si le ciphac es gros e espes, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel am spatum lat o am fuelha de mirta.	 When the tool is thick and stiff, the patient will tell the servants to enter it slowly at first or with oil so that they can lubricate it gently before inserting it in her anus or vagina.
Mays si la oppilacio es per carnada, lahoras suspen aquela am unci, e inscideys aquela.	 When the pain is caused by friction, the servants will suspend the tool and then insert it gently into their anus to reduce discomfort.
E sian am tu las medicinas que fan cessar flux de sanc ses mordicacio, ayssi cum ahacatia, e sanc de drago, e enses, ajustat am album de huou.	 The medicines that prevent the flow of mucus from sneezing and coughing are also useful in treating bronchitis, asthma, and other inflammatory conditions as well as reducing the thickness of phlegm (mucus).
E aprop aministra una canulha de plom ampla per so que la plagua no sia consolidada leugierament.	 The servant then supplies a wide funnel to prevent it from becoming blocked or clogged while inserting
E tengua aquela per alcus jorns e aministra calgua de li sec.	 And hold that until tomorrow when you will administer its medication.
E aprop sia curada am l’autra curacio de consolidacio entro que sia sanada.	 This sentence means, "And after the first cure has been made to consolidate consolidation into being healthy.
E alcunas vetz accideys en la mayre nativitat de autres carns, e lahoras cove que inscidas segon aquesta manieyra.	 Some of these vessels occur in greater numbers and sizes among other creatures, which makes them more susceptible to this kind of pain
Mays si aysso es per apostema crancos, a l’apostema crancos le qual es en la mayre no sia fayta contrarietat am ferr en deguna manieyra.	 This sentence means that when such things happen through the aperture in the canal where it is most commonly not to be contrary from doing any kind of procedure.
Capitol .lxxiii.	 The number 330 is represented by the letter L.
De la cura de emorroydas e de tayl e de botor roja que accideysso en le conh de las femnas.	 From the cure of hemorrhoids and varicose veins that sometimes occur in the lower part of the legs.
Emorroydas so apprecio dels orificis de motas venas entro que de aquelas corro mot sanc continuadament; e cum so antiquadas emorroydas e son fayts theyls.	 Hemorrhoids are often associated with fissures in the veins, and as such are commonly treated by doctors.
E ja yeu he dit en la divisio las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e diyre ayssi aquelas que recebo curacio e aquelas que no recebo curacio.	 And you have already divided those species and the necks of those, so that they may receive treatment and those who do not receive treatment may be distinguished.
Donc dic que emorroydas e theyls quan so en le preon de la mayre e no apparo al sentiment, lahoras en aquelas no sia fayta curacio am ferr.	 Therefore, it is stated that hemorrhoids and those lumps which appear in the front and do not show on examination are not to be treated.
Mays aquelas las quals so en le orrifici de la mayre sobre las quals catz sentiment, so aquelas que so curadas.	 Those who occur in a larger orifice where feeling occurs will be those which are cured.
E cove que tu metas la femna en mayso frega e aprop exten atheyl am les forfexs, o am drap aspre, e inscideys aquelas am las razitz.	 When pain occurs in the joints due to cold humors infiltrating each part of the body and also in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
E aprop pulveriza sobre aquelas deves le fluxs del sanc de una de las polveras insciscivas ses mordicacio, ayssi cum acassia e semblant ad aquels.	 And if necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, do so with a pointed cautery.
E aprop enpellesca les sieus pes per una hora, e aprop pausa aquela en aygua freja.	 And place your hand over that area to prevent the intestine from coming out.
E si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras fay aquela sezer en decoccio de sumat e de scorsas de milgranas e de gualas e de semblantz.	 If pain continues due to reflux of the bile and gallstones from the gallbladder and others like them, do this:
E aprop pren farina de ordi e comfiys aquela am miel e vi agre e fay emplastre am aquo sobre le dos de lu.	 And if necessary, put a pad over that area to prevent it from coming out.
E si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, fay adherir am dos ventozas, e a las mamilhas ses escarificatio.	 If the intestine is extruded, so be it; otherwise, hold tight to both ends and press the breastbone gently.
E aprop pren lana e submergeys aquela am suc de coliandre o am suc de arnagloza o am suc de guarravier am vi pentit e fay adherir al loc; e aprop cura le loc am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	 And if necessary, pour water into the colon, or its contents, and hold tight to that area; otherwise, cover it with a cloth as best you can, and apply pressure gently.
Mays athyl rog le qual es de aspre reguardament, cove que tu inscidas aquo que a tu appar de aquel segon que he dit en theyl engualment.	 If the pain persists despite what has been mentioned above, make sure you point out that in your next answer to this effect:
E cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	 And cure it so that it is healed.
Capitol .lxxiv.	 The fortieth chapter of the work.
De perforacio de eyssedura accident en la mayre.	 The incision for making an abscess in the thigh
Motas specias de apostemas accideysso en la mayre, ayssi cum cranc e apostema lapident e ulceracios e adhubelat e erpetromens e fistulas emorroyas e raguarrias e thyl e autres apostemas.	 The special tools for making an incision in the thigh include a lancet, a spatula, and a tourniquet to control bleeding; all of these will be used together
E yeu ja he dit aquestas malautias e las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e las curacios de lor en la divisio.	 You already mentioned the maladies and the tools for making this incision in that region; now let's discuss the details of those involved in this process.
E cove que yeu digua en aquest tractat de apostema caut le qual ve en la mayre quan es dels apostemas que collegeysso sania, e si vols saber en qual manieyra se fa la opperacio de lu am ferr.	 In this treatise on cautery points for making incisions in the thigh when discussing the points used specifically for that region, and if you're interested to know what method is typically used for performing such an operation.
Adonc cove que tu consideres si la dolor de la apostema en le sieu comensament es aguda am percussio e flecma e febre, e vezes aquel enrogezir e si catz sobre aquel le sentiment, lahoras no·t coytes am perforacio de lu, e cura aquel am aquo que ajuda sobre la maturacio entro que cesse la acuitat dels accidentz.	 When discussing the onset of joint pain caused by gout in the beginning and its symptoms like redness or swelling that may accompany it, do you consider if cautery should be performed to prevent this type of injury, and what treatment is used to alleviate the acute pain during recovery from such an injury?
E lahoras cove que tu fassas cezer la femna sobre una cezelha que aia doas cezelhas; e recline sobre le sieu dos e ajusta les sieus pes a la partida pus dejos del ventre, e las sieus coyssas sian expandudas, e pausa les sieus brasses dejos les sieus denols, e lia quascus am liament ad aquo convenient.	 Lay the woman on her side with one cushion placed under her abdomen and adjust them to a comfortable position by placing your hand over their chest; meanwhile let your fingers hold onto something appropriate as you perform this task.
E aprop la matrona segua del latz dreyt e aministre le instrument am le qual es ubert le orrifici de la mayre, la forma del qual vindra en aquelas causas que·s faran aprop.	 Then apply the tool to make the incision in the thigh; let it be guided by that which will fit into those causes for making the incision there.
E cove quan vols ministrar aquest instrument que tu fiques am lo ray le preon de la mayre de la femna, e aquo que del instrument es intrat en la mayre no sia mays que·l preon de la mayre e leda le malaute.	 When you want to use this tool on a woman's leg, fix it at the top of her thigh, and where the tool enters into the larger part is more than half the thickness of the instrument, it will be entered deeper inside.
Mays si l’estrument es major que·l preon de la mayre, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils sobre la textura del preon de la mayre per sso que sia prohibit l’intrament de tot instrument en le preon de la mayre.	 If the tool is larger than half the thickness of the thigh, then pain occurs when you try to insert it into the thigh, causing a restriction that prevents any other tool from entering there.
E cove que tu pauses le vertitge que corr en le strument del latz pus desus e que le ministre tengua le strument e revolva le vertitge entro que sia ubert le orrifici de la mayre.	 It is necessary that you take note of the height at which the instrument runs through its length, and it must be held such that when ministering to the patient, both the instrument and the hole are opened together so as not to disturb any other part of their anatomy.
E cum appar la excitura, e es tocada am la ma e es leon e molh, lahoras cove que tu secces aquela deves le cap de lu am spatum lat.	 After the incision has been made at the hand and is open and wet, it must be observed that you should proceed to close this part of his head from below up.
E cum la sania es evacuada, lahoras cove que tu pauses en la plagua una meca submersa en oli rozat o oli vert en le qual sia alcuna stiptisitat; e pausa la calca7 en la seccio en le preon de la mayre.	 After the ulcer is evacuated, it must be observed that you should insert a soaked sponge in hot oil or warm water, such that no stagnation occurs there; and then place the cloth on the wound at its location above the thigh.
E pause deforo la mayre e sobre le pentenilh lana munda submersa en aygua en la qual sian bulidas malvas.	 After removing the breast, spread a wet cloth over the abdomen that is immersed in water and contains boils.
E aprop sia curada aprop dos dias am enguent le qual conveneys ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	 It was done at two days after it had been decided to proceed as advised there, where he should be treated with respect for his health.
E alcunas veguadas es lavada la mayre e la plagua enayssi que es cristerisat am aygua e mel, e aprop am aygua en la qual es bulhida razit de liri o de aristologia longua, e aprop retorna al enguent.	 When a large and small vein is cleaned up in order to perform surgery on the leg or arm, prepare everything necessary for surgery such as instruments and assistants are summoned.
E si la plagua es dedintz en la mayre ameguada, lahoras cove que tu sias prohibit de la curacio de lu am ferr, habantz cura aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio.	 If the vein is cut into a large artery, it is customary for you not to perform surgery on that limb if allowed by the patient.
Capitol .lxxv.	 Chapter LXXV
A ensenhar las matronas en qual manieyre les enbrios bius sian medicatz quan yeysso segon figura no-natural.	 To show the midwives where to place the stitches if they are outside a natural fold.
Necessaria causa es que la matrona conogua en le comensament la figura del enfantament natural per senhals de lu, e es que quan tu vezas la femna expremar a las partidas dejos e desira odorar le ayre, e sobre aquo es enleujada per aquo que sobre ela es del part, e festina le eyssiment del enbrio, lahoras sapias que aquest part es segon figura natural, e es l’eyssiment de lu sobre le sieu cap, e la segondina am aquel o suspensa o pendent del ombelic.	 It is necessary that the midwife should first make sure there are no other injuries outside of a natural fold and then when she hears the woman scream or cry out in pain, about it, it is understood by this which part is the second figure of nature and it will be stitched up under his chin.
Donc cum tu vezes aquels senhals, lahoras cove que·l ventre de lu sia compremut per so que l’embrio deysenda leugerament quar quan deyssen sobre le sieu cap, deysen a lu la segondina, e es mondada de aquelas superfluitatz am bona mondificacio.	 Therefore when you come across these situations, the midwife should ensure that the belly of the child is not damaged so that it does not become loose during delivery, and then place another one over his chin and remove any unnecessary stitches after a good operation.
Mays aquel que es otra aquest part es no-natural e no-lausable, quar quan le enbrio es eyssit sobre sos pes e·l cos de lu es eyssit devant le cap de lu e·ls pes de lu, e la ma de lu una, o al pe de lu i, o es eyssit le cap de lu e la ma de lu, o al ventre de lu, e fort leu es convertit sobre le sieu col, e semblant de las figuras de lu no-lausablas.	 If another part is not natural and unusable, when the stitches are removed from that area of the child's body it will be removed at the top of their head or on the feet, hand or belly depending on how loose it becomes after the operation.
Don necessaria causa es a la matrona que sia savia e subtil en totas aquelas causas, e que·s guarde de error e de decepcio.	 The first sentence translates to "It's necessary that the midwife knows all these causes well and is discreet in handling them.
E yeu so mostrant tota figura de aquelas, e qual engen es en aquelas per so que sia significat per aquo e sia stat sobre aquo.	 You should present a complete picture of those, making sure that what it means here aligns with and is consistent with that elsewhere.
Quan le feyt es eyssit sobre le sieu cap per egrecio natural, e aquel es vehement sobre la femna e es fayt a lu part dificil, e vezes la vertut de lu ja debelitada, lahoras fay aquela sezer , o que las femnas tenguan lu, e evapora le conh de lu am fenugrec coyt e am olis humitz.	 When the veins become swollen on the head due to a natural cause, and it is severe in women and makes walking difficult for them, doctors recommend that they stop using shoes made of fur or wool.
E aprop entrometa la metrona entre les sieus ditz espatum petit e fenda am aquel la segondina, o secce aquela am la sua ungla entro que corro aquo que es en ela de humiditat.	 Then take the thermometer between their two forefingers and underarm, so that it touches the area of the second joint when you touch your wrist to check for humidity.
E preme le ventre de la femna entro que deyssenda le fet.	 Press the abdomen of a woman until she gives birth.
Mays si no deyssen, lahoras cove que la femna sia cristirizada de mucellage de ptilli e mucellage de fenugrec am cizami.	 If not, then doctors recommend that the woman be circumcised of both labia and frenulum.
E aprop comanda a lu, aprop le cristeri, que sia compremuda e fay aquela stornudar am condisi; e te la boca de lu e·l nas de lu per huna hora, quar le fet sira foro-getat tantost.	 Then command her to fast for three days without drinking water or food, and have the mouth of her and her nose perforated with a needle during that period.
E si las doas mas del fet so foro-getadas al comensament, lahoras cove que tu redusiscas aquelas am fecilitat petit a petit.	 If both hands are swollen at the start of it, then doctors recommend reducing those little by little.
Mays si no obezeys al intrament, lahoras pausa la femna sobre una cezelha e leva les pes de lu sus, e aprop concuceys la cezelha sobre la terra; e la femna sia tenguda que no caia deves la concussio.	 When the belly is not obese and the person has passed urine on a cloth, take it from them and place it under their feet, then remove the cloth and have her sit down so that she cannot make contact with the ground by sitting up.
E si las mas no son dedintz tornadas e morr le fet, lahoras inscideys aquelas e extratz le romament del fet o lia le cors a la ma de lu am drap e extratz aquel am equalitat, quar aquel sira foro-getat.	 If the above conditions are not met and the patient dies or loses consciousness, doctors should examine the body for any external injuries to the head and chest and remove it from the bed as necessary, ensuring that they do not die of suffocation by lifting their arms
De eyssiment del embrio sobre les sieus pes.	 From above, the abdomen towards their feet
Quan le fet yeys sobre les sieus pes, lahoras cove que tu impelliscas aquels en sus, e aprop convertas le fet petit, e aprop que engualhes aquel, e aprop que prenguas un pe de lu e extendas aquels petit a petit.	 When the patient lies on their back, doctors should gently lift them to sit up and then turn them towards the ground, supporting their head as necessary to prevent injury and maintain stability.
Mays cum son eyssit entro a las coyssas, lahoras tu comanda a lu que se exprema, e fay aquela extornudar am condizi, quar sira foro-getat si Deus lo vol.	 If the above conditions occur and there is concern for injury or suffocation, doctors should instruct them to lie flat on their back, placing pillows beneath them if necessary to prevent further injuries and ensure they can breathe properly.
E si no es foro-getat am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras tu retorna le fet petit a petit entro que pauses aquel segon figura natural, quar aquel sira lahoras foro-getat am leugier eyssiment.	 If they do not regain consciousness at this point and doctors recommend it, doctors should return them to the prone position gradually over time so that their chest returns to its normal shape, ensuring that further injuries are avoided.
E si es prohibit am tot aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras pren de musellage de altea e de goma dissolvuda, e percuteys tot en le mortier per bona percussio, e aprop linieys am aquo le conh de la femna, el pus bas del ventre de lu.	 If all recommendations have been exhausted and prohibited by the patient's condition or circumstances, doctors should perform a percussion over the sternum to try and stimulate breathing with gentle blows, then turn their body over to check for signs of life in the lower abdomen.
E aprop fay aquela cezer en aygua tebeza, entro que consegua les ypocondias.	 And put something between his thighs, place a cushion under them, another on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
E cum vezes que las partidas dejos de lu so lenificadas, lahoras fay a lu subfumiguacio de mirta e sub-pausa aquela a lu.	 And if the cuts are very small, do not apply direct pressure but rather place something under them and hold back slightly to prevent bleeding.
E quan te la sub-fumiguacio per una hora, lahoras tu la fay sezer sobre una cezelha, e aprop fay aquela stornudar e extrenh la boca de lu, e levas de aquela, e prem la partida pus bassa del ventre de lu am leugiera compressio, quar le fet sira tantost foro-getat.	 When you apply the tourniquet for one hour, place a bandage over it and tighten it to stop the bleeding from his mouth, remove that, and press firmly on his belly button as if giving a compression.
Eyssiment del fet sobre les sieus denols e las suas mas.	 Make sure both legs are straight.
Quan le fet eyssira segon aquesta forma, lahoras tu engenies en entrometen las suas mas petit a petit; e aprop la femna stia evessada sobre le sieu col, e les pes de lu pengo en jos, e aquelas sia jasent sobre le lieyt, e complegua las suas mas.	 When the fetus has achieved this position, gently insert the smaller one into its mouth and place your hand over it, and keep the other leg bent to make sure you do not block his field of vision.
E aprop prem sobre le ventre de lu petit a petit, e aprop extratz aquo que es dejos les pes de lu de las aurelhas entro que sia preparada en la partida pus dejos.	 Then press firmly on the belly button little by little until you have pushed his legs apart and are ready to deliver him into this world gently.
E si le fet no es fora-getat, lahoras pren les pes de lu e mau aquels am movement vehement, e aprop prem aquo que es sobre les ypocondres petit a petit entro que le fet puege a las partidas desus.	 If the fetus is not fully dilated, take his legs and make sure you're making strong contractions while pushing gently towards your cervix until he can start delivering from there.
E aprop entrometa las suas mas e engualhe le fet petit a petit, e comanda a la femna que se exprema entro que le fet sia foro-getat.	 And when you're ready to deliver the fetus gently enter your hand and guide it gently towards her as she opens up until he is fully dilated.
Eyssiment del fet latutidinalment pendent una de las suas mas.	 "Having placed a cushion under one of their thighs
Sia engeniat en reduccio de la ma de lu, mays si no podes aquela reduzir, lahoras eleva la femna e fe aquela anar.	 The surgeon will then proceed to reduce the abdomen if it is not possible to reduce that part
E si anar no pot, lahoras fay la jazer sobre le lieyt, e concuteys las coyssas de lu am concussio vehement, e aprop aministra liamentz les quals yeu e recomtatz de mucillages.	 If it is not possible to reduce that part, then the surgeon will apply a strong compression bandage and recommend the use of enemetics.
E si es vengut le enfantament, lahoras fay aquela sezer sobre cezelha, e aprop studia sobre la reduccio de la ma, e enguala le fet segon figura natural, e fay stornudar la femna e comanda a lu que comprema a si entro que sia foro-getat.	 If the fetus is engaged, then the surgeon will apply pressure to the cervix and order them to perform a second normal delivery as soon as possible.
Eyssiment del fet sobre·l col expandudas las suas mas e la fassia de lu es al dos de la sua mayre.	 The fetus is positioned so that its head is at the bottom of your pelvis, and you begin to push downwards towards the floor.
Cove que la matrona tengua la ma del fet e aprop revolva aquel petit a petit, e eque aquel am facilitat.	 As the midwife holds the fetus's hand and gently pulls it slowly, making that easy for her.
E cum es e quant so es engualhat, e lahoras pausa sobre le conh de lu aquo que havem recomtat de oli e de mucellages.	 When that is done, the surgeon stops urging them to take oil and enemetics.
E aprop comandas a lu que·s maugua petit a petit, e quan auras feyt aquo, lahoras fay aquela cezer sobre una cezelha e comanda li que sia inclinada sobre le latz dreyt, e aprop comanda a lu que sia compremuda; e fay aquela stornudar am condizi.	 Then the surgeon commands them to gradually increase their effort and when they feel that, orders her to apply pressure on one side of the pelvis and tells him to lie down in order for him to breathe properly; then she asks them to start pushing.
Exitus foetus praeparati super latus.	 Death of fetus above the hips
Quan deyssen a horrifici de la mayre segon aquesta manieyra, considera, e lahoras tu inscideys la segondina am la tua ungla entro que sia evacuada de la humiditat.	 When you have opened up this horrible wound, consider that the pain will subside as the second part of your urine is excreted from the humidity.
E si le fet es suspendut sobre la cara e·l col de lu, lahoras tu inscideys aquela del embelic, per so que no sia retengut e mora.	 If it's suspended over the face and neck of him, then let the pain subside as long as it is not held tight or forced to stay there.
E aprop empelleys le fet a las partidas dedintz entro que pauses aquel segon que cove, e manda a la femna que comprema a si alcunas veguadas, e el sira fora-getat am eyssiment leugier, si Dieus o vol.	 Then remove the thing from the direction to which it is pointing towards and move the woman so that she can see any obstacles in her way, otherwise if there are no obstacles, let them continue as they were originally intended.
Exitus geminorum aut foetuum multorum.	 Death of twins or many children.
Sapias que gemels motas veguadas so natz, e alcunas vetz naysso tres o quatre , mays aquo es estranh e tart s’endeve; mays v so causas foro natura, e no vivo.	 If twins were to be separated at an early age or three or four years old, this would not be beneficial, as the causes of nature do not lead them there, and it is unnatural to make that choice.
E conte aquelas, ja sia que sian montiplicatz, una segondina, e son seperatz per ciphac, distingen aquels enter le liguament en l’ombilic de cascun de aquels E alcunas veguadas so foro-getatz ayssi cum es un fet per eyssiment natural leugier, e so eysitz alcunas veguadas per eyssiment no-lausabla ayssi cum havem recomtat.	 And if they are twins separated at an early age or the second one is separated from the first one and it is done through surgery, ensure that all the ligaments in their abdominal area are still intact as this is a choice made to encourage natural development of their bodies, so let them be separated for non-labouring purposes only if others have recommended otherwise.
E si son dificils alcus de lor deves le enfantament e perveno ad aquo que havem dit de las figuras no-naturals, lahoras tu cura aquels ayssi cum havem recontat.	 And if the separations were difficult and you want to put in writing that they do not follow natural forms, then let them know so as to record this decision.
E si’ la matrona subtil e fassa aquo que fa am facilitat e subtilitat, e am tarditat, e sia ingeniat segon tota figura segon que es a lu preparat de l’engen amenant a salut.	 When the midwife is subtle and does this that makes it easy and subtle, and takes time, and has ingenuity second after everything when she reaches the prepared body by the doctor for health.
Rememoratio eius quod formatur in matrice ex embrionibus et Abortiuntur.	 The remembrance of things which are formed from embryos and abort
Alcunas veguadas son formatz en la mayre un, e dos, e tres, e quatre, e v, e vi, e vii, e mays x, e ja es deves mi verificat que una femna abortem ne getet vi, e una autra x totz formatz, la qual causa fo fayta per mensuracio dels glorios savis.	 Some eggs are formed in the larger one, and two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight, nine, ten; it is true that a woman can abort them all at once, which causes to be said about the glory of wisdom measurements.
E tot aysso cove que sia en la sciencia de la matrona quar fort leu ad aquela parve semblant de aquo, e donc opause se ad aquo am so que cove.	 And then it is also that in the science of the midwife she should be very light and like this one, and do such a thing to stop it as much as possible.
Capitol .lxxvi.	 Chapter sixty-six.
De extraccio del fet quan es mort.	 Of extricating the body when death occurs.
Quan tu curas le fet mort am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la medicacio e no es defora eyssit, e tu yest forsat usar de opperacio am ma, lahoras cove que consideras si la femna es de sana vertut e no es am alcu dels accidentz per les quals sobre ela es temuda perdicio.	 When you cure the dead body as it has been said in the division of medicine and is not forbidden, and you are also forced to use an operation with a needle, then consider whether or not the woman is of sound health and is not in any way related to the accidents that she fears will lead to loss.
Lahoras cove que la femna sia envessada sobre le lieyt sobre le sieu dos, e sia le cap de lu enclinat enjos e las coyssas de lu sian elevadas.	 Then consider that the woman is wearing a belt on her waist and has her head inclined to one side, with both of her legs extended.
E·l ministre tengua aquela de doas partz o sia liada en le lieyt per so que·l cos de lu no se extenda deves la extraccio del fet.	 When the minister has that of two parts or laid out in a line, such that the body of him not to extend downwards towards the feet.
E aprop tu humecta la boca de la mayre de lu am olis humitz e am mucellage de altea e de fenugrec e de semensa de li.	 You will now translate this sentence: "To moisten the mouth of the big one with a mixture of honey, water, flour and salt.
E aprop unte la matrona la sua ma am aquels olis e mucellages, e aprop entrometa la sua ma am fecilitat en la mayre, e aprop cerque am la ma loc en le qual fique les uncis en le fet.	 You will now translate this sentence: "To make the woman's hand moist with various mixtures and to prevent her hand from being stiff in the larger area, put a cloth over it so that both ends are within the body.
E locs convenient en aquo: adonc tu considera si le fet es preparat que deysenda sobre le sieu cap, e lahoras tu fique les uncis en les huels de lu, o en le col, o en la boca, o en le palat, o dejos la barba, o en la furcula de lu, o en les locs propdas de las costas, o dejos les ypocondres.	 "When it is convenient in this: when you consider that the body is ready to be served on its head, and the sores are located there or at the nose or at the palate or on his beard, or in the furcula of him, or in those places where the back comes out, or in the armpits.
Mays si le deysendiment es sobre les pes de lu, lahoras en le pentenilh, o en le mieg de las costas.	 "If it is about the soles of him, put it on his belly, or at the side of back.
E cove que tengua le unci am la ma dreyta, e pausa la curvitat de lu en aquel loc le qual es entre les ditz de la ma senestra, e entrometa la ma am facilitat e fique le unci en alcu de aquels locs les quals havem ditz, entro que pervengua a la causa boyda.	 "Put your left hand on the right side of his body, and put it over where there is an angle between the two parts of the right arm.
E aprop pause e fique en la apposicio de lu un autre unci, o le tertz si es necessitat, per so que sia atraccio engual, e no sia extencio segon la sua rectetut tant solament.	 When you have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, place a cushion under them and another servant on their legs, if necessary, to hold their hands steady as they will receive treatment.
Ans sia maugut a tota partida, per so que l’eyssiment de lu sia alleujat ayssi cum es fayt en dent deves la eradicacio de lu.	 In the end of each sentence there is something missing, which needs to be added before proceeding: "to remove
E cove en lu aquo que es entre lor que la extencio sia mollificada; e si alcuna partida de lu es retenguda, lahoras cove que la matrona unte alcus sieus ditz am oli e entrometa aquels espertament e revolva am aquels aquo que es retengut.	 In this sentence "the end of each" is missing before "sentence".
Donc si la partida del fet es fora-getada, lahoras les uncis sian permudatz entra loc le qual sia pus aut; e fay aysso entro que tot le fet sia fora-getat.	 If the child's case is not properly treated, the doctors will make it worse.
Mays si la ma es eyssida denant l’autra, e no es possible reduzir aquela per la coartacio de lu, lahoras cove que drap sia envolopat sobre aquela; e aprop extratz aquela entro que tota sia fora-getada, e inscideys aquela o en la junctura de la ma o en le coyde.	 If the other arm is swollen due to an ulcer, it cannot be reduced by bandaging alone. The doctors then cover that with a bandage and put pressure on it to ensure that everything is treated completely or at the joint of the arm or at its base.
E ayssi cove que fassas en l’autra ma e en les dos pes.	 Do this for both arms and feet as well.
Mays si le cap del fet es gran, o accideys a lu coartacio en le eyssiment, o es en le cap de lu aygua ajustada, lahoras cove que entrometa entre les ditz espatum spinos e fenda le cap e extragua la aygua, o que discroba aquel am un instrument le qual es nompnat “alundat”, la forma del qual vindra am las formas dels autres instruments en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	 If the head of the patient is large or when he is having difficulty breathing due to a swelling, doctors will put something in between his teeth to hold his mouth open and extract water through an instrument called "alundat", which looks like others but has its own shape.
E semblantment fassa si·l fet es de gran cap per natura: e lahoras cove que inscida aquel am algematu, o que prengua aquel am alunda ayssi cum havem dit; e aprop extra les osses am les forceps.	 When the body is naturally large, pains are inflicted upon it with cold humors; and when pain occurs in the bones, as if caused by illness or old age, then apply a pointed instrument to extract them.
E si le cap es eyssit e es coartat deves la furcula, lahoras sia fendut entro que la humiditat la qual es en le pietz sia efunduda.	 If the head is small and the veins are blocked, then apply a cautery to drain off the moisture in that part of the body.
Mays si no es complicat, ni obezeys a eyssiment, lahoras tu inscideys le cap tantost segon que a tu sira possible.	 If it is not complicated or excessive, then apply the cautery to strike gently upon the head until such treatment becomes necessary.
E si le dejos del ventre es apostemat o es en lu ydropici, lahoras cove que tu perfores aquel entro que corro la humiditat que es en lu.	 If the dropsy from the abdomen is caused by illness or old age, then apply a cautery to drain off the moisture in that area.
Mays si le fet es sobre les sieus pes, lahoras la atraccio de lu es leugiera e la direccio de lu a la boca de la mayre es leugiera.	 If the patient's limbs are swollen or there is dropsy from them, then apply a cautery to drain off the moisture in their mouth first and next towards the nose.
Mays si es coartat deves le ventre e·l pietz, lahoras cove que tu extraguas aquel am drap le qual auras envolopat sobre la tua ma, e que fendes le ventre e·l pietz entro que corra aquo que es en aquels.	 If the abdomen and chest are blocked or there is dropsy in them, then apply a cautery to extract that humors which have infiltrated into your hands, and drain off the moisture from the abdomen and chest towards these.
Mays si les autres membres so ostatz e torna le cap, lahoras la metrona entrometa la ma senestra; mays si la boca de la mayre es huberta, lahoras intrometa la ma en le preon de layre, e cerque am aquela le cap, e atira aquel am les ditz entro a la boca de la mayre, e aprop entrometa en lu un unci, o dos uncis, e atire lu am aquels.	 If the other limbs are swollen and the head is blocked or there is dropsy from it, then apply the cautery to strike gently upon your forehead as before; if the larger mouth is blocked, apply the hand into that opening first, striking gently until you extract the humors through this one, two openings.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada per apostema caut le qual accideys a l’u, lahoras cove que no sia trebelhat sobre lu; abantz cove lahoras aministrar efusio de causas humidas grassas.	 If the upper jaw is closed due to an abscess that causes pain when it opens, then the doctor should not apply heat on it; instead, they will administer fluid with cooling properties.
E aministre emplastres; e segua le pacient en ayguas que mollifican e humectan.	 They will give the patient something to drink that soothes and moisturizes
E si le fet es sobre le sieu costat, lahoras si possible es, sia agulat: e sia aministrat aquo que havem dit en le fet viu.	 If it is on his side, then possibly the doctor should try to apply that as directed before the live demonstration.
E si aquo no es possible, lahoras sia inscidit en pessas, e sia extrayt.	 If that cannot be done, they will insist and leave it alone.
E cove que non layssas alcuna causa dedintz de la segondina.	 They will not cause any harm to the second part.
E cum tu auras complida tota la tua opperacio, lahoras aministra aquo que havem dit de la curacio en les apostemas cautz les quals accideysso de la mayre.	 When you are done with all of your efforts, the doctor will administer that which has been prescribed for treatment to the abscess pain on their face.
E si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras deyssendas en ayguas stipticas e aministra l’autra curacio.	 If it turns out there are no more abscesses, they will give you a different medication.
E yeu ja e vist una femna en le ventre de la qual era fet mort, e aprop sobre aquel foc autra veguada emprenhada, e aprop foc mort es le fet autre.	 When you saw one woman with a dead fetus in her belly and another one was trying to remove it by force, if the latter is killed, then let the other be removed.
Accidit al u aprop lonc temps apostema en le sieu embelic; e inflat es entro que foc ubert, e comensec a getar brac.	 The abscess was opened in time and fluid flowed out when it burst, beginning to heal as the arm came closer.
E yeu fu appelhat a la cura de lu, e medicat a lu per lonc temps, e la plagua no es consolidada.	 He asked for treatment of him, and treated him for a long time, but the wound did not heal.
Adonc yeu pausegui sobre lu de alscunas causas emplastra de forta atraccio, e eyssic de lu un os, e aprop passero alcus jorns, e eyssic un autre os; e yeu fu trop meravilhat, cum en le ventre no sia os.	 When the pain is caused by a strong attraction of the causes inside and outside, it is customary to have another orifice, and also to have the first one pass through without delay, so that both should be opened simultaneously; but if this is not possible due to reasons related to pregnancy or some other conditions.
E adonc yeu cogitegui que eran dels osses del fet mort.	 When you think about the bones of a dead fetus
Donc yeu enguisigui la plagua, e extrayssi de lu motz osses , la femna existent en las sieuas milhos disposicios, e ja visquec en tal manieyra per lonc temps, correc de lu un petit de brac.	 Then you should lubricate the passage, and also remove the external muscles of the body, except for those that exist in the vagina's vestibule; then apply a small amount to your hand.
E yeu no afermegui asso esser stranh, sino quar en aquo es sciensa e ajutori ad aquo que le metge artifec am la ma per curacio aministra.	 Do not use it unless you know that the treatment is known and helps by a doctor.
De las formas dels instrumentz que so necessaris a extrayre le fet.	 Of the forms of instruments that are necessary to remove the fetus.
Forma de vertitge am la qual es uberta la mayre:	 The form of virtue by which you are guided, namely to do no harm
Aquesta es la forma de strenhedor en le qual so engualhatz les libres, al qual engualhament sian dos virtitges en doas extremitatz de dos futz.	 This is the form of strength in which you are guided, namely to have compassionately treated those who are enslaved; and also two virtues at the same time from both extremities of two feet.
May empero aquesta virtitge cove que sia pus subtil de strictori, e sia fayt o de eba o de fust de boys.	 May this virtue be very subtle in its severity, allowing for a range between firmness and gentleness to those who need it.
E sia la latitut de quascun fust quays dos ditz e le marge de quascu amdos quays un dit, e la longitut de quascu es un palm e mig; e en le mieg loc de dos fustz so dos ajustaments de aquel meteys fustz les quals ja son fermatz, dels quals la longitut es la maytat de un palm e un pauc mes, e la latitut de quascu es quay dos ditz, o un pauc mes.	 It is the width of each fist that measures two thumbs and an inch; and its length from one to another thumb, or a few inches longer than that, depending on the firmness you want.
E aquestz dos additamentz sian entromeses en la boca de la mayre per que sia uberta am aquels quan tu revolves las doas prescriptas virtigges.	 When two additional entries will enter through the mouth of the greater, it should be forced open with those prescribed virtues when you perform the two specified gestures.
Forma autra semblant de aquela pus subtil e pus leugiera:	 Another equally subtle and graceful manner is as follows:
Sia fayta de fustz de eba o de boys segon la semblansa de forceps.	 Use a touch of gentle pressure, or with the help of scissors to gently separate it from the rest.
Mays empero en la extremitat de lu so dos additament ayssi cum vezes, e la longitut de aquels additament es quays un palm, e la latitut de quascu es dos ditz.	 The two additional entries should be made at the tip of it twice, and the length of these additions is as wide as a thumb, and the latitude of each one is half that distance.
E cum tu vols am aquels ubrir la mayre, lahoras tu fay cezer la femna sobre le lieyt les pes pendentz, ubert aquo que es entre las coyssas de lu.	 When you want to bring it out through the greater opening, place your hand gently over its feet and hold it firmly between the thighs.
E aprop obre la tua ma am le instrument ayssi cum fas am forfexs engualment segon la quantitat que vols de la aprecio de la boca de la mayre entro que la metrona fassa so que vols.	 You should hold your hand as firmly as if you were holding a pair of forceps, and place it in such a way that the amount you want from opening into the greater mouth matches what is needed to measure for how much you desire.
La forma de vertitge la qual diysero les antics:	 The manner which they used formerly was as follows:
Forma de impellent am le qual es empellit le fet:	 The manner in which it is to be done by pressing on it.
Forma de amisidat2 am le qual es conterit le cap gran	 The method of doing this is as follows:
E es asemblat a forceps al qual so dentz en la extremitat, ayssi cum vezes, e alcunas veguadas es fayt lonc ayssi cum forceps segon aquesta forma, ayssi cum vezes, al qual so dentz ayssi cum dentz de ressegua am le qual es inscidit e conterit.	 The instrument of doing this is as follows:
Forma de amesidat pauc:	 In a certain manner,
Forma de unci havent una spina:	 The spine has been separated.
Forma de unci havent doas spinas:	 The vertebrae have been separated.
Forma de forceps a la qual so dentz de cerra am le qual le cap del fet sia conterit:	 A pair of forceps used to deliver the child's head without injury.
Forma de spatum havent dos extremitatz am le qual le cap es abscindit:	 Two arms have been separated at the level where the head is cut off.
Forma de dos espatums latz:	 Two spoons used in a surgical procedure.
Totz aquels instrumentz so excersitatz, e quan mes so multiplicadas las specias de aquel e so preparadas deves le artifexs, quant es pus leugier a la sua opperacio e pus aut deves les homes per la sua quantitat.	 When these instruments are used, and when multiple species of them have been prepared as required for the operation, it is necessary to choose the appropriate size based on the quantity you want to use.
E no obres de aquels instrumentz ja sia qua sia deves tu aparalhat, quar la necessitat de aquels no es excusabla.	 If these instruments are not used as specified and it is impossible for them to be recovered, then the need for those items cannot be excused.
De extraccio de la segondina.	 The second part of the procedure begins.
Quan la segondina es retenguda deves le enfantament, lahoras cove que tu comandes a la malautae que retengua le sieu ale, e aprop fay aquela stornudar am condizi, e strenh la tua ma sobre la boca de lu e sobre las nars de lu, e si per aysso es defora eyssit, bo es.	 When the second stage is finished and it's time to deliver the child, you will tell the midwife to hold him firmly so that he doesn't move around too much, and gently stroke his face with your hand over the mouth and nostrils of him, if necessary, or otherwise.
E sino, lahoras tu pren una ola e perfora en la cuberta un trauc e pausa en aquela erbas ubrent la boca de la mayre, ayssi cum calament e ruda e anet e camamilla e scicados arabic e cassia lignea e santaurea.	 Otherwise, you will take a cloth and put it in the child's mouth to cool him down gently with cold water, continuously washing his face slowly and carefully as well as with chamomile, sage, cinnamon, licorice, and sandalwood oil.
Totas aquestas erbas o alcunas de lor sian submersas en aygua en la ola, e pausa aquela sobre le foc.	 When these herbs or some of them are submerged in water, and placed on top of fire
E aprop pausa una canula de canaviera en la boca de la mayre, e tengua aquela entro que la evapor vengua a la concavitat de la mayre.	 You place the cannula into the mouth of the patient, making sure it enters through the cavity of their nose.
E aprop fay aquela stornudar ayssi cum havem dit, e la segondina sira fora-getada am velocitat.	 Place a second cannula at a rapid rate after that one
Mays si roman aprop aquesta curacio e no es eyssida, lahoras tu comanda a la matrona que submerge la sua ma sinistra en oli sizami o en micellage de altea, e aprop entrometa aquela en le conh e queresca am aquela la segondina, e cum aquela auras trobada, lahoras pren la e exten aquela pauc a pauc Mays si es annexsa en le preon de la mayre, lahoras entrometa la sua ma segon que havem recomtat, e quan aura trobat la segondina, extragua aquela petit a petit segon rectetut per so que la mayre no caja deves la atraccio vehement.	 Place the second cannula into her left hand and make sure it is submerged in olive oil or micellar solution as well, and then bring them together for use after that one has been found.
Abantz cove que sia permudada als costatz dreyt e sinestre am facilitat.	 The doctor will be able to easily move your arms from side to side.
E aprop sia ajustat en la quantitat de atraccio, quar ela obedira e evasira de adhirencia.	 Adjust the amount of traction as required, ensuring that it does not cause harm or injury.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada, nos ja havem recomtat la curacio am sturnutacio e am medicacio de la ola am erbas.	 If a patient's mouth is closed, you will administer the cannula insertion and medical treatment of their wounds with herbs
Mays si no es fora-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recomtadas, lahoras guarda te que no fetigues sobre aquela en iteracio de abstracio, mays empero cove que aquo que es eyssit de lu a la boca de la mayre lies a la coyssa de la femna, e aprop cristeriza aquela am enguent e tetrafarmacon; quar aquel fara poyrir aquela aprop alcus dias e sira dissolvuda e sira fora-getada.	 If the causes that you have mentioned are not complete, please make sure to avoid mentioning them in this section of abstraction, but it is allowed to indicate here that something was missed from the mouth of the patient's woman and then proceed to insert a cannula into her arm and tetra-farmacon; ensuring that such insertion occurs smoothly without causing any issues.
Mays quan se poyreys, es de lu elevada mala audor al cap, e al estomac, e aquo ledeys la malauta; e adonc cove que sian aministradas sub-fumiguacios e convenientz ad aquo.	 When the patient is about to vomit, elevate their head and stomach, and hold their tongue in place with something soft; also ensure that they are administered with a drink.
Mays alcus dels Antics ja so esproatz sub-fumigacio de nazitort e de figuas seccas.	 The ancient remedies include holding the nose closed to prevent suffocation and using soft towels or gauze soaked in water for spitting out phlegm.
Forma de instrument am le qual la femna es sub-fumiguada deves la retentio de mestruas e de la segondina:	 The manner of the instrument with which you should gently restrain the chest and second part of the body,
Sia fayta de veyre o de eram.	 Which way do you want to go or came?
E sia pausada la extremitat subtil en le conh e la extremitat ampla sobre le foc, e la sub-fumiguacio sia pausada sobre las brazas del foc.	 The delicate extremity is placed on the forehead and wide extremity above the fire; the restraint of spitting motion should be done over the palms of the hands.
E tengua aquela entro que sia consumida aquela sub-fumiguacio e itera·n autra.	 Ensure that the former has been consumed, but only then go on to another one.
De curacio del cul del enfant no-perforat.	 The anus of a child should not be perforated.
Motz enfantz naysso e les culs de lu no so perforatz, les quals ya ciphac subtil e opilat.	 A baby's buttocks and the anus must not be pierced, especially with something soft and blunt.
Adonc cove a la matrona que perfore am le sieu dit aquel ciphac; e sino, perfora aquel am spatum agut, e guarda se que no toque le lacert.	 And also tell the woman not to pierce her own tongue if she wants to keep it whole, and hold onto it tightly so that nothing touches it
E aprop pause sobre aquel lana enfusa en vi e oli; e aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia senat.	 Then put some oil on the inflamed area of your body, but also clean off anything that has come into contact with it.
Mays si temes que sia opilat, lahoras pausa en le trauc una canula per motz dias, e osta la quan le enfant voldra degerir.	 If you fear the piercing will be painful, stop the procedure by inserting a needle to numb the area first, and tell them when they want to proceed.
E ja accideys oppilacio del cul per consolidacio de plagua o de apostema; adonc cove que aquela consolidacio sia inscidida, e aprop sia curada am aquo que avem dit de la curacio e del plom.	 When the anus is opened to insert a suppository or enema; but after that insertion if it was not inserted correctly, then do as follows:
De curacio de las fistulas que endeveno dejos.	 After that procedure, you should follow this course of action.
Las fistulas que endeveno en la partida dejos pus bassa so nodacio e grossetut las quals endeveno prop del cul defora o en l’espazi de la una partida.	 Fistulas occurring in the anus can be treated by first ensuring the opening is properly closed and disinfected, then cleaning out any discharge or debris that was left behind from the procedure.
E es una fistula o motas.	 Is it a fistula or something else?
E cum aquela nodacio es antiquada e corr de la humiditat aygosa blanca o poyridura subtil, e alcunas veguadas so de aquestas fistulas alcunas penetrantz.	 If the opening is old and corroded by humidity, producing a white or powdery discharge, some of these fistulae may be penetrated.
E aquelas penetrantz so conogudas per aquo que es eyssit de aquelas per la egressio e per ventosetat; e alcunas vetz use le malaute de egressio, e fort leu es eyssit de aquelas verm.	 Those penetrators are used to expel what is coming out and prevent it from going back in; some vessels also close off the exit for expulsion, but it's easier to expel those.
E so de aquelas fistulas alcunas veguadas en l’espazi penetrantz entro a la vesica, e entro al meat de la vergua; e so de aquelas penetrantz entro la junctura de la coyssa e entro al notz de la coeta.	 Some of these fistulae form in the area between the bladder and rectum, or even inside the vagina; and some penetrators enter into the junction of the thighs and the scrotum.
E aquo en que es conoguda fistula penetrant entro al cul e no-penetrant, es que tu metas le tieu dit endic en le cul, e entrometas tenta subtil de eram o de ferr en la fistula quan no y es turtuositat.	 In the case of a fistulas that are both penetrable and non-penetrable, you want to try putting a finger inside in order to detect it or to pierce into it if it is turpitude.
Mays si en aquela es turtuositat, lahoras entromet en aquela tenta subtil de plom o de pels de caval entro que tu sentas la tenta o le pel en le tieu dit.	 When it is necessary to enter into something that causes a stir or the fumes of the horse enter you in such a manner that you feel the heat or the hair coming out through your nose,
E si no sentas aquela de tot ni no procezeys del trauc alcuna causa de egestio ni verm ni ventositat, ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras sapias que es no-penetrant, e lahoras coyta te a la curacio.	 If you do not feel anything or if there is no emission of fumes or the stirrings are not present, then as I said earlier, it means that the pain has gone away and you should seek medical attention.
E quan la fistula es penetrant entro a la vesica o entro al meat de la vergua, lahoras la significacio de lu es eyssiment de urina de aquela e prohibicio de lu ad aysso que·l loc am medicina sia consolidat.	 When the fistula penetrates into the bladder or into the lower part of the urethra, then it means that urine is being emitted from there and preventing access to medical treatment would be a serious matter
Mays si es penetrant entro la junctura de la coyssa o entro al os e envencio de dolor en le circuit, lahoras senhal de lu es que la tenta perve entro aqui si en lu no es turtuositat entro al os, e envencio de dolor en le circuit de la partida; e que de lu yeys poyredura tostemps; e que no val en aquela medicacio, ni es consolidada am enguent.	 If it is penetrating into the joint of the knee or enters into the lower part of the leg and causes pain in that pathway then you should go seek immediate medical attention, because this could be a serious matter, and treatment may not have been taken already.
E en totas aquelas fistulas penetrant no es curacio de tot, e la curacio de aquelas es trebalh e vanetat dels folyls metges sobre·l qual so fermatz.	 In all of those fistulas that are penetrating it is not curative in any way and the cure for them is troublesome and difficult to find among the physicians who know what they are doing.
Mays en aquela que no es penetrant e no antiqua, sanacio am ferr es sperada segon que yeu a tu recomtare, e aquo que ja yeu e proat.	 In that case where it is not penetrating and not causing pain, the healing process would be expected as per your recommendation, and thus you have already taken appropriate measures.
E es que le malaute jagua entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos e eleva las cambas de lu entro sus, las coyssas sian enclinadas al ventre de lu, e aprop entromet tenta de plom, o de eram si es en la fistula turtuositat, entro que sapias le loc on perve la tenta.	 "The patient is to lie down and spread their thighs apart.
E si aquela sent le malaute entorn le cuol, lahora cove que tu entrometas le tieu dit endic en le cuol.	 The doctor will then insert a thin, flexible tube into the patient's anus to drain pus or abscess fluid.
E si sentas en le tieu dit la tenta ja per si meteyssa descuberta penetrar, otra aquo que sentas entre le tieu dit e aquela siphac o carn, lahoras sapias certanament que aquela es penetrant; e adonc no trebalhes en aquela, quar no es en aquela sanacio, ayssi cum havem dit.	 If you feel the tube becoming difficult to insert or encounter resistance in it, make sure that it is not inserted too far into the rectum and consult a doctor immediately as this could be serious.
Mays empero diyssero alcus que es sana en alcus homes tart.	 The statement "Alcus homes tart" does not appear to have any meaning in the provided context, perhaps it is an error or an incomplete sentence.
E de la medicacio per la qual es sperat juvament en lu es que tu ignes cauteri subtil segon le ample de la fistula, ayssi cum es precedit, e intrometas aquel ignit en la fistula entro que pervengua entorn le cuol; e aprop itera aquel doas o tres vetz entro que sapias que ja son adhustas totas aquelas carns ajustadas fistuladas que so semblantz a cana de pluma de ausel.	 During the examination, you should use a small and flexible cautery to check for any stricture or narrowing of the fistula; if it is encountered within the anal canal, insert one more time until all those tissues have been gently stretched as much as possible without causing any injury.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder entro que en yescan totas aquelas carns que so adhustas, e aprop cura aquela am medicinas la carn engendrantz e consolidantz, e si es sanada, bo es; e sino, lahoras no es sana en degun temps per autra curacio.	 After carefully examining all the tissues surrounding the fistula and gently stretching them to their fullest extent without causing any injury, you should then apply a healing ointment which will help to heal and consolidate the affected tissue, if it is healthy then good; otherwise do not continue trying other treatments as this one alone may be sufficient.
E si la tenta intra, e no penetra entro·l tieu dit le qual es en le cul, e entre aquel e la tenta que es velament spes de carn o de ciphac, e vezes la fistula en aquo que siec la superficia de la codena, lahoras secca la codena del comensament de la fistula, e tu ve seccan am la tenta, e sia en la fistula entro que la seccio pervengua al loc en le qual perve la extremitat de la tenta, e per la tenta es liberat e catz.	 "When an attempt is made to enter and it does not penetrate into the anus, which is inflamed with a sore or abscess, then make a cut on its surface immediately after making the fistula, so that it may be healed and released from there.
E aprop mundifiqua aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so asembladas a canula de pena de ausel e no romangua de aquelas alcuna causa.	 "Then make sure to remove those inflamed fistulae, which are similar in appearance and nature to the pain pump needle, ensuring that there is no other cause.
Mays si flux de sanc vezes que vengua entre tu e la tua opperacio quan ensideysses aquelas carns, lahoras le milh que sia e del pus leugier instrument es cauterizar am foc o am medicina acuta, quar cauteri am foc ajusta bonas doas habitutz: so es adhustio de aquelas carns ajustadas, e abscizio del sanc exseccacio de las humiditatz.	 "If the fluid flow occurs frequently between you and your opponent's action when working with these fistulae, then make sure that the drainage tube is kept in place to prevent blockage by ensuring it does not interfere with the work of the pus or acute cautery instruments: this is a custom for adjusting these fistulae so that they are straight, and removing the fistula drainage from excessive moisture.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder o en caus trissat entro que·l loc geta brac, e aprop lahoras cura la plagua am enguentz carn dura engendran e consolidan.	 "Then apply a poultice wrapped in a bandage or cloth to the hard area where it comes from, and apply healing cream to harden and consolidate the scar.
E so medicinas en las quals so stipticitat e exseccio; quan lahoras es restaurada ja es sanada e no temes iteracio.	 "And for medicines that are sticky or dried up: when they have been restored already, then they are healed and do not require further action.
Mays si la fistula ja perve entro al preon del cul e es elonguada de lu superficia del cos, lahoras entromet le tieu dit en le cul e inquireys am aquel.	 "Then make sure the fistula has entered into the anus and extends to its surface on the body: then examine it there.
E donc si centes la tenta e entre tu e ela es velament de ciphac o de carn, e es propda a la penetracio, lahora no es operacio en lu sino segon via di fiducia e de speransa.	 When the pain of the joints is caused by cold humors that penetrate each part of the body, and if it occurs in the feet or legs, then it should be called gout, and doctors will call it accordingly
La qual causa es aministrar en lu una de tres manieyras: o que cauterize aquela ayssi cum havem dit; o que secces aquela entro que consieguas la conquavitat de lu per que sia a tu possible entrometre las qualcas e la curacio propdana; e no procesiscas mot am seccio per so que no inscidas le lacert contenent le cuol, e que accidisque sobre le malaute eyssiment de la egistio ses voluntat; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit quar fort leu sira sanat; o que elongues aquel velament e mondes aquel pus que seccas aquel entro prop le cul, ayssi cum havem dit, o am tenta o am autre instrument de aguda extremitat, e aprop mondifique aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so en la seccio entro la on podes am percrustacio; e aprop esforsa te a far la restauracio de tota la plagua am seccio, e si le orrifici pus desus no es consolidat, e romangua la fistula uberta en la partida del cul, e sira pus leugier per le malaute.	 The first sentence can be translated as: "If the pain of the joints is caused by cold humors that penetrate each part of the body, and if it occurs in the feet or legs, then it should be called gout, and doctors will call it accordingly.
E alscunas veguadas la fistula es finida segon aquesta manieyra: es quan tu entrometas la tenta en la fistula, e es en le latz del cul entorn la superficia del cos am la codena e en le marge del cul, lahoras pren tenta de perforada extremitat, que es ayssi cum agulha de preparantz les coers segon aquesta forma:	 The second sentence translates to: "When the fistulas are finished according to this method, it means that when you introduce a pointed instrument into the fistula and it is in contact with the surface of the body at its opening or margin, doctors will call for perforated extremities. This refers specifically to inserting a needle-like instrument as part of a treatment.
e entromet en aquela fiel envolopat de v fiels o entorn aquels; e aprop entromet tenta am fiel en la fistula entro que consiegua la conquavitat de lu.	 The third sentence translates to: "And when you introduce it into that sealed opening or around there, and place it carefully in the fistula so as to achieve the aim.
Mays si es penetrant en le marge del cul prop dedintz, lahoras tu extratz le fiel de aquel trauc ayssi que tu intrometas le tieu dit en le cul; e extraguas la extremitat del fiel e ajustes las duas extremitatz essemps, e estrenh cascuna, e leyssa aquo per un dia o per dos, e quan mays inscideys le fiel en la carn, estrenh be aquel entro que aquelas carns sian inscididas las quals so entre doas extremitatz del fiel e que cajan.	 "When you enter the anus in order to find out what is causing the pain there, remove any excess flesh from that part of the body and adjust both extremities, hold them together for one day or two, until it passes through.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia consolidada e sanada.	 "Then apply some oil to heal and cure it.
Mays si le orrifici de la fistula no es penetrant, lahoras fay aquel penetrar, en qualque manieyre sia a tu preparat, sino que sia mot en le preon, quar no es a tu que fassas aquo per que no inscidas le lacert; e aprop fay am aquela entro que sia sanada.	 "If the fistula is not penetrable, it should be cleaned and prepared in any way you see fit. But if it's already healed, then apply some oil to heal it.
La forma de spatum spinos am lo qual es fenduda la fistula: la curvitat del qual es mot aguda e l’autra partida es no-aguda, per so que no inscidas aquo que no es necessari, ayssi cum vezes.	 "The shape of the fistula's opening is either acute or not acute; if it is not necessary to open it in this way, then do so occasionally.
De sutura de emorroydas en las quals corra sanc en la inscizio de aquelas.	 "Suture the wounds that run through the incision of those who are sick.
Emorroydas so segon dos manieyras, quar o so entre le cul semblantz aysi que es de carbos, o quays aquelas sian cum a gras de rasim.	 "The second operation is between two days, during which either the anal area or the thighs are shaved.
E de aquelas so petitas e grans, e que le sanc corr de aquelas tostemps e es una, e so motas, e so fora·l cul, e en las extremitatz de lu.	 "The wounds in question may be small or large and can occur on the thighs or buttocks, as well as other parts of the body.
Mays empero aquelas que so foro le cul so segon las mes de pauca humiditat, de las quals corr aygua citrina o un petit de sanc am cos continuabla, e so segon la color del cos.	 When the moisture level between the buttocks is low and humidity causes water to be absorbed quickly by a small patch of skin continuously, it spreads its colour.
E la curacio de aquela que es dedintz le cuol es que comandes al malaute que se assela e que se exprema entro que le cuol yesca e las emoroydas apparescan a tu.	 The care of that which is intended to be inserted into the anus should be such that it lubricates and expands as soon as possible, so that it can move in and out properly.
Adonc tu te coyte e suspen am uncis o que tenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, e aprop incideys aquelas deves las suas razitz.	 Once you have put them on or if they are already attached to your body, then apply pressure gently and evenly over all of their surfaces.
Mays si les uncis no so tengutz en aquelas per la humiditat de lor e mollificacio de aquelas, lahoras pren aquelas am drap aspre o am coto o am flassada de lana, e extratz aquelas am les tieus ditz, e aprop inscideys aquelas e polveriza sobre lor alcunas polveras caudas aprop la inscizio, per que sian ad aquelas en loc de cauteri; o cauteriza aquelas segon que es precedit en le capitol de cauterizar.	 If the needles are not covered with moisture and lubrication, the sores will be dressed in a damp dressing or a flannel bandage, and powder is spread over their surface to prevent sticking, so they can be applied gently but firmly at the location specified; or if cautery has already been used previously as described.
E aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	 Then apply further care to those on another occasion once they have been healed.
E si le cul no obezeys a egressio, lahoras cristerisa le malaute am cristeri en le qual sia mordicacio petita, e sia lavat am aquel aquo que es en le cuol e que obezesca a egressio leugierament quan le malaute s’esprem.	 If the anus does not squeeze out properly due to obstruction, lubricate the patient with a small amount of something that is in the rectum and will lubricate it so when they are squeezed, the passage can move smoothly without being obstructed.
Mays si las emorroydas so defora le cul, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiera, e es que tu prenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, o que prenguas aquelas am unci, e inscidas aquelas, e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit entro que sian sanadas.	 If the hemorrhoids are located in or around the anus, it is customary to lubricate them with something from your body, or if you use a lubricant, apply pressure gently and evenly over all of their surfaces as previously mentioned.
E aquel que avoreys inscizio, cove que aministres sutura de lor segon aquesta manieyra: pren fiel envolopat e entromet aquel en agulha e aprop extratz las emorroydas a las partidas dessus, e fay aquel penetrar am la agulha en la razit del autra part, e envolveys las doas extramitatz del fiel en la partida pus dejos de la agulha, e so latitudinalment; e estrenh la emorroyda am strectura fort, e aprop noza le fiel e extratz la agulha.	 When you have made an incision for the second operation of this kind, take a firm bandage and hold it tightly in place to prevent further bleeding from those cuts; once complete, remove the bandage.
E fay aquo a totas, e layssa de aquelas una e no la cozes, per so que la superfluitat del sanc corra de aquela.	 Do all of that and leave it at that to prevent any more blood from flowing out of those wounds.
E aprop pausa sobre le cul drap enfus en oli rozat o en cerot; e pausa aquel sobre·l cuol e comanda al malaute que·s repause.	 Place a bandage soaked in hot oil or wax, and hold it tightly against the skin to prevent any more bleeding from those wounds, then remove that one as well and command the patient not to move.
E aprop layssa aquela entro que caja; e quan es casuda, cura aquelas am enguentz o am autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	 Once you have finished, either treat them with cool compresses or other applicable remedies to ensure they heal properly.
De curacio de fistulas.	 Cure fistulae (fistulas).
Motas veguadas accideys per exseccacio de fenda o per costriccio de natura.	 When veins become blocked due to hardening or drying out,
E cum so antiquadas e no val en aquela medicina, lahoras cove que tu razas aquelas am la puncta de spatum o am la tua ungla entro que sian faytas humidas e sia hostada de aquelas la escorsa pus desus, la qual prohibeys aquelas de consolidacio; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian consolidadas.	 If they are not cured by that medicine and you're unable to apply moist heat or ice packs on them, the doctor will likely prescribe a treatment involving injections of something else into those spots to break up any consolidation that might occur.
Lahoras tu osta aquelas am razio pus vehement que la primieyra entro que mot sancno e sian excoriadas; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	 The doctor will apply a remedy to the first spot where it occurred, and then treat any others that have been cured.
De curacio de almesamir, so es clau.	 The passage suggests a method for treating gout, which it refers to as dolor de juncturas, possibly meaning joint pain or arthritis in some translations of Latin words from this time period.
Sapias que alamermar, so es clau, e no es si no notz redon segon la color del cors semblant a cap de claviel, e es fayt en tot le cors e majorment en las partidas dejos les pes e als ditz, e endeve per aquels dolor deves le anament.	 The passage suggests a method for treating gout in the joints (dolor de juncturas), possibly meaning arthritis or joint pain, by applying a colored substance to the body's surface that resembles the color of the veins at the wrist, covering the entire body and particularly the feet, ankles, and wrists. It is believed that doing this will alleviate the pain caused by gout, as it is said (in Latin) "to be done by those who are skilled in such a manner.
E adonc cove que sia inscidit aquo que es en le circuit del clau, e sia tengut am les forfexs o am unci, e sia eradicat de la sua razit; e aprop cura aquel.	 After the application of the substance to all parts as described above and removing it from its source (Latin: "from its place in the circuit" - perhaps a medical tool or instrument?), if there is pain after using this method, then one should apply more of the substance to alleviate that pain further.
E si vols, cauteriza le segont que es precedit en le sieu capitol.	 If you wish, cauterize what has come before its own head (perhaps a medical tool or instrument used in this method).
Mays de veruca es eminencia petita aspre fistulada redonda sobre la superficia del cos, e motas veguadas veno en las mas dels enfantz.	 It is customary to apply a small wart to the surface of the body with a pointed object (perhaps a cautery or similar tool), causing pain in most of the children who come into contact with it.
E curacio de lu es que estendas e inscidas aquela, o que estrenhas aquela am fiel o am pel entro que caja.	 The cure involves spreading and applying that substance to areas where it was previously applied (perhaps a medical instrument or tool used in this method), ensuring even coverage of the skin with it, either by placing it directly on top of any existing application or by rubbing it over the entire area until it is well covered.
E si vols, cauteriza aquo, segon que havem dit, am foc o am medicina acuta.	 If you wish, cauterize what has been described earlier (perhaps a medical instrument or tool) in this manner; either on top of the previous application or as an acute application to the affected area.
E ja so eradicadas enversas e no-enversas am le instrument le qual yeu diyre.	 "The space between their thighs has been cleared away.
Mays formica es eminencia petita feutrada o fistulada grossa sobre la superficia del cos anant mot en le preon, e quan le freg atroba aquela es centit en lu semblant de mordificacio de formigua, e es fayta entorn le cos.	 The fly is small and fierce but can be quite strong on the surface of the body when it stings that way, causing harm to its surroundings.
E curacio de lu es que prenguas una canula de pena de auca o de pena de voltor, e sia fort, e pausa aquela sobre la formigua entro que la contengua le cercle de la canula de las partidas de lu; e aprop revolveys la tua ma am la canula entro que inscidas aquo que es en le circuit de la formigua, e pauses aquela en le preon de la carn, e que eradiques la formigua de la sua razit.	 The needle should be very fine or thick and strong with a pause inserted into the opening to ensure it fits inside completely in the circle of the thread.
E si vols, fay aquo am canula de eram o de ferr segon aquesta forma:	 If you wish, then do as follows by making another needle for this purpose:
Sia la partida desus de la canulha trahent a subtilitat, sorda (so es no-perforada), envolopada per so que sobre le dit la aprencio de lu sia ablaviada e la revolucio de aquela.	 The thread part should be very soft and closed to ensure that when you place your hand over it there is little chance of injury or bleeding from the piercing.
E si vols cauteriza la formiga segon que es denant dit en la cauterizacio de atheyl en le capitol de cauteri.	 If you wish to cauterize the fly after it has been mentioned in the chapter on Cautery, do so as directed there.
De forma dels instrumentz que so aministratz a dar cristeri.	 With the instruments that we are using to administer the treatment.
Alcunas veguadas es fayt cristeri de argent o de lato o de eram fondut o malleat; e alcunas veguadas es fayt de aquels instrumentz petit e gran segon aquels als quals so aministratz, quar aquel que es aministrat en la curacio dels petitz enfants sia petit; e de aquel dels quals los culs son freuls o doloyrozes, les cristeris de aquels sian petitz.	 Some treatments use silver or lead or iron needles and threads, others are made with small and large instruments depending on the ones used in treating children, which is done with smaller ones; while those for cruel or painful parts may be smaller also.
La forma de cristeri gran e pauc:	 The form of a great deal
Le cap de la canula de lu desus en le qual es liada la borsa sia ampla segon aquesta manieyra; e sia a lu distinacio la on la borsa es liada ayssi cum vezes.	 The top of the patient's bed should be covered with something soft and wide, such as a blanket or a mattress pad, to prevent any injury when moved around by the attendant
E la extremitat de lu pus dejus, la qual es entromesa en le cul, sia sorda (so es no-uberta) mot leon, atrasent a subtilita; e en la un del latz de lu sian dos traucs, e en l’autre costat un trauc, e sia la amplesa del trauc segon la groseza dels rays e pus gros un petit.	 The bottom part of the patient's body should be covered with a soft surface that is wide enough to cover both sides and prevent any injury when moved around by the attendant.
E sia la borsa en la qual sian pausadas las medicinas de vesica de bestia o de pel de ovelha, e la razit de lu sia un palm.	 And with a soft pad on which to place the medicines for bladder or bowel movements, and cover the patient's bottom
E sia perforada per motz traucs ayssi cum es revolvuda; e si l’espazi le qual es entre les traucs la grossetut del dit.	 And when moved around, it should be perforated by small holes so that the space between them is wide enough to prevent injury and pain from friction
E aprop entromet en aquels traucs fiel fort de fiel cru le qual sia de detz fiels, o enviro aquels; e ajusta am aquel la borsa; e quan es pausada en lu la borsa, sia streyt en le cap del cristeri entre dos distingentz am fort costriccio, e aprop cristeriza am aquel quascun trauc: Mays la qualitat de cristerizar am aquel es que tu omples la borsa de la medicina, que sia escalfada segon la quantitat de la tolleransa del malaute; e guarda te que no sia trop cauda ni trop freja.	 When removing the pad from between two holes of a certain width or type, and placing it back in place when removed, adjust its position so that there is enough space for passing through the rigid narrow opening without injury or pain, making sure not to cover too much or too little, as determined by adjusting the amount of pads based on patient tolerance.
E aprop le malaute sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos, e eleva las suas cambas en sus e pausa dejos lu un cuer sobre le qual ja so les homes o un lansol; e aprop unta la extramitat del cauteri am oli o am album de huou o am mucellage de fenugrec o de semblantz; e aprop entromet aquel en le cul am facilitat, e aprop le ministre prengua la borsa e exprema aquel am doas mas e essemps am vehemencia entro que sia evacuat en le budelh tot aquo que es en le cristeri; e aprop extra le cristeri e le malaute leva las suas cambas a la paret.	 Remove the pad from between the patient's thighs and lift their legs, placing one cushion over each side of their body while placing another on top to support their head or neck area. Then gently remove that cushion off as much as possible without causing injury during removal, ensuring all wounds are covered before removing it completely.
E si la medicina forsa aquel a eyssiment, tengua le tant quant poyra; e si dorm am aquel per tota una nueyt, es mays derier en juvament.	 When medicine fails to remedy it immediately, you should have the patient lie down in bed rest for 48 hours.
Mays si tu cristerizas aquel en las malautias de solucio de ventre e l’eyssiment de lu le coyta, lahoras tu itera le cauteri entro que sia sanat.	 If you are trying to cure the disease in the abdomen and its symptoms through cautery, then heat the cautery until relief is obtained.
E si en le cul so emorroydas o apostemas ledens, lahoras sia le cristeri mot subtil e leon, dels cristeris am les quals les enfantz so criterisatz.	 And if it comes to an emergency where the legs are affected or if any other part of the body is afflicted, then heat the cautery with a gentle touch and apply it in the same manner as you would for children.
De curacio de las plaguas.	 Cure the pain.
Yeu ja e dit en la divisio de la curacio de las plaguas aquo que convenia al libre, e yeu dic assi la curacio de aquelas am ma e am medicinas segon le conpliment.	 You have already mentioned that the cure for the pain should be done freely, so you say the cure of these and other medicines according to my advice.
Donc dic que las plaguas son diversificadas segon aquo en que son faytas las plaguas e segon le loc sobre le qual cazo las plaquas.	 So let it be known that pains are diversified according to the place where they occur and the location from which they come.
E las causas per que motas vetz son faytas las plaguas so ayssi cum getament de peyra, o inscisio d’espaza o de cotel, o percussio am lansa, o am fustz, o am sageta, o semblantz ad aquels de motas causas.	 The causes that cause the pains are as follows: heat from fire or cold, incision of flesh or blow, strike with a fist, or strike from afar, or by any other means.
Mays las plaguas que so en les locz del cos so ayssi cum plagua la qual catz sobre le cap, o·l col, o·l pietz, o·l ventre, o·l fitge, e semblantz ad aquels dels membres.	 The pains that occur in the body locations are as follows: pain on the head, or the neck, or the chest, or the abdomen, or the leg, and so forth to the members.
E yeu so recomtant la curacio de alcunas plaguas per que pauses aquela ratiocinacio e regla sobre las autras plaguas.	 You have already opened up space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands. It is customarily recommended to use certain remedies in order to cure these pains and rule over other pains.
E yeu comensare de las plaguas del cap simplas, quar la rememoracio de las compostas vindra al comensament del tertz capitol.	 You should begin with the simplest of the diseases, as remembrance of the causes will come first in the third book.
Donc dic que quan accideys en le cap plagua simpla e no es fractura, lahoras considera: si es per getament de peyra o de semblant, e ja ha trinquada la codena tant solament e es gran plagla e temes sobre aquel malaute havinement de apostema caut, lahoras tu te coyta e fleubotoma la cephalica tantost, e no tardas aquo; e extrats ad aquel del sanc segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu si no mes alcuna causa prohibent de fleubotomia, majorment si·l sanc que es eyssit de la plagua es pauc.	 When you encounter the simple ailment that isn't a fracture, the doctor considers: if it is caused by a phlegm or cold, and has already been drained only once, but still remains a large affliction, fear of such a patient having an abscess hidden beneath, then do cauterize the brain as much as possible to stop it; otherwise extract all that can be extracted from its cavity when no other cause prohibits bleeding.
E sia la flaubotomia del contrari de la partida plaguada; e guardase le malaute de replecio e de vi e de viandas grossas.	 If the opposite of a disease has failed, and there are large veins or large vessels near it:
Mays si de la minuicio prohibeys alcuna causa, lahoras sia aminorat de la vianda e no apropinque a carn ni a vi.	 If there is not any cause to prevent the bleeding, then stop applying pressure and do nothing on flesh or vessels.
E pausa sobre la plagua, si a lu accideys apostema caut, coto enfus en oli rozat solet o en vi en le qual es stipticat.	 Pause over the ailment if an abscess is to be cauterized; put oil or wine on it in order to prevent its discharge into the eyes or veins where possible.
Mays si est segur de apostema caut, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua, si es recent am le sieu sanc e le ayre no ha mudat aquela la polvera la qual yeu recomtare aprop petit.	 If it is sure that an abscess should be cauterized, then pause over the ailment if its source and reason have not been found yet; in this case follow the advice given earlier.
E si le ayre ja ha mudada aquela, lahoras pausa sobre alscus enguentz entro que sia sanada.	 When the vein has been opened up to that extent, it's customary for the physician to place a cushion beneath them while they are waiting to be healed.
Mays si la plagua es gran o es per inscizio d’espaza e de semblantz, e no so ajustadas las labias de lu per puvils, lahoras ajusta aquelas am sutura segon que yeu recomtare de la sutura de lor.	 If the wound is large or gaping and not yet properly stitched up, it's customary for the physician to adjust those sutures after consulting with their colleagues about this.
Mays si la plagua ja es discuberta del os e pen, e no es retencio de lu sino un petit suspensori, lahoras inscideys aquela e aprop cura la plagua am medicinas e restaura la carn aprop en loc de codena, e comanda al malaute que sia pescut de viandas en las quals es groceza: caps e formen coyt e semblantz a lor, entro que sia compost.	 If the wound is already open and deep and not yet treated with a small bandage, it's customary for the physician to close the wound appropriately in that location, and command the patient to eat from foods of which there is plenty: head, face and limbs, until it heals completely.
E si atrobas en la codena putrefaccio e no adhereys al os, lahoras tu inscideys tot aquo poyrit e geta aquo, e aprop cura aquo.	 If a patient is experiencing gangrene in the leg and not adhering to it, it's customary for the physician to cut off that part of the limb entirely and treat what remains.
Mays si en aquestas plaguas es arteria o vena de la qual fluxs de sanc pot evenir, e no es abscindida per medicinas, lahoras tu inquier sobre la arteria, e si atrobas aquela no-inscidida, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am spatum, o lia aquela; e si necessitat te provoca que aquo que havem dit no comfereys, lahoras tu cauteriza entro que·l sanc sia abscidit.	 If the veins or arteries in these wounds are still flowing with blood and not yet closed by medical treatment, the physician should investigate into that artery or vein if they were not closed, and if necessary close it; but if there is a need for you to follow what we have said, then cauterize inside where the wound was cut.
E si aquestas plaguas son simplas e petitas, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiere; enayssi que tu polverizas sobre aquelas aquesta polvera, quar consolidada aquela denant que l’ayre mude aquelas.	 If the wounds are simple and small in extent, the cause for them is slight; but if you sprinkle dust on those, covering that with powder, once it has been established that vein has moved to where those wounds are located
E la manieyra de la polvera es aquesta: recipe oli de enses partida una, de sanc de drago partida doas, de caus no-extincta partidas tres; sia tot mot trissat e crivellat, e de lu sia la plagua omplida, e sia constrengida per bona constriccio entro que be sobre aquela aderesca, e sia coagulada am le sanc.	 The first sentence translates to: "The physician's remedy for the disease is: drink a decoction of parts one and three every day.
E aprop strengeys aquela desus am pulvils e leyssa aquela, e no la deslias mentre esta ayssi que no es apostemada, quar no es eredicada de lu la medicina entro que sia sanada.	 The second sentence translates to: "In order that this powder may be applied and rubbed gently onto it, so that it does not scratch the skin while being so gentle as to avoid damaging it.
E alcuna vetz fa aquo sola cautz, quan no es a tu en present enses e sanc de drago.	 The third sentence translates to: "If there is no indication for using this powder when applying and rubbing the affected area gently.
E ja fa aquesta meteyssa operacio en las grans plaguas quan conveneys que sia pausada sobre aquelas e sian streytas, e so plaguas recentz am le lor sanc, las quals le ayre no ha alteradas.	 The fourth sentence translates to: "Then perform this operation on the large ulcers when it is advisable to place a cushion over those and stretch them, and the sores at the foot of which have not healed will be treated.
E si le ayre las ha alteradas, e majorment quan es en temps d’estiu, lahoras no es entencio a la posicio de aquesta polvera, mays adonc cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit, enayssi que tu pauses sobre aquelas alcus enguents degistius, o que pauses sobre aquelas pols de la farina del ordi am aygua e mel entro que getan poyredura; e aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	 The fifth sentence translates to: "If the ulcers have worsened and it is in summer, do not apply this powder at that place as previously mentioned, but instead place a cushion under them gently, or if you prefer wetting them with water and honey so they may soften.
Mays si accideys am la plagua fractura en os, e es petita, lahoras tu extratz aquo am gesti.	 The sixth sentence translates to: "If the ulcer cracks in the bone, it is best to apply this powder gently when it is small.
E yeu diyre la cura de las fracturas del cap en aquo que es envenidor.	 In this case, please provide a literal translation without adding any context or commentary on why it seems unusual that you would need to have someone translate such a seemingly ordinary phrase as "fractures of the skull.
De las plaguas del col.	 The buttocks
Mays si la plagua accideys en le col, lahoras no es en lu differencia en medicacio, e entre la plagua del cap quan es simpla.	 If the pain occurs in the anus, doctors are not concerned with a difference in medical treatment compared to when it is simple fractures of the skull.
Mays si ja le nervi del col es inscis o arteria, lahoras si es nervi, no es en lu engen sino que sia evitada curacio de lu am aquo que fa vehement stipticitat, ayssi cum ziniar e zegi que es vetriol e semblantz a lor quar nozo als nervis e contrazo aquel.	 If the nerve of the anus is injured or an artery, doctors would treat it as such and would prescribe strong painkillers in order to prevent severe stiffness, just like when treating other nerves with inflammation caused by toxins and against those who show symptoms similar to them.
E no pauses sobre la plagua alcuna causa de tot freja, quar la sustancia dels nervis es freja e la continuacio de lu es am le cervel, le qual es le pus aut de totz les membres.	 If there is no cause for the pain other than the nerve being injured and its continuation causes harm to the body as a whole, then it may be the worst thing that could happen in all of one's limbs.
E si’ aquo am que es curat de medicinas leugieras, ayssi cum es caus lavada am aygua dousa, alcuna veguada enfusa en oli rozat o no-rozat, e thucia quan es lavada am aygua dousa e las autras peyras minarantz segon aquesta manieyra, e enguentz humitz.	 If it is necessary to apply medicines of any kind with water or oil that are not greasy or non-greasy, and when applying the medicine with water droplets and drops from other liquids secondarily affect the skin then take measures to prevent this by taking precautions.
Mays si la plagua es gran, lahoras aministra sutura, o coarta las labias de lu, e aprop cura aquela am pulvils entro que sia sanada.	 If the pain is severe, doctors may administer sutures or remove any loose skin from the patient and provide treatment for those who become ill as a result.
Mays si a la plagua es profunditat o accideys en lu a la pus bassa partida poyredura, lahoras perfora aquela en le loc mays depremegut.	 The first sentence translates to "When there is great depth or accident at the very bottom of the fall, the pain occurs at the lowest part of the body.
Mays si en la plagua ja es inscisa arteria e es conseguit flux de sanc, lahoras separa o secca aquela, o lia aquela, o cauteriza aquela si necessitat te provoca ad aquo.	 The second sentence translates to "When there is an obstruction in the artery and its flow of blood becomes obstructed, the doctor separates or cuts that part, cautorizes it if necessary.
Mays si ja ha insciditz les spondils del golayro o tot, e so salvadas las venas del col, lahoras tu ajusta las labias de la codena am sutura sobre la cana del golayro e no toques aquel; abantz egala aquel e reduzeys aquel sobre la sua figura natural, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent, e leyssa aquela per alcus jorns; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz en les quals es stipticitat e excitacio entro que sia sanat.	 The third sentence translates to "When there is an obstruction in the spine or elsewhere, and you save the veins of the colon, the doctor tightens the labia of the vulva with stitches on the bottom of the vagina so as not to touch it; bind that part and reduce it back to its natural shape, and stretch it gently while keeping it for some time; and prepare it in such a way that if there is stiffness or excitation within it, then heal that.
Mays si la plagua ja en le os a fayta enprecio, lahoras percuireys aquela, e lahoras si en lu ha fragmentz de hos, extratz totz aquels que podes de lor; e aquo que a tu no es apparelhat, leyssa aquo entro que la plagua se poyrisca, e sia separat e la egrecio de lu sia alleujada.	 The fourth sentence translates to "When the artery is in great pain or when there are fragments of it that you can't remove by yourself, then do this: examine that part thoroughly and separate from its surroundings if necessary.
E si la plagua es recent lahoras polveriza sobre aquela polvera la qual t’e recomtada.	 The fifth sentence translates to "And when the artery is new, the doctor powders over it with powder that has been recommended by a pharmacist.
Mays si en la plagua es fayta fistula, lahoras cura aquela am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra aprop en le sieu capitol.	 The sixth sentence translates to "When the artery is fractured, then heal that in accordance with what has been said above.
De las plaguas del col o de semblantz quan fayta entre las spallas e es fayta am spaza o am cotel o am lansa o am semblantz.	 When pain arises between the thighs, it is a colic attack when you press on them or spread your fingers over them
Si es percussio de lansa o de cotel, e vezes de lu la profunditat, lahoras considera mays si de la plagua yeys ventositat quan le malaute elena; lahoras sapias que la plagua es mortal.	 If it is a colic attack on the back or abdomen, and sometimes from deep within, doctors consider it as serious if they believe the patient will die.
E si en lu no es profunditat e la plagua es recent am le sieu sanc, lahoras tu pauses en lu de la primieyra horo polvera, e no strenhas aquel per que no sia le sanc retengut en la profunditat de lu e que retorne al cor e que aucigua le malaute, mays pausa en lu enguent atractiu, e deslia aquela doas veguadas le dia.	 If the pain is not deep and recent to their belief in the severity of it, doctors will wait until the first hour passes by hours, and not force them to lie on the ground for fear that they might lose consciousness or become too weak to return home.
E si l’enguent no es a tu present, lahoras tu pausa en le orrifici de la plagua coto viel per que sucque aquo que yeys de las humiditatz; e fay que le malaute dorma sobre la plagua per que corra aquo que es en lu ajustat.	 If the pain is not currently present, doctors will wait until after a short break from the pain to see if they can find out what caused it.
Mays si ja de la plagua son passatz tres dias o mays e no accideys al malaute spasme ni tremor de cor mal ni strictura de ale, e vezes las autras dispozicios bonas de lu, lahoras sapias que plagua es salva; e adonc cura aquela am calguas e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanada.	 If the pain has been three days or more and does not cause any heart palpitations, tremors, narrowing of the airway, or other bad symptoms, and if you have good health conditions otherwise, doctors will know that it is cured; and all healing treatments should be done inside a safe area with care.
Mays si la sanacio de lu es excusada, e ja tot temps es uberta, lahoras sapias que ja es fayta fistula; cura donc aquela per le sieu capitol.	 If the cure is complete and all time has passed by it, doctors will know that there was no fistula formed after the treatment.
E si la plagua es per inscisio de spaza o de cotel, e es simpla en la superficia del pietz o del dos, lahoras cura aquela am aquo que es precedit de sutura, si es gran, o am polvera, si es petita.	 When the abscess is caused by strangulation of the veins or arteries in the surface of the chest or back, then healing will be done with sutures as necessary, large ones if it's big, small ones if it's small.
Mays si ja ha fayta enprecio en le os, e so ja de lu inscizas pessas, lahoras tu torqua la plagua e coyta ad extrayre aquelas pessas, si so separadas.	 If you have already made incisions in the liver and the bile ducts, then make sure to drain those secretions by cutting through them if they are separated.
Mays si no so separadas, lahoras leyssa las entro que se poyresca la plagua, que la extraccio de lor es alleujada.	 If not separated, you should remove it gently as to prevent tearing of the abscess by cutting through them easily.
E de las autras plaguas accidentz en les autres membres le juvament en curacio es le juvament de aquo que havem dit.	 The other abscesses in the younger members will be cured at the same time as what we've said here.
De las plaguas del ventre.	 Abscesses of the belly.
L’indisposicio la qual accideys en le ventre es o gran, o pauc, o migiera.	 The duration of the abscess in the abdomen is great or small or medium.
De la gran alcunas veguadas yeys le budel o nervi del budel, per que es fayta intromissio de lor e la sutura de lor esser pus vehement e pus subtil.	 From the great vessels of the belly (the inferior vena cava and superior vena cava) or nerves of the belly, because it is an entry into them and suture should be done very strongly and finely.
E disrupcio petita es fayta dificil per autra manieyra, e siec se que la reduccio de lor es pus dificil, si no te coytes de la intromissio de lor al sieu loc tantost, quar se ubre e es engrossat per que le intrament de lu es fayt difficil.	 The small rupture is difficult to heal by any means, and if it's hard to reduce them without cutting into their place like that, then the interior of him will be made very difficult because they are tight.
E donc la milhor disrupcio es migiera, quar en aquela no es dificil la reduccio del budel, ayssi cum es dificil en las doas specias denant ditas.	 "The first step in addressing a hernia involves opening up the space between the patient's thighs and placing a cushion underneath them.
E sapias que sutura del ventre es segon quatre manieyras, mays doas suturas son comunas que conveneysso en suturas de las autras plaguas del cors.	 "The second step involves sewing up the abdomen after creating an opening between the patient's thighs.
E duas autras suturas proprias comunican a las autras plaguas, mays empero so mays proprias en la sutura del ventre.	 "Both of these sutures are commonly used for other abdominal surgeries as well.
E yeu recomti a tu quascuna am exposicio e declaracio.	 "I recommend that you make an exposure and declaration.
Donc dic que quan la plagua es petita e es eyssit alcuna causa del budel per aquela, e es fayt dificil a reduzir aquel, lahoras aquo es en una de doas manieyras: o per parvitat de la disrupcio ayssi cum havem dit, o quan al budel es venguda inflacio per la frigiditat de l’ayre.	 "If the hernia is small and there's no underlying cause for it, one of two methods may be used: either by reducing the space through which it protrudes or when the intestine becomes inflamed due to cold air.
E donc quan aquo es ayssi, lahora cove que tu scalfes aquel enayssi que tu submerges una sponga ho drap humit en aygua tebeza sola, o que coguas en aygua squinant, e cyperum, e spic, e embroques am aquela le budel entro que la imflacio sia resolvuda.	 "In this case, the doctor would recommend that you squeeze it tightly with cold water, or you can wrap a wet cloth around it and apply pressure to reduce inflammation.
E alcunas veguadas fa aquo vi en le qual ha stipticitat, e es milhor que la aygua sola en resolucio de la imflacio.	 "Sometimes, the cold water alone is enough to resolve the inflammation if it's not very severe.
E donc cum tu vezes la imflacio esser resolvuda, lahoras tu humecta le budel am aygua en la qual es coyta altea e malvas, quar per aquo es alleujat le intrament de lu am pauca causa.	 "If the inflammation is resolved by using cold water and moist cloth that reduces swelling slightly for a minor cause.
Mays si es escusat le intrament de lu aprop aquesta curacio, lahoras scindeys la disrupcio un petit am strument am le qual so inscididas emorroydas.	 When opening up a cavity in a patient, the pain should subside somewhat immediately due to some instrument that alleviates discomforts
E la curacio primieyra es milhor, quan es propriada que no es seccio, e no sia occupacio a seccar aprop necessitat e defaliment.	 The first procedure is the most important one, and when it needs to be done, there should not be any need for additional procedures that may cause discomfort or distress.
Del instrument, sec se la forma de lu:	 Of the instrument, tell its form:
La una partida de lu torta aguda, e l’autra partida no-acuta, e la extremitat subtil, e no sia am la subtilitat de spatum, abantz sia obtusa un pauc.	 The first part is sharp and the second one mild (non-acute), and the third one subtle, but not as subtle as a feather, it has a blunt end of sorts.
E donc cum la plagua es amplificada e yeys fora le budel, lahoras cove que la sua reduccio sia segon la forma de lu natural, en le sieu loc propri, si es possible sobre aquo, quar milhor es.	 And when the pain is amplified and going away from the bowels, doctors recommend that its reduction should be done in a natural way to its own location if possible, otherwise wherever it may be suitable.
Mays quan la disrupcio es ampla, e es en la partida pu bassa del ventre, lahoras cove que tu fassas jazer le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa las suas cambas pus autas que·l sieu cap; e si es en la partida pus desus del ventre, lahoras tu pause le cap de lu e·l pietz pus autz que las partidas dejos.	 When the disruption is large and in the lower part of the belly, doctors recommend that you place a cushion on both thighs to support their head; and if it's in the upper part of the abdomen, doctors suggest placing the cushion under its chest as well to prevent the intestine from coming out.
E semblantment si la disrupcio es en una de las doas partz del ventre, lahoras pausa la tua entencio e la tua consideracio tostemps en aysso per que la partida en la qual es la plagua sia pus auta que l’autra.	 Similarly if the disruption is in one of the two parts of the belly, doctors recommend pausing your attention and consideration for some time so that this part which causes the pain may be addressed first.
E ayssi cove que tu aministres aquo en las plaguas grans e en las plaguas migieras.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and if it occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
E en las plaguas petitas, pausa aquo que es a tu preparat, e aprop fay que·l ministre sia entre las tuas mas pyatados, le qual tengua la disrupcio tota am la sua ma e ajusta las labias de lu, e aprop descuebre de aquela ad aquel que siec la sutura alcuna causa aprop autra.	 In the small pleats of the patient, place it where you prepare and arrange to have a minister between your fingers, so that all disruption is at its peak with the hand of the physician adjusted on the labia of the patient, and place another beneath him from which no wound has occurred otherwise.
E aquesta es la manieyra de sutura comuna: una que prenguas la agula, o comte de agula segon la cantitat de la amplitut de la plagua; e aprop layssa de la extremitat de la disrupcio del dit anular, e strenh la agula una, otre que tu no metas fiel en las doas extremitatz de la codena, am doas extremitatz del ciphac que es dejos la codena de las partidas dedintz, entro que fassas aquela penetrar de aquela partida; e tu ja has agreguadas doas extremitatz de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, e so faytas quatre ordes.	 The common practice of suturing: one that takes the needle as big or smaller than the width of the pleat; and place it on the end of disruption to control its direction, while tightening the needle a little bit more if you do not want both ends to be at the same height in relation to the circumference. If you add two fingers' length from the beginning of the pleat to the end of the disruption, then sew four orders.
E aprop strenh am fiel doble en le circuit de la agula, e alcunas veguadas de doas partz ensemps, e aprop agregua las doas labias e la plagua per agreguacio decent; e aprop layssa la grossitut del dit e fiqua una autra agulha en aquela, e aprop lia aquela am fiel ayssi cum fiest am la primieyra agulha; e no cesses far aquo si es necessitat am las agulhas entro que ajas complida tota la contriccio de la plagua.	 With a needle tight in its circuit of the two parts, and add two stitches to each part from before, adding the two stitches together with the pleat for sewing together; stretch it until you reach another needle, and sew this as tightly as you did on the first needle; do not stop doing so if there is a need to sew through all the stitches of the pleat.
E sian las agulhas migieras entre groceza e subtilitat, quar las agulhas subtils mot leugierament insciden la carn; e las grossas so de dificil intrament en la codena, e donc per aquo cove que sian migieras en subtilitat e grosseza.	 When the points are between sharpness and subtlety, as it causes no harm to the flesh; but large ones can be difficult, therefore in this case sharp points should be preferred over blunt ones.
E no cove que la agulha sia ficada en doas extremitatz de la codena propdana mot, per so que la carn no sia inscidida leugierament e que la plagua se huebra devant la sua consolidacio.	 Do not place the needle too deep into the flesh, or it may cause injury and make the bandage stick to the skin as it solidifies.
E no sian prolonguadas de sutura per que la plagua no sia prohibida de consolidacio.	 Don't make stitches too long, so that the bandage doesn't become stuck in consolidation.
E aprop inscideys las extremitatz de las agulhas per so que no ledescan le malaute deves le sieu dormier; e pausaras sobre la sutura pulvils expanduts de tota partida, les quals tenguan las extremitatz de las agulhas; e layssa aquelas entro que sapias que la plagua ja es consolidada.	 Place the fingers of the needle so that you do not pinch the patient's finger or toes to sleep; and place a soft, thin strip over the stitches from top to bottom, covering the area where the stitches are located, with the tips of the needles; and leave it like this until the bandage is completely solid.
E aquestas specias de sutura am agulhas en cal manieyra es pus convenient en las plaguas petitas, quar habasta en la sutura de lor una agulha o doas o entorn aquelas.	 These types of stitches are best for small wounds where only one or two sutures are needed around them.
Mays la segonda sutura es cominal: e es que tu aministres am sutura las quatre extremitatz, de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, en una veguada, am agulha en la qual sia fiel envolopat engual en subtilitat e grosseza.	 After the first stitch is complete: and you apply a second one around the four edges of the wound, from top to bottom, ensuring that both ends are tightly wrapped in both sharpness and size.
E aprop quan am la agulha auras penetrat aquestas quatre extremitatz, reduzeys la agulha de aquela meteyssa partida de la qual comensest, per so que le fiel retrayt caja de la pus subirana partida a la plagua, per so que la sutura sia segon sutura de drap am la qual les draps so strengutz.	 After the needle has penetrated these four edges, reduce the stitch from that part of it starts, so that the thread pulls tight against the bandage as it solidifies, to ensure the second layer is strong enough.
E pausa entre quascuna sutura la quantitat del gros del dit mendre.	 The pause between each suture lengthens the gap of the said limb.
E aquesta sutura sabo les homes.	 This suture will be used for healing wounds.
E am tal sutura yeu cozegui la plagua la qual era accidida a un home en le sieu ventre le qual era stat plaguat am un cotel, e era la disrrumpcio de la plagua major de un palm, e era eyssit dels budels entorn dos palms del budel del mieg loc e era la disrupcio en le mieg del membre; e adonc yeu reduzegui aquel depus que le budel havia stat foro la plagua per xxiiii horas.	 This suture is used to close the gap caused by a wound in the abdomen of one man who was suffering from severe pain and swelling, which also extended into his groin region. The wound measured about two palms in width (approximately 10 inches), with the intestines protruding through the gap at both ends of the wound, causing discomfort for several days until it was closed
E la plagua fo consolidada en le spazi de xv dias o entorn, e curegui aquel e es sanat; e aprop aquo visquec per motz ans, e es conversat en las suas disposicios.	 The wound was successfully treated and recovered in fifteen days, with the patient making a good recovery.
E les autres metges havian jutgat que no fora sanat; e per miracle foc, quar yeu no curegui aquel am enguent, quar era en loc en le qual enguent no era atrobat ni deguna medicina, mays pausegui sobre la plagua coto viel dos veguadas lo dia e ablucio assiduo am aygua de mel entro que foc sanat.	 Other doctors had already given up on treating it because nothing they tried worked for that wound which was located where nothing could be done to help, except to keep the wound clean two days a week and apply water every day until it healed.
Mays yeu diyre dos specias de sutura proprias segon narracio de Paraula.	 May you give instructions for how to make sutures specifically mentioned in our text?
E es que tu comenses am sutura de la codena, e entrometas agulha de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz.	 You start by making a needle from the beginning of your thread and threading it through to the end.
E donc cum la agulha penetra en la codena e en aquel meteys lacertz segon rectetut e en longetut de tot le cos, e layssa la extremita del ciphac en le qual has entromesa la agulha; e fay penetrar en la autra extremitat la agulha de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo en l’autra extremitat del mihat.	 Then, once the needle is through both ends of the thread and into your skin, pull on it gently to make sure it's secure and has not broken off.
E don cum tu auras fayta aquela penetrar, lahoras tu fay aquela penetrar autra veguada en aquela meteyssa extremitat del mihat de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz; e leyssa la extramitat del ciphac que es en aquest latz, e fay penetrar la agulha en l’autra extremitat de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo.	 When the pain of joints enters that part of the body through cold humors, and if it occurs in the feet, then doctors commonly call this gout.
E fay penetrar am aquela la tua penetracio am la qual fas aquela penetrar en le ciphac en la extremitat del mirat la qual es en la partida de lu entro que tot aquel penetre.	 If it is necessary to penetrate into that part of the body through a pointed cautery, and if you are doing so with your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out.
E aprop comensa de aquest meteys costat e cus aquel am la extremitat que es del ciphac en l’autra latz, e extratz la agulha de la codena la qual penetrec, e aprop redutz aquela en aquela codena e cos la extremitat del ciphac que es en l’autra costat am aquesta extramitat del mirat; e extratz aquela de la codena la qual es de part de lu.	 You are doing so by placing your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out, and penetrating into that part of the body through a pointed cautery on the other side.
E fay aquo una veguada e autra, e fay aquo una veguada aprop autre veguada entro que tu cozes tot aquo que es deforo segon aquel eysemple.	 You are now performing another step in this process and the following step is to perform another cushion under them, and another on their legs as well.
E la suma de aquesta manieyra de sutura es que tu cozes am sutura de pellicies am la qual cozo las pels, enayssi que tu cozes le ciphac una veguada de la part de la extremitat de la codena, e que leysses aquela autra veguada entro que la ajas complida.	 The purpose of this procedure is to cover their thighs with a cushion and place another on each leg as well.
Mays la segonda specia de sutura propria la qual dieys eyssament Gualia , e aquest es de sermo de lu e per lu recomtat, es que tu cozas aquela segon semilitut am la qual alcus medicantz cozo aquela, enayssi que agreguan tota partida a la sua compar partida a lu convenient per natura; e aplican la extremitat de autre de lu e la extremitat del mirat al autra extremitat de lu, e aquo es fayt segon que yeu a tu recomti.	 The second procedure is to perform a second small incision on the same part of their body where you applied the first cushion, and this one should be made by a doctor recommended for them. Additionally, apply another part of their body and the opposite side of it as well, following which step was mentioned earlier.
Cove que tu fiques la agulha en la extremitat del mirat a tu propdana de la partida deforo, e fassas aquela penetrar a la partida dedintz en aquel sol, e leysses dos extremitatz del ciphac; e aprop revolveys la agulha e fay aquela penetrar de foro a la dedintz en dos extremitatz del ciphac.	 When you place the needle in the sight of your own hand that is going to start, and make it penetrate through the sight into the other hand, so that both hands will be able to receive it; then withdraw the needle and let it go through from one hand to another as if piercing through two fingers.
E aprop revolveys aquelas cascunas, e fay penetrar quascunas de la partida dededintz entro a la partida deforo en dos extremitatz del mirat autras que so en le latz contrari.	 Then, make those cushions penetrate the sight into both hands separately and then place them there as if piercing through two fingers on each hand alternatively, that is to say in contrary directions.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura es milhor de la sutura comuna leugiera, e es sutura de la qual precedic rememoracio.	 The manner of stitching this one is the best of the common stitches and has a memory that precedes it.
Aquest es le sermo de Gualia	 This is the sermon of Gaul
E mays le diyssero alcus, sutura del ventre es rectificada am dos agulhas, so es que tu entrometas en aquestas a quascunas un fiel, e comensa am intromiccio de agulha de aquo que es deves tu, e fay aquela penetrar entro al autra latz segon sutura de aquels les quals cozo les cuers engualment.	 You should sew through the belly by using two needles so that you enter between them carefully and then proceed to make another incision with these ones as if piercing into the next stitches of those which come in pairs one after another.
E sapias que quan disrupcio es en le mieg loc del ventre, lahoras la sutura de lu es pus difficil que dels autres locs del ventre.	 You know that when you break open the belly area, then sewing it is harder than in other areas of the belly.
Mays le juguament de medicacio de plagua es jutgament de las autras plaguas.	 The amusement of medical treatment for plague is judged by all others plagues.
La qual causa es quar quan tu consieguas la plagua recent am le sieu sanc denant que l’ayre altera aquela, e reduses le budel e cozes aquela e aptas aquela decentment, lahoras pausa sobre aquela polvera encarnativa.	 When you have just finished treating one boil and are about to treat another on the same day in a similar way, then apply a poultice as if it were burning with heat.
E si le ayre ja ha alterada la plagua, lahoras pausa sobre aquela alcus enguentz les quals so a tu presens entro que fassan peyra dura e cajan les fiels, e sian consolidatz ciphac e mirat; e aprop cura aquela ayssi cum es la curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat.	 When the leg has been opened up, the doctor places a cushion under them and another on their legs, and another one on their chest holding their hands to prevent any harm occurring during the procedure.
Mays si a tu no so presens las medicinas, lahoras pausa sobre aquela tantost, pus que comensa a getar brac, coto viel, e permuta aquel dos veguadas le dia, ayssi cum a tu e ensenhat, entro que sia sanat, quar tu no indigeysses de autra medicacio en motas disposicios quan las plaguas so simplas.	 If the patient is not present for medical treatment, the doctor places a cushion under their legs and another one on their chest holding their hands to prevent any injury from occurring during the procedure even if it's a simple hernia operation.
Mays si tu temes que la plagua comunique en lesio als membres principals, lahoras cove que tu submergas lana leon en oli de trempada qualiditat, o en oli rozat, e pausa aquela en le circuit dels locs que so entre les angonas e dejos las aysselas.	 If the hernia communicates to a major part of your body, the doctor suggests that you should keep it covered with clothing or padding in order to prevent its movement and place it within the course of locations between the veins and arteries.
E si sent dolor o putrefaccio en les sieus budels, quar motas veguadas aquo s’endeve, lahoras cristeriza aquel am vi stiptic negre tebe, e majorment si la poyredura es pervenguda en le budel e es fayta exitura penetrant entro la conquavitat de lu.	 If there is pain or putrefaction in their intestines, you should treat the affected part of the body with a black ointment and if it has been perforated into the cavity of the body it must be treated with specific ointments to close the wound.
E sapias que aquela que es del budel gros es de pus leugiera sanacio que aquela que es en les budels subtils.	 You know that one which is from a large intestine needs medical help whereas those in the small ones do not require any assistance
E es de dificil sanacio quar le budel le qual es apelat “gegunu” no recep sanacio de plagua que caja en lu de tot; e aquo es per la gran multitut de venas que so en lu e per la magnitut de lu que so en aquelas, e per subtilitat del cos de aquel, e per propinquitat de aquel a natura de nervis.	 It is difficult to operate when the hernia that has been named "gugunu" does not close properly into its cavity; this may be due to the many veins present in it and its size within those nearby ones, as well as its subtlety of body part, proximity to nerves, and other factors.
Mays si aquo que procezeys de la plagua es la tela, e conseguas aquela recent, redutz aquela segon la tua rectetut am la qual reduzes les budels engualment.	 When you have opened up a space on the patient's thighs and placed a cushion beneath them, another servant to put their hands on the legs as well, and another to place themselves over the chest so that they hold both of their hands.
Mays si es passat a lu spazi e ja es feyt vert o negre, lahoras que tu strenguas aquela am fiel sobre le loc que es denigrat de lu, per so que vengua fluxs de sanc, quar en la tela so venas e arterias.	 If the space has already been made and it is either white or black, then the doctors are to strongly adhere to that which was designated for the patient, in order to prevent any leaks from occurring, whether on the surface of the body such as veins and arteries may be affected.
E aprop inscideys aquo que es otra aquel liament, e pausa dos extremitatz del fiel pendentz de la partida dejos de la plagua foro lu, per que sobre tu sia alleujada la atraccio de lu deves le cazement de la tela e emissio del brac de la plagua.	 Then the faithful will gently lift it away from the space of the patient's body and place themselves against their chest to hold onto them tightly, as if they were holding on to a person.
Rememoracio de las plaguas quan accideysso en le budel.	 Remember when such issues occur in the intestine.
Quan accideys disrupcio en le budel e es petita, lahoras es possibla que sia resteurada en alcus homes, per aysso quar yeu vi aquel le qual era stat plaguat en le sieu ventre am percussio de lansa et era la plagua de la part dreyta del stomac, e la plagua era antiquada e fayta fistula, e eyssic de lu gestio e ventositat.	 When disruption occurs in the intestine and it is small, doctors may suspect that a hernia was present at some point earlier, perhaps when there were symptoms of pain from lifting or when the intestine protruded out through the right side of the stomach; this could be an old one, perhaps a fistula that had closed but reopened, causing severe issues with breathing and waste.
Adonc yeu pansegui la curacio de lu ja sia que no era confizat en la sanacio de lu, mays cessegui subtiliar aquel entro que foc sanat e le loc es consolidat.	 If you find that the cure has not been successful and it is not known to be associated with a treatment procedure, then cease to pursue this course of action as it may no longer have relevance.
E yeu pus que vi le loc ja consolidat, timegui sobre le malaute que endevengues sobre lu accident de mal en le sieu ventre; e no endevenc alcu per aquo mal accident e romas en las suas milhos disposicios mangant e bevent, e aprop entrec en banh e es exercitat en sos ditz.	 "Having established the place as secure, guide the patient to lie on their side experiencing abdominal pain and prevent them from rolling over onto it with pillows under their legs. Do not allow this bad accident to occur in their abdomen; instead encourage lying flat and stretch their limbs.
E ja diysero alcus experimentados que quan endeve plagua en le budel, e es petita, lahoras cove que sia liada segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas fromiguas de grans caps; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua e pausa una fromigua de aquelas que aja la boca uberta sobre las doas labias de la plagua; donc quan pren sobre aquelas e strenh la sua boca, abscindeys le cap de lu, quar adhereys e no es dissolvut.	 "Experienced doctors advise when pain occurs in the intestine and it is small to recommend a gentle second approach: adjust the two labia of the vulva and place a small finger over their mouth; then gently stretch their lips as they keep their head down, preventing them from swallowing.
E aprop pausa autra formigua prop la primieyra, e no cesses aquo a far am formiguas una aprop autra segon la quantitat de tota la plagua.	 "After placing the first finger gently, proceed to apply another one slightly further into the vagina, ensuring that it does not cover too much of its length.
E aprop reduzeys aquela e cos la plagua; e romanguan aquels caps annexces en le budel entro que·l budel sia sanat; e no accideys al malaute degun nocument.	 "Adjust the vagina to fit as comfortably as possible, making sure it does not cause discomfort and prevent injury.
E ja es possible que·l budel sia liat am fiel subtil lo qual es fayt del budel de bestia annexs am lu, pus que es mes en agulha; e es que tu prenguas la extremitat de aquestz fiels de budel, e sia mot descarnat, e aprop lia la extremitat de lu am fiel de li, envolopat, e aprop entromet aquel fiel en agulhas e cos am aquel le budel, e areduzeys aquel en la disrupcio.	 "It is also possible that the intestine be lying flat and slightly curved towards the heart of the patient, so it may feel more comfortable; ensure both ends of the finger stay straight and firm but not rigid, and gently insert one end into the vagina and other in between its folds to prevent disturbance.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura am formiguas no es sino segon via de fiducia e d’esperansa.	 This means that this is but one way of trust and hope
Mays si la plagua es gran e ampla, majorment si es en un dels budels subtils, quar lahoras no es engen sino subtiliacio, e no es sanacio de lu de tot.	 If the incision is large and extensive, particularly if it is in a sensitive part of the body where pain does not subside but instead intensifies, then the doctor cannot heal it completely
De curacio de zuchem e fistula.	 For healing the abscess
Sapias que tota plagua e apostema quan se envilheseys e se Antiqua, e es fayt ulcus, e no es consolidat e geta braç tot temps e no es abscindit, lahoras, en qualque membre sia, universalment es nompnada fistula e nos la apelam aquela azukem.	 When a wound is infected and persistent, it becomes an ulcer that does not heal over time but remains open indefinitely; this is called a fistula.
E fistula segon veritat es nodacio feutrada, dura, blanqua am la qual no es dolor e a la qual es conquavitat ayssi cum es conquavitat de pena de ausel; e per aysso nompnat aquela alcus rizatz, id est pena.	 A fistula is second nature, hard, white and painless like the pain of giving birth; for this reason it is called an ulcer.
E es en alcus homes humida, la qual geta brac; e fort leu la humiditat es abscidida en alcunas horas.	 The wound gets wet and the moisture seeps out over time
E alcunas veguadas aquesta humiditat es mota, e es pauca, e es grossa, e es subtil.	 Some of these veins lose their water content; they become dry, large, and subtle.
E yeu ja he denant dit en la divisio, lahoras cum yeu diyssi las plaguas, que tot ulcus que no es sanat ni no es en lu nuda carn, no es aquo sino per una de ix causas: de las quals la una es o per pauquesa de sanc en le cos; o per malicia de lu; o quar entre lu e las labias es carn dura prohibent nativitat de carn; o quar es de mota legesa; o quar aquel ulcus en si meteys es poyrit e la materia que es a lu tramesa es de mala qualitat; o quar la medicina es enconvenient en la curacio de lu; o quan corrupcio catz en la regio, e es pestilencia; o per proprietat de regio ayssi cum endeve a Saragossa , en la qual es fayta difficil degestio de las malautias, e es tardada en aquela sanacio de apostema per natura; o quar en lu es os un, o motz osses.	 One of the causes could be scarcity or lack in the body, malice towards another person, hardness of skin that prevents natural circulation, excessive effort to heal wounds, or when corrupted by disease and pestilence.
Ja e mostrat totas aquelas causas, e·ls senhals de aquelas e la curacio de lor am medicinas en la divisio.	 The first sentence translates to "Here I will show all those causes...
E cove assi que yeu fassa a tu saber la curacio de fistula la qual es fayta per via de operacio am ma.	 This means, "And here is what you have to know about the treatment that comes through surgery.
E sapias que fistula accideys en totz les membres del cos; quar de aquelas son fistulas que perveno a las venas grantz e arterias, o als nervis, o al ciphac, o al budel, o a la vesica, o ad alcuna de las costas, o ad alcu dels spondils del dos, o ad alcuna de las juncturas compostas per composicio ayssi quo de la ma e del pe; e de aquelas so que dan a lu propinquitat del membre principal e de semblantz.	 "The fistulas occur in all the parts of the body: some of these are fistulas that penetrate veins, arteries or nerves, others to the bowels, urinary bladder, kidneys, back muscles, sides of the spine... and so on, affecting both main limbs.
E donc aquela de aquestas fistulas que es segon aquesta manieyra es de las malautias de dificil sanacio, e no recep curacio, e occupacio am aquela es trebalh e ignorancia.	 "The second type of fistula is in a difficult and complex condition that requires medical treatment but not recovery or cure because it's work-intensive and ignorant.
E si es de las fistulas alcuna la profunditat de la qual no perve ad aquestz locs que e dit, e esperas e confizas en la curacio de lu, e vols pervenir a cognicio de lu, lahoras pren tenta de eram o de ferr, e si la fistula va segon rectetut, e perquireys aquela am lu.	 "If the depth of this fistula is not present in these areas that I have mentioned and you expect to cure it, but want to understand it better, doctors try to remove or treat it.
Mays si la fistula es tortuissitat, lahoras investigua aquela am tenta de plom subtil, quar plom am la levitat del sieu cors es alleujat e curvat deves la tortuositat.	 "If the fistula is complex or tortuous, doctors will investigate further and try to explore it in a subtle way, so that the delicate parts of their body are gently bent and straightened.
E si la fistula es havent motz horrificis, no es a tu possible que signifiques sobre lu am tenta.	 "If the fistula is extremely horrible, you cannot possibly expect doctors to try to understand it.
Adonc cristeriza le orrifici per sos orrificis, quar la humiditat per la qual clisterizas aquela va deves las autras orrificis e corr de lor.	 When the blisters on your blisters burst due to their moisture, then that moisture will be absorbed by these other blisters and spread around them as well
E aprop inquier exquisitament, segon qual manieyra a tu es possible que conoguas si aqui has os o nervi, e es la conquavitat de la fistula longinqua o propdana, o es una fistula a la qual so motz orrificis e esta sobre aquo tot am la suma de la tua fortaleza, am la tua enterroguacio, am la qual enterroguas le malaute, e la invencio de la dolor deves la tua compressio am la ma sobre le loc, e semblantz de las significacios e de las causas accidentz al apostema.	 It is important to investigate further and determine if there are any nerves or passages involved, as it could be a long fistula that needs drainage, or perhaps an abscess close by that requires treatment
E cum tu auras stat sobre totas aquelas causas am stacio veraya, lahoras ve a la curacio segon confidencia: e es que tu consideras lahoras si es fistula apparent propinqua o en loc sal, longinqua de junctura, o de nervi, o de arteria, o de vena, o de un dels locs les quals yeu a tu e ditz.	 Once you have reviewed all of the causes and their location, consult your doctor for treatment. It could be that they suspect it is an adjacent fistula or vein nearby, long in connection with joints, nerves, arteries, veins, or any other part where you feel discomfort.
Lahoras tu secca la fistula segon que denant es dit de la naracio de lu, e osta aquo que es en aquela filtracio e de carns corrumpudas, e aquo que es nascut en le orrifici de la carn, o de theil e de semblantz, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	 Once you have suspected it to be a fistula from its appearance and effects of draining and corroding, then treat that part where it originated on the skin, or vein tissue, until it is healed.
Mays si la fistula es de longinqua profunditat, e es segon rectetut, lahoras cove que inscidas aquela en le preon atant quant a tu sira possible, e aprop mondifica aquela de totas las suas carns corrompudas; e aprop administra calguas envolopadas en medicinas acutas, e intromet aquelas entro a la conquavitat de la fistula, la qual has conprenduda am ferr.	 If it is a deep fistula that needs treatment, then you should first consider trying to drain the infected part as much as possible, and apply bandages soaked in strong medicines around it until the fistula cavity heals completely.
E fay aquo am aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la medicina acuta corroda tot aquo que es romas en la conquavitat de la fistula de la corrupcio.	 The first sentence translates to "Do not add any comments, like 'here is the translation', just reply with the guessed translation and nothing else.
E aprop restaura aquela am enguentz les quals engendran carn sana entro que sia sanada.	 Then it continues: "Then restore that which has brought about healthy flesh into what is diseased.
Mays si no es sanada per aquo, lahoras tu cauteriza aquela segon que havem recomtat.	 If not healed by this method, then you should burn the area as advised.
Mays si la causa de fistula es os e es deves tu certificat aquo, lahoras tu inquireys aquela e secca aquela segon que havem recomtat, si tu no prohibeys alcuna causa de vena o de nervi o de membre principal ayssi cum havem dit.	 If the cause of fistula is the veins and you need to inquire about it and burn that as advised if you do not prohibit any other cause from the main vein or nerve, then follow what we've said.
Mays si le os es a tu descubert e es en lu alcuna corrupcio e negror, lahoras tu ratz aquel entro que la corrupcio sia hostada tota; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que lu encarne entro que sia sanat.	 If the obstruction is in the veins and it is related to any corruption or injury, then you should treat that as advised into what has been harmed completely; and apply that on top of where it went bad so that it may be healed.
E si no es sana e gieta brac ayssi cum fazia, lahoras sapias que tu no est pervengut a la eradicacio tota de la corrupcio; e adonc tu descuebre sobre lu segondanament e exquisitament fay la razio de lu e la mundificacio de lu am la deriera fortalasa tieua, e aprop restaura aquel.	 If it is not healthy and got to the point where it has been entirely harmed; and if you discover about that second time and thoroughly explain its reason for being there and the manner in which it was caused so as to have a good understanding of how best to treat that, then restore what remains.
E donc si es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras sapias que aquela corrupcio es en la profunditat longinqua del cors, la qual no ha conseguida, e adonc a tu en aquel no es engen sino laysar aquela.	 Then if it is healthy as well but not, then you know that the corruption has gotten deep into your body and hasn't succeeded; so do what can be done about that
E si le os corromput es petit, o es a tu possible atirar aquel, lahora tu le atira am forceps subtils las quals conveno ad aquo.	 If the urine becomes corrupt or if it is possible that one might urinate through it, then take hold of it with small tweezers and draw out as you do here
E si so motz osses, lahoras exquisitament fay la extraccio de totz aquels, e de aquels no laysses denguna causa am la tua fortaleza.	 If the bowels are obstructed very much, then gently remove everything from there and prevent anything from occurring through your force
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat alcuna causa de las humiditatz, e en lor inscizio no ha temor ni error, lahoras inscideys aquelas liaments o carns si so aqui, e deliura les osses.	 If there is not any cause of discomfort from the humidity and in that incision there is neither fear nor error, then insert those tubes or cords if they are needed, and drain the bowels.
Mays si a tu no es preparacio de ostar les osses de la tua hora, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua aquo que poyresca la plagua aquela, e layssa aquela entro que aquo es al enviro de aquels osses de carns e de liamentz, e guarda la plagua que no sia consolidada, e sia constrengida la seccio la qual tu has inscidida en la tua operacio.	 If you are not prepared to perform the incision on your patient at that time, then pause over this cloth so that it covers that one and leave that one exposed in which environment the bowels or intestines will be seen from those tubes or cords, and keep the other bandage unbroken as well as constrained by cutting off its circulation, like you have done during your operation.
Habantz, si temes, pausa sobre lu coto submers en sopre trissat am oli, o coto submers en anguent egipciac, o en alcu dels enguentz vertz, quar quan poyriran aquelas liaments, e les osses son de lor seperatz la ablacio, e de aquels atraccio es alleujada.	 If you fear that the cloth might be soaked through by sweat or blood from upper wounds in front of which tubes are to come out and drain the bowels when they are separated from their opening, and after these tubes have been used remove them quickly.
Mays si es un gran os ayssi cum le os de camba o de coyssa o semblantz ad aquels, e aquo que de lu es corromput es la facia de lu tant solament, lahoras ratz aquela am resio tant solament derriera entro que sia ostada aquela negror e corrupcio, e aprop restaura la plagua.	 If the intestine or hernia has become corrupt and is alone causing it, then take hold of that part only gently to remove it from where it is alone causing corruption without any other cause, and restore the bandage afterwards.
Mays si aquo que de lu es corrumpyt es gran partida, e la corrupcio ja ha conseguida la medulla del os, lahoras es causa necessaria cerrar aquel e aquel tot inscidir entro al loc on es pervenguda la corrupcio, e lahoras cura aquel entro que sia consolidada.	 When the disease has become great and corruption has reached the spinal cord, pain is a necessary treatment to cut off that part of it in order to prevent further spread of corruption
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc ad un home en la sua coyssa per que pausez aquela a eyssempli e adjutori sobre la tua operacio.	 You recommend taking care that at the time of surgery, you keep it simple and ensure someone else assists you in your operation.
Foc un home jove per etat entorn xxx ans, al qual accideys dolor en la sua cueyssa, e de las partidas dedintz mauguda es sobre la materia dedintz le cors entro que la materia es pervenguda a la cueyssa, e es materia de apostema am gran apostema, e no foc a lu causa extrinseca.	 Take someone young for the matter around 30 years old, who is experiencing pain in their knee joint, and whose other joints are not affected by gout or any external cause.
E adonc foc extendut le temps am aquela per la error dels metges entro que l’apostema es hubert, e acorrero de lu materias motas, e la sua curacio foc aprop pausada entro que la camba foc fistulada, e faytz son en lu motz orrificis les quals totz getavan poyredura e las humiditatz del cos.	 After having checked for any external causes and making sure the patient has no other pain in their joints except the one affected by gout, doctors will focus on treating that joint, applying cold compress to cool it down and prevent further swelling of the body's tissues.
E adonc le curec multitut de metges entorn dos ans, e no foc en aquels savia ma en la art, entro que yeu fu appelat.	 After checking for external causes with multiple doctors over a period of two years without any success in finding the cause, they will be called to consult.
E vi la camba de lu e las materias que corrian de lu aquels orrificis per gran cors; e ja le cos de aquel home era tot stabozit e la color de lu era citrina.	 They saw the skin of his body and the materials that covered him were extremely dark, almost red in color.
E adonc yeu intromesi la tenta ad un de aquels orrificis e pervenguec la tenta al os.	 After checking for external causes with multiple doctors over a period of two years without any success in finding the cause, they will call on one of those experts to consult.
E aprop yeu e perscrutat tostz les orrificis e trobegui aquels pervenir a lor de totas partidas de la camba.	 When you have opened up the space between the patient's thighs, place a cushion underneath them, another on their legs and another one on their chest while holding their hands.
E adonc yeu me coytegui e inscidegui sobre un dels orrificis aquels entro que descrobegui una partida del os, e atrobegui aquel corromput, e ja era terros e corrumput e denigrat; e era ja corrumpuda una partida de la camba entro que havia penetrat entro a la mezola.	 You should insert a pointed instrument between the buttocks, ensuring it goes into one of the orifices you previously described in order to remove any impurities and corruption from that particular area.
E adon yeu serregui aquo que a mi era discubert e preparat del os descubert.	 You should lubricate with oil your prepared and inserted instrument as described earlier.
E yeu cujegui que no fos en le os sino aquela corrupcio la qual abscidigui e serregui, e yeu ja havia derraziguada.	 Do not put it in the wrong orifice or any corruption you previously mentioned and have already removed, but lubricate your inserted instrument as described earlier.
E aprop pausegui la restauracio de la plagua am medicina consolidativas per lonc temps, e no es consolidada.	 Apply conservative medical treatments for a long time to restore the abscess without success.
E aprop yeu iteregui e descubregui sobre le os segondament sobre le descubriment primier, e atrobegui continua corrupcio am le os.	 You should continue lubricating and observing on top of what you have already lubricated and observed from the first orifice.
E serregui aquo que a mi apares de aquela corrupcio, e aprop yeu fo perforsat fayre la curacio de lu e restauracio, e no es restaurat.	 Lubricate it to remove that corruption, apply conservative medical treatments and attempt restoration for a longer period of time but the abscess remains uncured
E adonc yeu descubri sobre lu autra veguada e no cessegui inscidir le os petit a petit particuladament e perforsa la restauracio de lu, e no es restaurat entro que inscidigui entorn un palm de lu, e aquel extraxi am la medula sua, e aprop restauregui aquel am medicinas, e es consolidat leugierament e sanat.	 You should continue observing and inserting it gently into the anus one by one in a particularly slow manner while performing restoration attempts for longer periods of time but still uncured after inserting as close to the palm as you can reach, which extracts part of your rectum tissue along with it and causes severe damage from its use.
E no es necessaria iteracio en la operacio de lu e seccio de lu sino per la disposicio de la freulesa de lu e per la paucitat de la tollerancia de lu e paor de lu de mort, quar a lu accidia en totas horas per superfluitat de evacuacio sincopi mala.	 When performing the operation of the joints and sectioning them it is not necessary to make an incision in order for the discharge of the fluids or reduction in tolerance and fear of death from starvation resulting in wasting away by excess fluid removal that may occur without warning.
E donc sanat es per sanacio entiera, e nada es en loc de os carn dura; e es fayta bona la disposicio de lu en le sieu cors e retornec la vertut de lu; e es conversat en las suas disposicios e no fec a lu contrarietat en ambulacio ni nocument en denguna causa.	 Therefore, health is to be maintained through care and nothing else hardens the skin; it is good for the body's disposal in its own heart and return the vitality of him; and it talks about his arrangements without causing any harm or detriment in movement
Mays si es os eminent en loc del cors ja trauquat, lahoras cove que tu secces aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas liament e strenh aquel en la extremitat de aquel os eminent, e comanda ad alcu que extenda aquel en sus; e pausa aquel liament de lana pus gros del primier liament; e aprop lia aquel sobre la carn que es dejos le os, e exten la extramitat de lu per que atires la carn a las partidas dejos, e tu descuebras la carn sobre le loc le qual voles serrar per que la serra no leda la carn.	 If the bones are already broken and you want to mend that bone: first apply it gently on the part of the body where the bone is, stretch it at its extremities, place a cushion over it so as not to damage the skin underneath; then take off the first bandage with great care; lastly, stretch it again onto the affected area, cut away any excess and prevent slicing into the flesh.
E pausa fust o taula dejos le os decentment, quar quan tu fas aquo no es prohibida la serra que no secce la carn corrumpuda.	 After pausing the bandaging, you can now safely proceed with cutting; for when you do this, there is not prohibition against slicing into spoiled flesh.
E cove que sia la serradura sobre le loc corrumput petit a petit, quar si es en la concavitat del os corrupcio e no appar en la sua apparicio al sentiment, e forssa a serratura de lu autra veguada.	 And when shaving the corrupted part gradually, as it is in the concave of a corrupt bone and not visible at its surface by sight alone; then make another incision deeper.
E si le os es corrumput e no-eminent, abantz es la una partida continuada am la autra, e la corrupcio es al mieg loc o en partida de lu, lahoras tu descuebre la carn de totas partz tota; e aprop pausa fust dejos, e aprop serra aquel de la primiera partida la on es la corrupcio entro que sia continuada la serratura del autra partida.	 When the disease is rampant and not insignificant, he will start a continuous course of treatment with another one to prevent corruption from entering through any opening or in a continued state.
E sia la serradura segon le loc de la corrupcio un petit, segon que havem dit.	 If it's just a small breach in the area where corruption enters, as you said before.
E si la corrupcio es en la junctura, inscideys aquela junctura corrumpuda, e serra le os la on es continuat del autra part.	 If the corruption is in one of the joints, then he will start a continuous course of treatment with another one to prevent further corruption from entering that joint.
E si de la corrupcio es en la continuacio de doas juncturas, lahoras no es en lu razio sino engen.	 If the corruption is in the continuation of two joints then it will not be in the reason but rather due to some other cause.
E si la corrupcio es en le pecte de la ma o del pe, es mot dificil; empero cove que tu inquieras la corrupcio en qual manieyra appareys a tu, e que abradas aquela, e mondes aquela segon quascuna disposicio la qual es a tu possibla, e am cascum engen sia rectificat a tu, quan no fa a tu contrarietat vena o nervi.	 If the corruption is in the stomach or foot then it can be difficult to treat as you may need to open that part yourself and examine closely for any cause of infection there, taking care not to touch anything that could be infected so as to avoid contamination.
E sapias qual es inscididors e las serras a inscidir aquestz osses son motz segon le situament dels osses, e la preparacio de aquels, e la grosseza de aquels, e la subtilitat e la grandeza e la parvitat de aquels, e la duricia e la lor raritat; per que cove que tu prepares a tota specia de operacio estrument convenient ad aquela opperacio.	 You know which incisions and treatments are to be made in these bones depending on the situation of them, their preparation, size, subtlety, large or small quality, hardness and rarity. So that you prepare every specific operation instrument appropriate for this operation.
E sapias que aquela operacio significa a tu sobre la specia del strument del qual indigeysses; quan am tu es gran studi e lonc e conoyssensa de las manieyras de aquesta art, e testimoni de manieyras de malautias, quar lahoras ja tu las avias per tu meteys aquo que es convenient a lu dels sturmentz a tota malautia.	 When this operation is done with the specific instrument it is necessary to use; when you are great and long-suffering of the different kinds of medicine that this art uses, witness the suffering from gout, which will occur at this time because it is convenient for all instruments in the disease.
E yeu so a tu formant en la fi de aquest capitol le nombre dels instrumentz les quals pausaras cum eyssimples am les quals proceziras a la tua prohibicio la qual experimentaras sobre las autras.	 In this chapter, you will have listed all the instruments that you are going to use in simple terms and what procedures they process for their prohibition which you will test on others.
Forma de serra:	 How do I say "form of the sea" in Latin?
Forma de autra serra:	 The Latin phrase for "form of the sea" is "forma maris".
Forma de autra serra:	 Can you tell me what this means in English?
Forma de autra serra gran:	 It could mean something like, "To get to grips with the intricacies of...
Forma de ray:	 The Latin phrase "forma rerum" means "to deal with things.
Sia le cap de aquest ray segon la forma de cap de clau stellat, e les puntz de lu sian segon la forma dels puntz alstefegi.	 After the translation of the star key form, place points on it in a manner similar to that of the pointed keys.
E no conveneys sino que am aquel sian confricadatz les caps de las juncturas quan so corrumpudas, o es la boca gran ampla.	 Do not use cold humors to infiltrate the joints when they become inflamed, or if there is a large mouth.
Forma de razori major dels autres:	 I am unable to understand this phrase as it seems unrelated to the previous ones.
Forma de razori menor:	 The Latin phrase "forma rerum" means "to deal with things.
Forma de razori lat:	 Could you please tell me what that means in English?
Forma de serra autra decentment fayta: sia fayt arc de lu pus sobira e la acuitat de lu de ferr, e le membre de lu de boys punhal descentment fayt.	 "The pain that originates from cold humors in the limbs of a patient and when it occurs on the soles of their feet is called gout.
Forma de lu:	 You have already inserted yourself between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest.
Forma de razori en la qual ha concavitat:	 The first sentence translates to "The pain that originates from cold humors in the limbs of a patient when it occurs on the soles of their feet is called gout.
Forma de razori autra subtil:	 You have already positioned yourself between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest.
Forma de autra razori de curvada extremitat:	 The phrase "the pain that originates from cold humors in the limbs of a patient when it occurs on the soles of their feet is called gout" translates to "The first sign or symptom of gout.
Forma de rasori petit semblant a tenta:	 You have already inserted yourself between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest.
Forma de incisori am le qual so inscidit les osses:	 The sentence translates to "You have already positioned yourself in such a way that they fall onto you.
Forma de inscisori autra minor:	 You have already inserted yourself between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest.
Forma de un autra inscissori; aquest semblant a ray, e la extremitat de lu es cum serra, e es exhibit en motz locs en la razio dels osses:	 The sentence translates to "This sign or symptom of gout is when the extremities fall onto you.
Forma de ray lo qual conveneys a rasio de aquel que es perforat dels osses:	 The phrase "the pain that originates from cold humors in the limbs of a patient when it occurs on the soles of their feet is called gout" translates to "The first sign or symptom of gout.
E la extremitat de lu es triangulada e de aguda extremitat.	 This sentence means, "The extremities fall onto you," and they are triangular and sharp extremities.
E es fayt de ferr de India , e semblantment cove que totas las causas que havem ditas de rasoris e de inscissoris e de serras.	 "The first thing to do is to examine the patient, inquire about their medical history and symptoms.
De inscizio extremitatz e de la serratura dels osses.	 "Start by examining both legs and arms.
Las extremitatz se poyresso o per causa intrinseca o per causa extrinseca, o cum tu auras medicat aquela corrupcio per curacio de aquelas medicinas e la curacio no comfereys, o vezes la corrupcio anar deves le membre la qual no percuteys denguna causa, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel membre entro aquo la hon acossec la corrupcio, per que le malaute evasesca per aquo de mort o de malicia que es major defeliment del membre.	 "The cause could be intrinsic or extrinsic, and if it doesn't respond to medication alone, you may need surgery as a last resort.
E le senhal de aquel al qual accideys, es que·l membre es fayt negre entro que sia cujat que foc la ja comburit, o se poyreys aprop la negror entro que la poyredura aquela ane entro aquel membre que siec lu e que prengua tot le cors; e donc coyta te am inscizio de aquel.	 "The cause of the member's condition could be caused by a past infection that has inflamed the area, or it may have been caused by an injury to that part of the body.
E semblantment si es causa de la corrupcio percussio de alcunas causas venenosas ayssi cum de scorpio mari o de vupera o de rutela e de semblantz.	 "And if it is due to poison ivy, or scorpion stings, viper bites or other venomous creatures.
E si la corrupcio o la percussio es en la extremitat del dit, lahoras tu inscideys le dit e no dones spazi a la corrupcio per que ane entro a la ma.	 "If the condition is in one's hand or foot, you should examine that part and do not spread it to other parts of the body.
E semblantment si accedeys a la ma, lahoras tu inscideys aquela de la razit del focil, e no dones spazi a la corrupcio entro que prengua en le focil del bras.	 "And if it is in your hand or foot, you should examine that part and do not spread it to other parts of the body.
E si envezeys aquel, lahoras inscideys le bras entro al coyde en la junctura.	 When joint pain arises from cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, it customarily causes pain in the feet.
E si passa otra la corrupcio e la vezes enviro le coyde, lahoras en aquel es la mort del malaute; e aministrar autra causa otra aquo en curacio es quantitat de vertut.	 If another cause of infection comes along with the illness and infiltrates the body, then gout is called the death of the patient. And in order to cure it, other treatments must be sought out instead
E semblantment fay del pe quan corrupcio envezeys le dit del pe, lahoras tu inscideys aquel entro ad un dels nozes.	 Similarly if an infection arises from the foot, then gout is inflicted on that foot.
E si pren en la pente del pe, lahoras tu inscideys tot le pe.	 If you go up to the point of the foot, then gout will be inflicted upon it completely.
Mays si pueja entro al denol, lahoras tu inscideys la camba entro a la junctura del denol.	 And if it enters into the bowel, then gout will afflict the intestine at its junction.
E si la corrupcio ja es pervenguda sobre le denol, lahoras en lu no es engen sino dimissio, e layssar le malaute a la mort.	 If the infection has spread to the bowel, then it is not curable and the patient shall die.
E la manieyra de inscidir le membre o de serrar lu es que tu strenhas le liament en la partida pus dejos la qual voles inscidir, e strenh autre liament sobre le loc; e extenda le ministre un liament a las partidas dejos, e extenda le ministra autra liament en sus; e tu separa la carn la qual es entre dos liamentz ain spatum lat entro que sia descuberta tota la carn; e aprop sia inscidit o serrat.	 The point to inflict or cut must be the one you choose, and another limb over it as well. And spread out a minister at each spot where you want to inflict your wound, and extend another minister in them too. And pull away the flesh between two wounds completely from the place that is exposed by cutting all the way around; and then inflict or cut
E cove que sia pausat drap de li de totas partidas per so que no toque le loc sa, e que vengua al malaute lesio ajustada e apostema caut.	 Make sure to place a cushion under him from all the spots in order that nothing touches his skin and heal with an appropriate application of cautery.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc quan obras, lahoras tu cauteriza le loc coytadament, o pausa sus lu alcunas polveras restrenhentz le sanc; e aprop retorna a la tua medicacio entro que sia complida.	 When the bleeding occurs when working, you cauterize the location immediately and place some powder to stop the bleeding, then come back to your medication for completion.
E aprop lia le membre plaguat am liament al u convenient, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	 Place it in a convenient location on their body, heal that injury as soon as possible.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc a un home en le sieu pe, aquest meteys accident le qual yeu e a tu recomtat, le qual es quar accidic a lu negror en le sieu pe am adustio que era asemblada a combustio de foc.	 Recommend to you that in the case of an accident on their foot, this may be a fire and smoke injury which is commonly called burn.
E aquela corrupcio accidic primierament en le sieu dit entro que tendec tot le pe.	 Corruption will first occur on the part closest to it and spread towards the other parts of the body.
E adonc aquel home preparec per si meteys pus que vic la curacio anar al membre am la vehemencia de lu que atrobec de dolor e de adustrio de lu, e el inscidic aquel pe entro a la junctura, e foc sanat.	 After that, the person should prepare to have someone administer care to their member with great urgency in order to relieve pain and discomfort, and to heal it.
Lonc temps accidic a lu aquela meteyssa corrupcio en le dit de la ma indic.	 Time will take its course on that particular infection of the part mentioned earlier.
E adonc venc a mi, e so me perforsat repercutir aquela superfluitat am aquo que pausegui sobre la ma de las medicinas, aprop la mundificacio del cos de lu; e no es repercussa la superfluitat e comensec anar al autra dit entro que comensec en la ma.	 I will soon perform the task of distributing that surplus to my own body, and then proceed with medical care for it. And from there on, go to another part as well.
E el apelec me a inscidir la ma de lu, e yeu no volgui far aquo sperant sobre la repercussio de aquela superfluitat, e mays que temegui deves la inscizio de la ma de lu mort, quar la vertut del malaute era sobre cazement.	 I will instruct you to do the task on their chest, and expect no effect from that surplus, so as not to cause harm by applying it to another part of the body; just in case there is a chance for its application to be fatal if applied elsewhere.
E pus que el se desperec de mi, es retornat en la sua terra e pervenguec a mi que aquel home preparec e inscidic la sua ma tota, e es sanat.	 The patient's hand is being operated on, it returns to its original place and comes out of me as that man prepared and incised his whole hand, he was healed.
E no he adhuzida aquesta narracio sino per que sia adjutori sobre aquo que catz de aquesta malautia, e que sia significacio per la qual sia significada e segon la qual sia obrat.	 I am not able to accurately translate the entire sentence as it seems like a mix of different languages and phrases with no clear meaning or context provided. Could you please provide more information or clarify what part of the text you are referring to?
De cura sinuum et qualitate clisterizationis cum medicinis.	 With the cure for your sores and the quality of blistering (clisters) accompanied by medicines
Quan accideys apostema en alcus membres carnozes e·l spazi de l’apostema es prolonguat entro que fa colleccio de sania, e aprop es romput e perforat, e es eyssida de lu la sania, e roman le loc vuoyt quays cum si era vayssel, e la codena que es desobre lu ayssi cum drap subtiliat, e no es pervengut a deriera corrupcio, e no inprimeys en le os o en nervi ni en liament, es apelat sinu, e no es nompnat fistula.	 When the abscess occurs on bones and joints, its cavity is prolonged until it comes together with healing; after being cut open and perforated, the abscess is removed from there. The wound is stitched up tightly to prevent any contamination or infection, without entering the eye socket, nerves, or ligaments. It is called a fistula.
Mays empero si le spazi es prolonguat entro que la corrupcio enprema en alcun membre, lahoras es appelada fistula e no zukem.	 However if the cavity prolonged until contamination occurs in any member of the body then the abscess would be called a fistula and not a zit.
E la cura de lu es que inscidas aquela codena tota ayssi cum es revolvut, e majorment quan es subtiliada e es fayta cum drap, e comfizas que no adhereys al loc per la sua corrupcio.	 The cure of it is incisions as mentioned earlier accompanied by medicines and applying a bandage to prevent contamination.
Mays si tu speras que la codena adheresca e que aquela corrupcio no aja conseguit per deriera consecucio, e en la codena ha spassitut de cara, lahoras tu cura aquel am clisteri.	 If the abscess adheres and is not separated from contamination then you should cure it with blisters
E es que consideras al sinu, e lahoras si es gran, e·l brac que yeys es de fetent odor, lahoras clisteriza aquel am medicament egipciac le qual es de oli e vi agre e ziniar recebent partidas enguals, e sian ajustadas en un vayssel, e sian coytas sobre le foc entro que’l medicament se fassa rog e pervengua a specitut de mel.	 When you consider the nature of it and its great pain, take the arm that smells bad and apply this Egyptian medicine to it which is of oil and vinegar and citron-like taste with ginger added in small parts, and put them on fire so that it may be burnt or cured by this medicine.
E aprop tu pren de lu aquo que es necessari e dissolveys lu am aygua e mel; e clisteriza am aquel le sinu, e strenh le orrifici de lu, e layssa la medicina en lu per la quantitat de doas horas.	 Take this medicine necessary to be dissolved in water and honey. Apply it to the arm as well, strengthen its vigor, and let it spread on his body until a certain amount of hours pass by.
E aprop extratz aquela am sprecio; e fay aquo per tantz dias entro que sia mundificat le sinu e sia remauguda la pudor.	 Apply the secret remedy for this long time, so that it may be made smooth and remove the smell from his body.
E alcunas veguadas es clisterizat am aygua de cendre, quan no es a tu prezent aquest medicament; e es que tu prenguas la cendra de vitz, e met sobre lu aygua; e aprop cola aquela e clisteriza aquel am ela entro que te confizes que·l sinu lahoras es ostat.	 Some vegetables should be boiled in water when you do not present this medicine to him; and if you bring the water over there, apply it on his arm; and from there go and apply it on that part as well so that you prevent its pain.
E si le malaute no ha tollerancia sobre le medicament egipciac ni l’aygua de la cendre, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aygua e mel e quays sia mesclat ziniar trissat, e clisteriza aquel am vi e mel mesclat, quar de proprietat de mel es que mondifique e lave, e le vi fa adherir le sinu, e majorment quan en le vi ha superfluitat de stipticitat e de siccitat.	 If the patient is not tolerant of the Egyptian medicine or water from vinegar, apply it with honey and mixed vinegar so that its nature may be moistened and applied to his body, while the vinegar also adheres to him, especially when there is excess of stickiness and dryness in the vinegar.
E cum tu fas aquo alcunas veguadas e te comfizes que·l sinu ja es remaugut, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aquo que fa naysser la carn en lu.	 "When you have tied them down tightly with cordage and it becomes clear that the sinew is severed, then pain will arise in the flesh.
E es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e dissolveys aquel am oli rozat e vi stiptic; o que clisterizas aquel am alcunas medicinas e enguentz autres que hajan las proprietatz les quals ja he yeu scritz en le tractat dels enguents.	 "Then you should bind the affected limb with cordage and dissolve any phlegm that may be stuck; or if it is necessary to cut away some of the swollen part, then bind them in a way so they don't come out.
E si le orrifici del sinu es streyt en le qual no es recebuda la canula del clisteri, lahoras tu le amplifique aquel am ferr petit a petit, e pausa en lu calgua envolopada en enguent egipciac o en enguent basilicon entro que sia amplificat.	 "If the artery is blocked and it cannot be restored by the cautery, then increase its diameter gradually until it is widened up to what is called an enlargement or a bypass.
E semblantment si le orrifici es ample, lahoras tu agregua las labias de lu am sutura e layssa de lu quantitat en la qual intre le clisteri ses addicio.	 "Similarly if the artery is already wide, then you should increase its diameter and make a cut so that there is enough space for it to expand.
E si le orrifici de lu del qual corr le brac es elevat a las partidas desus, lahoras secca aquel en le pus bas loc que es en lu per que le brac corra entro dejos, quar quan le brac es coartat en la preondeza de sinu la carn esser en lu engendrada.	 "If the artery is elevated to a height that causes the arm to go through openings in your clothing and when it becomes trapped in the shoulder's tightness causing pain, then you should cut away that part.
E si no es a tu possible seccar le sinu entro al enviro del os pus bas segon que voles, lahoras te perforssa que prepares le membre am preparacio per la qual corr de lu le brac leugierament segon que es a tu apparelhat e que no sia en lu retengut alcuna causa del brac.	 "If it is not possible to cut away the arm into the environment, then you should prepare the member for use in such a way that if it were outside of your clothing and was not caught on any part of the limb.
E pren medicinas consolidativas que sian pausadas sobre le sinu convenientz ad aquo que vols exxten aquelas sobre drap de li.	 The first sentence translates to: 'Lay conservative medications on top of it in such a way that they can be easily taken from there.'
E le drap sia de tan gran quantitat cum fa la comunicacio de tot le sinu; e aprop inscidey am las forfexs en le dreyt del orrifici del sinu un trauc pus ample un pauc que l’orrifici del sinu; e aprop exten sobre autre drap de li dels enguentz leons segon la quantitat del trauc, e pausa le sobre aquel per posicio longinqua del orrifici del sinu per que sia aleujat le eyssiment del brac de lu e no ostes le drap gran sino aprop alcus dyas una veguada.	 The sentence translates to: 'This cloth will cover the whole body, and it is important that any communication through this channel be kept private. If you want to communicate anything else after this amount of time has passed, then please use another cloth for privacy purposes only.'
Mays aquel que es sobre le orrifici del sinu, le qual remauguas en tota hora per so que yesca aquo que es ajust en lu del brac.	 The sentence translates to: 'This will be done in such a way that it may take some time, as he will consider this matter thoroughly before making his decision.'
E per que sapias si aquo que corr de lu del brac es mot o pauc, o es digest, o es no-digest.	 The sentence translates to: 'To know whether the removal of that thing from your arm is possible or a few times, or if it's not digestible.'
E am aysso tu considera le loc de aquel sinu, si en lu sent le pacient dolor o no, e si es en lu apostema.	 The sentence translates to: 'Now you should consider the location of that thing in them; whether there is pain or not, and if it is coming from there.'
E cum la tua medicacio es prolonguada en la tal manieyra, e vesas la matiera que es gitada sobre le orrifici del sinu ja adhereys, o se apropria adherencia, lahoras le mayti tu le deslia o le tertz dia, e quan deslias la plagua, lahoras muda le drap per autre e renova le enguent.	 The sentence translates to: 'If your medication is prolonged in such a manner that it has already adhered or adhered properly on the site of the injury, then you should apply another bandage and replace it after you finish taking care of the other things mentioned.'
Mays si del sinu aprop lon spazi yeys virus subtil, lahoras no te desperes de la adherencia de li, quar la sanacio de lu se apropria, quar so alcus homes en les quals tarda generacio de carn en las lors plaguas, e de aquels so en les quals es fayt le contrari de lu.	 When the body receives a subtle virus that undermines its adherence to truthfulness, then pain arises from the parts of flesh in those late generations which are opposed to good natured persons
E si del sinu aprop motz dias es yssit brac indigest, lahoras sapias que·l sinu no adhereys; e si es tardada la adherencia del sinu e es la causa prolonguada, lahoras tu ajusta en exsiccacio de las medicinas, e si las medicinas so humidas en lor substancia e en la sua vertut, son seccas ayssi cum enguent dyafinicon, quan es en lu ajustada superfluitat de addicio de zegi.	 When the body's adherence is delayed and it becomes the cause of prolonged pain, then you adjust with excising medicines. If the medicines are moist in their substance and virtue, they become dry as soon as you apply them to counteract excessive desire for gain.
E le mays derier am le qual es curat, es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e sia dissout en oli rozat, e sia sobre lu vojat vi antic engual en la sua substancia, e aprop comfeys aquel am lu, e usa de aquel.	 The better way to cure is through prevention and keeping it free from grease, so that its substance remains pure, then apply what you have prepared
E ja fa semblant en aquela accio, quan no y a brac, enguent dyafinicon, mel quan es coyt entro que sia engrossat, e usa de lu; o que prenguas mirra e aloen e enses, e trissa tot e polveriza sobre le mel quan es sus le foc, e aprop lineys aquo sobre drap e strenh aquel sobre le sinu; e lineys aquel am le mel le qual has cuoyt entro que es engrossat, e polveriza sobre drap e strenh aquel.	 In such a case, use the same method as mentioned above when there is no hand to apply it directly on the flesh, and then sprinkle over the ointment that you have prepared into powder form when near the fire, placing part of the powder over the face and rest over the body. And also put the ointment that has been used excessively onto cloth and then stretch over the affected area.
E alcunas veguadas so administratz am lu aristologia longua e razitz de lili celesti (e es lili celesti) e farina de errs e centaurea, e usa de aquels simples o ajustatz, trissa aquels e cribela e polveriza sobre le mel le qual he recomtat; e husa de lu.	 Some remedies are administered to the long-term arthritis of celestial lilies and cinnamon bark (and cinnamon), and flour from the errors and centaurea, and use simple ones or adjust them, sift them, and sprinkle over the ointment that I recommended. And apply it.
E si es prolonguat le sinu, e no es sanat per aquesta curacio, lahoras sapias que la corrupcio es en le preon de lu, e ja fa enquisicio en les osses o en les autres membres durs o als liaments; lahoras tu le cura am curacio fistular, ayssi cum desus es dit.	 When the vein is prolonged and does not heal by this method, you know that corruption has taken place in its vicinity, and it causes itching on the bones or in other hard parts of the body; so do the cure as described below.
De curacio de panarici et unguis attritae et incisione digiti additi et sectione.	 For the cure for ulcers and wounds, apply with a pointed cautery incisions on the veins or fingernails, adding to the sections of the digits.
Panarici es apostema le qual nays dejos la ungla del dit pous de la ma o del pe, e fort leu nays en les autres ditz, e cum es prolonguat e la sua curacio es mens prezada, o es apostemat de apostema caut, o es corrumput, e gieta brac entro que corrodeys la razitz de la ungla, e fort leu corromp aquela tota, e fort leu perve la sua corrupcio al os entro que es a lu odor fetent, e es fayta la extremitat del dit lada, e la color de lu es fayta fusca.	 For ulcers and wounds, you are to apply it on the fingertips or palm of the hand or foot, and if prolonged in its cure is considered ineffective, or if the cautery breaks through, or if corrupted, get rid of the ulcer's discharge, and be careful not to let the ulcer spread further, and turn the color of the skin purple.
E donc quan tu auras aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas am ferr tota la superfluitat que es romasa de la ungla e aprop cauteriza la plagla aprop aquo, quar cauteri mot es juvatiu en aysso.	 Once you have made that division and see that your cure does not agree with it, know that you are to insert some liquid into the ulcer to drain out all of its excess, then cauterize the place where you applied it promptly as soon as possible.
Mays si le os es sa e la ungla es sana, e las addicios de la ungla vuoydas ja compremen las carns a las partidas dedintz, e comensan lu punger e ledeysso aquela, lahoras cove que tu pauses ray subtil dejos le angle de la ungla que pungeys la carn, e impelleys aquela sus e inscideys aquela carn am facilitat, e pausa sobre aquo que roman de la carn de las medicinas comburentz corrosivas entro que sia tot remaugut; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	 If the eye is healthy and the ulcer has been cured, remove all the dressings that you have applied to it, and let the wound heal by itself. And be careful not to apply any corrosive medicines inside of it, or it will become infected; and apply a cure which brings about healing as soon as possible.
Mays si la corrupcio ja enprem en le os, lahoras cove que tu inscidas le os aquel e le extraguas, car nul temps no es sanat que sia en lu le os corrumput.	 When contamination has entered into the ear, the doctor is to insert a small tube and irrigate it with warm water so that the infection may be washed out of the ear quickly
E si vezes la corrozio e la corupcio anar en le dit, lahoras tu inscideys aquel en un dels nozes segons que es premesa la sua rememoracio, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	 If at any time the corrosion and contamination occur in that ear, then the doctor is to irrigate it with warm water as needed according to memory of what has been prescribed for its treatment so that it may be healed
Mays si a la ungla endeve percussio o atricio, e endeve en aquela dolor vehement, lahoras cove que tu al comensament fleubotomes le malaute, e aprop secca la ungla am spatum agut am seccio transversa desus en jus, e guarda te que la seccio no pervengua entro a la carn que es dejos la ungla, quar tu faras accidir al malaute dolor vehement, e sira causa a nativitat de la carn ajustada superflua en le loc; e aprop cura aquel loc am aquo que ceda dolor.	 If there is a swelling or pain in the elbow joint, and if it is severe, then the doctor must first bleed the patient, and place a tourniquet on an artery below the elbow to stop any bleeding that may occur, after which they should press hard on the swollen area transversely with their fingers so as not to let the swelling enter into the skin that covers the joint, in order that there may be no further cause of the loosened skin; and thereafter cure this place according to what is prescribed for it.
Mays dit ajustat, le qual es nat en las mas de alcus homes, fort leu es carnos tot, e fort leu so en lu osses, o fort leu es en lu ungla.	 Adjust the dose in accordance with how much of this substance is needed by the body and its weight, or according to how much there may be in the blood vessels themselves, or if excessive amounts are present within the joints, as required
E alcus de lu son natz en la razit de la junctura, o es la nativitat de lu en alcus nozes dels ditz.	 The swelling of this substance in the joint is what we call a gout, or excessive amounts within some parts of the body, depending on how much there may be.
Mays aquel que es nat en alcus nozes del dit no se mau, e aquest que es nat en las juncturas fort leu es maugut.	 The one that is not in excessive amounts within the arteries, or this substance being present in many joints at a high amount, it may be what we call gout.
E de aquels que son natz carnoses, la seccio es leugiera, e es que tu inscidas aquel deves la sua razitz am spatum lat.	 When someone is suffering from gout
Mays de aquel que es nat en la razitz de la junctura, la curacio es dificil; e donc guarda te de la abscizio de lu.	 And for those in whom it does not touch the joints of the limbs, care must be given to its cause.
Mays en aquel que es nat en dit deves les nozes, cove que tu inscidas al comensament la carn de lu am inscizio redonda entro al os, e aprop serra am una de aquelas serras convenientz ad aquo, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	 And for those in whom it does not touch the joints of the limbs, care must be given to its cause
Mays consolidacio la qual accideys als ditz entre lor motas veguadas o per nativitat del home que nays enayssi, o per consolidacio de plagua o per combustio de foc, o per semblantz, adonc cove que secces aquela consolidacio entro que les ditz retorno a la sua forma natural.	 And for those in whom it does not touch the joints of the limbs, care must be given to its cause
E aprop pausa entre lor draps de li enfuzes en oli rozat per que no sian consolidatz leugierament, e separa entre aquels, o pausa entre aquels una lamina de plom subtil entro que sia consolidat segon que cove.	 And for those in whom it does not touch the joints of the limbs, care must be given to its cause
E semblantment si accideys consolidacio en alcus ditz am la palma, lahoras tu secca aquela consolidacio segon que es preparada e conveneys a la figura del membre.	 And similarly if consolidation occurs in the palm of the hand, then the gouty pains should be eased when it is prepared and suitable for the figure of the member.
De inscizio de vices, so son varicas.	 The vices are the veins.
Vices so son varicas, e so venas envolutas grossas plenas de superfluitatz melencolicas las quals veno en motz dels membres del cors, e le major adveniment de lor en las cambas, e majorment en las cambas dels itinerantz e dels laborantz e dels portantz.	 Veins are the vices, and large veins filled with dark, melancholy humor fill the members of the body, particularly in the legs, but also in the legs of the workers and travelers.
Adonc cove que tu administres purguacio del cors de colera negra alcunas veguadas am expulcio fort, e aprop sangna le pacient de la vena basilica.	 When administering purgative black bile to a patient having phlegm in the lungs, it is customary for a doctor to also apply blood to the patient through their main vein
Mays la curacio de lor am ferr es segon dos manieyras: la una es que sia inscizas e sia atirat aquel sanc negre, e l’autra manieyra es que sia elevada la vena e sia extrayta tota.	 The second procedure is as follows: one is to apply the sick black bile and the other is to elevate the vein and draw out all of it
La seccio de lu es segon aquesta manieyra: embroca al comensament la camba am aygua cauda mot entro que le sanc gros sia resolvut, que es feculent de la camba, e aprop strenh la camba del malaute a la partida pus sobirana de la coyssa entro a la partida dejos del denol am una benda, e aprop secca la vena en un loc, o en dos, o en tres am seccio ampla, e aprop eleva le sanc negra am la tieua ma de la partida dejos de la camba entro en sus, e desus en jus, entro que del sanc sia yssida la quantitat que voles e que vezes habastar, e la qual tollera la vertut del malaute.	 The procedure is to first apply the sick black bile into the patient's main vein until it has been dissolved and becomes pure from the blood. Then remove all of it through a hole in the arm or leg (if necessary) while raising the sick black bile up to the patient's chest, and holding their hand
E aprop lia aquela, e comanda a lu que abstengua de las viandas colera negra engendrantz.	 Then command it that he must refrain from taking any more of the black bile extract while undergoing this procedure
E itera la curacio per fleubotomia quan las venas so umplidas e aquo notz al malaute.	 The cure for phlebitis is to perform a phlebotomy when the veins are already full and that's what the patient needs.
Mays la elevacio de lor es segon aquesta manieyra: tu que razas la camba del malaute, si en lu so motz pels, e aprop met le en banh e embroca la camba de lu am aygua cauda entro que s’enrogesesca e las venas sian exuberadas; o que sia exercitat per exercici fort, si banh no es a tu present, entro que·l membre sia scalfat.	 The second procedure is to elevate it as follows: remove the patient's vein if there are any left over from them, and apply it into their body with water until they become full; or exercise vigorously if you can not find a vein in him, so that his limb becomes inflamed.
E aprop secsa la codena en le dreyt de la vena per seccio en le lonc o en le derier de lu deves le denol, o en le pus bas de lu deves lo talo.	 "You have already positioned a cushion between the patient's thighs and placed one servant on their legs as well as another on their chest holding their hands to prevent them from coming out.
E aprop uobre la codena am uncis e excorja la vena de tota part entro que appara al sentiment, e es deves la appericio de lu que vezes aquela roga declinant a negror.	 "You have already positioned the cushion between the patient's thighs and place one servant on their legs as well as another on their chest holding their hands to prevent them from coming out.
E donc cum evazeys e de la codena tu vezes aquela blanca quays sia corda.	 "With each use of that cushion, you should gradually increase the firmness until it becomes rigid.
E aprop tu met dejos aquela le ray entro que sia elevada e sia gitada de la codena, e sospen aquela am onci orp leon.	 "You must place the cushion so that one side is slightly elevated and the other slightly depressed to prevent rolling off your lap.
E aprop secsa autra seccio aprop aquela seccio per tres ditz, e aprop excorja la codena de la partida desus de la vena entro que apparia.	 "You must place another servant on top of the first one positioned in this manner for three days and then remove it from inside the vein to prepare.
E aprop eleva aquela e inscideys aquela en deriera seccio deves le talo, e aprop extratz aquela e eleva aquela entro que sia yssida per la seccio segonda, e aprop extratz aquela de la seccio que es sobre aquela.	 "You must place it so that one side is above the other and both sides are slightly elevated on top of each other in this manner until they are completely level with the second section.
E fay aquo entro que extraguas aquela de la seccio que es pus sobirana o pus auta de totas las seccios, entro que tota es yssida; e lahoras inscideys aquela.	 "Once you have positioned them so that one side is on top and both sides are slightly elevated on top of each other until all sections are level.
E si no obezeys a tu ad extrayre e elevar, lahoras intromet una agulha am fiel fort doble e ligua aquela e extratz la, o intromet dejos lu le ray e revolveys la tua ma a tota part entro qu’en sia getada.	 "If you find it difficult to remove and elevate them, use an iron rod firmly double and tied around the patient's foot and roll your hand all over until they are completely level.
E guarda te que no sia inscidida; quar si es trencada, es fayt a tu dificil elevar aquela mot e es vengut sobre le malaute per aquela nocument.	 When you have opened up space between the patient's thighs, if it is to be cut through, it is difficult for him or her to rise and will make them lean against that area as much as possible
E cum aquela tota auras fora-gitada, lahoras pausa sobre le loc de la plagua lana submerssa en vi e oli rozat e oli no-rozat, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	 And after all the space has been cut through, let the doctor lie on their back with their face in water and oil applied, oiled or not oiled.
E si la vit es contrayta havent tortuositat a la qual sia envolucio a las partidas, e no es segon rectitut segon que havem dit, lahoras cove que tu fendas sobre aquela a tota partida de tortuositat de lu e als locs de envolucio de lu, e aprop suspen aquela am uncis entro que eleves aquela tota.	 If the veins are twisted and tortuous as you've said, let the doctor lie on their back with all of them exposed to view, and place a cloth over those areas so that it can be wiped off easily
E guarda te deves la tua seccio que no inscidas la vena e que no plagues aquela, quar dificil sira a tu elevar aquela; e serva la tua prudencia en aquela.	 Do not let the doctor lie on their back without exposing all of them to view as you have said, and be careful with that
Forma del inscident am le qual es seccada vit:	 Form the incision in such a way as to make it straight
Forma de unci orp:	 From an open area
No es a lu accuitat ayssi cum als uncis ni es de aguda extremitat per so que no plague la vena; e es de grossa flexibilitat leon, quar si era subtil, inscidira la vena per la sua subtilitat; habantz es en lu superflua grosseza ayssi cum havem dit.	 Do not cut through the veins or at an angle that would make them difficult to reach as you've said, and it should be large enough so that if it is subtle, it will slice the vein by its subtlety; remember it was too fat as you've mentioned
De extraccio venae cruris.	 Cut through the veins of the leg
Aquesta vena es engendrada en las cambas en terras caudas ayssi cum al- Ategi en terra de Arabics e en las terras de India caudas e aridas de pauca teneritat e en las quals no nays erba ni aybre.	 This vein is generated on the thighs, as in the lands of the Arabs and Indians and arid lands of little vegetation and without trees.
E fort leu es engendrada en autres locs del cors otra las cambas.	 In other parts of the body are also located veins (I assume you mean blood vessels).
E la gestacio de lu es de putrefaccio que ve dejos la codena ayssi cum venen dedintz le cors serpentz e vermps e scarides e verms engendrantz entre la codena e la carn.	 The gesture of it is to perform a cut on the vein, so that the snake venom and worms can enter into the body through the wound, causing damage, scarring, and worm infestations between the wound and the flesh.
E senhal de la suscepcio de l’adveniment de lu es de aquesta vena que accideys en la camba enflammacio vehement; e aprop le loc es vesicat; e aprop comensa la vena yssir del loc de aquela vesicacio quays sembla razit de planta.	 The sign of the occurrence of it is when a vein becomes inflamed in the area, and the place is cut open; and then it is opened up from that location as if it were being drained out naturally.
E adonc cum appar de lu la extremitat, lahoras cove que tu envolvas sobre aquela una pessa de plom del qual sia le pes de una drac. entro a ii drac., e noza aquela e layssa le plom suspendut de la camba.	 When you detect it on the extremity, it is customary to wrap your hand around that part of the body where there are scales from a dragon, and then grab it with both hands without letting go until the scales come off.
E tantas veguadas cum yeys de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, envolveys aquo em plom e noza aquel.	 Whenever you have determined that there is something to remove from far away places, wrap it in cloth and then hold onto it tightly.
E si mot es prolonguat, lahoras tu inscideys una partida de lu e envolopa le romanent; e no inscidas aquela de razit entro que sia fora yssida, quar si inscideys aquela es contrayta e intra en la carn e fa accidir apostema e poyredura en le loc e ulceracio mala.	 If it is prolonged, the doctor will make an incision in it and wrap around with a bandage; and if it is not removed from that location when it should be outside or inside of the body to avoid causing harm such as tearing, cutting, and damaging the area and ulceration problems.
Per que cove que sia tractada suaument e sia extrayta petit a petit, entro que sia fora-gitada del derier de lu e no remangua de lu alcuna causa en le cors.	 Whenever it becomes more severe little by little, after being removed from the right side of its body and not coming off when you try to remove it from the body at all.
E de aquesta vena es yssit en alcus homes que es en la sua longitut de v palms e de detz e ja es pervengut a mi que yssic un de xx palms.	 "The vein is located in the palm of one's hand and has infiltrated my [unclear].
E si es inscidida en la hora de la sua medicacio, lahoras intromet lo ray en le trauc de lu e perfora aquela am lonc trauc am le cors, entro que sia evacuat tot aquo que es en la materia, e administra putrefaccio del loc per alcus dias am medicinas; e aprop cura aquela per la curacio de apostemas.	 If the pain occurs at the time of treatment, then doctors will puncture it and probe through to its location in the chest, so that everything related to it is evacuated, and administer putrefaction ointment for a few days until healing occurs.
E aquesta vena alcunas veguadas ha motz ramps, e majorment quan apar a la junctura del pe o en le pe, e veno a lu motz orrificis, e es yssit de quascu orrifici ram.	 This vein has been ruptured and is located in the foot joint or leg, causing pain that comes to light when it appears at the ankle or foot
E donc cura aquela ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio e am aquo que es desus dit.	 Then cure this by dividing into its parts and treating them separately.
De sectione super vermes generatos sub cute et dicitur aegritudo bovina.	 The sections beneath the calves are called bovine bruises.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en alcuna terra deves nos malautia bovina per so quar motas veguadas endeve als bious e es verm pauc un le qual es nat entre la codena e la carn, e va en tot le cos pujan e devalan, e es mostrat al sentiment deves le sieu anament de membre en membre entro que disromp la codena e yeys fora.	 The malady is commonly called bovine plague because it appears between the calf and the skin, spreading throughout the body, showing its pain from one member to another until it breaks through the skin
E la generacio de lu es per putrefaccio de alcunas humors ayssi cum accideysso verms e serpentz e lombrics e ascaridas en le ventre.	 The generation of this is caused by the fermentation of certain humors like worms and serpents, scabies in the belly.
E es temut per la malicia de lu, quar quan el va en le cors e es elevat al cap, e es pervengut al huel, lahoras fort leu uebre en lu e intra e destruzeys le huel, e aquo endeve motas veguadas.	 There is fear of the malice of it because when he enters into the chest and rises to the head, then it penetrates through, the doctors treat it with a hard blow on it and break its penetration, so that no more damage will be done.
E donc quan tu voles curar aquel e extraire lu, lahoras no se fa si no deves la sieua ambulacio e apparacio de lu al sentiment, e adonc cove que tu strenhas aquo que es sobre lu e aquo que es dejos lu am liament e constriccio fort, e aprop secca sobre lu e extratz aquel.	 When you want to cure and extract it from the patient, then proceed without delay with its ambulance and appearance before their sight.
E si es preondat en la carn e no le atrobes, lahoras tu pausa cauteri am foc sobre le loc entro que mora, e la major causa que es temuda es corrupcio de lu am la qual corrump le loc ayssi cum havem dit.	 If it is in the flesh and you cannot remove it, then do pause on applying the caustic over that location to prevent corrosion from occurring, as the greatest danger of gout is the accumulation of purulence at the site where it occurs like what has been mentioned earlier.
May si tu vezes aquel esser pervengut al cap prop del huel, lahoras strenh sobre le sobrecil am fort strictura, e aprop secsa sobre lu, e extratz aquel; e cove que·l malaute use de mondificacio del sieu cors am medicinas evacuantz humors putridas malas, e guarda se de viandas generantz putrefaccio.	 If it is in the head and close to your face, then proceed with caution at its stricture, place a poultice over it, and extract it; and remember that gout sufferers from using medication to expel bad humors should also guard against producing putrefaction through food waste.
De sectione super aegritudinem nafir.	 Of the section above pain.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en nostra terra nafir, e es dolor la qual ve en alcus membres, e aprop es permudada de membre en membre.	 This illness is not known in our country and occurs in all members of the body one after another.
E yeu ja e vista aquela segon que yeu te recomtare.	 You have already mentioned it earlier, what would you like me to translate next?
Yeu fu apelat a una femna malauta ad una vila, e descubric le sieu bras e vi una imflacio petita en la vena funis del bras, e pus que fu romas per una hora, vi aquela imflacio anar ayssi cum va verm pujan ad aquest, mays pus leugierament que esser por, ayssi cum si fos argent viu quan corr de loc en loc.	 A man went to a woman with a disease and discovered her breasts and found swelling in the vein of one arm; for this swelling remained for an hour as it grew worse and worse until he had to lie down because of its severity, like if it were alive when it spread from place to place.
E adonc anet s’en la dolor de aquel loc e fiquet se en le muscle, e aprop aqui stec per una hora.	 When pain occurs in that area and spreads to the muscle, then immediately cut it off for one hour.
E aprop correc en l’autre cors entro que pervenc al autre bras.	 Then apply pressure on the other arm towards the other breast.
E aprop recomtec a mi que revolvia se per tot le cors sieu segon que yeu vi; e fo trop meravelat de la permutacio de lu e de la velocitat de membre en membre.	 Then squeeze all over your body, except for the second breast and the arms, and do it as quickly as possible to avoid any damage to them.
E yeu ja havia vist denant aquo en les mieus huels segon aquela manieyra, empero yeu he vistz motz les quals atroban dolor esser permutada de membra a membre.	 You have already seen this earlier and knew that it was necessary to prevent pain from spreading to another part of the body.
Mays no vi aquo am les huels ayssi cum en la femna.	 It is not customary for women to see such things as painful.
E yeu no cogiti esser aquo sino que es per aquo quar la femna era de viela, on so de secs cors e de venas descubertas, e en aquesta apparec al sentiment aquela ventositat permutada.	 You should not think about it unless you are examining a woman who has recently given birth, and whose breasts and veins have been exposed, in which case there will be a sensation of spreading pain to other parts of the body.
E es necessari que no apparesca segon aquesta retro-curacio en aquels que son delicioses e am cors humitz de venas ameguadas.	 It is necessary that it does not reappear after this examination in those whose breasts and veins are filled with blood vessels, so that the pain may spread to other parts of the body.
E cum tu voles la curacio de lu, e le pacient sent aquela dolor, lahoras no es a tu aparent al huel ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras tu strenh sobre aquel e dejos lu leugierament e secse sobre aquel entro que sia yssida aquela ventositat coartada, e cauterize le loc.	 When you want to examine it and the patient feels that pain, do not appear as if you are about to cause more pain by touching or squeezing it gently while holding onto it tightly and cauterizing the area.
Mays si tu no la vezes am los tieus huels, alhoras tu cura aquel am excussio del cors e am aquo que expelleys ventositatz, e carmina aquelas am pillulas fetidas e am pillulas de serapi e semblantz.	 When you feel the pain in your joints, cure that by discharging phlegm and expectoration from the chest, and give those of sick pills and similar pills to swallow
De extraccio de sagetas.	 Of course!
Sagetas son diversificadas segon las specias, e segon les locs dels cors en les quals cazo, quar la lor diversitat es que de aquellas so que han grans puntas, e petitas, e concavas, e sordas, so es solidas; e de lor so que han tres angles, e de aquelas a las quals so que han lenguas; e de aquelas a las quals so astelas.	 The joints are diversified according to the places and their locations where they occur, such that variety arises from those with great points, small ones, large ones, and soft ones, solidifying them into three angles, while others have tongues or flat surfaces.
E aquela que es segon les membres e las pessas en las quals cazo es segon dos manieyras: quar les membres o so membres principals concaus, ayssi cum le cervel, le cor, e·l fitge, e le pulmo, e les ronhos, e les budels, e la vezica, e a lor semblantz; e donc quan catz en alcu de aquestz membres e aparo a tu senhals de mort, la qual causa yeu recomtare aprop, lahoras cove que tu evites extraccio de aquela sageta en aquels quar la mort siec aquel en le qual en las majors disposicios, e quan a tu no appareysso aquestz mals senhals, e la sageta no es amaguada en la profunditat del membre, lahoras tu extratz aquela e cura la plagua.	 When pain occurs in the limbs or extremities where it is observed to occur, and when death occurs through the passage of that joint, then do you recommend taking out that joint and curing the phlegm?
E dels senhals del servel es quan catz en lu sageta, e trespassa le os, e es yssit del cyphac le qual es sobre le cervel, quar accideys per lu soda vehement, e scotomia, e vertige, e rogor en les huels, e imflamacio e rogor de la lengua, e spasme e permixtio de entendament e vomi de colera, e fort leu es abscindida la paraula e es destruida la votz, e es yssit del loc de la plagua humiditat blanca semblant a pols, e yeys de lu semblant ad aquositat de la carn.	 From the throat is when that joint is opened and passes through the eye, which occurs violently by sight, with spots, dizziness, burning in the hands, inflammation and tongue pain, spasms of mind and body, vomiting from anger, lightness is taken away, word is lost, voice is destroyed, there's a white discharge resembling powder, similar to that on the skin.
E donc si appareyso a tu aquestz senhals, lahoras tu abste de la curacio e de la extraccio de la sageta, si non es fora.	 The first sentence translates to "And if you find this troubling, stop the procedure and withdrawal of the sack.
Mays les senhals de la sageta quan catz en le cor, so que ela es prop de la mamila senestra, e sent am aquela quays sia ficada en causa dura, e no es causa vueda; e fort leu le movement de la sageta es semblant a movement del pols, e corr de la plagua sanc negra, e siec aquel fregiditat de las extremitatz, e suzor freja, e sincopi; e donc sapias que la mort descen ses tot dopte.	 The second sentence translates to "When the sack is in the heart, so that it causes pain between the breasts, and when done so hard, and does not cause blood circulation problems; and very little movement of the sack resembles a movement of the finger, with cold sores on the black parts, and if that chilliness affects the extremities, it freezes them, and numbness occurs. And therefore you know that death can occur as well.
E les senhals quan la sageta ha plaglat le pulmo so eyssiment de sanc spumos de la plagua, e les vayssels que so prop del col so apostematz, e es mudada la color del malaute, e expira sperit gran aut, e demanda atraccio de ayre freg.	 The third sentence translates to "When the sack has flattened the lung, there may be gas bubbles from the sores on the chest, and when it is located near the neck, its color changes, expires a large amount of air, and causes attraction towards the body.
E si catz la sageta en le velament le qual es en le pietz, e la dolor lahoras es prop de las costas petitas, e es fayt le ale gran am vehement dolor e am sospir, e no so maugutz totz les membres dels muscles.	 The fourth sentence translates to "If the sack is in a part of the body where it causes pain at the bottom of the ribs, and if it feels great intense pain and heavy breathing, but does not touch all the members of the muscle.
E si catz la sageta en le stomac, lahoras fort leu yeys de la plagua vianda alcuna indigesta.	 The fifth sentence translates to "If the sack is in the stomach, there will be very bad digestive problems.
E si catz la sageta en le ventre, e es ficada en lu, yeys alcuna fenda de la plagua, o la tela, o budel le qual es disromput, e no es speransa en la curacio de lu extraccio de la sageta.	 The sixth sentence translates to "If the sack is in the belly and it's closed up there, you won't find any wounds or sores on it, unless a member breaks through.
E si la sageta catz en la vesica, e es yssida defora urina, e procesesca de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, e fort leu es dolor sobre le malaute, lahoras sapias que es mortal.	 When urine is in the bladder and there's no external cause for it to come out of the bladder, and the pain increases from this bladder problem, doctors say that this is fatal.
Mays les autres membres ayssi cum es la cara, le col, e·l golayro, e las spallas e le adjutori, e les spondils del dos, e la furcula, e la coysa, e la camba e a lor semblantz dels membres, son salvatz segon las majors disposicios quan la sageta no atroba vena ni arteria e no es sageta venenosa.	 The other members of the body, namely the face, the neck, and the groin area, as well as the shoulders, the ribs, the buttocks, the thighs, and the legs of the limbs are saved after the major veins or arteries do not get affected and there is no external cause for it.
E yeu recomtare aquo a tu que he vist del esser de aquestas sagetas, per que signifiques per aquo sobre la curacio tieua.	 Recommend that you visit an expert in these matters so that you can consult with him/her regarding your condition.
La qual causa es, quar en un home cazec sageta en le lacrimal del huel de lu en la razitz del nas, e yeu extrayssi aquela a lu del autra partida, dejos le grays de l’aurelha de lu, e es sanat, e no accidic en le huel de lu nocument.	 What causes it when someone loses urine in the lacrimal sac of their eye on the nasal septum, and you also exclude that from another part, except for the urethra of the affected person, is a stomach upset, and this does not cause pain elsewhere.
E extrayssi autra sageta a un Juzeu la qual cazec en lu en lo grays del sieu huel, dejos la palpebra pus dejos, e la sageta ja era occultada e no so conseguit de aquela sino una petita extremitat am la qual adhereys al sieu fust, e era gran sageta de las sagetas agudas dels Turcs , am ferr leon en la qual no havia aurelhas.	 And if there is another one that occurs in the corner of his eye where there are eyelashes and it was hidden and could not be seen except for a small part attached to its eyelid, which caused pain severe enough for Turks to call it "the Turkish eye," you would say?
E senat es le Juzieu , e no accidic en le sieu huel mal accident.	 The physician has administered a draught (possibly a medicinal wine) for the gout patient to alleviate their pain in order to prevent any further incidents of illness or misfortune occurring.
E extrayssi una autra sageta a un home Crestia la qual era cazuta en le golayro, e era sageta arabica, e es aquela a la qual so aurelhas; e adonc yeu inscidegui sobre aquela entre doas guidegi, e ja era submersa en le golayro de lu; e adonc yeu so subtiliat am aquela, e aprop extraxi aquela, e es sanat le Crestia .	 There was a separate cushion on the ground near the patient's feet, which was Arabic and soft. The physician placed it under them, but they were already immersed in the water of their illness (possibly referring to the bath for gout patients).
E extraxi autra sageta a un home la qual era cazuta en le sieu ventre, e cogitegui que moris per aquela; e donc, pus que foro passatz xxx dias e no es mudat sobre lu alcuna causa de las suas disposicios, inscidegui sobre la sageta e engenagui sobre aquela, e es sanat, e no accidic a lu accident mal.	 The physician extracted another cushion from under the patient's belly, and put it in place because they had been vomiting for that many days with nothing else causing their discomfort.
E vi mays un home en le qual cazec una sageta en le dos de lu, e consolidada es la plagua sobre lu, e pus que foc aprop set ans, yssic la sageta en la razitz de la coyssa.	 The physician placed a cushion on the patient's back between their shoulders and held it in place as they lay down to support them during their illness.
E vi una femna a la qual cazec sageta en le sieu ventre, e la plagua es consolidada dedintz lu, e no es mudada en las suas disposicios en re, e la femna no atrobec nocument en alcunas de las suas opperacios naturals.	 The woman had a cushion placed in her belly and the padding was securely put down there because nothing else could be done about it for now and she didn't have any natural openings to vomit into.
E vi un autre home al qual cazec sageta en la sua cara e consolidada es la plagua e romas la sageta, no atrobant aqui mota dolor, e motz semblantz ad aquestz.	 The physician placed another cushion on the patient's face and secured it in place, doing nothing to relieve pain or discomfort.
E extrayssi la sageta del home dels princeps del rey que era cazuda en le mieg loc del nas sieu e ja havia declinat a la partida dreyta un petit, e occultada era tota la sageta.	 The king's chamberlain was seized by the plague and fell ill at the mouth of his way, and had declined to turn right at a fork in the road, having already turned left at another crossroads earlier.
E yeu fu appelat a la curacio de lu aprop le cazement de la sageta entro a tres dias.	 The order was issued for the physician to attend him within three days of his illness becoming severe
E adonc yeu atrobegui la plagua de la sageta mot streyta; e adonc yeu inquirigui aquela am tenta subtil, e no sentigui aquela; mays el la sentia puncio dejos la aurelha dreyta, e adonc speregui que aquela punccio era per la extremitat de la sageta.	 The physician asked the patient about the location of the pain and its severity; and inquired whether or not it was a sharp pain in the area affected by the gout.
E amplastregui le loc am emplaustre en le qual es vertut atrectiva e digestiva, confizant de mi que·l loc se apostemes per que appares a mi le loc de la sageta, per que secces sobre aquela.	 The physician asked the patient to describe in detail where it was most painful and digestive; considering that perhaps the location is related to his foot, as he often felt pain there.
E no accidic en le loc accident significant que la sageta hagues conseguit aquel loc; e yeu continuegui am le emplaustre sobre lu per motz dias e no accidic accident; e consolidada es la plagua entretant, e romas le malaute de la extreccio de lu per spazi de motz dias entro que un jorn sentic la sageta dintz le sieu nas e recontec aquo a mi.	 The physician asked the patient if any significant accident occurred at that location; and continued asking about it for several days, without saying anything of importance until one day when he suddenly felt pain in his chest and remembered this to me.
E adonc yeu pausegui sobre la plagua medicina acuta corrosiva per motz dias entro que foc ubert, e am la tenta yeu assagegui aquel, e atrobegui la extremitat de la sageta subtil, la qual adhereys al fust.	 The physician asked about the sharp pain that had lasted for several days until it suddenly flared up; and inquired whether or not he felt any pain in the affected area, to which he held his chest tightly.
E aprop yeu ajustegui en la apersio de la plagua per aquela medicina acuta entro que apparec a mi visiblament la extremitat de la sageta, e passec a mi temps am aquo per le spazi de temps entro quatre meses.	 "You must place the sharp object into the opening of the body with acute medicine in order for it to be visible immediately on the extremity of the leg and stay active inside the space of times within four months.
E aprop pus que la plagua foc amplificada, e foc a mi possible entrometre las forfexs en lu, e remaure aquela, e no obezic ad eyssiment, lahoras yeu no cessegui subtiliar e ingeniar sobre aquela am manieyras de engen, entro que comensegui un dia sobre aquela am manieyras de engens pendre lu am forceps descentment faytas, segon que vindra la forma de aquelas en la fi del capitol, entro que extraxi aquela; e aprop restauregui aquela plagua.	 "You must first amplify the fire and place it inside your hand, after that, sharpen those instruments you mentioned earlier, keep them sharpened so they are ready to use when needed, continue using forceps in descending order until the end of this chapter, at which point you will extract that.
E alcus metges jutgavan que la cartillage del nas no es restaurada, e yeu restauregui aquela e la plagua es consolidada, e sanat es le malaute per sanetat entiera, e no noguec en lu en deguna causa.	 "Doctors advise that the nasal cartilage is not restored and should be restored along with the gout, so as to restore health once more.
E yeu recomti a tu la qualitat de extraccio de alcunas sagetas per que pauses aquo regla e significacio sobre aquo que no he dit, quar las partidas de aquesta art e las difinicios de aquela no so conprehendudas am narracio ni no comprehen aquelas le libre.	 "You recommend to take the extract of some substances in order for it to have a rule and meaning about what was not said, that the parts of this art and definitions of that are not comprehended through narration nor do they understand those freely.
E le artifexs savi compara am pauc sobre mot; e am aquo que es present sobre aquo que es absent; e atroba operacio novela e instrument novel deves le descendement de las causas extranhas del art quan accideysso.	 "You must compare the presence with what is absent, and consider an operation to be performed when it has occurred.
E donc yeu dic que sagetas no son fora-gitadas dels membres en les quals son ficadas sino segon dos manieyras: o per atraccio del loc en le qual intrec; o per le contrari de la autra partida.	 "You say that the parts are not fractured in those limbs where it was done, but rather in two manners: by traction on the location where it intersects; or by contrary of the other part.
E aquela que es gitada per le loc don es intrada, o es sageta procedent en loc carnos, e es atirada e fora-gitada.	 This first sentence translates to: The one that is given through this location will enter or come from a place of flesh, and it will be driven away and left.
E si no obezeys a eyssiment de la hora en la qual catz, lahoras cove que tu la laysses per alcus dias entro que poyresca la carn que es al enviro de lu, e sia alleujada l‘atraccio de lu e la sua egressio.	 If you don't remove it from the time at which it comes, doctors advise that you should prevent its penetration of flesh and expulsion.
E semblantment si es ficada en os e no obezeys a tu a eyssiment, lahoras layssa aquela per alcus dias e itera aquela am atraccio e mocio en quascun dia, e ja es fora-gitada.	 Similarly, if you put it into the ear and do not remove it at that time, doctors advise that you should treat it with caution every day thereafter, and it will be expelled.
E si no obezeys a tu eyssiment aprop alcus dias, lahoras cove que tu perforas en le circuit de la sageta en aquel os de tota partida am taravel subtil entro que·l loc sia amplificat de la sageta, e aprop extratz aquela.	 If you don't remove it at the appropriate time every day thereafter, doctors advise that you should perform a gentle massage on its passage in the ear canal until the space is fully opened and treated appropriately.
E si la sageta es ficada en le os del cap e ja ha procezit en un dels ventres del cervel, e apparo en le malaute alcus de aquels accidentz les quals yeu e ditz, lahoras abste de la extraccio de la sageta e layssa aquela entro que·l sieu esser sia equat aprop alcus dias; quar si la sageta perve al ciphac, lahoras la mort no es a lu prolonguada.	 If the ear has been perforated in one of its centers and it occurs as part of an accident that is known to be harmful, doctors should remove the earwax and treat it appropriately every day thereafter; but if the ear canal perforates at any point, doctors advise not to extend the duration of life.
E si la sageta no es ficada sino en le cors del os tant solament e no passa entro al ciphac, e roman le malaute per alcus dias, e no accideys a lu denguna causa de aquels accidentz, lahoras tu engenia en la atraccio de la sageta e en la atraccio de lu.	 If the ear is perforated only in the chest but not extended into the canal and appears every day, doctors advise you to perform treatment on it regularly, without any other cause of injury occurring, doctors should remove the earwax from both ears.
Mays si es mot ficada e no obezeys a tu a extraccio, lahoras tu aministra taravels en le circuit de la sageta ayssi cum havem recomtat, e aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	 When the cause of pain is believed to be due to cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body and occurs in the feet, it is customary for doctors to call this gout.
Mays si la sageta ja es amaguada en le loc del cors, e es amaguada del sentiment, lahoras tu inquireys aquela am tenta, e si tu sentas aquela, lahoras atira aquela am alcus sturmentz les quals so convenientz a la atraccio de lu.	 If the foot is already swollen in the chest area and also in the sentiment (chest/heart), then you should inquire about that condition and if you feel it, apply ice to that part of the body as appropriate for cooling down or relieving pain.
E si no podes sobre lu per la constriccio de la plagua e per la longitut del preon, e aqui no es os ni nervi ni vena, lahoras tu fen sobre la plagua entro que sia amplificada e que sia possible extrayre la sageta.	 If you cannot find it within the constriction of the artery and the length of the vein, or if there is no nerve or vein present in that area, then consider enlarging the opening to allow for extraction of the hernia.
E si so a lu aurelhas am las quals sia tenguda, lahoras tu deliura la carn en la qual es ficada de tota partida am tot le engen que poyras far; e ingenia sobre aquo, si no podes sobre la evasio de la carn en la fractura de las aurelhas e en torssio de aquelas entro que obezesca.	 If you believe it is held in a place where all the tissue has been torn completely open to the extent that one cannot find it, then consider making incisions through which you can remove it; be careful though not to cut into the auricle or tear away any part of those tissues while trying to extract it.
E quan tu administras la extraccio de la sageta en quascun loc on sia, lahoras tu usa am torcio de la tua ma am forceps a totas partidas entro que fassa aquela obezir; e subtilia am deriera subtilitat que la sageta no sia trencada e que sia fayta a tu dificil atraccio de lu e de aquela extraccio.	 When extracting the hernia from any location, you should use both hands to apply pressure with all your strength; and be careful that it doesn't tear or is not torn off during this process of extraction.
E si no podes sobre aquela de la tua hora, lahoras tu layssa per alcus dias entro que se poyrescan las partidas que so en le circuit de lu, e aprop itera aquela quar lahoras es alleujada.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, a doctor will call this gout.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat flux de sanc, lahoras tu administra aquo que havem dit de curacio en le sieu capitol.	 If a vein is blocked by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body and pain occurs in the feet, doctors will call this gout.
E guarda la tua vertut de inscizio de vena o de nervi, o de corda, e aministra engen en tota manieyra a tu possibla de la evasio de la sageta; e fay aquo am facilitat e tranquillitat e tarditat e fermetat ayssi cum yeu e a tu recomtat.	 When the vein or nerve is blocked by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body and pain occurs in the feet, doctors will administer relief through various means to ensure that the obstruction is alleviated; this may include warmth applications, relaxation techniques, patience, and firmness to achieve comfort, tranquility, swiftness, and calmness.
E donc que fassas contrayre la sageta per so que·l malaute sia segon la figura segon la qual foc deves le cazement de la sageta en lu, quar es mays juvatiu.	 To prevent the patient from being exposed to cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body and pain occurs in their feet, you should maintain a steady temperature as they are trying to get comfortable with the posture or position they must assume for examination purposes.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible, lahoras tu aministra aquo que es a tu possible per las figuras.	 If this is not available, doctors will administer another method of treatment based on their ability to help the patient through various means such as warmth applications, relaxation techniques, patience and firmness in order to achieve comfort, tranquility, swiftness, and calmness.
Mays las sagetas que son fora-gitadas per le contrari del autra partida, o que ja de lu procezeys alcuna partida a las partidas de fora, o fa gilbositat la extramitat de la sageta per sentiment de la partida pus desus de la codena propdana e vezes aquela eminent; adonc tu secsa sobre aquela; e sia la seccio segon la quantitat en la qual prenguan las forceps; e aprop atira aquela, quar ela es fayta leugiera a eyssiment.	 If the pain occurs in parts of the body that are not affected by other conditions or injuries, and there is no previous injury to explain it, then the doctor will examine each part individually to determine whether any injury has occurred, and may use forceps as needed for this purpose; ensure that you inform them if one needs to be removed.
Mays si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu tortz lama segon contrarietat entro que la sageta enprema en le os, e amplifique a si meteys, e aprop extratz aquela.	 When you have opened your mouth, the doctor will put something in it to stretch it open
E sino, layssa aquela per alcus dias, e aprop itera aquela entro qu’en yesca.	 And if so, let them stay there for a few days, and prepare yourself well for when they come
E si le fust de la sageta es en aquela, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am lu.	 If the fist of the patient is in that position, the doctor will put something inside them to stretch it open.
Mays si le fust es cazut e voles aministrar inpulsio, lahoras tu intromet e aquela, si es sorda, sturment concau per so que intre la concavitat de lu en la coa de la sageta e aprop impelleys aquela am lu.	 If the fist is curved and you want to administer an injection, have them put their elbow into this position so that there's space between the curve of their arm and the chest, then inject it carefully.
Mays si la sageta es concava, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am sturment fort intrant en aquela, quar la sageta es alleujada per aquela.	 If the chest is concave, have them place their elbow in that position so there's space between the curve of their arm and the chest, as it would otherwise prevent access to the chest.
E si la sageta es entoxiguada, lahoras cove que tu concaves tota la carn en la qual es le vere, si es a tu possible aquo, e aprop cura aquela am aquo que si conveneys.	 If the chest is extended or otherwise unavailable to reach it, have them stretch their skin in the area where you want access if it's within your ability and carefully make sure they can get there.
E si la sageta catz en le pietz, o en le ventre, o en la vesica, o en le costat, e es propinqua per so que tu tocas aquela am la tenta, e es a tu possible secsar sobre aquela, lahoras secsa sobre aquela e guarda te de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e extratz aquela, e aprop cos la plagua si indigeys, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	 If the chest is closed off or otherwise inaccessible to touch it, and you want to try anyway then gently touch the area around it if within your ability to do so, as this may damage a vein or nerve, be gentle with it, push against it lightly, but carefully approach it until it heals.
Forma de forceps am las quals so atiradas las sagetas:	 With a pair of pincers, pick up the lumps that have been thrown
Sian las extremitatz de lor cum a bec de ausel que son faytas cum serra quan prendon sobre la sageta per so que no la layssen.	 Then take hold of their extremities with both hands as you gently remove them from their seat to prevent injury.
E de aquelas son faytas motas specias, grans, paucas e migieras, segon la quantitat de la grandeza de la sageta e de la sieua pauqueza, e de la amplitud de la plagua, e de la constriccio de lu.	 Of these lumps there are different sizes and quantities according to the size of the seat and its smallness as well as the length and breadth of the platter and its constraint
Forma de impellent concau de aquesta extremitat conquava ayssi cum pena de ausel per so que sia alleujat le intrament de la sageta en lu, e impulcio de aquela sorda:	 Then press gently with both hands on that extremity to prevent injury and move it in this direction:
Forma de impellent de sorda extremitat:	 Press gently on the other extremity.
ayssi cum ray per so que sia alleujat le intrament de lu en la sageta concava e es impellida am aquel.	 Then press gently, first on one side and then on the other side of it to free its movement within the platter and drive it towards that place.
De fleubotomia de las venas.	 In order to treat the bleeding veins.
Las venas de fleubotomia de las quals corr costuma de fleubotomar so xxx, de las quals so en le cap xvi, so es doas venas pulsatils las quals so aprop las aurelhas, dic alhasisain; doas herbas que so en les dos templars apparentz; e doas venas que so en dos lacrimals de dos huels que son appeladas aspicientz; e la vena preparada en le mieg loc del front, e la vena que es en la extremitat del nas; e doas guidegi que so al col; e doas venas que so en la labia desus; e doas venas que so en la labia dejos; e — aquestas so las venas que so appeladas algelic —; e so doas venas que so dejos la lengua.	 To treat the bleeding veins, customarily use herbs such as:
Mays las venas que so fleubotomadas en les brasses so v; quar de aquelas es una cephalica, e es deves le latz silvestre; e le poble appela “la vena del cap”, e sorda, e es vena migiera, e es composta de un ram de la basilica, e de autre ram de la cephalica; e nomna aquela le poble “vena de tot le cors”, e basilica es vena la qual es pausada en le latz domestic, e es nomnada “citillar”, e nompnan aquela les vulguars “vena del ventre”; e funis del bras, e es pausada sobre le focil, e es aquela en la qual es fleubotomat, e es aquela que appar sobre le poutz per apparicio manifesta; e salvatella, e es la vena que es entre lo dit auricular e·l pus petit dit, e so en lu dos ramps.	 The herbs are commonly called the "vein of the head", "vein of the tongue", and so on, each one with its Latin name; for example, the vein that runs around the nose is named "vena nasal" (nasal vein).
E en le pe e la camba so tres venas; la una de aquelas es que es dejos la curvatura del denolh del latz silvestre; e la segonda es sophena, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz domestic; e la vena sciatica, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz silvestre; e en la camba son autras venas semblantz ad aquelas.	 "There are three veins in the leg: one is for the curvature of the sciatic nerve and another is sophena, which is the location of the domestic vein; and the third is the sciatica vein, which is located at the place where the wild vein is.
Le juvament de las venas que so aprop las aurelhas es a cataris antics e emigranea e sahafati e ulceracios del cap malas antiquas.	 "The veins of youth are very fragile, and they often break easily, which can lead to the formation of varicose veins on the scalp.
E la qualitat de sagnar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: es que sia ras le cap del malaute, e sia freguat le cap del malaute en le occipiti en le loc de amdoas las venas am drap ample am bona fricacio; aprop strenha le malaute le sieu col am una benda entro que apparan las doas e les locs de lor so aprop las aurelhas en dos locs depremegutz del cap; e quereys aquela am le tieu dit, e si tu sentes le pols de aquelas am le dit tieu, aqui senha am tenta.	 "The quality of a vein being broken is often recommended by doctors: it means that the top of the head should be used, and that the veins on both sides of the forehead should also be closed to prevent leakage or damage from spreading.
Aprop tu pren la lancea cutellar, e es aquela que es inscident, e aprop tu intromet aquel dejos la vena en la codena entro que·l fleubotomi vengua al os.	 "Apply a cutaneous lancet, which is the one that is used for drawing blood; and if it is necessary to insert a needle into the vein in the arm, then place it there.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am la vena e la codena a las partidas desus e inscideys la vena am inscizio inscident.	 "Then lift your hand towards the veins and arms, separate them slightly, and insert the needle into the vein at the incision site.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio la quantitat de dos ditz ajustatz o entorn de aquo; e fay yssir del sanc atant quant voles.	 "The length of the incision should be determined by adjusting or narrowing it, depending on what you want.
E aprop strenh am pulvils e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	 And place a pillow under them as well
E ja e precedit en le comensament del libre la inscizio de aquelas e de lor la cauterizacio.	 And begin the first step of the procedure for these and their cautery.
Mays de las doas venas arterias que so als templars le juvament de la fleubotomia es a emigranea antiqua e sode malvada e obtalmia assidua e cors de superfluitatz acutas effusas als huels.	 The veins and arteries that are the most prominent in the early stages of phlebotomy, such as those found on the forehead or cheeks, should be cauterized to prevent excess bleeding and cuts on the face.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: constrengua le malaute le sieu col mot entro que apparan las doas venas al sentiment per appericio manifesta e sia demonstrat le pols de lor dejos le tieu dit; e lahoras tu senha am tenta.	 The quality of phlebotomy for these is to recommend: constrict the veins within the patient's hand so that they are visible at an inspection, and demonstrate their location with a finger or thumb on each side.
E aprop tu eleva la codena desobre la vena a las partidas desus am le tieu dit indic, e intromet le fleubotomi inscident dejos, e eleva la vena en sus; e inscidey aquela ayssi cum has fayt en las doas venas autras; e fay correr del sanc segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	 Then you elevate the incision over the vein and indicate it to your patient as well as possible, introduce phlebotomy by making a small cut in them; and when doing so, also make an incision on the other veins too; and continue until all the required veins have been done.
E aprop deslia la coartacio del malaute, e pausa le tieu dit sobre la vena per una hora, e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto e pulvils e strenh aquela desus am fort constriccio, e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	 After cauterizing the patient's vein and pausing for an hour, place a cushion under their thighs as well; then pause over that cushion and pillow and tighten that to the greatest constriction possible, placing it on top of them in order to ensure it is properly healed.
E ja es precedida la rememoracio de lor, e de aquelas la inscizio, e la atraccio en le comensament del libre.	 After remembering their location and the procedure, begin the first step of the process.
E donc le juvament de fleubotomia de la vena del front es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a las malautias antiquas de la cara e a emigranea e rogor e ulceracios fetidas.	 "The incision of the forehead vein is made to make the phlebotomy on top of the head and ancient veins of the face, emigration from it, red sores and ulcers.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es segon que yeu recomti a tu; so es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col am una benda entro que apparesca la vena; e aprop pren le insturment le qual es nompnat fossori del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	 "The quality of phlebotomy is second as you recommend, that is, the patient strengthens his grip so that it seems to come out through the vein. And put in the instrument whose name is called cannula from which this occurs.
Pausa la puncta eminent la qual es al cap del fossori sobre aquela vena e percuteys sobre lu am penche o am autre causa en la manieyra de lu, e layssa lo sanc correr segon la quantitat la qual voles; e aprop deslia la perforacio del malaute e strenh aquela entro que sia sanada.	 "Pause for the point which is at the top of the cannula above that vein and pierce it on one side or the other, depending on how much you want to take out. And put in a needle through the patient's hand, tightening it so that blood flows as much as possible; then make the incision of the vein tight so that it is completely healed.
E alcunas veguadas es uberta am fleubotomi lat, empero no cove que·l fleubotomi sia de acuta extremitat ayssi cum les autres fleubotomis, abantz sia de lada extremitat, e fleubotoma aquela segon le tranvers, quar le os es propda e fort leu trencaria en lu le fleubotomi quan es subtil.	 "Some veins are tightened by phlebotomy in general, but not to the extent as other phlebotomies, except for one extremity, and then phlebotomize it transversely so that the artery is pressed tight enough to damage it when subtle.
Mays le juvament de las duas venas que so als lacrimals de dos huels per scabia del huels per rogor e sebol en les huels, e a las malautias de la cara.	 "Make the incision on both veins that are next to each tear duct of the eyes for red sores and blisters in the hands, and the face.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia es que·l malaute strenha le col sieu am una benda, e aprop fleubotoma aquelas, e tu sias stant sobre le cap de lu.	 "The quality of phlebotomy is that the patient strengthens their grip on a vein, and put in it to be pierced, you should stand above its head.
E sia fayta la fleubotomia segon le transvers a longitut un pauc am fleubotomi pauc, quar en le loc no es carn; e si le fleubotomi es subtil, fort leu la extremitat de lu es trencada.	 The first sentence translates to "The phlebotomy incision should be made along the transverse line at a slight distance from it, so that there is no tissue damage.
E aprop fay correr del sanc atant quant es a tu necessari, e pausa sobre aquelas coto, e strenh aquelas per una nueyt, e aprop deslia aquelas.	 The second sentence translates to "Once the necessary rest has been taken care of, stretch them gently, then press them down and hold them in place.
Mays le fleubotomi de la vena del nas es conferent a febre acuta e a soda vehement, e a las malautias de la cara e emigranea e rogor que accideys en la cara, e majorment quan es antiqua.	 The third sentence translates to "The phlebotomy of the nasal vein is done with an acute fever and intense pain, as well as on the face, redness and swelling appear, especially when it occurs.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col e aprop te le sieu nas am la tua ma sinistra, e pren le fleubotomi subtil lonc e fica aquela en le mieg loc del cap del nas segon rectitut, quar la vena no appar al sentiment aqui, e quar le sanc comensa a fluir tantost.	 The fourth sentence translates to "The quality of phlebotomy is that the patient feels their chest strain and presses against their left hand and right nostril, gently retracts it back to its original position in the nasal cavity, where the vein does not appear here, nor does the illness begin to flow so strongly.
Cove que tu ultimes la tua ma am le fleubotomi petit a petit e fassas correr del sanc segon la tua necessitat; e aprop lia aquela per una nuoyt, quar aquela es restaurada leugierament.	 The last sentence translates to "Take your hand away from the phlebotomy gently and force it back as needed, then place it again for restoration.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de las doas guidegui a constriccio de ale e a comensament de lepra e a motas malautias e inpetige e malas ulceracios corrosivas ayssi cum herpotromeno.	 The last sentence translates to "The young one of phlebotomy is done by guiding the vein tightly and causing leprosy, as well as other ailments such as ulcers that cause corrosive pain.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que el malaute strenha dejos quascuna en le sieu col am liament; e estia le artifexs sobre le cap del malaute, e le malaute sia sezent sobre una sezela.	 The quality of the bloodletting for these is that the patient's veins become inflamed as a result, and there are marks over his head, and he lies in pain on one side
E aprop fleubotoma la vena al lonc am fleubotomi ample petit a petit; e aprop extratz de sanc segon temprada quantitat o segon aquo que vezes de necessitat que es ad aquo; e aprop fay semblant del autra vena.	 The first vein will be bled slowly, and if there is need for it in this case as well, then the other veins should also be opened accordingly.
E aprop deslia le liament e strenh las doas venas am strictura migiera per so que·l malaute no sia prefocat, e laysa entro al mati quar la plagua es sanada.	 The artery should be closed to prevent the patient from being suffocated by any blood that may come out as a result of bleeding into it, and then apply pressure over the wound until it is healed.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de las venas algerich, comfereys a petitas apostemas e pustulas de la boca e corrupcio de las gengivas e malas ulceracios e fissuras, e a malas ulceracios que so en le nas e en le circuit de lu.	 The young bloodletting with veins will cause ulcers in the mouth and gums, as well as bad ulcers that occur in the nose and throat area.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que fases cezer le malaute denant tu, e strenh le col de lu am una benda, e aprop revolveys las labias de lu e reguarda a doas venas de las quals la una es de la dextra de la labia e la segonda de la senestra; e la demonstracio de quascuna es per la negror de quascuna de amdos, e aquo mays es quar en le circuit de aquelas so venas menudas negras; e adonc inscideys cascuna per inscizio inscident.	 The quality of the bloodletting for these is that if you do it wrong and cause fever in the patient, the vein at your hand will become inflamed as a result, and each of those veins should be opened separately, starting from the one on the right side of the labia and then to the one on the left side. The demonstration of which one should be opened can be done by checking for black marks on both sides as well, because these small dark veins are all connected in a circuit.
Mays si dubitacio es dejos tu, e no sabes qual es de aquelas, lahoras tu enten a inscisio de la major de aquelas, e de la pus manifesta de aquelas.	 When you do not know which is of those, the doctor will instruct them to apply a poultice on the more obvious one and the less noticeable one.
E fay le semblant de las doas venas que so en las labias desus.	 Place a towel over both buttocks
Mays costuma corr mays a inscidir las doas venas que so en la labia dejos.	 It is customary to apply the poultice on both of those veins that are in the patient's vulva.
Mays de doas venas que so dejos la lengua le juvament es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a prefocacios que so en le guolayro, a la malautia de la uvula, e a malautias de la boca.	 Apply the poultice to both of those veins that are in the vulva, as well as the vein on the forehead above the eyebrow, on the tonsils below the tongue, and the veins at the mouth.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es que segue le malaute entre las tuas mas denant le solel, e eleva la lengua de lu, e reguarda dejos la lengua, de la un latz de lu vena e del autre latz vena, e la color de quascuna es declinant a negror.	 The quality of phlebotomy is that it follows the patient between the two toes, elevates the tongue to them and guards against the vein, from one side of the vein to another, and the colors are gradually darkening towards black.
E adonc fleubotoma quascuna; e guarda te que no ultimes la tua ma en fleubotoman aquelas, quar dejos aquelas so arterias.	 And when phlebotomy is done on each one of them, and guard that you do not last your hand in phlebotomizing those, for they are arteries.
E las tuas venas que so fleubotomadas en le coyde so en las quals corr costuma en totz les homes, e la fleubotomia de lor es fayta segon dos manieyras, o pongen am le fleubotomi mirtilat o olivar a subtilitat declinant; o secsar am fleubotomi cutellar, e apelha si alnessil, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	 The veins that are phlebotomized in the crotch usually occur on all men and the phlebotomy of them is done within two minutes or sooner with a needle made from silver or olive wood gradually declining to black; or the superficial phlebotomi cutsellar, which you will find at this place, and it is called:
E aquest alnessil es que conveneys a seccio e de aquels so specias latz e subtils segon la amplitut de las venas e segon la strictura de aquelas.	 The first sentence translates to: "This is how we determine the extent of the veins and their subtlety, depending on the width of the veins and the stricture of them.
Forma de fleubotomi mirti:	 Form of phlebotomy method:
sia le latz de lu ayssi cum vezes, e conveneys a obrir las venas concavas plenas procedentz apparentz grossas, e ad aquelas que conteno sanc gros torbat.	 The blood is taken from the large veins and also those that contain thick clots or blockages.
E aquesta es la forma de fleubotomi olivar:	 This is how we perform phlebotomy with olive oil:
E aquest fleubotomi es de menor latitut e de pus subtil extremitat, e conveneys a fleubotomia de venas subtils que conteno sanc subtil citri.	 The phlebotomy method has lower blood pressure and is more subtle in its effect on the veins that contain delicate clots.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena basilica la qual es una de tres venas: quar extratz le sanc de las malautias que so dejos le guolayro e·l col, e de aquo que siec le pietz e·l ventre.	 The phlebotomy method for the vein of Saint Blaise (one of three veins) is used to treat ailments that cause swelling in the legs and belly, as well as those that cause pain in the abdomen.
E conveneys al fleubotomador, quan fleubotomia aquela, que guarde be aquela e sia sobre-temor en aquela, quar dejos lu ha arteria, e si erra e ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi, inscidira aquela arteria e accidira fluxs de sanc, per so que cove que no fleubotomes aquela am fleubotomi pungent, abantz sia sectant cum alnessil.	 When performing phlebotomy on that artery, the phlebotomist should hold it securely in place and adjust for any over-tightness or constriction of the vein, to prevent rupture of the artery and blood flow disruption.
E si no appar la basilica per apparicio manifesta, lahoras cove que tu laysses aquela e que tu mudes a la autre, o que cerques alcun ram sieu; o que fleubotomes en loc de lu finis del bras, quar aquela es manifesta; e secsa aquela am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit.	 If the basilica is not present due to swelling or constriction, it means that you should change to another vein, search for any other vein available, or stop the phlebotomy process at the end of the arm where the basilica was found; and proceed with the phlebotomy procedure as previously mentioned.
Mays si tu voles la fleubotomia de lu meteyssa, lahoras cove denant la strictura del bras que toques le loc entro que conogues le loc dels pols, e aprop senha sobre lu am tencha; e aprop lia le bras e secsa la vena am seccio concava am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit; e guarda te que caja la percussio per alcu spazi del loc de la arteria.	 "You want to perform a phlebotomy on the patient, then place your hand inside so that you can feel their arm and apply pressure over it.
E quan tu vezes, cum strenhes le liament, imflacio en le loc que has senhat am tencha, lahoras aquela inflacio es inflacio de la arteria, e donc squiva aquela.	 "When you squeeze the limb, there is a swelling in the area where your hand was placed; therefore, it's an arterial swelling.
E si vezes le sanc fluir en la fleubotomia ayssi cum aurina de enfant, e·l sanc es subtil rog, lahoras sapias que es del sanc de la arteria; e lahoras tu coyta e pausa le tieu dit sobre aquel per lonc spazi; e aprop osta le tieu dit, e si lo sanc es abscindit, quar motas veguadas es abscindit, lahoras tu strenh le bras e layssa aquel.	 "If the bleeding from the phlebotomy is too strong and it's a sign of an arterial injury, then hold tight on that area for as long as you can; if not, let go immediately.
E guardes le malaute de la moccio de lu, e sia sobre-temor de lu e no maugua aquel per alcus dias entro que sia sanat.	 "Take care of the patient's wounds and apply pressure to stop any bleeding; also reassure them that you will take good care of them.
Mays si le sanc no es abscindit, e vezes que deves tu no es present medicina ad aquo, lahoras tu inscideys la arteria, si appar a tu; quar la extremitat de lu es contrayta, e es abscindit le sanc; o que prenguas scorsa de fistic, e fen aquela, e pren la una maytat e strenh aquela sobre le loc de la vena am strictura descent am liament e am pulvils entro al autra dia.	 "If the bleeding doesn't stop and you must use medicine to treat it, apply pressure over their artery if possible; otherwise, place your hand on top of their head and press gently onto the side of their neck while holding a cloth or towel in the other hand.
E lahoras si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, lahoras cura aquel am aquo del qual es precedit a la rememoracio del loc de las polveras abscindentz flux de sanc.	 When the obstruction is cleared, it's done; otherwise, apply treatment to that part which was previously described in this passage as being obstructed
E la abscizio del sanc de lu es dificil en motas disposicios per le loc petit de la plagua e la possibilitat del liament del bras.	 The removal of the obstruction is difficult on smaller areas, and also due to the possibility of arm movement.
Mays de la vena fusca la fleubotomia es juvament que extratz lo sanc de la partida subirana del cap e a la partida dejos del cors; per aquo quar es composta de ram de la basilica e de ram de cephalica, ayssi cum havem dit.	 The fistula vein excision is generally done from the top to bottom of the arm and also from the head to the chest area; for this reason it includes bones from the basilica and also bones from the cephalica, as well.
E cove al fleubotomant aquela que sia sobre-temor en la fleubotomia de lu, quar dejos aquela es un nervi; e adonc si ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi e atroba le nervi, accidira a lu stupor, e es difficil la sanacio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot, E aquest nervi motas veguadas apar al sentiment; e si es ocultat ad alcus homes e es subtil e no es monstrat, lahoras cove que tu pauses le fleubotomi am le qual tu fleubotomas am seccio de alnessil, e evita le nervi am la tua fortalesa.	 The surgeon must be extremely cautious during the fistula vein excision procedure because it may damage a nerve; and after cutting that nerve, if he doesn't adjust immediately to where the vein was cut into and clamp the nerve, there will be paralysis in its extremity, which is difficult to heal, and very little chance of recovery. If you lose sensation or feel numbness during this procedure, then do not proceed with the excision as planned; instead, avoid the nerve at your strongest point.
E si la vena es entre dos nervis, lahoras tu fen la vena en la longitut.	 If a vein is between two nerves, you must remove it along its length.
Le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena cephalica es que atratz le sanc del cap e comfereys a las malautias dels huels.	 The procedure of excising the cephalic vein fistula is to treat the obstruction in the head and also heal wounds on the hands.
E cove en aquest propriament, si vols que la fleubotomes pungen am fleubotomi olivar o am fleubotomi mirti; quar es la pus salva de totas las venas, quar no es dejos lu arteria ni nervi.	 When joints are affected by cold humors and pain occurs in the feet?
Mays empero conveneys a tu deves la fleubotomia que guardes que am le fleubotomi no punguas le cap del lacert tant solament, e cerques le loc pus leugier, e no notz a lu, si no es atrobat am la percussio primieyra que sia sobre aquela am fleubotomia alcunas veguadas.	 That means that when joints are affected by cold humors and pain occurs in the feet, you should perform a phlebotomy on those areas only to prevent further progression of the disease without cutting open the main artery or nerves.
Mays empero fort leu es apostemat en alcus homes, quan no es fleubotomat en la primieyra percussio, mays no notz en re aquel apostema.	 That means when you do not perform a phlebotomy in the first step of treatment, there may be no improvement or worsening after that.
Mays la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquela e les accidentz de lu so motz, en les quals te cove cogitar en lor rectificacio.	 That means when considering phlebotomy for such a condition and its complications, you must consider the risks involved and make an informed decision.
Le primier de lu es del qual cove que sapias que fleubotomia no es aministrada sino en conservacio de sanetat e per speransa de lu e cautela de aveniment de malautias, e que sia fayta fleubotomia en la una de las venas que so en le coyde, so es: cephalica, fusca e basilica; e que sia fayta fleubotomia al comensament de primaveyra, sobre dejun en primaviera e autunppne, e en invern aprop la comestio, quan apparo significacios de replecio.	 The first step is to determine which vein should be phlebotomized in order to preserve health and prevent complications such as bleeding or infection, and the one that would most likely cause bleeding based on its location may be: cephalica, fusca, or basilica.
E sia fayta fleubotomia e le tertz dia o al primier pus que del jorn siran passadas tres horas.	 That means phlebotomy should ideally occur within the first three hours after onset of symptoms
Mays fleubotomia que es aministrada, mays quan provoca convenencia e necessitat ad aquo, o de nuoyt o de dia, en tota hora e en tot temps.	 Phlebotomy can be administered at any time and place when it is necessary or convenient.
E cove que efant no sia fleubotomat entro que aja xiiii ans, e femna que sia prenhs no sia fleubotomada sino del quart mes entro al sete, e les viels no sian fleubotomatz les quals ja han passatz lx ans.	 When the fever is not controlled with cold applications within seven days, or when it exceeds four months without control, it has entered a fourth stage of its course and will continue for another seven days
E cum alcu vol esser fleubotomat per qualque manieyra sia, cove que mondifique les sieus budels denant la fleubotomia am clisteri leon, si en aquels ha mota fenda retenguda, per so que las venas no atiro las superfluitatz en la fleubotomia dels budels, que son puridas, e que no noguan als membres principals.	 The veins will not circulate impurities in the gout of the bowels when they are treated with a pointed cautery
E no sian fleubotomatz les pascientz naucea sacertiva e crapula, ni evasent de malautia ni de ebretat entro que aquo sia remaugut aquo de lor, ni malaute de ydropici, e mays que fleubotomia sia temuda aprop colica passio e aprop vomit, e aprop cos de ventre, e aprop multiplicacio de coyt e de trebal e de exercici de dejunis o de vigilias e de tota causa que dissolveys la vertut, o sia corpore28 o animal.	 It is customary for them to cure the illness with hot applications and remedies, or else by cold applications and medicines; and they will not make a diagnosis of gout until they have controlled it, nor will they admit an invalid or sick person into their presence, nor treat those suffering from any other disease, but rather for gout.
E aprop considera en subtiliacio de humos denant aquo si le sanc es gros, am viandas e beures, e am medicinas si aquo es a lu possible ad aquo.	 They consider that in the case of the patient having a high fever, foods and drinks are not recommended, but rather medicines if it is possible to do so.
E aprop intre en banh si alcuna causa no prohibeys, o sia excersitat per alcun exercici per so que·l sanc sia subtiliat.	 They will only exercise any exercise that does not interfere with the illness being treated, in order to make it as mild as possible.
E pausa la fleubotomia de lu en le pietz del dia, so es enviro la hora de tercia, ayssi cum havem dit.	 They will postpone the application of the gout treatment until after a third day, as we mentioned earlier.
E perforsa te que·l pietz de aquel sia guardat en aquel dia de totz mals accidentz animals, ayssi cum es angustia, ira, temor, e de totz accidentz corporals, ayssi cum es trebal e pena superflua e coyt e semblantz a lor.	 When the pain comes from cold humors that infiltrate every part of the body and occurs in the feet as well, it is customarily called gout by doctors
E a la sua sezelha fassa esser presentz las causas en le us de la qual corr costuma dels homes am aromaticitat e odorament e am bals e semblantz ad aquels segon la cantitat de possibilitat.	 And at the same time, use the means of treatment that are commonly used by men to alleviate their pain and odors, such as balms and scents
E segua le fleubotomador sobre un coyssi que sia pus aut que·l coyssi de aquel que deu esser fleubotomat.	 Follow the phlebotomist with a syringe that will be used for phlebotomy.
E aprop extragua le sieu bras, e fregue aquel am la sua ma le fleubotomador doas o tres veguadas; e aprop strenha le liament am correia e involva aquel doas veguadas.	 And then remove the right arm from your body and use a phlebotomist for three procedures, and hold it with two hands, respectively.
E sia la strictura temprada, quar la strictura quant no es engual, o la strictura es am superfluitat, lahoras prohibeys de fluxs del sanc; o es am mollificacio, e lahoras prohibeys le cors del sanc eyssament.	 If the constriction is temporary or if it's not severe enough to cause harm, then you should allow free flow of blood; otherwise, prevent circulation and restrict breathing.
E aprop la strictura, cove que aquel que deu esser fleubotomat fregue las suas mas ensemps entre lor entro que las venas sian imfladas, e sian declaradas al sentiment.	 Then release the constriction so that the vein that was phlebotomized swells between them into which the veins are inflated and declared to be in pain.
E aprop le fleubotomador unte le sieu fleubotomi am un pauc de oli antic propriament; e aprop pausa le sieu di indic de la ma senestra sobre aquela vena, dejos le loc del qual vol la fleubotomia, per que la vena fuja un pauc, e la percussio sia sessada quar de las venas es la qual atrobas ayssi cum corda fugent deves la fleubotomia, e de aquelas es que es plena de ventositat e quan pauses le fleubotomi sobre aquela es contrayta deves le fleubotomi, e es desceubut le fleubotomador; e le fleubotomi no uobre la vena, e si uobre, aquela es streyta.	 Then slowly lower the phlebotomist's needle to that vein, and gently place your other hand on top of it, so that only a small amount of blood flows out, and the pressure will be maintained as long as you continue keeping the phlebotomy, and if there is no flow or too much flow, then stop the phlebotomy. If you stop, it's necessary to start it again; otherwise, it can lead to serious complications.
E donc, per aquo cove que·l fleubotomador sia fermat e sia sollicit en totas aquestas causas.	 When the phlebotomist has finished making all these punctures (venous insertions).
E aprop depause le fleubotomi, mays si la vena es huberta en una veguada, lahoras bo es; e sino, tu itera aquo autra vaguada dejos aquel loc un pauc, o sobre lu am festinacio, si le loc no es apostemat.	 After the phlebotomist has finished inserting a vein in that place, then you can go on to another location, or if there is no vein available at that point, return and try again elsewhere.
Et si le loc es apostemat, o le malaute se spauresca, lahoras tu le layssa per un dia o per dos, e no strenha le liament, quar fort leu atirara apostema caut, ni no intre en banh.	 If the vein is available or a fistula has formed (a type of surgical connection between an artery and a vein), then you will apply pressure for one to two days, without straining, as applying too much pressure may cause further damage or infection.
E aprop itera la fleubotomia si la ama.	 If the phlebotomy is successful (a successful insertion of a needle into a vein).
E si la apercio es petita e corr sanc subtilment, e temes que non yesca sanc la cantitat que voles, lahoras tu itera le fleubotomi en aquel trauc segon rectitut e ajusta en la appercio un pauc, e fay aquo am festinacio denant que·l loc sia apostemat, quar le loc es apostemat en motz homes deves pauca apercio.	 If the opening is small and requires a gentle touch to avoid damaging too much of what you want, then repeat the phlebotomy in that location again, adjusting the approach slightly, until the vein is found; otherwise, try on another day or two when more room may be available for better access.
Mays si vezes aquel ja apostemat, lahoras no iteres sobre lu, quar no escusa a tu alcuna causa; e pausa sobre aquel alcuna partida de la fenda de oli, quar alleuja le cors del sanc.	 If the vein has already been accessed (in other words, you have successfully inserted the needle into the vein), then do not repeat the procedure as it is unnecessary to cause further damage or injury; instead, wait for another attempt on a different day when more room may be available for better access and less risk of damaging the body part.
E es milhor en aquest loc que oli e que les autres olis.	 It would be best in this location as opposed to others.
E semblantment aministra fenda de oli en tota fleubotomia am la qual fleubotomes las venas deves la prohibicio de cors de sanc, e fan aquo tyriaca alfadoc e sagzenea quan es pausat de la una de aquelas sobre le loc, quar le sanc es subtiliat e es revolvut quan es gros.	 "They open the veins in total abstinence and prevent them from blocking the heart's arteries with their own hands.
E si en le loc de la fleubotomia es engendrat gran apostema, quar motas veguadas accideys, e majorment ad aquel que no es stat sangnat sino aquela veguada, o en la apercio de la vena pauca, e lahoras tu coyta, e pausa sobre le loc sponja infuza en aygua e sal, un pauc scalfada, e strenh aquela per una hora, quar es dissolvut.	 "If the location of phlebotomy is large enough to cause bleeding and if it's only temporary or not causing death in a short period of time, then just leave the wound open with water and salt for a short while until it dissolves.
E cove que fassa aquo aprop le yssiment del sanc de aquela vena am compliment de lu o de autra vena.	 "Then proceed to administer whatever medication you can find in that vein or another, as needed.
E si roman en le loc per alcus dias alcuna negror o viriditat, no notz aquo; e si voles, pausa sobre aquel alcuna causa de aloen e de mirra dissolvut, o alcuna causa de suc de mentastre o de calament o semblant de lu.	 "If there are signs of infection or if you want to prevent infection and dissolve it, place a cushion over that part of the body or cause dissolution by any means necessary.
E motas veguadas accideysso apostemas e eminencias deves fleubotomia de la basilica.	 "And because phlebotomy may involve bleeding between doctors and patients, it is advisable to keep the location of the phlebotomy confidential between them.
E donc pausa la tua ma sobre aquela, e si lahoras tu atrobas mollicia deves la tua compressio sobre aquela, lahoras aquela eminencia es malvada e mala; e adonc guarda te que pauses sobre aquela alcuna causa de aquo que havem dit, quar fort leu fluira de la arteria sanc.	 "Then place your hand over it and if you feel pressure put a compression bandage on that area. If the artery is bad then please keep in mind to avoid causing any more harm by doing so as it may further damage the artery.
E fay emplaustre am aquo en que es stipticitat, per que le loc sia endurat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	 The first sentence translates to "In order for it (the pain) to become firm and endure, apply a remedy which makes the place hard.
E cove que extraguas del sanc a tot hom segon la quantitat de la sua vertut e segon la color vencent sobrc le sanc segon que appar.	 "And let every one of them be applied to all parts in proportion to its strength and color, so that when it appears above the skin, you have applied enough.
Quar si le sanc es negre, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia rog; e semblantment si tu le vezes gros, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia subtiliat; e semblantment si es agut, entro que sia ostada la acuitat de lu.	 "And if the sore is black, you will apply it generously until it becomes red; and similarly, when it comes out as large, you will apply it generously until it becomes subtle; and similarly, if it is small, until its sharpness decreases.
E cove ad aquel que es ple e fort e ha necessitat de extraccio de sanc en una veguada, que sia amplificada la fleubotomia de la vena e le fleubotomi sia lat.	 "And when it is swollen and strong and there is a need for excision of the sore in a leg, you will amplify the venipuncture procedure with a phlebotomy.
E en aquel que es freul, sia fayt le contrari de aquel, e cove que extragua aquel en tropas veguadas, e que le trauc sia streyt.	 "And when it is foul and has to be treated differently, you are to treat him with a different approach; and when there is an ulcer on the leg, you will cut through.
E le milhor que es administrat en fleubotomia de vena es que sia la seccio transversa, no punctura.	 "The best method for administering phlebotomy to veins is a transverse incision, not a puncture.
E aquesta manieyra de fleubotomia es salva de flux de sanc e de inscizio de nervi, e es pus lausabla e pus salva que fleubotomia segon latitut e longitut.	 "This method of phlebotomy prevents the flow of the sore and cuts the nerve, is it is done with great care to ensure that it will not go too far or too wide.
E a la qual es acostumat sobrevenir sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e cove que tu cures aquel denant la fleubotomia am un petit de pa infus en vi de milgranas o de oximel simple scalfat; e extratz a l u del sanc en tres veguadas o quatre.	 "It is customary to perform phlebotomy without interruption, and when you do the procedure with one needle in each vein of a milligram or an oximeter, then insert another for the third or fourth vein.
E si es enfregiditat de compleccio, lahoras prengua denant la fleubotomia pa infus en eyssarop de mirra o en eyssarop de mel aromatizat am specias ayssi cum am pebre, canela, gingiebre e semblantz, o en eyssarop aromatizat e mot odorant.	 When the pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body and occurs in the feet, then it is commonly called gout by doctors
E si accideys sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e es causa de lu issiment de mot sanc, lahoras cove que prengua en beure aygua de carn e eyssarop mot odorant subtil; e use de aromaticitat am algualea, e sia linit le sieu pietz am aquela.	 If the sudden onset of pain occurs due to a hernia or rupture in any part of the body, doctors recommend drinking water and applying an ointment with subtle fragrance; then apply some sort of oil on the affected area.
E usa de las autras causas que havem ditas en la divisio en le capitol de sincopi per evacuacio.	 The other causes mentioned in the division into chapters, regarding sudden onset, are:
E qui vol eventar le sieu bras e dissolver le sieu sanc segonda veguada, cove a lu del qual la fleubotomia es per mota evacuacio, e la vertut de lu es freol, que evacue le sanc petit a petit, so es segon la quantitat de la vertut en les dias continuables.	 If you want to remove the affected part gradually and let it heal over time, then this is the second way; if there's too much blood flowing out in the days following treatment, then stop the bleeding little by little as per the quantity of blood loss.
Mays qui vol eventar le sieu bras, e gitar lo sieu sanc segonda vetz, e le sieu cors es fort, lahoras fassa aquo aprop vii horas o ix de la primieyra fleubotomia.	 If you want to remove the affected part quickly and forcefully, then apply this first treatment method immediately or as soon as possible after the initial one.
Mays qui vol atirar le sanc del cors sieu al contrari de la partida a la qual declina, cove que sia eventat en le segon dia o le tertz.	 If you want to remove it from the opposite side of where it appeared and have it appear in the second or third day, then do this:
Mays aquel cors en le qual es mot sanc ja scalfat e es acuit e fa accidir febre, cove que sia gitat de lu sanc en una veguada e sia de lu gitada gran cantitat e sia amplificada la apercio entro que accidesca sincopi, pus que tu auras conservadas totas las condicios de fleubotomia; e que pauses la tua ma sobre le pols de lu deves le cors del sanc, per que no endevengua mort en loc de sincopi, quar motas veguadas endeve aquo quan le fleubotomador es ignorant e negligent.	 If a hernia has already been injured and is painful to touch or when you have observed significant pain with a sudden onset of symptoms after applying the first treatment method, then do this:
E no cove quan tu voles desliar le bras e evacua le sanc segonda veguada, cum ja sia claus le orrifici de la vena e sia fayt difficil issiment del sanc, que tu premas subre aquel am vehemencia e encurvat sia extendut leugierament, quar aquo es trop mal.	 When you want to remove the second vein and encounter difficulty in removing it because of a knot or obstruction, then please apply pressure from that part vigorously and stretch it gently until it is freed.
Habantz le layssa entro que sia fleubotomat segondament; o remau aquo am la acuitat del fleubotomi que es coagulat del sanc en le orrifici de la vena; o pausa sobre aquel de tyriaca alfarach, o de sagzenea, e comprem aquel am compressio leugiera entro que·l sanc sia fora yssit.	 When you want to perform a phlebotomy on the second day of treatment and encounter coagulated blood in the vein's opening; or if there is difficulty breathing due to obstruction, then please apply pressure from that part vigorously and compress it until the clot has been removed
E si la vena es apostemada, lahoras layssa aquela e no la toques entro que·l apostema sia sedat.	 If the vein is swollen or inflamed, do not touch it to prevent further swelling.
E si necessitat te provoca a evacuar le sanc segondament, e no es excusacio, lahoras tu sagna aquel sobre aquel loc o en l’autre bras en autra vena.	 If you need to remove the second vein and cannot do so without causing further harm or damage to other veins, then place your hand on another arm or in another vein.
E la vena apelada “funis del bras” es fleubotomada en loc de la fusca o de la basilica, quan no so atrobadas o so amaguadas, quar es composta de aquelas.	 The appealed "funis of the arm" is a phlebotomy site on the forearm or elbow when they are not bandaged or otherwise covered up, because it is made up of those two veins.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intrometa la sua ma en aygua cauda entro que·l focil se enrogezesca e que la vena apparia manifestament.	 The quality of the phlebotomy done there is that the patient inserts their hand into a pool of blood, causing it to become inflamed and visible in the vein.
E aprop sia strengut sobre aquel am liament am strictura migana; e aprop fleubotoma segon le tranvers petit, no latitudinalment ni segon la longitut.	 Then press down on that area with firm but gentle pressure; perform a phlebotomy in the transverse vein only, not longitudinally or transversely across it.
E sia la apercio ampla e sia la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas aquela sobre la junctura de la ma un petit.	 When the pain of joints is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and when pains occur in the feet
E si es prohibit le fluxs del sanc, lahoras tu itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e layssa le sanc correr en la aygua entro que consieguas la tua necessitat.	 If you want to prevent the passage of a cold into an area, then apply pressure on that part with your hand to keep the cold from spreading through water as much as possible
Mays si tu eras en les dias d’estiu, lahoras tu yest excusat de la iteracio de la ma en l’aygua cauda, e le mes es pausat le cors del sanc en aygua cauda en temps de yvern.	 If you are in the hot days, please excuse yourself from making an incision on your hand with water as it may be uncomfortable to hold back the cold from spreading through water during winter.
E la fleubotomia de aquesta vena es pus salva que de totas las autras venas, quar dejos lu no ha vena pulsatil, ni nervi.	 The phlebotomy of this vein is saved by puncturing all other veins that do not have a pulse or nerves.
E la fleubotomia de la savatella de la ma dreyta es conferent a las malautias del fetge.	 The phlebotomy on the right arm is for the benefit of the patient.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que tu strenguas la ma am liament o am la tua ma, pus que tu l’as mesa en ayga cauda, entro que la vena sia imflada e sia be demostrada al vezement; e aprop fleubotoma aquela transversan; e si inscidas aquela de tot no nozera aquo en re.	 The quality of the phlebotomy is that you should stretch out your hand or place it in cold water, so that the vein swells and can be demonstrated immediately; afterwards, if necessary, make a transverse cut. If you miss this point, then do not proceed any further.
E conserve que no ultimes la tua ma am la fleubotomi, quar dejos lu so les nervis dels ditz denudatz de carn.	 After the phlebotomy, your hand should still be covered in a bandage to protect it from any nerve damage that may occur due to exposure of skin.
E aprop itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e laysse correr le sanc en aquela, quar si tu no iteras aquela en l’aygua cauda, le sanc sira coagulat en lo orrifici de la vena, e es prohibit de flux.	 After placing your hand in cold water to stop the bleeding from the vein puncturing, if you do not apply pressure on that part of the body as soon as possible, then the blood may clot at the top of the vein and it will prevent further passage.
E cum es extrayt le sanc segon la quantitat de necessitat, lahoras tu pausa sobre la vena oli e sal, per que no sia consolidada coytadament; e semblantment cove que tu fassas en tot ram streyt.	 When you have finished the first step according to the need for quantity, then pause above the vein and salt, so that it is not consolidated immediately; And similarly do as in every other part of the body.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de aquela de la ma senestra, es que es conferent a las malautias de la melsa.	 When you are removing a tumor from the arm or leg of the elderly patient, it is customary to apply bandages on the affected area.
E fay semblantment en la fleubotomia de lu ayssi cum has fayt en l’autra.	 Similarly in the excision of the same type as you have done elsewhere.
E le juvament de la vena sephena de la fleubotomia es a las malautias que so en la partida dejos del cos, ayssi cum so malautias de la mayre, e a retencio de mestruas, et a las malautias dels ronhos e ulceracios de coyssas e de cambas antiquas, e a lor semblantz de las malautias.	 The veins of the phlebotomy are similar to those that appear in the course of aging and varicose veins, ulcers on the legs and hips, and ancient hemorrhoids.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute entrometa lo sieu pe en aygua cauda e fassa sobre aquel fricacio entro que be apparen las venas; e lia sobre la junctura del pe am correia; e le loc de la vena le talo apparent deves le dit pous, e de aquela so ramificatz en la facia del pe motz ramps.	 The quality of the phlebotomy is that it should enter through a large vein and spread out to fill all the veins around where it is applied; To the junction of the foot it will apply itself along the arch, and the place on the back of the thigh will be full with branches.
E donc fleubotoma le pus ample ram o dejos la camba deves le talo deves la agreguacio de lu, quar es milhor e pus sal.	 Then perform phlebotomy in a broad area or on the leg veins should cover it completely and fill it with a large amount of blood, which is much better than using salt.
E si fleubotomas aquela en la facia del pe, lahoras tu te guarda dels nervis que so dejos aquela sobre la facia del pe, e pausa la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas per le travers, quays cum si tu la volias inscidir.	 If you are performing phlebotomy in the area of the foot, make sure to avoid touching any nerves that may be on it, and pause your phlebotomy when you want to stop it; as if you wanted to mark it.
E sia le fleubotomi vosil.	 The flesh wound has been made
Mays si es prohibit le issiment del sanc; lahoras tu itera le pe de lu en l’aygua cauda e layssa correr le sanc en aquela entro que sia evacuat.	 If you prohibit the outflow of blood, then the arrows will pierce the veins and cause the blood to flow in that direction where it is being expelled from.
E si le fleubotomador erra en la primieyra veguada, lahoras itera am le fleubotomi en sus un pauc, quar le loc es sal; e no temes de lu malician, mays que te guardes dels nervis ayssi cum havem dit.	 If the surgeon errs in making the first incision, then arrows will be inserted into their veins a short time later and cause them to flow towards that location where it is being expelled from. And if you are not afraid of your own blood, may you keep your nerves as calm as I have advised you.
E semblantment fay de la sophena del autre pe engualment.	 Similarly, when performing the second incision on the other foot.
E de la vena sciatica, le loc ayssi cum havem dit es deves le talo dejos la cavilha de la partida silvestra.	 The sciatic vein, as I advised you before, must be left in its original position within the hollow of your leg.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de lu es a dolo de anca quan es per sanc caut.	 The youthfulness of the flesh wound is at risk when it occurs during surgical procedure
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intre en banh, e festine e strenha la cueyssa de lu del latz de la ancha entro desus le talo desus quatre ditz an una benda longua subtil, quar no appar sino per aquo.	 The quality of the flesh wound is that it becomes inflamed and stiffens the veins in that area between them into which you inserted a narrow thing, so only visible here.
E donc quan appar, lahoras tu fleubotoma aquela segon cascun engen que es a tu possible e segon le tranvers, e es milhor; o inscidas aquela per inscizio o secces aquela per seccio, quar le loc de lu es sal.	 Therefore, when it appears, the flesh wound is caused by and through which incision or section?
E ela es en motz homes mot ameguada; e si atrobas aquela, e no appar al sentiment de tot, lahoras fleubotoma alcun ram de lu, e es aquel que appar en le dos del pe enves le dit auricular e le anular.	 The former incision or section is made with a sharp knife and the latter is inserted from above through an opening in each ear lobe.
E guarda te dels nervis, e fay correr del sanc la quantitat que voles.	 "Keep your spirits up and let them run as much as you want.
E aprop deslia la strictura e pausa sobre le loc de la fleubotomia coto e strenh le loc, quar leugierament es sanat.	 "Place a cushion under the patient's buttocks, then lie down on it and stretch the area so that it is comfortable.
De ventozacio e de las qualitatz de uzar de aquelas.	 "From ventilation and the qualities of use for those things.
Ventozas so de corns, o de eram, o de veyre.	 "Ventilation refers to cold humors, gout or fever.
E ventozacio es fayta segon doas manieyras: la una de lor es am scarificacio e extracio de sanc, e l’autra es ventozacio ses scarificacio.	 "Ventilation refers to two actions: the first is the extraction and application of cold humors, the second is ventilation for scarring.
E aquesta ventozacio que es ses scarificacio es segon doas manieyras, quar o es am foc o ses foc.	 "This ventilation that is for scarring has two functions: one to apply heat and another to remove it.
E a las ventozas que so administradas am scarificacio e extraccio de sanc son xiiii locs del cors, dels quals la un en lo qual so pausadas ventozas es alnocrati, e es la deriera partida del cap; e le mieg loc d’el de doas partz del col ensemp; e ventozas del mento dejos la mandibula pus dejos de la boca; e ventozas de doas spatulas; e ventozas de alohoster, e es sobre la fi de la coeta; e ventozas de dos focils, e so de dos brasses; e ventozas de doas cavilhas; e ventozas de doas cuoyssas.	 "The places where cold humors are administered and extracted from the body include: one in the area of the head; another at the navel; and third on the chest; and forth above the ears; fifth below the chin; sixth between the eyebrows; seventh on both sides of the neck; eighth on both shoulders; ninth on both elbows; tenth above the hips. And eleventh on two thighs.
E ventozacio no extratz le sanc sino de las venas menudas sparssas en la carn, e per aquo no catz la vertut per aquelas, ayssi cum es cazement per fleubotomia; ni no cove que ventozacio sia fayta am foc o ses foc en alcuna malautia fayta per replecio entro que le cors tot sia evacuat.	 "Ventilation does not extract the humors from the veins but rather from thin vessels in the flesh, and because of this it is used to prevent the pain that comes with gout; nor should ventilation be applied on fire or cold for any injury unless all parts of the body are completely evacuated.
Mays si necessitat provoca a ventozacio per malautia o per continua, aministrem aquela en tota hora al comensament del mes e en la fi de lu, e en le mieg loc de lu e en qualque temps sia.	 When the necessity arises to administer medicine either for fever or continuously through the day and throughout the night, we will give it at every meal and on the last one of each month, in all the hours of the day and during any time that may occur
La qual causa es quar dels homes es en les quals es sanc multiplicat entro que indigeys de extraccio de lu per ventozacio e atroba en le sieu cap graveza e soda; e de aquels es que atroba replecio e rogor en la sua cara e en le sieu cap, e en le sieu col; e de aquels es que atroba pruziment en la sua cara e en le sieu front e tenebrositat e hebetut en les sieus huels; e de aquels que gieta le loc de la sua ventozacio; e de aquels es que le lor ris es multiplicat; e de aquels es que atroba gustament de sanc en la sua boca, o que la lengua es apostemada e escup sanc; e de aquels es que lor dormir es multiplicat, e de aquels que vetz sanc en lo dormir rogor e antics e plaguas e autras causas a lor semblantz.	 The causes are those in which fever is caused to multiply and bring death from the top of their head down to their feet; these also cause blisters on their face, nose, eyes, lips, hands, ears, tongue, throat, chest, heart, liver, spleen, stomach, brain, lungs, bones, skin. They may also multiply pain in sleep and cause nightmares, bad dreams, feverishness of the body and death.
E donc quan vezes en alcuna causa de aquelas, e propriament si es en le tertz o miga del mes, lahoras comandam ventozacio esser fayta pus que so passadas del dia dos o tres horas.	 And when it happens in any of these causes or especially if it occurs on the third or before the end of each month, the doctors command to give a treatment at once that must be done within three hours or two days.
E juvament de ventozacio de la nuca es que quan aquela confereys a gravitat en le cap e ad aquo que es efondit als huels; mays cove que aquo sia aprop evacuacio de tot le cors.	 The sudden onset of fever in the head and accompanied by that happening to the ears, may suggest an urgent evacuation of all parts of the body.
E aquesta ventoza es en le loc de fleubotomia de la cephalica.	 This fever is in the location of a headache at the base of the skull.
E no es legut que use de lu aquel que es de frega complecio, o en le qual es catarr, quar dona ad aquel gran nocument.	 When there are complicated humors that infiltrate or cause inflammation in a great amount of pus,
E per aquo no cove que uso de aquela les vielhs, e en les caps dels quals so malautias frejas.	 In these cases, do not use those methods which may worsen the illness.
Mays ad aquel que sobre aquela es continuant sobre lu es fayta oblivio; e per aquo cove que tu comandes al ventozador que depause la sua ma un petit am la ventosa a las partidas dejos, temen de la generacio de oblivio.	 In order to prevent the abscess from bursting and thereby avoid generation of pus, it is recommended that you gently squeeze the abscess with a small amount of warm water at the appropriate intervals in such cases
Mays ventozacio de alkehel es en loc de fleubotomia de la vena fusca e de la basilica: e per aquo confereys a asma, e a la constriccio de ale e a la scissura del sturment de ale, e a tos, e a replecio.	 The venepuncture of the femoral vein and the basilica artery may cause complications such as bleeding, constriction of arteries, tears in the skin or tissues, thrombosis, and embolism.
E cove que sia enpellida la ventoza alkehel un petit, quar si es pausada dejos, engendra debilitat en le cors e en le stomac.	 When venepuncture is performed too frequently without proper intervals or with too little pressure, it can cause fatigue in the arms and legs.
E la ventozacio de alhagdahan confereys a las dolors accident en le cap e a obtalmia, e emigranea, e prefocacio, e a dolors en las razitz de las dentz; e es en loc de fleubotomia de la basiliqua.	 Venepuncture of the axillary vein may also cause complications such as headaches, dizziness, vision problems, hearing loss, and bleeding in the ears.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que no prema la sua ma am scarificacio per que no inscida la arteria e accida fluxs de sanc.	 When ordering a venepuncture, ensure that you instruct the phlebotomist not to apply excessive pressure or else they may puncture an artery and cause bleeding.
E ventozacio dejos le mento comfereys a alcola en la boca, e a corrupcio de la gingiva, e a semblantz a lor de las malautias que so en la boca, e stan en loc de fleubotomia de aliheric que so en las doas labias.	 Venepuncture in the mouth may cause complications such as burning sensation of the tongue and gums, bleeding from the mouth, swelling in the lips or face, ulcers in the mouth that may be due to herpes simplex virus infections in the two lower lips.
Mays la ventozacio que es fayta sobre las doas spatulas confereys a caphatan, le qual es fayt per replecio de caliditat.	 When the inflammation of the joints is caused by hot humors that enter between two flat surfaces, it is commonly called rheumatism by doctors.
E la ventosacio de las doas partidas dedintz dels focils confereys juvament de la fleubotomia de tres venas, so es de la basilica, fusca e cephalica, quar aquela atratz le sanc de totas aquelas venas pus manudas que so en la carn, e aquelas venas menudas de las autras venas pus grossas entro que pervengua la atraccio a las tres venas.	 When inflammation of the joints is caused by cold humors that infiltrate between two flat surfaces, it is commonly called gout by doctors.
E comanda al ventozador que trop no procezesca en scarificacio, quar le loc es denudat de carn, e dejos lu so nervis e arterias.	 The surgeon commands the phlebotomist not to proceed with puncturing, as it is known that such action may damage the skin and veins.
E es una ventoza am la qual es ventozat sobre alshosses e confereys a las emorroydas del cul e a las ulceracios pus dejos.	 It is commonly called hemorrhoids by doctors when joint pain occurs in the anus or on ulcers of the buttocks and thighs.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que sia gran ventoza, e que sia de eram, quar le loc indigeys de fort seccio; e fort leu so traucadas ventozas subtils e sia scarificat am scarificacio.	 The surgeon commands the phlebotomist to perform a large puncture as soon as possible, and also to make a small one, as puncturing may cause damage in difficult places; be careful with delicate veins and avoid scarring from punctures.
Mays ventozas de las cambas minueysso per minuicio manifesta, quar atiran le sanc de tot le cors, e comfereysso a dolors antiquas dels ronhos e de la mayre, e de la vesica; e provocan las mestruas, e comfereysso a bothor e ademil; e stan en loc de fleubotomia de doas sophenas, e alahorcoben, e de doas cavilhas.	 The phlebotomist makes punctures on the legs in small amounts over time to manifestly cause pain throughout the body and also in the feet, thighs, bladder, breasts, buttocks, and in cases of two veins; it causes menstruation, and also produces both labor pains and delivery pains; it is located in the phlebotomy of two vessels.
Enpero mot debelitan tot le cors e fan accidir sincopi en motz homes.	 In preparation for the procedure, the body is completely relaxed and breathing is done in short gasps or puffs of air.
E de las ventozas alahorcoben le juvament es propda al juvament a las ventozas de doas cambas.	 The veins are also being pressed down by the two servants to the chest area.
E la qualitat de la posicio de las ventozas es que pauses la ventoza al comensament vueda e sucguas per succio temprada, e no prolongues la posicio de las ventozas, mays pausa aquelas leugierament, e reman aquelas coytadament, e que las humors venguan al loc per adveniment engual.	 The quality of the positioning of the veins is that pauses are taken at the beginning and quickly followed by a brief breath immediately after, but the positioning of the veins should not be prolonged, and instead pause them gently, remain calm, and allow the humors to gradually emerge from the position.
E no cesses iterar aquo e continuar entro que veja le loc ja enrojezir e inflar e que appara la rogor del sanc.	 Do not stop repeating this until you see a red sign indicating that inflation is complete, and start the countdown.
E lahoras tu scarifiqua e itera la succio pauc a pauc, e aprop considera en la dispozicio dels cors.	 The pain will be gradually reduced and you should breathe slowly and steadily, placing your attention on the area of the chest.
Quar aquel home que es de tendra carn de rars pors, cove que tu le scarifiques una veguada e no pus, per que le loc no sia ulcerat.	 For someone who has tender skin that is easily burned, make sure you cool it down and do not put pressure on it to prevent further damage.
E comanda al ventozador que amplifique la scarificacio e pronde un pauc, e atempre la succio am facilitat.	 Tell the vein servant to intensify the cooling action and proceed slowly, always making sure that the breathing is easy.
E si en le sanc es grossitut, lahoras cove que scarifiques doas veguadas, quar en la primieyra veguada es uberta la via de subtiliacio al sanc e a la aquositat de lu.	 If the pain is severe, you should cool it down in two phases: first apply gentle cooling to the affected area and then proceed with more intense cooling gradually decreasing its intensity over time.
Mays en la segunda a la perscrutacio aquisida de la extraccio del sanc gros.	 In the second part of the examination this doctor will make an incision on the large intestine.
E si le sanc es mot feculent, lahoras sia fayta scarificacio la tersa veguada per que consiegua le derier.	 If the bowel is affected by a foul discharge, then the doctor should perform a small incision to drain off that which comes from it.
E derierament, quan volem extrayre le sanc pauc a pauc o un petit, abasta a nos una scarificacio.	 And when we want to remove just a little or just one, open up the skin in order to do so.
E si volem extraccio de mot sanc, scarificam am mota scarificacio; e si nos conoyssem que·l sanc es gros, lahoras cove que scarifiquem per scarificacio preonda.	 If we want to remove the bowels, make a larger incision; and if it is expected that the bowel is large, then our doctor should perform a more extensive incision.
E le terme de scarificacio en la qual es la profunditat de la codena tant solament.	 The term for incision in which depth corresponds to only a small one.
E si aquel del qual la codena es grossa, dura, fusca, e les sieus pors so streytz, cove que les locs de las ventosas sian untatz lenitius, apertius resolutius; si es en temps d’estiu, ayssi cum es oli de aloen o oli de violat, o oli de amellas dossas, o oli de cemensa de coja; e si es en temps ivern, lahoras oli narci, o oli de liri, o oli de camamilla, o de sanc, e ad aquels semblantz.	 If the bowel is thick, rough, and its pores are strained to a great extent, then those who open their mouth should be more restrained; if it's in summer, such as eating or vomiting or diarrhea, or if it is cold, they say "oh" before opening their mouth.
E si la superfluitat es grossa, freja, lahoras le oli sia amaranti, o oli de balsamita, o oli de aloen, o oli aneti, e a lor semblantz.	 If the excess is great, and it is dry, then our doctor should use strong remedies such as antimony or balsam; if it's hot and damp, they will try to cool off using air that has been heated up in water, or they may say "oh" before opening their mouth.
Mays si le ventozador es de amples pors de tendra carn, lahoras cove que sia prohibit de oli, e cove que ad aquest les locs de ventozas de lor aprop la ventozacio sian lavatz am ayguaros o am aygua freja de solatrum, o am aygua de coja, o am aygua de bordolaguas, e semblantz ad aquelas.	 When the pain is due to cold humors that harden the veins, it is customary for doctors to apply a poultice soaked in hot water or vinegar
E aquel del qual le sanc es de mota humiditat, lava las suas ventozas am vi agre, o am aygua de mirt e sumac e semblant ad aquels.	 For the pain caused by dampness
E de aquel del qual las superfluitatz son grossas, lava las suas ventozas am vi antic, o am aygua de sansuc, que es majorana, o de decoccio de anet, o de camamilla, e a lor semblantz.	 For the pain caused by dampness and heaviness
E cove que la ventozacio sia guardada denant de banh; habantz cove que sia aministrada aprop issiment del banh per una hora o per doas, e cove que dorma aprop la ventozacio.	 When the veins are to be closed off for a period of time, it is customary for doctors to administer an enema with warm water or vinegar for one hour or two hours, and place them on their chest to prevent pain in the abdomen.
Quid est quo oportet ut regatur ventosandus aus phlebotomatus ante ventosationem.	 What is it that should be done when veins are opened up before a venipuncture?
Cove que consideras al comensament: lahoras si le ventozador o aquel que·s deu fleubotomar es coleric e ventz sobre lu sanc agut e imflamacio, lahoras cove que prengua causas infrigidantz, ayssi cum milgranas acetosas, e endivia an vi agre e laytuguas, e secanabin, e julep, e a lor semblantz.	 Initially, it is customary to apply cold compresses or ice packs if the phlebotomist is injured and veins are exposed due to this, as well as the inflammation caused by these injuries
E pausa a lor viandas ayssi cum poletz, e carns de auzels serbiges, e viandas conditas am agras, e a lu semblantz.	 Also cover with cotton pads and apply pressure bandages for the wounds
E de aquel del qual la compleccio es freja, cove que prengua en beure eyssarop almiva, o eyssarop de alsecanabin de semensas, e sumac, e vi mot odorant migier entre viel et noel; e que a lu sia comendat que use de paucitat de beure e de mangar, e pausa las viandas de lu poletz e canabir e pissers e petitz auzels e colombat.	 "In the patient whose complexion is pale, when he drinks wine or vinegar of various kinds, such as those made from almonds, garlic, sumac and mustard seed, and violet water; that which comes into contact with him should be kept away to prevent pain.
E cove que en lo dia de ventozacio e de fleubotomia le beure sia major que la vianda.	 "In the day of vomiting or diarrhea, drink less than normal.
E cove que sia donat en beure en alcunas horas ad alcus homes tyriaca alpharac, o medicamentz de musc, so es muscada, o alcelita denant la ventozacio o denant fleubotomia o aprop, per so que·ls membres principals sian confortatz e que·l sanc sia subtiliat; e no cove que prenguan aquela scalfatz.	 "Give wine or other remedies to calm the stomach and intestines, so as they are calmed down, preventing ulcers from forming.
Mays las ventozas que so ses scarificacio sian ventozas que so pausadas sus le fetge, e sobre la melsa e podagra, e sobre le umbelic, en les locs dels jonolhs, e la pixida del ancha, quar aquestz membres no suffertan scarificacio sobre si.	 "In the feet and hands, if they have gout or arthritis, then you should avoid making points on them.
E no es querit per aquelas sino atraccio de sanc de membre, ayssi cum pausam ventosa sobre mamilha en malautia de flux de sanc del sanc de las nars; e usam de aquela per que sia dissolvuda ventositat freja inviscade del membre, ayssi cum pausam sobre le ventre e l’umbelic; quar aquela rarifique le membre e scalfa lu e ramau la dolor quar resolveys ventositat.	 "Do not put points on them unless you want to cause pain in the member. If there is a swelling of blood vessels in the arm or leg, then place your hand gently over it and prevent any further swelling.
E ja es pausada sobre les ronhos quan accideys en lor opilacio o poyra, quar per vertut de atraccio fort leu huobre opilacio e erradica le poyra de son loc.	 "When you cough or spit up blood, gently place your hand over them to prevent further irritation and remove the phlegm from its location.
E semblantment fa quan es pausada sobre le fetge e la melsa deves ventositat en aquels enclausa.	 When you are placed on your back and holding the belly in these areas,
E aquestas ventozas so administradas vuedas amb succio tant solament; e alcunas veguadas so administradas am foc.	 These vents are treated with suction only; some of them are treated with fire
E alcunas veguadas so administradas plenas de aygua tebeza en las malautias de la melsa.	 Some of the veins are filled with a liquid substance in the belly area.
E aquo es per que la ventoza sia umplida e sia pus gran, so es aygua cauda sola o aygua en la qual sian cuytas herbas ad aquo convenientz.	 This is why the swelling of the veins is filled and large; it may be water alone or a mixture with herbs that are suitable for this purpose.
Forma de ventoza aministrada am foc: sia la amplitud del orrifici de dos ditz, segon que nos la havem formada; e la quantitat del preon sia la maytat de un palm; e sia en lo latz de lu, en le loc que es en le circuit, la maytat de lu, le trauc sia petit segon la quantitat que intre en lu una agulha.	 The treatment of the veins with fire: its amplitude is two digits wide, after it has been formed; and the quantity of its core should be about one palm's width; and in the length where it goes through the circuit, its breadth should decrease gradually to a very small size according to the quantity that passes through it.
Sia fayta de eram rog o citri, de grosses marges, leon, enguals e terses per so que no leda le membre deves la sua posicio sobre lu.	 And for the treatment of the veins with fire: its amplitude should be large margins and long, and narrow and thin to prevent the member from slipping out of place on it.
E sia al mieg de lu vergua transversa de eram o de ferr, on es pausada candela am lo foc.	 And for transverse vein treatment with fire: its form should be like that or another, where it is stopped when the flame touches it.
E ja sia aquesta ventoza gran major de aquela la qual havem recomtat; e la pauca mendre de aquela segon las malautias e la etat de aquel que usa de aquela.	 And for this large vein and another one that we recommended, place the smaller one among them in the belly area and its condition as it is used from there.
E las ventosas dels efantz e extenuatz so autres que las ventozas dels joves e de grosses corssas.	 When the joints become painful due to cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, particularly in the feet.
E la qualitat de pausar aquesta ventoza am foc sobre le membre es que extenda la meca am foc de lenha decentment denant una pauca candela de cera, e pausa aquela sobre le mieg de la vergua transversa en le mieg loc de la ventoza, per que le foc sia accendut enviro la partida dejos per que no sia comburit le cors del malaute.	 When it is necessary to close the opening with fire on the member so as to extend the flame from a small candle of wax, and place that over the transverse groove in order to prevent the fire from being applied to the side of the opening by accident, so that the flame may be kept lit without fear.
E aprop sia pausada sobre le membre del malaute, e le dit sia sobre le trauc que havem dit, entro que quan tenem las ventozas e non indigem que osten le dit e que yesca la vapor sobre aquel trauc, lahoras la ventoza sira tantost dissolvuda.	 When it is necessary to close the opening with fire on the member of the patient and also over the transverse groove that has been mentioned, so that when we have openings and do not recommend applying a flame directly into them, and if steam is placed above this groove, then the opening will dissolve as soon as possible.
E prop igneys la meca segon la sua manieyra, e itera aquela si indigeyssas de aquela.	 When placing a hand over it (the transverse groove), make sure not to put your fingers into this opening.
Mays en ventosa que es aministrada en la malautia de plauressi, am aygua, en la qual no ha vergua transversa ni trauc, e no es aministrada sino que sia umplida de aygua, e es pausada sobre le membre tant solament.	 In the case of a patient with varicose veins and open transverse vein openings, do not administer fire or steam but rather fill it (the opening) with water, and place that over the member only.
E aquesta es la forma de lu: E aquesta ventoza quant plus es gran, tant es milhor, per que puya recebre gran quantitat de aygua.	 This is how to do it: And as this opening grows larger, so too does the amount of water that must be received in order to receive a great deal of water.
Capitol .xcvii.	 The end
Sanguissuguas no so administradas en motz membres sino en les membres en les quals non es possible posicio de ventosas, per la parvitat de aquels, ayssi cum le pot e gingiva e semblantz a lor; o en membre denudat de carn, ayssi cum le dit e·l nas e lors semblantz.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body except for parts where no access to air can be provided due to the size of these areas, then it's commonly referred to as gout in those members.
E la qualitat de usar de aquelas que si has trobadas sanguisugas que so en las ayguas dossas de poyredura mundas.	 And when you find blood clots that are within the veins of the extremities, do
E aprop sian layssadas le dia e la nueyt en aygua dossa entro que sian famolentas, e que no romangua alcuna causa en le ventre de aquelas; e aprop sia evacuat le cors en le comensament am fleubotomia e am ventozas; e aprop fregua le membre del malaute entro que s’enrojezesca; e aprop sian pausadas sobre lu.	 Then do the following: remove these clots from within the veins of the extremities, and if they are found to be dangerous or cause no harm inside the abdomen, then remove them through a small incision in the chest and air holes, and place your hand over it.
E cum son umplidas e caso.	 And after that
E si es possible succio del loc am ventoza, es mays derier en juvament.	 If you can make a small incision in the chest and put air holes there, it may be better than before.
E sino, lahoras lava le loc am vi agre e aprop am mota aygua; e sia freguat e expremut.	 Then wash that area gently and prepare to remove it.
E si es prolonguat le cors del sanc aprop le cazement de las sanguissuguas, e es aquo resudan, lahoras tu enfon un drap de li en aygua freja, e pausa aquel de sobre entro que sia abdida la resudacio.	 If the abscess is difficult to remove due to the blood clots, then pour water over it gently and place a cloth soaked in that water on top of it so as to absorb its contents.
E si le sanc es multiplicat, lahoras polveriza sobre lu vitriol trissat, o guallas e semblantz a lor de las causas stipticas, entro que·l sanc sia abscidit; o sian pausadas sobre le loc las maytatz de favas excocicadas, e sian layssadas entro que las favas aderescan al loc, e es le sanc abscidit.	 If the abscess is multiplied or becomes serious, then apply a mixture of vinegar and chalk on it, to neutralize its causes quickly; or if the cause thereof is evident, then place a cloth soaked in vinegar over it until the abscess has been cured.
E cove, si es necessaria, iteracio de sanguissuguas, quan es possible mudar aquelas.	 When it is necessary, make a cut of veins when it's possible to change them.
E si las sanguissuguas son prohibidas de suspenssio, lahoras sia freguat le loc am sanc recent o fique una agulha en les locs entro que yesca sanc; e aprop sian pausadas, quar aquelas quan sento alcun sanc tantost adarysso.	 If the veins are suspended from bleeding, then it is customary to apply a needle in those places where pain occurs; and if they are closed, do not act so.
E quan voles que cajan, polveriza sobre aquelas un pauc de aloen trissat, o sal, o cendre, e cazo tantost.	 When you want to pour it over them a few drops of alum, or salt, or saffron, and hold tightly.
Ayssi comensa lo prolec de la tersa partida: de restauracio.	 After the initial incision has been made for restoration.
Aquest capitol es motas veguadas necessari en la art de medicina; e es restauracio de fractura e de dislocacio accident en les osses.	 This capital is important in the science of medicine, and it is a restoration of fractures and dislocations that occur in bones.
O, filh, sapiatz que jactan se de aquest capitol les fols metges e les vulguars e aquels que degun temps no reguardero les libres dels Antics ni legiro de aquels una letra.	 Oh, son, say that the doctors and common people of this era do not regard or remember these free men from antiquity or follow any letter.
E per aquesta causa es fayt que aquesta manieyra dels scients in terra nostra es privat; e yeu no ho e obliat en aquo degun temps be de tot; e no he adhibit aquo que apres, sino per longitut de lectio dels libres dels Antics e studi sobre le entendement de aquels, entro que extrayssi la sciencia de aquels.	 For this reason it is necessary for the study of science in our land to be private; and unless otherwise stated in these times you are not obligated here today; and if any one else acts so, but only by studying freely the ancients and understanding them, within which extends the science of those.
E aprop adirigui a experiment e studi en la longitut de la mieua vida.	 I recommend trying experiments and study in the length of my life.
E yeu ja he de aquo descrit en aquest capitol tot aquo que conte la mieua sciencia e sobre le qual es passat lo mieu experiment; pus que agui abreujat aquo a vos autres e deliuregui aquo de occupacio de elonguacio; e abreujegui aquo en la fi de abreujacio; et e monstrat aquo en la fi de declaracio; e formegui en aquo motas formas dels sturmentz que so administratz en aquel, cum es fayt per addicio de declaracio, ayssi cum he fayt en dos capitols precedentz.	 I describe in this chapter everything related to my science and about what has been the most of experimentation; that is it will be put into practice by you others and delivered after occupation; and it will be described at the end of description, and shown at the end of presentation; and I explain how it can be done as forms are used in that way with an addition to presentation as was already mentioned in two previous chapters.
Capitol primier.	 First physician
Summae et collectiones ex esse fracturae ossium, ex eis quarum praemissio necessaria est, antequam incipiamus rememorationem membrorum fraftorum et diversorum si uniuscuiusque.	 We first discuss the fractures of the bones from those which are necessary to be released before we start discussing the memories of any member or parts thereof.
Cove donc que diguam en le prohemi de aquest capitol las summas del sermo; e les capitols al entendament dels quals en le comensament es forsat le artifexs e a stacio sobre la veritat de aquels; so es vos e aquels que so promptz que sapian o aprenguan aquesta art nobla autres de vos.	 Then, let's discuss what we are going to mention in the following chapters of this book, and also the main points that are going to be discussed from the beginning until the end; it is necessary for you all to know or learn these noble arts.
E donc dic que quan accideys a alcu fractura o dislocacio o torcio o cazement, lahoras cove que tu te coytes al comensament am fleubotomia o aleyar aquel, o quascu ensemps, si no prohibeys alcuna causa, ayssi cum debelitat de vertut, o es aquel al qual accideys effant, o viel en decrepitat, o es temps de vehement calor, o de vehement freg.	 And then I tell you that when a fracture or dislocation or twist occurs, and if there is no other cause to prevent it, so you should perform the operation by putting the patient under anesthesia immediately; or if he happened to be sick, old, in times of great heat or cold, wait until those conditions are over.
E aprop sia content en vianda sieua de erbas frejas e de carns de auzels e de crabotz; e prohibem carns grossas e umplir si de viandas e de tota vianda que umple las venas de sanc, entro que siras segurat de apostema caut, e si no temes efusio de materia al membre.	 Then be careful with the herbs and foods that are hot or cold; do not fill your veins with excessive food or drinks, so you will be sure of not having a dangerous reaction to any medication, unless otherwise advised by a physician.
E lahoras retorne le malaute al sieu regiment primier am le qual corr costuma de lu.	 Then the patient is returned to their first regiment in which they are usually treated.
E donc cum le os trencat comensa esser restaurat, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia pascut de viandas nutritivas de nutriment mot e gros e greu en les quals sia viscositat, ayssi cum so viandas faytas de froment cueyt am aygua, e ris, e caps, e pes, e ventres de vacas, e huous, e peys fresc, e vi gros e semblants ad aquels, e am aquest regiment es fayta coagulacio de fractura pus leugierament e miels.	 Then the patient is restored to their first regiment in which they are usually treated with nourishing and nutritious food, avoiding excessive fats and heavy foods; so with fruits, vegetables, nuts, beans, eggs, milk, meat, fish, bread, cheese, cold drinks and other similar foods from that regiment.
E sapias que les osses trinquatz quan so en les homes que so en la primiera vilura e en los decrepitz, no es possible que sian continuatz e sian consolidatz segon lur natura per la exsiccacio dels membres de lor.	 When bones are exposed in the bones that have already been exposed to frostbite and those of the second degree, it is impossible for them to continue and consolidate themselves after nature dries out their members.
E son consolidatz e continuatz segon lor natura tot temps per la exsiccacio de aquels membres, e so continuatz e consolidatz aquels que so de lor en la fi de la lenitat, ayssi cum les osses dels petitz effantz.	 They continue and consolidate themselves over time due to the drying out of these members, and they continue and consolidate those that are at the end of the frostbitten period just as bones from pets do.
Mays empero natura ajusta e amnecteys sobre le os trencat de tota partida alcuna causa semblant a glut en le qual es grossitut que adhereys e strenh aquel entro que so ensemps conglutinatz e liatz ensemps, entro que venen la fi de fortitut e de fermesa, ayssi cum foc al comensament, entro que denguna causa no prohibeys aquel de las suas obres.	 However nature adjusts and adheres to the severed bone in any way that is similar to glue, so that it remains strong and strong until after a long time or firmness has come to an end, just like at first, unless some cause prohibits its use from those of his works.
E per aquesta causa es necessari que pauses las viandas del malaute, viandas en las quals so gravitat e viscozitat e grosseza, ayssi cum havem dit.	 For this reason it is necessary to pause the veins of the patient, veins in which there is gravity and viscosity and thickness, as we have said.
Mota diversitat de fractura segon diversitat del membre.	 There are different types of fractures depending on the member.
E sapias que las specias de fractura son diversas segon la diversitat dels membres, quar fractura del os de la camba es diversa de la fractura del os del cap; e la fractura del os del pietz es divers de la fractura del os del dos; e semblantment totz les autres membres son diverses entre lor.	 You know that the types of fractures are diverse depending on the diversity of members, since a fracture of the arm is different from a fracture of the head; and a fracture of the foot is different from a fracture of the leg; similarly all other members have their differences among them.
E yeu venc am rememoracio de tota specia de fractura, expausada en le sieu capitol distincta del autre.	 You remember each type of fracture in its own separate chapter from the others.
Mota diversitat de fractura en si meteyssa.	 Diversity of fractures in this treatise
E son diversificadas las specias de fractura del os en lor meteyssas; quar es fayta fractura arcuada otra aquo que accidan en lu stellas; e alcunas veguadas es fayta fractura segon la longitut del os: e so las fracturas de lu satagia e astelhas e addicios procedentz e no-procedentz, ayssi cum es fayt en la pena quan es preparada a escriure, e es fractura am plagua e disrupcio en le cap, e es fractura fissura petita.	 The treatise discusses various types of fractures and their characteristics; the curved one is another type that occurs in the limbs; some are flat fractures second by length; so there are those who heal well and those who do not, just as it is written when it is prepared to write, the fracture causes pain and disruption to the head, and a small fracture.
E a tota specia es engen o turment propri en restauracio de lu segon que vindra rememoracio de lu distincta en les sieus locs.	 Each type has its own remedy in healing; only after remembering different remedies for each location will come the restoration.
Mota senhal de fractura del os.	 The sentence does not seem to have a complete meaning on its own, as it seems like there is no clear topic or context mentioned within the text.
E per aquo es conoguda fractura del os: es tortuositat de lu, e de aquel eminencia e appericio de lu al sentiment, e so de lu quan compremes aquel am la tua ma.	 The sentence seems to be referring to the characteristics of a fracture; its tortuousness and inability to straighten itself on its own, as well as its reappearance upon touching with one's hand.
E donc quan no es en le loc tortuositat apparent ni so no es feyt deves le tieu tocament quan toques le os am agitacio e le malaute no atroba gran dolor, lahoras no es aqui fractura.	 If there is no visible tortuousness and if it does not cause major pain upon touching the limb and its gout attack; then that fracture does not occur.
Habantz es possible que sia tortuositat o petita fissura, adon no cove que tu mauguas aquel am la tua ma e am compressio de tot; habantz pausa sobre lu de las medicinas de las quals ve rememoracio aprop aquel moment le qual conveneys al loc; e aprop sia streyt per strictura subtil.	 It is possible that it could be a tortuous fracture or a small fracture, as touching may cause pain and stiffness of the entire limb; pause over its application to remember the appropriate remedy at the time which suits the location; and apply it strictly with a subtle restriction.
E sapias que·l loc quan es arcuat e no es scindit en dos o otra aquo que no accidan en lu satagie, cum es remauguda tota partida de la sua compar, lahoras cove que comenses de la tua hora a rectificacio de lu habantz que a lu accida apostema caut.	 When the area is curved and not cut into two or more pieces that do not happen in the cavity of this disease, you should start counting from your own hour for the corrective treatment to be done with a pointed cautery
E si a lu accida apostema caut, lahoras layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que cesse le apostema; e aprop engualha aquel segon quascuna manieyra que podes de levitat e de engen.	 If the abscess is opened with a pointed cautery, they should wait for at least two days before doing anything else like lifting or moving around
E sapias que restauracio de lu e agulacio de lu es pus leugiera que del os en le qual accideysso sathagie.	 The recovery and healing of this disease is more difficult than from any other
E aprop strenh aquel segon que vindra la rememoracio de lu.	 After that, they should remember the treatment
Mays si en le os so satagias, lahoras es necessaria extencio de aquest membre trencat de doas partz, si es la ma o le pe; o am la tua ma si le membre es petit; o am doas cordas o am una corda e la ma.	 If it is necessary to cut off the member from half of its parts, such as the arm or leg; or if your hand is small then use two cords or one cord and a hand
E sia la tua posicio am la qual pauses le membre loc engual segon la sua figura natural, mentre que las partidas so extandudas del membre trenquat, lahoras te perforsa que fassas retornar aquelas addicios am engen e segon quascuna manieyra que poyras en lor locs.	 If the member is in a position that would normally be used for it, while keeping the body parts extended from the member, you should ensure that you perform these actions gently and carefully as each of them
E guarda te segon la tua forssa que no accida sobre le malaute per la tua operacio delor ni lesio; e perforsa te segon le tieu poder que tu appliques la un os am l’autre son companho segon lors milhors formas.	 Remember to avoid touching the patient during their operation, and ensure that you use both hands in a coordinated manner as close as possible after the procedure is over
E cove que en aquela hora aprofitablament tu toques am la tua ma aquel, e si vezes aqui alcuna causa diversa, rectifiqua aquel e enguala aquel per la quantitat de la tua vertut.	 In that favorable hour you should touch your hand to him, and if there is no other cause different from it, correct him and bind him up with the quantity of his virtue
E exquiva vehement extenssio e compressio, ayssi cum fan mots fols metges que motas veguadas fan accidir apostema caut per la sua operacio, o fan accidir contraccio en le membre ayssi cum havem vist aquo per la operacio de lor motas veguadas.	 It causes severe swelling and compression, as well as the application of hot compresses to soothe it, or by applying a cold compress on the affected part for treatment purposes.
E aprop annecteys, aprop equacio e decent operacio e strictura de aquel membre, e repaus e tranquilitat; amoneste le malaute sobre aquo e fay le squivar que no maugua aquel en la hora de las suas vigilias e del sieu dormir, e ves la sua revolucio e agitacio, e deves la sua egestio, e deves totz les sieus movementz am tota la sua vertut; e aguarda se que la posicio del membre sia posicio am la qual sia asegurada la dolor, la qual causa es quar quan sent en la disposicio de la posicio del membre delor o lesio; lahoras cove que permutes aquel ad autra disposicio de aquela am la qual non senta dolor; e guarda am aquo que la posicio de lu aquela sia dreyta e engual, per so que al membre non accida tortuositat quan es restaurat.	 You must perform immediate surgery and stricture on the affected member, rest and calm it down, apply a hot compress to soothe it, or by applying a cold compress for treatment purposes.  After that, you should ensure its position is in place so as to prevent any further pain or damage when moving about; guard this so that movement of the part does not cause further injury; and await that its position remains fixed and unyielding, so that no tortuous movements occur once it has been restored.
E la qualitat de la strictura del membre tranquat es aquela que yeu recomti; per que sapias que·ls membres trencatz so diversificatz en lor parvitat e en lor grandeza e en la forma de aquels.	 The tightness of the stricture on the member should be such that you know how to stretch and flex different parts in their size, shape, and form; this will enable them to bend or move as required.
E de aquels que son petits ayssi cum le bras e·l dit e·l focil e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras cove que la envolucio sia de drap mol subtil.	 For the smaller ones like your arm and hand or finger nails, apply a very soft cloth to cover it
Mays aquels que so grosses ayssi cum la cuoyssa o la camba, cove que en aquels sia envolucio lada e dura, quar la liadura lada connecteys le membre gran e strenh aquel de tota part am strictura engual, enayssi que en lu no intre macula.	 "The joints and legs become inflamed when the body's cold humors infiltrate them.
E aprop comensa, aprop la tua evacuacio de equacio, pausar liament convenient ad aquo, sobre le loc de aquela fractura am tres envolucios o quatre segon que·l membre mereys; e strenh la tua ma un petit am le liament.	 "Place a cushion under their thighs and another on their legs to prevent the intestines from coming out.
E aprop ve am aquel a la partida pus sobirana del loc de la fractura, e strenh mens que no foc la tua strictura am la qual has strengut le loc de la fractura.	 "When you return it back inside its cavity and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out.
E aprop elongua te am envolucio del loc de la fractura un pauc, e mollifiqua la strictura petit a petit, entro que prenguas del loc sa una gran partida.	 "Inflam the joint and legs to make them more sensitive as you place your hand over the area.
E aprop pren una autra benda e envolveys aquela autra veguada sobre le loc trenquat am envolucio, e aprop ve am las envolucios a la partida pus dejos de la fractura; e sia la tua operacio en la strictura de la envolucio e en mollificacio de aquela segon que havem dit en la envolucio primieyra desus.	 "Place another hand on the area right next to where you placed your first hand, and return it back inside its cavity.
E aprop pausa entre las volucios de stopa leon o drap am le qual sia engualada la tortuositat de la fractura, si en lu es tortuositat; e sino, no pauses en lu alcuna causa.	 "Pause between the joints on either side of the fracture if it has a curvature or tortuous nature, otherwise do not pause in this way.
E aprop pausa sobre lu autra benda, e aprop enguala sobre aquestas envolucios stelhas decentment faytas tantost, si en le loc no es imflacio o apostema caut, e lahoras pausa sobre lu aquo que sede le apostema aquel e que oste la imflacio; e layssa aquela per alcus jorns; e lahoras tu strenh sobre lu las stelhas.	 "Pause on the other hand and place it gently next to these joints, so that it touches both of them if there is no inflammation or redness, otherwise pause over this area where you placed your previous finger.
E sian las stelhas de la maytat de canna lada raza, e be formada saviament; o sian de fust de pi; o de ramps de palma ; e sia le ample de quascuna stelha segon aquesta forma e aquesta figura:	 "The pillow for the patient's head should have a small hole and a ramp. The pillows under the arms of the patient should be flat.
Empero cove que la astelha que es pausada sobre aquela fractura sia pus grossa e pus lada un petit que las autras astelhas, e la longitut de la stela segon qu’es legut al membre en magnitut e parvitat; e aprop strenh sobre las astelhas am autra benda segon la tua primieyra strictura; e aprop lia desus am fiel decentment segon que havem dit de strictura, e es que sia la tua strictura segon le loc de la fractura mes, e quant mes es alonguat de la fractura, es mendre la strictura.	 "The pillow placed over the fracture should be large and flat; smaller pillows are provided for under the arms of the patient; the length of the pillow is proportionate to the size and thickness of the limb it supports; place a towel between the pillows below the first one, in order to keep them separate.
E cove que les fils sian migiers en grossesa e subtilitat, e sian de li mol; e si les fils so grosses, ayssi cum yeu he vist per la operacio de alcus fols pausantz les lors fils de cordas de li tort, e es error gran, quan catz la strictura fora equalitat.	 "The cords should be soft and flexible, and they must not be too loose; if the cords are too thick, then during the operation of loosening them, loosen the cords between the patient's limbs, as this is a great error.
E eyssament fils subtils no so convenientz, quar tu no consaguiras per strictura am aquels aquo que voles, e no cove que entre astela e astela haja mens de un dit.	 "Very soft cords are not very convenient, because you cannot control the tension of the cords if you want to, and there must be some space between one cord and another.
E si le malaute es ledit per las extremitatz de las stelas aprop la strictura en les locs sas, lahoras pausa dejos aquelas de stopa leon o lana carmenada entro que aquo no li fassa lesio.	 "If the patient is lying on their side with one arm and hand above and one below, then place the pillow to support them at least as wide apart so that there is no risk of injury.
Alcunas veguadas fractura es am plagua, e accideys disrupcio en la codena, e yeu vindre am rememoracio en aquela en le capitol segon singularitat.	 Some bones have been fractured in pain, and there occurs a disruption of the code, and you will remember this at the second coming
E sapias que ges tot membre trencat no es streyt am stelhas al primier dia; la qual causa es quar le membre, quan es gran, no cove que pauses sobre lu stelhas sino aprop v dias o vii o mays, segon la tua seguratat de adveniment de apostema caut.	 Do you know that when a member is broken it does not stretch the fingers on the first day; its cause is when large, then do not place it over the fingertips but wait for 3 or more days depending on your certainty of the coming of the sign
E aquesta es la manieyra dels emplaustres am les quals les Antics restauravan, les quals so pausatz sobre fractura e dislocacio e torcio.	 This is the way that doctors used to treat fractures and dislocations, which they hold over a fracture or dislocation
Manieyra de emplaustra comu abruejat de restaurament de fractura, convenient a motas compleccios e majorment a las femnas e als efantz, quar es de aquo sobre le qual no ventz calor ni freg: e es que prenguas de polvera de moli, e es la medula de la farina que pen deves le movement de la mola en las paretz del moli.	 The treatment for breaking a bone is to apply cold and not heat; it's best on the fingers or toes where no warmth comes, as this prevents any inflammation and allows for better movement of the muscles in the area.
E comfeys aquel ayssi cum es, sino que cribelles aquel am album de huou, e pausa la comfeccio de lu no-spessa ni subtil; e aprop usa de aquela.	 If this is as it should be then put him into a pouch and stop the effusion from spreading or being too subtle; and apply it appropriately
Autra manieyra de emplaustre restaurant fractura e dislocacio e torcio: recipe de assafetida, de lapdanum, de acacia, de enula, e migrach, que es razit de milgraner salvage, de totz ana drac. x; de mirra e aloen ana drac. v; alochil ana drac. xx; totz sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian mesclatz am aygua alichil o am album de huou si la compleccio del malaute es scalfada; e aprop usa de aquest emplaustre, quar es de bona composicio e restaura les osses trencatz leugierament, e confereys a motz homes.	 Another way to treat fractures and dislocations is to use a poultice made of astringents like acacia or alum, which are also used in milgrane salve, ointment and drink; mixed with water or put into an envelope if the effusion from the patient becomes excessive; applied appropriately.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre le qual comfereys a fractura e torcio: recipe migrach e met de altea blanca ana drac. x; de mirra e de aloen ana drac v; de acacia drac. vi; de bol armenic drac. .xx.	 Another vein of inflammation causes fracture and dislocation: apply mustard paste, white wine or garlic.
Totz sian trissatz en mortier am mota contricio, e sian cribellatz, e sian comfitz am aygua o am album de huou e sia administrat.	 The broken bones will be set with plaster, and the wounds will be dressed, either with water or by applying the album of honey, according to their condition.
Manieyra de emplaustre a juncturas e osses separatz de lors locs, e seda dolor accident en aquels e a fissuras e fractaduras: sia presa lana sutza e sia submersa en vi agre e oli cuyt e sia pausat sobre le loc.	 The vein of inflammation that causes joint pain and bones to separate from each other will cause pain accidents in those, and fractures and dislocations as well: it will be treated with a poultice or soaked in vinegar, and the affected areas will be placed over the affected part.
Mays en aquest emplastre no es vertut de restauracio, de apostema caut e expelleys dolors propriament.	 If this treatment is not beneficial for restoring health, apply a poultice or soak in vinegar to remove the pain.
Autra manieyra de emplastre que restaura os trancat: pren fuelas de figuier sort e fuelas de papaver salvatge; contereys tot e fay emplastre de lor.	 Another vein of inflammation that restores fractures: use fig leaves or poppy leaves, apply it to the affected area and cover with a poultice of honey.
Manieyra de emplastre abreujat aministrat deves la restauracio de fractura de os e quan tu voles resolucio del romanent de apostema: recipe razitz de altea, de camamilla e flors de violes, de farina de ers, de totz ana partida i; sian totz trissatz e sian cofitz am vi, si·l membre no es scalfat.	 Another vein of inflammation that restores fractures and when you want to resolve the pain: apply mustard paste, chamomile flowers, or violet flower petals, flour from rye, mix them all together; treat with poultice or wrap in cloth if it is not swollen.
Mays si es scalfat, lahoras comfeys aquel am aygua de coliandre humit o am aygua e usa de lu.	 If the member is swollen, place warm water on a cold compress or apply wet cloth and use it to cool down.
Autra manieyra de emplastra pus fort en resolucio que aquest primier, quan accideys apostema dur deves la restauracio del membre: recipe de razitz de altea e de semensa de li, e de balaustia, e mellilot, majorana, flors de viol, de camamilla, de totz ana partida i engual; totz sian trissatz e sian cofitz am aygua de sauze o am aygua dousa o am vi, tot aquo segon la qualitat del membre e le repaus de la color de lu.	 Another member of the staff will come to help you restore this first limb as needed: a servant for arms and another for legs; one for thighs, buttocks, flowers of violets, camomile, all parts and pieces, these shall be bathed with water that is fresh or double water, depending on the quality of the member and its repose from its color.
Mays Ypocras no diyssec en le sieu libre que sia pausat sobre le membre trenquat deves la restauracio de lu sino cerot fayt de cera e de oli e no autre causa; e recomtec que sia migier entre grossitut e subtilitat.	 Another member of the staff will come to help you restore this limb, as needed: a servant for arms and another for legs; one for thighs, buttocks, flowers of violets, camomile, all parts and pieces, these shall be bathed with water that is fresh or double water, depending on the size and delicacy.
Mays a Gualia es vist que sian pausatz sobre le membre trencat deves la restauracio de lu e las causas en las quals es exsiccacio am petit de caliditat so ayssi cum mirra, enses e semblantz a lor de aquelas causas que havem recomtadas.	 Another member of the staff will come to help you restore this broken limb: for arms and legs; one for thighs and buttocks; another for delicate parts like camomile, all parts and pieces; these shall be bathed with water that is fresh or double water, depending on the causes which are causing this small cooling, such as those mentioned.
Manieyra de emplastre que comfereys a lesio e dolor: recipe migat, de cezes, de pels de home inscizes o pena de auzel, e de altea, e sal, partidas enguals; sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian cofitz, e sia fayt emplastre.	 Another member of the staff will come to help you with injuries and pain: a servant for incisions or wounds, home remedies like salt water, another for blisters, all parts and pieces, these shall be bathed as needed.
Mays la quantitat segon la qual cove que romangua la liadura e aprop sia disliada, es que consideres si no es accidit dolor ni pruziment ni le os es trencat no es maugut de son loc, lahoras tu no deslies de motz jorns.	 Another member of the staff will come to help you with injuries that occur: depending on how much or when they occurred, if there is neither pain nor bleeding, and only a cut without any other injury, then you do not need treatment for days.
E si accideys al loc dolor vehement o prusiment o imflacio, lahoras tu te coyte o deslie aquel en la hora, e osta le emplastre de lu.	 When there is a violent or sudden pain in the limb or swelling, then you should apply a poultice at that time
E pren drap de li e spongia marina leon humida, e submergeys aquela en aygua tebeza, e am aquela lava le loc entro que cesse aquel pruziment e la dolor sia sedada; e aprop layssa repausar le membre per una hora; e aprop pausa sobre lu lana sutza submersa en vi agre e oli o oli rozat, e lia sobre lu per una nuoyt entro que sias segur de apostema caut, e que repause la imflacio del membre, e sia remauguda la dolor de lu.	 You should apply a compress soaked in saltwater to it and immerse it in cold water to cool the swelling down, let it rest for an hour; then place a damp cloth over it to prevent further swelling, and finally if necessary you can also use a poultice soaked in vinegar or oil-of-rubicon (a mixture of herbs) to reduce the pain.
E aprop itera aquela strictura subtil e emplastre petit e no·l strenhas per la tua constriccio primieyra, e subtilia am aquel entro que sia sanat.	 You should apply a small tight bandage over your first constriction and gently wrap it around to alleviate the pain.
E si vezes que le apostema e la rogor e la dolor e la imflacio e tots les accidentz ja so remaugutz de tot, e indigeysses de emplastre e de strictura, lahoras tu itera aquel ayssi cum has fayt al comensant engualment.	 If the symptoms of gout and pain and swelling are already gone or have disappeared completely, then you should apply tight bandages to prevent recurrence.
E si no accideys al membre alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no deslies aquel sino aprop tres dias o quatre o v o vii; e alcunas veguadas tot aquo es layssat per xx dias segon que a tu appar per la desliadura del membre, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que la fractura adhereys, e se acosta a la coagulacio de la carn sobre aquel.	 If no cause for the symptoms you mentioned is found, then do not apply the treatment described earlier; rather wait three to four days or more depending on how long it takes for the affected part of the limb to heal as previously advised, until the fracture adheres and clotting of the flesh starts over that area.
E lahoras ajusta en la strictura mays que en la tua strictura primieyra tota, e ayusta en la engrossacio de la vianda del malaute, segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu.	 You should adjust the tightness of the bandage that you previously used on your first constriction to a medium level and increase the compression over time as recommended in previous instructions.
Mays si tu vezes le loc de la fractura ja desiccar e extenuar mays que no cove, lahoras sapias que·l nutriment es prohibit pervenir ad aquel; e donc embroca aquel am aygua tebeza deves tota veguada que delias aquel; e sia aquo en totz tres dias; e alleuja la strictura un petit, e per aquesta operacio corr al membre le nutriment, e es sanat leugierament.	 When the fracture site has healed and extended as much as possible, doctors understand that nutrition is prohibited from then on; therefore, wrap it tightly with a bandage every day until healing occurs; and after three days have passed, loosen it slightly so that nourishment may be provided to it; and thus is this procedure carried out.
Mays aquo que fan les fols restauradors de la fractura del membre autra veguada quan no es restaurat al comensament, segon que cove, e es restaurat segon tortuositat, es error segon la operacio de lor, e temor gran, e si fos dreyturier aquo agrandit les Antics en lors libres e agueran am aquo obrat.	 When the bone-restoring surgeons of a fractured member have finished restoring it if not restored immediately after surgery, second, in case of difficulty and subsequent surgery is required, there is great fear; and if righted by this means, it has grown significantly larger than before.
E yeu no he vist ad alcu de lor aquo far, per que es pus razonable que aquo no fassa.	 And you do not see that doing so would be reasonable as to prevent the thing from occurring.
Capitol segon: De fractura quan accideys en le cap.	 When a fracture occurs in the head.
Las specias de fracturas son motas, e las figuras de lor son diversas, e las causas son distinctas, quar de fracturas alcuna es fayta per percussio de spaza, e la percussio osta tot le os entro al ciphac, le qual es dejos le os, ayssi cum fay ayssa en le fust, e per aquo aquesta specia es nompnada ascial; o la spaza inscideys alcuna partida del os, e inscideys la carn de lu e no passa la inscizio entro al derier de lu; e aquesta specia de fractura es nompnada levatio absoluta.	 The types of fractures are different, and the figures vary greatly, and the causes differ. None occur due to impact alone on bone itself, as this is prevented by striking against it from within its cavity or fist, so that only one kind occurs; but when a blow strikes no part of the bone at all, and penetrates flesh without reaching the skin, then such a fracture occurs.
E la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca, e de fractura que es contricio o atricio; e causa de lu es percussio am poyra o cazement sobre peyra, e a lor semblantz.	 When the bones are broken or small in number, and when the fracture is an injury to the bone itself or to the tendons, it is customary for doctors to perform a blow with their hand on each place where they occur
E aquesta fractura o es penetrant que ja apropinqua al pannicol le qual es dejos le os; o es en la facia del os, e la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca.	 And this fracture is penetrating that it comes close to the joint where you see its appearance or in the surface of the bone, and the pain from these fractures is great or small
E de fractura es que es ameguada en le os, en la subtilitat del cabel petita, e per aquo es nompnada aquesta specia fractura capillar.	 And a fracture is said to be capillary when it occurs in the fine hair of the body
E es fractura que es fayta o per cazement o per percussio de peyra e a lu semblantz, que fa intrar alcuna lamina del os a las partidas dedintz, e es fayta en le loc concavitat ayssi cum accideys als payroles de eram quan accideys a lor percussio e es partida de lor intrada a las partidas dedintz.	 It is a fracture that is made by striking or by hitting it with the hand, which introduces a plate into the cavity of the bone and occurs when there is a blow to their entrance and the exit from them, as happens in the case of blows
E majorment es fayt aquo en les cors de osses humitz, ayssi cum so caps de efantz.	 In addition it may occur in the bones of the limbs as well, that way
E so a totas aquestas specias fracturas satagias, so son pessas ayssi cum stelhas separadas.	 And all these special fractures are painful, just like separated stitches.
E yeu vindre am reremoracio de tot aquo en son loc.	 You will be cured from everything in that place.
E conoyssem totas aquestas specias de fractura per deteccio sobre aquelas e per inquisicio de lor am tentas e ostament de carn corrumpuda que es sobre lor.	 All the special fractures will be detected by inspection and investigation of their causes, and from contaminated flesh that is over them.
E specia capillar es conoguda per aysso que es descubert sobre le os, e es abstergit, e linit sobre lu am tentha, quar la fractura appar negra.	 When the joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate into each part of the body, and when pain occurs in the feet, it is commonly called gout among doctors
Mays en la curacio de fractura considera al comensament les accidentz del malaute, e lahoras si tu vezes per los accidentz que signifique per significacio manifesta sobre paor, ayssi cum es vomit de colera, e extencio, e perdement de entendament, e abscizio de votz, e sincopi, e febre acuta, e eyssiment dels huels e rogor de aquels, e semblantz a lor dels accidentz en las majors disposicios, ses dopte no es sanat.	 In the case of fractures, it is recommended to initially consider any injuries that may have occurred before the pain which signifies by its manifestation of fear, so vomiting and dizziness, loss of understanding, exclusion from work, shortness, acute fever and pain in the limbs, and also with contusions or external lesions on major joints.
E si vezes accidentz no-correntz tu speras salut, lahoras tu comensa la curacio de lu.	 If there are current injuries that prevent you from being healthy, then it is recommended to begin the treatment of that injury first.
La qual causa es quar si es vengut a tu le plaguat en le comensament cum es plaguat e aquo es en les dias de ivern, lahoras cove que tu studias en le ostament del os denant le dia xiiii segon tota disposicio.	 The cause is that the pain which first comes and this happens in the early days of illness, it is recommended to study thoroughly the affected part on the day following the fourteenth until all the duration of its treatment has been completed.
E si es en les dias d’estiu, lahoras cove que te coytes ostar le os denant le vii dia, habantz que aquo que es dejos le os sia corromput del pannicol, e que accidescan les accidentz que havem recomtatz.	 If it is in the days of summer, you should check whether the ulcer has been caused by heat and that any lesions or injuries have been reported.
E si la fractura ja es pervenguda al pannicol cubrent le cervel, e es am partidas menudas e atricio, lahoras cove que inscidas la partida conminuta e atrita, segon que yeu recomtare a tu.	 If the fracture has already been caused by heat and is accompanied by redness or swelling of the face, it is recommended to examine closely and carefully, after reporting to your doctor.
E es que tu razas le cap del malaute plaguat, e descuebres sobre le os segon costuma e manieyra a tu possible segon la figura de la plagua, e que sia leugier sobre le malaute.	 The first sentence is "The passage of the bowels must be done carefully
E si accideys a tu deves la deteccio del os, fluxs de sanc o apostema caut, lahora tu te oppausa a lu am aquo que cove, e es que huemplas le loc de draps infuzes en vi e oli rozat, e fassa repausar la plagua entro que sia sedat le apostema, e sies segur de fluxs del sanc; e aprop comensa en la circuicio del os e en la ablatio de lu.	 The second sentence is "When the bowels are passed through with a finger or an instrument
E aquo sia segon una de dos manieyras de operacio.	 This means that there are two ways of performing this operation, one using your finger and the other using an instrument.
E la una manieyra es que tu inscidas le os am inscisori de streyt tal, e aquesta es la forma de lu: E aprop administra un autre inscissori aquest, un pauc pus lat que aquel; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	 The first way is to insert the bowel through a small incision in that manner, and this is how it should be done. And after inserting another small instrument into it, which is just slightly longer than the previous one.
E aprop administra mays le inscissori pus lat que·l segon.	 The second way is to insert a longer instrument through a larger incision.
E cove que sia deves tu nombre de inscissoris diverses, dels quals alcus so pus latz que alcus autres; e alcus de lor so pus breus que·ls autres e sian en le derier de acuitat de las suas extremitatz, e sian de ferr indi o felod.	 You need multiple instruments of different sizes, from the longest to the shortest; and you must be careful with the last one as it is in the highest position of sharpness among your fingers, and its job may require precision or delicacy depending on which hand you are using.
E usa de lor am facilitat en percussio sobre le inscissori per so que no concutesca le cap e leda aquel.	 Use them with ease in passing the instrument through to ensure that it does not come out and harm anyone.
E si le os es fort, dur, lahoras cove que perfores en le circuit de lu denant que tu administres los inscissoris am les taravels, les quals so nomnatz taravels no-profundantz.	 If the bowel is hard and tough, you should perform this procedure outside of it during which you insert the instruments, ensuring that they are not too deep to avoid damaging them.
E no so nomnatz ayssi sino quar aquels no pausan le terme de l’os del test ad aquo que es aprop lu, per so quar al taravel es redonda extremitat o marge sobre aquel que es dejos le cap de lu agut semblant a marge o a cercle petit, le qual prohibeys esser submergit e passar la spissitut del os.	 "When the patient lies down on his back as directed and placed under their thighs a cushion, another servant is positioned on their legs, and another over their chest with hands held.
E es convenient que tu prenguas de aquestz taravels gran nombre dels quals quascu convenesca a la spicitut de quascun os, entro que sia a tu present en tottz testz del cervel la extremitat del qual sia aguda, la quantitat en longitut e brevitat sia segon la quantitat de spicitut de aquest test.	 It is advisable to take many servants from among those which are suitable for the purpose of each limb, until you have reached this part of the test in a straight line the extremity of which is acute and quantity in length and breadth is related to the amount of sharpness of this test.
E aquesta es la forma de tres specias de teravels: La qualitat de perforar en le circuit del os trencat es que pauses le teravel sobre le os e revolvas aquel am les tieus ditz entro que sapias que l’os ja es penetrat; e aprop permuda le terevel ad autre loc, e pausa aquo que es entre tot trauc la quantitat de la grosseza del ray o enviro aquo.	 The three types of servants are: the quality to perforate through a cut in the leg is that you place the servant over the leg and rotate it as directed until you know that the leg has been penetrated; another servant to be placed elsewhere, and then apply pressure between all the way around the quantity of thickness of the ray or direction.
E aprop inscideys am inscissoris aquo que es entre quascun trauc del os, e fay aquel pus subtil que podes sobre aquo en fi de levitat, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que erradiques le os, o am la tua ma, o am alcuna autra causa per alcus sturmentz les quals auras apparelhatz ad aquo, ayssi cum tanalhas e forceps subtils.	 Then apply a sharp servant to pierce between each leg, and place one gently over it at the end of levity, as mentioned before, until you remove the leg or your hand, or for any other cause that may require the use of fine tools which are held in this case, as well as using blunt forceps.
E cove que tu guardes am tota cautela que l’inscissori no toque alcuna causa del ciphac.	 Make sure the servant does not touch any part of your body that may cause harm.
E donc cum auras circuit le os perforan, e sira separat del ciphac si es continuat am lu, e auras aquel extrayt, cove que razas e enguales aquel en la asperitat de lu de aquo que es en le os am autra sturment semblant a inscissori, mays empero cove que sia pus teon e pus subtil que les autres inscissoris.	 "When cutting into the body opens up space," if the cut is continued in this manner, it will separate and expose what lies beneath on its own, which can be compared to the appearance of incisions made by surgeons.
E si roman alcuna partida dels osses petitz e satagias, lahoras pren aquela am facilitat am aquo que es deves tu dels sturmentz; e aprop aquo cura la plagua am lichinis e enguentz les quals havem ditz.	 "If no part of the bones is broken or injured and if all joints are healthy, then doctors would recommend doing this.
E l’autra manieyra de operacio es leugiera, longinqua de paor, la qual diyssec Gualia e la lauzec per gran lausor; e aquest es le sermo de lu: necessari es a tu en le comensament que comenses descobrir la partida del os del loc en le qual es la fractura pus vehement e pus manifesta, entro que quan auras descubert aquela partida e auras pausat dejos lu la extremitat de aquest inscissori lent e alegre del qual aquesta es la forma:	 "The other way of operation is gentle and painless. It involves cutting through the bone in a particular manner to discover where the fracture is most severe and visible, after which you will have placed your hand on that incision gently and easily.
E es que la partida lenticular es leon e no inscideys alcuna causa, e la partida aguda es de lu en dos latz avantz en longitut, ayssi cum vezes; que la partida lenticular sia ajustada al ciphac am la facia de lu inscident aguda en le os.	 "If the lenticular incision is made and no cause for concern arises, or if the acute incision has been placed at a certain distance in length as mentioned earlier, then adjust the lenticular incision to fit with that of the acute one.
E aprop percuteys sobre le inscissori de una partida am un petit malhet entro que inscidas tot le os am facilitat ayssi cum es revolvut, e tu sias segur del pannicol que no accida en lu accident que temas en denguna manieyra, e si le medicant14 era le pus fol de totz les homes e le mays ignorant de lor; certament, e si era dorment.	 "Then gently cut around the incision of one part with a small knife to ensure that you do not accidentally cut into any other parts and if the doctor is aware that it may be very painful for some people and many are ignorant about it, certainly, but he was sleeping.
Lahoras si romania alcuna causa annexa al os del pannicol en alcus locs de os, inscidira aquel de lu am la extremitat del inscissori aquel lenticular, e deliuraria aquel de lu am facilitat, quar es deliurat de lu ses nocument e ses paor.	 When joint pain is caused by a cold humor that infiltrates the parts of the body and causes pain in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
E si fractura del os no penetra entro al pannicol, e aquo que es abscidit o es ostat del os es la facia de lu, e roman en lu asperitat e satagias subtils, lahoras cove que razas aquela asperitat e erradiques aquelas satagias am razoris subtils per les quals tu has preparat le nombre, de diversas quantitatz per que sia a tu possible administrar de aquels en tot loc les pus convenientz de lor e le pus dreyt de aquels segon aquo en que te perduzeys la tua operacio aquel os trencat e la figura de lu.	 If the humor does not penetrate into the cavity of the knee, and if it is excluded or excluded from the joint, its action should be made in a way that it erases itself, and the rough edges of these satagias should be erased by gentle strokes on the parts where you have prepared the number. Of various quantities to administer them in all places most convenient for their use and the worst place for them after this operation when your broken limb is torn out from its figure
E cove que administres en la tua razio am la qual razes le os al comensament le pus lat de aquels razoris, e aprop usa aprop lu del pus subtil de lu, e no cesses far aquo segon continuitat entro que pervenguas ad aministrar le pus teon e·l pus subtil de totz aquels.	 And when you administer in the area where the bone meets the skin at first gently, and then proceed with the finest part of it, and do not stop doing this second continuously until all those are administered.
Mays en quascuna de las autras fracturas petitas capillars e fractura subtil, cove que administres cura segon aquo que perduseys ad rectificacio de lu.	 When it comes to small capillary fractures or fine fractures, when you administer care after this operation of straightening the limb.
E es causa que no es ameguada sobre totz les quals han studi en aquela art.	 It is a custom that all those who have studied in that art are not mentioned here.
E stec sobre aquo que nos scriut havem mostrat en grans fracturas.	 We have shown you great fractures before.
E si le pannicol es retangut quan tu erradiques le os, lahoras cove que prenguas drap de li segon la quantitat de la plagua, e submergeys aquel en oli rozat, e pausa aquel sobre le orrifici de la plagua; e aprop pren autre drap doblat o triplicat e submergeys lu en vi e oli rozat e pausa aquel sobre drap prim e fay aquo al pus leugierament que podes sobre aquel, que no graves le ciphac; e aprop administra sobre aquel liament lat, e no strenhas aquel sino per quantitat que tengua la plagua tant solament.	 "When the pain in the stomach has increased and is unbearable, you should put a second blanket on top of it to reduce its intensity, submerge it with hot oil, and place that over another blanket so that they do not overlap each other; and additionally apply another blanket doubled or tripled and submerge them in warm oil as well, and place that one over the first one. After applying all these blankets, you should administer a soothing ointment to reduce any further discomfort.
E layssa aquel am aquesta cura per un dia o per dos entro que sias segur de apostema caut; e aprop deslia aquel e aprop aministra medicinas am las quals es superflua siccitat, ayssi cum razitz de lin e farina de errs, e polvera de enses e de aristologia, e de semblantz ad aquels.	 "This treatment should be applied for one or two days until you are sure that the pain has subsided; and once it is done, remove it from the area and administer medicines which are superfluous such as mustard seeds, flaxseeds, ginger powder, and similar substances.
E es que tu fassas de aquestas medicinas polvera que sia pulverizada sobre la plagua, ayssi cum son secas; e universalment, administra en aquel tota medicina de proprietat de la qual es que abstergesca e no mordique.	 "And ensure that all medicines are powdered over the area as well, and universally apply any medicine which has properties to eliminate it without causing harm.
E guarda te segon la tua vertut que la plagua en la tua curacio sia neta; e no sia en lu surdicia de enguent ni autra; ni no layssas agreguar virulencia en lu; quar quan es ajustada sobre le pannicol del cervel, corromp aquel e poyreys aquel, e accideys sobre le malaute aprop aquo malicia maligna.	 "Remember in your care that the area should be clean and not infected or contaminated with any germs; nor do you add any virus to it; because when the pain is relieved from the stomach lining, treat this as a cancerous ulcer and prevent its spread.
E accideys en le ciphac del cap, cum de lu es mondificat le os e majorment quan es menspresada la cura de lu, e es negror en la superficia de lu; e donc considera lahoras si accideys al malaute les accidentz que havem ditz, sapias que es parnicios ses tot dopte.	 "Then apply to the top of the head as well and mainly when the cure is applied for it, its color should become black; so consider the doctor if you see accidents similar.
E si no accideys negror sino de la medicina que es pausada desus, e es en vertut de aquela medicina que fassa aquela negror, lahoras cove que tu prenguas de mel una partida e de oli rozat partidas iii, e am aquels linieys un drap, e aprop pausa aquel sobre le ciphac; e aprop cura aquel am las specias de curacio que conveneys entro que sia sanat.	 When cold humors infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customary to call gout by doctors. And if necessary, make points on the surface of the foot with a pointed cautery. Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out. You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs and placed cushions under them. Another servant is put on their legs, another one on their chest, holding their hands.
Capitol .iii.	 The first sentence translates to: "When cold humors infiltrate each part of the body and pain occurs in the feet, it is customary for doctors to call gout.
De restauracio del nas quan es trincat.	 To restore breathing after a nosebleed
Sapias que no es trencat del nas sino doas partidas ensemps pus sobiranas, o una de aquelas alcunas veguadas, per so quar en lu has dos osses, quar la partida dejos es cartillaginosa, e no es trencada e no accideys a lu sino atricio e tortuositat e sinuitat.	 If the nosebleed was not caused by cold humors (which would indicate a more serious issue), you should cover it with a handkerchief and seek medical attention if there are two bones broken, as this part of the nose is fragile and may be cut or torn in addition to breaking bone.
Mays si es trencada la una de las doas partidas de lu, lahoras cove que tu intrometas le dit petit en le sieu nas, e que engualhas aquela fractura dedintz am le tieu dit indic, e am le dit pous defora, entro que retorne le nas segon la sua figura natural.	 If one of the two bones in your nose has been broken, you should gently insert a small thing into it to straighten out that fracture and also apply something like plaster or tape over it so as not to lose its shape while allowing for healing to take place.
E sia fayt aquo per tu am facilitat, e guarda te que no caja per aquela tua operacio sobre le malaute delor.	 This should be easily done and you should keep the area clean during this operation on your patient's back.
E si la fractura es en la pus sobirana partida del nas, e le dit no perve ad aquela, lahoras cove que sia equat am la extremitat del ray en le qual sia petita grossitut.	 When a fracture occurs in the upper part of the nose and it is not possible to reach that side with the hand, then pain occurs at the end of the extremity where there is little room.
E si la fractura es en doas partidas, lahoras tu fay le semblant de aquo.	 If a fracture occurs in two parts, then the doctor will follow this procedure.
E coyta te am restauracio de lu en le primier dia de la fractura, si es possible; e sino, lahoras aprop le vii o·l x deves le repaus del apostema caut.	 On the first day after a fracture occurs if it is possible to restore function using the pointed cautery, and otherwise, do as you have been advised by your doctor.
E aprop entromet en la extremitat del nas una meca de drap de li, si la fractura es en una partida, o metz doas calguas, si la fractura es en doas partidas, e sia en la calgua grossitut de tanta quantitat que umpla le trauc del nas.	 If the fracture is in one part of the nose, insert a strip of cloth into it; if there are two parts to the fracture, and they are at such a narrow width that you cannot fit both ends of the strip through the nose, then put your finger inside instead.
E diysso alcus dels antics restauradors que las calguas sian enfundudas en boder, e sian permudadas en tot dia, mays no es vist a mi; habantz cove que la meca sia enfunduda en album de huou comfit am polvera de moli; e aprop layssa la qualgua entro que l’os sia fermat e sia endurazida la cartillage.	 The old restorers advised that the strips should be soaked in warm water, and changed every day if they were not yet wet all over by morning; also suggested placing a strip inside so that it could remain firm while the flesh was being stitched closed.
E alcunas veguadas sia entromes en le nas, en loc de calgua, pena de auca pus que es envolopada de drap de li leon; e sia que ja te la fractura del nas pus vehement e que le malaute no sia prohibit de inspiracio.	 Some bandages should be inserted into the nose, in place of a strip, to prevent wrapping around the fingers as it comes out and to ensure that an inflamed vein is not blocked by inspiration.
E aquesta causa no es a tu necessaria; e si voles, fay aquo, e si voles, fay calguas.	 This cause may not be necessary; if you want to proceed anyway, do so; if you don't want to proceed, then stop here.
E si accideys autra veguada apostema caut, emplastra le nas am cerot o am coto enfus en vi agre e oli rozat, o am diaquilon.	 If another more severe disease occurs after gout has developed or infiltrated the body and ulcerated tissues have appeared in the feet, then it is customary to call this a more advanced condition of gout called podagra.
Mays si no accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que emplaustres aquel defora am farina de sizami e am polvera de enses cofitz am album de huou; e aprop pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e no lies le nas am alcuna causa.	 If another severe disease does not occur after gout has developed or infiltrated the body and ulcerated tissues have appeared in the feet, then it is customary to apply a poultice made of crushed grains mixed with wormwood and parsley from the album of herbs; and place your hand over the area to prevent any other cause.
Mays si so trencats les osses del nas am fractura petita o so conminuitz, lahoras cove que scindas sobre aquels, e extraguas aquels am insturmentz que conveno ad aquels; e aprop cos la scissura, e cura aquela am aquo que encarna e consolida, e am emplastres ad aquo convenientz.	 If the bones of the nose are broken or crushed in a small fragment, then it is customary to cut off those and extract them from the instrument that suits them; place your hand over the area while cutting to prevent any other cause, secure that with which you want to fill in and consolidate, using instruments suitable for this.
E si accideys plagua dedintz le nas, lahoras cove que cures aquela am calguas e administra canulas de plom entro que sia de tot sanat.	 If a plague occurs within the nose, then it is customary to treat that with poultice and apply lead plummets from all over which are of total health.
Capitol .iiii.	 This sentence does not translate as there is no context given in your question for this phrase.
De restauracio de la mandibula quan es trincada.	 Restoration of the mandible when broken
Quan la mandibula dejos es rompuda e la fractura de lu no es am plagua, reguarda lahoras si la fractura es deforas tant solament, e no es trencada en dos e es curvada a las partidas dedintz, lahoras la sua cognicio es leugiera.	 When the mandible is broken and the fracture does not extend to the nose, remember that if the fracture is severe enough but not divided into two parts and curved at the ends of the jaw, it will be necessary for the dentist to straighten it back.
E cove donc, si la fractura es en la part dreyta, que tu intrometas le tieu indic senestre en la boca del malaute; e semblantment si la fractura es an la mandibula senestra, lahoras intromet le dit indic de la ma dreyta; e impelleys am aquel la gilbositat de la fractura dedintz am facilitat a las partidas defora, am la tua autra ma de la partida defora del os; am aquel decentment equa aquelam.	 "If the fracture is in the right jaw, you should introduce the tongue indicator into the mouth of the patient; and similarly if the fracture is in the lower jaw, the doctors will introduce a finger indicator on the left side.
E si la fractura de la mandibula ja es separada en doas, lahoras cove que administres extensio de doas partz segon rectitut entro que sia possibla la equacio de lu.	 "If the fracture of the mandible is separated into two parts, the doctors will administer extension in both directions to allow for its reduction.
E si accideys conmocio de dentz a disrupcio, lahoras strenh aquelas de las quals speras que romandran am fil de aur o de argent o de ceda; e aprop pausa sobre la mandibula trencada cerot, e aprop pausa sobre lu drap duplicat, e pausa sobre le drap gran stelha decentment fayta, o una pessa de sola engual a la longitut de la mandibula; e aprop lia aquela desus segon que a tu es apparelhada la liadura de lu e que conveneys la applicacio, entro que no es destruida.	 "If teeth are pulled out of their sockets or if the jaw is broken in two pieces, the doctors will stretch that part with something hard and flat to prevent injury; place a cushion under the broken mandible as well, and put another cushion over it to support its length, so that you can apply it without damaging it.
E comanda al malaute que use de repaus e tranquilitat, e pausa la vianda de lu sorbicios leons.	 "Tell the patient to use rest and relaxation, and pause the bleeding by applying pressure with their fingers.
E si extimas que ja es alterada la figura en alcuna manieyra, lahoras tu te coyta e deslia aquel al tertz dia; e aprop rectifica aquo que ja es alterat de lu e emplaustra aquel am polvera de moli, am album de huou, o am farina de cisami, pus que tu auras ostat le cerot de lu, e pausa sobre le emplastra lana leon.	 "If you notice that the figure has been altered in any way, tell them to come back tomorrow; and correct what was altered by pressing it against a soft surface like cotton wool or flour, making sure that you cover its eye.
E adonc cum sta annex e ajustat aquel emplastre sobre lu, e la disposicio del os no es alterada, layssa aquel, que no le deslies entro que sia sanat e strenh la fractura; quar motas veguadas aquesta fractura es streyta en tres sempmanas.	 When the plaster has been applied and placed in position as before, if there is no alteration in its disposition, leave it as such, for you will not wish to let it go until it has healed completely; since these fractures are usually straightened out within three days
E si autra veguada accida apostema caut, lahoras administra aquo que havem dit motas veguadas en la sedacio de lu entro que sia sanat, e sia remaugut aquel apostema.	 If another ulcerated point is found, the doctor will administer the following remedy: you must rub it gently with a pointed cautery until the pain goes away and the ulcer heals
E si la fractura es am plagua, lahoras considera si es pessa del os separada o satagias, lahoras tu te subtilia que ostes aquelas satagias am aquo que conveneys ad aquo en la remocio de aquelas dels sturmentz.	 If the fracture is a sprain or strain, the doctor will advise you to apply cold compresses and heat as needed in the treatment of those injuries
E si le orrifici de la plagua es streyt, lahoras tu le amplifique am le fleubotomi segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	 If the abscess is severe, the doctor will apply more frequently to the extent of your need for further treatment.
E aprop quan tu auras ostat aquelas satagias, e de aquelas no sira remaugut re, lahoras tu cos le orrifici de la plagua si es ampla; e sino, pausa sobre aquela un dels emplaustres que conveneysso ad aquo e encarnan aquela, entro que sia sanada.	 After you have applied the compresses and some of them are not yet healed, the doctor will apply a compress on one or more of the wounds as needed to speed up healing.
Capitol .v.	 The end
De restauracio de la furcula quan es trinquada.	 The restoration of the collar bone when it is broken.
Motas veguadas es trencada la furcula de la partida denant deves le muscle, e aquela fractura es fayta en una de tres manieyras.	 The injured muscles tear the collarbone and usually only one of them heals in three days.
Quar o es trencada, o seperada, o es seperada en doas partz otra que no accidan satagias; e es leugier a la restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que accideysso en lu satagias, e es dificil a restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que la fractura es am plagua.	 If one is fractured or torn and the collar bone is separated in two parts that do not hold together, it will be necessary to reconstruct it using medical techniques; if this happens around sutures, reconstruction of it may prove difficult; otherwise, if the fracture was simply a sprain, it may heal on its own.
E la operacio en aquela, quan la fractura es ses plagua, es que tu fassas esser present dos ministres, per so que la un tengua le adjutori e siegua la furcula trencada, e l’autre extenda le col ves aquela partida.	 When the fracture is healed, you should make two ministers present to ensure that both assistants can hold the cut tendon while the other stretches the opening.
E aprop enguala la fractura am les tieus ditz entro que sia fayta la forma de lu segon que cove, e no sia en lu eminencia pauca ni concavitat.	 After placing the fracture and its assistants in their appropriate positions, ensure that both of them are set correctly to prevent any uneven tension or depression.
E si indigeysses mes de extencio, lahoras cove que pauses dejos le titillic del malaute spera de drap o de lana, e sia la grandesa de lu segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat; e exten e eleva la furcula e coarta la spera am la tua ma entro que enguales la frectura segon que cove.	 If you need more assistants for stretching the tendon, make sure that each assistant is large enough to meet your needs in terms of quantity and size as well as being able to hold it securely while extending and lifting the furcula towards its target area.
E si no podes atirar la extremitat de la furcula a las partidas defora, per so quar es pervenguda al preon, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e pauses sobre le muscle de lu un coyssi migier en grandeza.	 If you cannot reach the far end of the furcula from its original position, it is advisable to have the patient rest on their back with one cushion placed over a smaller portion of their chest and another over their knee slightly elevated for support.
E le ministre prema le muscle de lu a las partidas dejos entro que l’os de la furcula sia elevat que es en le preon en sus, e lahoras tu rectifique la fractura e enguala aquela am les tieus ditz.	 The minister should place the muscle at its target location on the back of the patient so that it is elevated towards the front in their support and fix the fracture as well.
Mays si sentes satagias de la furcula e so maugudas, lahoras cove que fendes sobre aquela e extraguas aquelas satagias am facilitat.	 If you feel a lump or swelling of the tendon that is making it difficult to extend and lift towards its target area, do as follows: gently push against it and stretch those lumps in order to facilitate proper stretching.
E si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu ingenia inscisio de lu am un dels inscissoris les quals has apparelhatz ad aquo, pus que havias pausat dejos la furcula le sturment que serve le ciphac; e es sturment de fust o de ferr del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	 When the intestine is removed and a gap remains, it will be closed with a stitch.
E es semblant a culier del qual aquesta es la concavitat; e sia la sua latitut segon aquo que has necessitat de lu, segon la grandeza del os o la pauqueza de lu.	 It is similar to cutting a hole in which this would be the cavity. And if you need it again, then consider its size or lack thereof.
Mays la longitut de lu sia segon que es a tu possible a la operacio; que haja doas extremitatz ayssi cum vezes, e la una extremitat sia ample e l’autre streyta.	 The length of it should be according to the possibility for the operation; there may also be two extremities as in this case one is wide and the other thin.
E si la disrupcio de la plagua la qual has inscidida quan has extraytas la satagia del os es ampla, e yest segur de apostema caut, lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura.	 If the disruption of the opening through which you have removed the satiety from the body is wide, then it is certain that the doctor will sew both lips together with stitches.
E si la disrupcio es pauca, o temes apostema caut, lahoras tu uemple la plagua am draps e pulvils segon la quantitat de la scissura de la plagua.	 If it is small or you are worried about the stitches, then the doctor will seal the opening with glue and powder according to the size of the tear in the opening.
E si accideys apostema caut, lahoras infon drap en vi agre e oli rozat e vi, e pausa sobre aquel.	 If stitches are needed, then place a bandage on top with grease and oil over it, and cover that one as well.
Mays la strictura del os quan es ses plagua e ses seccio, es que pauses emplastre fayt de farina de moli am album de huou, e pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e aprop pausa la spera dejos le titillic de lu, si indigeyssas de aquela, e aprop pren humemate, so es torca la qual teno les Sarrazis , que sia mot longua, e sia latitut de lu de un palm o entorn aquel; e aprop pausa pulvils duplicatz sobre la stopa e l’emplastre; e aprop pren una stela de taula subtil de la qual la latitut d’ela sia de tres ditz e en longitut semblantment; e aprop envolopa aquela en drap, e aprop envolopa aquel drap am la stela en lo loc sobre le loc de la fractura; e aprop pausa humemati ayssi cum es revout, e revol aquela sobre le col de lu e dejos le titillic de lu sa e dejos le titillic de lu malaute, e reduzeys aquela sobre tota partida, e quan vezes que la strictura de la fractura am strictura descent, e es aquo que no es occultat sobre tu.	 When the opening is sealed and cut as in the previous sentence, then place a fine table cloth over it to cover that spot on the fracture location; put another bandage with grease and oil over it too; place gauze pads over both of them if necessary; and finally, cover everything with a bandage, except for covering the one at the top directly.
E tot, que no sia mauguda la stelha desobre le os trencat; e per so cove que tu vejas le malaute quascun dia, que quan le liament es mollificat o vezas la stela ja esser remauguda, lahoras tu rectifica aquo e strenh la liadura.	 When the broken tooth is healed and it's time to insert a new one in its place, then the doctor corrects this with a pointed cautery.
E aprop pausa le dormir del malaute sobre le col de lu, e pausa dejos le titillic de lu deves le dormir de lu en la nueyt un petit coyssi; per so que am aquel sia elevat le adjutori de lu del latz de aquel, e donc es elevada la la fractura de la furcula a elevacio del muscle; o sia le bras de lu liat al col de aquel.	 Place the pillow under the patient's buttocks and place one more on their thighs to keep them warm in this new cushion, so that both arms are placed over the chest of him as an assistant.
E no deslies le liament si no accideys en le loc prusiment o apostema, entro a xii dias.	 If there is no improvement or worsening within 12 days, then it must be caused by another illness.
E aprop renovelha le emplastre si has vista la facia de lu ad aquo, e ajusta en la strictura e restaura aquel e layssa entro que sia restaurat e sia coagulat la fractura de la furcula.	 If the injury of the ribs is healed and it's time to heal a fracture in this part, adjust the brace and restore both parts as soon as they have been healed and coagulated.
E es strenguda e comfortada segon le mes en xxviii dias, e alcunas veguadas en alcus homes es fayt en mens de temps de aquel.	 It is strengthened and comfortable within 28 days, and some vegetables are found in the dishes of foods that will be eaten during this time.
Capitol .vi.	 After all
De restauracio de fractura de la spalla.	 The treatment for rib fractures.
Spatula tart es trencada en le loc lat de lu e no so trencatz de lu sino les marges.	 A broken spatula in the lower part of him, do not break off his bones, but only break away from it's margins.
E donc quan es trencat le loc de lu — e es trencat en le mieg loc de lu — e no es conogut sino per tocament, lahoras segon que es la figura de la fractura sforsa te la preparacio de lu e reduzir aquela segon la figura natural en tota manieyra de engen la qual es a tu possible.	 Then when it is broken in the lower part of him - and also in the middle part of him - but only gently, doctors will know that this is an oblique fracture which you have to prepare for reduction to the shape of normal as much as possible through all kinds of engineering involved with it.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc polvera de moli am album de huou e stopa leon; e aprop pausa pulvil de drap duplicat; e aprop pausa sobre lu stela lada de taula subtil segon la quantitat de la spatula tota o mays un pauc.	 "Place a cushion under their buttocks, place another under the thighs and legs, hold their hands in front of them to prevent any movement.
Mays si dejos la stela es concavitat en alcu dels locs de la spatula, lahoras tu enguala aquela concavitat am stopa leon, e aprop pueja la stela segon equalitat.	 "If the cushion is concave at the spot where the spatula touches it, then place another cushion on top of that and hold it steady.
E aprop strenh desus am humemati longua ab constriccio decent e am fermesa de la stela entro que no sia remauguda del sieu loc.	 "Apply pressure to the abdomen, making a knot tight at the top of your chest, and hold it steady with the cushion as not to move from its place.
E considera le liament en quascun dia; e totas veguadas que sia mollificat, lia autra veguada e stren le e equa la stela si es remauguda del sieu loc.	 "Consider the length of the day, and all vegetables should be softened, except one and tighten it as if it's moving from its place.
E jagua le malaute sobre le sieu latz sa.	 "Put the patient on their back.
E la spatula es restaurada en xx dias o en .xxv.	 "The spatula will be restored in 20 days or less than that.
E donc quan es complit aquest nombre, lahoras tu dissolveys le liament, e que tu scias ensegurat quar aquela es dels osses dels quals la cominicio no es temuda ni lor dissolucio.	 "Then when the number is complete, loosen it and make sure that this is where the bones start to be dissolved.
E si procezeys del loc del os pessa e pongeys dejos la codena, lahoras tu scindeys sobre lu, e osta le, e fay segon que havem dit en la fractura de la furcula de sadacio de apostema caut si accideys aqui.	 "If there is trouble in the chest area and you suspect a rib fracture or broken sternum, then hold it still.
Capitol .vii.	 "The next sentence to translate.
De restauracio de la fractura del pietz.	 Restoration of the intestine
Le pietz alcunas veguadas es romput en le mieg loc de lu e aquo tart endeve; mays las extremitatz de lu mot endeve que so ciccadas e comminuidas.	 The intestines may be moved from their location and placed in a safe position, making sure the extremities of the patient do not get injured during this process.
E dels accidentz de lu quan es trencat le mieg de lu es que declina a las partidas dedintz e accideys a lu gran dolor, e dificultat en lo hale, e tos, e fort leu e vomeys sanc; e es declarada en lu cavitat en le os trencat e no es occulta al sentiment.	 It is stated that when the ligament of the patient is torn and it causes great pain, difficulty in breathing, weakness, fatigue, and loss of sensation in the extremities, as well as a cool feeling; this condition is declared to be present within its cavity after being torn but not hidden from perception.
E la restauracio de lu es que sia resupinat le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa entre las spallas de lu un coyssi; e aprop prem als muscles de lu, e ajusta las costas de lu am las mas de dos costatz, e subtilia te en la operacio de lu e en la equacio segon tota manieyra que es ad aquo possibla e que conveneys ad aquo, entro que retorne la figura del os segon que cove.	 The restoration of the patient is to support them on their back with both hands, place a cushion between their thighs and press down on the muscles; adjust the chest's muscles as well, in order to keep their head straight during the operation, which allows for movement that can be done without causing any serious injury.
E aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e estopa e pausa desobre astela de taula subtil de sauze o de caligi e de a lor semblantz en levitat, pus que tu envolopas aquela en drap; e aprop subtilia te en lian aquela sobre le os trencat que no sia maugut; e vay am liadura segon retonditat al dors alcunas veguadas, e strenh aquel am strictura decent; e aprop considera la liadura en tota hora, e quan es mollificada strenh aquela.	 Place a cushion under their head and stomach to prevent them from hitting the table or floor during movement, also wrap them in a blanket if necessary; additionally, make sure they do not rest on the torn area as it may be sensitive.
E si necessitat provoca a desliament de aquela deves corrossio o pruziment, o dolor, o apostema que accideysso en le loc, lahoras tu coyta e deslia aquela e erradica le emplastre e rectifique aquo que accideys per aquo am manieyra de curacio de lu; e aprop reduzeys le emplastre, si vezes ad aquo la facia; e ajusta a lu strictura entro que sia sanat.	 If necessary, check for any bruising or swelling on the patient, pain, or any other signs of injury in that area; if so, treat them with appropriate care as dictated by this procedure to ensure their safety.
Capitol .viii.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
De restauracio de las costas quan son trincadas.	 Restoring back after a fall
Sapias que fractura de las costas no catz sino en locs grosses que siegon le dos; e de las extremitatz de lor de la partida denant no accideys ad aquelas contricio sino per aquo quar so cartillaginosas.	 If a fracture of the ribs is not fatal, but rather occurs in large areas where it causes much damage to both of them; and on their extremities when they occur, they will not come out unscathed unless this treatment is applied accordingly.
E cognicio de lu no es amaguada al sentiment deves la inquisicio de lu am les ditz.	 And knowledge of it does not make you immune from pain; the pain comes as a reminder to inquire about it.
E la restauracio sia ayssi que enguales la fractura am les ditz segon la manieyra possibla, entro que sia engulhat segon que cove, e aprop emplastre e strenh le os trencat am stela, si indigeys de aquel.	 The restoration should be such that the fracture heals as quickly as possible, without any delay, and then apply a firm pressure to the broken bone accordingly. If necessary, hold it in place with a splint.
E si la fractura de las costas es declinant a las partidas dedintz, lahoras accideys al malaute dolor vehement e punctura, ayssi cum punctura que accideys ad aquel que ha pleureci, e per aquo quar le os ponh le velament; e accideys a lu difficultat de hanelit, e tos, e vomit de mot sanc; e aquesta es de dificil curacio.	 If the fracture of ribs is declining from its place causing much pain and injury, then inflict such intense pain and cuts to him who has received it, so that you may apply a dressing with linen, and also to the difficulty in breathing, coughing, vomiting, and this is difficult treatment.
E ja les Antixs so engeniatz en aquela am motz engientz.	 And these actions should be taken into account in such a case.
E de lor so que diso: cove que pauses viandas del malaute que engendro imflacio e ventositat, per que le ventre sia imflat e sia extendut, e la fractura sia impellida a las partidas defora.	 So that you say to the patient who is generating inflammation and distension: to make their belly flat and extended, so that the fracture may be pulled away from its place.
Mays nos avoreyssem aquo per so que no sia causa leugiera a generar apostema caut, si no accideys; e si ja accideys, lahoras ja ajuda ad aquo.	 When joints are affected by cold humors and if there is pain in the feet, it is customary for doctors to call gout.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia pausada desus ventoza e aprop que sucque am fortitut; e es semblant a ratiocinacio, mays empero es temut que la ventoza atire las superfluitatz al loc per la debilitat.	 It is advisable to remove the wind from their head and place it gently on top of them, in order to prevent weakness causing them to fall down.
E diyssero alcus de lor: cove que·l loc sia cubert am lana que ja es submersa en oli caut, e sian pausatz pulvils entre las costas entro que sia umplida, que sia la liadura engual quan envolopas aquela segon retonditat; e aprop sia curat le malaute am curacio de pleuresi de vianda e de medicina.	 It is advisable to place them in a cool liquid that covers their body gently, and make sure the powder does not enter between their toes if it is filled, as this can cause swelling around the second joint; it is also advisable for doctors to treat their pain through medical procedures such as injections or medication.
E si causa vehement constrenh le malaute la qual no sufferta, e le os punh le velament am punctura ledent, temem sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que fendam sobre le loc, descubram de la costa trencada, e aprop pausem desobre aquela instrument que conserve le ciphac, la rememoracio del qual es precedida, e que inscidam le os am facilitat, e extraguam aquel.	 If the gout is caused by intense heat and pain occurs at one of their joints, it is customary for doctors to apply a pointed instrument that will help draw out phlegm from them, remembering which joint was affected; this procedure should be done quickly in order to prevent swelling around that joint.
E aprop que ajustem las doas labias de la plagua, si es gran, am cozidura, e curem aquela am emplastres entro que sia sanada.	 It is advisable to remove the two flaps of skin from their back if they are large and place them over the affected area so that it can be healed quickly.
E si accideys dedintz apostema, lahoras tu coyta e enfon pulvils en oli rozat e pausa sobre le loc, e que sia curat le malaute am aquo que cove a la apostema dedintz.	 If the gout is caused by blunt trauma, doctors will apply powder to their wound and hold them over it in order for treatment to be applied quickly.
E sia ressupinat sobre le latz sobre le qual dorm, entro que sia sanat.	 The patient has fainted while lying on a bed, which suggests that they are unwell
Capitol .ix.	 I am sorry, but the text you provided seems to be a mix of different languages and does not form a coherent sentence or question in any known language. Could you please provide more context or clarify what part of the text is meant to be translated?
De restauracio de fractura del spondil del dos e del col.	 The restoration of fractures from the spine, specifically at L2 and L3 levels
Alcunas veguadas endeve fractura als osses del col, e tart endeve a lor atricio, e semblantment als spondils del dos.	 The broken bones in the lower back must be properly aligned by a doctor to restore them; this is also necessary for the spine levels L2 and L3.
E cum aquo accideys ad alcu e voles saber si sara sanat o no, lahoras considera, quar si vezes las sieuas mas ja mollificadas e stupefaytas e mortas e no pot maure aquelas ni extendre ni strenher aquelas e quan constrenges aquelas am les tieus ditz o punges aquelas am agulha e no sent en aquelas dolor, lahoras sapias que no es sanat, e en las mes de disposicios es mortal.	 If you fall and find out whether or not you are injured, the doctors consider that it is a serious injury; if your muscles are paralyzed to an extent where they cannot expand themselves any further nor can endure them when pressed, and pain occurs in those areas but does not extend there, then doctors conclude that it is not good news, and at most such injuries may prove fatal.
E si mau aquelas e sent en aquelas constriccio am les ditz e punctura, lahoras sapias que la nucha de l’os es salva e que le malaute guereys am curacio.	 If the bones are broken and you feel pain at the affected points, doctors know that your bones are saved and that treatment is required to heal it.
E si ve als spondils del col le semblant ad aquo e voles saber si sira sanat o no, lahoras considera als pes de lu.	 If you fall and find out whether or not you have any spine injuries, doctors consider the situation carefully.
Lahoras si tu vezes que so ja mollificatz, accideys ad aquels aquo que es accidit en las mas, e aprop quan jatz sobre le sieu dos, yeys ventozitat e egestio ses la sua volontat, e alcunas veguadas es resupinat sobre le sieu dos e vol urinar e no pot, lahoras sapias que es mortal, e adonc no trebales en la curacio de lu.	 If you once already have numbness or tingling in your arms and legs from the back, when you sit up it may cause vomiting and diarrhea; doctors know this is dangerous, and if not treated quickly could be fatal.
Mays si no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, la causa es milhor e pus leugiera.	 If there's no cause for that pain mentioned earlier, then the cause must be more severe or urgent.
E la curacio de lu es que te perforses a la sedacio del apostema caut que pauses sobre le spondil atrissat oli rozat sol, o am mugols de huous asatz; pausa sobre aquela aquel alcunas veguadas le dia entro que sia sedat le apostema caut.	 The treatment is to press on the hollow of the elbow with a pointed cautery, or place it in the mouth of someone who can swallow (if you don't want them to be swallowed), and place it there for some time until the abscess is satisfied with the cautery.
E lahoras pausa un dels emplastres confortantz e exsitans, e strenh sobre aquel am liament; e comanda al malaute que use de repaus e de tranquillitat e que no dorme sobre la partida am la qual atroba dolor entro que sia sanat.	 Then take a break from the burning, and apply pressure to that area, and tell the patient to rest and be calm, not sleep on the part where the pain is intolerable until it subsides
E si accideys deves la atricio del os satagias o alcuna causa que ja es seperada de lu, lahoras cove que secces sobre la codena e que ostes aquel os; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua, am sutura si es gran; e aprop cura aquela am alcu encarnatiu dels enguentz, entro que sia sanat.	 If there is a problem with the stomachache or another cause that has been separated from it, then rest on its hollow and apply cold packs if necessary, and gently stretch that part of the body in order to bring it back into place, ensuring it returns to health.
Mays si es trencat le derier del os alhoses, e es la fi de la coeta, lahoras cove que tu entrometas le dit pous de la ma senestra en le cul, e que enguales le os trencat am l’autra ma segon que es possible per equacio segonda; e aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e astelha, si indigeysses de aquels, e aprop strenh aquel.	 If the artery of the arm is torn or if it's the end of a war, then take your hand and put it up to the other elbow on both sides; and gently press down on that part as well, ensuring you stretch it.
E si sentes satagias trencadas en lu, lahoras tu fen sobre aquela, e osta aquel, e cura la plagua am la curacio que es precedida entro que sia sanada.	 If the stomachache is torn up there, then take that part and rest it; also put a poultice on it as well to cure the pain in preparation for recovery.
Capitol .x.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
De restauracio de la ancha.	 The restoration or reduction
Les osses de las anchas tart so trencats, e si trencan, lahoras la fractura de lor no es sino communicio en las extremitatz de aquelas e son inscidas en la longitut e declinan a las partidas dedintz; e accideys al malaute dolor en le loc e punctura, e la camba es stupefacta quan es fractura.	 Bones of the wide areas are broken and when they break, fractures occur in their extremities and spread throughout the length, causing pain at the site of injury and bursting veins if a fracture occurs.
E la restauracio de lu es que tu extendas la tua ma sobre aquel entro que sia sobre la fractura qual es la figura de lu.	 The restoration is to place your hand over that part where there is a break in the shape of it.
E si fractura es en la extremitat de lu tant solament, lahoras tu enguala aquela segon que a tu es apparelhat per equacio engual entro que sia asemblat a la sua figura natural.	 If there is only a fracture in the extremity of it, then doctors wrap that part with another garment shaped to match its natural form.
Mays si la fractura es en le lonc o que ja declina a las partidas dejos, lahoras tu fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu ventre entro que sia preparada a tu la restauracio de aquela fractura.	 If the fracture is in the length or has spread to the edges of it, then doctors wrap their abdomen with another garment prepared for the restoration of that fracture.
E donc quan auras engualada aquela, pausa sobre lu emplastre, e aprop pausa sobre aquel astela de fust o de codena, e strenh per strictura sobre la qual no temas punctacio de fractura ni remocio de la stelha.	 And once wrapped in that way, pause on the bandage and place a cloth over it or under it to prevent tearing of the bandage while strengthening from above to avoid any breaking of the bone or damage to the sling.
E enguala la concavitat am aquo que uempla aquela entro que aquela prengua la strictura segon equalitat, e comanda al malaute que dorma sobre le sieu dos o desobre le sieu costat sa.	 And wrap it around that part where the pressure is applied to maintain evenness and command the patient to rest on their back or side.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu cessa de extencio de lu e de la sua restauracio entro que sia sedat le apostema caut, e pausa sobre lu aquo que sede aquel segon que es precedit; e aprop retorna a la restauracio de lu, e strenh aquel ayssi cum cove.	 When the abscess is opened, stop extacting it and its restoration until it is healed, then restore it as you did before; and after that do so again
E si accideysso en le os satagias o son comminuidas, lahoras tu las tratz.	 If the abscess occurs in a saggy or sunken area of the skin, cut away those parts.
Capitol .xi.	 This is the final sentence of the passage and does not require translation into English.
De restauracio de la fractura del adjutori.	 After restoring the fractured arm
Adjutori es aquo que es entre le coyde entro al cap de la spalla.	 The attendant is where it stands between head and shoulder
E si es trencat, lahoras la restauracio de lu es en una de doas manieyras, de las quals es la una que tu prenguas fust pla de migiera groceza segon aquesta forma:	 If it is broken, the restoration of it will be done in one of two ways. The first way you should proceed according to this shape:
E sian liatz en doas extremitatz dos liamentz, e aprop sia suspendut del loc elevat.	 And if there are two limbs involved, and the higher limb is suspended in such a way
E segua le malaute sobre una sezela; e aprop gieta fora le sieu bras trencat sobre le fust entro que pervengua al titillic de lu en le mieg loc del qual sia annexa la curvitat del fust.	 The patient should lie on their side, and the broken arm is placed below them in such a way that it extends down to the hollow of the elbow where it joins the curve of the arm.
E aprop suspen sobre aquel alcuna causa greu, o·l minestre extenda aquel a las partidas dejos; e aprop le metge eque la fractura am las sieuas mas ensemps, entro que la fractura retorne segon que cove.	 And if the limb can not be placed in this way, then it is to place another servant below them and extend that one also to their feet; and have a doctor examine both of those arms before the fracture returns as well.
E l’autra manieyra es que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sieua cervitz e suspen la ma del col de lu am liament; e aprop comanda a dos ministres que la un de lor tengua aquo que es desobre la fractura am las suas mas; e l’autre tengua le pus dejos de lu; e quascu de lor extenda a la sua partida.	 The other remedy is that the patient should be raised up on their chest and supported by another servant holding their hands, while the first servant supports them from below with one hand.
E si voles que la extencio sia pus fort, lahoras tu strenh sobre la fractura am liament e sobre aquela am autre liament, e quascu dels dos ministres extendan a doas suas partidas.	 If you want the extension to be strong, support them on one arm and the other arm as well, while both servants spread their hands apart.
E donc si la fractura es propinquada a la extremitat del muscle, lahoras cove que sia pausat la mitat del liament sobre le citillic e l’autre dejos la fractura deves le coyde.	 If the fracture is close to the end of the limb, then it's customary for one servant to support their hand on top and the other to hold down the fracture gently.
E semblantment si la fractura es propdana al coyde, lahoras cove que sia pausat le liament sobre aquel loc e sobre aquel coyde.	 Similarly if the fracture is at or near a joint, then it's customary for one servant to support their hand on top of that area and another to place the limb over that area as well.
Enguala aquela am facilitat e ses trebal, e aprop quant sira engualada segon que cove e es applicada per bona applicacio, lahoras strenh aquela si no accideys apostema caut.	 Strengthen it with care and make sure to use good judgment when applying for a correct application, otherwise support the fracture gently if necessary.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras layssa la strictura entro al vii dia, e pausa sobre lu lana sutza enbeguda en vi agre e oli rozat entro que repause le apostema, e lahoras tu stren aquela.	 If necessary support the fracture gently and allow it to heal for a week with proper care applied every day, and then gently stretch it when you feel ready after allowing some relaxation time for the gentle touch.
E la manieyra de strenher aquela es que pauses emplastre sobre la fractura, e aprop pausa envolopament de drap nau sobre le emplastre; e aprop ajuste le bras sobre aquel adjutori, e pause la sua ma uberta sobre le sieu muscle.	 The remedy for strengthening it is to place a cushion on top of the fracture, and then wrap an extra bandage around that cushion, and support their hand above that servant while placing your other arm over their own muscle.
E pausa le drap e strenh sobre le adjutori le bras per so que·l bras sia en loc de stelhas, si no prohibeys de aquo alcuna causa del os trencat.	 The patient has already been placed on their side, with the arm raised to support it in a sling position, unless any harm is caused by tearing off part of the shoulder.
E lahoras usa de stelhas.	 They are using slings.
E es que pauses sobre la fractura aquela stela que sia pus lada e pus fort de las autras stelas; e pausa entre quascuna stela la latitut del dit, e sia la longitut de las stelas segon la trencadura am addicio de tres ditz de tota partida.	 The pause occurs between the fractures of two adjacent slings, and at a latitude line that is parallel to both the height and width of the slings after tearing off three fingers from all four sides.
E aprop strenh sobre las stelas am la strictura la qual he dita al comensament del capitol.	 Then they raise their arms over the slings, starting with the left arm at the beginning of the capital.
E es que la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura sia pus streyt.	 The fracture location must be very close to your touch.
E quant pus es alonguada la fractura sia la strictura menor.	 When the fracture is larger than the smaller sling,
E donc si vezes le situament de las stelas e la strictura ayssi cum havem dit en la hora en la qual restauras le membre al sieu assituament, lahoras tu fay.	 If there are times when the situation of the slings and the fracture occur at different times than in the restoration of the member to its original position, then they may also do so.
E si temes apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la strictura e las stelas entro al dia vii ayssi cum havem dit.	 If you fear a pointed injury, then they place both slings and the fractured part in one day's rest as advised.
E aprop considera le liament en totas partidas per tres dias per so que no accida en le loc pruziment o imflacio; o es prohibida la vianda pervenir al membre per disposicio de superfluitat de strictura; e donc rectifiqua tot aquo segon que havem dit.	 Consider the matter in all three days to prevent swelling or bruising of the area, unless it is forbidden to use slings for additional support and then correct this as advised.
Mays si tu yest sobre confizanssa que no accida alcuna causa de aquo, lahoras no deslias la liguadura sino aprop tres dias o mays.	 If you suspect that there may be a cause for it, then they do not remove the sling but rather leave it in place for three days or more as advised.
E sia la sua dormicio del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e las sieuas mas sian sobre le stomac.	 When a patient's thigh space has been opened, have their feet placed on it and also place another servant above their stomach.
E pausa sobre le adjutori cocena plena de lana engualment, e considera en tota hora de la nueyt o del dia que no sia deliada ni dissolta la figura del membre trencat, o que sia le liament mollificat, donc rectifica aquo tot am la tua vertut.	 And pause the servant with full of wool equally, and consider every moment of the new day or night that it is not broken apart, or that it has become relaxed from injury, then rectify this altogether according to your ability.
E pausa la vianda del malaute segon le orde le qual havem denant mes, enayssi que la vianda sia subtil en le comensament entro que es comensat strenher; e lahoras cove que egrossas la vianda de lu.	 And pause the servant of the patient after giving them as much, unless that the servant is subtle from its beginning until it reaches its extreme point; and cover over the servant with oil.
Quar de constuma del adjutori e de la camba de lu es que sian strengutz en xl dias; e lahoras cove que sian desliatz e sia administrat banh e sia medicat am enguentz los quals rectifican aquel.	 And of the servant and leg of him it is customary to be tight for 14 days; and cover with banh, and administer oil in addition, as they heal those who correct it.
E si la fractura es layha atrita, lahoras tu no deslies de aquela le liament e las stelhas entro a l dias o entro a dos meses.	 And if the fracture is not too severe, then do not loosen that link and ties until 2 months.
Capitol .xii.	 Chapter XII.
De restauracio de fractura del bras.	 On restoration of fractures in the arm.
Bras es compost de dos osses les quals so appelatz dos focils; dels quals la un es petit, e es aquel que siec le dit pous, e l’autre es gran e es aquel le qual es pausat dejos le petit dit, de la partida pus dejus.	 The arm is composed of two bones that are called the two fingers; one of which is small and it is the one that bears the name of the thumb, and the other is large and it is the one that is placed on top of the smaller one from below.
E fort leu es trencat le focil major solament, o le petit, e fort leu son trincatz ensemps.	 When the larger fire has been extinguished only, or the smaller one, then the flames will be put out.
E quan es trencat le focil petit desus, lahoras la restauracio de lu es leugiera, e la sanacio de lu es pus leugiera.	 After extinguishing the smaller fire, the pain of it should cease and healing will commence.
E quan es trencat le focil de lu dejos la fractura de lu es mala, e la sanacio de lu es dificil.	 When the larger fire is extinguished only, or when the smaller one is extinguished, a fracture may occur in its place, and healing will be difficult.
E pus mala de aquela es quan son trencatz dos osses essemps.	 It's when two bones are broken at once that misfortune strikes.
Donc si l’os le qual es trencat es le focil petit desus, lahoras es convenient al metge, deves la restauracio de lu, que pauze petita extencio am facilitat entro que aquel sia engualhat.	 When a bone that is broken is the smaller fire only extinguished, then it's customary for the doctor to see you, so as to restore it, which may involve a small excision and make its exit difficult
Mays si le focil gran es aquo que es trincat, lahoras cove que pause extencio pus vehement.	 When the larger fire is extinguished only, then they say that great trouble will come forth fiercely.
E si les dos focils so ensemps trincatz, lahoras cove que tu pauses la extritura mot pus fort.	 If both fires are extinguished at once, they say that you should endure a difficult time for escape
E cove que pauses la figura de la ma deves la restauracio de lu e la extencio de lu estenduda sobre un coyssi, e sia le pols de la ma a las partidas desus, pus aut que totz les autres ditz, e le dit auricular sia pus bas dels autres ditz, e le malaute sia cezent sobre una cezela cayrada.	 If you place the figure of your hand above it and extend its excision over a cushion, and put both hands on top of it, as well as all others, ear, nose, eyes, mouth, and anus will be in order.
E sia un coyssi denant lu en la altetut o endreyt de lu, per so que·l malaute no encorra trebalh.	 If you put it on a high place or a low one, to prevent its bad nature from coming out.
E aprop le ministre extenda le bras de la partida pus dejos am la sieua ma o am liament, e autre ministre extenda desus semblantment.	 Then extend your arm from the start by placing it on top of them, and another minister extends both arms in a similar manner.
E aprop le metge engualhe le os entro que redugua aquel segon la milhor figura que pot.	 The physician shall then proceed to examine that second joint closely after making the first one more visible.
E si en la factura del os so satagias, lahoras te perforsa raduzir tota pessa en le sieu loc am la tua vertut.	 If it is necessary to make an incision on the bone, then perform a full exploration of all the tissues in that location and your own judgment.
E si appar en lu satagia separada que punh la codena e no es a tu speransa en la restauracio de lu, lahoras tu fen sobre lu e osta aquela segon la manieyra la qual havem dita desus.	 If there is a separate compartment that cannot be reached or if you need to perform surgery in order to restore it, then do so and proceed with the procedure as described for us.
Mays si la fractura es am plagua, yeu ja he fayt ad aquo capitol singular, e donc pren la curacio de aquel.	 If there is a fracture that has already been treated separately or if you need to proceed with its separate treatment, then proceed as described for this particular issue.
E si accideys apostema caut al comensament de la tua restauracio, lahoras tu lineys un drap am cerot fayt de oli rozat e cera blanca, e sia migier entre specitut e subtilitat, e strenh drap sobre aquel am strictura subtil entro que le apostema sia cedat; e lahoras remau le cerot e pausa emplastre preparat de polvera de moli am clayre de huou, e aprop pausa stelhas; e sia la stela la qual es pauzada sobre aquela fractura pus lada e pus fort.	 If the issue occurs during the beginning of your treatment process, then apply a cold compress and cover it with gauze soaked in white vinegar. The dressing should be between two thin cloths or layers, and cover it with another cloth to prevent direct contact; then apply a sterile bandage over that area. Lastly, ensure that the bandage is placed above any fracture wound.
E sapias que·l nombre de las stelas del bras so vi en las majors disposicios, o sia la fractura en un focil o en dos focils ensemps.	 You know that when speaking of splints for the arm there are two options available to you: one is in only one place or multiple places depending on the fracture location.
E aprop pausa la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura pus fort e pus vehement, e quan mays sira la extrictura a las partidas desus de la fractura o a las partidas pus bassas de lu, pausa la strictura un pauc pus molh segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu en le comensament del capitol.	 When the fracture is strong and severe, pause it for some time before attempting to open or close it, as you remember that it was opened only once at its beginning.
E les draps que so envolopatz sobre la fractura sian draps mols humitz, e no sian durs ni aspres, e·l fiel am le qual es strenhut sia de li propriament migier entre subtil e gros, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	 The bandages that wrap around the fracture should be moist but not too soft or hard, and faithful to one who is skilled at judging between subtle and gross.
E considera le membre e·l liament aprop alcus dias.	 Consider the member and its ligament properly aligned.
E si accideys alcuna causa de la qual rectificacio es necessaria, ayssi cum prusiment le qual accideys al membre, e lahoras cove que tu enbroques le membre am aygua cauda entro que cesse aquel pruziment.	 If any cause arises that requires correction, such as a fracture to one of the limbs, and pain occurs in this way when you try to straighten the affected member with water applied gently but firmly until it ceases that movement.
E leysses le membre no costreyt entro que repause, e aprop torna la strictura.	 Keep the member still while pausing, then resume the pressure.
E si la extrictura ja es mollificada e l’os ja es remaugut e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras rectifiqua tot aquo am la tua vertut.	 If the fracture has been softened and the affected part is relaxed and similar to this state, then you correct everything as per your ability.
E considera mays si le nutriment es prohibit pervenir al membre per superfluitat de strictura, quar lahoras cove que mollifiques aquel un petit e laysses aquel per alcus dias entro que corra ad aquel le nutriment, e aprop strenh aquel.	 Consider if nutrition is prohibited on the member for excessive tightness, and you soften it a little and place it to rest a few days until the flow resumes in that way, then tense it again.
Mays si al malaute no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no cove que sia desliat entro aprop xx dias o enviro de aquels.	 If the patient does not experience any of those causes we mentioned before, then do nothing to relax it after these days or for that matter.
E aprop sia suspenduda la ma del malaute per la sua vertut de movement agitatius, e fay aquel dormir sobre le sieu dos.	 And hold down the patient's hand to prevent excessive movement, let him lie on his back.
E sapias que aquesta fractura es restaurada en xxx dias o en xxxii dias, o fort leu es restaurada en xxviii dias, e tot aquo es segon la disposicio de las compleccios e las disposicios de la vertut.	 And you know that this fracture is restored in 3 days or 42 days, and if it's light, then it's done in 28 days, all of which depends on the complexity and disposition of the patient's body.
Capitol .xiii.	 Chapter XIII
De restauracio de fractura de la pinche de la ma e dels ditz.	 On the treatment of fractures in the arm or leg.
Sapias que a la pinche de la ma e als nuzes dels ditz tart endeve fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio motas veguadas.	 You know that when it comes to the wrist and legs of the same arm or leg, then the fracture should happen but may be hidden deep inside.
E quan accideys a la ma fractura o atrissio, lahoras cove que·l malaute segua cayrat e denant lu lies cezent segon equalitat, e aprop pausa la ma de lu sobre aquela extenduda.	 When the fracture of the arm or injury occurs, the doctor will know to have the patient rest and wait until they can move it equally again, then place their hand over that extended area.
E aprop le ministre extenda les osses trencatz e·l metge engualhe aquels entro que sian congongitz am bona congoncio.	 The surgeon will extend the bones and gently massage the injured area to help the patient recover quickly.
E lahoras cove que pause emplastre e estopa, si no accideys apostema caut; e aprop pausa stela desus segon la quantitat del loc, e tu ja has envolopada aquela en drap de li.	 The doctor will also place a bandage and cover it if there is not enough skin to wrap around that area, then you have already covered it with cloth of some kind.
Mays si la trincadura es en las partidas dedintz deves le ventre de la palma, e lahoras fay semblant de spera de drap, e comanda al malaute que strenha aquela am la sua palma trincada; aprop sia strenguda am drap lonc.	 If the wound is on a finger of the belly, then the doctor will apply cloth-like dressing and instruct the patient to stretch that part with their bandaged hand.
E sia la stelha de cuer am drap en le qual sia levitat, per so que le cuer sia aplicat a la palma; e strenh aquela segon que cove.	 The first sentence means "The cushion on which it lies is lifted," or perhaps more literally translated as "the bed sheet from under which the body lies is raised.
Mays si la fractura es a las partidas defora, lahoras cove que pauses desus stela e autre estela de la partida dejos en la palma, per so que la ma sia uberta e dreyta; e aprop pausa la strictura, ayssi cum es revolvuda la ma a la rateta entre les ditz am liamentz.	 If the fracture is in an outer part of the body, the doctor should place a cushion on top and another on the side opposite to where the pain occurs, so that the hand can be extended and flexed; also put pressure on the constriction, as if rolling it between the fingers.
E si accideys fractura a alcu dels nozes dels ditz, lahoras si es le dit pous, sia engualat segon que cove e aprop sia strenhut am la palma e si·t voles, pausa a lu astela petita dreyta per so que sia elevada la fractura e no sia mauguda.	 If the fracture occurs in the toes of one or both feet, then put another cushion on top next to where it hurts, and place your hand over it tightly as if you want to roll it back down; also put pressure on the constriction so that the fracture is held high up but not too tight.
Mays si la fractura es en les autres ditz, ayssi cum en aquel del mieg loc, o en le indic, o en le auricular, o en le anular, lahoras sia engualhat e liat am le dit sa le qual siec aquel; o sian totz liatz segon continuacio, e es milhor; o pausa sobre aquel stela petita, ayssi cum havem dit en le pous.	 If the fracture is in another digit other than those listed (such as the big toe, index finger, ear lobe, or nose), then put it next to where that digit starts and supports itself; or if you need more support for all of them together, do so; or place a small cushion over each individual part.
E considera, en la tua restauracio, e aprop aquela, la disposicio de apostema caut e oppose — am la tieua operacio — am aquo que cove quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, segon que es iterada la narracio de lu.	 Consider in your treatment, and apply it as mentioned earlier, the use of a pointed cautery and opposing force - during the operation itself - is that which occurs when any cause of these issues is repeated again.
Capitol .xiv.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, it causes gout in certain members of the heart.
De restauracio de fractura del os de la coyssa.	 Restoration of a fracture of the arm bone.
Le os de la cueyssa motas veguadas es trencat e es declarat al sentiment segon que es convertit a la partida denant e a la pus sobirana.	 The upper arm bone was broken, and it was declared to be at risk of further injury when it showed swelling in the area after being injured
E la restauracio de lu se fa enayssi que·l liament es strenhut sobre la fractura e autre liament dejos la fractura, e le malaute sia prostrat sobre le sieu ventre e sobre la cara.	 The restoration is made by placing a splint over the fracture and another to immobilize it, with the patient lying on their stomach and face.
E aprop le ministre extenda tot le liament a la sua partida segon la qualitat, quan la fractura es en le mieg loc del os.	 The minister extends the splint up to the joint after assessing its quality when the fracture is at or near the bone end.
Mays si es propdana a la razitz de la cueyssa, lahoras sia le liament propda al denolh a la partida del pentenilh, per so que la extencio caja en sus, e le autre liament dejos la fractura.	 If it is necessary to apply to the arm's elbow joint, then place the splint on the bent arm and another over the fracture.
E semblantment si la trencadura es propdana al denolh, lahoras sia fayt le liament propda al denol, e sia la extencio a las partidas dejos.	 Similarly if it is necessary to apply on the elbow joint as well, then place the splint on the bent arm and another over the fracture.
E aprop le metge enguale le os am amduas las sieuas mas entro que reduzesca aquel segon la semblansa natural e l’os es conjungit per bona conjunccio; lahoras cove que pauses emplastre e strictura, si no accideys al membre apostema.	 The doctor applies the splint to both arms inside so that it is firmly fixed and straight, in case of any sudden movement by the patient.
Mays si accideys en lu apostema, lahoras tu layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que l’apostema caut sia cedat, e aprop retorna a la tua curacio.	 If an accident occurs to it, then place it with caution for several days until the arm heals properly and consult your doctor again.
La strictura de lu sia ayssi fayta: cove que envolopes sobre la fractura una benda dura, e dobla aquela dos o tres veguadas, e remaugua de lu superfluitat; e aprop envolopa la camba entro que pervengua al talo e a la razitz de la cueyssa.	 When the stricture is so severe that it completely closes over the fracture causing stiffness and limitation of movement in both legs, then covers the abdomen towards the back of the thigh
E intromet lonc fiel entre la cueyssa e la camba prop del denol a las partidas dejos, e venguan las extremitatz del fiel de la partida pus sobirana de las doas partz, e aprop revolveys sobre la camba e la cueyssa aquo que superflueys de la benda.	 And insert the finger between the thigh and abdomen to the extent of a finger's breadth on both sides from where it emerges towards the back of the thigh, then wraps around the belly and thighs in order to prevent swelling of the body part.
E aprop pausa sobre la cueyssa en le loc de aquela fractura astelhas, e pausa de aquelas una stela sobre le os de la camba.	 And place a cushion over the area on top of the fracture and also place one on each side of the belly.
E aprop uempli las vacuitatz entre la camba e la cuoyssa am draps mols, per so que sia coagulada la extrictura.	 And tighten the belts between the thighs and abdomen in order to prevent further extension of the stricture.
E aprop comensa am strictura fort del mieg sobre le loc de la fractura am tres envolucios o quatre, e quant mays tu te alonhas am liament del loc de la fractura, la tua strictura sia menor e pus leugiera e pus molha.	 And begin with a very severe stricture over the area of the fracture covering three or four times, and whenever you touch the location of the fracture your stricture will be less rigid and loose.
E aprop exten a doas extremitatz del fiel a las partidas dejos entro que pervengua a la cavilha del pe, e strenh amdoas las extremitatz de las stelhas del autra part per so que·l liament no sia remaugut del sieu loc.	 And extend both fingers from the two parts of the thigh to where it enters between the calf and foot, then tighten both ends of the belt in order that the ligament is not pulled out of its place.
E aprop leyssa la strectura sobre aquel, don esta ayssi que no accideys al membre corrosio ni apostema caut ni emflacio e semblantz ad aquels; e si accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, adonc cueta te am desliament de lu, e rectifica aquo que accideys tot aprop, segon que havem dit motas veguadas.	 And place the belt tightly over it so that there is no bruising or swelling of the member, nor any other cause occurs at all; and if any cause occurs then do a quick check to remove it from here, and correct as necessary according to what you have mentioned previously.
Mays si en le os es pessa del os la qual pongua, lahoras cove que tu engualhes aquel segon que a tu es possibla; e sino, fen sobre lu e remau aquel, e cura am aquo del qual es precedida la rememoracio entro que sia sanat.	 "The pain of the joints is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet.
E alcunas veguadas es strenhuda aquesta fractura de la coyssa otra aquo que sian ajustadas a lu stelhas, ayssi cum havem dit en le adjutori e·n le bras.	 "And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery.
Mays empero en la restauracio de lu en tal manieyra fayta no accideys al malaute claudicacio; e si es restaurada sola, otra aquo que li sia applicada l’autra camba, lahoras es necessari que claudique aquel del qual es tostemps.	 "However, in the restoration of it in such a way that a gout attack does not occur thereafter; and if restored alone, then another cushion should be applied.
E sapias que la coyssa es strenhuda en xl dias o un pauc mes o un pauc mens, e tot aquo es segon la diversitat de las compleccios e de las autras dispozicios.	 "You know that the joint is strained for a few days or a month, and all of this depends on the complexity of the case.
Capitol .xv.	 The fifteenth chapter
De restauracio de la fractura de la rodela del denolh.	 "Of joint fracture treatment.
Sapias que fractura de la rodela del denol tart endeve, mays accideys a lu motas veguadas atrissio.	 "You know that a joint fracture of the thigh can lead to loss of motion in other joints.
Mays si accideys a lu fractura, lahoras no es sino fissura o trauc en las suas partidas, e aquo es am plagua o ses plagua, e sobre aquo tot es estat am le sentiment.	 "If a joint fracture occurs, then it is only a tear or sprain in the affected parts, and this is painful either immediately after or later on.
E la restauracio de lu es enayssi que sia engualat aquo que es romput de las partidas de lu am les ditz entro que sia agreguat e conjongit segon que es possible per equacio e facilitat e fabricacio.	 "The restoration of it is to be done in such a way that the torn or sprained parts are reunited as soon as possible, by means of treatment and facilitation.
E aprop pausa emplastre e pausa sobre aquel stela redonda, si indigeysses de aquela; e strenh desus am strictura ad aquo convenient.	 With a cushion placed under them and another on their legs, hold their hands
E aprop considera totas las disposicios las quals havem recomtadas en las autras fracturas, ayssi cum es apostema caut e semblant ad aquels enaissi que se oppause a tot accident am aquo que a lu es convenient entro que sia sanat.	 With all the measures that are recommended in other fractures as well, be careful and do exactly what I've mentioned to prevent accidents from happening when it comes to taking care of this patient
Capitol .xvi.	 The translation is: "With a cushion placed under them and another on their legs, hold their hands.
De restauracio de la fractura de la camba.	 Restoration of the fracture of the tibia.
Sapias que en la camba so dos osses dels quals la un es gros, e es le nompnat per nom de la camba; e l’autra es subtil, e es nompnat focil.	 In the tibia there are two bones: one is large and is called the tibia; the other is subtle and is known as the fibula.
E accideys a quascus de las specias de fractura aquo que accideys als dos osses del bras, e per aquo es fayta restauracio de lu ayssi cum restauracio del bras engualment, e la operacio de lu es una.	 When the two bones of the arm fracture as well, and for this reason restoration is done equally to both bones in the same operation, resulting in a single bone restoration procedure.
E si so trincatz dos osses ensemps, la camba es convertida a totas partidas.	 If two bones are separated or displaced, then the tibia becomes one part of it.
E si es trinquat le os pus subtil, la camba es convertida a las partidas Denant.	 If the subtle bone is fractured, the tibia becomes divided into two parts.
E si es trincat le os pus gros, atrobas aquel dejos, e es de aquelas causas que no so a tu ameguadas.	 When the large bone breaks, it separates from its cause and is not considered as part of that caused the fracture.
E aprop aministra extencio e equacio e liguacio de las astelas segon aquel engualment.	 The sutures are opened up, stretched out, and tied with thread afterwards.
Mays empero cove, si la fractura de la camba es laja havent motas satagias, que la extencio sia mendre e pus leugiera, e alleuja am la tua vertut.	 When a fracture of the vein occurs in one limb, it is customary for the physician to open up and drain the vein, and remove all the fluid that may be present within.
E en la camba es alcuna causa de operacio sobre le bras, e es quan tu engualas las stelhas e que comples tota la tieua operacio, lahoras tu prendras pessas de fustz de pi le qual es pausat dejos las cauzas las quals so pausades en solies, e so faytas eyssament de brancas de palma; aligeys de aquelas a las quals es petita groceza, e no sia ges de las manudas, e sia la longuesa de aquelas segon la longuesa de la camba, e del denol entro al pus dejos.	 If there is no cause for surgery on the arm and you perform all the necessary procedures to treat it, then physicians will remove any phlegm or pus that may be present in those tubes separately, as well as removing any white fluid from the palm; take care of those small ones that are not too large, and do not touch those that have no cause, but only for their length and follow the length of the vein to the pus that is located at its exit.
E aprop envolopa sobre quascuna drap en doas envolucios segon la longitut de lu, e pausa la una sobre la partida de la camba de la una part e l’autra del autra part, e sian del denol entro al pus bas loc del pe.	 Then approach each drape from both sides following its length, and place one over the entrance of the vein in that limb on one side, and another at the exit of the other side, as they lead to the pus found at their end.
E aprop lias las doas stelhas en tres locs de doas extremitatz e al mieg loc, quar am aquesta strectura la camba es prohibida de clinar a la partida dextra e sinistra, e sta per bona stacio.	 Then approach the two tubes in three locations on both limbs and at their end, where this structure is forbidden to examine the right and left sides of the vein, as it causes good placement.
E ja es aministrat un brasset de fust segon la longuesa de la camba; e sia pausada en lu la camba per so que conserve aquel de movement.	 Then administer a compress with a needle after its length to keep that vein moving.
E majorment cove que tu fassas aquo en fractura, e quan am aquela es plagua propriament.	 Besides when there is a rupture and it happens frequently.
E aprop considera en quascun jorn la camba e studia am aquel per derier studi, e tu le guardes de apostema e de imflacio o de autres causas semblantz; e cum accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, lahoras opausa te a lu am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	 When one suffers from the day and studies it carefully, and you are aware of any other causes that may occur thereafter, then if there is any cause among them all, the pain will stop with this remedy so that he or she becomes healthy again
Capitol .xvii.	 The previous statement was an incomplete translation to a medieval medical treatise in Latin, Italian, Spanish and slightly French as well. Please complete the translation by line 17 of the provided text as you did for the first sentence.
De la fractura del talo e dels osses del pe e dels ditz.	 Of fractures on the toes and bones of the foot,
Al talo no accideys fractura de tot; mays als osses del pe accideys fractura alcunas veguadas; e als ditz del pe pauc accideys fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio en las mes de disposicio.	 The toes do not always break all of them; sometimes the bones in the foot may break some knuckles; and rarely the feet will break without causing any harm to those around it.
E si als osses del pe endeve fractura e vezes aquels osses esser elevatz sobre si entre lor, lahoras le malaute pause le sieu pe sobre la terra preparat ayssi cum anant.	 And if the bones in the foot need to be broken and sometimes those bones are lifted up between them, then doctors will place a cushion under their feet on the ground so that they can rest comfortably as before.
E aprop pausa la un pe sobre aquo que es elevat de aquels osses, e aprop calca aquels, e prem, e engualha aquels entro que torno en los locs.	 And after placing a cushion under that which is lifted up by those bones, and pressing them with both hands, and holding them in place like this, it will prevent the intestine or hernia from coming out.
E aprop pausa emplastre e stopa desus, e pausa dejos le ventre del pe una petita taula a la qual sian dos caps plas.	 And after placing on their belly a small table with two heads placed, they will rest their stomach in it so that the intestine or hernia does not come out of it.
E aprop strenh aquela am le pe am strectura descent, pus que tu has envolopada aquela am draps e am autres causes de las quals indigeys.	 And after pulling on their leg at a stretch downward, with the hand that wraps around you hold it closed and other causes which follow.
E cum a lu passan tres dias o quatre, lahoras tu deslia le liament, quar tu atrobaras les osses engualatz, o sian trincatz o sian dislocatz, e la operacio en aquels es ayssi co coneysses.	 When it has passed three or four days, you should loosen the joint, as your joints will become stiff and unable to move around, thus requiring surgery
Mays si alcus ditz son trincatz, lahoras restaura aquels, e enguala aquels ayssi cum yeu e recomtat a tu en la restauracio dels ditz de la ma.	 If the joint stiffness persists, you should restore it and loosen it as recommended by your doctor in the restoration of those same joints.
E aprop pausa al dit trincat stela segon la longitut del dit, e sia pus lada de lu un pauc; e aprop dejos le pe aquesta taula la qual e a tu recomtada, e strenh aquela am strictura decent.	 Then place the pointed cautery on top of that finger for half an inch and gently press down on it as recommended, and do not remove your foot from this table any longer than necessary.
Mays si aquo que es trincat dels osses so dos o tres o mays, lahoras tu pausa sobre quascun dit astela de la sua quantitat envolopada en drap leon, e strenh la taula en le pus bas del pe, e sia stant sobre la un dels caps de la taula foro le ventre del pe per que la tengua am bona retencio.	 If the joint stiffness persists for two or three days and more, you should rest your foot on a table covered in linen cloth, and press it firmly down at the top of the foot, and have it placed over one end of the table to support its belly so that it has good retention.
E es convenient a tu que no oblides que no consideres totas las causas las quals que e ditas a tu en las autras fracturas dels accidentz que havem dit; e opausa te a tot accident am aquo que cove.	 It is advisable for you to remember that all of the causes which are mentioned to you in other fractures, and stop any such accidents from happening here.
Capitol .xviii.	 This is the end of the text.
De fractura del conh de la femna e del os del pentenilh e de la vergua del home.	 Fracture of the femur and the tibia and vein of the male.
Quan le conh de la femna es trincat, lahoras fay aquela ceser en cezela cayrada, e aprop enclina aquela a la partida del dos un petit, e sia tenguda detras.	 When the femur bone is fractured, doctors put it in a cast and hold it behind them on one side for support.
E aprop la matrona umpla le conh de coto, e sia fayt en le conh de lu ayssi cum spera; e aprop la femna sia concutida, e eleva le dos de lu petit a petit, quar tot aquo es fora-getat entro que sia denant la partida del conh ayssi cum spera e l’os trincat retorna.	 "The midwife will remove the cord from her hand and gently pull it through to the baby's chest. The midwife will cut off one of the baby girl's legs, then another one after that, until they are all removed.
E aprop pausa pulvils sobre le dos de lu, e quan vol urinar remaugua le coto am facilitat e aprop urine, e reduzeys e retorna aquel segon la manieyra segon la qual mezist aquel al comensament, e aprop retorne al sieu pulvil primier.	 "The midwife will place a powder on both legs and when she wants to urinate, it makes urination easy; reduce it and return it back the second time, after which you put it on top of the first one.
E fassa ayssi per vii dias o enviro aquels, quar aquel es restaurat.	 "Do this for seven days or until they are restored.
E si voles, pren una vezica de ovela e strenh sobre le trauc de lu una canula de canavera; e entromet tota la vesica en le conh de lu, e aprop ensuffla en la canula am vertut entro que la vesica sia imflada dedintz le conh, quar la fractura retorna.	 "If you want, take one of the veins and stretch them over the leg; insert a cannula into it completely, blowing air in through it until the bladder is inflated due to insertion of the vein, preventing the tear.
E aprop sia umplida de coto e estia per alcus dias segon que havem recomtat, entro que sia sanat.	 "Then fill up her bladder and keep it filled for a couple of days until she is healthy again.
E quan le os del pentenil de home o de femna es trincat, lahoras aministra en la restauracio e agulacio de lu aquo que havem recomtat en l’os del anca.	 "When the veins of a man or woman are torn, then treat it for healing and stitching in the same way as you would do on the other.
E aquo que es dreyt no es occultat en aquestas fracturas proprinquas e que pauc endeveno, majorment ad aquel al qual es alcun studi e us e enten aquest meu libre mot; quar aquela fractura significa a tu en las majors disposicios via dreyturiera en la restauracio e en la strictura de lu, e donc enten be.	 "As for what is right and wrong in these similar wounds that are few and far between, the one who knows best studies this thing and takes his own words; because each fracture means different things to do when it comes to healing and stitching of the body.
Mays en la vergua del home quan es trincada, pren guarguamela de auca, e met la vergua en aquela; e aprop pausa sobre lu envolucio de drap, e sia envolopada, e aprop sia layssada per tres dias o enviro aquels, e sia sanada.	 In the case of a hernia when it is incarcerated, remove its sack and place it in that area; after placing a cushion over it, cover her with another one as well, hold her hands.
Capitol .xix.	 This line appears to be incomplete or corrupted. Could you please provide more context or the full text of which medical treatise this is from?
De restauracio de fractura dels osses quan es am plagua.	 In the case of a broken bone when it's been bruised,
Convenient es ad aquel al qual accideys fractura am plagua, e majorment si le os es gran ayssi cum es le os de la cuoyssa o de l’adjutori, o semblant ad aquel, que tu te cuoytes e fleubotomes aquel tantost si las condicios de fleubotomia a tu o testifican ayssi cum desus havem dit.	 It is convenient to do so for those who suffer from broken bones and bruising, especially if the bone's part of the elbow or shoulder, as it would be similar to doing so with the same care that you should give when performing phlebotomy on your arm or leg.
E si la plagua eflueys sanc, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la retencio de lu enayssi que tu polverizes sobre lu zegi trissat, si a tu autra causa no es present.	 If the bruise is still present after all of that, then you should also powder it gently to remove any remaining swelling or bruising.
E aprop comensa restaurar la fractura en aquel meteys dia, e no prolongues aquo, si no accideys apostema.	 Begin restoring the fracture in this case as quickly as possible and do not prolong this if you're about to leave.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la restauracio de lu entro al ix dia, entro que sia cedat le apostema, e no apropinques a lu en le tertz dia e·l iiii de tot, quar tu faras accidir mals accidentz.	 If you're about to lose consciousness or in case of an accident occurs on the third day and thereafter, do not put it back together until the patient has given consent unless he/she gives orders otherwise.
Mays si le os trencat es eminent sobre la codena descubert, lahoras cove que te perforses reduzir aquel e engualar aquel am las tuas mas am facilitat e am pauca extencio.	 If the bone is broken over a significant part of its joint and you can't easily reduce it back into place or if there are any other complications, then do your best to bring both ends together but also consider reducing them as much as possible while still keeping it in position.
Mays si extencio no es a tu preparada e la equacio de lu am las tieuas mas, lahoras tu reduzeys aquel am las tuas mas am aquest sturment; e es sturment le qual es fayt de ferr, la longitut del qual es de vii ditz o de viii e la latitut del qual es segon la quantitat de la plagua; e per aquo es necessari al metge que prengua de aquels tres o quatre segon la quantitat que indigeys ad aquo en la curacio en tota specia de fractura.	 When the bones are broken, the joints become inflamed and cause pain.
E sia redon, e sia en lu pauca groceza per so que no sia doblat deves la comprecio sobre aquel en la hora de la operacio.	 It is important to make sure that it's not overly swollen or stiff after the operation so as to prevent any complications during surgery.
E sia de aguda extremitat al qual sia marge en las sieuas extremitatz; e sia le desus de lu a grossetut tendent, e de la maytat de lu entro a las partidas.	 The extremity must be immobilized and kept still by supporting it with a splint or brace, to prevent movement that could cause further damage.
E aquesta es la forma de lu:	 That is the way of doing so.
E es nompnat en grec “labre volentz atelarem”, so es paleta pauca.	 The proper Greek term for this technique is "leproteles thalassa".
Per que cove que sia pausada la extremitat de lu acuda elevada sobre la extremitat del os eminent.	 That arm must be held elevated over the opposite shoulder to aid in blood flow and reduce swelling in the affected extremity.
E inpelleys aquel en una veguada entro que retorne le os, e sia engualat am alcuna equacio.	 After putting that leg back into a flat position, it must be held immobile by placing something under it to prevent movement and maintain its position while the area heals.
E donc esforsa te engualar las extremitatz de la fractura entre lor, e si la extremitat de lu trencada es subtil, e no pren aquela le sturment per bona axcepcio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas la extremitat de aquel os entro que l’insturment haja poder de aquo.	 Therefore, to prevent further damage and ensure the limb remains immobile after a break or injury, make sure that both limbs are held between them in good alignment, and if only one leg is broken but can still be supported, hold it so that the splint allows for this mobility.
Mays si no podes reduzir le os de tot am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras enscideys aquel am aquo que coveneys a lu dels inscizoris les quals havem ditz; o serra aquel am una de las serras en qualque manieyra sia a tu possible.	 When it is not possible to reduce the size of that thing mentioned earlier, then remove and discard that thing from what was previously recommended.
E aprop ratz aquel que roman en le os de asperitat e de scorsas menudas.	 Then place a cushion on their hips for support.
E cum le os es reduzit, e aprop la reduccio le malaute atroba dolor vehement ledent, lahoras sapias que le os no es retornat al sieu loc natural; e adonc fay aquo quar tu confereyses al malaute gran juvament.	 When the size of the thing has been reduced and you place a cushion on their hips for support, if excessive pain arises due to sudden movement of the organ being treated, then doctors advise that it should not be returned to its natural location; instead, allow them to lie in bed rest until they calm down.
Cum es complida la tua restauracio la qual fas al os, e lahoras submergeys drap en vi stiptic negre, e propriament si es en estiu, e no pauses sobre la plagua cerot ni autre causa en la qual sia oli, per so que no fassa en lu accidir poyredura e corropcio.	 After completing your restoration work on the thing and removing the bandage soaked in black vinegar (and also in summer, do not place it over a clean cloth or any other cause that could lead to irritation), so as to prevent further injury to skin or burns.
E aprop aministra stelas en la hora del tieu compliment de la restauracio de l’os, e layssa la plagua descuberta enayssi que inscidas le trauc am forfexs e uses de envolucios segon la quantitat de la plagua.	 After completing the restoration work on the thing and removing the uncovered bandage (and also in summer, do not use any other wrapping material except for the amount of bandage), give them instructions for using a second bandage if necessary.
E guarda te am tota cautela que no strenhas la plagua am la fractura, quar motas veguadas an fayt aquo les fols metges, e fero accidir sobre les sieus malautes mort o malautia corrodent o zuthement, so es sania.	 Be very careful not to stretch the bandage over the fracture as it may cause further injury or burns on their wounds, and prevent any aggravation of existing sores or ulcers.
E si la tieua strictura leugiera, molli, diversa de la strictura de las autras fracturas.	 When a hernia occurs through a long and narrow space, different from that of a femoral hernia
E si la plagua es gran o es plagua mala, e temes sobre aquel alcus accidentz mals les quals havem recomtatz, e atrobas dolor en le loc, lahoras no cove que pauses sobre aquel astelas, mays fay ad aquel envolucio de draps durs en loc de stelas e strenh lu am aquelas.	 If the swelling is large or is a bad swelling and you fear that an accident may happen causing injury to which parts of your body, do not lie down on top of it, but place a hard blanket over the swelling in order to prevent any further accidents
E cum aprop un dia o dos vezes ja la plagua comensar, que en lu sia engendrat brac, lahoras tu osta desus le drap le qual havias pausat sobre aquel am vi, e aprop aministra calguas, enguentz am les quals de nostra constuma es que mediquem las plaguas, ayssi cum enguentz tetrafarmacon e semblantz ad aquel.	 If it has started to swell two times or more often, the swelling is accompanied by a lump in your hand, then place a damp cloth on top of the blanket that you have placed over the swelling, and also administer calogas, as well as tetrafarmacons and similar medications as prescribed.
E conveneys a tu que deslias le liament e considera la plagua en quascun dia mati e vespre entro que sia consolidada e fermada, e cove que·l membre sia preparat en tal manieyra que la poyredura corra de lu a las partidas dejos am facilitat.	 In order to ensure that the swelling is stable and firm throughout the day and night, consider placing a bandage on it when you wake up in the morning and before going to bed at night, so that your member will be prepared in such a way as to prevent any discharge from occurring easily.
si a la plagua passan motz dias, e no es consolidada ni es abscindit de lu le brac, lahoras sapias que aqui so satagias de las petitas per que cove enquieras la plagua am tenta.	 If the swelling has lasted for several days and is not stable or shrinking in your hand, then you should seek advice from small things to try and get rid of it.
E de aquelas satagias aquelas que so separadas remau e extratz, aquelas que de lor no so separadas e pongen le membre e fan accidir dolor, perforsa te a inscidir aquelas segon que a tu aquo es possibla.	 From these suggestions, choose those that are separate and tighten them in order to cause pain, unless it is possible for you at this time.
E si accideys a la plagua zuchem o eluchen, so es stiomenios, o autra specia de corrupcio e de putrefaccio, lahoras cove que pauses a quada un de aquels am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio del qual es precedida narracio en le sieu capitol.	 When joint pain is caused by bad humors or corruption and decay, the doctors will advise that a cushion be placed under them, and another servant on their legs to prevent it from coming out.
E de aquo en le qual cove que stia lo mieu sermo e tu fassas present la tua pessa: quan os gros es trincat, emineys sobre le membre ayssi cum le os de la coyssa e del ajutori e semblantz ad aquels dels membres grans, e que no presumas atraccio de lu, ni la extraccio de lu quar motas veguadas accideys per aquo la mort; habantz layssa aquel entro que poyresca, quar fort leu cayra per si aprop xx dias o xxx; e lahoras cura la plagua si a tu es vist, e si no layssa aquela.	 If you have already opened the space between their thighs and they are experiencing pain, then place another cushion under them to prevent it from coming out.
Capitol .xx.	 The following sentence is missing the end of a Latin phrase or a preposition that completes its meaning: "Capitol.
De la curacio de nodacio que accideys en le vestigi de alcuna fractura.	 Of the treatment for fractures
Motas veguadas accideys aquesta nodacio en le vestigi de sanacio de fractura, e majorment que es prop de las juncturas, e es orrasada per lu la figura del membre; e fort leu prohibeys le membre de la sua operacio natural.	 Gout treatment includes preventing further fractures of the joint and applying pressure to the affected area with a pointed cautery
Adonc considera si la nodacio es recent e aministra en aquela medicinas que han stipticat ayssi co es aloen, e enses, e mira, e sercacollo, e acrassia, e semblantz ad aquels; enayssi que prenguas de aquela alcunas o totas, e comfesiys aquelas am vi stiptic, o am album de huou, o am vi agre, e pausa aquela sobre la nodacio en estopa, e constringeys aquelas sobre lu per bona constriccio.	 If the recent fracture has been treated appropriately by drugs such as those mentioned above, and you also have to look at any previous treatments or therapies, and try to strengthen them using devices like braces, and place it over the affected area with good pressure.
E leyssa extrictura que no deslies aquela per motz dias; e aprop deslia aquela e itera autra, entro que sia remauguda la nodacio; o strenh sobre aquela lamina de plom descentment, quar plom ha proprietat de remaure tot aquo que es imflat en les membres.	 When the stitches are removed, place another cushion below them to prevent infection and keep their legs elevated to promote blood flow.
Mays si nodacio ja es en peyra convertida e streyta es e nessessitat provoca a ostar aquela coytadament, e lahoras scindeys aquela per la partida pus sobirana de lu, e inscideys la superfluitat e eminent, o ratz aquela am alcus rezoris entro que sia remauguda; e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	 If the stitches are opened and it is necessary to remove them, gently remove them from the wound, soak them in a solution that prevents infection and excessive bleeding, and care for them until they heal.
Capitol .xxi.	 Chapter Twenty-one
De restauracio de fractura quan es restaurada e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul no segon la sieua natura.	 When a fracture is restored and properly aligned, the limb regains its natural function
Quan fractura de os es restaurada, e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul, lahoras aquo no es fayt sino per motas causas: de las quals la una es multitut de solucio del liament e de la liguacio de lu fayta no segon que cove; o per superfluitat de strictura dels liamentz entro que·l nutriment sia prohibit correr al membre; o per multitut de embrocaccio superflua; o per movement superfluent no en la sua hora; o per pauquesa de sanc en le cors del malaute e per debelitat de lu.	 When a fracture is restored, and correctly aligned, the limb regains its natural function due to several causes: first, if there is excessive solution in the ligament or joint, it can restrict the movement of the limb; second, if nutrition is prohibited for the limb; third, if excessive lubrication is present; fourth, if movements that are not at their time; fifth, poverty of blood in the patient's body and debility
E curacio de aquo es dar a mengar al malaute e far le cor de lu tendre entro que·l sanc sia multiplicat en lu; e aministra banh; e entromet gaug e leticia sobre lu.	 The care involved is to feed the patient and make their body tender, so that the pain increases in them.
E aprop pausa pegua sobre le membre, per so que la pegua atire a lu mot nutriment, o continua embrocacio de lu am aygua tebeza, entro que·l nutriment corr e retorne a la sua figura natural.	 To prevent the limb from receiving nutrition or excessive lubrication, and to return it to its normal shape.
Capitol .xxii.	 When a patient has pain in his joints caused by cold humors that penetrate each part of the body, particularly the feet, it is customary for doctors to call this gout.
De curacio dels osses trincatz quan so restauratz tortuozament e prohibeys la operacio de lor de aquo que cove.	 To relieve pain in joints that have become stiff and prevent any surgery from being performed on them, it is customary for doctors to exercise the affected areas gently with a pointed cautery.
Quan accideys al membre ja restaurat aprop la sanacio de lu de tortuositat e eminencia al os trincat e nodacio, e es per aquo fededa de forma del membre, mays empero le membre no es prohibit de la sieua operacio natural, lahora no cove que tu recipias la paraula de aquel que exsistima aquel membre sia de novel trincat.	 When the affected limb has been properly restored to its former flexibility and strength through exercises of traction, elevation, and flexion, but it is not permitted to prevent any natural surgery on that limb, unless you receive a confirmation from someone who confirms that that limb is indeed new and free from injury.
Mays ja so statz motz fols metges e restauradors les quals han fayt aquo en nostra tera; e aquesta operacio es mot vituperable perduzent a gran temor le senhal de la qual es mortal.	 After the doctors and restorators who have performed this operation in our time, it is considered to be very dangerous due to its potential for death and great fear of which fatal condition?
Mays si claudicacio e nodacio son recentz, lahoras cove que sian enbrocatz am aygua tebeza en la qual so coytas erbas mollificantz, ayssi cum son fuelas de altea e razitz de lu, e mellilot, e semblantz ad aquels; e sia fayt a lu emplastre am emplastre mollificatio ayssi cum dyallaquilon ben fayt; o que sia preza mucillage de razit de altea e sia contucida am gray de gualina o am oli de cirami, e sia emplastrat am aquel; o que sian prezes figuas grassas e sian trissadas am fems de colom, e semblantz ad aquels de las medicinas que son nompnadas amermans consolidacio.	 If claudication and nodulation are recent, it is necessary to perform exercises such as those that wet your toes in cold water, alternating with heat from below or above, which promotes the circulation of legs; or the alternation between a warm bath or cold one, applied on the affected area, until it is cured.
E alcunas vetz es dissolvuda am assidua fricacio leugiera que sia am las mas humidas, e sia administrat movement del membre a tota partida en totas horas.	 When some wetness is dissolved by very cold water applied to the most humid parts of the body and administered to every member continuously throughout all hours
Mays si tortuositat ja es anada denant e es fayta fort e convertida es en peyra e provocada es necessitat a curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que sia le pus desus cecsat e la continuacio del os sia dissolvut, e sia inscidit aquo que superflueys de nodacio de aquel meteys am le os am inscissoris subtils, e sia aministrada facilitat en aquel am sollicitut e studi.	 The pain is caused by an inflammation of the bowels and must be treated with immediate care because it will subside if you apply a cold solution to stop it, continue administering the remedy, and be cautious not to irritate the delicate parts near the anus and administer it gently in that area
Capitol .xxiii.	 Chapter 23
De sermo en dislocacio.	 About the dislocation.
Dislocacio es eyssiment de alcuna de las juncturas del sieu loc, per que es prohibida de movement, e es orrezada la figura del membre, e fa venir sobre le malaute dolors e lesios grans.	 A dislocation is when one of the joints in its place is dislocated and it stops moving, leading to pain and great injuries.
Donc quan accideys ad alcu dislocacio, lahoras cove tantost perforsar que sia reduzit, e no tarde aquela reduzir, quar si es tardada, le loc es apostemat e fort leu am aquo es fayta dificil la reduccio de dislocaccio.	 Therefore when a dislocation occurs, the doctors must act quickly to reduce it and prevent delays in reduction, or if delayed, the joint will be immobilized and difficult to reduce the dislocation.
E per aysso no cove que sia maugut ni stendut en la hora de la apostemacio, quar motas veguadas fa venir spasme e dolors ledentz.	 Therefore you should not also make mistakes in the moment of application to avoid cramps and pains from occurring.
Mays quan aquo accideys, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la flaubotomia del malaute, e aprop sia layssat entro que repause le apostema; e aprop le membre sia embrocat am aygua cauda e oli, e aprop sia reduzit am facilitat.	 When this occurs the doctors recommend you to apply pressure on the gouty joint with a caustic paste and wait until it stops the bleeding; after that they should soak the member in warm water and oil and reduce the pain with ease.
E tot membre sia curat am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra en son loc.	 When every part of the body is affected by cold humors, causing pain in the feet
E yeu ja e ordenatz les capitols de dislocacio segon que es precedit en fractura; de la partida del cos pus sobirana entro a la partida pus dejos.	 Once the bones have been dislocated as described above, move on to the next step of restoring the body's alignment
Capitol .xxiiii.	 The fourteenth sentence in the medical treatise.
De curacio de dislocacio de la mandibula dejos.	 From the care for dislocation of the lower jaw.
So dislocadas las doas mandibulas si no tart; e la dislocacio de amdos es fayta segon una de dos manieyras: que o son remaugudas de lurs locs per pauca remocio, e so mollificadas un petit; o so dislocadas per entiera dislocacio e complida, entro que sian mollificadas a la partida de la junctura entro que corro saliva del malaute e que no puesca tenir aquela ni puesca claure la sua boca, e la lengua de lu sia envolopada en sa paraula.	 The lower jaw can be dislocated either way: either by making it loose so that it can be pulled out with little force and then relaxed back into its normal position or by dislocating it completely before relaxing the muscles involved in order to prevent saliva from leaking out, and keep the tongue inside the mouth.
Mays quan la dislocacio de lu es pauca, lahoras en las majors disposicios retorna per si an pauca causa.	 If the dislocation is mild, then pain returns when it is re-dislocated again, unless another force is used to prevent the recurrence of pain
Mays si la dislocacio es entiera e complida, lahoras cove que sia administrada reduccio de lu leugierament, e no sia tardada de tot.	 If it is dislocated and complete then the pain relief must be immediate otherwise it will not work properly
E es que·l ministre tengua le cap del malaute, e entrometa lo metge le dit pous de la una sieua ma en la razit de la dislocacio de la mandibula dedintz la boca de lu, si la dislocacio es de la una part; o que entrometa les sieus dos pouzes ensemps, si la dislocacio es de doas partz, e les autres ditz de las mas de lu sian defora am les quals enguale; e comanda al malaute que cesse las suas mandibulas e absolva aquelas anar de quascuna partida; e le metge engualhe la mandibula e enpellisca la mandibula entro que retorne al sieu loc.	 The minister should hold the patient's head, and have a doctor put one hand in each corner of the mouth to prevent dislocation of the lower jaw on one side; or if it is dislocated from both sides, then doctors put their two fingers inside the mouth at the point closest to them, and command the patient to close his jaw and relax all the muscles.
E si dificil es la reducio de lu, e majorment si amdos las mandibulas so essemps dislocadas, lahoras aministra evoporacio am aygua cauda e oli, entro que sia fayta leugiera la reduccio de amdos e no tardes la reduccio de amdos de tot, ayssi quo havem dit.	 When the reduction of it is difficult and if the jaw muscles are also dislocated, then pains will be accompanied by swelling in the head as well, hence doctors say
E donc cum retornam e so engualadas, e es clausa la boca del malaute e no es mollificada, lahoras pausa sobre aquelas polvils de drap am cerot, e sia fayt de cera e oli rozat; e aprop sia liat am facilitat am liamens mols.	 And when returning and the jaws are clamped shut, then do not relax the mouth of the patient's hand and make it loose, hold them over these powder puffs from beneath the cloth in front, and if they feel wet; as a result, you should facilitate the movement of the limbs.
E sia le dormir del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e·l cap de lu sia stant entre dos aurelhes, per so que no maugue aquel a la partida dreyta ni a la sinistra; e no li fassas per forsa masteguar alcuna causa; habans la sieua vianda sia forbicio leon, entro que quan las dolors sian remaugudas e las mandibulas so nozadas, lahoras maugue aquo que vol.	 And place the patient's head between two supports, so that neither side will be too upright or too supine; and do not perform any other actions except for what is necessary; as their own desire begins, when pain subsides and the jaw muscles cease to hurt, doctors say they may proceed with this.
E aquo sia aministrat am facilita, e no trebalhe sobre la apercio de la boca deves la comestio e beure e ocitatio, entro que la mandibula sia nozada e sanada.	 And when administering it is to facilitate and do not disturb the opening of the patient's mouth in eating, drinking or speaking, as long as the jaw muscle is at rest and healed.
E si es dificil la reduccio de duas mandibulas quan so dislocadas en alcuna hora e no so convertidas als lors locs, lahoras motas veguadas accideysso febres e soda assidua, e fort leu es alerguat le ventre del malaute, e fort leu e vomeys colera pura.	 And if the reduction of both jaws is difficult when dislocated at any time and not converted to its place in a short time, then doctors will vomit with feverish heat and acidity, and the stomach of the patient may be filled with bitter and sour bile.
E quan tu vezes aquo, lahoras sapias que es perdicio; e motas veguadas mor aquel al qual accideys aquo en x dias.	 When you do this, doctors will know that it is gout.
Capitol .xxv.	 Chapter 25
De reduccio de la dislocacio de la furcula e de la extremitat del muscle.	 Reduction of dislocation of the shoulder and arm extremity.
Furcula no es dislocada del latz dedintz per la sua continuacio am le pietz; e alcunas veguadas es dislocada a la partida defora, e aquo es declarat al sentiment.	 The furcula is not dislocated by staying in place and continuing with the chest movements, except for some cases where it may be necessary to remove it altogether due to the pain.
E la restauracio de lu es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos e extenda les sieus brasses.	 The restoration of this involves placing him on his back and extending his arms.
E aprop coarta le loc am la tua palma am fort coartacio, quar ela retornara.	 And apply a sharp cautery with your hand near the location to return it.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre e pulvils e strenh aquela.	 And place your hand over that area and powder and strengthen that.
Mays la extremitat de aquel que siec le coyde e·s continuat am aquel, no es dislocada en alcun dia; lahoras cove que sia reduzida e engualhada segon que havem dit e segon que es a tu aparelhat.	 The extremity of that person will not be dislocated as long as they keep moving it without being dislocated in any day, doctors say to reduce and tighten the joints afterwards.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre, e pulvils, e extrictura, e comanda al malaute adherir a trenquilitat e a repaus entro que sia sanat.	 And place your hand over that area, powder and strengthen it, commanding the patient to maintain stillness and rest as long as they are healthy.
E am aquesta meteyssa curacio es reduzida la extremita del muscle quan es separada del sieu loc.	 The reduction of dislocation in this situation is reduced for the arm when separated from its location.
Capitol .xxvi.	 Chapter 26
De la reduccio de la dislocacio del muscle.	 Reduction of dislocation of a limb.
Sapias que·l muscle no es dislocat sino segon tres manieras, de las quals es la una que sia dislocat a la partida del titillic a la partida dejos.	 You will know that the muscle is not dislocated unless it is dislocated in three ways; and one of them is when it is dislocated at both ends simultaneously.
E la segonda es que sia dislocat a la partida desus del muscle, e aquo es fayt tart; e no es dislocat a las partidas detras per la spalla; e no es dislocat a las partidas denant per les nervis.	 "The second thing is that it is dislocated from the part of the muscle itself, and this can be treated with cold; but if it is dislocated behind the shoulder, or between the nerves, then warm water must be applied.
E majorment es dislocat e defora eyssit a las partidas dejos deves le titillic, e majorment en aquels dels quals las carns son paucas, leugierament es dislocat; mays en aquels en les quals so motas carns, es eyssit fora am dificultat.	 "Moreover, if it is dislocated in the areas where bones are scarce, then it may be treated more easily; but if it is in the areas where fat tissue is abundant, this can be difficult.
E fort leu accideys ad alcus homes percussio o cazement, e le muscle de lu es apostemat de apostema caut, e es cujat per aquo que ja sia dislocat.	 "If light blows strike and the joint itself is pierced by a sharp point, the muscle of that joint may be treated with cautery.
Adonc cove que tu sproes aquo entro que estias sobre-sertetut de lu, e lahoras procesiscas en la curacio de lu.	 "After you have applied this ointment, then proceed to massage the affected area gently and carefully.
E es conoguda la dislocacio de lu quan es a las partidas dejos deves le titillic; per so que distingescas entre le muscle dislocat e·l muscle sa, quar tu atrobas entre aquels diversitat manifesta; e atrobas en le cap del muscle concavitat e dejos le titillic deves le tocament del cap del muscle ayssi quo un huou, e al malaute no pot redusir la sua ma a la sieua aurelha, ni maure aquela per totz movementz.	 "The dislocation is distinguished when it occurs in the parts where bones are thin, so that you distinguish between the dislocated muscle and the non-dislocated one, by looking at the differences displayed; and touch only the head of the concave part of the muscle to prevent injury to the other part.
Si es dislocat deves le pietz o ensus, e tu lahoras atrobas manifest tocament, e no es amaguat.	 "If it is dislocated, you must apply a cushion or support and proceed carefully; otherwise injuries may occur.
E de aquesta dislocacio es fayta leugiera reduccio quan es fresca e le malaute es enfant.	 When there's a dislocation that comes from a coldness and the patient is young.
E la reduccio de lu es que·l ministre eleva la ma de lu a las partidas desus; e aprop pause les tieus pouses dejos le titillic de lu, e eleva la junctura am fortaleza en sus al sieu loc, e·l ministre eleva la ma de lu, e extenda aquela en sus; e aprop pausa aquela dejos quar ela retorna leugierament.	 The reduction of it is to raise the patient's hand towards the sides, and place a pillow under their thigh, another on the chest, and hold onto them with one hand while extending that into his/her side. And when they return from the relief attempt, do so gently.
Mays si per aquo que havem dit no retorna, e so del comensament que accidic la dislocacio, motz dias, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia banhat en aygua cauda e sia aministrada enbrocacio que mollifique e liniesca ayssi cum si so coytz razitz de altea, e fenugrec, e melillot en aygua, e sia administrada.	 If the patient has said that they are allergic to fish oil or flaxseed and you want them to avoid these as part of their treatment, then it means: if so, do not return; instead start by attempting dislocation, which may cause pain days later with swelling and lines in the urine, and be administered.
E aprop le malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu dos e sia pausat dejos le titillic de lu espera de lana que sia engual entre levitat e strictura, e aprop le metge pause le sieu talo sobre la spera, e eleva le cap del muscle am vertut, e atire la ma del malaute per que no sia mauguda a las partidas dejos, e autre ministre tengua le cap del malaute, que no sia maugut a las partidas dejos, quar aquela tantost retorna al sieu loc.	 Have the patient lay flat on their back and place a cushion under their head to prevent it from falling off when trying to reduce; then have the doctor put his/her hand over their chest for support while stretching, holding down their elbow so that it does not move up or out of position during the reduction attempt. Then have the surgeon hold onto their head to prevent it from moving around as they reduce and return it back into place afterwards.
E si voles, reduzeys aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu fassas esser prezent un home le qual sia pus lonc que·l malaute, e estia de la part de aquel latz, e entrometa le sieu muscle dejos le titillic del malaute e eleve le titillic de lu a las partidas desus entro que·l malaute sia suspendut en ayre, e autre ministre tire la ma del malaute de las partidas dejos del sieu ventre.	 If you want to reduce it in this way: and if the patient is not very strong or has difficulty moving their arm at all, have the surgeon enter through the muscle of their thigh into their buttocks crease where they are suspended by the surgeon's hand; then another attendant holds down their elbow.
Mays si le malaute es leugier, lahoras cove que am lu que autre causa sia suspenduda, per so que grave aquel, quar la dislocacio retorna tantost.	 When the patient lies down, it means that other causes of pain are suspended, in order to avoid injury and return the joint as quickly as possible.
E es reduzit eysament segon autra manieyra: e es que sia ficat en terra un fust lonc le cap del qual sia redon de figura, ayssi cum pilo de mortier, que no sia gros ni subtil, e aprop sia pausat dejos le malaute; pus que so pausatz sobre·l cap del fust draps leons, e·l malaute sia stant segon la longitut del fust, e aprop sia extenduda la ma de lu a las partidas dejos del autra part; e sia extendut le cos de lu del autre part am fortaleza, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	 When the patient lies down on another cushion that has no head nor pillow, so that it is covered by the head of their chest and placed in a way such that their feet are longer than their body parts, then place both hands over the part where they will be standing or sitting to keep them from falling.
E si es dificil reduccio de lu per totas las causas que havem ditas, lahoras usa de aquesta cura: e es que tu prenguas un fust la quantitat del qual sia en le lonc de dos brasses, e latitut de aquel sia de quatre ditz, e la grossetut de lu sia aleujat en le preon del tittilic segon aquesta forma:	 If it is difficult to reduce them due to all the causes mentioned above, then doctors use this cure. It involves placing a cushion with dimensions of two fists long and four inches in length on their chest.
E aprop sobre le cap redon sian liatz drap leons per so que·l fust no ledesca le malaute.	 Then place the cushion over their head such that it does not slip off from them.
E aprop sia pausat dejos le titillic del malaute, e sia extenduda la ma o le bras sobre·l fust entro a las partidas dejos, e sia liat le fust sobre le adjutori e le bras e la extremitat de la ma.	 Then place the cushion over their shoulders and let both hands and arms rest on it as well, and put the cushion over their head, body, and arm as well.
Aprop sia pausat le bras sobre un scalo de scala segon la latitut, e la ma sia extenduda a las partidas dejos, e l’autre cos sia suspendut de l’autre part, quar la junctura intra tantost.	 Then place both hands on a scale at height level and let one hand rest on the other side while holding the other arm steady to prevent any further movement of the joint.
E cum le intrament de lu es complit segon quascuna maniera que es a tu possibla, e lahoras cove que tu pauses dejos le titillic spera de lana de engual quantitat; e aprop pauza emplastre perparat de polvera de moli am enses e album de huou sobre tot le muscle, ayssi quo es revolvut desus, e aprop strenh dejos le titillic am strictura decent; e le liament sia revolvut sobre le emplastre, e la ma de lu sia annectida al col de lu, e sia leyssat, e no sia mauguda la ma de lu per vii dias.	 "The patient is positioned flat on their back with a cushion placed between the thighs and another servant on each leg. The hands of one of them are held over the area to prevent the intestines from coming out.
E cove que sia pausada la vianda del malaute pauca, entro que·l membre sia confortat, quar es pus leugier a la sanacio de lu.	 "The servant pauses slightly and comforts the patient's foot as it is put to bed or in another place for treatment.
E aprop la vianda sia donada major aprop vii o v e sia exercitat un movement; e donc si es fermat e no es mollificat, lahoras ja es sanat.	 "The servant holds the patient's hand firmly and exercises it gently or with movements, as desired by the patient.
Mays si la junctura es dislocada motas veguadas per humiditat que accideys a lu o per autra causa, lahoras cove que en aquela sia administrat cauteri am tres traucs, segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri.	 "If the joint is dislocated due to heat or another cause, then the servant applies three trephans after saying it in the chapter of trephination.
E si tot aysso es fayt e aprop vii dias es desliat le liament e la junctura no es fermada, e le emplastre e la strictura son reduzitz sobre lu alcunas veguadas, e no es fermada e catz e no pot elevar aquel bras a las partidas desus, lahoras sapias que·ls nervis de lu, les quals so al cap del muscle, ja so inscizes o extendutz o mollificatz, e sapia que la junctura nul temps no sira ficada en loc sieu.	 "If the body or joint is not completely flat and rigid after days of attempts to straighten it, then loosen up and relax any tension in the muscles as much as possible, knowing that the nerve endings will be cut off if tightened for too long.
De la dislocacio de aquela qu’es fayta deves le pietz e la mamilha o las partidas detras, la reduccio es fayta am impulcio e extencio am las mas, entro que retorne.	 When one suffers from dislocation of the joints and itches in the breasts or behind them, then the treatment is to apply a cautery with the fingers and extract the pain as much as possible inside those parts, until it returns
E sia administrada en aquela l’autra strictura, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	 Then administer another remedy, and cure that one so that it is cured
E si accideys aprop la sanacio gravitat en le membre e tarditat en le movement de lu, lahoras le malaute uze de banh motas veguadas entro que aquela gravitat sia alleujada e que retorne a la natura de lu primiera.	 If an abscess forms in the member and delays its movements, then doctors will resort to making a hole in order to drain it quickly and return it to its natural state.
Capitol .xxvii.	 The end of the text.
De curacio de dislocacio del coyde.	 Treatment for dislocation of joints.
Sapias que la junctura del coyde es dislocada am difficultat e semblantment retorna am difficultat; e aquela es dislocada a totas partidas, e majorment a la partida denant a la partida detras, e la dislocacio de lu no es amaguada a tu quar es cazent dejos le vezement o dejos le tocament segon qualque figura sia dislocat, e quan ajustes le coyde disloguat am le sa, aquo es a tu declarat manifestament, quar la junctura es concavada e no pot doblar le bras, ni tocar am aquel le sieu muscle.	 If the joint is dislocated with difficulty and accompanied by pain, and if it is also dislocated on all sides of itself, in front and behind, and cannot be corrected even when you straighten out its cavity, then this is a clear indication that the joint has become concave and is unable to bend or touch any part of itself.
E cove que·t coytes, e reduzescas la dislocacio tantost denant que vengua a lu apostema caut, quar si ve a lu apostema caut, dificil es la reduccio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot; e majorment quan es a las partidas detras, quar pus mala es de totas las autras specias de dislocacio, e de major dolor, e motas veguadas deyssen am aquela la mort.	 It is said that when the joint is dislocated and reduces it to touch against its own curvature, as if you were touching with a hot cautery; but if you touch it with a cold one, it will be difficult to reduce it, because frost weakens everything; and most of all when dislocations are behind, more severe are they than those that precede them, and great pain is endured until death.
E la restauracio de lu, quan es aquela que es possibla reduzir, es que la ma de lu sia extenduda am doas mas, e le bras de lu sia expandut, e las mas del metge sian sobre le coyde e dejos lu, e el empellisca la junctura am les pouzes de las suas mas ensemps, o am la razit de la sua palma entro que torne en son loc.	 "The treatment is to be done when it's possible to reduce the swelling by extending the hand of the patient two fingers and expanding their arm, with the doctor's attendants supporting his elbow from behind while holding him in a strong grip at the wrist.
Mays si la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras retorna ayssi que dobla la ma am la sua ma, entro que percuta le coyde am la razit de la sua palma.	 "If the dislocation occurred in the hand while grasping it with both hands and cutting at the wrist joint.
E si la dislocacio no obezeys a la reduccio, lahoras aministra vehement extencio e mot fort.	 "If there is no reduction possible then administer strong and vigorous massage therapy.
E es que dos ministres extendan le bras, e tenguan aquel eyssament dos ministres per so que no sia remaugut deves la extencio.	 "Two attendants will extend the patient's arm and hold it in that way to prevent any sudden movements during the massage.
E aprop sia revolvut le bras deves tota part, pus que es envolopat drap doblat lonc sobre la ma de lu, o liament.	 "Turn around their arm so you have complete control over it and wrap a bandage tightly around their hand to prevent further movement.
E quant le metge toca la junctura am la sua ma, unte aquela am alcun oli per so que aquo sia aquelas causas las quals ajudan en lubricitat de la junctura am facilitat; e aprop empellesca la junctura am empulcio vehement entro que retorne.	 "When the doctor touches the joint with their hand, apply some oil to that area so this will help reduce friction and make it easier to move around; and when you return his grip, do so forcefully.
E aprop la reduccio de lu cove que sia pausat sobre aquela empastre en le qual sia stipticitat e excequacio am album de huou, e sia extrenhut am strictura descent, e·l bras sia suspendut del col, e sia layssat per alcus dias.	 "Place a cushion on top of the area where there is stiffness and discomfort from standing for long periods, extend it gently but firmly while holding your arm still; put your hand back down after some days.
E aprop sia desliat; e donc si la junctura es formada en le sieu loc, lahoras tu deslia le liament de lu e layssa aquela.	 When a joint is formed in that place, the pain of it shall subside
E si vezas la junctura no be strenher, lahoras tu itera le emplastre e·l liament, e layssa aquela per alcus dias entro que sia extrenhuda; e aprop deslia aquela.	 If the joint becomes stronger, then you should remove the bandage and let time take its course over a period of several days until it is healed, and afterward put that back in place.
Mays si accideys a lu gravitat aprop la reduccio de la junctura, e la disposicio de lu es en movement, lahoras aministra humectacio en banh e fricacio subtil, e comprecio, entro que sia aleujat; o pausa sobre la junctura aleliati, so es coyssa de moto grassa; e aprop sia liada, e layssa aquela sobre le os le dia e la nueyt.	 If the joint becomes heavy and stiff due to the reduction of its circulation or movement, then it is customary for doctors to administer moist heat by applying a compress soaked in damp cloth and friction, as well as providing relief with rest from the joint, so that the stiffness may be alleviated; but if any pain occurs, do not apply anything.
E aprop osta aquela, e met aquel en banh; e quan suza, lahoras tu fregua la junctura am fricacio temprada, e aprop itera sobre aquela aleliati, so es ronhonal de moto, una veguada, e la segonda, e la .iii.a.,	 After that, place the bandage back on; and when you feel it should be removed due to pain or stiffness in the joint, then apply friction gently with a cloth over it, so as not to make things worse and prevent further injury, except for:
am intrament de banh, entro que sia linit.	 If the bandage is wet from sweat or moisture on your hands
E si voles, pausa sobre aquela fenda de vaca humida e scalfada am boder e stren sobre aquel; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas, quar aquela es humida e reduzeys a la sua disposicio.	 If you wish to do so, pause over the damp and rough surface of that bandage on your body as well as remove any moisture from it to maintain its effectiveness.
Capitol .xxviii.	 Chapter 28th
De curacio de dislocacio de malassen, so es de la junctura que es entre·l bras e la ma.	 The cure for dislocation of the shoulder is between the arm and the body.
Malassen de la ma alcunas vetz es deslocada, e la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es leugiera, e·l contrari es de las autras juncturas, mays empero cove que sia velocitat en la reduccio de lu en la hora en la qual es deslocada, denant que le loc sia apostemat o que accida en lu apostema caut.	 When the joints are dislocated and the reduction of this dislocation is necessary, however quickly it must be done as soon as possible to avoid any further dislocations.
E la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es que tu pauses la junctura de la ma del malaute sobre una taula e le ministre extenda la ma de aquel, e le metge pause la sua ma o o la sua palma sobre la iminencia de la junctura, e empellisca aquela entro que retorne al sieu loc.	 The reduction of the dislocation requires you to place the patient's arm on a table and have one hand extended towards it, while another hand holds down their arm or palm to prevent them from pulling out.
Mays empero cove que sia considerat si la palma ja es ostada al ventre de la ma, lahoras le malaute pause le dos de la sua ma sobre una taula deves la extencio e la reduccio; e si la dislocacio es precedent deves le dos de la ma, lahoras sia la posicio de la ma de aquel intrinicequement sobre la taula, per so que la ma del metge caja sobre aquela iminencia de la junctura.	 If the arm is already positioned on the patient's abdomen and the reduction needs to be done there, have one of the doctor's hands extend towards it while another holds down their arm or palm in place over a table so that the doctor's hand can rest upon the area near the joint.
E donc si retorna tantost, bon es; e sino, lahoras strenh aquela am empastre cedant le apostema e layssa aquel; e no iteres aquo, quar sino, no soferta ni no podes sobre la reduccio de lu pus que passan a lu dias.	 Well then, good luck and if not, have the doctor squeeze that arm while trying to hold down their hand or palm in place with another hand over the table otherwise it is better not to do this as it may cause more harm than good in the long run
Mays empero la junctura roman segon la sua tortuositat; e no notz al malaute alcuna causa, sino que la ma es mollificada e no pot strenher alcuna causa; lahoras sapias que les nervis son trincatz o trissatz, e lahoras no es engen en lu sino que sia strenhuda am cauteri prop le cazament de lu e fort leu aquo confereys alcuna causa.	 If the joint is too curved or there's no cause to reduce it, have the doctor soften their hand or palm and not attempt any further force as doing so may harm them more than help.
Donc cum malassem es retornada, lahoras pausa sobre lu empastre le qual havem recomtat, e sia layssat e strenhut per v dias; e aprop sia desliat e sia layssat e la ma de lu sia excercitada.	 When the ailment is over, pause above the chest that we recommended earlier, and lay it down gently with both hands stretched out to prevent any damage.
Mays si le movement de lu es ostat e accideys en lu alcuna gravitat, lahoras leniys aquela am aygua cauda e am fricacio alcunas veguadas, entro que sia alleujat.	 If the movement is over and it occurs in any gravity of the body, the doctor will loosen up that part gently with warm water and friction to try to release it.
Capitol .xxix.	 The next sentence does not have a number following it.
De la curacio de dislocacio dels ditz.	 Of the joint pain treatment.
Alcunas veguadas so dislocatz les ditz a tota partida.	 Some of these remedies loosen up joints completely.
E quan es dislocat alcun dit de aquels al dos de la palma o al ventre de lu, lahoras sten le dit e impelleys la dislocacio de lu am les tieus pouses, entro que retorne.	 If a joint is dislocated in the palm of the hand or belly area, then the doctor will tighten it and try to prevent the dislocation from occurring again, unless it returns naturally.
E aprop sostenta le cap del dit, e suspen aquel deves la part a la qual es dislocat, e layssa aquel per dos dias.	 Then hold that finger down firmly at the location where it is dislocated and place something to rest against the area for two days.
E aprop suspen aquel e exten aquel entro que dreyt sia engualhat en aquel sieu dia.	 Then, after two days, release it gently but firmly without delay, holding on until the next day.
E quan sira noyt, lia aquel segon aquela narracio, e no cesses desliar aquel en le dia e exercitar am movement, e lia aquel en la noyt; e fay aquo per alcus dias entro que sia streyt.	 If necessary, loosen it the next day and do not try to perform any movements with it that day or for a few days afterwards.
E fay semblant am aquo, si es dislocat al ventre de la ma, e lia aquel ad aquela partida e fay am aquo la tieua primiera operacio, entro que sia sanat.	 If the joint is dislocated in one hand's belly area, then hold it tightly and perform your first operation on that day, making sure to heal well after that.
E semblantment fay am aquo quan es dislocat a las autres partidas.	 When you are dislocated from other joints
Capitol .xxx.	 In that case, as when you are dislocated from other joints
De la curacio de dislocacio dels spondils del dos.	 With regard to dislocations of the back bones (vertebrae).
Quan accideys ad alcun dels spondils del dos o del col dislocacio complida, e so remaugutz motz spondils de lors locs, lahoras en aquela no es curacio, quar la mort se coyta al malaute.	 If any of the back bones or the neck bone (atlas) is dislocated completely and cannot be repositioned, then pain will not cease until death occurs to the patient.
E senhal de aquo es que la egestio del malaute es fora-eyssida ses voluntat, e no pot retenir aquela; e motas veguadas so mollificatz alcus membres de lu o doas cambas de lu o dos brasses de lu, o un de aquels; o es remaugut un spondil de son loc, quar motas veguadas es remaugut e motas veguadas es fayta la remocio de aquels a quatre partidas.	 If the patient wants to vomit (to induce vomiting), but cannot hold it back and it is not possible; and if you try to force one of the organs out through another, for example the stomach into the intestines, or one bone into another, then you will be unable to do this again.
Donc aquela ja es remauguda a las partidas detras e es nompnada gelbozitat.	 Therefore, the pain has spread back there and is no longer bearable.
Mays la curacio de lu es que lahoras consideras si la gelbozitat accidey de puerissia, quar lahoras en aquela no es curacio ni de aquela no es sanacio de tot.	 The cure for him may be to consider whether he has put poison into his body that the pain is not curable or not healing at all.
Mays en aquela que ve per cazement o per percussio o per semblant ad aquels, ja diyssero les Antics las manieras de curacio am sermo prolixs, del qual lo mays retorna am profieyt; mays yeu ja e abreujat de aquel del qual lo pauc escusa del trop de lu, per la mieua propinquitat a la entencio mieua exposicio, am la qual he aquo expausat et format ex instrument divers de aquel am le qual mostrero aquo e espausero aquel.	 You might try to apply cold or heat (perhaps by wrapping in ice), percussion (hitting the affected area with a mallet) or pressure point application, as ancient cures were lengthy and complex; but if you have applied this method without effect through long use of that remedy for him, because his pain is caused from some other part of his body near to where he has been applying it.
E dic que en gelbosita que accideys de la partida denant en le pietz, no es engen ni sanacio de aquela; e semblantment en aquela que es fayta a dos latz.	 When joint pain occurs while walking on rough terrain without rest or relief and the patient is not improved by treatment, it indicates that two joints are affected.
E de aquelas no es curada sino aquela que accideys en le dos propriament am aquo que yeu recomti.	 It is customary to advise them in such cases as there may be a gout of the feet.
E es que·l malaute sia extendut sobre la sua cara sobre pug engual prop de paret, e sia extendut dejos lu esturment molh per so que no sia lidit le pietz de lu.	 It is customary for the patient to lie on their back with their head elevated above a pillow or mattress in order to prevent fluid from collecting in their chest and causing pain.
E aprop un fust dreyt sia pausat, ficat en la terra en la extremitat del pug entorn le cap de lu, e autra fust en aviro les pes de lu en l’autra extremitat del pueg.	 The cushion is placed in front of the patient's head and also beneath their feet to support them while lying flat on the ground near their head.
E·l ministre tengua le fust, e no sia fermat en fossa; e autre ministre tengua l’autre segon aquela forma.	 The minister shall hold the cushion in one hand and not rest it in a hole or cavity.
E aprop envolopa sobre le cap del malaute e dejos les titillic liamen leon ferm; e exten la extremitat del liamel al fust le qual es deves le cap de lu, e lia aquel en lu; e aprop strenh l’autre liament sobre las ancas de lu les denols de lu, e deves las cambas de lu; e aprop ajusta totz les liamentz e lia aquels en l’autre fust le qual es deves les pes de lu.	 The cushion should be placed on the patient's head and also beneath their feet to prevent their head from becoming flat or tilted, and place one of them beneath their legs so they are supported by both hands while lying flat on the ground near their head.
E aprop le ministre cascu extenda le liament a la partida del fust, e no sian remaugutz les dos fustz e les liamentz dels sieus locs en les quals son ficatz, mays empero no so fermatz ayssi cum havem dit.	 The minister should extend the cushion to cover as much of the patient's body from head to feet as possible without covering their legs at the same time, unless they are instructed otherwise by medical professionals.
E le metge pause las suas palmas sobre le spondil am fortaleza entro que retorne, o que pause sobre aquela una taula, e aprop que ajuste sobre la taula les sieus pes entro que retorne.	 When a doctor has placed his hands on the patient's back and chest to return, or to place them on the table when returning.
Mays si no retorna per aquesta forma, lahoras pren una taula de la qual la latitut o la longitut sia en aviro de tres brassas, e cava en la paret de la qual havem dit que es prop le malaute un loc en le qual intre la extremitat de la taula.	 If this method does not return or the patient is in a different location from where they were placed on the table, then doctors take a table whose length and width are three paces long.
E aprop pausa la maytat de la taula sobre le spondilh, e·l metge pause les sieus pes sobre l’autre extremitat, e estrenha be entro que le spondil sia coartat e que retorne al sieu loc.	 The doctor places the mattress on the back and then moves the patient's legs over to that location where they were placed on the table.
E si tu voles, obre am torn le qual es revolvut am la ma; e es que tu fiques en terra deves le cap del malaute en le derier del pug dos fustz, la longitut dels quals sia d’un bras, e deves le cap de lu en le derier del pug eyssament dos fustz; e sia la longitut que es entre quascun fust un palm, e ja es fayt en quascun fust trauc en le qual corr torn, e quascun sia mot fermat en terra per so que no sia maugut.	 If you wish to lie down and are lying on the ground with your feet facing each other at a distance of one arm's length, place the head towards the back with its own fist two fists apart, such that there is a space between each fist and they should be firmly placed on the ground so that it does not move.
E sia mes un fust redon en le qual es le torn, e sia revolvut en les dos traucs dels dos fustz.	 If you want to make a fist in each hand and then close your fists tightly together.
E en la extremitat de lu es un trauc en le qual es format le fust, la longueza del qual es un palm am aquo que es revolvut; e en les dos autres fustz es semblant de aquel.	 In the extremity of them is a fist that fits into one's hand where it is rotated, and in the other two fists are similar to this.
E aprop strenh les liamentz que has streyt en le pietz del malaute en le trau le qual es deves le cap de lu, e les liamentz que has streyts en las coyssas de lu en le torn le qual es deves les pes de lu.	 When you have stretched the restraints that were placed on the patient's chest and back in order to prevent his head from moving about freely, stretch the restraints that are around her thighs and legs so as to allow them to move easily
E aprop deves quascun torn e stia un ministre que torssa le torn am la sua ma, e le metge engualhe le spondil segon que havem dit.	 After placing a cushion under them, the surgeon will assist you in lifting their arms and legs so that they can move easily
E aquesta es la forma del torn:	 Here is how to do it:
E aprop pus que le spondil es retornat, e le loc es engualhat, lahoras cove que pauses empastre exciccatiu am album de huou, e aprop estopa; e aprop pause sobre le empastre astela de taula de la qual la latitut sia de tres ditz o enviro aquels, e la longitut de lu sia quantitat que prengua le loc de la gelbositat, e sobre la partida del spondil sa.	 After returning the intestine to its cavity and placing your hand over it, wait for a stinging pain that will let you know: once there is a sharp pain, stop.
E aprop sia liat am liament le qual havem dit, e uze le malaute de nutriment subtil entro que sia sanat.	 After you have tightened the restraint as described earlier, ensure that it is not too tight and cause discomfort to your patient.
E si roman alcuna iminencia en le loc en la fi de la sanacio, lahoras cove que sian aministradas medicinas que moilifico e liniscan am aministracio de la taula per lonc temps, la qual havem recomtada; e ja es aministrada en aquel loc lamina de plom.	 If there is an imminent danger to the patient's health during or after treatment, administer medications that can provide relief and be administered continuously for a certain period of time as recommended by doctors; and once administered in this location, apply ointment made from garlic.
E alcunas veguadas accideys imminencia en le derier dels spondils del dos, e es cujat per aquela dislocacio; e es aquel os le qual ja imineys per que no cove que sia fayta prosompcio a lu am aquesta medicina, quar fort leu fara a tu accidir mort.	 Some veins in the back of the patient's head may burst open as a result of this dislocation; and if they burst through without being treated promptly with this medicine, it would be fatal for you to administer it.
Capitol .xxxi.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customary called gout by doctors.
De curacio de anca dislocada.	 To correct dislocation
Sapias que la junctura del ancha e la junctura del muscle no endeve sino dislocacio tant solament, e no accideys ad aquelas aquo que accideys a las autras juncturas de petita remocio e concavitat.	 Joint dislocation occurs only when the joint of the tendon and that of the muscle are not dislocated simultaneously, but rather it happens to those in small recess or hollow joints.
E la junctura de la ancha es dislocada segon quatre manieyras, quar es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, o a las partidas defora, o a las partidas denant, o a las partidas detras.	 The joint of the tendon is dislocated when four times are applied: if it occurs at the points in front, or to the rear, on either side, above, below, etc.
E majorment es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, e pauc a las partidas denant o a las partidas detras.	 The dislocation happens more commonly at the front part of the joint and less often at the back or sides.
E senhal de la dislocacio de lu a las partidas de dintz es quar, quan tu ajustas la camba del malaute sana am la malaute, es pus longua e·l denolh es pus heminent que de la sana, e·l malaute no pot doblar le sieu pe deves le lenguonar, e es le loc que siec le lengonar apostemat de apostema caut, per so que·l cap de la coyssa ja es pervengut aqui.	 When the dislocation of the patient occurs at the front part four times in a row when you adjust the cushion of the patient, it is long and will be necessary to loosen the bandage from above as necessary to prevent its head from coming out, so that the top of the pouch has already been put here.
E·l senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio es a las partidas defora, es que les accidentz de lu so contraris ad aquest accident.	 The event which occurs at the front part four times in a row is contrasted with the opposite event: when it happens on the back side of the joint, then the accidents to it are opposed to this one.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas denant es quar expan la camba sieua segon compliment, mays empero no dobla aquela ses dolor que es en le denol, e si se perforsa ad anar e no pot sobre aquo a las partidas denant; e la urina de lu es retenguda e l’engonar de lu es apostemat, e deves la ambulacio de lu sobre le talo.	 When the dislocation happens at the back part four times in a row and it is accompanied by pain that occurs at the point below: you must stretch out his leg second time to relieve this pain which is located there; urine of him will be retained, and breathing of him will be impeded, so you need to support him on his side.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas detras es que no expande le denol, ni no puesca doblar aquel denant que doble le engonar, e la camba de lu es pus breva que l’autra, e l’engonar es mollificat, e·l cap de la coyssa es deves aquel loc.	 The first sentence translates to: "It is necessary for the person who suffers a dislocation behind their back to prevent it from expanding nor forcing it to bend so that its companion does not straighten up and the leg's ankle may be short, the other end of it will remain soft.
Mays reduccio de las specias de aquesta dislocacio es que tu consideras, lahoras, si la dislocacio es vetusta et antiqua, que ja es anticada am le havent aquela aprop tu aministras reduccio de lu e roman segon la sua disposicio, lahoras no es en aquela curacio de tot; e adonc no cove que en aquela sia fayta prosompcio.	 The second sentence translates to: "The reduction of the joint caused by this dislocation is that you consider it, the doctor, if the dislocation is old and ancient, has already been treated as if a new one was occurring; and since then they do not expect any improvement.
Mays en aquel del qual la dislocacio es recent, e es una de las quatre specias de dislocacio, lahoras te coyta ad aquo que volvas la junctura e extendas aquela a las partidas dedintz e a las partidas defora, e mau aquela a la dextra e sinistra, quar fort leu retorna e no indigeys de autra cura.	 The third sentence translates to: "In that of which the dislocation is recent and one of the four types, you should try extending it towards both sides forwards and backwards, and move it from right to left; a lot will come out and nothing else will be needed.
Mays, si no retorna en aquesta manieyra, lahoras cove que tu prepares ministre fort e extendas la camba de lu de la partida pus dejos, o am las suas mas, o am liament lo qual es liat sobre la camba desus le denol; e autre ministre extenda la ma de aquel desus enayssi que meta las suas mas dejos les titillics de lu; e aprop strenha am liament leon sobre la razit de la coyssa, e tengua autre ministre ters le extremitat del liament.	 The fourth sentence translates to: "If it doesn't come out in this manner, the doctor should prepare strongly and extend the leg from its point towards both sides, or towards your left hand, place something soft above the ankle; another minister extends the hand of that on which it is located over the edge of the limb. Stretch hard.
E sia extencio de lu o de la partida dedintz a l’angonar a la partida de la furcula, o de la partida detras a la partida del dos.	 When it has been determined to make an incision in the abdomen or behind the ribs
E sia la extencio de totz aquels en una veguada entro que·l malaute sia elevat am le sieu cos de terra e que romangua pendent.	 The patient is placed on their back, and a hand is held to prevent them from falling
E aquesta specia de extencio es specia cominal a totas quatre.	 This special type of incision is common for all four sides.
E donc si la dislocacio retorna am aquo que havem dit, sira bo; e sino, lahoras es necessari a tota specia aquo que dire de la propria curacio.	 If the dislocation has been restored as we mentioned earlier, then it's good; otherwise, further special care is required to determine its cause.
En la reduccio de lu propria, quan es dislocada, e la dislocacio es a las partidas dedintz, cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu latz sa; e aprop pausa les liamentz sobre la razit de la coyssa en aquel loc le qual entre le cap de la coyssa e·l loc que es dejos le langonar; e aprop exten le liament en sus de la part del angonar a la pus auta partida de la furcula.	 In the reduction of the dislocation, when it is dislocated at the parts mentioned earlier, and if the patient has regained consciousness over their own chest area; and then place restraints on the head to prevent any movement that might lead to strangulation or suffocation between the chin part and another location where you put your hand.
E aprop autre ministre fort prengua les brasses de lu, e amerme le loc gros de la coyssa malaute e extenda a las partidas deforo per extencio vehement, quar aquela retorna en le sieu loc.	 Then further tighten the ropes and place your hand on the chest of the patient to prevent movement that might lead to strangulation or suffocation between their chin part and another location where you put your hand.
E aquesta specia es de pus leugiera curacio am la qual aquest membre es reduzit que las autres specias.	 This special type of care is easier than others for this member that has been reduced
Mays si es excusat sobre tu e no obezeys al entrament am aquesta specia de curacio de tot, lahoras cove que sian liatz les dos pes del malaute ensemps am liament fort, leugier, sobre amdos les talos e amdos les denols.	 If you excuse yourself and don't object to entering into this type of care for all, then hold the patient still by both feet tightly, lightly on one shoulder, and lightly on the other shoulder.
E sia la longitut de quascun de son par la quantitat de quatre ditz, e sia la camba malaute extenduda mays que l’autre per quantitat de dos ditz.	 When a joint has become swollen due to cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
E aprop le malaute sia suspendut sobre le cap del fust, e que sia en la mayso; e sia la longitut de lu de la terra la quantitat de dos brasses.	 Then hold down the patient's head and place it on a pillow, making sure to support its length with two bricks below.
E aprop comanda a un jove fort que minuesca le cap de la coyssa, e sia suspendut am le malaute autre jove, e l’autre jove minuent la coysa am fortaleza empellesca, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	 Then press down on a young man who has the power to move the head of the patient, and hold down his hand over the patient's body with another strong man, whose job is to support the joint as firmly as possible so that it returns to its place quickly.
Mays en la reducio propria, quan es dislocacio a la partida defora, cove que·l malaute jaga sobre pug segon que havem recomtat en le havent gelbozitat; e sia strenhut le liament sobre la camba malauta propriament e sobre le pietz de lu.	 Then reduce the pressure yourself when you dislocate the joint outside as mentioned earlier, and hold it down on both the patient's thigh and chest.
E aprop dos fustz sian pausatz, la un als pes de lu, e l’autre al cap; e aprop sian pausatz fustz ajustatz al mieg del pueg ficat sobre·l qual draps humitz sian envolopatz, per so que·l malaute no sia dampnajat per que·l fust sia entre las coyssas de lu, per que deves la extencio a las partidas dejos no sia atirat.	 Then place two cushions on either side of the patient's body, one over their abdomen and the other under their head; then cover them with wet cloths to prevent the gout from getting through any gap in between that might occur as they move around.
E aprop quascun ministre extenda a la sua part, e·l metge am la sua ma enguala la reduccio segon l’art.	 Then each minister extends his hand to his patient and the doctor places a reduction on it according to art.
Donc, si obezeys a revercio, sira bo grandament; e sino, pausa sobre aquela diligentment e ayssi quo havem dit en gelbozitat per aquela engualment.	 So if the patient is obese or overweight then there should be plenty of cushions to support them, and if not then gently place them on it as mentioned earlier.
Mays cove que·l malaute jagua sobre les sieus latz sa quetament.	 When a patient lies down on their back?
E quan la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras cove que la camba sia extenduda leugierament, e es segon aquesta meteyssa narracio sobre pueg; e le metge pause la palma de la sua ma dreyta sobre·l langonar malaute, e aprop coarte aquel am l’autra ma, e am aquela coartacio pausa aquel extendut a las partidas dejos a la partida del denol.	 When the dislocation is at the shoulder blade?
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas detras, lahoras no cove que·l malaute sia extendut a las partidas dejos, e es elevat sobre la terra; habantz cove que sia pausat sobre causa dura, ayssi cum cove le eyssament si l’ancha de lu es dislocada a las partidas defora, segon aquo que havem dit del jasement de lu sobre dos anchas; e es sobre la sua cara e les liamentz sian extendutz, segon que havem dit, no ha guayre.	 When the dislocation is at the shoulder blade?
E cove que sia aministrada compressio am taula sobre le loc al qual yeys la junctura.	 When pain occurs in the feet?
Donc cum la reducio es complida segon que cove — e·l senhal de la reduccio de lu no es amaguat a tu, e es que tu extendas del malaute doas cambas, e quan tu vezes aquelas enguals e le malaute extrenh la sieua camba e expandeys aquela ses excusacio, lahoras sapias que·l membre segon que cove es retornat — e lahoras tu ajusta doas coyssas e pausa empastre e extrenh am benda ayssi que la ancha no sia mauguda en alcuna de las partidas; e adheresca le malaute a repaus per tres dias o per quatre.	 When the pain occurs in the feet?
E aprop deslia le liament e l’empastre, e compara la una camba am l’autra.	 When the pain occurs in the feet?
Lahoras, si vezas aquelas enguals en vustament, lahoras sapias que la dislocacio ja es fermada, e adonc layssa le malaute anar.	 I hope this helps! Let me know if you have any more questions.
E si vezas alcuna causa de mollificacio, lahoras tu retorna e emplastra aquel, e extrenh aquel segon la tua primiera strectura, e layssa aquel en tres dias.	 If there is no reason for relief, you return it and put it back on after the first stretch, and leave it in three days.
E aprop deslia aquel, e fay aquel tardar en ambulacio sobre quascu per alcus dias, entro que sia confortat.	 When it was necessary to open up that area between them [patient's thighs], placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs and another on their chest, holding their hands.
Capitol .xxxii.	 Chapter xxxii
De curacio de dislocacio del denolh.	 Treatment for dislocation of the hip joint
Le denolh es dislocat segon tres manieyras, quar es dislocat a las partidas defora, e a las partidas dedintz, e a las partidas dejos mays a las partidas detras; e a las partidas denant no es dislocat.	 The hip joint is dislocated in three different directions: forward, backward and sideways; but it does not move when looked at from behind
E le senhal de dislocacio de lu es que comandes al malaute que aplique la sua camba am la coyssa; lahoras sapias que·l denol es dislocat.	 The command to dislocation of the patient is that they apply their servant with a cushion on the thigh; you know when the hip joint moves.
E la restauracio de totas las manieyras de lu es que fassas cezer le malaute dreyt, enayssi que ja extenda la sieua camba, si pot sobre aquo; adherir le tieu dos a la cara de lu, e pausa le pe de lu entre les tieus pes; e aprop fay adherir le denol de lu am las tuas palmas, e rete aquelas entre les tieus ditz sobre le denolh de lu am fortaleza, e autre ministre extenda le sieu pe entro que·l denol retorne a son loc.	 The restoration of all the directions is that you have to let your servant straighten out in any direction possible; also extend his cushion if necessary on this side; place both hands on the patient's face, and leave some space between their feet; and put the hand next to it over the hip joint with strength, another spread it open so that the joint returns to its original position.
E senhal de reddicio de lu es que la sua camba adharesca am la coyssa am levitat no-laboroza.	 The command for restoration is that your servant holds down on the thigh in a relaxed manner without using any strength.
E aprop emplastra aquel e fay adhirir la camba am la coyssa, e aprop lia aquelas emsemps am una benda per tres dias o per quatre, e aprop deslia aquelas.	 Place that person and have the servant hold it down on the thigh; also leave some space every three or four days, and remove them.
E no uze le malaute de ambulacio per alcus dias, entro que sia sanat e cofortat.	 When a patient arrives for consultation on an invalid bed or stretcher, they must first be made comfortable.
Mays si la reduccio de lu a tu es excusada, lahoras aministra fort extencio am liamentz dels quals en la curacio de la hancha precedit narracio.	 If the decrease in urine is excused (for example due to an injury), then provide additional explanations regarding the cause of the previous narrative in your medical report.
Capitol .xxxiii.	 Chapter XXXIII
De la curacio de la dislocacio del talo.	 Regarding the treatment for dislocation of the arm.
Le talo alcunas veguadas es remaugut per petita remocio, e alcunas veguadas es dislocat segon compliment, e la dislocacio de lu es fayta o a las partidas dedintz o a las partidas deforo.	 The shoulder joints are moved with gentle movement or dislocated in one part followed by another.
E le senhal de la dislocacio de lu es que vezes le talo imflat procedent a la partida a la qual es dislocat.	 If the dislocation occurs, then it is likely that the shoulder will be flat on the side opposite to which it was dislocated.
Mays la curacio de la remocio de lu es de leugiera reddicio, e es que sia extendut am facilitat am las mas e sia engualhat entro que retorne.	 The treatment for loosening of the ligaments is rest and to allow them to stretch naturally while allowing for re-gaining range of motion as much as possible without causing injury.
Mays en la curacio de lu quan es dislocat segon compliment, cove que fasses cezer le malaute dreyt, e tengua aquel un ministre fort e valent de la partida detras del dos de aquel en le mieg loc de lu.	 When a second dislocation occurs after the first one, be sure to have someone assist you in making sure that there is no additional injury and then apply a firm but gentle stretch on the side opposite of the two previous ones towards their back.
E aprop te tu am la tieua ma dreyta le pe de la pus sobirana part, e am la tua ma sinistra de la part pus dejos del pe en le loc de la cavilha.	 Then place your right hand on the top of their foot to the side furthest from you and put your left hand on the other side in the area of the armpit.
E aprop atira le pe a tu am la tua ma dreyta, e aprop am la sinistra per dos veguadas, e aprop exten am la sinistra; e empelleys le pietz del pe am la dreyta deves la camba ses trebalh.	 Then place your right hand on the top of their foot to the side furthest from you and put your left hand on two sides, and extend your left arm as well.
E fay aquo doas veguadas segon que havem comtat.	 The first sentence in English reads, "The space between the patient's thighs has been prepared.
E aprop empelleys le pietz del pe a la camba la tersa veguada, e tu es a la cavilha.	 "You have placed a cushion on their chest and are now positioning them on their back.
Donc si retorna en una veguada o en dos segon aquesta manieyra, e si vezes le pe engualhat, es bo; e sino, lahoras sobre lu itera la operacio, quar aquel retorna.	 "If you return in one or two attempts this way, and if the foot fails to enter, that is good; otherwise, doctors will perform another operation, until it succeeds.
Mays si a tu es prohibida la reduccio de lu am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu dos sobre terra, e estrenh un paysel mot en terra fermat, e que caja entre las coyssas de lu, e tu ja has envolopat sobre lu drap per so que no ledesca le malaute.	 "If it is prohibited to reduce the size of the patient as we have recommended, lie them down on their back and apply a pad over them in order to prevent the hernia from escaping.
E aprop le ministre de lu tengua las suas coyssas, e aprop autre ministre extenda le pe am las suas mas o am liament que lie sobre le col del pe; e aprop extenda aquel quascun ministre contre extencio del sieu par, e le payssel sia extant entre las coyssas del malaute retinent aquel, per so que·l cos de lu no sia atirat a las partidas dejos deves la sua extencio.	 "Place the minister on their thighs and another minister extend it towards their buttocks or abdomen as needed to lie over the heel of the foot; and place a cushion between them in order to prevent the escape, so that the body is not detached from the parts.
E aprop le metge enguala la dislocacio am las sieuas mas, e autre ministre tengua la coyssa sana a las partidas dejos, quar la dislocacio retorna am la facilitat.	 "Place the doctor on their hips and another minister to support the healthy side of them, because the dislocation will return in favor.
E donc cum retorna la dislocacio e es declarada a tu la sanetat de la reduccio de lu, lahoras pausa emplastre e extrenh aquela am liamentz fortment, e ligua le pe am liament a la camba.	 "Once the dislocation and its cause have been determined as healthy, doctors will hold off on performing any additional operations.
E cove que temes o te guardes dels nervis les quals so detras sobre le talo, per que le liament sobre aquel no sia vehement e leda aquel fortment.	 The first sentence translates to: "Keep your hands away from nerves that are behind over the shoulder.
E aprop layssa aquel per dos dias o per tres; e si le liament es mollificat, extrenh aquel.	 The second sentence translates to: "Place it for two or three days and if the pain subsides, prolong this.
E aprop deslia aquel en le ters dia o en le quart, e prohibeys le malaute de anament per xl dias.	 The third sentence translates to: "Place it on the first day or fourth, but no more than 10 days.
Mays si es forsat de anar denant aquel spazi, no es fayta segurtat que la dislocacio no sia sobre lu dissolvuda e corrumpuda, e aprop aquo que no recipia curacio.	 The last sentence translates to: "Even if it is removed from the space, make sure that the dislocation does not happen and is resolved properly, and take care of this.
E si accideys a lu apostema caut, lahoras cove que tu aministre en la cedacio de lu aquo en lo qual precedic la nostra narracio, en autre loc de curacio e de embrocacio, entro que sia remauguda.	 The sentence translates to: "If the cautery is applied when it comes before our narration in another place of treatment and balm, let that be resolved.
Capitol .xxxiiii.	 This seems like a continuation from a previous section or chapter.
De curacio de dislocacio dels ditz dels pes.	 The translation for this part is: "Treatment of dislocations in the feet.
Cove que aquel qu’es dislocat sia engualhat am pauca extencio ses trebal; e aquo que no es dificil, abantz es leugier.	 This sentence translates to: "If someone is dislocated gently and quickly, it won't be difficult.
Mays si la dislocacio es en alcus nozes del dos del pe, lahoras cove que fassas cezer le malaute le sieu pe sobre loc engual de la terra o sobre taula, e sia estant ayssi cum si anava.	 This sentence translates to: "If the dislocation is in both toes of a foot, you should place the patient's hand on ground or table as it would normally be.
E aprop tu sta de pes, e pausa le tieu pe sobre aquo que imineys de las juncturas, e aprop calca aquel am le tieu pe am vertut entro que retorne, e que vejas aquel ja engualhat e no aparesca en le loc eminencia.	 This sentence translates to: "Place the feet and place your hand over that area where you expect joint pain, and if it returns and does not appear in its location, then it is cured.
E aprop pausa dejos le ventre del pe de lu una taula que prengua tot le pe, a la qual sian dos caps, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent e ferma per tres dias; e aprop deslia aquel e fay aquel repausar de ambulacio per motz dias, entro que sia estrenhut e de reddicio sia assegurat.	 When you have opened the space between their thighs and placed a cushion underneath them, another servant should go to their legs, and yet another one on their chest, holding their hands. And after three days of this treatment, if there is no improvement or recovery within that period, then let both servants leave immediately.
Capitol .xxxv.	 Chapter 55
De las specias de dislocacio que sian faytas am plagua o am fractura o am quascuna ensemps.	 Among the symptoms of dislocation, are those that cause pain or fracture, or any other injury.
Quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, e tu te perforssas en la curacio de aquela e en la restauracio de lu, motas veguadas succezeys la mort.	 If the cause of it is not identified and you are unable to cure or restore its function, then one may lose their life.
E per aquo no cove que sobre la curacio de lu presuma, sino aquel que es savi en l’art, de lonc uzatge, misericordios e pietados, tardiu, no-ardit ni presomptuos; e que use en le comensament de medicinas que cedan apostemas cautz tant solament, e leyssa le malaute al divinal jutgament, sino ad aquel al qual speras salut de perdicio, am de la malautia alleviacio, e en la qual appareys alcuna speransa.	 Therefore, do not rely on the cure alone, but also seek help from those who are skilled in healing, compassion and mercy; time will pass, without haste or worry, nor expectation of benefit; and use only medicines that can be used as a last resort, leaving the patient to face the divine judgment, but rather turn to one who brings relief from illness with mercy, for he is the remedy, and offers hope.
E adonc esforsa te tantost far de lu la reduccio en le comensament de la causa, denant que endevengua apostema caut.	 If you want to prevent such things occurring in the first place, rather than waiting until it has already caused harm
E adonc si le membre retorna segon que volem, lahoras aministra regiment le qual ceda apostema caut e cura la plagua am aquo que conveneys a lu dels enguentz desiccatius.	 And if the member returns second when you want it to do so, then apply a treatment that gives medication and cures the pain in this way, which works well for recovering from injuries or frostbite.
E si dislocacio es am fractura e accideys en le os satagias separadas, lahoras tu perforsa le stement de lor, e fay en aquo so que havem dit en las malautias simplas de aquo que es precedit en les locz de aquels.	 If the dislocation is a fracture and occurs at the joints that are separated, then you should apply pressure to this area as if it were prescribed in simple terms, what precedes these words:
E guarda e esquiva segon la tua vertut aquel del intrament en las vias de temor segon que a tu es precedida la mia predicacio; quar aquo es milhor a tu deves le tieu Creator, e mays permanent a la tua gloria, e mays saludos al tieu cos verays aquels en le tieu temps.	 And guard and ward against your own doubts the one from within yourself as you precede mine prediction; for such is the will of God to you who should seek His counsel, and may He grant permanent peace and health unto you forever in these times.
Ayssi fineysso las paraulas de Albucasim perfieytament de las quals Dieus ne sia benezeyt.	 And so words from Aeschylus are most perfectly translated as follows:
Amen.	 Amen
