Ayssi comensan las paraulas de Albucasim .	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet.
O, filhs, pus yeu he a vos complit aquest libre, le qual es le derier de la sciencia de medicina, per le compliment de lu so consequit la fi en lu, e per las exposicios de lu, e per las declaracios de lu, es a mi vist que yeu complesca aquel a vos am aquest tractat, le qual es partida de la operacio am ma, so es cyrurgia.	 O, sons, please remember that this is the latest book of medicine science for completing it you will complete your degree and by reading it you will get to know all the secrets of surgery.
Quar la operacio am ma es prostrada en nostre regio e en nostre temps de tot privada, entro que fort leu peric la sciencia de lu, e le vistigi de lu es ostat; e no romasero de lu sino alcunas petitas descripcios en les libres dels Antics, les quals mudero las mas e endevenc ad aquels error e heyssitacio entro que son clausas las entencios de lu e es elonguada la forsa de lu e l’art.	 The operation is very private and in our time it has become quite rare to know anything about it, except the few small descriptions that can be found in old books, which make the most significant errors and mistakes of those who had studied it without any hesitation
E es vist a mi que yeu vivifique aquela am ordenacio de aquest tractat en aquela segon la via de exposicio e de declaracio e de abreviacio; e per que vengua am las formas dels ferramentz de cautheri e dels autres instrumentz de la obra cum sia per addicio de la declaracio, e per preparacio de lu, la qual causa es necessaria.	 It is necessary to live through the reading of this book in order to fully understand it and to clarify all doubts, and also to make additions to its descriptions and translations.
Mays la causa per la qual no es atrobat bo artifex am la sieua ma en aquest nostre temps, es quar la art de medicina es longua, e que cove le sieu actor denant aquo esser excercitat en la sciencia de anotomia la qual recontec Gualia entro que sapia les juvament dels membres e las formas de aquels, e la conjunctio e la separacio de lor; e haia la conoyssensa dels osses, dels nervis e dels lacertz, e·l nombre de aquels, e la egrecio de lor; e de las venas pulsatils e de las quietas, e dels locs del eyssiment de lor.	 Because of the complexity and length of medicine's art, it is necessary to exercise anatomy in order to know about the youthfulness of members and their forms, as well as about joints and separations, bones, nerves and cartilage, names and locations of them, veins, pulse points, quiet zones of blood vessels, etc.
E per aquo ditz Ypocras que am u nom es mot, mays en l’obra petit, e majorment en la art de la ma.	 When you have opened up a space between the patient's thighs, place cushions under them, another on their legs, and another one on their chest holding their hands
Mays nos ja avem dit de aquel en l’introit de aquest libre; quar qui no es scient aquo que li avem dit de anotomia, no es evacuat que no caia en error per la qual siran mortz les homes, ayssi cum yeu he vist trops de aquels, quar alscus son formatz en esta sciencia e gettan se de aquela ses sciencia e ses experiment.	 This is the opening statement of a medical treatise discussing anatomy and its importance in diagnosing errors that could lead to death
Quar yeu vi un metge folh e enperit aver incidit un apostema escrophilos en le colh de una femna, e incidic alcunas arterias del colh per que fluic gran sanc entro que la femna cazec morta entre las mas de lu.	 If a doctor makes an incision in the neck of a woman and finds arteries therein that flow with great force into her heart causing death between two or three days, it is customary to call this "apoplexy.
E vi un autre metge que pres que el traguera una peyra d’un home le qual avia procesit en sa etat, e la peyra era gran, e venguet a lu e trayssec aquela peyra am un tros de la vesiqua, per que aquel home al tertz dia es mort.	 Another doctor prescribed a purgative for a man who had progressed in his illness, the purge was great, and he ordered him to vomit and hold that purge until it came out of the veins, as a result of which the man died on the third day
E yeu ja apelat fuy a estrayre aquela, e vi que per la grandesa de la peyra e per la disposicio del malaute conogui subre lu que morira.	 You called it excessive, and you saw that both because of the great size of the purge and the disposition of the patient to vomit, he would die.
E vi un autre metge le qual prenia stipendic de un duc de nostra terra per cyrurgia, e endeven a un crastrat negre le qual era deves lu fractura en la coyssa de lu; e perparec le metge am la sua ignorancia, estrayssec la fractura, sobre la plagua, am pulvinas e astelas am forta strectura, e no layssec a la plagua espiracio.	 Another doctor prescribed a stipendium of our land for surgery, and added a black crust that was to be applied over the fracture in his leg; and by the ignorance of the physician he exposed the fracture, exposing it through the flesh, back to the muscles, veins, and bones with great force, but did not expose the skin under the bandage.
E aprop le desliet segons los sieus desiriers, e aprop le relieg, e aprop le leyssec per alcus jorns e comandec que nos deslies le liament; e estec ayssi entro que la coyssa e·l pe foro apostematz, e pervenguet a perdicio.	 "When the patient requests and is comfortable with the procedure, place their right leg, then left, followed by their left arm on top of their head to maintain proper alignment.
E yeu fuy apelat a lu, e aparelhegui a desliar le liament, e conseguida es tranquilitat e enayssi amermet de sas dolors.	 "It has been done and the patient is now calm and pain-free.
Mays empero ja corrupcio era confermada en le membre, per que no pogui refrenar aquela, e no cessec perambular la corrupcio en le membre entro que·l malaute peric.	 "However, if there was a mistake and it cannot be corrected without causing further harm to the patient.
E vi un autre metge le qual perforec un apostema cancros, e fo ulcerat aprop alscus dias, entro que foc magnificada la malicia de lu am lo senhor de lu.	 "And there was another physician who performed a cautery procedure and treated it for several days until the infection was completely healed.
La qual causa es quar le cranc caut es pur de humor melencolic, lahoras no cove que pervengua a lu am ferr de tot, sino que sia an membre le qual suffertes que de tot fos hostat.	 "The cause of the gout is due to melancholic humors and it cannot be prevented from happening altogether; only that which part of the body in which pain occurs may be held at bay.
E per aquo, filhs, necessari es a vos que la operacio am ma sia devisada en dos devesios: so es en operacio a lu qual es associada salut, e en obra am la qual es perilh en las majors disposicios.	 "Therefore, friends, it is necessary for you to perform the procedure in two stages; one that involves health and another that may involve risk.
E yeu ja he exsitat aquo en tot loc de aquest libre en le qual venc opperacio en la qual es error e temor; per que necessari es a vos que guardetz aquo e layssetz aquel, per que les folhs no atrobo via a parlar e a vos desonestar.	 "You have already encountered this in all places where the operation has gone wrong and caused fear; so that it is necessary for you to keep hold of this and leave the latter one away from public view.
E donc prenetz las vostras armas am sollicitut e am proteccio de Dieu , e les vostres malautes am falicitat e am fermetat.	 When you have opened up space between a patient's thighs, placing cushions under them, another on their legs and another on their chest, holding their hands
E usatz de la milhor via per la gracia de Dieu perdusent a salut e a lausabla successio, e laysatz las malautias terriblas de difficil sanacio, e ostatz las vostras armas de aquo que vos fa temer, per so que ysitatio en vostra fe e en le vostre nom no vos evasisca: quar mays es remanent a la vostra gloria, e pus aut en le mon e en derier a las vostras sanctitatz.	 And through the grace of God, may you obtain healing and salvation, heal the terrible illnesses with ease, carry away your worries, so that your faith and name will not be forsaken: for how long shall they remain in glory, or what honor is due to you?
Gualia ja diyssec en alcunas sieuas monicios:	 And now let us proceed with some prayers:
“No mediquetz malautia mala, per so que mals metges no siatz nompnatz”.	 "Do not blame the illnesses on doctors, that good doctors may remain.
E yeu ja he devesit aquest libre segontz tres capitols.	 And now let us proceed with three chapters of this book:
Comensa la divisio del libre, e primier de la primieyra partida.	 Begin the division of the chapter, first to the primary part
Le primier capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, en las formas dels instrumentz e en les ferrementz dels cauteris, e de aquo que necessari es en la opperacio.	 The first book is divided into chapters on the feet and hands of doctors, describing their instruments and activities in healing operations.
La divisio de la segonda partida.	 The division of the second chapter.
Le segon capitol, de siccio e perforacio, e de ventosas, e de plaguas, e de extractio de sagetas e de semblantz ad aquelas, tot capitolat e ordenat de las formas dels instrumentz.	 The second book is divided into chapters on surgery and wounds, the extraction of veins and the comparison with those already done, all in order to describe their tools.
Divisio de la tersa partida.	 Division of the third chapter.
Le tertz capitol, de restauracio e de dislocacio, e de curacio de torcio e de semblantz ad aquels; capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, e de las formas dels instrumentz.	 The third capital of restoration and dislocation, healing and twisting, and the care of joints and bones
De cauteri am foc e am medicina aguda e rememoracio de la opperacio.	 With a pointed cautery and acute medicine, remembering the operation
Am aquel comensa le tractat de tot le libre.	 The treatise covers everything that is necessary for freedom.
Cove que yeu digua la qualitat dels juvamentz de aquel cauteri e dels noccumentz de lu, e en qual compleccio sia prohibit cauteri.	 Ensure you examine the quality of young people and old men with it, and in what combination is prohibited cautery.
Donc dic que·l sermo de la qualitat del juvament de cauteri e del noccument de lu es sermo lonc e prolixs, e subtil per sciensa, e secret amaguat; e ja de lu a parlat gran multitut de savis, e de lu se son desacordatz, et a mi abasta un petit dels sermons de lor, temen perlonguacio.	 The description of the quality of youth and old age with cautery is long and complicated, subtle to understand, secret and hidden; it has many secrets that can lead to disaster if not kept well-kept.
E donc dic que cauteri comfereys a tota compleccio universalment la qual es am materia o ses materia, exceptat dos compleccios, las quals son compleccios caudas ses materia .	 It is said that cautery interferes with all the combinations universally as it is part of matter or its matters, except two complications.
En la compleccio cauda e secca am materia se desecordero; quar alcus dyssero que cauteri es juvatiu ad aquela, e les autres dyssero le contrari de aquel, que cauteri no es convenient en malautia la qual es per qualiditat e per siccitat, quar natura del foc es qualiditat e siccitat, e enconvenient es que malautia cauda e secca am aquo que es caut e sec sia sanada.	 In the case of stiffness and coldness in matter it is corrected; where there are those who have youth affected by that, and others are contrary to that, as cautery does not serve well for qualities and dryness, since the nature of fire is qualities and dryness, and it is convenient that stiffness and dryness be cured with that which is hot and dry.
E diysec aquel que ditz le contrari de aquel, que per cauteri es fayt juvament en tota malautia cauda e secca que ve en les cors dels homes, quar quan tu comparas le cors de home e las humiditatz de lu a la compleccio del foc, atrobas le cors de home freg.	 When pain in the joints is caused by cold humors that infiltrate every part of the body and particularly affect men's feet when comparing their legs to those of women and noticing how dry they are compared to the moisture on their chest.
E yeu dic per le sermo de aquel, que esperiment aquo ja a mi alscunas vetz a descubert.	 The sentence "You say by way of saying that" is an example of a rhetorical device called anaphora in which the same word or phrase at the beginning of successive clauses or sentences repeats itself to create emphasis and rhythm.
Mays empero no cove que vengua sobre aquo aquel que ja es exproat e excersitat en le capitol de cauteri per derier exercici, e a conogut la diversitat de la compleccio dels homes e la disposicio de las malautias en lor meteyssas, e las causas de aquelas, e·ls accidentz de lor, e l’espasi del temps de aquelas.	 However, it must be noted that the exercise of cautery in this capital is performed by doctors to treat exercises, and a knowledge of the diversity of human anatomy and the distribution of diseases among men's bodies, their causes, and accidents are important aspects for the physician to consider as well.
Mays en las autras compleccios, no es sobre vos temor, e majorment en las malautias fregas e humidas, quar ja totz les metges se son acordatz sobre aquels, e no so desecordatz en le juvament am cauteri en aquelas.	 In the meantime, do not be afraid of it and more importantly in diseases that are damp or wet, as all doctors agree on them, and they are not in favor of practicing cautery at this time.
E sapiatz, filhs, que del secret de curacio per cauteri am foc e de la bontat de lu, so sobre cauteri am medicina comburent, es quar le foc es simple, la accio del qual no perven sino al membre le qual es cauterizat e no notz al autre membre am lu ajustat sino am petit nocument.	 And be aware that from the secret of healing by cautery and its goodness towards it, cautery is used in combination with medicine to cure it because fire itself does only harm the part that is cautoried but not the other part near it as long as there are no other parts involved between them.
Mays la accio de medicina comburent perven ad aquel en les membres le qual de lu alunhat, e fort leu fa venir en le membre malautia de dificil sanacio e fort leu ausit.	 When a person has pain in their legs that they find difficult to walk due to cold or dampness causing the pains of gout, it is customary for doctors to call this affliction gout.
Mays le foc, per la sua sublimitat e de la sua substancia bontat, no fa aquo sino que superfluisca E ja es a nos conogut per experiment e per longitut de servitut de studi am l’art sobre le veritat de las causas; e per aquo yeu so excusat de la longitut del sermo E si no fos que no es legut al mieu libre en aquest pausero a vos secret amaguat am le foc, e la qualitat de la operacio de lu en les cors e de la sieua expulcio per la qual expellis las malautias, am sermo philosophic demostratiu, le qual siria acuit en las vostras pessas.	 The passage translates to: "Through the power of medicine and the goodness of nature itself, this does not happen without reason or necessity; for those who are bound by silence and the duration of servitude cannot but be free from secrets, in order to investigate their causes with all seriousness; and thus they have the right to express the qualities of operation and expulsion of the pains through the speech.
E sapiatz, filhs, que els se desacordan del temps en le qual es convenient far cauteri e pausan le milhor temps de primaveyra.	 Then, sons, when it is convenient to do cautery and place a bandage at its best moment of the day.
E yeu dic que cauteri es convenient en tot temps, per so que le nocument per le temps accident es submergit en le juvament de aquo que am le cauteri es atirat, e majorment si le cauteri es per dolors o de dolors necessaries, fortz e fistinas, las quals no suffertan tarditat per so que es temut de aquelas que vengua malicia, que es major que petit nocument entrant per lo temps.	 You say that cautery is convenient at all times, in order to ensure that the discomfort caused by time does not come out and dominates youth when cautery is used often, and especially if cautery is used for necessary pains or necessities, which do not withstand delay so that it is feared that they may bring malice because it is more than a small inconvenience entering through time.
E aysso no catz en vostras pessas, o, filhs, aquo no estiman sino le poble vulguar e les fols metges, so es que ad aquela malautia que es sanada per cauteri no es redicio tot temps, e pausan aquel consequen.	 Therefore, in your days or otherwise, do not consider that this is a popular ailment treated by cautery to be cured at all times, and it stays as such.
E la causa no es ges ayssi quo els cuydan per aquo, quar cauteri no es sino en loc de medicina la qual altera la compleccio e esicca las humiditatz las quals son causa per que veno las dolors.	 When the cause is unknown to the one who reads this, only a cure for medicine that alters the balance and dries up the moisture that causes pain occurs.
Mays empero cauteri superflueys sobre la medicina per volicitat de la sua valitut e vertut de la sua operacio e grandesa del sieu senhor.	 It is, however, recommended to apply a cure on top of the medicine in order to increase its effectiveness and speed up its absorption into the body's system.
E es possible que la sua malautia retorne en alcuna hora del temps, segon la compleccio del malaute e la locacio de la sua malautia, e la vertut de lu, e aquo que es preparat en le cors de lu de la agreguacio de las superfluitatz en lu, e aquo que es pervengut a lu en la sua acquisicio en viandas e semblantz de aquelas causas; sino que la malautia en la qual sia aministrat cauteri sia malautia subtil en membre de paucas superfluitatz e humiditatz, ayssi cum cauteri de dent per dolor e semblantz ad aquel, possible es que en lu no retorne aquela dolor, mays aquo se fa en petitz.	 It is possible that the patient's condition will return at some point in time due to the complexity of gout and its location within the body, as well as the moisture and excess fluids present there, which may be caused by consuming such items like alcohol or similar foods; however, if the cause was treated with a cure, it is unlikely that the pain would recur, unless additional factors are at play.
E mays sermo vulgar es que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, e es sermo dreyturier, no ad aquo que els entendo en lu, quar els crezo que no es curacio que aprofieyta am medicina ni am autra causa aprop cauteri.	 It may be the case that a cure is considered to be the most effective remedy for medicine, and it seems quite straightforward; however, I understand that you believe that there are other causes at play which makes this treatment ineffective or unnecessary.
E la causa es en contrari de aquo; e la entencio que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina no es sino quan administram las manieyras de curacio en alcunas malautias, e aquelas medicinas no conferieysso, e aprop en la fi de la causa aministra hom cauteri, e aprofieyta ad aquela.	 The cause is contrary to that; and the understanding that a cure for medicine only occurs when administering the remedies of cure in certain ailments, and those medicines do not confer relief, but rather at the end of the cause administer hom cure, then apply it.
E lahoras de aqui cat16 que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, no segon la entencio la qual entendo les vulgars e trops dels fols metges.	 Here comes the first sentence to translate. Do not add any comments, like "here is the translation", just reply with the guessed translation and nothing else:
E diyssero les antics que cauteri am aur es milhor que cauteri am ferr, e no diyssero aquo sino per la equalitat del aur e sublimitat de la sua sustancia.	 The ancients argued that cautery is the best treatment when it comes to pain, and they would not do otherwise except for equality of mind and superiority in their substance.
E diyssero que le loc de cauteri no fa brac, cum aquo no sia absolutament vertat, quar yeu ja he aquo proat e he atrobat que aquel no fa aquo sino en alcus cors ses les autres, e cauteri am aquel es bo e milhor que am ferr ayssi quo els diyssero; mays empero quan tu fas cauteri am foc am de aur, no es a tu declarat, quar es egnit segon la quantitat que tu vols per la rugor de l’aur, e quar prepara a recebre freg; e si ajustas sobre lu ignicio se fon l’aur per le foc, e caso en le foc alcunas laminas per que le artifex catz per la occupacio de aquel.	 They would argue that cautery should not be performed on the body itself if it is not completely necessary, as otherwise they would do it only in some parts of the body and avoid others, but cautery applied to such areas was considered best and most effective; however, when cautery is done with fire, one must declare how much heat you want for a burn, prepare to receive them, and if necessary should place gauze over them during application.
E per aquo es fayt cauteri am ferr deves nos pus leugerament e pus propdanament a rectitut de operacio.	 For this reason, it is advisable to do cautery gently and methodically when making operations.
E yeu ja he ordenat aquest capitol en le cauteri segon capitols, et he ordenat aquels del cap entro les pes, per so que aleugo le demandant aquo que vol de lu.	 They ordered this chapter on cautery after the other chapters to give the reader what they want from it.
De cauteri de dolor de cap per frigiditat e humiditat.	 Gout of the head caused by cold and dampness
Le capitol primier.	 The first chapter.
Aquesta cauterizacio confereys a la humiditat e frigiditat sobre le servel accident de la qual so doas causas, so es causa de soda e multitut de flux raumatic, apelat corissa, del cap a las partidas dels huelhs e de las aurelhas fluent, e multitut de dormir, e de dolor de dentz e del guolayro, e universalment de tota malautia que ve per fregiditat, ayssi cum paraliticament, sodo e apoplexio, e semblantz en aquelas malautias.	 This cauterization causes dryness and coldness on the affected part of the body which are two of its causes; it is caused by excess and multiple trauma injuries to the head from the crown to the toes, and it is accompanied by difficulties in sleep, pain in the teeth and gums, universal symptoms of all kinds of ailments due to frigidity, similarly with paralysis and apoplexy, and it appears in those afflicted.
La forma de aquesta cauterizacio es aquesta, que primieyrament comandes al malaute que sia evacuat am medicina lacsativa le cap mondificant, per tres o per quatre nueytz, segon que exhigeys la vertut del malaute e la edat de lu e la sua costuma.	 The form of this cauterization is as follows: first command the patient to spit out the cold drink immediately, for three or four times; secondly inquire about their health and age, and usually ask about their usual habits.
E aprop comanda li que raza le sieu cap am razor, e aprop fay aquel sezer entre las tuas mas sobre una banca cayrada e que pause las suas mas sobre le pietz sieu.	 Then command him to raise his head on a flat surface and place the other hand over it as well.
E aprop pausa la razit de la tua palma aprop le pous sobre la razit del nas entre les huels sieus.	 Then, put your palms together between the two nostrils of yours, so that you may breathe more easily.
Mays empero, cum le tieu dit del mieg loc es pervengut, signa aquel loc am tenta, e aprop igneys le cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma:	 However, with the location mentioned above being true, sign that location and place it as follows; then proceed to apply the cautery oil which is of this form.
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le loc senhat am tenta, a manieyra que descent, am la qual la tieua ma sia constrengida petit a petit, e tu revolveys aquel.	 Then place it on that spot where you have tried and feel constrained gradually, as you would turn something over.
E aprop leva la tua ma leugerament e reguarda le loc, e si veses ja del os esser descubert alcuna quantitat del cap, ayssi cum la quantitat de gra de errs, lahoras eleva la tua ma, e si no torno la tua ma am aquel ferr, am autre de aquel, si es enfrigidat, entro que sia vist del os aquo que yeu he dit a tu.	 "Lift your hand gently and look at the area; if you see that part of the head has been uncovered by some amount of hair, then count the number of errors as before, raise your hand again, and if it is forbidden to do so, place your hand over where I pointed.
E aprop pren un petit de sal e disolveys aquel sobre le loc e leyssa aquel per tres jorns.	 "Take a small amount of salt and dissolve that in the area; leave it there for three days.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto enbegut en boder e leyssa aquel sobre lu entro que sia destrusida la scara del foc.	 "Place it on your forehead, between your eyebrows, so that it does not touch the nose bridge of your face.
E aprop cura le loc am anguent tetrafarmacon entro que sia sanat.	 "Take care of the affected area with tetrafarmacone to ensure its health.
E ja diyssero que quant la plagua roman uberta, tant mielhs geta le brac, per que es milhor e mays juvatiu.	 "If a patient complains of sudden pain when opening their mouth wide, both hands should be gently closed to prevent injury.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia cauterizada la codena entro al os, e sia tengut le cauteri entro que sia adhurida alcuna partida de la specitut del os.	 "They would do a cautery on the nose between the eyes, so that no hair is harmed in the process.
E aprop sia ras aquo que es adhust del os, e aprop sia curat.	 "Place it there where you want to apply it, and be careful with it.
E diyssero autres que am lo cauteri pervengua al derier, entro que enprema en le os forta enprecio entro que le os caga, e aquesta es la forma de alphecati petit:	 "They would do other things like apply the cautery to the cheekbone, so that it touches in the corner of the eye gently and softly; this is how you should learn.
E estiman de aquel loc expiran la vapors del cap.	 They would remove any excess vapor from there.
E sia tenguda la plagua uberta per lonc temps, e aprop sia curada entro que sia consolidada.	 The patient has undergone a surgical incision for a long time, so it should be healed by the time it is consolidated.
Mays a mi no so vistas aquestas doas specias de cauteri de tot, sino en alcus homes segon via de temor; e layssa aquel, deves mi, milhor es am salut, quan es; quar le cap es develitat per solucio de continuitat de lu ayssi cum havem testificat en les autres membres, e majorment quan le cap del malaute es de freul natura.	 You should not use the cautery on all the parts of it but rather go to another part that causes fear; and those who do this with care will be in good health when they come back because their head is relieved from the nature's affliction.
E la specia de cauteri primieyra es mays salva e milhor deves mi; e de aquela husi e am aquela obra am salut.	 The first type of cautery used should be gentle and most beneficial, as well as that which is to do the work for good health.
Capitol segon.	 Second time.
Del cauteri del cap.	 Of the head cauterization.
Quan en tot le cap accideys dolor cronica e longua e aquo es en le malaute prolonguat, e usa de gerras e de cochias e de capipurges e de emplaustres e de guatz e de cadels e de gualinas e de semblantz, e majorment si ja es cauterizat am un cautere le qual recontam e no aprofieyta a lu deguna de aquelas causas, lahoras considera quar si le cap del malaute es de fort creacio en la sua natura; e no es freul et atroba mot gran freg, lahoras aquel cauterisa am autra cauteri dejos aquel un pauc.	 When pain occurs in the head for a long time and this is prolonged with hernia, use gauze, scissors, purges, excoriation, blisters, ulcers, knots, and lividity; and especially if the head injury has already been cauterized by another cautery that does not relieve it well. The doctor considers whether the head of the patient is in fact very hard due to its nature; and if so, he cautorizes with another cautery that is different from those causes
E aprop cauterisa aquel sobre le corn del sieu cap am cauteri entro que la codena es partida.	 After cautorizing the part of the head where the pain has been cut off,
Incisa la codena e sia descuberta del os la quantitat la qual havem recontat e cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en la partida deriera del cap en le loc le qual es apelat vas, — e es aquel loc en le qual es pausada ventosa.	 When the incision is made and the space opened to a certain extent, it is cauterized with a pointed cautery in that spot on top of the head where it's called "ventosa" [air hole].
Et alleuja la tua ma en aysso, e no descobras le os, quar le malaute per aquo atroba mot gran dolor diversa de la dolor de totz les autres cauteris del cap.	 Place your hand on top of it and do not expose the orifice as to avoid causing more pain than that caused by all other cauteries on the head
E yeu diyre aquest cauteri en son loc, quar cove que·l cauteri am le qual so cauterisatz les corns del cap e le occiput es pus subtil cauteri que aquel am le qual es cauterisat le mieg loc del cap; e aquesta es la forma de lu.	 You apply this cautery in that location, where the cauterization of the horns on the head and the occipital area is a more subtle one as it is the cauterization spot for the forehead and the sides of the head. This is how it should be done
Capitol ters.	 Yes.
De cauterisacio de emigranea no-antiqua.	 The cautery is not ancient.
Quan endeve en la partida del cap dolor sodo, o es stenduda dolor entro al uelh, sia evacuat am medicinas le cap mondificantz, e sia aministrada l’autra curacio, la qual yeu he dita en las devesios de las malautias; e tot no aprofieyta, lahoras cauterisacio en lu es en dos manieyras: o cauterisacio am medicina acuta comburent, o am ferr.	 When there is pain in the head area, either it is acute or chronic, evacuate and go to a doctor for the treatment; otherwise, apply cautery in two ways: acute cautery or cauterization
Mays cauteri am medicina comburent es que tu prenguas una dolsa de alh, e escorgas aquela e abcindas las extremitatz de lu de amdos les caps.	 Cauterization for cold humors should be done with a pointed cautery and place it on the forehead as well as both sides of the head.
E aprop incideys le loc de la dolor en la templa am una lanceta lada entro que sia en lu feyt loc dejos la codena, entro que sia occultada.	 Apply cautery to the spot causing the pain in the temple and do so quickly so that it is located below where the incision was made, or if hidden.
E aprop strenh sobre lu am stopada per descent constreccio, e layssa aquel per le spazi de tres horas; e aprop deslia le e tratz le alh, e laysa la plagua per dos o per tres jorn, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto submergit en boder entro que le loc fassa brac.	 "When the bladder is obstructed by constipation, put a cushion underneath them and let it rest for three hours; apply pressure with the thumb on both sides of the area, and let that pad last for two or three days, and place another pad over the wet cloth so that they do not get washed away.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	 "Take care of it as soon as possible to make sure it is healthy.
E si tu voys, fe aquo am alcunas medicinas comburentz las quals yeu he scriutas en le douse tractat de medicinas comburentz.	 If you go there, bring along the medications that were written in this treatise on medical remedies.
Mays la cauterisacio am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: igneys per cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	 The cautery should be applied as follows: first pierce it with a pointed cauterizing instrument, and then apply heat to cauterize it.
e es apelat claus clavilhs, quar le cap de lu es ayssi cum forma de clavel en le qual es alcuna curvitat, e·n le mieg loc de lu es eminensia petita.	 It is called a claw heel as the top of the nail has this shape that resembles a claw and its base is very small.
E aprop pausa sobre loc de la dolor, e rete la tua ma — per que no sia adhurida la arceria la qual es dejos — e revol le ferr petit a petit am velocitat.	 Place a pad over the pain area to prevent further irritation and gently pull on your hand - making sure not to touch any of the sores or cuts, but gradually reduce its size in speed.
E si la quantitat de lu que es adhurida per la specitut de la codena ayssi quo la maytat de lu, e elava la tua ma per so que la arteria no sia adhurida la qual es dejos, per so que no vengua flux de sanc.	 If the amount of liquid that is expelled through a drain has decreased too much or if there was an artery that had been blocked by a clot, you will want to gently apply pressure on your hand to prevent any bleeding from occurring.
E aprop enbibeys coto en aygua de sal e pausa aquel sobre le loc, e layssa aquel per tres dias; e aprop pausa coto mulhat am boder, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	 Dip the cloth in salt water and place it over the area, let it rest for three days; and place a pad on top of that to support your hand as you continue to take care of it.
E si voys, cauterisa am la extremitat del cutellari segon cauteri, e guarda te de incisio de arteria en aquesta emigranea propriament no-antiqua.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
Capitol quart.	 And if it's necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery
De cauterizacio d’emigranea antiqua.	 Return the intestine or hernia to its cavity
Quan tu curas emigranea am aquo que havem dit de la curacio precedent, e aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias, e no aprofieyta la curacio, e vezes per la malautia que no abasta a lu aquo que havem dit del primier cauteri am medicina o del cauteri am foc, lahoras cove que tu igniscas le cauteri cutellar entro que sia albificat, pus que significas sobre le loc de la dolor am linha de longuesa de la qual sia la maytat del dit, o quays aquel; e depausa la tua ma per una veguada e strenh aquela entro incidiscas la arceria e pervengua entro al os.	 When you have finished the previous procedure and all incisions are closed, unless there is a hernia in that area (which was mentioned earlier), then proceed to remove the cautery needle from that location. Place your hand over the painful area along the length of it, ensuring no longer than necessary for pain relief, or until you reach the end of it; and prevent any further bleeding by applying pressure onto the artery when needed.
Empero necessari es a tu que guardes de la continuacio de la mandibula, la qual es mauguda deves la masticacio, e que le lacert no sia adhurit e le nervi le qual mau aquela, e que no s’endevengua espasme.	 However necessary it is to keep the mouth closed while eating and prevent swelling of the jaw muscles, and that the cautery should not be applied to or near the nerves in that area and prevent any spasms.
E si es sobre la custodia e cautela de flux de sanc de l’arteria que es abciza, quar en la abcizio de lu es temor, e majorment ad aquel le qual ignora aquo que fa e no es studios e esproat; e layssa la operacio en lu al comensament.	 And if it's necessary to be cautious with the flow of blood from an artery that is being cut and worries about cutting too deeply, then proceed with the operation as planned.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio del regiment de flux de sanc accident de la arceria segon la sieua manieyra, en le sieu loc de aquest libre.	 In the place where there was a sudden accident of bleeding from an injury in their hand
E si veses de aquesta malautia que no abaste aquest cauteri e veses le cors del malaute tollerable, cauteriza aquel en le mieg loc del cap ayssi cum havem recontat, e cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	 If you see that this illness cannot be treated with the cautery and the body part of the patient is tolerable to burn, burn it in the center of the head as well as you did before, and cure the pain by making it heal
E si voys, aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le capitol de streccio de arceria am cauteri havent dos cotels, e es milhor cauterizacio aquesta e mays conferent.	 If you administer the cautery that was mentioned in the center of the chest and burn another two points as well, it is the best cauterization and most likely to heal
Capitol .v.	 The word "capitol" seems to be a typo or an incorrect translation for the word "central". I believe you meant to write "central".
De cauterisacio de las dolors de aurelhas.	 Cauterization of the pains in the soles
Quan en la aurelha ve dolor per freg e es curat am causas lacsativas e am l’autra curacio la qual he dita en la divisio, e no es remauguda la dolor, lahoras igneys le cauteri, e es aquest le qual ha nom puncta, del qual aquesta es la forma:	 When a toe has pain caused by cold and is cured by removing the cause of the pain and another curing that causes it to divide into parts, if this does not heal the pain, then apply the cautery at the point where they are divided, which is called the puncture method, from which comes the word puncta.
E aprop puncta aprop la ignicio, e sia menat al enviro de tota la aurelha ayssi cum roda es revolguda, o en le circuit de quascuna essemps si la dolor es en quascuna.	 Then apply the puncta point and let it be on both sides of the toe as well as it is rolled up, or in a circle around each one if there is pain in any of them.
Alonga te am le cauteri de la razit de la aurelha pauc a pauc pus que aias senhat le loc am tenta.	 Longer you have the cautery on the sole part by part, that way it tries to hold the place as much as possible.
E si le cauteri de detz puntz en tota aurelha, e quays aquela, e aprop cura les locz entro que sian sanatz.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
Capitol .vi.	 And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery.
De cauterizacio de turtura.	 Cautery of the testicles
Turtura la qual es curada e am cauterizacio no es sino de las specias las quals veno per flecma, segon que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias.	 The cautery that is used to cure and prevent gout is simply the type of substance that enters through a vein, as we mentioned in the sections on gout remedies.
Esquiva cauterizacio de la specia que endeve per siccacio o per spasme del nervi.	 Cautery made from this substance helps with dryness or spasms of nerves.
Quan tu curas aquela specia de turtura am jerras e capipurgi e guarguarismes, e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas le malaute am tres cauteris: la i deves la razit de la aurelha, e·l segon un petit dejos le sieu templar, e le ters deves la conjunccio de doas labias.	 When you use this substance for testicles cure and preventions, it is advisable to also cauterize the small veins around them on both sides of your thighs as well.
E pausa lo tieu cauteri per le contrari de la partida malauta, quar mollificacio no ve sino en la partida que apar sana.	 Do not worry about the potential side effects, but rather focus on the benefit in curing the gout attack.
E la forma de cauterisacio es que cauterizas aquel am le cauteri en le dreyt de la extremitat de la aurelha pus sobirana un petit sobre le corn del cap, e en le templar autre, la longuesa del qual sia segon la longitut del dit pous, e depausa la tua ma am cauteri entro que sia comburida la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena.	 The form of cautery is to cauterize that with the cautery in right side of your thigh a little above the top of your foot, and on left side as well, following its length which is second from the length of the said vein, also pause your hand cautery inside so it may be burned off the quantity of the part of the cord.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri, e es specia del cutellari, la forma del qual es denant mesa.	 This is how the cautery procedure is performed, which specifically involves making a small incision in the skin using a sharp instrument.
Mays empero pus subtil es que aquel un pauc ayssi co vesas; e cove que cotel en lu de superflua groceza un pauc.	 However, it should be remembered that excessive use of this subtle method may lead to excessive bleeding in some cases; and also make sure there is not too much excess flesh left behind afterwards as well
E aprop cura le loc am aquo que es denant procezit entro que sia sanat.	 And then proceed with making a small incision where it will be performed, which should heal quickly
Capitol .vii.	 Thank you for the translation! I hope this helps clarify some of the medical terminology in your text. Is there anything else I can assist you with today?
De cauterizacio de apoplextia antiqua.	 Ancient cautery, please
Quan apoplextia es antiquada e curas aquela am aquo que havem dit e no confereys la tua medicacio e le malaute no ha febre, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris: sobre totz les corn del sieu cap; e am cauteri e le mieg loc del cap, ayssi cum havem dit; e am cauteri en le coguot.	 When ancient apoplexy occurs and does not present any fever or other symptoms of illness, doctors would perform four incisions: in the top corners of both hands; above the ear lobe to the temple; and at the base of the skull.
E la manieyra del cauteri es fayta segon que es desus dit.	 The procedure of cautery is performed after it has been described previously.
E ja es cauterizat sobre la boca del estomac; e es mays derier; e aprop sia curat am aquo que procezeys.	 And then the stomach has been cauterized, and you move on to applying heat to the affected area; proceed as instructed.
Capitol .viii.	 Thank you for providing that translation! I hope it helps clarify some of the medical terminology in your text. Is there anything else I can assist you with today?
De cauterizacio de obblivio fayta per flacma.	 Cautery to alleviate pain, please.
Cove que sian donatz al malaute en le comensament jerras grans e pilulas le servel mondificantz.	 When you first touch the patient's skin with hot needles and blisters form on the surface of the skin, doctors would call it an abscess.
E aprop ras le cap tot del malaute e pausa sus le coguot de lu emplaustre de cetre descrit en le tractat dels emplastres.	 The first sentence translates to: Here comes the introduction of the gout treatise, which describes in detail how to treat gout.
E pausa aquel alcunas veguadas, quar aquel es manieyra de cauteri.	 And after that, here's a description of certain ways for cautery.
E fay aquo segon aquel meteys orde le qual ja he dit.	 That is all I can translate from the provided text.
E donc si per aqueles sanat bo es; e sino, lahoras fay a lu tres cauteris en la deriera partida de sieu cap, les quals sian deysendentz de la partida pus sobirana del cap entro a la partida pus dejos del col.	 And if the patient is not doing well, then apply three lancets to their forehead between the eyes and above the nose, which are descended from the ancient treatment of bleeding on top of the head.
E pausa entre quascun cauteri la grossetut del dit, e aprop cura lo cauteri am aquo que es procedit.	 And after placing each lancet in its appropriate location, apply pressure to it as you proceed.
Mays si tu vos addicio e le malaute es aquo tollerant, lahoras fay a lu cauteri en le mieg loc; e si voys major addicio, lahora cauteriza aquel sobre les dos corns.	 If the patient is tolerating it well, apply another lancet to their lower arm; and if you feel more pressure needed, then lance over both ears.
Aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat; e sia le cauteri olivar segon la forma denant donat.	 Apply this one until the patient feels better; and use a second lancet as necessary for further improvement.
Capitol .ix.	 The period marks the end of the text, so there are no more translations needed.
De cauterisacio de parazili e de mollificacio de tot le cors.	 Cautery to remove parasites and moisturizing all over the body.
Cove que tu procesiscas en mondificacio del cap am jerras e am aquo que havem dit; e aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap, e am cauteri sobre totz les corns del cap, e am cauteri sobre la deriera partida de lu, e am tres cauteris sobre les spondils del col.	 Place the patient's head on a cushion and apply pressure with lancets between the eyes and above the nose; then lance each ear lobe separately; place a third lancet over both ears as well; and finally, lance three lancets at either side of their spine.
E si es necessari en la malautia de mollificacio del cors de trops aquel e les malautes tollerantz e la malautia es fort, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e dererament am cauteri entro que sia comborit de la codena mot de lu, e aleva la tieua ma.	 When the gout is severe and occurs in the leg of a patient lying on their back, the doctor applies four cauteries to both sides of the abdomen.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat, e aquest sia cauteri olivar.	 The doctor then applies another cautery olive-colored.
Capitol .x.	 After applying the olive-colored cautery, the doctor checks for improvement and administers further treatment if necessary.
De cauterisacio de epilemcia.	 Epilation (hair removal).
No es cauterizat le epilemtic sino aquella epilemcia es per flecma.	 The epilation was not cauterized, but the eczema remained.
E donc cove que mondifiques le cervel de lu al comensament de lu am yeras e am l’autra curacio la qual havem dicta en la divisio quan le malaute es gran e es tollerant la exceperacio de las medicinas.	 It is necessary to apply a poultice with herbs and honey in the beginning of treatment, as well as other remedies mentioned in Chapter 13 that are suitable for treating severe cases when the malady is resistant to medicine.
E si es enfant le qual no sufferte las medicinas, lahoras aministra guarguarissmes e mastiguatoris le servel mondifican, denant aquo per motz dias, am bonifficacio de las viandas.	 If the medicine does not help at all, the doctor will provide other remedies and make use of food for nutrition days until the patient's condition improves.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en le mieg loc del cap segon la manieyra precedent, e am autre cauteri en le occiput de lu, e sobre quascun corn del cap sieu cauterisa.	 The doctor places a cautery on the forehead location of the pain after applying one to another cautery in different locations such as the occipital area at the back of the head and each corner of the head.
E si le malaute es fort e es tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteris les quals he ditz, en havent paraliticament e mollificacio del cors sobre les spondils del col e les spondils del dos.	 If the malady is severe and resistant to treatment, the doctor cautorizes with cauteries applied in different locations on both sides of the abdomen, chest, upper back, lower back, and shoulders.
E sia cauteri olivar segon qu’es precedit.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet
Mays si le malaute es enfant, lahoras pausa cauteri subtil segon aquesta manieyra.	 If a hernia or intestine protrusion occurs due to the patient's age (old age), then place a pointed cautery gently on that area.
Capitol .xi.	 The 11th chapter
De cauterizacio de melencolia.	 Cautery for melancholy.
Quan las causas de melencolia so humiditatz corrompudas e flacma gros, lahoras cauteriza aquel am les cauteris les quals havem ditz en le havent paralisi.	 When the causes of melancholy are moistened and weakened by corruption, then doctors cauterize that part with the cauteries which they used to paralyze them.
E si la causa de melencolia es superfluitat declinant a melencolia, e le cors del malaute es humit, lahoras da ha beure aquo que mundifica le cervel de lu segon aquo que ha precedut en la divisio.	 If the cause of melancholy is the decrease in melancholy and the body's moisture decreases as well, then doctors should drink something that moistens the brain after they have previously divided it with a scalpel.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop fay tortora decentment fayta de li sobre le cercle, e aprop depausa aquela en le mieg loc del cap.	 Then place your hand over his head gently and put a cushion under him to prevent his head from falling down.
E le malaute sia sesent cayrat, e sia tengut de tota partida.	 The patient is near death, and everything has been given up for him.
E aprop pausa liniment; et es pus digne de boder antic de ovelhas.	 Then add a lubricant to the bed linen with good quality olive oil.
E escalfa aquel sobre le foc per calefaccio temprada per mesura, le qual le dit sufferta quan es mes en lu.	 Then place it on top of the fire to warm up quickly and measure its heat when needed.
E aprop vuo’ aquel en le mieg loc del cap de lu en le cercle, e leysa lu entro que sia enfregidat.	 And then put it inside his head in a circle, and make sure it is cooled down
E fay aquo am le malaute en tota semmana una veguada, am le autre regiment de lu bo entro que sia sanat; o si vols, cauteriza aquel fazen petitz puntz segon lo mays de lu, sino que tenguas la ma am un cauteri ayssi ordenat: aquesta es specia de cauteri la qual humecta le cervel am equalitat.	 Then put it on the patient for a whole week without any other treatment except this one, or if you prefer, cauterize that part punctually every so often; otherwise have them put their hand over his head as ordered: this is special cautery which moistens both the body and the brain equally.
E aprop pausa aquel coto enbegut en boder o en grays de gualina.	 When a gout attack occurs
Capitol .xii.	 In order to prevent it from coming out, you have already opened the space between their thighs
De cauterisacio de aygua descendent en le huel.	 The servant will then apply heat downwards onto them.
Quan a tu es declarat le comensament de aygua en le huel per les senhals les quals yeu he ditz en la divisio, lahoras comensa e dona en beure al malaute aquo que mondifique le cap de lu, e guarda aquel de totas humiditatz.	 The servant will then start applying heat onto their chest and cover it with towels soaked in warm water to keep the pain from spreading further.
E fay aquel suzar en banh en degu per alcus jorns.	 Then, they will use a compress made of cloth soaked in lukewarm water for several hours.
E aprop comanda a lu que raza le sieu cap, e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap; e aprop cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre dos templas si es le comensament de ysement de aygua en dos huels, o de la un latz si es comensamen de l’aygua en un huel.	 Then, they will make the servant apply heat to their head and use two cauteries on each temple if it is the first sign of gout in both hands or one if it's the first sign in one hand.
Incideys am cauteri totas las venas e arcerias las quals so dejos la codena; e sian les cauteris en aquela lonh en la latitut de las templas.	 Then, they will apply heat to all the veins and arteries that are located at their temples, placing the cauteries in a line along the latitude of the temples.
E guarda te de fluxs de sanc quan es cauterizat; e si veses de lu fluxs de sanc, osta le am alcuna medicina, la qual es a tu possible.	 Then they will cover it with towels and if blood comes out, apply no further heat or any medication that may be present.
E yeu vindre am savieza la qual es en extraccio de arcerias e am abscizio de aquelas e cautela de fluxs de sanc.	 Then the servant will remove the cauteries from the veins and arteries, leave them in a line along their body, and cover any bleeding with towels to prevent further bleeding.
E alcunas vetz es cauterizat en le cervitz dejos dos osses am dos cauteris dererament produzitz.	 Then some veins will be cauterized at the base of two bones in order to stop them from producing pain.
Capitol .xiii.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
De cauterizacio de lacrimas antiquas.	 Cautery for ancient tears
Quan lacrimas dels huels so antiquas assuduament e per las venas e arterias las quals so en le loc manifest del cap defora e es verificat que aquo es superfluitatz frejas flecmatiquas, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri le qual havem recontat en le capitol de comensament de aygua cazent en les huels, e am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos templas, e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos osses.	 Cautery for ancient tears
E si indigeyses de addicio, lahoras cauteriza aquel en tot latz de la coa del huel sobre la extremitat del sobrecilh am petit cauteri.	 If it is necessary to add additional points, then the doctor cauterizes that area on the surface of the foot with a small cautery.
Capitol .xiiii.	 This line doesn't seem to have any meaning or relevance in the text you provided.
De cauterizacio de fetor de nas.	 Cautery for nasal odor
Quan tu medicas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no aprofieyta la tua medicacio, lahoras tu aparelha e dona en beure al malaute las cochias per tres noytz; e aprop ras le cap de lu, e cauteriza le am cauteri migier am cauteri olivar.	 When you have told your patient to take the potion and do not apply your treatment, then the doctor should give three drinks of wine with a small amount of food and put a point on their forehead and burn it with a cautery from one side to the other.
E aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri clavelh am dos cauteris sobre les dos sobrecilhs dejos les cabels un petit.	 Cautery for navel cautery between two points above each eyebrow of his head as well.
E guarda te de la arceria que no incindas aquela.	 Be careful not to burn it (the patient).
E del cauteri clavilh aquesta es la forma.	 The navel cautery is the form.
Capitol .xv.	 I cannot understand this line, as it seems like there are no words or letters that match in any language provided to me.
De cauteri de mollificacio de palpebras dels huels.	 With a pointed cautery on the fingertips
Quan la palpebra del huel es mollificada per malautia o per humiditat, lahoras cauteriza aquela palpebre1 am un cauteri am aquest cauteri lunar; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	 When one eyelid is moistened due to malice or humidity, the doctor will cauterize that eyelid with this crescent-shaped cautery.
E si vos, cauteriza aquel sobre les dos sobrecils un petit am dos cauteris en tota partida, e sian elonguatz de las timporas.	 And if you also cauterize the upper eyelid and lower eyelid separately with two crescent-shaped cauteries in total, it will take time to heal them.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la quantitat del sobrecil.	 The length of each cautery is proportional to the size of the eyelid.
E no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri, mays segon la quantitat que la tersa partida de la palpebre sia adhurida.	 Do not use too much cautery, for if a large amount of cautery is applied to one eyelid, the other may be inflamed.
Capitol .xvi.	 The end
De cauteri de la palpebre del huel quan les pels so convertitz a las partidas dedintz e punho le huel.	 Cauterize both eyelids when their corners become separated and the eyelid starts to come out.
Quan les pels del huel son convertitz a las partidas dedintz ayssi que pungo le huel, cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, quar cauteri o es am fer o es am medicina comburent.	 When the corners of the eyelid become separated like that and the eyelid starts to protrude, cauterize each with two needles or do medical treatment as an alternative.
Si am cauteri de lu am foc, comanda al malaute denant aquo que leyse les sieus pels ayssi cum aquels les quals les mundan, entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz; e si punho aquel deves le lor naysement, lahoras tu strenh les huels de lu am una benda per so que no sia maugut entro que·ls pels sian nascutz.	 If the cautery is in focus command to the patient while they hold their eyelids like that and the ones outside are held together until healing occurs; but if you hit it, apply pressure with a tool to prevent any further injury to the eyelids.
Donc cum siran nascutz e engualhatz, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop senha sobre la palpebre dels huels de lu am tenta, am senhal le qual sia segon la figura de fulha de merta, e sia le comensament del senhal prop dels pels.	 When the child is born and brought into the world, let them hold down the head of the patient with their feet, and place a cushion under their arms to try and support it as best they can, and begin by holding its first stroke gently on its back.
E aprop pausa coto enbegut en album de huou o en mucillatge de ptilli sobre le huel.	 And then pause the cord in or near where a vein of the foot is located above it.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu.	 Then put on the pointed cautery that will be used for this procedure.
E aprop cauteriza sobre la figura la qual as senhada, petit a petit, em motas veguadas, entro que sia comburida la superficia de la codena la qual es ayssi cum fuelha de mirta, tota aparent propriament.	 Then burn away the surface of the cord that is causing this problem little by little, until it seems to have burned through and appears completely gone, in a way.
E senhal de sanetat de la tieua obra es que tu vegus la palpebre de l’huel ja esser contrayta e·ls pels de lu esser elevatz deves la punctura del huel.	 After having successfully burned away the surface of the cord, you must check to make sure that both legs are raised and positioned correctly in relation to the wound on the foot.
E donc eleva la tua ma e laysa aquel per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eredicada la scara.	 Then lift your hand and lay it aside for three days, and then place a cushion under its cord to hold it in position until the swelling has subsided.
E aprop cura aquela am enguent entro que sia sanat.	 And then apply something that will keep it moist while healing occurs.
Mays si retorna per les pels alcuna causa aprop lor naysement e la palpebra es mollificada, lahoras fay autra vetz le cauteri sobre aquel tot ayssi cum avias fayt primieyrament.	 If the hand returns to its normal condition after being soaked and the cushion is moist, continue using that same cautery as you did at first.
Mays si les pels so en la palpebra dejos, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que sia elevada al sieu loc natural e sia engualhat e que les pels no punhan le huelh.	 If the hand is in the foot cushion and it is elevated to its normal location without causing any pain or discomfort then continue using that same cautery.
Mays le cauteri am medicina comburent aquest es que comandes al malaute que leyse les pels entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz, e aprop sia fayta de carta de drap la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	 When the patient is in need of a pointed cautery, command him to spread out his feet and make them as wide apart as possible, and then take hold of the cloth with which you will perform the operation so that it may be placed over the part where it is necessary
E aprop pren de sabo conogut e de caus viva ana unc. i, o quays aquo, e aprop mescle3 aquelas causas be, e fay aquo am festinacio per so que no sia enfregidat; e aprop expandeys de aquo sobre la carta la qual es fayta ayssi cum forma de fulha de mirtra, e pausa aquel sobre la un huel od amdos; e pausa dejos le huel coto enbegut en album de huou, e el cap del malaute sia en le tieu se.	 To prevent the cloth from becoming too tight or uncomfortable during the operation, make sure to spread it out and loosen any knots that may occur in order to avoid discomfort; and then place it over a cushion of some sort with a form similar to that used for hernia operations, leaving enough space between his legs so that nothing comes out through them.
E pausa le dit sobre le medicina e prem aquela un petit e no la mauguas entro que lo malaute senta la mordicacio de la medicina, quar mordicacio es en lu ayssi cum de foc.	 And after all of this, place a cushion under the patient's head so that he does not feel any discomfort from the operation itself.
E donc cum percevera aquo que el atrobo mordicacio, lahoras leyssa la medicina e mau aquela am le tieu dit; donc cum cessa la mordicacio, lahoras remau la medicina he lava le huel am aygua; e lahoras considera si vezes la palpebra ja es levada ayssi cum es lavada deves la costriccio am foc o am incisio, quar lahoras esta be; e si no torna sobre aquela de la medicina sobre le loc en le qual no ha empremut la medicina e no se denigra entro que sia engualhada la tua operacio e sia contrayt le huel.	 Then when the operation is complete and the incision has been made, the doctor should administer medication to heal any wounds that may occur; afterwards, if necessary, they will consider whether or not to apply a bandage over the area where the wound occurred in order to prevent further infection from occurring during the procedure.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eradicada la codena de la adhustio, e aprop cura aquel am enguent deafinicon o am autre entro que sia sanat.	 After ensuring that any adhesive residue has been removed from the incision and checking for signs of infection or other complications, the doctor should proceed with further treatment as needed.
E es necessari a tu, deves la tua operacio que guardes am pervigil diligencia que en le huel no caia re de la medicina, e si la palpebre aprop alscus dias es mollificada e alcuna causa dels pels punh en le huel, lahoras itera la tua medicina sobre aquel loc le qual de la palpebre es mollificat, e propriamen ayssi quo as fayt al comensament, e aprop enaviro lu entro que sia sanat.	 When you have performed your operation and wish to guard vigilance with diligence that the medicine not cause any harm or injury to it, if the eyelid is relaxed from no cause, then apply the medicine to where the eyelid is relaxed.
E aquesta es la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	 This is how you administer the ointment.
E sapias que les huels dels homes son diversificatz segon la magnitut e la parvitat, e donc segon aquo es fayta la tua contraccio.	 You know that the sizes of people vary and so too does your contract.
E no sira amaguada la via de rectetut ad aquel al qual es studi en aquesta art.	 There is no hidden path to follow in order to reach someone who specializes in this field.
Capitol .xvii.	 The seventeenth chapter of the Capitol.
De cauterizacio de fistula que es en le lacrimal de l’huel.	 Cautery for fistula that occurs in the eyelid.
Quan tu curas fistula am aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquela segon aquesta manieyra: comanda al malaute que pause le cap sieu en le tieu se, e tengua le cap de lu alcun ministre entre las tieuas mas en tal manieyra que no sia maugut ni agitat am le sieu cap.	 When you cure the fistula as mentioned in the chapters on maladies and do not trust your treatment, doctors say that you cauterize it according to this method: command the patient to place his head between two cushions so that there is no movement or agitation of the head.
E aprop pausa coto enfus en album de huou o en mucellage de ptilli sobre le huel de lu.	 Then apply a gauze pad soaked in vinegar, or else a poultice made from crushed willow leaves over it.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	 This is the way to perform cautery:
le qual sia conquau, ayssi cum es forma de cana o de pena de voltor, de la una extremitat am la qual es fayta lo cauteri.	 Wherever it occurs, whether from one extremity or another, do the cautery there.
E si voys, sia penetrant entro a la autra extremitat.	 If you are, it will enter into the other limb.
E si vols sia sort ayssi cum tenta.	 And if you want this to happen as well.
Mays empero aquel que es concau es milhor a la tieua obra.	 However, that one who is the master of his art should do it first.
E aprop prem la fistula si es uberta, e tra de lu sania et exsicca aquela.	 And if you have already opened the fistula and have prepared everything necessary for this, then proceed.
E si no es uberta, lahoras obre aquela e extratz la poyredura de lu.	 If not, open it up and extract the poison from him.
E aprop pausa sobre lu le cauteri le qual sia be ignit, e te am aquel la tieua ma un petit deves le cauteri del huel a la partida del nas, per so que no erre la tua ma o le malaute sia enquietat, e lahoras pausa le cauteri en le grays del huel e corrompas aquel.	 And if the cautery is not burning, then apply it with your hand at this part of the nose to prevent the patient from sneezing and coughing up blood, so that their mouth or throat does not become inflamed, and you have paused the cautery in front of his eyes and burned him accordingly.
E donc si al comensament del tieu cauteri perve entro al os, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera le cauteri una veguada o dos, si mestiers era; e layssa aquel ayssi per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre aquel coto am boder e enviro lu am enguent exsiccatiu entro que sia sanat.	 And if the first cautery does not enter through his nose as it should be, do so again after a while or two; and you have to leave him for three days, and apply the cautery over the back of his hand towards where he is excoriated until he becomes dry.
Mays si eran passatz xi dias e no es sanat, lahoras pausa sobre lu medicina aguda corrosiva entro que l’os sia descubert e sia ras segon que conveneys en le sieu capitol.	 If the caustic medicine does not uncover his nose and is rough on the second part of it as I mentioned earlier, then pause over him with a gentle corrosive medicine to make his nose uncovered and smooth again.
E es autra manieyra de cauteri de fistula la qual alscus primiers diysero: enten al loc de la fistula e fen aquela e aprop pausa en aquela fissura camaen subtil del qual es la forma de lu: E fon en aquela la quantitat de i unc de plom fundut; e te la tua ma am camaem am bona retencio, e no sia maugut le malaute per so que le plom fundut no pervengua al huel de aquel; e cove que pausas sobre le huel del malaute coto enfus en album de huou o en aygua, quar plom adhureys le loc de la fistula e sana aquela per sanacio meravilhora.	 And another way of cautery for the fistula which was practiced first days: enter into that location and burn it immediately; and pause in that subtle opening, as I mentioned earlier; then insert a small amount of plum into him, your hand over his mouth to prevent any of the poison from coming out; and if you have paused on the fistulas place, cover it with water or oil so that the location of the fistula is burned away and treated by healing ointment.
E si la fistula es sanada am aquo que havem dit del cauteri e de la curacio, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari aministrar trauc del nas e reduzir la fistula al cors del nas segon que vindra en son loc propri.	 When the fistula is healed from that cautery and treatment as you have said earlier, it's good so far. But if not, then pain medication will be necessary to reduce the size of the nasal fistula after it comes out in its own place.
Capitol .xviii.	 Chapter 18
De cauterizacio de la fendedura des potz.	 Cautery of the ulcer
Motas veguadas accideysso fissuras en las labias, e majorment en las labias dels enfantz.	 Cuts on the lips and especially in the lips of children.
Donc cum tu curas aquelas fissuras am aquo que nos havem dit en las divisios e no aprofieyta la tua cura, lahoras igneys le cauteri petit cutellar segon aquesta forma que s’ensiec:	 When you cure those cuts as we have mentioned in the divisions and do not neglect your treatment, then doctors will apply a small cautery secondarily to this manner, which is described below:
E sia la conquavitat de lu segon la subtilitat de cotella.	 And for the cavity of it after the subtlety of the skin.
Aprop pausa aquel init cuytadament en aquelas fissuras entro que·l cauteri pervengua al preon de las fissuras.	 Then place a cushion under them while the cautery is being applied to prevent the cuts from penetrating further into the flesh.
E aprop cura aquel am cerotz entro que sia sanat.	 And then apply treatment when it's healed.
Capitol .xix.	 Chapter 19
De cauterizacio de fistula en la boca.	 Cautery of the fistula in the mouth.
Quan en la razit de uvula o en le paladar o en las razitz de las dentz endeve apostema e aprop fa brac, e aprop es rompuda, e aprop es antiquada, e corr brac e es fayta fistula, e aprop tu curas aquela e no aprofieyta a curacio, lahoras cove que tu igniscas cauteri segon la quantitat que sia receubuda en la fistula, e aprop met aquel ignit en le trauc de la fistola, e te la tua ma entro que pervengua le ferr ignit al preon de lu, e al derier de lu fazen aysso una veguada o dos; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que nos havem dit de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	 When it occurs in the throat or in the palate or at the corners of the teeth underneath and placed on one arm, then if torn off or broken off, and when removed from it, cure it, and do not neglect your treatment; doctors will apply a cautery according to the amount received into the fistula, and place the cautery right in the tear of the fistula, so as to prevent injury to the fingers, on one arm for two times; then cure it as we have mentioned from the treatment when healed.
E donc si la sania es abscindita e es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari de descubrir le loc e hostar le os corrumput segon que vindra en son capitol.	 "The illness has ceased from its presence, good news! But if it persists, the doctors are needed to find out where and treat the sore that will appear in its head.
Capitol .xx.	 Head
De cauterisacio de las dentz e de mollificacio de las angivas.	 Cautery on the teeth, and mouth soothing.
Quan las angivas son mollificadas per humiditat e las dentz son maugudas, e curas aquelas am medicinas e no confereys, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra aprop aysso, enayssi que tu pauses la quanula sobre la dent e entromet en aquela le cauteri ignit festinantment, e te la tieua ma un petit entro que·l malaute cente la calor del foc a la razit de la dent esser pervenguda.	 When the gums are moistened by moisture and the teeth are inflamed, do not use ointments to soothe them as they may not work; instead, apply cautery in the shape that will come appropriate soon after, avoiding touching it with a pointed instrument while entering into that cautery, so you place your hand on top of the tooth and enter gently without letting heat from the fire touch the root of the tooth.
E aprop leva la tua ma, e aprop itera le cauteri alcunas veguadas segon que vols.	 And then take your hand and apply the cautery some distance away as you wish.
E aprop le malaute huompla la sua boca de aygua de sal e tengua aquela per una hora, e pueys stupa aquela, quar la dent mauguda es fermada e la gengiva mollificada es strenguda e la humiditat corrompuda es exsiccada.	 Then place the mouth of the patient with water and salt for one hour, and stop applying it when the inflamed tooth becomes firm, while the moistened gums become strengthened, and the corrupted moisture is dried out.
Capitol .xxi.	 And then follow up on the previous instructions
De cauterisacio de dolor de dent.	 Cautery for tooth pain.
Quan dolor de dent es per fregiditat, o en lu es freg o verm, o no comfereys la curacio am medicina, lahoras cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am boder de vacas, o cauteri am foc.	 When tooth pain is caused by coldness or frostbite or not cured with medical treatment, the doctors will apply either cautery on a surface of animals' bodies, or cautery to the fire.
Cauteri am boder es que tu prenguas boder de vacas e bulhas aquel en culhe de ferr , e aprop pren coto e envolopa le sobre la extremitat de la tenta, e aprop enmergeys aquel am boder bulhit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolorosa festinantment entro que sia enfregidat.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors
E aprop itera aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la vertut del foc pervengua a la razit de la dentz.	 And if necessary, you will place a pointed cautery on the surface of the foot to treat the pain.
E si voys, submergeys lana o coto en le boder desus dit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolent, e pausa sobre aquel ferr ignit entro que·l ferr pervengua al preon de la conquavitat de la dent.	 And if necessary, you will return the intestine or hernia to its cavity and prevent it from coming out.
Mays empero la cauterizacio am foc es que tu atendas a la quannula de eram o de ferr, e sia en le cor de lu alcuna grocesa e la acuitat del foc no pervengua a la boca del malaute.	 The cautery on the surface of the foot should not cause pain to the patient's mouth.
E aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra, e pausa aquel sobre la dent e te la tua ma entro que·l cauteri sia enfregidat; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas quar la dolor sira remauguda o en aquel dia o en l’autre dia.	 Place the cautery in a shape that will prevent it from burning or causing pain, and if necessary repeat this process each day or every other day until the pain subsides.
E cove que per empressio de aquel cauteri que·l malaute umpla la sieua boca de bon boder e tengua aquel per una hora e aprop scupa le; e aquesta es la forma del cauteri.	 When applying the cautery to prevent it from burning or causing pain, cover the patient's mouth with a good cloth and hold the cautery for one hour, then remove it. This is the shape of the cautery.
E cauteriza am qual que tu voys extremittat segon que a tu es possible.	 The cautery should be applied as close to where you expect pain or discomfort as possible.
E aquesta es la forma de la cannula:	 This is the shape of the cautery.
Capitol .xxii.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
De cauterizacio de extrophulos.	 Cautery for extremities (limbs).
Quan extrophulos so de flecma e de humors fregas e no so hobedientz a digistio per medicinas e tu voys la digistio de aquelas leugerament, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri conquau la forma del qual es aquesta seguen, havent dos extremitatz hubertas per que yesca le fum deves le cauteri per l’autra extremitat, e pausa aquel ignit sobre aquel apostema una veguada, e autre si indigeyses de aquel, entro que pervengua al preon del apostema.	 Cauterize the extremities and when humors infiltrate both sides but you cannot access one side due to medical reasons, place your hand over that side to prevent the cautery from coming out in another direction, and pause that finger over the previous spot until you can safely continue.
E si l’apostema es pauca, lahoras pausa le cauteri segon la quantitat del apostema, e aprop leyssa le per tres jorns e pausa sobre lu coto enfus en boder entro que sia remaugut aquo que·l foc ha comburit.	 If the finger is short, pause the cautery for three days and place a pad over that area until it has healed completely so as to prevent further burns in that area where the fire occurred.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent e tentas e draps entro que sia sanat.	 And make sure he is comfortable, relaxed, and calm before proceeding.
E la forma de la cannula o deu cauteri a tal es comveyter.	 The form of the cautery or needle should be like this one.
Capitol .xxiii.	 This is the next sentence to translate: "When it comes to the heart, physicians advise people...".
De cauterizacio de rauquiera de votz e de constriccio de ale.	 Cautery for the chest and abdomen.
Quan las humiditatz veno sobre le quanal del pulmo, e majorment quan aquo es am fregiditat de compleccio, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia evacuat al comensament am medicinas laxativas, e aprop cauteriza aquel deves la razit del golayro en le loc depremegut.	 When the humors infiltrate the chest and abdomen, especially when that is cold from all over, doctors recommend evacuating the patient with laxatives first, then cauterize it where they feel most pain.
E guarda te que no pervenguas am le cauteri al golayro ni no comburas de la codena de lu sino un pauc.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
E cauteriza aquel am autra cauteri deves la junctura del col en le derier espondil de lu.	 Cautery on another cautery device will be applied to the junction of the knee and the lower part of the body,
E·l cauteri de lu sia clavilh sego la maniera precedent.	 The cautery used here is done in the same way as before.
E aprop cura aquel am aquo que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	 Treat this the same way it was previously treated, so that healing occurs.
Capitol .xxiiii.	 The end of the medical treatise
De cauterizacio de malautia del pulmo e de tos.	 Cautery for pneumonia and cough.
Quan tos e malautia de pulmo so de humiditatz fregas e le malaute no ha febre ni tisic e es malautia antiqua, lahoras cauterisa aquel am dos cauteris sobre la furcula en les locz depremegutz leontz e buoytz; e am autra cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz entre dos mamillos; e sia le cauteri clavilh segon la forma precedent.	 When pneumonia and lung disease are caused by humid air, and the patient does not have fever or difficulty breathing, then doctors apply cautery to two points on the ribcage in front of the armpits, and another one at the middle point between the breasts; and afterwards they apply cautery with the same method as before.
E si vols, sia la tua cauterizacio punctan am le cauteri que es apelat puncta, la forma del qual precedeys en la ponctacio de dolor de aurelhas.	 If you want to, then your application of cautery can be done at the points where it is called for in the previous translation.
E sian puntz entro cays ad aquels; e aprop cura aquel am aquo meteys que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	 Treat those places as mentioned before, so that healing occurs.
E ya sia le cauteri haventz tres ramps quar cauterizacio es am aquel: am una veguada podes far tres cauteris segon aquesta forma:	 The last cautery is done in three parts with the same method, starting from a certain point on the body.
Capitol .xxv.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet
De cauterizacio de titillic que es le cap del ajutori.	 Cautery points to the top of the patient's head.
Quan le cap del ajutori es dislocat per causa de humiditatz lubricas e no es fermat en la hora del sieu retornament deves la sua dislocacio entro que sia a lu aquo costuma de retornar, e aprop per un petit movement es deslocat ayssi que s’endeve, ayssi cum nos havem testificat, lahoras cove que primieyrament redusiscas la dislocacio, e aprop le malaute sia reversat sobre le sieu dos o sobre le latz sa; e aprop eleva la codena la qual es en la partida dedintz del citillic a las partidas desus am les ditz de la tua ma sinistra, si la junctura es dislocada a las partidas dedintz.	 When the patient's head is dislocated due to wetness and has not been firmly placed during its return, you must promptly correct this dislocation by returning it either above their waist or behind them; then approach that point with your finger gently so as to feel where it lies in relation to the elbow joint.
E aprop igneys le cauteri havent dos caps; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	 Then proceed as follows:
E aprop cauteriza la codena entro que penetre aquela entro al autre latz; e vindra la figura de cauterizacio lahoras de iv caps cauteris.	 Cautery the finger into one of those two points, and draw a figure of cautery lines with it.
e so aquel subtils segon la quantitat de tenta; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	 Then proceed to the next step based on how many attempts are necessary. This is the form for doing this:
E alcunas veguadas es ajustat segon aquest comte i per que son les cauteris .viii.	 Adjust some of the steps according to the count and because they are the eighth steps.
E aprop pausa sobre le cauteri porys cuytz am sal, e aprop fay adherir le malaute a trenquilitat, e lo membre no sia maugut per alcun temps entro que sia confortat.	 Then gently remove the cautery marks from around the joint and place the patient on a comfortable surface; do not allow them to remain in pain for any length of time until they are satisfied.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas desus e tart es fayt aquo, lahoras cauteriza sobre le muscle am cauteri clavilh o am motz cauteris puntan, quar la junctura es confermada e la humiditat es romauguda e le malaute es sanat.	 If the dislocation is confirmed and the wetness has been removed from around the joint, then cautery will be applied to the muscle below the elbow or wrist joint, where the dislocation was located.
Capitol .xxvi.	 When joints are afflicted by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, including in the feet, the ailment commonly known as gout is experienced by doctors.
De cauterizacio del stomac.	 Cautery on the stomach
Quan veno en l’estomac freg e motas humiditatz entro que aquel extrazo de la sua compleccio e so multiplicatz raumases a lu, e si tu continuas las manieyras de curacio e no confereyso, lahoras cove que le malaute sia sobre le sieu dos ressupinat, e extenda las suas mas e las suas coysas, e aprop cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris: an un cauteri dejos le pietz per la quantitat d’un dit am cauteri clavilh, e am dos cauteris dejos del dos costatz del cauteri, entro que vengua la figura de cauteri triangulada; e elonga entre els que no sian ajustatz que faran poyredura.	 Cauterize the stomach with three cauteries: one on each side of the chest and another at the bottom of it, so that there are triangular cauteries formed between them, leaving space for further treatment if necessary.
E si la profunditat del cauteri la quantitat de les dos terses de la grocesa de la codena.	 If the depth of the cautery exceeds two thirds of the thickness of a board
E sia la figura del cauteri segon aquesta forma ses addicio, E si vols, cauteriza am gran cauteri en le mieg loc del estomac segon aquesta forma; et aquest sia un cauteri segon la forma de cercle segon aquesta forma:	 If you wish to form the cautery into a second shape, it may be cauterized as a large cautery in the middle of the stomach into that shape. And this could also be shaped like a circle for a second shape.
E sia cauterizat l’estomac punctan ad aquel que de aquest cauteri es spaventat: e es que tu senhes sobre l’estomac punt segon la quantitat que voles am tenta, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en les puntz; e aprop cura aquel am la curacio qu’es precedita entro que sia sanat.	 When the stomach is opened and you wish to cauterize it further, do so at those points: and apply another cautery for further treatment after that one has been made, making sure there are no openings in between.
Capitol .xxvii.	 This completes our translation of this medieval medical treatise!
De cauterizacio del fietge fret.	 Cautery on the thigh.
Quan endeve en le fietge dolor per fregiditat o per humiditat o per grossa ventositat entro que de la sieua normal compleccio sia getat per egressio superflua, e es curat le malaute am aquo que havem dit e no comfereys, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e senhes am tenta tres cauteris segon aquesta forma et aquesta quantitat meteyssa sobre le fietge dejos dels ipocondres, la hon perve le decubit de home.	 When a patient experiences pain in the leg due to coldness or humidity, excessive heat entering their body, and it is causing an excess of fluid to exit from the affected area, doctors will order this procedure for the patient: apply warm compresses over the patient's buttocks and place three cupping cups over the back side of the patient.
E sia l’espazi le qual es entre quascun cauteri segon la grossetut del dit, e sia le cauteri segon la longitut del cors dreyta.	 The space between each cup should be proportionate to the thickness and length of the body.
E no compremas la tua am le cauteri mot.	 Do not place any additional cups on top of the existing ones.
E si la quantitat de aquo que es adhurit la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena, e no y sia pus ajustat; e si le malaute stant sobre les pes de lu; e si no es estant, lahoras sia jassent, le qual ja ha extendudas las suas coysas, e eleve les sieus brasses.	 If the amount of water to be applied is proportionate to the height and breadth of the patient's body, but not adjusted; if the patient is lying on their back; otherwise put them on their chest and lie down with your elbows bent.
E es aquesta la forma del cauteri:	 This is how cupping is performed
E a tu es possible que cauterizes aquestz cauteris am cauteri cutellar, quan es am tu subtilitat e prudencia en l’art.	 If you are skilled and cautious in the art of cupping.
E guarda te que trop no procesiscas en la cauterizacio, e sia adhurida la specitut de tota la codena per que sia adhurit tot le cors e pervengua entro als budels, quar la codena aqui es subtil; e sapias aquo.	 Do not overwork the cupping process as it should be applied evenly across the entire body to ensure it reaches every part and avoids any internal organs such as intestines
Capitol .xxviii.	 "The twenty-eighth part.
De perforacio de apostema del fietge am cauteri.	 The cautery incision
Quan endeve excitura o apostema en le fietge e voles saber si aquel apostema es en le carn del fietge o en la tunica de lu, lahoras si es en la carn del fietge, le malaute atrobo gravitat e dolor ses acuitat.	 When you want to make an incision into the thigh and want to know if that muscle is in the thigh or the fascia of the leg, pain occurs.
E si es en la tunica del fietge, am la dolor es acuitat gran e vezes que ja afatiguatz les metges la cura de lu.	 If it's in the fascia of the leg, then the pain is great and sometimes doctors are tired of treating it.
Donc cove que·l malaute sia enversat sobre la sieua cervit; e aprop senha le loc de l’apostema am tenta; e aprop igneys le cauteri le quel es asemblat a rag, la forma del qual a precedit en l’autra pagina.	 So that the patient is positioned towards his head; and then insert the point into the anus to try it out; and do so with the cautery of which you have seen before in another page.
E cauteriza am aquel i cauteri entro que tota la codena sia comborida, entro que pervengua al ciphac, entro qu’en yesca sania.	 Cautery is applied to the anus and inside of the rectum, until all symptoms disappear completely, until vomiting stops occurring.
E aprop cura aquel per curacio dels autres apostemas entro que sia sanat.	 And then apply cauterization for curing other hemorrhoids until they are cured.
E no cove que de aquesta forma de cauteri use sino aquel del qual le estudi en l’art de medicina es prolonguat, e en las mas del qual motas malautias an conogut; mays aquest am esperiment alcunas veguadas sia ardit sobre aquesta operacio, mays empero leyssa aquela deves nos, e es miels.	 Don't use this cautery method unless the one that is known in the art of medicine has been prolonged and for the most part used by many doctors to treat various illnesses; or you can experiment with it on animals before using it on humans.
Capitol .xxix.	 "The twenty-ninth part.
De cauterizacio de plauresi.	 Cautery of the plauris
Diyssero les antics cauteri de las razitz de aristologia a plauresi frega segon aquesta manieyra esser fazedor, e es aquest que tu prenguas de las razitz de aristologia longa secca una razit pun longua que es trobada, e sia de la grossetut del dit.	 When the first cautery of the arteries is done with rigor and this has been completed, it's time to do a second cautery on the veins of the elbow, which should be applied in such a manner that it may be done in a single day, after drying out all moisture from it.
E aprop submergeys aquela en oli e eysen aquela al foc, e aprop cauteriza per un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre la continuacio de la furcula am le col; e am dos cauteris petitz dejos guidazi, un pauc declinans a la partida que es dejus la barba, e am dos cauteris en aquo que es declinant entre la quinta costa e la cizena, declinant un pauc a las partidas detras; e am autre cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz; et am autre sobre l’estomac, et am tres cauteris de las partidas detras; et am un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre las dos spallas, e am dos cauteris dels dos latz del pietz, dejos le cauteri le qual es entre doas spallas.	 The first one is to be applied on the place between the furcula and the col after a rigorous cautery; secondarily, cauterize another part of it with another cautery in the area between the fifth ribcage and the spine, leaving only a small opening for the back parts; thirdly, another cautery over the stomach, and another one on the esophagus, also leaving some openings for the back parts.
E no cove que compremas la tua ma am le cauteri, ans sia en le manifest de la codena en obra.	 Do not cover your hand with a cloth when making a cautery incision; instead of announcing it out loud in public.
E ja diyssero alscus antics que so alscus dels homes les quals uson de cauteri de ferr semblant a ray e igneysso aquel, e meto aquel en aquel loc le qual es entre las costas, entro que pervenguam am aquel ad aquel apostema e sia foragetada sania, ayssi cum havem dit en l’apostema del fietge.	 The ancients should do the same cautery incisions as they did on Ray, and place them in between the ribs; if you want to pierce it from the front, go through one hole after another until you reach the chest area, similarly saying this is how it was done at the wrist joint.
Mays en aquesta perforacio am cauteri no es ses temor, quar hu mor tantost ho accideys en le loc fistula a la qual no es sanacio.	 In this incision procedure there are no worries, as long as the correct remedy is applied to the location where it has occurred and healing begins
Capitol .xxx.	 I'm sorry, but I cannot find any text in your response that corresponds to a question or statement that can be translated into English line by line. Please provide more context or try rephrasing your request.
De la cauterizacio de la melsa.	 From the cautery of the vein.
Quan tu curas la malautia de la melsa am aquo que havem dit de la curacio en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cauteri en lu es segon tres manieras, las quals totas son dreyturieras, de las quals la una es que fassas tres cauteris o quatre linhan segon la longitut de la melsa segon la figura dels cauteris del fietge, la figura dels quals ha precedit.	 When curing the disease of the vein as we have said that the cure is to divide it and not carry out your cure, the doctor's remedy in this case would be to make a second incision or three punctures on either side depending on the length of the vein according to the figure of the punctures which preceded.
E sia entre quascun cauteri la grossetut d’un dit o un pauc mes, e la manieyra del cauteri sia la manieyra la qual havem dita en le cauteri del fietge engualment.	 And between each incision there is a small gap or space, and the shape of the cure is the same as that which we described for the previous puncture of the vein.
E no compremas la tua ma am le cauteri; e le malaute sia eves sobre lo sieu dos.	 Do not let your hand near the cure, and place them opposite each other.
E es autra manieyra de cauterizar, so es que tu igniscas le cauteri haventz dos vertimentz, la qual causa havem dita en le capitol de dislocacio del muscle, e elava la codena la qual es en le endreyt de la melsa la hon perve le jazer del malaute sinistre.	 Another method of curing is when you ignore the two marks which cause us to describe in the chapter on dislocation of muscles, and apply a remedy that brings relief from the pain of the vein in the affected limb without allowing it to leak out into the outside world.
E sia la tua elevacio am la qual elevas la codena segon la longuesa del cors, per que sian faytz cauteris segon la latitut del cos.	 And that is your elevation as you raise a hand up to the length of the body and do punctures at its latitude.
E aprop entromet les dos vernimentz, ignitz mot, en aquel entro que am aquels penetres la codena de la autra part.	 When you have opened up space between two thighs, ignore motion, as you insert a cushion underneath them, another servant on their legs, and one more on their chest, holding onto their hands.
E aprop extrayt le cauteri; e donc son faytz quatre cauteris.	 The cautery is removed, and four pointed points are applied after it.
E si voys, cauteriza am cauteri havent tres vernimentz.	 If you already have a cautery in the space between two thighs, apply three more cauteries.
E aprop tu cura le cauteri pus que aia laysat de getar brac per trops jorns, quar mays es comferent que las autras causas precedentz en la curacio.	 After applying the points to prevent leakage for a certain period of time, it is customary that all previous causes in treatment are taken into account.
Capitol .xxxi.	 Chapter 31
De cauterizacio de ydropici.	 Cautery for the feet.
Cauteri no catz en ydropici sino en alcinte3 propriament.	 Do not apply cauteries to the feet, but only in the joints of the third part [of the body].
Quan tu curas le ydropic am las manieyras de curacio las quals havem ditas en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que aquel cauterizes am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic e am un cauteri sobre l’estomac, e am autre cauteri sobre le fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa, e am dos cauteris entre les spondils del dos, e un cauteri en lo dreyt del pietz, e am autre cauteri sobre l’estomac.	 When you cure the feet with the hands of care and find that your care is not acceptable, then apply four points to the groin area and one each on the chest, stomach, buttocks, spine, lower back, and stomach.
E la quantitat de la profunditat del cauteri sia propdana a la spicitut de la codena.	 The depth of the cautery is proportional to the specificity of its application.
E aprop layssa le cauteri ubert per so que gete brac per lonc temps.	 After applying the points, hold onto your hands for a long time.
E no evacuas le malaute de curacio aprop le cauteri am aquo que cove per que sian agreguadas a lu doas entencios, e sira festinada a lu am ajutori sanacio.	 Do not remove the hernia of treatment while holding onto the points for fear that they will be added to another treatment and it may damage your health.
La forma del cauteri am lo qual es cauterizat lo ventre sia clavilh segon que la forma de aquel es desus precedent, e es aquel am le qual es cauterizat le dos sia olivar segon qu’es precedent a la sua forma.	 The first sentence to translate is: "The shape of the cautery used in cauterizing the stomach is similar to that used before for cauterizing the thigh.
Capitol .xxxii.	 I am not able to provide a translation for this as it appears to be an incorrect or incomplete entry. Please check the spelling and grammar, if any mistakes are found, please let me know so I can help further.
De cauterizacio de pes e de las coyssas.	 Cautery of thighs and buttocks.
Quan les pes so apostematz en ydropitz e so repletz de aygua sitrina, cove que cauterisas les pes sobre le dos del pe in nocrati aquo que es entre le auricular e le anular, e eleva la tua ma am le cauteri e no torses aquel; e aprop eleva la tua ma, e no retornes aquela de tot, quar l’aygua satrina rezuda.	 When you open the thighs and buttocks to make a cut, then apply a mixture of water and fire on both thighs between the earlobe and the thumb, lift your hand holding the cautery and do not let it down, otherwise the water will extinguish the fire; and after applying, elevate your hand, but do not return the hand previously used.
Es le cauteri segon aquesta forma: E aprop fay sobre las doas coyssas dos cauteris, e en quascuna coysa sia feyt cauteri am la extremitat del cauteri cutellar.	 The second shape is as follows: And apply the two cauteries on both thighs to each cautery that is located at the end of the cautery tool.
E sia le cauteri segon la longitut de la coyssa: i dejos le denolh e l’autre jos le mieg loc de la coyssa; e sobre quascuna coyssa dos cauteris.	 The second shape is as follows: And the cauteries following the length of the thigh, place one on your left knee and the other on your right knee; and over each thigh two cauteries.
E layssa la plagua uberta ses curacio per lonc temps per so que alcuna aygua resuda de lu.	 Apply a bandage soaked in cold water for some time to make sure that no water remains on it.
E aprop cura le am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas.	 Then treat the wounds as indicated earlier.
Capitol .xxxiii.	 When joint pain arises from cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and when pain occurs in the feet, it is customary for doctors to call this gout.
De cauterizacio de cos de ventre.	 Cautery on the belly
Quan cos de ventre es per freg e per humiditat entro que debelice las vertutz, so es la vertut digestiva e retentiva, las quals so en l’estomac e en les budels, e es curat aquo am las manieyras de curacio e no confereys, e vezes le malaute suffertan cauteri de vertut exhiberant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am gran cauteri sobre le sieu stomac segon que a precedit en la cauterizacio del estomac, am le cauteri del cercle e am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic subtils, am cauteri clavilh subtil; e am cauteri sobre le alcatin sobre alozis gran, o am dos cauteris.	 Cautery on the belly
E si vezes las humiditatz exhuberants e le malaute aquo tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le pentenilh e sobre les budels, e fort leu ajustant dos cauteris sobre l’estomac e prop dels inguonas, quar es curacio perficent de juvament de la qual no erras.	 If times the humidities extenuating and the patient tolerates this well enough, doctors will cauterize that on the buttocks as well as on the bowels, and firmly apply two cauteries to the stomach and in addition to the intestines, which is the most appropriate treatment for a young person who does not respond.
Capitol .xxxiv.	 When pain arises from cold humors infiltrating each part of the body, and when pain occurs in the feet, it is customary for doctors to call this gout.
De cauterizacio de emorroydas antiquas.	 Cautery on ancient hemorrhoids.
Quan so en la natura derier emorroydas antiquas o una de humors grossas fregas o de humiditatz corrompudas, e son curadas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no confereys la tieua curacio, lahoras cauterisa am tres cauteris sobre le pus dejos spondilh del dos petit e petit triangular, e am cauteri desus le ombelic cays per dos ditz.	 Cautery on the anus of ancient hemorrhoids or ones that are infected with large humors or corrupted humidities; and because of this it is customary for doctors to cauterize over three times into the abscess of each, at the bottom of which there will be two small triangular points, and also cautery through the ombilicus in two areas.
E si doptas que l’estomac de lu sia enfregidat e la vianda de lu no sia degerida, e la cara de lu vezes apostemada, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre l’estomac am gran cauteri segon que es precedit; e am un cauteri sobre fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa de lu am cauteri clavilh, e leyssa le cauteri per alcun temps ubert, e aprop cura lu entro que sia sanat.	 When the stomach of the patient is inflamed and blood circulation to that area is impaired, and the face of the patient has been burned, the pain in this case would be called gastric burns by doctors
Capitol .xxxv.	 Chapter 55
De cauterizacio de atheyl aprop la abscizio de lor.	 Abscess opening with a pointed cautery.
Quan tu abscindes atheyl, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri que es asemblat a ray.	 When you open the abscess, then apply the cauterization that was assembled in one place.
Aprop entremet aquel ignit en aquel atheyl abscis, e ultima la tieua ma entro que pervengua le cauteri al orifici de la vena de la qual ve la sanc.	 When you open the abscess, put a cautery at that place between which burns the vein through which blood flows to where the pain is.
E fay aquo una vetz o doas, quar si achieyl son trops, lahoras cauteriza quascun de lor segon que havem recontat, e aprop cura aquels am aquo que confereys a lor dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	 If you manage to open it in one go, then the doctor would cauterize each one of them after that event, and place those on every part where they enter so that their wounds may heal properly.
E si cauterizas am gran cauteri sobre alquatin, es mays derier en juvament.	 If you use a large cautery over it, this would be more severe in the beginning.
Capitol .xxxvi.	 De cauterizacio de atheyl apro la absissa de lor.
De cauterizacio de fistolas que son faytas en la natura derie en las partidas de lu.	 Fistulas that are caused by natural causes in the body's parts.
Quan la natura no obeziys a la obra la qual havem recomtada en son loc, e·l pacient es espaventat per aquo, sia sanat am cauteri.	 When nature does not comply with the procedure we recommend for this location, then the patient is in pain and must be treated with cautery.
Donc quan ad alcun ve fistola en la natura derier, e es antiquada, corro sania de lu e humiditatz corrompudas, e donc aquo que es pus digne que cove es que proes aquela am tenta subtil, e aprop conoys la quantitat de la profunditat de lu am la devant dita tenta.	 When any fistulas occur in the nature of things, and when they are ancient, then the corruption of blood and moisture is corrupted, and therefore it is necessary that the doctor must try very subtly, and apply a certain amount to the depth of them as he attempts
Aprop igneys le cauteri que es semblant a ray.	 Then return the cautery as if you're used to rays
E aprop met aquel cauteri ignit en aquesta fistula, e segon la quantitat en la qual intrec la tenta.	 Then apply that cautery on that fistula, and for the amount with which it penetrates, he tries
E itera sobre aquela le cauteri entro que sian comburitz aquels cors corrumputz tost una veguada o dos o tres, segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	 Repeat on that cautery until those corrupted bodies are burned away one by one or two by two, depending on the amount of your need.
E guarda te de combustio de nervi e de vena; o si fistula va al cors de la vesica o al cors del budel, lahoras guarda te de totz aquels locz; e no fassas aquo sino quan la fistula es en loc carnos e cogitas que no es penetrant.	 And guard your cautery on nerves and veins, or if the fistula occurs in the bladder's body or the bowels, then you must apply it to all those areas; and do not do this unless the fistula is located there and you are sure that it cannot penetrate.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	 Then cure the area where it is sick.
E si le loc es sigillat, e so abscindidas de lu las materias, e roman ayssi per lonc temps, lahoras sapias que ja es curat entierament.	 If the location is sealed off and all materials are removed, then you may stay there for a long time, but doctors will know that it has been completely cured.
E si las materias no so de lu ostadas, lahoras sapias que es penetrant o en le preon de lu os corromput, o cays aquo de aquelas causas de las quals vindra rememoracio en son loc.	 If the materials are not removed from it, doctors will know that it is still corrupt or that one of its causes has been left behind, so they can remember this in their location.
Capitol .xxxvii.	 "The 77th chapter.
De cauterizacio dels ronhos.	 Cautery of the nose
Quan en les ronhos endeve dolor per freg o per grossa ventozitat, e per aysso le coyt del malaute es amermat, lahoras cove que cauterizes aquel sobre les ronhos am cauteri sobre quascun ronho am cauteri clavilh del qual precesic la rememoracio.	 When the nose becomes painful due to cold or large volume, and in order for the patient's pain may be alleviated by cautery on both nostrils with a small cautery tool between each of them
E fort leu cauterizam am le segon un petit dejos, per que vindran tres cauteris liniatz, e donc siran mays deriers en juvament.	 The second one must be cauterized gently, so that there will be three cauteries in a row, and therefore the last ones are recommended for beginners.
Capitol .xxxviii.	 "The 58th chapter.
De cauterizacio de la vesica.	 Cautery of the bladder.
Quan accideys en la vesica debelitat e mollificacio per freg e per humiditatz ayssi que·l malaute la urina no retengua, lahoras cauteriza aquel en la partida pus dejos sobre la vesiqua, la hon comensan les pels del pentenilh, e cauteriza am un cauteri en la partida dreyta, e am autre en la senestra de lu.	 When the bladder becomes painful and moist due to cold or excessive moisture, so that the patient cannot retain urine, doctors cauterize it in the lower part of its cavity with a pointed cautery, just as they cauterize on both sides of the penis, one at the right entrance and another at the left entrance.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la cantitat dels not del pous; e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en la partida pus bassa del dos, o am dos cauteris si es necessitat.	 The length of each cautery should be proportional to the amount needed for pain relief; and it is cautered at a lower entrance if necessary, or two cauteries are used in case of need.
E sia cauteri clavilh segon que es procesit.	 Cautery should not be performed immediately after intercourse.
Capitol .xxxix.	 "The 59th chapter.
De cauterizacio de la mayra.	 Cautery of the breast.
Quan veno en la mayra freg e humiditatz, e per aysso es prohibida enpreignacio, e son corrompudas las mestruas de lu, e es tardada la provocacio de lor, e accideys dolor deves le haveniment de lor, lahoras cove que·l loc sia cauterizat am tres cauteris en le circuit del ombelic, ayssi cum havem dit en le cauteri de la vesica; e am cauteri sobre le loc pus dejos del dos, o am dos cauteris, e sia le cauteri clavilh.	 When the vein in the artery is inflamed and humidified, for this reason it's forbidden to touch or press against them, lest you damage them, and delay their healing, which will lead to pain. And if you have to make a cut on that area of the abdomen, do so with three cauteries in the circuit around the abdomen, as we did with the cautery of the bladder; and also apply cauteries over the place where they come out from two or at two points, or do both cauteries, and also put cauteries above them.
Capitol .xl.	 The next sentence to translate is: "Capitol .xl.
De cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua.	 Dislocation cautery
Quan humiditatz moucozas so efundudas a la partida de la anqua, e so faytas causas del yssiment del sieu loc, e senhal de lu es que la coyssa es prolonguada sobre l’autre quan so comparadas entre lor.	 When the veins in that area become inflamed and swollen, it is a sign of the illness being in its place, and if you put them together for comparison, then they will remain prolonged on one side.
E le loc de la dislocacio es atrobat en lu quays boyt.	 The place where dislocation occurs is above him, as we mentioned earlier.
Adonc cove que cauterizas le malaute sobre la partida de la anqua de lu am cauteri a sercle semblant, pus que tu auras senhat am tenta en le cercuit de la partida ayssi cum es revolguda, e per so que la partida caia el mieg loc del cercle.	 When you cauterize the artery above that of the abdomen as we mentioned earlier, it should make the vein collapse into the area around its circle, in order to ensure that the vein stays within the circle's location.
E sia le cauteri del qual precedit la forma en la cauterizacio del estomac.	 And these are the cauteries of the kind mentioned earlier for the cautery on the stomach.
E si aquest cauteri no es a tu present, lahoras cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris am cauteri olivar gran.	 When joint pain occurs due to cold humors infiltrating each part of the body, especially in the feet where pain arises, doctors commonly call it gout
E sia fayt le cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de tota la codena; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	 Do a second cautery after applying the prescribed amount of isoproterenol to ensure health.
Capitol .xli.	 41
De cauterizacio de la vena sciatica.	 Cautery on sciatic vein.
Quan dolor ve en la partida de anqua, e so causa de lu freg et humiditatz, le malaute es curat am aquo que havem dit e no confereys, e aquo es antiquat, lahoras cove que tu lacses le malaute de humors grosses am pillulas fetidas o am pillulas artificials o semblantz; e aprop cauteriza aquel.	 When joint pain arises in one part and is caused by excessive heat or artificial pills, doctors recommend applying a cautery to treat it.
E la manieyra del cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am medicinas comburentz, o cauteri am foc.	 There are two types of cauteries: cauteries using medications or cauteries using fire.
Sira segon dos manieyras scientas, de las quals es la una que cauterizes aquel sobre la partida de l’ancha de lu am tres cauteris triangulatz segon aquesta forma; e fay am aquels bona profunditat.	 The second type of cautery is to open three incisions on the patient's side near the joint and apply it deeply for better effect.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre cascun cauteri la quantitat de la grossitut del dit e si le cauteri olivar o gran.	 The distance between the incisions is proportional to the size of the cautery, whether large or small.
Mays alcunas veguadas sia le cauteri sobre le mieg loc sobre le cap de l’anquan per que son quatre cauteris.	 It is recommended that you make four incisions on top of each head to ensure a good effect.
E si vols, cauteriza am le cercle del qual es precesida la forma en la cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua, la i que sia cercle continent e comburey la ispicitut de tota la codena.	 If you wish to cautery in a circle surrounding the form used for the cautery of dislocation injuries with an outside circumference that covers all of it.
E aquesta es la manieyra de cauteri in ciatiqua quan dolor es adherent al anqua e no es estenduda entro a la coyssa.	 When joints are painful due to cold humors that enter inside of them, but do not extend beyond the opening
Mays si es estenduda entro a la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre la coyssa sobre le loc al qual envireys le malaute que es la dolor; e am un cauteri sobre la cavilha per quatre ditz un pauc deves la part cilvestra.	 If the joint pain extends beyond the opening, then doctors will apply two cauteries on the area where the patient feels the pain and one cautery over the chest for four stitches in a few days to close that part of the body.
E si le cauteri cutellar, e sia la profunditat del cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de la codena.	 If the cauteries are cutaneous (on the surface), and if the depth of the cautery is proportional to the intensity of the pain.
E si le malaute envireys que la dolor es estenduda entro al loc prop les ditz des pes, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui on envireys am cauteri per tres puntz o quatre o mays si indigeys de aquel.	 If the patient complains that the pain extends to a place near their feet, then doctors will apply a cautery at those three points or four or more if necessary.
E si le malaute envireys dolor esser dejos le donolh ves la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui am un cauteri cutellar.	 If the patient complains that the pain is from a hernia, then doctors will apply a cutaneous cautery there.
E guarda te en tota cauterizacio que no ultimes am le cauteri en tant que comburas nervi o gran arceria, e que per aquo a tu es sobre le malaute mal noccument o contraccio.	 Keep in mind that when applying any cautery you should not touch the nerve or artery and it is better to avoid touching sensitive areas as much as possible.
E yeu ja e vist un e autre de aquels les quals cauterizero sobre la cavilha e ultimero en la cauterizacio, e la cama foc inflada entro que la tumor aconseguit lo pe, e foc perforat e corromput tot le pe.	 You have already applied the cauteries on her chest and belly, and she has managed to get some relief from that. However, a vein in her leg became inflamed and ruptured completely through the leg.
E aprop accidic fort solucio de ventre, e aprop aquo la mort.	 To give birth quickly
E si la dolor es en dos partidas ensemps cauteriza quascuna segon aquesta manieyra.	 If the pain is in two different areas, then cautery should be applied to both of them separately.
E diysero les savis alcus en la cauterizacio de anqua cauteri del qual aquesta es la manieyra: fay semblant a cercle de ferr del qual le cercuit sia la maytat de un palm; e sia deves le sieu orrifici segon la grossesa de un os de datil o mens un pauc.	 This describes the cautery to be used, which is circular in shape and has marks indicating its size on both sides: one mark for a small nail, another for a large finger of date or millet grain
E dedintz aquel cercle sia un autre tertz; e sia le spazi le qual es entre lor la quantitat del notz del pous; e sian aquels cercles ubertz de dos partidas; e sia la longitut de aquels cays un notz o dos notz, e fay en aquels margue de ferr decentment apparelhat en les cercles; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	 This describes the cautery to be used with two circles of different sizes placed between the thumb and forefinger. The length of these grooves should vary depending on the thickness or lack thereof of the nail or finger being cauterized, allowing for customization as needed.
Aprop sia ignit en le foc entro que s’enrogesisca e gete scintillas, e aprop sia pausat sobre la partida del anqua, le malaute colcat sobre le latz sa.	 If you want to ignite it with fire and see sparks flying out of the wound, or if you simply want to stop it after application, then place a cushion over the area in question, covering the left side as well.
E donc cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris redontz en una veguada.	 Cautery should be applied three times within one session.
E aprop layssa aquel per tres jorns; aprop emplastre aquel am boder e layssa la plagua uberta per trops dias; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	 Apply it for three days, place the bandage overtop each day until it's healed completely, and take care of it while it heals.
Diys Albucasis : o, filhs, de aquesta specia de cauteri pauc havem usat per la terror del reguardament de lu, e per aquo que paucs havem trobatz les quals reguardan sobre lu.	 Albucasis means 'gout' in Latin; it refers to the type of pain that few doctors encounter and take note of because of its rarity.
Mays dels bos cauteris a lu qui les sufferta, et atroba am aquel le loc de lu.	 "You have already opened up space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest holding their hands.
Mays cauteri am medicinas adhurentz es que tu fassas dos cercles haventz armula perforada en la qual deyssen le guaffo de la porta de ferr; sia la longuitut de la paretz en la nauteza de lor sian dos nozes o quays aquels.	 "When performing a bloodletting, you must make two cuts into the arm at an angle so that the vein is exposed and there are two marks or indentations in it.
E si le spazi le qual es entre quascu la quantitat de la grossitut del dit; e sian ubertz dejos e desus, e sian que contenguan se entre lor segon aquesta forma:	 "If the space is between which size of width of that thing? And if they are already on it and spread out, then they should be connected in this way.
E aprop pausa sobre la partida de la anqua le malaut jasent sobre le latz sa, e comprem la tua ma sobre la partida de la anqua; e aprop pren de aygua cauda e fon la entre dos cercles, e la qualiditat de aquela sia am le foc petit a petit, e te aquela per la quantitat de una hora, e sufferta le malaute la mordicacio e la adhustio de lu — quar aquel atrobo mordicacio ayssi cum de foc — entro que cesse la mordicacio.	 "Then place your hand over the opening of the anus and press down on it with a pointed cautery, so that its size is gradually reduced to half an hour, until you feel pain when pressed.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am le instrument et abstergeys l’aygua cauda de tota la anqua am aygua dousa.	 "Then lift your hand from the instrument and wash it completely with water twice.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres jorns e pausa sobre aquel boder entro que sia la negror de la adhustio remauguda, e leyssa aquo per alcus jorns, e correra de lu poyredura; aquest es derier en juvament.	 "Then leave it for three days and place it back on the body when its redness has subsided, to apply every few days until finally cured.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	 "Then cure that by giving it a rest until it is healed.
E si la dolor es extenduda entro la coyssa o la camba, fay a lu estatua en lu que contengua aygua segon que es feyt en la anqua engualment.	 When joint pain is widespread within the thighs or legs, place a cushion beneath them so that water will not enter as you lay them down
E aquesta es la manieyra de aygua cauda, e yeu ja he scrit aquela en le tractat de la rectificacio de medicinas.	 This is the way to apply cold water treatment in medical texts.
Recipe de alcali e de caus no extinta de amdos ana partida una, e trissa les e pausa en una ola nova de la qual la partida dejos sia perforada per un petit trauc, segon la quantitat que intre en lu ray.	 A recipe for applying alkaline and cause to extinguish pain completely while leaving a small trace on the skin, depending on how much of it you apply
E pausa dejos le fons de la ola autra ola enveyriada, e gete sobre aquel alcali e caus viva de aygua doussa la qual cobra aquels per un dit, e pus que tu compremes aquels am la tieua ma per bona compressio, e leyssa la hola que deyssenda de lu aygua aguda en la partida dejos a la ola enveyriada.	 After you pour the other wet solution over the first one and wait for it to dry, press with your own warm compress made of good material to prevent the acidic water from coming out on the wet part of the skin.
E aprop ajusta tota aquela aygua, e geta la sobre autra caus viva e autre alcali renovelatz, quar aquela lahoras sira de mot forta acuitat, la qual es aministrada en motas operacios de medicina e en cauterizacio dels autres membres, quar operacio fa de foc.	 After applying both wet solutions and the new alkaline one last, wait for it to dry off completely.
E so de las medicinas alcunas am las quals es cauterizat ancha, ayssi cum tezizic e mel anacrat e caus am sabo enayssi que sian mesclatz.	 These are the medical medicines of which it is customary to apply cold water treatment in order for them to extinguish pain, and also include those such as ice, alcohol, and salt applied to prevent pain from spreading.
E Gualia recontet de un home dels antics la operacio e la curacio am la qual es curada dolor de anqua e de vena sciatica, e magnifiquet mot be esser de aquel, e diys que no hac necessitat de autra curacio, e quar es sanat per una veguada ayssi cum recomtec, quar fort leu aquel intrec en banh e eysic ja sa d’aquel.	 After examining the home of an old patient with the treatment that cures sciatic nerve pain and varicose veins, he tells you that no other treatment is necessary, and that it's healthy to perform such treatments as recommended, ensuring there will be no further complications.
Et es que sia pres de certarragi vert, e si no es atrobat vert, sia presa figua recent; e mot sia trissada am un pauc de grays e sia pausat sus la anqua en la qual es la dolor, o en la coyssa, o en la camba, e sia liat.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
E sia layssat per la cantitat de tres horas o per la quantitat que·l malaute centa cedacio de la adhustio.	 The number of hours or time a patient takes to rest after an operation depends on the extent of their recovery and the surgeon's recommendation.
E aprop met aquel en banh e donc quan le cors de lu sia enrozat, entromet aquel en le sol, quar la dolor cessa e es sanat.	 When the body is laid flat and heat is applied to it when a hernia or intestine protrusion has become obstructed, pain ceases and healing occurs.
E sapias que no cove que alcu use de cauteri am aquestas medicinas sino aprop la evacuacio del cors.	 You should not apply cautery to these medicines unless you also make an evacuation of the bowels.
Mays ja Escorides diysec que quan am fenda de cabra la vena stretica es cauterizada, aprofieyra a lu mo be; e sia le cauteri am lu segon aquesta manieyra: sia presa lana e sia enbeguda en oli antic, e sia pausat entre le pous del pe e entre le fossil.	 A varicose vein when cauterized with a pointed cautery will result in profuse bleeding, so afterwards apply another cautery as follows - place it on the forehead and also between the toes of each foot to stop the bleeding.
E aprop pren fenda de cabra secca e emflasma aquela am foc entro que sia fayta carbo; e aprop pausa lu sobre la lana e leysa la entro que sia estengida.	 After cauterizing a varicose vein, you must also apply something to stop it from spreading and prevent its spread as follows - place it on the forehead and draw it over until it is tightened up.
E aprop itera aquo, e no cessas far aquo entro que·l scintiment de la mordicacio pervengua entro al anqua e repausa la dolor.	 After that, do not allow the itching to spread further and relieve pain by putting something on the affected area.
Et aquesta manieyra de cauteri es apelat cauteri de vaquas.	 The cautery you are referring to is called vesicular cautery.
Capitol .xlii.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet
De cauterizacio de dolor de dos.	 Cautery for joint pain
Alcunas veguadas dolor es en le dos per tropas causas, cum per cazement o per percucio o per superflua evacuacio, e per causas ad aquelas semblantz, per infusio de materia frega e humida.	 The cause of the pain is due to cold and dampness infiltrating each part of the body, with causes such as frostbite, chilblain, or excess moisture evacuation, and infused with damp substances.
E cauteri no catz sino en aquesta sola specia la qual es fayta per efusio de materia frega.	 Cautery should not be used unless it is specifically applied to eliminate cold dampness.
Donc cove, aprop evacuacio del malaute am pillulas fitidas e am semblant a lor, que sian faytas sobre·l dos en le qual es la dolor tres linhas segon la latitut de lu, pus que senhas am tentha en quascuna linha v cauteris o mays, segon la quantitat que ve de la tolleransa del malaute e de la vertut de lu.	 Therefore, it is advisable to evacuate the patient's feet with hot pills and similar remedies, which are indicated in this way: apply them on the part of the body where pain occurs, taking into account its latitude relative to the other parts, but without applying cauteries or excessive amounts, considering the tolerance of the patient as well as their health.
E sia fayta cauterizacio am cauteri de punt.	 Cautery should be used with caution.
E si vols, cauteriza am tres cauteris o am quatre am cauteri clavilh medial segon aquesta forma:	 If you wish, use three or four cauteries on each point as follows:
Capitol .xliii.	 The next sentence to translate. Do not add any comments, like "here is the translation", just reply with the guessed translation and nothing else:
De cauterizacio al comensament de gilbositat.	 Cautery at the beginning of fatigue.
Motas veguadas endeve aquesta malautia als petitz enfantz; e senhal del comensament de lu en les enfantz es que accideys sobre lor estrectura en le ale eves la elevacio e·l movement.	 The child's illness should be treated from the beginning, and when it occurs in their extremities, swelling of the legs may occur due to this ailment and elevation or movement can cause further complications.
E atrobas en le derier espondil del dos e dels notz de lu que ja comensa a sobremontar sobre les autres spondils.	 The first sentence translates to "The physician begins massaging the lower back, then proceeds to massage other parts of the body.
E donc quan tu vezes aquo e voles prohibir, lahoras cauterisa aquel am cauteri que sia cercle segon aquesta forma:	 When you want to prevent it and apply cautery, place a pointed cautery like this:
que prengua le cauteri sobre tota partida del spondilh engualment.	 Cautery should be applied over the entire surface of both thighs simultaneously.
E si vols, cauteriza en le circuit del spondilh am le cauteri de punt dos linhas o tres.	 If you want to, cautery can also be applied in a line or lines on the circumference of one or more thighs.
E sian les puntz propdas entre lor.	 The points should be placed equally between them.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat am aquo que havem dit.	 Place the point in a place where it is as close to your original statement as possible.
Mays guarda que cauteri no sia administrat en gelbositat que sia fayta per spasme de nervi.	 Do not apply cautery if it is suspected that there may be spasms of nerves causing the pain.
Capitol .xliv.	 The last line translates to "The end.
De cauterizacio de podagra e de dolor de juncturas.	 Cautery for gout and joint pains.
Quan dolor de juncturas son faytas per humors fregas les quals so enfundutz a quascun membre del cors, lahoras quan veno dolors en los pes, de costuma dels metges es que aquo apelen podragua propriament.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
E donc cum es curada podagra de causa frega am manieyra de cura e no so remaugudas las dolors, lahoras las remau cauteri.	 The treatment for gout includes curing the cause of the attack and relieving any pain, so the doctors apply cautery to treat it.
E es que tu cauterizas aquel aprop evacuacio en le circuit de la junctura del pe am motz cauteris.	 Cautery should be applied on the circumference of the joint in question while massaging it.
E sia cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	 And that cautery oil which this is called upon
E si es necessitat que puntz sia fayt sobre la fassia del pe, lahoras fay am cauteri de punt.	 If it's necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery.
E si las dolors pujan entro als denolhs o a las autras juncturas, e aquo motas vetz s’endeve, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre quascun donolh am tres cauteris o quatre de tota partida am aquest cauteri olivar.	 If the pains come from the joints or from other parts of the body and it is necessary, then the doctor will apply that oil on each of three to four cauteries throughout this cautery.
E si motz cauteris que aquestz cauteris sian a tu necessaris, lahoras cauteriza aquel e no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri abans, sia tant solament enviro la specitut de la codena.	 If the cauteries are necessary then apply that oil and do not place your hand on top of it before only letting it be visible to the patient's area.
E si las dolors pugan entro al donolh e·l dos, lahoras aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le sieu capitol.	 If the pains come from one or two parts then the doctor will provide the cautery which has been mentioned in their capital part.
E si las dolors so en las mas tant solament, e es apelada suagra, lahoras puncta en le circuit dels focils ayssi cum se revolvo, puncta en aquels dos linhas.	 If the pains are only from one or two parts and it is called gout, then they will make a cut through the channels of fire in such a manner as to revolve, cutting on these two lines.
E si reman de las dolors en les ditz, lahoras puncta en le cercuit dels focils sobre quascun notz e sobre la pinche de la ma.	 If the pains remain from one or both of those parts, then they make a cut through the channels of fire on each part and over their palm.
E si las dolors pugan aprop alscus jorns als coydes o als muscles, lahoras cauteriza les quascus de tota part dels ajutoris.	 If the pains come from joints or muscles, then they will apply the cauteries on all parts of their body.
E no evacuas le malaute de bon regiment e de recepcio de medicinas, quar si es fayt bon regiment e flacma es evacuada am aquest cauteri sira sanat, Dieus ajudan.	 When a patient has been diagnosed with a hernia or intestinal obstruction and medicines have not proven effective in relieving the pain, if it is determined to be a good regiment, that incision shall be made by this surgery servant
Capitol .xlv.	 The next sentence of your text translates as: "And therefore they can do nothing but let nature take its course.
De cauterizacio de rompeduras.	 This line translates to "The incision for hernia surgery.
Quan endeve rompedura en les angonars e diysendo les budels denant l’atela al genetiu, e aquo es comensan de aprop, lahoras cove que tu mandas al malaute layssar la sua comestio en le sieu dia e que use de causas leniens per so que la fenda deyssenda del sieu ventre.	 When the hernia occurs in the groin and is being treated with a prosthesis or implant, it's customary to make incisions for hernia surgery at that time, and those wounds are closed by puncturing them
E aprop segua le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e comanda a lu que tengua le sieu ale entro que sia foro getat o aparesca l’atela o·l budels.	 Then continue between the patient's legs over their buttocks and tell them to have it in there so that either their anus opens or the hernia shows itself.
E aprop retorna aquel am les tieus ditz e senha am tenta la ruptura sobre le os del pentenilh am senhal la extremitat del qual sia semblant a la maytat de cercle a las subiranas partidas del cors.	 Then return to those stitches and try to make the rupture over their buttocks so that it resembles in shape and size as much as possible the circumference of the body's upper part.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	 And if you use this kind of cautery, then
entro que sia mot rog e gete cintilhas.	 Then put a bandage on it.
E aprop reduzeys le budel o l’atela a la sua conquavitat, e aprop pause la sua ma sobre le loc per so que le budel no yesqua.	 And return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent it from coming out.
E tu ja has ubert entre las coyssas del malaute e dejos lu as pausat un coyssi, et autre servent sia sus las cambas de lu, e autre sus le pietz de lu, le qual tengua las suas mas.	 You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs and placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
E aprop pausa le cauteri sobre aquel senhal am la tua ma am cauteri stan dreyt, e te aquel entro que am lu consieguas le os del pentenilh entro al mieg del duiduni; e itera am aquel autra veguada si a tu aquel no has conseguit en la primieyra veguada entro al os.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and when pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
E observa saviament del ysiment del budel en la hora de la tua cauterizacio, que no comburas aquel budel per so que sobre le malaute no vengua in mort o autre gran malicia.	 Pay attention to the intestines during your cautery procedure, do not crush it so that harm does not come upon the patient or any other great wickedness.
E sapias que quan tu am le cauteri no atenhas le os, no confereys la tua operacio.	 You know that when you perform the cautery without paying attention to them, do not administer your operation.
E cove que·l cauteri dels enfants sia subtil segon le gran e la mesura de lor.	 The cautery for children is delicate and depends on their size and measurement.
E aprop cura le loc del cauteri per tres dias am boder entro que sia remauguda la scara del foc.	 Take care of the location where the cautery will be performed, to ensure that it is clean from fire scars for three days.
E aprop cura aquel am les autres enguentz entro que sia sanat.	 Make sure you have everything else ready in case something needs attention after the cautery procedure.
E le malaute sia jasent sobre le sieu dos per xl dias entro que sia sigillat le loc e la plagua.	 The patient should be kept quiet for two days to ensure that nothing leaks out and the area remains covered with a bandage.
E cove que pauses le nutriment de lu segon la longitut del temps de la curacio de lu le qual le linesca le ventre de lu, e que le budel no yesca fora deves le esforsament de guerir.	 You should pause the food intake according to the duration of the treatment so that the body does not become bloated and the intestines do not come out during treatment.
E aprop quan se vol levar aprop xl dias, lahoras aministra liament decentment fayt, e tengua aquel per autres xl jorns.	 If you want to take it easy for a while after that many days have passed and hold onto it for another two weeks.
E sia mermat de trebalh e de replecio de vianda e de beure, e de votz vehementz, quar quan usa de aquest regiment de sanacio entiera sira sanat.	 When a man has excessive heat in his body from drinking wine and eating sour food, he will suffer from the same ailment as someone who uses this regimen of healing.
E yeu diyre la curacio de las rupturas en las autras partidas del ventre, e so al comensament, e vols que no treguan, lahoras cauterisa la ruptura d’aquel am cauteri redon segon la quantitat de lu, e sia aquo que es exhurit de la codena ayssi cum la tersa partida de lu; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit, e no es ajustat.	 You should cure the ruptures in those parts of the belly and apply it as soon as possible, so that they do not spread, cauterize the rupture with a certain amount of cautery fluid, and then treat that wound as well; but do not adjust.
E ja diyssero alcus primiers que ruptura sia cauterizada am cauteri triangular segon aquesta forma, pus que es senhada am tenta:	 The first rupture should be cauterized with the triangular cautery according to this method, and then you should attempt
e es pausada linha que eys per la latitut en le latz pus sobira de la ruptura, e autra linha al desus; e depausa la tua ma am un cauteri clavilh, mays le primier cauteri es pus leugier e milhor.	 After making a pause for the latitude and longitude of the rupture, another line along the opposite direction from it should be done; then place your hand over one cautery hole, so that the first cauterization will heal faster than others.
Capitol .xlvi.	 Chapter XLVI.
De cauterizacio de torcio.	 Cautery for wounds.
Quan endeve en alscus membres per cazement o per percussio dolor e persevera aquela dolor per lonc temps e no comfereys al u curacio am medicinas, lahoras cove que cauterizes am cauteri de punt.	 If it is necessary to cauterize the joints or bones when there are pains caused by blows or percussion and this pain persists for a long time without being relieved by medical treatment, then the doctors should cauterize them with cautery points.
E sia le cauteri de tot membre segon la magnitut e la parvitat de lu, e vertut e develitat de lu, e locacio de torcio e dolor de lu.	 The cauteries of all members in proportion to their size and quantity, location of the wounds, and pain of them.
Donc si·s sanat per le primier cauteri, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera sobre lu le cauteri; quar de costuma de aquelas dolors es que sian punctatz de membre ad aquel membre le qual apropinque al u, per que cove que consieguas aquels am cauteri entro que·l malaute sia sanat.	 When the first cautery is done, if it was successful; otherwise, apply another cautery and repeat this process until all of the pain is gone from both members in which you want to find relief.
Capitol .xlvii.	 Chapter 77
De cauterizacio de lepra.	 Treatment for Leprosy
Les lebros alcunas veguadas am cauteri per mot gran juvament, e magerment si la specia de lepra que es fayta per putrefaccio de flacma e de melencolia.	 Hot cauteries are applied to the affected areas early on, and especially in cases of leprosy which is caused by putrefaction of flesh and melanosis.
E donc cum tu vols cauterizar aquel, considera si la lepra es comussan e as aquela curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no deysen, ni esta, e temes sobre le malaute que la corrupcio comprehenda tot le cors de lu e tota la compleccio de lu, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le cap am v cauteris: am un en le mieg loc del cap, e am le segon pus dejos de lu, eves le front a la fi dels cabels; e amdos sobre dos corns; e am un detras, sobre la nuca o servitz.	 When you want to cauterize that place, consider if leprosy is common and whether the cure applied in this section has worked or not. Do not apply it if they are saying no or do not recommend it. And be careful about leeches causing the spread of corruption throughout the body and completeness of the patient. Cautery should only be done on top; at one point on the head, another behind them, below the eyebrows, around both ears, and one behind as well.
E ultima la tua ma am le cauteri un pauc entro que emprema en le os una petita empressio, e de lu sian deslocadas las scorsas, per so que la expiracio de grossas vapors sia alleujada de lu; e cauteriza sobre la melsa segon que es precesit.	 Lastly, place your hand over the cautery just enough to allow a small opening at the nose, and to make it disappear the scorsas from her so that the exit of large vapors is eased up, and cautery on top when necessary.
E si la lepra es ja expanduda sobre le malaute e apar manifestament, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquel am aquels cauteris les quals havem ditz en le cap; e am cauteri sobre la extremitat del nas, e am dos cauteris sobre las doas maysselas, e am dos cauteris sobre dos spondils del col, e am vi cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e am un gran sobre les spondils prop de la coeta, e un sobre la cotea , e am dos sobre las anquas, e am un sobre quascuna anqua, e am dos sobre les donols e un sobre quascun donolh, e am dos sobre les coydes, e am dos sobre les muscles, e am dos las teneretutz del sieu pietz; e cauteriza aquel sobre totas las juncturas dels ditz de las mas e dels pes, e sobre quascun talon dels sieus pes, e sobre les foscils de las suas mas.	 "The pestilence has spread over the patient and is clearly visible, so I cauterize those areas where previously mentioned in the head; on the nose tip, on both thighs, on two rib bones, above the chest ribs, a larger one at the waist, and two others on each arm, and one on each side, and two on the shoulders, and one on each elbow. I cauterize that over all the joints of the legs and the feet, and over every finger nail, and over the eyes of their hands.
E guarda te dels nervis les quals so sobre le talo que no comburas aquels.	 "I keep those nerves which are above your throat such that you do not touch them.
E alcunas veguadas es cauterizat am un cauteri sobre le os del pentenilh e am autre sobre la boca del stomac, e autre sobre le fietge.	 "A needle is placed on the tongue of the patient and another one above their stomach, and another one over their throat.
E sapias que quant mays ajustas cauteris, tant es mays juvatiu e mays conferent; e sapias que le malaute no ha en le cauteri dolor, ayssi cum han les sas, per so quar le cors de lu ja es stupefayt.	 "You know that the more joints you cauterize, the less vital and less sentient they become; and you know that a patient without heat on their cautery will suffer as much as if all their body were paralyzed.
E cove que les cauteris sian grans o paucs segon les membres e las juncturas segon que es precedit de las specias dels ferramentz.	 "You know that the cauteries should be large or small, depending on the members and joints mentioned previously in the tools.
E aprop cura le cauteri am farina de errs coyta am mel e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
Capitol .xlviii.	 Chapter LVIII
De cauterizacio de stupor.	 Cautery for stupor
Quan alcun membre es stabozit o adormit e es curat am medicinas, olis e emplastres, e no es sanat, lahoras tu cauteriza aquel membre stabozit am cauteris segon que merita la grandesa del membre o la parvitat de lu.	 If any member of the body is stabbed or falls asleep and it is being treated by doctors, it should be covered up with gauze to prevent further harm to the member as a result of its size or weakness.
E sia lo tieu cauteri intrant la ispicitut de la codena un pauc.	 And when inserting the cautery into the opening, you must do so gently, avoiding excessive force and causing less discomfort for the patient.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	 Then return it to its original position where it was good for health.
E alscunas veguadas es cauterizada alcuna stupor le qual endeve a las mas e als pes, e als spondils del dos e ves le eysiment dels nervis les quals mavon aquel membre, e es remauguda la stupor.	 And those veins were cauterized for no more discomfort to the patient's feet and spine and prevent any numbness in the extremities of nerves affected by that member, ending the stupor.
Mays no prusuma sobre aquo sino aquel que es savi en la anotomia dels membre e de la egressio dels nervis tot le cors moventz.	 Do not question this but rather focus on understanding how it relates to the anatomy of a member and its exit from nerves throughout the entire body moving.
Capitol .xlix.	 Chapter LIX
De cauterizacio de albaras que es morfea.	 Cautery for abscesses that cause fevers
Quan albaras es antiqua e no comfereys a lu alcu dels enguentz de medicina, lahoras tu cauteriza sobre aquela am cauteri preon un pauc segon la quantitat de la specitut de la codena entro que sia remauguda la blancor e la color de lu, e la color de lu sia mudada.	 When abscesses are opened and do not match with the opening of the medicine's entrance, doctors cauterize over that part of the cautery to prevent further harm from happening on it, including damage to its whiteness and coloring, as well as a change in its color.
E aprop cura aquel am farina de errs e de lentilhas am oli rozat e am folhas de arnagrosa, e am sanc de colomba o am sanc de yronda, da cascuna sia una partida e totas sian mescladas, e aprop sia linit un drap e sus le loc sia pausat entro que sia sanat.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
Capitol .l.	 And if it's necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery.
De cauterizacio de cranc.	 Return the intestine or hernia to its cavity and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out.
Quan canser es comensan e vols aquel ostar, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri de cercle en le circuit de lu ayssi cum es revolgut.	 When cancer is suspected or wants to be treated with a pointed cautery as it was used before, then the sores are cautorized around the circumference of the affected area after being inflamed.
E diysero les savis que sia cauterizat am lo derier cauteri en le mieg loc; mays a mi no es vist aquo, quar temi que sia ulcerat, e yeu ja e vist aquo alcunas veguadas.	 The servants said that the sores were cautorized with the older cautery in this location; however, they noticed that it was irritated and wanted to be sure that there was no wound, so they checked around for any injury.
E es pus dreyturier que sia cauterizat en le circuit de lu am cercle ayssi cum avem dit, o am motz cauteris.	 The servants agreed that the sores were cautorized in this location as described, or not with a pointed cautery.
Capitol .li.	 And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery.
De cauterizacio de adubilati.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
Quan alcun adubilati es tardat en maturacio, e aysso es per la superfluitat fazen aquela, o per etat del malaute, quar es vielh en decrepitat, de pauc sanc, o per le temps, e tu vols festinar en la maturacio de adubilati; lahoras cauteriza en le circuit de lu am motz cauteris petitz punctan; e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela fastinara en maturacio.	 When someone with arthritis is being treated and this happens to be in a state of deterioration, either from old age or illness, and you want to relieve the pain in the joints; doctors cautorize around the circumference of the affected area punctually, and place their hand over it to prevent the cauterization from spreading.
Mays si tu vols la perforacio de lu am cauteri, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: e depausa aquel en le mieg loc de adubilati entro que penetre la codena.	 When you want to make a point on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery.
E si le cauteri en aquel loc que es pus dejos, per so que le cors del brac sia alleujat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	 And if the cautery in that location is too strong and causes harm to the arm's shoulder, then apply pressure on it gently
Capitol .lii.	 Then do you want to know what follows?
De cauterizacio de corrodent.	 Cautery of corrosion.
Corrodent es corrupcio ambulant en le membre, la qual corrodeys aquel ayssi cum a foc comedent lenha secca.	 Corrosion is a walking corruption that occurs in the member, causing it to dry out
Donc si vezes aquel corrodent en loc le qual sufferte cauteri am foc, lahoras tu igneys cauteris clavils motz paucs, e grans segon que es convenent en aquel loc en le qual es corrodent.	 If the corrosion occurs in a location where you apply heat, then do so with pointed cauteries gently and gradually until it is suitable for that location where there is corrosion.
E aprop cauteriza aquel de tota partida entro que erradiques tota la corrosio e no romangua alcuna causa de lu.	 And apply the cautery all over to eradicate the corrosion without leaving any cause of harm.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres dias, e pausa sobre les locs cauterizats solpre trissat am oli mesclat entro que las scaras sian totas eradicadas e tota la corrupcio.	 And after three days, then stop applying it to the cauterized areas and leave them covered with oil until all scars are eradicated and all corrosion is done.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz carn engendrantz.	 And when bringing a new body part, do so with caution.
Mays si aprop tres dias vezes que la carn nasca sana en la qual no es corrupcio, bo es; mays sino, lahoras itera le cauteri sobre aquo que es romas en les locs corrumputz.	 If the new skin is healthy and not corrupted, then proceed as before; but if it isn't, then repeat the cautery on those locations.
E corrodent es medicat alcunas vetz am medicina aguda, quar aquela es meza en loc de cauteri.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, it customarily called gout by doctors when it occurs in the feet.
Mays empero cauteri am foc es de pus leugier juvament.	 And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery
E yeu ja e dit la curacio de lu am medicina aguda en la divisio, e donc pren aquela quan de lu auras endegencia.	 When using medicine for a painful inflammation in this division, and it may occur at any time.
Capitol .liii.	 Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out.
De cauterizacio de claus e dels autres semblants.	 Cautery of closure and others like it.
Motas veguadas endeve a las partidas dejos del pe malautia que s’apela clau, e es causa grossa, fentrada, la qual ladeys le pe; e cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, so es cauteri am foc e cauteri am aygua cauda.	 When there is a big problem with the foot that causes pain and swelling called gout, caused by the passage of the foot, then it is customary to apply cautery on both sides; one for heat and one for wet cautery.
Mays cauteri am foc es que igniscas le cauteri concau semblant a pena de voltor, le qual sia feyt de ferr segon la quantitat la qual contengua le clau de tota partida, e sia de subtils marguas.	 Cautery of heat is to prevent burns when applying similar cauteries that are painful because they burn; it should be done in the quantity that contains the amount of all parts and fine details.
E aprop pausa aquel ignit sobre le clau, e aprop revolveys la tua ma am le cauteri en le circuit del clau entro que·l cauteri pervengua a la profunditat del clau.	 Then place your hand over the area to prevent the cautery from penetrating too deeply into it.
E leyssa aquel per tres dias entro que comense getar brac.	 It should be done for three days until the pain begins.
E aprop emplastre aquel am malvas salvatges trissadas am sal, e leyssa le emplastre sobre aquel per una nuoyt, quar aquel sira eradicat de las suas razitz.	 Place it over a wound that is infected with pus and let it rest for one night until the wound is healed.
E aprop cura le loc am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanat.	 When a sudden rupture of the generative organ occurs while it is healthy
E si so no-convertitz, e motas veguadas accideysso en la superficia del cors, majorment en las mas e les pes, lahoras cove que tu aministres en aquels cauteri am aygua, e es que prenguas una quannula de eram o de ferr o de pena de voltor, e pausa aquela sobre le clau; e aprop geta en la quanula de aygua cauda pauca cantitat, e rete la tua ma, e tu revolveys aquela am compressio de la tua ma de tot, e sia enpremut le marge de la canula en la razit del clau, e atrobara la aygua cauda via al preon de la razit del cau; e espera le malaute un pauc la mordicacio de l’aygua cauda per una hora, e aprop remau aquela, quar le clau am las suas razitz sira erredicat.	 When a rupture of the generative organ occurs while it is healthy, if you notice blood on the surface of the body, especially in legs and feet, call for immediate medical attention with these cauteries to stop the bleeding, place your hand over that area to prevent further loss of blood from flowing out, and apply water pressure through the cannula into a vein in order to slow down the flow. If you notice the end of the tube is damaged or the patient has severe pain due to excessive bleeding, remove the tube immediately and call for immediate medical attention.
E ayssi fe am aquels la i aprop l’autre entro que venguas sobre totz les quals de lor so en le cors.	 And in that case, put another one over your whole body to cover any areas affected by the injury.
E aprop cura aquels pus que las razitz dels claus so erradicadas am aquo dels enguentz les quals la carn ve engenran.	 In that case, remove all dressings covering wounds from which blood is flowing out rapidly.
Capitol .liiii.	 [No translation provided]
De cauterizacio de tremor.	 Cautery for tremors
Quan endeve ad alcu tremor per freg en le nervi o per febre de causa frega, o per autra causa semblant, lahoras cove que tu cauterises aquel am quatre cauteris o am v sobre les spondils del dos, entre quascun spondilh am un cauteri; e am cauteri en le pietz de lu, e sobre l‘estomac de lu, am cauteri olivar.	 When you want to cauterize a tremor in the nerve or because of fever that causes it, or for any other similar reason, doctors do this: cauterize it with four cauteries or over both shoulders between each shoulder and one cautery; on chest, stomach, and liver.
E la tremor de lu se repausa e festina la sanetat de la malautia frega.	 The shaking of him stops and finds relief from the illness he has
Capitol .lv.	 Latvia, capital city
De cauterizacio de albati accidentz al cors.	 Cautery on the abdomen
Quan en le cors so espellitz albati, e so pustulas fendas las quals so feytas de materias grossas corruptas; donc cove al comensament cum apareyso, que sia cauterizat sobre tot cap de la fistola am cauteri subtil am fustz de mirt, la extremitat del qual es estenduda am foc; o am razitz de erestologia longua; o am cauteri lentecular.	 When the abdomen is opened with a probe, pus and ulcers will occur that are caused by putrefied materials. Therefore, it is customary to apply cautery over all parts of the fistula, using a pointed cautery in the extremity of which is extended towards fire; or using a long cautery; or applying a lenticular cautery.
E alscunas veguadas es cauteri ademamil al comensament de la sua expulcio segon aquesta manieyra; e no so cregudas, e es disrumpuda la superfluitat fazens aquels, et sana de aquels.	 When the intestine is opened for evacuation after that time, do not worry or concern yourself with this matter; and these fluids will be discharged from those
Mays empero cove que aquo sia fayt aprop evacuacio am fleubotomia.	 Do you mean to say that it should be done in conjunction with phlebotomy?
Capitol lvi.	 Latvia, capital city
De cauterizacio de fluex de sanc accident per incisio de arceria.	 Cautery on the artery incision
Tropas veguadas endeve fluex de arceria que es inciza deves la plagua la qual endeve deforo, o deves la incizio de apostemas o cauteri del membre, e alor semblantz, e es dificil remaura aquel.	 When veins become inflamed due to injury of the artery incision, you must open the vein and remove its blood clot, or make an incision on the member and apply cautery there, otherwise it will be difficult to heal that place.
Donc cum accideys ad alcu aquo, lahoras tu·t coyta am la tua ma a l’orrifici de la arceria, e pausa sobre aquel le tieu dit endic estrenh aquel motas veguadas entro que sia ostat le fluex del sanc dejos le tieu dit, e que non yesqua.	 When this happens with the artery, put your hand over that area and hold it so that any inflamed veins do not come out or leak.
E aprop pausa en le foc les cauteris olivars paucs e grantz, per nombre motz, e exsuffla sobre aquels entro que sian mot ignitz.	 Place a cushion under their thighs, another on each leg, and one more on the chest, holding them with both hands
E aprop pren de aquels un petit o un gran segon le loc e la plagua en la qual es rompuda la arteria, sobre aquela vena festinantment pus que auras remaugut le tieu dit, e te le cauteri entro que sia abcindit e restreyt aquel sanc.	 Place a cushion over the small or large area where an artery is ruptured and bleeding, causing pain in that vein, with care and attention to prevent any further injury to it.
E si le sanc es expellit de l’orrifici de la arteria quan tu remaues le tieu dit e extringeys le cauteri, lahoras pren la un autre cauteri coytadament dels cauteris les quals en le foc son preparatz, e donc no cesses fer aquo un aprop autre entro que le sanc sia restrengit.	 If the artery is expelled from the orifice when you remove it and tear apart its cautery, then doctors should bring another cautery to treat those in the fire area as well, so that the artery does not remain injured.
E guarda te que no comburas le nervi que aqui es, e que vengua sobre le malaute autra malicia.	 Be careful not to harm any nerves here, and go easy on the patient from now on.
E sapias que quan de l’arteria flueys sanc, lahoras no es possible en aquels restrenge la sanc, e majorment quan l’arteria es gran, si no am una de quatre manieyras: o am cauteri ayssi quo dit havem, o am extraccio quan no es extrayta, quar quan es extrayta las extremitatz de lu miels son comburidas e es restreyt le sanc, o que sia liat am fiel o am liament per fort strectura, o que sian pausadas sobre lu medicinas de las quals la vertut es restringir la sanc; e sian strengudas am pulvinar am costriccio decent.	 If an artery bursts from a small injury then doctors can control it by cauterizing where the artery is burst, but if large artery is burst they need to use four ways: either apply cautery as shown in this text, or extract it without removing any of its parts, otherwise when extracting both sides are burned and tightened the artery, or place a cushion over it to prevent further injury.
Mays aquel que aministra restriccio decent de lu am liament e am strictura am draps o per posicio de causas comburentz e de semblantz, no comfereys sino tart.	 Those who administer restrictions gently on the limb or constriction in the bandage, and prevent contact with hot and inflamed areas, but not interfere too much
Mays si aquo endeve ad alcu e no sia le metge present ni medicina, lahoras obre am pausament del dit indic sobre le orrifici de aquela vena ayssi cum havem dit, e entenda a la gran costreccio de lu entro que le sanc sia ostat de la sobirana partida de la plagua, e sobre la arceria le dit no sia remaugut; e de sobre la arceria sia aspergit am aygua frega de mot gran fregiditat entro que·l sanc sia congilat e engrossat; e mays cossire en que ha de cauteri o de medicina necessitat.	 When the vein has become blocked and there is no medical help or treatment available, pain will occur in that limb as gout attacks typically do.
Comensa la segonda partida.	 And here comes the second sentence to translate.
De incisio e perforacio e ventozas e de fleubotomia e de plaguas e de lor semblants.	 Incision, perforation, and swelling of veins; phlebotomy (puncture with a needle); and ulcers or sores.
Aquestas son paraulas de Albucazis.	 These are paragraphs from Albucasis.
Ja havem dit en le primier capitol tota malautia en la qual cauteri am foc es convenient e am medicina comburent, e las occasios e las causas de lu, e les instrumentz en aquels necessaris am las formas dels cauteris; e he ordenatz les capitols de la subiranetat del cap entro als pes.	 In the first chapter of the book that doctors should use for pain relief and treatment, they discuss various ailments and causes as well as necessary instruments in performing procedures like punctures or phlebotomies. They also list chapters on different body parts from head to feet.
E yeu procesire en aquest capitol per aquela meteysa guisa, per que sia alliujat lo querent aquo, lahoras sobre aquo que aura demandat.	 You will proceed in this chapter for the purpose of treating and understanding what is being sought after here, pain doctors have about it.
E denant que yeu comense aquo, cove, fils, que aprenguatz que en aquest capitol es per terror aquo que es en le capitol primier de cauterizacio.	 And once you begin this chapter, please remember that within this chapter are the procedures of cautery.
E per aquo que cove que sia en lu gran cautela, quar en la operacio la qual es en aquest capitol motas veguadas catz evacuacio la qual es am sanc am le qual esta la vida deves la aspersio de la vena o incisio sobre l’apostema o apercio de exsitura o puracio de la plagua o extraccio de sageta o incizio de peyra e a lor semblantz.	 For this reason, consider that within the operation being performed in this chapter are the procedures of cautery such as evacuation of sacrum (anus), incision over the anus or vulva, perforation of fistula, purification of abscess and vein, excision of hernia or appendix, and other similar procedures.
E de totz aquels so acompanhatz temor e tremor e en le mas de lor catz la mort.	 When all these are combined together they bring terror, trembling, and in some cases death
E yeu amonesti vos que sobre vos no caia aquo en le qual es esitacio, quar alcunas veguadas cazo deves vos manieyras de homes am manieyras motas de malautias.	 You should know that over time you may develop a tolerance to this and the side effects will become more pronounced
E de lor es alcu que s’irays am la sua malautia e es leugiera deves lu la mort, e aysso per la vehemensia de aquo que troba de sa malautia, e per longuesa de la malautia de lu, e am la malautia es paor la qual significa mort.	 They go to war against their disease and leave nothing left but death, due to the persistence of this treatment and its duration as well as the severity of their illness
E de aquels es le qual dona a tu son aver e ditta, tu esperant am aquel sanetat, e la sieua malautia es perniciosa.	 This means that your pain is incurable, and you are expecting treatment but it has no cure for this disease.
E donc no cove que tu consentas en aquel que ve a vos del qual es aquesta manieyra; e la vostra cautela sia major que covesitat e la vostra rapacitat; e no presumatz alcuna causa sobre aquo sino aprop sciencia certa la qual virifica aquo deves vos, e al qual perve successio lausabla.	 Therefore, you should consent to that which comes from your illness, and be cautious as you can about this matter; do not assume any cause for it unless there is certain knowledge of what causes such symptoms.
E usatz en la curacio de totz vostres malautes de pronosticacio e indicacio de lu al qual es salut convertida, quar en aquel es a vos ajutori sobre adquisicio de fama e de memoria, de lausor e de gloria.	 In the treatment of all your illnesses prognosis and indication for its conversion to health, which in that is helpful towards acquisition of fame and memory, glory and honor.
O, filhs, Dieus en vos spire le sieu entendement e no oste a vos direccio e proteccio, quar aquo es en la sua ma.	 Oh children, hear the voice of God who speaks your understanding and not your direction or protection, because this is in its own way.
E yeu e ordenat aquest capitol distingent per capitols segon que precedit en le capitol de cauteris, de la cura del cap entro als pes, per que sia a vos alleujat aquo que demandatz de aquo e del qual havetz necessitat.	 This chapter is distinguished from the previous chapters in terms of its title and content, as it goes into treatment for the head to the feet, so that you may be relieved of what you have asked for and need this one.
Capitol primier.	 The first sentence translates to: "First above all.
De la curacio de aygua la qual es contenguda en le cap dels enfantz.	 From the head of a child, water is supplied through these channels.
Sapias que aquesta malautia motas veguadas endeve als enfantz deves le enfantament e quan la noyrissa estrenh le cap del enfant ses livitat.	 This illness affects children and when it reaches the head of a child, its symptoms begin to appear.
E alcunas veguadas endeve per causa amaguada la qual no es saubuda.	 Some channels are blocked due to an obstruction that is hidden from view.
Mays yeu no vi aquesta malautia sino en les enfantz; e a totz aquels les quals yeu vi se coytec la mort, e per ayssi es a mi vist layssada obra en aquels.	 This illness will occur in children and if one of these channels is blocked to the point that it causes death, then this will be my final warning sign for you.
E yeu e vist que un enfant le cap del qual era d’aygua omplit, e·l cap de lu era totjorn ayssi magnificat entro que ceser no podia sobre si meteys per la grandesa del sieu cap, e mays que la humiditat fe aucmentada entro que foc mort.	 If a child's head that was receiving water suddenly became full and the head swelled so large that it would be impossible to breathe through it due to its size, then it is certain that death will occur from the lack of moisture.
E aquesta humiditat o es agreguada entre la codena e l’os, o es agreguada dejos le os sobre le ciphac.	 This humidity may be between the brain and the skull, or it could have been caused by swelling in the skull itself.
Quar la operacio en aquel si la humiditat es entre la codena e l’os e le apostema es pauc, lahoras cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am una fissura en la latitut, e sia la longitut de la fissura cays dos notz entro que corra la humiditat, e aquesta es la forma del spatum:	 If the humidity is between the brain and the skull itself but only a small aperture exists, then doctors would caution you to make an incision in that area of the head at its latitude. The length of the incision should be long enough so that it reaches all the way around for your safety.
E donc si la humiditat es mays augmentada e l’apostema es major, lahoras son aqui dos fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	 If however the humidity is greatly increased and there is a larger aperture existing, then doctors would recommend making two incisions as follows.
E si la humiditat es dejos le os, senhal de lu es que tu vezes la comissuras del cap ubertas de tota partida e l’aygua es spremuda quan tu compremes aquela am la tieua ma a las partidas dedintz e no es aquo a tu amaguat.	 When the humidity is causing pain, then it's customary for you to turn over your head completely and water runs down towards your feet from that point on, not reaching this area here
Cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am tres fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	 Then make a slit in the scalp at three points following this method
e aprop la inscizio extratz ne tota la humiditat; e aprop strenh las fissuras am draps e plumassols; e aprop enbroca aquo de sobre am vi e oli entro al quint dia, e aprop deslia le liament e cura la plagua am tentas e enguentz, e strenh le cap am equalitat; e mange le malaute am vianda secca de pauca humiditat entro que·l membre sia confortat e sanat.	 Then make an incision through the whole of the humidity and turn off the heat in the folds and wrinkles; then cover up this area with a dry cloth to absorb any remaining moisture, and cool it down evenly by applying a damp cloth on top; afterwards, treat the patient for their condition using ointments or medicines as needed.
E es autra manieyra de incisio, que consideras hon apar la magnitut del apostema e la colleccio de l’aygua, quar alcunas veguadas es mays en le occipicii, o en la partida denant, o en la destra, o en la sinistra; e donc aten am la incizio on appar le apostema e la replecio de l’aygua, e fen aquo segon que a tu es miels possible.	 Another incision method to consider is making an incision through the middle of the forehead and collecting the water, which some veins may be longer than others, or in front of them, behind them, on the right side, or on the left; then take it away once it's possible to do so.
Et observa que no inscindas la arteria e endevengua flueys de sanc e mora le malaute per aquel flux de sanc am evacuacio de humiditat.	 And be aware that you don't cut the artery and drain off too much blood from the patient due to fluid loss caused by moisture evacuation.
Capitol .ii.	 The end of this text.
De inscisio de las arterias las quals so aprop las aurelhas, apeladas hilasseysse.	 When cutting into the arteries that are close to the ears, which are known as "hilasseysse".
Capitol segon.	 "When pain occurs in joints
Quan endeveno ad alcu catars o raumas als huelhs o al pietz, e es antiquat aquo, e no confereys en aquo la curacio de las medicinas, lahoras la deriera curacio en aquest es incizio de aquelas dos arterias.	 When pain occurs in the arteries or veins of arms and legs, it is customary to do so, and not seek medical care until after this step has been completed.
E donc cove quan tu vols inscidir aquelas que le malaute raza lo sieu cap, e aprop fregua le loc am drap aspre per so que aparan las arcerias, e aprop sia strengut le col del malaute am alcu drap; e aprop considera on polsa la vena; e les locs de quascuna sobre les locs les quals so aprop las aurelhas depremutz, e tant se occultan sino en alcus homes.	 When you want to insert those into the patient's artery cap, and tightly apply a dressing over it so that any blood clots may be prevented, and put your hand on top of each location where they are applied, making sure not to apply them on all parts at once.
E aprop senha sobre la arceria am tenta, e aprop inscideys quascuna am le spatum de quascuna partida agut am inscizio pervenient entro al os, e sia aquo per la latitut del cap.	 Then secure it to the artery with a tight bandage and insert each into one of the openings present at the insertion point towards the head, making sure that there is space for latitudinal growth through the opening in the skull.
E si vols, entromet le spatum dejos la arteria e trenqua aquala a las inciden a las partidas desus.	 If you want to insert it into the artery and remove this from their hands.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio cays dos ditz ajustatz, quar quan alcuna vena es inscizida le sanc es eyssit am egressio pulsatil, le qual saut deforo per saut frequent.	 The length of the insertion is adjustable to two fingers, such that when any vein is inserted and blood flow exits pulsantly, it can be prevented from flowing frequently.
Mays si la arceria no apareys al cintiment, lahoras cove que tu mesures de la aurelha la quantitat del spazi de tres ditz, e aprop senha am tenta, e fen entro al os.	 If the artery does not appear at the center of the bandage, doctors will measure from the top of the ankle to the bottom three fingers and apply it around the head.
E aquo que cove getar del sanc es quantitat de vi unc., e fort leu ne geta de lu mays o mens, e tot aquo es segon la quantitat la qual appareys de la vertut del malaute e de la replecio de la arceria de lu.	 When the amount of blood flowing in is equal to that flowing out and there is no weight gain or loss from it, then this corresponds exactly to what occurs when someone is well-nourished and has not been fasting for a long time.
E aprop considera la plagua, e donc si reman sobre le os alcuna causa del ciphac, lahoras inscindys aquo per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	 In order to prevent any harm from coming from the point of application, then do not worry about that at all.
E aprop strenh la plagua am plumassols e am liamentz de drap de li, e aprop cura aquela am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	 Stretch out the sheet and remove any loose clothing from around them, and make sure they are in a safe location after all that is done.
Capitol .iii.	 The third chapter of De re militari.
De extraccio de las arcerias las quals so en las templas.	 Extracting the arrows that are stuck in the temples.
Quan ad alcu accideys emigranea antiqua o catertz agutz, per humiditatz agrimonials e per qualiditat en les lacertz des templas, o sodo antiqua vehement e semblantz ad aquels, e es medicat am las manieyras de curacio de medicina e aquo no comfereys, lahoras nos hem sproatz en aquestas malautias extraccio de las arcerias en les templas, o cauterizacio de aquelas ayssi cum havem mostrat.	 When someone gets hit in the temples by an ancient or sharp arrow that has been soaked in water and rust, or if it is a very old one that resembles what we've seen before, then do extract those arrows from the temples with cauterization as necessary for medical treatment to avoid complications.
E la manieyra de la operacio e extracio de aquelas es que·l malaute raza les pels les quals son en les templas; e entenda a la arceria apparent en le templar quar ela es a tu mostrada per le sieu pols, e·s occultada sino en paucs homes per vehemencia de freg.	 The operation and extraction of those arrows is to shave the patient's head in the temples where they are located; understand that the arrow is apparent on the temple from which it came out, but hidden unless there are few people who feel it strongly.
E si a tu es occultada, lahoras le col del malaute sia strengut am alcun drap; e aprop fregua le loc am un drap aspre o evapora le loc am aygua cauda entro que aparesca a tu la arceria manifestament.	 When the patient is hidden and it's time for treatment, apply a cold compress to the chest of the patient; if you want to put on a cloth that will absorb moisture as quickly as possible so as to make sure it reaches all parts of the body rapidly.
E lahoras tu pren le spatum del qual aquesta es la forma:	 The method for applying the cold compress is described in this sentence
E aprop tu scorja la codena am aquel am facilitat entro que pervenguas a la arceria; e aprop geta en lu onti e extratz aquela a las partidas sobiranas entro que extraguas aquela de la codena e descobras aquela de las tunicas las quals so dejos aquela, de tota partida.	 Once you have obtained the gauze that fits this description, place it on your hand and spread it out to cover as much of the body as possible; then remove any other gauze or dressings from around the area being treated and take off those from around the chest if necessary.
Mays si la arteria es subtil, lahoras envolveys aquela am la extremitat del oncii, e aprop inscindeys de aquela una partida segon la quantitat per la qual sian alonguadas las extremitatz de lu e sian contraytas, e no endevindra flux de sanc, quar si no so inscididas no pujara le sanc de tot.	 If the artery is small, wrap it around one side of the wrist; then measure its length against the other extremity to ensure that both are equally long and prevent any damage from occurring, as if not equal in length there may be a risk of injury
E aprop evacua del sanc de vi unc. entro a tres.	 When removing it after three
E si la arceria es gran, lahoras cove que tu lies aquela en dos locs am fiel dopble fort de ceda o am cordas a lonc, e no coyte a lu putrefaccio denant la consolidacio de la plagua e endevengua flux de sanc.	 If the artery is large, wrap it around two places at once, tightly or cords to length, and do not cut into the fabric while preserving its integrity to prevent any damage to the artery or vein.
E aprop incideys la superfluitat la qual es entre dos liamentz; e fay aquo en aquela hora o aprop autra ora.	 Once you have measured it, decide whether to remove it immediately or wait another time.
E si vols, cauteriza aquela am cauteri entro al os am cauteri cutellar entro que sian incididas las extramitatz de lu, e stara en loc de aquela meteyssa obra.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body and feet are affected by it, then it is customary for doctors to call this gout
E es milhor obra sino que·l malaute aia febre o es de escalfada compleccio; quar cauteri es de aquelas causas que ajudan a las humiditatz finidoras, e donc es milhor en juvament.	 And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot and prevent the intestine from coming out.
E cove aprop la extraccio de las arcerias que huomplas le loc de coto antic, e sian pausatz sobre lu polvils decentement fayt, e aprop sia curat am medicinas seccas fazen naysser la carn e am calguas entro que sia sanat.	 Then you should gently pull the edge of the bandage away from the area where it is supposed to be applied, and place the cautery over the affected area lightly, ensuring that it does not touch any of the underlying skin or veins, as doctors may use sharp implements for this purpose
E si mentre obres autra veguada endeventa flux de sanc de la arceria, lahora tu te coyta a restrenger aquel sanc, o am cauteri, o que omplas le loc de coto, e strenh la tua ma entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	 If while opening another vein you find a blockage in the artery, then stop applying the cautery or any other instrument and press your hand over that area to prevent further damage.
E si deguna causa de aquelas no es a tu present, lahoras pausa le tieu dit sobre le loc entro que·l sanc sia congilat, e enbroca le loc am aygua de vehement fregiditat entro que la acuitat repausa, e sia strengut segon que cove.	 If the cause of this is unknown to you, then pause any further application on that area, cool it with water and apply a cooling cloth over that area until the pain subsides, be careful not to freeze it.
E aquo que es pus leugier en extraccio de arceria es que tu cauterizes la vena am aquest cauteri haventz dos cotels, pus que tu has senhat les dos locs am tenta, e depausa quascus, mot ignitz, entro que pervenguan al os e inscindan la vena en dos locs, per so que sia elonguat aquo que es entre las extremitatz de lu, quar no son consolidadas de tot am aquest cauteri.	 When you cauterize the vein with that cautery make sure to use two needles and place them both in an attempt, pause if necessary, not to cause injury or damage to the vein at those points so that it is stretched between the extremities of the patient, ensuring that it is not consolidated as a whole by this cautery.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri:	 The method of cautery
E sia la acuitat dels dos cotels esemps.	 And in this case,
Mays empero si so mendres acuitat que dos cotels es milhor, quar si so agudas cum dos cotels propera a quascuna freg, e no enscideysso la carn am velocitat.	 If the two needles are sharp enough to pierce each one of them separately without cutting into the flesh at great speed
Donc cum en aquels es alcuna grossitut, es tenguda la calor del foc en aquels e la carn es abscindida leugierament.	 But if there is no such thickness, then apply heat from fire to these and the meat will be easily cut away.
E aquesta obra es milhor en tota obra e pus leugiera.	 This method is the best in all works and most easy to perform.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre dos cotels la quantitat de la grossesa del dit.	 The space between two needles depends on the thickness of this matter.
Capitol quart.	 That is,
De la cura de cors de lagremas agudas e aciduas dels huels.	 It means for curing pains in joints that are sharp and acidic from nature.
Quan so lagremas aciduas, e es le cors de aquelas venas las quals so sobre le test del cap deforo, e no comfereys en aquo alcuna causa de la curacio de medicina, e vezes la cara del malaute ja enrogesir e sent en le sieu front deambulacio ayssi cum si era deambulacio de formiguas, e·ls huels de aquel so extenuatz, humitz enayssi que ja les pels de lor son conodutz, e las parpelas so scalfadas per la acuitat de las lacrimas, les antics agro mesties en la curacio de aquelas de aquesta operacio, e nompnero aquela curacio am spassa.	 When there are acidic veins that cause the face to swell and become inflamed as if from a burn, with the skin of their legs becoming dry due to the heat caused by tears, those afflicted then seek medical treatment for this affliction, which is called gout.
E es que tu comandas al malaute rayre les pels les quals son en le sieu front, e aprop inscideys en le front tres fissuras engualment distans segon la longitut del front.	 Then you command the patient to remove all of his or her hairs from the face, and cut into three equal parts across the length of the forehead.
E si’ la longitut de la fissura cays dos ditz: la una fissura sia engualment distant a la longitut del nas en le mieg loc del front, e la segonda segon la longitut un petit del movement dels lacertz les quals so en le lacrimal, e la tersa del autre part.	 When the fissure length is two inches: the first fissure should be equally distant to the length of the nose in this location on the forehead, and the second one at a little distance from the movement of the eyelashes which are in the tear duct.
E guarda te de la incizio de las arcerias las quals so en dos latz, e elongua la tua ma de la continuacio de amdos las mandibulas.	 Hold onto the beginning of the arteries that are in two lengths, and extend your hand for continuing to support both lower jaw muscles.
E si’ l’espazi de quascuna inscizio la quantitat de tres ditz ajustatz.	 If the space between each incision is three inches long adjust it.
E si’ a tu una pessa d’espongua apparelhada o draps seccatz motz am les quals exsiccas le sanc.	 You have a wet sponge applied or cloth that absorbs and dries up the sweat.
E aprop entremet le spatum de dos agudas extremitatz, del qual aquesta es la forma de la inscisio de lu:	 Between these two sharp extremities, which are of this shape:
que es de la partida des templas entro a la segonda inscizio.	 The incision starts from the temples to the second one.
Exxcorja am aquel tota la codena la qual es entre dos incizios am le ciphac le qual es sobre le os, e aprop fay aquo de la inscizio migera entro a la segonda inscisio.	 Corrects the spelling of each incision between two incisions, over which it is written that this is about the nose, and place it into the first incision to be moved to the second incision.
E aprop stratz ne aquest spatum e entromet en la primieyra inscizio autra vetz un autre instrument le qual es apelat cutellar, agut de una part e del autre no agut.	 Place this sponge between the first and second incisions, insert one other tool which is called a scalpel, straight into each of the two parts separately from the other.
E pausa le latz de aquel agut deves la carn annexa deves la codena, e le latz de lu leon dintz le os, e empelley aquel entro que pervengua a la fissura migera, e abscindeys am aquel totz les vaysels que descendo del cap als huels.	 Pause the length of that part you need to attach fleshly tissue should be joined directly in order for it to penetrate into the nose passage, and then remove it from where it went through the incision moving down towards the head area.
Mays que sia continuada la inscizio ad aquo appar de la codena, e aprop fay aquo en la fissura migana entro al autra fissura.	 When a patient has been prepared as described above, make an incision here at this point on the midline and proceed to make an incision in the next smaller opening between two openings
E pus que corr del sanc quantitat engual, exprem les locs de las pessas del sanc congilat.	 Push all the contents of the sac out through the places made for it (the small holes)
E aprop pausa en quascuna fissura calgua de coto vielh, e pausa sobre aquels polvils enbegutz en vi e oli e vi agre, e vegas que no endevengua apostema caut.	 Place a cushion over each small opening and pour the contents through gently and slowly, making sure not to disturb any of the stitches
E en le tertz dia deslia le liament e aministra gran enfusio de aygua cauda o tebeza, e aprop cura aquo am enguent bazilicon am oli rozat e autres entro que las plaguas sian sanadas.	 On the third day, administer a large dose of water or syrup, and apply it with a pointed cautery to other sores as needed.
Capitol .v.	 Thank you
De la cura de lagramas per catartz e als huels descendentz de las partidas dedintz del cap.	 The treatment for headaches and falling from the head descends from the parts of the neck down.
Quan ad alcu veno catartz agutz e continuantz, e vezes les huels del malaute extenuatz petitz, e ja le reguardament de lor es debelitat, e las palpebras ulceradas e de lor cazo les pels, e en le preon del cap es dolor aguda ledent e extrenutacio consequent, lahoras sapias per aquestz accidentz que las materias e catartz no veno sino de motas venas de las partidas dedintz procedent.	 When you arrive at this point, and continue the pain subsides gradually, until eventually the head becomes free of these ulcers, and then the ulcers on their face are healed, and in the forehead a sharp pain leads to an acute and subsequent throbbing, the doctor understands that the materials and substances from which it originates do not come from only one vein but from many veins that arise from the areas of the brain.
E la milhor curacio en aquels es aquesta: que comandes al malaute que raza lo sieu front, e aprop inscideys en aquel una fissura al mieg loc del front, un petit per la latitut (e comensa am la fissura del templar senestre entro al dextre templar; e sia inscisio entro al os; e eslongua la tua ma dels lacertz del templas lesquals son maugutz deves la mastigacio), entro que sia le os descubert.	 The best cure is to order the patient to raise their head, and make an incision in that area just above the hairline (and also starting at the temple on the right side and then moving towards the left temple; and after making the incisions place your hand over the eyes), until the openings of the eyes are uncovered.
Exsicca tot le sanc am espongua o am drap secc e aprop repleys entre las doas labias de la fissura am coto vielh o am draps de li.	 When there is a space that is dried up or covered with cloth, the servant puts it in between the two lips of the tear
E aprop estrenh desus am polvils enbegutz en vi e oli per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	 The servant spreads their palm over it and applies pressure to prevent any leakage from a sharp point
E quan deslias aquo e veses que l’apostema ja es diminuit, lahoras cove que fregua le os entro que comensa en lu nayser carn, e aprop cura aquel am regiment exsiccatiu le qual fassa neysser la carn, ayssi cum si tu prenes de farina de froment dos partidas e de colofania quatre partidas e mescla o, e de lor sia fayt emplastre e sia aministrat en aquestas plaguas a de la carn nativitat.	 When the abscess is reduced and there are no more leaks, then apply ointment made of flour from two parts to four parts mixed with oil or fat, and spread it over the affected part natvally born, in order for it to heal
Capitol .vi.	 This is a line from Shakespeare's play "Romeo and Juliet.
De la cura de aquo que catz en las aurelhas.	 The servant washes the abscess on the cheek.
Tota causa que catz en las aurelhas es una de quatre specias, quar o es peyra mineral o causa semblant a peyra, ayssi cum ferr e veyre, o es de planta ayssi cum ceze o fava, o es causa fluxtibla ayssi cum aygua e vi agre e a lor semblantz, o alcuna bestia.	 The cause for washing the cheek could be either a mineral substance that resembles it, or perhaps due to something growing on it, such as ivy or mold, or even an outbreak of disease, depending on how you see or feel it.
E donc quan peyra catz en l’aurelha o autra causa semblant de aquelas causas que no ajustan ne creysso en l’aurelha, e pausa la aurelha al solelh, e si vezes la peyra, lahoras distilla en aquela alcuna causa de oli violat o sizami, e aprop aministra la extraccio de lu, e fay le stornudar am condizi, e oppila las nars deve le aveniment de stornutacio.	 If you find that the cause for washing is neither a mineral substance nor any other cause mentioned earlier on the cheek, then pause it in sunlight and sometimes wash it, and distill oil from it or apply ointment to it according to what you found, and place the drain over it so as not to let it leak out.
E aprop pausa en le circuit de la aurelha alscunas pessas de drap o lana, e dextendas la aurelha a las partidas desus, quar motas veguadas es foro-getada am aquestas causas.	 When the space between the thighs of the patient has been opened, place a cushion beneath them, another servant on their legs and still another on their chest while holding their hands.
E si no n’es getada, lahoras aministra extraccio de lu am le instrument apelat gesti epicicarios subtil del qual aquesta es la forma:	 If the space is not ready, the doctor will provide a small tool called a catheter for urine collection from which this method is used:
E si es foro-getada am gesti, bo es; e sino, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am onci subtil de pauca duplicacio.	 If the space has been prepared using the catheter mentioned before, it means yes; otherwise, the doctor will provide another small tool for urine collection.
E donc si no es foro-getada per aquo, lahoras fay una canula de aram e entromet la extremitat de la canula en le trauc de la aurelha e claus a l’enviro de la canula am cera e am oli mollificada per so que no sia ubert sino la canula.	 If not prepared for this, the doctor will insert a flexible catheter into one of the patient's thighs and seal it in place with adhesive tape to prevent leakage from both ends while maintaining softness to avoid discomfort.
E aprop extratz am le tieu vent am fort atraccio, quar tropas veguadas cum aquo que havem recontat.	 The doctor will now stretch the patient's legs as much as possible and check if all is in order
Mays si no es foro-getada en aquesta manieyra, lahoras pren de halka alumbat o de vecz aparelhat am le qual son preses les ausels una patita quantitat, e pausa aquel en la extremitat de ray, e aprop envolopa sobre aquel coto decentment pausat.	 If not prepared for this procedure, the doctor will measure the patient's leg length and position it under a cushion to ensure proper positioning of the lower extremity, then hold that limb still while proceeding.
E aprop entromet aquel en le trauc de la aurelha am facilitat, e aprop excicca la aurelha de la humiditat.	 The doctor will gently insert the catheter into one of the patient's thighs and lubricate it to facilitate insertion, then proceed with checking the lower extremity's moisture level.
E donc si no es foro-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recontadas, lahoras tu coyta a talhar aquela denant que endevengua apostema caut o espasme.	 "When there are multiple causes for joint pain that have been discovered, the doctors will apply this cautery treatment to alleviate it.
E la manieyra de talhar aquela es que tu al comensament sancnes le malaute de la vena sephasica e extratz del sanc segon la mannieyra de la vertut de lu, e aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas e converteys l’aurelha a las partidas desus, e fen am petita fissura en la razit de la aurelha deves lo greys de lu en le loc be premegut de lu.	 "The procedure involves first massaging the superficial vein of the patient and extending it out of their second hand, then applying cautery between your fingers to burn away the gout.
E sia la fissura de figura lunar entro que pervengua a la peyra, e, la peyra atrobada, osta aquela si podes am instrumentz apropriatz; e aprop cos la fissura en aquela hora am velocitat, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	 "If the lunar figure ulcer occurs on your foot, and you have to apply cautery in that moment as well, then take an appropriate instrument for it; and burn through the ulcer rapidly until it heals.
E si la causa cazent en la aurelha es un dels gras que creysso e so inflatz, lahoras aministra la curacio e la extraccio de lu; mays si no obezeys a tu ad eyssiment, lahoras tu pren spatum teune subtil segon aquesta forma:	 "If the cause is one of the fats that you suspect and is spreading, doctors will apply treatment and extraction on it. But if it's not necessary to remove fat cells, they may prescribe a more subtle procedure.
e aministra am aquel la abscizio de aquel gra lo qual es cazut en l’aurelha.	 "Doctors will apply excision of that fatty substance occurring on the foot.
E no fassas aquo quan cogitas que aquel ja es humectat per la vapor del aurelha, e pausa aquel en motas pessas, e prop extratz ne aquelas am les oncis o am gesti subtil, o ab inscizio ayssi co dit havem, quar es alleujada la extraccio de lu.	 "Do not do this if you suspect that it has already been affected by foot sweat and should be stopped immediately or burn out gently with fine tweezers.
Mays en l’aygua la qual es intrada en l’aurelha cove que·l malaute use de sternutacio am condizi al comensament, e omple la sieua aurelha am alcu coto vielh, e jagua sobre aquela aurelha en la qual es l’aygua, e si per aquo es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, lahoras pren tropas peyras teunas e leons segon la longitut del dit, e calfa aquelas en le foc un pauc, e le pacient entrometa una de aquelas en le trauc de la sua aurelha e saute sobre la un pe sieu de aquela partida e percussia am una autra peyra sobre la peyra la qual es dintz la aurelha.	 "Begin the procedure by administering a local anesthetic to numb the area, and then open up space between the patient's thighs with a cushion placed underneath them. Another servant will be positioned on their legs, while another one is placed over their chest.
Donc no cesse aquo am peyra entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada.	 "After administering the local anesthetic and creating enough space between the patient's thighs, proceed to open up a space within that area with another cushion placed over it as well.
E ja l’aygua sira foro-getada enayssi que tu prenguas de papier o de gonc i, e met la una extremetat de lu en l’aurelha e estendas l’autre extremitat am foc entro que sia comburit le may de lu.	 "After the space has been opened up and the local anesthetic administered as needed (using paper or gauze), place one end of it in their chest, extending the other towards the foot to prevent any potential movement.
E prop met i autre gonc e fay aquo tantas veguadas entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada, e stratz aquel am canula ayssi co desus es dit de la peyra extrasadora.	 "Proceed to place the other cushion and secure it with a needle as directed by your medical staff.
Mays en la extraccio de bestia intrant en aquela aurelha, si es a petit cos, ayssi piussa e a lu semblant, cura aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio; mays si es de gran cos la qual causa apar al sen del vezement, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am gesti e oncis, e la causa de lu es pus leugiera de totas las autras causas que cazo en l’aurelha.	 "Ensure the animal enters within that area as needed; if it is a small incision, do so with precision and care, ensuring you maintain the correct spacing indicated by your medical staff.
Mays en la extraccio de verm engendrat en la aurelha, quan tu curas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e en le tractat de distillacios e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu reguardes la aurelha al solelh.	 "In the incision of a newborn baby in its navel cord, when you cure this as I have mentioned in division and in the treatise on distillation without confusing your care, do not forget to clean up after it.
E donc si apar aqui alcuna causa dels verms, lahoras extratz aquel am gesti o am onci subtils, mays si no apar deguna causa, lahoras pren una canula dejos streyta e desus ampla de la qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	 "If there is no cause for worms, the doctor will take a syringe and draw out its contents into this wide tube:
E entromet la extremitat subtil en la aurelha segon la quantitat la qual suffertar puesca le malaute; e aprop sucgeys am aquela per succio fort, e fay aquo motas veguadas, entro que totz les verms sian foro-gitatz.	 "Introduce the delicate extremity into the body in proportion to how much pus is needed for the patient. After that, when it's time to remove them, make sure all the worms are removed.
Mays si no obezeysso a tu al ayssiment, lahoras tu opila e claus en le circuit de la canula am cera ayssi cum havem dit; lahoras aministre distillacios las quals han ja esproadas les antics en la curacio dels verms, e atrobaras aquo en le tractat de distillacios.	 "If you find it necessary to do so, the doctor will fill and close off the circuit of the needle as mentioned earlier; they must administer antibiotics if those have been previously used in worm removal treatment.
E sia la tua efusio am la qual efundas les olis medicinas en la aurelha am aquest strument del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	 "It is your duty to use the oils given for medicinal purposes on this instrument, which forms the tube:
E fay aquela de argent o de eram, dejos streyt, en le qual sia un petit trauc, e am pla desus.	 "You will then take it and insert it into a small hole, after cleaning the area.
E donc sia cum empellent a que es en la conquavitat de la canula de continent aqui on sira necessari.	 "And when you are in the cavity of the continence needle here where necessary will be:
E si vols, pren le ray e envolveys en la extremitat de lu decentment coto, e aprop gieta oli en la concavitat del auziment, o suc de alcuna herba, o aquo que vols de aquestas medicinas en la canula — e aquela es en la aurelha —, e aprop entromet le ray am coto desus e exprem am la tua ma aquel am compressio temprada de lu entro que l’oli sia expellit en la concavitat del auziment e le malaute senta le oli dedintz.	 If you want, take the arrow and insert it gently into the patient's abdomen, or into any other part of their body that is indicated by a herb, or into the vein - and there it is in the artery - to prevent its expulsion from the abdomen or groin.
E aquo que sia enfundut en la aurelha sia ja scalfat am foc un petit.	 And if something small has infiltrated that area, you must remove it immediately.
E guarda te que la causa la qual distillaras en l’aurelha no sia trop frega, quar las medicinas de aurelha no suffertan aquo.	 If the cause of what is in the vein does not come from an excess of heat, then medications for veins may not work on this occasion.
Capitol .vii.	 VII
De curacio de opilacio de aurelhas.	 The care and treatment of veins.
Alcunas veguadas alcus enfantz yeysso dels ventres de lors mayres no-perforatz, e aquo ja accideys en alcus homes, opilacio en le meat de la aurelha per plagua o per carn nada en aquela; e aquesta opilacio alcunas veguadas es fayta en le preon del trau de la aurelha la qual no consiec le vezement, e alcunas veguadas es en las partidas defora.	 When performing a venipuncture on the larger veins of the arms and legs, do not puncture through muscle or fat into that area; this operation is performed in the region of the vein without damaging it, and some variations are in the separate areas far away.
E aquela que accideys en le preon de lu, la qual no comprehen le vezement, es en las majors disposicios de dificil sanacio.	 When it occurs on this region which does not understand its meaning, then it is in some of the most difficult surgeries to perform.
E en aquela en qual consegueys le vezement, cove que tu pauses la aurelha del malaute al solelh e reguarda en aquela.	 When you succeed in that operation where you understand its meaning, then you should place a bandage over it and protect it there.
E donc si vezes oppulacio apparent, obre aquela am espatum subtil del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	 And if a sudden swelling appears as soon as you put this subtle application which then becomes its form.
Si’ la extremitat de lu en la qual sia petita la latitut, del qual la una partida sia aguda e l’autra no; e le spatum sia de dos latz leon per so que no fassa lizio al aurelha.	 If the part of it which is small in latitude has a sharp tip and one side is not, and its surface has two lines to prevent injury to the foot
E donc si la opilacio es per carn nascuda en la aurelha o en le meat de lu, lahoras te aquela am oncis subtils e incidiys aquela vehement facilitat entro que sia ostada tota la carn.	 And if the application is made with raw flesh on the head or in the part of it, then apply this subtle and rapid cure so that all the skin is covered.
E si opilacio es en le preon de la aurelha, lahoras pren ray subtil leon e escalfa aquel am foc un pauc, e aprop met aquel en le meat de l’aurelha.	 If it's on the forehead of the head, then apply a subtle line and gently put that over there to prevent any injury.
E donc si as scentit oppulacio am aquo que le malaute atroba am facilitat, per gravetat de ausir, esforsa la oppressio de lu am facilitat; e guarda te que no plagues les nervis del aurelha.	 And if the swelling caused by this is serious and must be prevented with great urgency, force a release of it as quickly as possible; do not harm any nerves in the forehead.
E aprop pausa en l’aurelha drap de li segon la quantitat del ample del trauc lo qual tu as envolvutz en l’enguent egipciac; e fay aquo per alcus jorns entro que sias segur de la consolidacio de la plagua; o que prenguas qualgua e enfon aquela en ayguaros e pulveriza sobre lu segi trissat e usa de lu; e si vezes la aurelha ja esser apostemada, lahoras cove que tu estraguas la qualgua e permutes aquela am autra qualgua la qual tu envoloparas en cerot que sia fayt am oli rozat, entro que sia le apostema caut cedat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	 After placing it on the forehead as described in the Egyptian language, wait a few days until you are sure of its consolidation into the plaster. If necessary, take another one and put it over that which has been burned and use it as well. And if once the forehead is plastered, then apply this same way to cure any other part of the body.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras submergeys esponga o drap en aygua frega e pausa sobre la aurelha, e usa del autra curacio la qual restrengeys le flux del sanc, la qual es dita en le tractat de distillacio.	 When blood flow is interrupted in the veins near the affected area, pain may occur and cause a blue discoloration of the skin as it dies due to lack of oxygen
Capitol .viii.	 Capitulation
De cura de athezil le qual endeveno a las palpebras.	 To cure cataracts (which can appear on the eyelids).
Athezil les quals endeveno a las paupebras dels huels alcuna veguada so humitz, alscunas veguadas son secs.	 Cataracts that affect the eyes and cause them to become dry.
Donc cove que tu tenguas aquels am tenhalhas o am onci, e inscindas aquels am espatum de las suas razitz, e aprop pausa sobre les locs segi trissat.	 Therefore, if you have these symptoms and notice any swelling in the area of your eye sockets, place a cushion over that area to prevent further swelling.
Mays si dolor am flux de sanc veno, lahoras tu cauteriza aquels am cauteri lanticular subtil.	 When pain occurs due to interrupted blood flow near the affected area, doctors will use a small, pointed cautery.
E la milhor cauterizacio es aprop las inscizios e tropas veguadas retornam quan reman alcuna causa de sas razitz; e quan so cauterizadas am foc, aquelas razitz son comburidas e no retornan.	 The milder cautery is applied to the veins and tissues affected by it, returning pain when they are left untreated. When a milder cautery has been used on the eye sockets or similar areas, those areas will become burned and not return back to normal function.
Capitol .ix.	 Capillaries
Cura de grandeyssa que veno a las palpebras dels huels.	 Large cataracts that affect the eyes
Motas veguadas endeve en las palpebras dels huels alcuna causa la qual es asemblada a grandissa en sa fortalicia e duricia, e per so grandissia es apelada.	 Large cataracts that cause problems like those of hardening and toughness in the eyes are called senile cataracts.
E es agreguacio de humiditat grossa en la palpebra dejos e desus.	 Accumulation of thick moisture on the eyelids and corners of the eye.
Donc la opperacio en lor es que consideras lahoras si la grandissia es procedent en lu en aquo que apar de la palpebra e es mauguda a tota partida; e la causa de lu es leugiera.	 When considering the cause of gout, you should pay attention to when it first appears in or around the eye and is painful from start to finish; and its cause is a deficiency of fluids.
Donc fen sobre aquela am fissura per la latitut, e aprop escorga aquela de tota partida am facilitat entro que evasesca, e aprop suspen aquela am onci e abscindeys aquela.	 So then you should apply it to that part specifically and make sure it covers the whole area without leaving any gaps, and also remove from around the edges
Mays si a tu no es apparelhada la incizio de lu si no pus que penetras la palpebra am inscizio pauc a pauc, lahoras aquo no notz en deguna causa.	 If you do not notice gout in its initial stage or if it does not cause pain when touching the eye gently from one side to another, then there is no need for worry.
E si la figura es gran, lahoras tu l’ajusta am sutura; e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	 If the figure is large, you should apply it in a thin strip across its surface; and care for this to ensure it is healed properly.
E si es pauca, a tu no sobrevindra mal per aquela quar l’anguent de lu restaura aquela e encarna.	 If it's very small, you will not have any problem with that as long as the rest of its skin is well-maintained and healthy.
E si la grandissia es declinant a las partidas dedintz de la palpebra deves la superficia dedintz, lahoras evesa la palpebra e suspen la grandissia am onci, otra que tu indigescas de incizio, e prem aquela de tota part, e si la palpebra per inscizio es alonguada, aquo no notz en deguna causa.	 If the size of it is decreasing at around the eye area and you suspect an initial cause, then apply this to its surface completely without gaps, put a bandage over the top too, and if the surrounding part is healthy otherwise there's no need for worry.
E aprop la incizio, lava le huel am aygua salada; e cura le loc am aquo que encarna entro que sia sanat.	 First, apply a cold solution to its beginning, and care for the area where it infiltrates into in order to heal properly.
Capitol .x.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet.
De la cura axcirnah en la palpebra desus del huel.	 And if it's necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery.
Axcirnath es grays le qual es engendrat en las tunicas de la palpebra desus, e majorment endeve als enfantz, agrava les huels de aquels et accideyso a lor catartz le mayti; e no podon reguardar la claror del solelh per aquo quar lagremas se coytan ad aquels.	 And if it's necessary to make a hole in the membrane of the eye, and more especially for infants, worsen their eyes and cause them to turn toward that; do not look at the sun directly because they may become blind.
E per so tu vezes aquels jaser sobre les lors caras tot temps, e sobre les lors caras dormen; e so a las palpebras de lor dejos les sobrecils humidas, las quals ja ha cuberta imflacio, e iminencia de accernac apparent es en l’uelh; e que quant tu premes le loc am les tieus ditz, tu centes accernac entro aquels.	 And so you will sometimes see these sores on the eyelids as they sleep and awake; and those that have been covered with inflammation are about to burst open, and it is noticeable in them; when you press against their veins, they become inflamed and swell up towards what was pressed.
E alcuna manieyra de opperacio es en aquel que le malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop pausa drap de li e de lu fay calgua, e fay de lu cercle segon la quantitat la qual contena arthernach de tota partida, e aprop pausa aquel sobre aquela e prem am les tieus ditz de tota per que sia agreguat arcernac en le mieg del cercle, e aprop fen en le mieg de aquela humiditat am spatum inscident am fissura per la latitut, e la fissura no sia major que la fissura que es fayta en flaubotomia.	 No matter how much you press against their veins, they will not burst open; and if it is necessary to make a hole in the membrane of the eye, more especially for infants, worsen their eyes and cause them to turn towards that; do not look at the sun directly because they may become blind.
Mays en le preon cove que tu fendas la codena tota entro que pervenguas ad arcernach, quar en las mays desposicios proceseys arcernach per fissura segon la forma de grayseza blanca.	 And if it is necessary to make a hole in the membrane of the eye, more especially for infants, worsen their eyes and cause them to turn towards that; do not look at the sun directly because they may become blind.
Donc extratz aquela am draps los quals tu as envolopatz entre les tieus ditz a las partidas deforo e revolv entre la ma dextra e sinistre entro que sia dispargut.	 "Then, remove that drape which you have placed between your thighs and the table cloth to the left of it.
E guarda te que no ajustes en la fissura per so que am le spatum no pervenguas al huel e ladescas aquel.	 "Make sure not to adjust in the incision so that the spit does not go into or pass out through it, and keep it like this.
Mays si no apar a tu arternach en le comensament de la fissura, mays que tu ajustes en la fissura un petit am fecilitat entro que procesisca arternach; e aprop extratz aquela ayssi quo havem dit; e aprop submargeys draps de li en aygua e vi agre e pausa les sobre le loc e estrenh aquels am polvils.	 "If you don't want the patient to move their arm during the first part of the incision, make sure that you adjust in the incision a small soft pad so as to prevent movement of the arm; and then remove that pad from there, and put it aside with water and gauze, covering them well.
E so alcus que trissan sal e pausan aquel en la conquavitat de la fissura per so que aquo que es remas de aquela humiditat.	 "And then rinse the pad after placing it in the cavity of the incision to ensure that this is the last addition of moisture.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	 "Then care for that so as to keep it clean.
Mays si accideys en le loc apostema caut, lahoras cura aquel am emplastres cedatils entro que sia sanat.	 "If a clot or pus happens in the area after placing it there, then take care of that so as to keep it clean.
Capitol .xi.	 "Capitulation. XI.
De manieyras de tactimi del huel.	 "Many thanks for translating this into English.
Quan en las palpebras dels huels so natz pels ajustatz dejos les pels naturals e so antiquatz, lahoras aquels noso al huel e fan endevenir manieras de malautias ayssi cum lacrimas assiduas e mollificacio de palpebras e tela entro que aquo sia causa de destruccio del huel que s’apela tactinir del huel, e cura se en quatre manieyras: o per cauteri am foc; o am medicina acuta segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri; o es fayt atactini per inscizio e sutura; o per cannas segon que yeu diyre.	 When the eyes are swollen due to excessive rubbing or itching, doctors treat it with cautery of fire, acute treatment as mentioned in the chapter on cauterization, incision and sutures, or use needles if indicated by a doctor.
E donc cove que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se; aprop converteys la palpebra del uelh am la tua ma sinistra, e si es convertida, bo es; e sino, entromet agulha en aquela en la qual sia fiel de la partida pus dejos de la palpebra, e fay penetrar la agulha am fiel desus, e aquo sia — prop del marge de la palpebra en le qual naysso les pels — prop dels pels, e tira le fiel a las partidas desus am la palpebra, e converteys aquela am le ray.	 "And when you have placed the cushion under their thighs and another servant on each leg, and one more on their chest holding onto them with both hands.
E aprop fen en la partida dedintz de la palpebra dejos les pels ajustatz am spatum inscidentz del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal mendre; e aprop extratz le fiel e pausa dejos la palpebra polvilhs petitz de coto o de drap, e aprop senha sobre la palpebra am tenta, e sia ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirt.	 "And when you have inserted the servant into the corner of the eye towards the inner corner of the eyelid; and remove the bandage gently to clean it or change it with a cloth, and then place the band over the eye as instructed.
Mays empero cove que sia la figura segon la quantitat de helevacio de la palpebra, quar aquo ja es diversificat en les homes, quar de aquels es le quals indigeys que sia inscidit de la palpebra gran quantitat segon la quantitat per la qual la palpebra es mollificada.	 "However, remember that this depends on the height of the eyelid, as it varies from person to person, for those whose eyelids are very high may require a larger incision than those whose eyelids are relatively relaxed.
E aprop fen am le spatum sobre las doas linhas las quals has senhadas, e comensa del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal menor.	 "And when you have made the servant on both of the lines where it was placed and started from the inner corner towards the outer corner.
E si’ la tua fissura prop dels pels naturals ayssi cum es la grossetut del rey.	 "If your natural tear duct is so large, as it often is with the size of a man's, then...
E aprop met le onci en un dels dos angles de la codena, e aprop excoria aquela tota, e aprop ajusta am la scitura las doas labias am gula o fiel de lana subtil, e abstergeys le sanc, e fay adherir aquo que superflueys dels fiels sobre dos sobrecils am alcunas causas enviscans, si voles far aquo, e sino, non cures.	 "Place the servant at one of two angles in the corner, and remove it entirely; then take a fine thread and sew around both lips or eyelids as instructed, and cut away any excess threads over two eyes if you wish to proceed.
E aprop leyssa la sutura dels fiels entro a tres dias o quatre, e aprop cura aquo.	 "The surgeon should open the field in three or four days, and then proceed to operate.
E si vols, layssa la plagua ses sutura, e cura aquela am aquo que exsicca e constrenh, quar la palpebra es alevada deves la sigillacio de la plagua e la agreguacio de lu; mays sutura es milor E donc aysso diysso les antics de taxanir.	 "If you want to make the incision deeper and constrict, let the surgeon close it up until it dries out completely.
Mays empero en lu sia sollicitut sobre le malaute, e es de bona operacio, e no es en lu temor.	 "It is better if they are attentive to the patient's condition and perform a good operation, as long as there is no fear involved.
E es autra manieyra en taxmir, e es que senhes sobre la palpebra figura ayssi cum fuelha de mirt, e aprop eleva la palpebra am tres uncis segreguatz e congreguatz segon aquesta forma:	 "Another remedy is to press it with a warm compress and elevate the foot three inches.
Mays si no es possible aquo, tener les uncis, e aquo no es engualhat, lahoras pren una agula en la qual haia fil e met aquela en le mieg de la figura, e entromet le autre fiel prop le lacrimal major, e·l fiel segon prop le lacrimal mendre, e ajusta entre les tieus ditz les fiels am equalitat, e aprop am aquels eleva la tua ma am elevacio engual, eleva tota la codena sobre la qual es senhat ayssi cum havem recomtat.	 "If not possible here to do this, the physician will take a needle and place it in the middle of the foot and move another one towards the lower eyelid, and then adjust them so that they are equal in height. And after having elevated their head elevation, he will elevate his hand as well.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	 "Then close the two flaps of the incision and proceed to healing it.
Mays si accideys apostema deves la tua inscizio o la tua fissura, seda aquel apostema am cerot e a lu semblantz, e am enguentz.	 "If your nose bleeds or has a wound, soak it in the wax and continue as before.
E alcunas veguadas endeve a la palpebra que·ls sieus pels sian convertitz, adonc cove que tu uses en aquela de aquo que havem dit de inscizio; mays sutura en quascus es mays artificial.	 "You should soak the eyelid when it becomes inflamed and use that to which you learned of incision; maybe the stitches will be more artificial.
Ataxinir am cannas es segon aquesta forma:	 When you are suffering from gout of the joint pain caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body,
e es que tu convertas la palpebra e scindas la figura qu’es dedintz segon que he recontat; e aprop per art fay doas cannas o doas astelas subtils de las quals longitut sia segon la longitut de la palpebra e la latitut de lor sia mendra de la latitut del spatum.	 If you want to remove the cataract, make a slit in order to separate its figure from that of which it is connected; and put over them two thin canes or astels such as those longitudes are similar to the longitudinal length of the eyelid and latitudinal length of their side, so that when they are placed on the eye,
E tu ja has inscidit en las extremitatz de quascunas partidas, la on tenes les fils.	 You have already inserted them into each part where there is a hole.
Aprop agregua quascuna am subtilitat subre aquo que superflueys de la palpebra del huel, e constres las cannas de quascunas partidas am fort strictura, e layssa aquela per alcus jorns, quar la codena per la strictura morira e sira denegada e se poyrira entro que per si meteyssa cayra.	 Then add a narrow part below it so that the fine hairs of the eyelid do not get entangled with it, and put on the canes such as those of the small parts in order to prevent them from becoming rigidly attached, placing their ends together for a time, after which they can be taken out without damage.
Mays si es tardat, lahoras trenca la am las toroyras, e aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanat.	 If it is too late, the doctors remove the cane and apply cream in order to heal it.
Donc cum es solidada, la palpebra es elevada e les pels no pungo.	 And when it is cured, the eyelid will be raised and the hairs will not itch.
E aquesta es la forma de doas cannas las quals faras segon aquesta forma:	 This is how to use the canes that you'll be using for this purpose:
e haia la quantitat de la longitut e de la latitut ni mays ni mens.	 The length and latitude do not matter in amount.
Capitol .xii.	 Chapter 22
De elevacio de pels pungentz en le huel am agula quan le pel es dur.	 In order to relieve pain, apply pressure on the eyelid when it is rough.
Quan son pels no-naturals, durs e aspres e pungentz les huels, lahoras la operacio en lu es que tu prenguas agula subtil e pauses en aquela fiel de ceda subtil e leon, e aprop que tu ajustes las extremitatz de lu e nozes quascu en manieyra mot subtil.	 When joints are affected by cold and damp humors that inflame the hands, doctors perform surgery with a sharp needle to make incisions carefully and firmly in those places where there is no other remedy for pain
E sia la longitut dels fiels de quantitat de una palma.	 The length of the fingers should be measured as equal to the width of one palm.
E aprop tu compon2 autre fiel subtil dejos lu en breu, e nuza las extremitatz de aquel si tu·t vols.	 Then apply another fine needle quickly and remove it if you wish.
E aprop pause le malaute le sieu cap en le tieu se, e sia prop del solelh per que la tua obra sia declarada, quar es operacio subtil e menuda.	 Then place the patient's head in a comfortable position and ensure that your work is visible so that the subtle operation can be declared as done.
E aprop intromet la agulha en la razit del pel ajustat la qual ha necessitat de engen, e fay aquela penetrar en la palpebra festinantment entro que extraguas aquela desus le pel natural.	 Then insert the needle into the root of the hair making sure it has enough room to penetrate and ensure that you pull it out gently before extracting the natural hair.
E aprop tire le pel entro desus e intromet aquel en alixati, e sian les pels un o dos o tres e no mays.	 Then take off the skin around the area and insert the needle in a straight line, making sure that there are one or two hairs pulled out depending on how much hair is to be removed.
E aprop tira la tua ma am aquel entro que·l pel sia fora-gitat am alixolati en la palpebra am le pel natural.	 Then pull your hand away from the area and gently remove the hair naturally in front of the needle.
Mays si es atirat alixalati e non es gitat le pel, atiraras alixati a las partidas dejos am le fiel le qual tu has compost am aquela, entro qu’en sia gitat alixalati del trau sobira.	 If it is necessary to remove all the hair or not, you will then pull out all the hairs from the area mentioned and leave some behind so that there are no hairs left over after the removal process.
E vegas aquela am la visio del huel, quar lahoras tu gitaras alixati e lo fiel, e grotan quascu e clautz le huel, e laysse le claus per dos dias o tres, entro que·l pel adheresca al sieu loc e nasque sobre aquel bona carn.	 "When the joints are affected by cold humors and infiltrate into each part of the body, then pain occurs in the feet, as it is commonly called gout.
E si es mays breu le pel, lahoras tu ajusta un pel lonc dels pels naturals, e es elevat am aquel, o que·l leysses entro que sia alonguat aprop alcu spazi, e lehoras tu eleva aquel.	 "And if it is necessary to make a point on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery.
Capitol .xiii.	 I am not able to provide a translation for this Latin phrase as it appears to be a heading that starts a new section or chapter in the medical treatise.
De la cura de ehacratir la qual ve en la palpebra desus.	 "From curing the eye, which is located at the eyelid of these.
Quan ve en le huel ehacratir, e es contraccio de la palpebra quan es contrayta en sus, o a dextra o a sinistra partida, per mala consolidacio de plagua o de seccio o de cauteri, e es apelada leporina, e aquesta ahercrati o es natural o accidental, e es fayta per consolidacio de plagua o de seccios o de cauteri, o per semblantz a lor malcuratz.	 "When the eye is affected by gout or has inflammation of the eyelid, it can be treated either surgically to remove the ulcer or by cautery to prevent the ulcer from coming out, and depending on whether it was accidental or intentional, it may be cured through either consolidation of ulcers or cauterization.
May la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que tu fendas aquela consolidacio e que separes las labias de lu, e pauses en lu en aquo que es entre aquelas una meca de drap de li, e ligues aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	 "The procedure of doing this is to make an incision in it and separate the lips from it, placing them on a piece of gauze that lies between those two flaps, and tying them so they are healed.
E no cove que tu uses de curacio de lu de las causas las quals exsiccan, constrenho; quar si tu fas aquo retorna alixacratir pus mal que nulh temps no foc habantz.	 "And do not use cauterization when the cause of the ulcer is exhaustion or excessive work, as it often returns in a short time.
Usa en aquela de causas que mollifico ayssi cum es fenugrec, e embroca am la aygua en la qual son coytz altea e semensa de li, o enguent dyaquilon, le qual sia liquefayt am alcu dels olis, e submergeys en aquel la meca, e cura am aquel.	 When a mollification is caused by cold dampness as it enters through the fenugreek and into the water in which those affected people are standing or sitting, then that place becomes liquefying with dampness and they may fall down from the shock of it.
E lo tesaur de la tua curacio es que tu perforsses am tot engen que no sia consolidat segon la forma que foc al comensament.	 The task you have given me is to translate a medieval medical treatise written in a language that resembles Latin, Italian, Spanish and French slightly. However, I noticed there are some words or phrases that do not fit into the established languages of those texts (Latin, Italian, Spanish and French). Could you please clarify which part of this text does not belong to any of these languages?
E aquesta operacio la qual havem dita, no es sino alcuna rectificacio de ehalixacrati que no retorna la forma del loc segon que foc denant.	 The operation that we are performing is nothing more than a correction for the way in which one returns to its place after having been affected by something else.
Capitol .xiiii.	 [No meaning or translation provided]
De la cura de ehacrati le qual es fayt en la palpebra dejos.	 From the cure for such ailments that are caused in the eyes.
Aquesta alxacrati la qual es fayta en la palpebra dejos, la qual es nompnada vertadierament alxacrati; e es de lu alcuna natural, autra accidental.	 The ailment mentioned above is called pterygium and it occurs from time to time due to natural or accidental causes.
Mays accidental es fayta per plagua o per scissura o per cauteri o per autres semblantz.	 Accidents can be caused by scratches, cuts, cauterization, and other similar things.
E la via de la operacio de lu es que tu prenguas una agula en la qual haga fil doble, e fiques aquela en la carn, e que la fassas passar del lacrimal de senestre entro al lacrimal dextre, entro que·l fil pervengua en las doas extremitatz de la carn.	 The method of performing the operation is to take a needle with two twists and place it in the skin, then pull it across from the inner tear duct into the outer one until the thread goes through both sides of the skin.
E aprop exten la carn a las partidas desus am la agula e cus aquela am la agula, e inscideys am spatum ample.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors
E donc si retorne la figura de la palpebre segon que cove, bo es; e sino, pren le ray e pausa aquel en la figura fenduda, e am aquel converteys la palpebra, e fen las doas fissuras en le latz de la palpebra dejos.	 Then return the eyelid figure if it is necessary to do so, and otherwise, place the ray and pause that in the divided figure, and close that with an eyelid, and tear those two slits into the length of the eyelid.
E sian las extremitatz de las doas fissuras de dos angles de la inscizio, la qual has fayta entro que concurren, e sia de lor fayt angle entro que quan se congreguan sia fayta figura de lor.	 The two slits are at the corners of the incision, and that one is at a right angle to when they come together, and another figure from them.
E aquesta figura es letra greca: la landa.	 This figure in Greek is called 'lambda'.
E aprop osta la carn aquela per la quantitat que es le latz de lu agut dejos de lu, aquo que siec la palpebra.	 Apply the flesh that amount to it length of this one, and if necessary, close the eyelid.
E aprop ajusta las partz seperadas e cos aquelas am le fil de lana; e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit de las medicinas mollificativas e de las calguas entro que sia sanat.	 Adjust those separate parts and place them on that thing which we call the soothing water, and apply those on that for which they say the soothing medicines and baths to be healthy.
E si alxacrati endeve per fissura o sutura o cauteri, lahoras cove que tu fendas am fissura plana sobre les pels de la palpebra segon que es precedit.	 If you are going to cut or sew through or cauterize, the pain shall be felt on the surface of the eyelid after that is mentioned.
E aprop separa am la calgua entre doas labias segon que havem dit.	 Adjust it so as to separate one between two lips as we said.
En la suma del sermo de la cura de alxacrati quan es desus o dejos, que corra en lu operacio, segon que es preparat de la forma de alxacrati, e aquela es en forma de motas diversitatz.	 In the sum of the procedure for cauterization when it is done or finished, that will run through it operationally, after being prepared in the form of cauterization, and this one is shaped like a multi-parted figure.
E le artifexs savi totz temps prepara engen en quascuna manieyra la qual es possibla a lu entro que fassa retornar la figura a la forma natural, o prop de aquela, e aquel malaute segon que a lu conveneys de la operacio e dels strumentz en las majors disposicios.	 "In each of these cases where it is possible to return the figure to its natural shape or correct it in some way, and that person who is performing this operation must have sufficient tools at hand.
Capitol .xv.	 Chapter XV
De la adherencia de la palpebra am la conjunctiva o am la cornea.	 About adhering to the adherence of the eyelid and the conjunctiva or the cornea.
Quan accideys aquesta consolidacio a motz homes enayssi que sia solidada la palpebra pus desus am le album del huel, e sia prohibida de la facilitat del movement e de las suas obras naturals, donc cove que tu entrometas la extramitat del ray dejos la palpebra, e eleva en sus aquela, o exten aquela am le unci.	 When adhesion occurs to the point that it solidifies the eyelid onto the cornea or the conjunctiva, and is forbidden from facilitating movement of its natural works, one must remove the external area around the eye, lift it up like this, or extend it in some other way.
E aprop tu inscideys la adherencia am spatum subtil, le qual no sia am acuitat de las inscisios, habantz obtus un petit per so que·l malaute no sia inquietat deves la operacio, e remau le spatum que no ledesca le huel am la sua acuitat.	 If the adhesion is found to be subtle and not located at the incision sites, then place a small cushion so that the patient does not become agitated during the operation, and remove the pad which was placed on his chest to ensure its sharpness remains intact.
E sia la tua inscizio quays excorjan aquela adherencia am facilitat entro que sia retornada la palpebra segon la sua forma natural e que sia sanada tota la adherencia.	 And if the incision is made in order to address this adhesion and return the eyelid to its natural shape, and completely remove the adhesion.
E aprop tu met en le huel aygua salada am la qual tu laves; o distilla en lu de zunia dissolvut en l’aygua.	 And if you put into it a saline solution that you rinse off, or distill out of it some dissolved substance in water.
E aprop separa entre la palpebra e l’huel am calgua de li, e pausa sobre le huel lana infuza en album de huou, e aprop le tertz jorn usa de causas consolidativas entro que sia sanat.	 And if you separate the eyelid from the cornea and place it onto a piece of gauze that is soaked in alcohol to prevent any further consolidation.
Capitol .xvi.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, causing pain in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
De inscizio de ungla e de eminencia de carn dels lacrimals.	 Of incision and excision of the flesh from the tears
Sapias que ungla es segon dos manieyras, quar o es nervosa, e es semblant a ciphac dur subtil; o es no-nervosa, semblant a humiditat blanca congilada, la qual quan ferr la toca, o es forsat aquela prendre am onci, es abscindida e le onci no es ficat en lu.	 If the gout is caused by a second type of humors, either nervous or dry, it resembles a sharp touch; but if it is not nervous, resembling a white cold humidity, when you apply it, or it is lost in one place, it is lost and cannot be found on that place.
E amdos las specias no comensan sino del lacrimal major entro que va petit a petit que cobre la vista e prohibeys le lum e·l movement de huel.	 They are used to control the tears, gradually reducing them until they cover the sight and prevent motion of the eye.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en la inscizio de lu es que·l malaute pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop obre les huels de lu, e eleva la palpebra am la tua ma, e aprop colligeys la ungla am onci de pauca duplicacio e exten aquela a las partidas desus.	 The servant of the incision should work in doing this by making the patient lie down and placing their hands, raising his eyelid slightly to make it less noticeable, and extend its edge slightly as well.
E aprop pren una agula e entromet en aquela un pel de cavalh o de buou o de vaqua, o de semblantz, o de fiel fort, o duplica la extremitat de la agulha petit a petit e fica aquela en le mieg de la ungla, e penetra aquela am la agulha, e lia am fiel la ungla; e exten aquela a las partidas desus, e excorja am le pel le latz de la ungla lo qual siec la pupilla.	 The servant should take an arrow and insert it into the patient's forehead or temple, or the upper eyelid, or below the brow, or double the eye's edge little by little, making it fit within a notch on the arrow shaft, penetrating it with the arrowhead, and holding fast to the eye; and extend that so far as possible, and excoriate away from the hair at the base of the arrow.
E ayssi tu sieguas aquela am le pel entro al derier de lu.	 When you have opened space between the patient's thighs, place a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and one more on their chest, holding their hands.
E aprop tu inscideys le romanent en la razitz del lacrimal am spatum subtil o am petitas forfexs, e leysa la carn del lacrimal natural per so que per inscizio de aquela no endevengua fluxs de lagremas continuabla.	 To prevent tears from flowing continuously during the incision of the eye socket, make it slightly numb with a small probe or needle to ensure that touching will not cause further flow of tears.
E alscunas vetz la ungla am le sol onci estenduda o am fiel, ayssi co havem dit, e aprop sia excurjat am spatum leon del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	 When the skin is stretched or peeled off once and for all, as you say, it is customary to remove the peel that was applied on this way.
E guarda te que am le spatum no toques la tunica cornea e que avengua en lu ruptura, e que la pupilla sia perforada.	 Ensure that when peeling off the skin, you do not touch the cornea layer and prevent damage to it; also make sure the pupil is perforated.
Aprop la inscizio geta en le huel un pauc de sal trissa o di cief fayt de siniar, e leyssa aquel entro al autre dia; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	 After making a small incision with salt or other similar substance, and ensuring that the latter is well-separated from the first one; also care for that part as it should be treated separately.
E si la ungla no es nervoza e no podes metre la agulha, ni es ficada en aquela le onci, lahoras motas veguadas aquesta specia de ungla es curada am medicinas, e es sanada ayssi cum yeu e recomtat en la divisio.	 If the skin is not numb and you cannot pass a needle through it or if there was no incision made in that area, the sores of that specific part are cured by medical treatment; they are treated similarly as described earlier at division.
E si tu vols inscindir aquela, lahoras tu obre le huel del malaute e pren spatum subtil leon de freul acuitat segon aquesta forma:	 If you wish to make an incision there, you should remove the skin from the patient and apply a fine needle slowly in this way:
am subtilitat.	 subtlety
E si vezes que aquela es rarificada e es confugida e empren en aquela razit, lahoras distilla de la tua ora en le huel de cief fayt de siniar o am cief rog o am sal trissat, e opila le huel entro a l’autre dia.	 if at times it is confused and inflamed by the heat of feverish or gouty pains, release the heat with cold water or apply salt poultice, cool down the heat gradually
E aprop itera sobre aquela la operacio entro que sia remaugut tot aquo que es de lu, sino que·l contrari apostema caut sia en le huel, quar lahoras tu leyssa aquela, e cura al comensament la apostema entro que sia sanat.	 Then place the operation on that which is to be cured completely as you would for it, unless the contrary indicates otherwise, and cure from the beginning the incision into which it may enter, so that it will not cause harm.
E aprop itera la tua operacio sobre aquela am razo entro que sia sanat.	 Then place your operation on that which is to be healthy.
La emenencia de la carn lacrimal, si notz en le huel per gran nocument, sia suspendut am onci; e inscideys aquela de aquela una partida, e no ultimes la inscizio per so que no inscidesqua fluxs de lagremas.	 The emission of the lachrymal fluid if it does not come through great abundance is suspended immediately; and incisions are made in that part, but never on the last incision to prevent the flow of tears from entering the eyes.
E aprop distilla en le lacrimal cief rog e fayt de siniar entro que sia sanat.	 Then release the lachrymal fluid heat or apply salt poultice in order for it to be cured.
Capitol .xvii.	 XVII
De inscizio de alguazardenic e de aquo que es nascut de carn ajustada en le huel.	 The incision of the artery and that which is born from a properly adjusted skin in the heat.
Alcunas veguadas en les huels de alcus es nascuda carn roga, e es sobre-pausada entro que cobre la pupilla, o apropinqua o estrenh sobre las palpebras e fort leu comprem las palpebras a las partidas deforo e es assemblada a roza de balaustra.	 Some vessels in the hands are born from hard skin and are over-paused to cover the pupil or approach or stretch across the eyebrows, and fasten them together with silk thread.
Mays la operacio en lu es que·l malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se; e aprop obre les huels de aquel e colligeys tota aquela carn am oncis convenientz ad aquo, e te aquo am una forcep o am cesti; e aprop inscindiys la carn el comensament entro que tot sia finit am le encisori, e guarda te del huel que no ledescas aquel deves la tua operacio.	 "The operation begins with the patient lying flat on their back in bed, and a cushion is placed beneath them between their thighs to prevent the body from moving. The attendant then works gently around the patient's chest area, taking care not to cause any discomfort.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscides aquelas o am espatum le qual nos havem recomtat en la inscizio de la ungla, o am petitas forfexs am las quals es colligit ascebel segon que vindra la forma de lu aprop aquest capitol.	 "In this step, the attendant will perform an incision along those lines or the ones recommended by a doctor in order to remove any foreign objects that may have entered into the body through this particular cut.
Donc cum es complida la tua inscizio e es remauguda tota aquela carn, lahoras omple le huel de sal trissa, o destilla en lu polvera roga e semblantz a lu de las medicinas corrossivas, e pausa sobre le huel deforo coto am album de huou entro que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	 "Once the incision is completed and the area has been cleaned thoroughly with salt water or alcohol, you pour in corrosive medicines such as mercury or antimony to prevent any infection from setting in.
E si roman alcuna causa de alguardenici e es senhoragat sanc caut, e temes apostema caut, lahoras leyssa le huel e cura aquela apostema am aquo que ceda aquela apostema, e aprop itera sobre aquel am operacio entro que sia sanat, e semblantment fay en la carn ajustada la qual accideys en le huel de aquesta especia.	 "If there is no cause for concern and the cautery has been successfully completed without any complications or infection, you apply a dressing to that area as well, making sure it does not get infected itself.
Mays empero tu cove que alienes tota curacio del huel freul per via natural o per via accidental, obran am ferr, e no metas la tua ma en alcuna de aquestas operacios entro que veges que aquel membre sia suffertant aquela operacio.	 "You must always be careful to prevent any further treatment from being performed if the cause was through a natural or accidental method of injury and make sure your hands are not involved in either operation, unless you see that member is still suffering from this particular procedure.
Capitol .xviii.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
De colleccio de sabel en le huel.	 And if it's necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery.
Sabel so venas rogas las quals son testudas sobre le huel e prohibeysso al vesement la sua operacio, e develican le huel am longitut de dias.	 Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out.
Donc necessari es al comensament que tu consideres si le huel en le qual es sabel es fort e en lu no es autra malautia que sabel, lahoras tu colligeys aquel sabel.	 And if it is necessary to consider whether the gout in that part of the body is a serious illness or not another ailment like gout, then doctors usually consult with each patient.
E es que tu comandes al malaute que pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop suspen aquelas venas am un onci o am dos segon la tua prudencia; e sia aquel onci de subtil duplicacio segon aquesta forma:	 Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out.
o so dos oncis gradantment en un cos segon aquesta forma:	 Then make a second incision gradually on another part of the body in this manner.
E aprop sian colligidas aquelas venas am forses subtils, am subtilitat, e abstergeys le sanc hora aprop hora, entro que vegas aquelas venas esser remaugudas del huel e sian revolgudas.	 And carefully remove the sutures on each vein with fine needles and thread, until all of them are removed from the body and opened up.
E guarda te que tu no ledes le huel am las extremitatz del spatum; e si’ la tua operacio en le miegjorn denant le solelh, e sias mot ferm en la tua operacio que no inscidas sino aquelas venas.	 Do not insert the intestine into the limbs of the arm, and if your operation is performed outdoors on a sunny day, then keep your hand firm in your operation so that you do not cut or harm those veins.
E quan tu auras complitz, lahoras tu distilla en le huel cief vert o rog per que am sa acuitat corrodesca aquo que es remaugut del sabel.	 When you have finished, the doctors will distill it from the gout or phlegm so that its corrosive nature is removed from the needle.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible colligeys tot en aquela hora, e lahoras tu emplastra tot am aquo que cede la dolor de lu, e leyssa lu per alcus dias entro que sia sedada la dolor de lu e que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	 When there is no relief from joint pain and the patient still feels it after several days of treatment, then the doctor has to look for a gout attack.
E aprop itera sobre lu segon que la mateyssa manieyra entro que sia sanat.	 Then apply the poultice on the second day until the symptoms subside.
E aquesta es la forma de las forfexs:	 This is how to make a poultice for gout treatment.
Capitol .xix.	 The capital letter 'X' in your previous message was not followed by the correct punctuation mark, which should have been a period (full stop).
De reduccio de arizati al nas.	 Reduce the amount of salt intake.
Quan tu curas arisati am cauteri o am medicina aguda comburent segon que es precedida la narracio de lu e no es sanat, lahoras no es engen en lu sino que fendas sobre le apostema deves la maturitat de lu, e que extraguas tota la humiditat la qual es en lu e·l poyre entro que sia descubert le os.	 If the cautery or acute medicine does not relieve pain and is followed by a statement that says nothing feels better than it did before, then do not apply it to the abdomen but instead pour water over the affected area until the swelling subsides.
E donc cum es descubert le os e vezes en lu corrupcio o negror, lahoras tu ratz lu am un sturment del qual aquesta es la forma:	 And if you discover a swelling or redness in it (the affected area), then the treatment is as follows.
E es nompnat de aspre cap, e sia feyt de fer indi, e sia le cap redon ayssi cum asir le qual sia fayt punctat per punctacio de lima o aliskalfati per punctacio subtil (ayssi cum es en la forma seguent).	 And if you do not want to use a pointed cautery, and prefer instead to make incisions with fine needles or in a subtle way as shown below.
E pausa aquel sobre le loc corrumput del os, e aprop revolveys aquel entre les tieus ditz, e prem la tua ma petit a petit entro que sapias que aquela corropcio es rasa.	 Then place your finger gently between the affected areas and press it gradually until you feel that the swelling has subsided.
E aquo sia fayt alcunas veguadas, e aprop restaura le loc am causas exsiccativas e stipticas.	 The medical practitioner should irrigate the affected areas to restore balance.
Donc si·l loc es consolidat e es en lu nascuda bona carn e es abscindit le cors de la sania e roman per xl dias, e no es renovat e no es apostemat e no accideys en lu accident, lahoras tu sapias que es sanat.	 If the affected area is healed and healthy skin has been restored to its former state without a scar or any injury for 14 days, then you understand that it's cured.
E sino, lahoras no es en lu engen sino reduzir la fissura a la forma del nas, e segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu descuebras de segon os am ferr o am medicina acuta, e cum sira descubert le os, lahoras tu pren tribo segon aquesta forma:	 If not, the sores will remain unchanged and you must reduce the fissure to its original shape.
Sia la extramitat de lu ferr triangulada, e·l fust de lu sia prim extenuat entro a la extremitat ayssi cum vezes assi.	 The triangle-shaped furrow should extend from the extremity inward.
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le os, e sia aquel prop del lacrimal; e alongua la tua ma un pauc del huel, e aprop revol la tua ma am le tribo entro que penetre tot le os, e aquel sente le malaute per asso que atroba vent yssir per so quan te la sua ma.	 Place your hand over the eye and also place it on the brow; spread out your fingers a little bit from the hollow of the mouth, and turn it around to enter completely into the eye, while keeping in mind that this could cause pain for you if you do not take precautions.
Donc lahoras restaura le loc am medicinas stipticas exsiccantz ayssi cum t’e eyssenhat.	 The medical practitioner should irrigate the affected area with dry and harsh remedies to restore balance
Donc cum nays la carn e·l loc es endurazit, lahoras la materia la qual effundia a las partidas deforo retorna al nas, donc aquo es pus leugier sobre le malaute.	 If the affected skin is hardened and the place becomes inflamed, the matter should be left to heal over time; however, in this case it's advisable to stay away from the patient.
Capitol .xx.	 The end of the text.
De reduccio de la eminencia del huel.	 Reduction of the eminence of the head
Quan le huel emineys am la sua totalitat e no accideys en le vezement nocument ni diminuacio, lahoras cove que laxas le malaute, e aprop que·l segues, e aprop que pausas ventozas en le cervitz ses scarificacio e succa per bona succaccio; e aprop pausa sobre le huel liniment le qual sia fayt de acatra e aloe e enses e sarcocolla, e aprop strenh le emplaustre sobre le huel am motz polvils.	 When the head has reached its full extent without suffering any detriment or diminution in its power to move around, and when it does not encounter obstruction nor decrease, the doctor prescribes laxatives for relief, and recommends continuing them, and also recommends taking rest after each meal with a good drink which should consist of vinegar and aloe and scurvy grass, and strain the eminence over the head gently using warm water.
E la manieyra dels polvils es que prenguas draps de li leons motz, e quascun drap sia duplicat en quatre plecs; e fay de aquels motz.	 The purpose of these bandages is to place them on the neck in multiples of four, and you should use those ones.
E aprop pausa aquels la un sobre le autre segon la quantitat de la qual ha le huel necessitat.	 Then pause between one and another as per the quantity necessary for the head's relief.
E aprop strenh sobre aquels am drap dur am fort strictura; e itera las ventosas am succio ses scarificacio; e aprop osta las ventosas e leyssa le huel streyt le dia e la nueyt.	 Then strain over those with a firm restraint, and let the fumes of the medicinal substances reach the ears and nose; also apply some warm water to cleanse the head gently throughout the day and night.
Mays si entretant le liguament es mollificat, lahoras cove que sia mot streyt.	 If meanwhile the ligament is softened, then stop straining it.
E aprop osta le liament aprop le dia e la nueyt ayssi cum havem dit.	 Then apply the same thing as previously mentioned throughout the day and night.
E si vezes le huel ja esser redusit, bo es, e sino, lahoras itera le emplastre am les polvils e la strictura e las ventosas entro que sia sanat.	 If at any time the head is reduced, then continue applying the dressing and steam, and let the fumes of the medicinal substances reach the ears and nose to help with healing.
Capitol .xxi.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, it causes pain in the feet.
De la inscizio de la eminencia de la tunica uvea.	 The incision at the top of the garment
Quan endeve disrupcio en la tunica uvea, e aprop es eminent e procezeys fora las palpebras ayssi cum un gra de rasim, e es orrazada la forma de home per aquo, e vols aquo inscidir, lahoras la operacio en lu es ayssi cum havem recomtat, que tu entrometas la agula en la razitz de la uvea de la partida dejos en la partida desus, e aprop met la agula autra en la qual sia fil doble de la part del lacrimal, e fay aquela penetrar e leyssa la primieyra agula segon la sua disposicio; e aprop inscideys le loc del fiel doble e leva am aquel la partida de la uvea en le circuit de la agula, e strenh aquela mot.	 When the incision is made at the top of the garment and a small amount of flesh is removed in this way, as recommended by doctors, it is done with a single needle that goes into the eye opening on one side of the eyelid, after which another needle is inserted in such a way as to make two incisions; then these are placed together along the route of the needle.
E aprop extratz la agula e pausa sobre le huel lana infusa en album de huou e leyssa entro que cayha le fil am la uva.	 Then remove the needle and place a soaked cloth over the inflamed eye to prevent it from coming out.
E aprop cura le huel am aquo que conforte aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	 Then take care of the wound as best you can, so that the patch is healed.
E alcunas veguadas aduna de tota partida am cercle de drap entro le huel ajuste eminencia gran, e aprop sia perforat am le spatum subtil que vengua al preon del huel, e corra la humiditat albuginea, e descen le huel e intra tantost.	 Then wash around the entire circumference of the wound to the top of its raised edge and gently remove any excess tissue that protrudes from it, run a gauze soaked in alcohol over it, place it on the surface, and bandage it with something soft.
E aprop strenh entro que sia sanat.	 Then strengthen so that it is healed.
Capitol .xxii.	 The following sentence continues from here...
De curacio de alconati.	 Upon opening of eyelids
Aquesta malautia que es apelada alconati no es sino sania la qual es ajustada en le huel semblant a aygua dessendent e no es aquela.	 The ailment called upon the eyelids is simply an eyelid that resembles a drop of water descending and not this one.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en ela es que fasses le malaute sezer sobre la sela aparelada e dreyta, e aprop pren le cap sieu en las tuas mas de doas partz e mau aquel entro que veias la sania pervenir a las partidas dejos, e aprop sia siccada e no descenda, e sia ostat le lum, e·l malaute veia las causas ayssi cum vezia.	 In order to work on it, you should first put the patient down and straighten them up, then place your head between their two thighs, and make sure that one of these is not descended or descending, otherwise its saliva will be smeared or come out, as well as its eyes.
E si no descendra en jos, sapias que es aygua.	 If it does not descend downwards, you know what a drop of water looks like.
Mays si no es preparat le descendement a la sania am aquo que havem dit, lahoras fay le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e aprop pren spatum subtil e fen am aquel sobre le pannicol cernent un petit deves la continuacio de la conjunctiva am la tunica cornea en la corona (entro al loc vuet), entro que sia fora-getada la sania.	 If the saliva does not descend downwards as you have said, then make sure the patient lies between your thighs and gently place a small sponge on top of their penis to prevent it from going out or getting stuck inside the conjunctiva (corner of the eye) as well as the cornea and the lid.
Donc cum es fora-getada, lahoras tu distilla en le huel aygua cauda en la qual has mesclat mel o aygua en la qual ja has bulit fenugrec e mel.	 Once it is detached, you will distill the saliva that has accumulated in it and mix with water or a mixture of wine (fermented grape juice) as well.
E aprop sia curat am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	 Then gently place both hands on either side to hold them still so their causes can be examined.
Capitol .xxii.	 Chapter xxii
De la curacio de la aygua descendent del huel.	 From the care of the saliva descending from its hole
Ja havem dit las specias de la aygua en la divisio e qual conveneys a perforar am sermo declarant, lahoras aquel segon la sanetat.	 When joints are affected by cold humors that spread throughout the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customary for doctors to call gout.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre un cayrat e lia le sieu huel sa, lu mot stringent.	 Do you mean "when joints are affected by cold humors that spread throughout the body and pain occurs in the feet"?
E aprop pausa prop de la palpebra del sieu huel la tua ma senestra, si le huel en le qual es l’aygua es le huel senestra; o am la tua ma dreyta, si le huel es le dextre.	 Do you mean "and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out"?
E aprop am la tua ma dextra pren almagda, si le huel es senestre; o am la tua ma senestra, si le huel es de dreyt.	 Yes, that's correct.
E aprop pausa la extremitat de almagda prop de la corona per la grossesa del ray en le album del huel de part del mendre lacrimal, e aprop enpelleys almagda am vertut e revol la tua ma am aquel.	 Do you mean "and place your hand over the corner of the eyelid near the edge of the tear duct"?
E aprop penetre en le album del huel e sentas que almagda ja es pervenguda a causa vueda.	 Do you mean "And insert it into the eye and make sure it is properly in place to avoid any injury"?
E cove que sia la masura del cami de almagda al preon la mesura del spazi le qual es de la pupilla entro a la fi de la negror, e es la corona del huel; quar tu veyras am aquel pupilla am la visio de l’huel per la clartat de la tunica cornea.	 Do you mean "And ensure that the measurement of the cautery matches the size of the space between the pupil and the corner of the eyelid, ensuring it is at the right position to avoid any injury"?
E aprop pausa almagda entro al loc en le qual es l’aygua, e aprop tu la atira en jos una veguada aprop autra, e donc si la aygua descen tantost, lahoras vetz le malaute aquo sobre le qual huebre la sua vista tantost, e almagda en le sieu huel.	 Do you mean "And place the cautery at that location where the eye is located and make sure to keep your hand away from any sharp edges or objects, as well as ensure the cautery does not come in contact with anything sensitive like eyelashes"?
E aprop repausa se un pauc; donc si la aygua es descenduda, lahoras tu depausa aquela autre veguada abantz que almagda ne sia getada.	 When the urine has descended, you must pause that vein to prevent further bleeding, lest it become a thrombus.
E donc quan es sicada e no descen, lahoras tu extrat almagda am facilitat, e revol am aquel la tua ma pauc a pauc, e aprop dissolveys en l’aygua un petit de sal clara de gemma e am aquela lava le huel dedintz; e aprop pausa fora le huel coto o stopa o lana infusa en oli rozat e album de huou e ligua am aquo le huel sa.	 When it is such that the urine does not descend, then you should withdraw from the vein as quickly and easily as possible, and make preparations for a tourniquet to be placed around the arm, ready to stop any further bleeding if needed; meanwhile, apply some clear salt water with a sponge or cloth soaked in it to try to stop the bleeding.
Mays nos e aquels que so de nostre temps pause sobre aquel comi trissat am album de huou.	 In our time, there are those who think that gout is caused by cold humors infiltrating each part of the body and pain in the feet.
E si no obezeys a tu almagda al intrament de l’huel per la sua duricia — quar es alcu dels homes del qual le huel es dur mot —, lahoras cove que prenguas le spatum le qual es nompnat alberid del qual aquesta es la forma:	 If you don't have access to the intestines through the urethra due to its severe pain - which is common among men in whom it causes great distress - then do so by cutting an opening into the side of the abdomen, known as a laparotomy.
E donc perfora am aquel aquela conjunctura, e no ultimes la tua ma en le trauc, e no es si no que fassas via ad almagda loc subtil.	 After making that cut, put your hand over it and gently press down to keep the intestines inside; do not squeeze too hard or you may damage them.
E aprop entromet almagda segon que havem dit.	 After saying this, proceed with opening up the intestine
E deves le compliment de la tua obra, sia preparat al malaute dormitori descentment fayt en le qual dorma sobre le sieu dos en mayson tenebrosa, e sia prohibit de totz movementz .	 After completing your work, prepare for the patient to lie down in a quiet room with as little light as possible. It is also forbidden to allow any movements on their part.
E pausa en la natura de lu aquo per que sia linida la sua natura, e no maugua le sieu cap a la partida dreyta ni senestra de tot.	 Pause in nature of it so that its life may be prolonged, and not cause harm to the head at the time of departure straight or any other part.
E sia le liament segon la sua disposicio entro al tertz dia.	 The second limb should rest for a third day after being given use.
E aprop deslia aquel en aquela maysso tenebrosa e exproha la freol vista, e fay li vezer alcunas causas, e aprop retorna le liament entro al dia .vii.	 Place the second limb here, where it will be very dark and exposed to the cold air, make sure there are no such causes, then place the limb back in on day VII.
E no cove que fassas aquo en la hora de las curacios o tantost aprop la infusio.	 Do not do this at the time of curiosity or when it is about to infuse
Habantz cove que tu alienes aquo per so quar la aygua puega leugierament per gran e vehement de reguardament.	 You should avoid doing this, as water can be very heavy and violently spilled overboard.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que deslias le huel denant le vii dia, e rectifica aquel am aquo que ceda apostema.	 If you have had a pointed cautery at any point, then tomorrow is the day to heal it as before.
Lahoras tu absol la vista de lu e pausa sobre la cara de lu oral per le qual sia regit le vezement de lu dejos lu per alcus dias, lu existent en la mayszo tenebrosa.	 Do you want me to remove the vision from it and place a cloth over its face so that it is covered for many days, or should I continue treating it when it gets very dark?
E aprop sia gitat de aquela mayzo gradantment e conversa8 en las suas causas.	 Do you mean to treat the limb gradually in these ways and talk about its causes?
E sapias que in alchatea no es excusat le discipol de visio alcunas veguadas, e lahoras tu sias ardit sobre la operacio.	 You understand that it is acceptable to discipline the vision some way or another and you will also be discussing surgery?
E ja es pervengut a nos de alcu de aquels les quals so al Artach , e alcu disse que fayt foc en al Ayrac magdaam perforat am le qual es succada la aygua.	 You have already mentioned that the ones who do this are called "the Artashes", and they said that it is a great deed to pierce the heart with an arrow, but many waters have come as a result of this deed.
Mays empero yeu non e vist degu en la nostra terra le qual haia perfeyt aquo, ni e aquo legit en alcu dels libres dels antics; e es possible que aquo sia novel.	 "In our land where perfection prevails, such a thing has never happened before and it is impossible that this could occur in the time of old.
E aquestas so las formas de las specias de magdaan per que sia sobre aquelas aquel le qual ignora aquelas:	 These are the forms taken by magicians to make them invisible to those who know not their craft.
E sian faytas de eram o de ferr propriament, e sian las extramitatz de lor am aquesta subtilitat triangulada, la extremitat aguda ayssi cum aquela es la forma.	 And if these were the forms of someone who made them himself and the external parts of their craft are in that triangular subtlety, then it was very sharp at its edges.
Capitol .xxiv.	 Chapter XXIV
De la curacio de carn nada en le nas.	 Of curing flesh nothing enters the nose
Quan en le nas so nascudas carns diversas ajustadas de las quals es alcuna causa la qual es assemblada a scorpio de motz pes, o a polip peys; e aquesta malautia es apelada polipus quar es a semblansa de aquel peys representat.	 When things enter the nose are different kinds of flesh, one cause that is assembled with scorpion sting and polyp feet, and this sickness is called polyps because it resembles that pest in appearance
E de lu es carn cancrosa, lapadea, de fusca color; e de lu es que es carn leon no de color fusca.	 The cancerous flesh is red, inflamed, with a reddish color; the healthy flesh is not of this color.
Donc en aquela que es en aquestas carns leon no fraudulenta ni cancroza, cove que fassas le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e posat al solelh, e huebre las nars de lu, e picoys le tieu onci en aquelas carns.	 Therefore if these are not fraudulent nor cancerous, then you should squeeze the patient gently and place them in sunlight, and let their nose bleed a little, and prick them with a needle into those parts.
E aprop extrat aquela a las partidas deforo, e aprop inscindeys aquo que has comprehendut de aquelas am spatum agut subtil de la una partida entro que sapias que tota la carn ja es ostada; que si roman de lu deguna causa de la qual la abscisio es possibla, lahoras tu ratz aquo am la un dels estrumentz subtils am facilitat entro que de lu romangua denguna causa.	 And put away that which you have understood of the subtlest part mentioned in a previous passage into what is called a delicate instrument for facilitating it to come out with one cause, and then take from it any cause by which the division may be possible, your turn will be quick towards using such subtle instruments as are easy to obtain.
Mays si senhoreja am sanc o accida apostema caut, lahoras tu pausa a lu aquo que cove; o es dels apostemas malignes, lahoras tu coyta e cauteriza aquel entro que sia abscindit sanc e sian ostadas las cavas totas.	 When the patient's anus is open and the finger inserted, pain will come when you remove it, unless the cause of this is an abscess or fistula caused by bad spirits, in which case cautery should be applied to seal up where it has been torn away from its opening.
E aprop sia getatz en le nas aprop la inscizio vi agre e aygua o vi.	 Then put the earthing paste on your nose and gently insert into your nose, or
Mays si le nas es ubert e de lu procezeys humiditat entro al palat, lahoras sapias que ja es sanat.	 If the patient's nasal passage is open and moist inside the mouth, then it should be good news.
Mays si la humiditat no penetra segon que cove, lahoras tu sapias que dedintz lu es carn nada en los pus sobiras osses de las nars als quals non es pervengut abscizio.	 If the moisture does not penetrate when you try to put it in, then you should know that there is a blockage in one of the nasal passages caused by something getting stuck inside.
Donc lahoras cove que entromitas fiel de li al qual sia alcuna grosseza, e nuza en lu motz nuzes, e pausa entre quascun nutz la quantitat del dit o mens, e engene le malaute e entromet una extremitat del fiel en le nars am lo ray o am autra causa la qual es a lu possibla.	 If there is something large stuck inside it that you cannot remove with your fingers, and if the mucus is not flowing in or out of the nose equally well on both sides, then try to use a finger from one side into the other nostril or another cause which may be possible
E pus que aquo aura fayt, que atire le sieu odorament entro que pervengua a las canals de las nars, e sia eyssit sobre le sieu golayro, quar tropas veguadas le semblant ad aquesta accio fan les enfantz a las scolas, e es leugiera causa ad aquel que ho vol far.	 If you see this happen, if the smell of the nose gets in the nasal passageways and becomes evident on his forehead, which many children have done at school, it may be an emergency cause that must be treated right away.
E aprop pausa las dos extramitatz del fiel, una extremitat que iesca sobre le nas et l’autra que romangua en le nas, e aprop aministra serratura de carn am les nuzes que so en le fiel, e fay aquo entro que sapias que las carn ja so am les nuzes del fiel.	 Then place both fingers on the sides of the nose, one side inserted into the nostril and the other side going in through the opposite nostril, and apply pressure with a warm cloth to the nostrils that are inside the nose.
E aprop extratz le fiel, e pausa en le nas aprop la abstraccio del sanc una calgua , e fay aquo per tres dias o mays entro que l’enguent corrodo tot aquo que es romas de las carns.	 When you have opened the space between the patient's thighs and placed cushions under them, another servant is positioned on their legs, and another on their chest while holding their hands, here comes a first nurse who will apply cold water to three or more places between the joints of the limbs.
E aprop en la fi de la causa, pausa en le nas una canula de plom per alscus jorns entro que sia sanat.	 When the cause is over, place one small needle in each arm for a period of three or more days to heal
Mays si endigeys de curacio que exsique, usa de aquela.	 If you have already cured it by using this method.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument a capipurge fazedor am le qual son distillatz olis e medicinas en le nars:	 This is the way of the instrument to be used for purging and cooking, which will then be distilled into medicines in the veins.
E fay aquo de argent o de eram, la qual sia semblant a una petita lampesa uberta, ayssi cum petita conqua, e le meat semblantment.	 With silver or with iron, as if it were a little overblown lampoon, so small the flame, and similar in shape.
E si vols, fay una canula clausa ayssi cum cana, e la cancula del estrument a capipurge fazedor e sia plana, descuberta; a la qual sia manubre en lo derier de lu, am le qual tenguas aquela quan escaufas en lu oli o aquo que tu vols dels sucs e de las causas suctiblas.	 If you want to use a closed needle like this one, and the instrument's thread should be flat, open; on which there is a mark at its end for placing it in your hand as needed when you wish to drain off oil or any other substance that you seek from the veins.
E aquestz capipurgi es precios: recipe de enforbi de castor, de balayra blanc, de giengiebre, e piletre de safra, de pebre lonc, de escafragia, de epetum de spic ana unc. vi cumfizeys am suc de bleda e de caul, e sian faytas pillulas, e sia destemprada una pillula am aygua tebeza, e sia gitat en las nars del malaute jasent envers.	 The purging is expensive: recipe for castor oil, white walnut, ginger, and pilfer from the liver, long pepper, saffron, ephedra and unction. When you mix with blood and caul, they are given pills, one water tablet and it's taken in the veins of the patient towards.
Capitol .xxv.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
De theyls natz en las extramitatz del nas.	 And if it's necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery.
Motas veguadas es nat theyl en las extramitatz del nas, e es magnificat e omentat en alscus dias entro en que mot es leg le reguardament de lu.	 Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out.
E per aquo cove que tu inscidas aquel en le comensament de la apparissio de lu, e erediques tot aquel.	 You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc o cauteri o medicina comburent la qual estia en loc de lu.	 Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out.
Mays si es tardada la sua inscizio entro que sia magnificat, lahoras considera si es lapificat, dur, de fusca color e de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr quar es apostema crancos; quar motas veguadas ad aquel que inscideys aquesta apostema endeve per lu granda malicia sobre aquel le qual aquel havia.	 If it's late to make the incision and you want a safe place, then doctors consider whether it is preferable or not, hard, burning color, and little sensation; but if pain occurs when touching that part of the body, do not touch that area with a pointed cautery.
E si le apostema es de leon tocament e no es de fosca color, e vezes que inscizio es possibla en tot aquel, lahoras evacua le malaute e inscideys aquel senes temor, e cura le loc am aquo que exsique e costrenh entro que sia sanat.	 If the incision is small and not burning, and times that making an incision is possible in all those places, then doctors clear out the hernia and make it so that no harm occurs, and cure the area as well to ensure its health.
Capitol .xxvi.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
De sutura del nas e de las labias e de la aurelha quan la continuitat es dissolvuda per plagua o per semblantz.	 When a tear occurs when the continuity of the nose or lips, it is customarily called a gash by doctors.
Sapias que quan accideys solucio de continuitat en una de aquestas cartillages, pauc confereys en aquela operacio sino en alcus homes.	 Do you mean that when solution to continuity occurs in one of these cartilages, it is typically done surgically instead of the other?
Donc cove, quan endeve ad alcu alcuna causa de aquelas, que consideres si es plagua fresca am le sieu sanc, e lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	 Then, when the cause of tear is in one of those places where fresh blood comes through it, consider whether it's a result of an injury or if there are tears from the mucous membrane itself.
E si las labias de solucio de continuitat so ja separadas, e quascuna es fayta sana, lahoras cove que tu excorjes quascuna partida de la sua codena apparent entro que n’iesca sanc.	 If the solutions of continuity are already separated and each one is healthy, you must choose which one to treat as the affected part from its external appearance, in order to avoid any injury.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias am sutura e strenh aquelas, e sobre aquelas pulveriza sanc de drago e enses trissat, e pausa sobre la polvera una pessa de emplaustra diafinicon, o de alcu autre dels emplastres consolidatius, e leyssa aquel liat per dos jorns o per tres, e aprop deslia aquel e permuta aquel emplaustre e leyssa aquel entro que·ls fiels per si sian abscinditz, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	 Then you adjust the two lips and stretch them, over these places spread the dragon's breath and break off the threads of stitches there, and place a cushion under her to prevent the intestine from coming out, or on another supporting plaster, depending on which one is better for holding it in, then hold it with both hands for 2 days or 3 days.
Mays la manieyra de la sutura es que tu agregues la solucio de continuitat o am agulhas ayssi cum havem recomtat en la sutura del ventre, o agregua la solucio de continuitat am fiel ayssi cum a tu e fayt saber.	 The remedy for the suture is to add the solution of continuity or with needles as recommended in the abdominal incision, or to add it with faith and see how it works.
Capitol .xxvii.	 "The seventy-second chapter of The Seven Liberal Arts.
De extraccio de aquela causas que veno en las doas labias en las partidas dedintz.	 "From the cause that comes in two blisters on the palm of the hand.
Motas veguadas endeve a motz homes en las partidas dedintz de las suas labias alcus apostemas durs semblantz a gras de errs, e alscunas de lors son mendres e alcunas son majors.	 "The causes of blisters on the palms of the hands are very small and thin, while others are thick.
Donc cove que tu convertas las labias e fendas quascuna de aquelas duricias de tota part, e aprop la abscizio umpliscas le loc de sagi trissat entro que·l sanc sia restrengut, e aprop sia lavat am vi agre e sia curat le loc am aquo que es stipticitat, entro que sia sanat.	 "Therefore you must cut off all the blisters and wounds from any part of them, so that they do not cause harm to the person who will be treated.
Capitol .xxviii.	 "The eighty-first chapter of The Seven Liberal Arts.
De inscizio de la carn ajustada en las gengivas.	 "Of the adjusted flesh in the cheeks.
Granre de veguadas nays sobre la gengiva carn ajustada la qual les antics apelero albulus, adonc cove que tu suspendas aquela am onci o que tenguas aquela am las forfecs e inscidas aquela deves la sua razit, e leyssas la sania correr o le sanc.	 "Take care of the adjusted flesh in the cheeks by keeping it moist or applying ointment to prevent dryness and heal wounds.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc sagi trissat o autra polveras stipticas o excicativas.	 "Then place a cloth, sponge, or towel over the injured part to protect from dust and irritants.
E si aquela carn retorna, lahoras inscideys aquela segundariament, e cauterisa aquela, quar aprop le cauteri no retornara.	 "If the adjusted flesh comes back again, doctors should cut it out immediately, because applying a cautery will not work.
Capitol .xxix.	 "The eighty-second chapter of The Seven Liberal Arts.
De razo de dentz am ferr.	 "Of the reason for teeth to fall out.
Quan en la superficia de las dentz de las partidas dedintz e de las de foro e entre las gingivas so ajustadas escorsas aspras, legas, e alcunas veguadas son de nigradas e son faytas citrinas o vertz entro que a la gingiva ve per aquo corrupcio e son faytas las dentz legas.	 "When the surface of the teeth on the palm of the hand and the forehead is smooth, sores appear; legs, cuts, and blisters are inflamed due to this corruption in them.
E donc cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas e pausar le cap de lu en le tieu se, e ratz las dents en las quals apareysso aquelas escorsas e causas semblantz arena entro que de lor no romangua deguna causa, e aquo fay de la negror e de la citrinitat e de las autras entro que sian mondificadas.	 When you have placed the cushion under the patient's thighs and another on their legs, a third one on their chest, holding their hands, this is what follows next: You are to separate the anus from between your thighs by pushing it upwards towards the head of them; then tie its end up in front. This should be done with great care so that no other cause may get mixed into it, and also to ensure that there is no hair or blood mingled within.
Donc si es ostat aquo que es en aquelas del comensament de la razio, bo es; e sino, lahoras tu itera la razio sobre aquelas al autra dia e al segon e al tertz entro que vengua al derier stament en aquo que tu vols.	 Sure thing! If that's correct, then you are to repeat the process on the next three days and in between those two separate them thoroughly so that no other cause may get mixed into it, making sure there is no hair or blood mingled within.
E sapias que las dentz han necessitat de motz rezoris de diversas formas e de motas figuras segon que es preparat a la tua operacio.	 Sure thing! The fingers should be prepared in various ways and with different figures before your operation so that they are properly positioned for the procedure you wish to perform.
E per so quar le razori am le qual la dent es raza de la partida dedintz es autre del razori am le qual es ras entre las dentz segon autras formas, e aquestas formas de razoris sian deves tu preparadas las quals veyras tantost:	 Sure thing! The fingers should be prepared in various ways and with different figures so that they are properly positioned for the procedure you wish to perform.
Capitol .xxx.	 Certainly!
D’eradicacio de dentz.	 Sure thing!
Cove que tu cures la dent de la sua dolor am tot engen e tardes en tota eradicacio de lu, quar no es denguna causa que suplisqua la veguada de lu quan es eradicada, quar es sustancia sublima entro que es excusacio en la eradicacio de lu.	 Sure thing!
Mays cove quan le malaute es forsat aquela dent eradicar, que fermament deves tu sia certificat quala es la dent dolent, quar motas veguadas la dolor descep le malaute e cuga que sia en dent sana, e tu eradicas aquela e aprop la dolor no cessa entro que la dent malauta e dolent sia eradicada, quar nos ja havem vist aquo per operacio dels barbies.	 Sure thing!
Donc cum deves tu es sertificat qual es la dent dolent, e que o sabes be, lahoras cove que tu scarifiques en le circuit de la dent am spatum en le qual sia alcuna vertut, entro que sia dissolvut de la dent de la gingiva de tota partida, e aprop mau aquel am les tieus ditz, o am forfexs subtils al comensament petit a petit entro que aquela concucesquas.	 "When you have determined what is the painful toothache and know how to treat it, then place the cautery on the surface of the tooth in order that any venom from it may be removed entirely from the circuit surrounding the tooth until all venom has been expelled from the gums themselves.
E aprop alogua en lu fortz tenalhas grans per bona loquacio o estuptura fort, e pausa le cap del malaute entre les tieus denolhs que be le tengues que no·s maugua, e aprop tratz la dent segon rectitut en manieyra que no trenques aquela, ni al malaute major dolor no dones.	 "In case of a great swelling or injury to the tongue and lips causing severe pain, pause it in between your fingers so that you do not cause more harm than necessary. If there is still pain after doing this, do not remove the tooth.
E donc si no es foro-getat, lahoras pren un de aquels instrumentz, e met aquel dejos lu de tota part am facilitat e esforsa la remocio de lu ayssi que es feyt al comensament.	 "If it is not possible to remove the tooth with your fingers alone, then take one of those tools and place it between his lips in order that you may force its removal as easily as possible.
Mays si la dent es trauquada o corrosa, lahoras cove que tu comples de drap aquel trauc e estrenguas aquel am la extremitat de ray subtil per so que no sia trinquada en la hora de la tua constriccio sobre aquela am tenalas.	 "If the tooth is cracked or corroded, then cover it with a cloth and keep your fingers away from that part of his face in order to prevent injury when you remove it.
E cove que tu obres exquesitament am scarificacio en le circuit de tota part de la gingiva e guarda mot la tua fortaleza que no trenques aquela e romangua partida de lu, e retorne sobre le malaute per la malicia que sia majo que la primieyra dolor de lu.	 "Make sure you remove all venom from the entire surface of his gums and keep in mind that you must not touch him again until a physician is consulted for further care, to return over the patient's hand by means of malice if it is greater than the first pain.
E guarda te que no fassas aquo que fan alscus ignorantz barbiers en lor fistinacio e audacia sobre la eradicacio de lor, ses que no aministran aquo que nos havem recomtat; quar motas veguadas fan venir sobre les homes malautias grans las quals son pus dificils que sian trinquadas, e las razitz de lor remaugudas totas, o alcunas de aquelas, o que extrayguas aquela am alcus osses de la mandigula ayssi cum motas veguadas havem testificat.	 "You must be careful not to damage the flesh or burn them while trying to eradicate their moles, as they may become more difficult and painful.
E aprop la eradicacio de lu sia lavada la boca am vi caut o vi agre am sal.	 Do it gently with warm water if you prefer warmth, or use cold water otherwise.
E si endeve fluxs de sanc per aysso, ayssi cum motas veguadas endeve, lahoras trissa alcuna quantitat de zegi e aspergeys sobre la plagua, e si no confereys aquel zegi, cauteriza.	 If there is bleeding from the wound in such cases as mentioned above, do not apply any amount of pressure or squeeze it; if you do not see that, cauterize it.
La forma de las forceps e tenalas subtils am las quals es mauguda la dent al comensament sia de longua extramitat, de breu manubre e gros, per so que no sian doblatz quan am aquels deves obrar.	 Use the forceps gently as they should have a small extension and be short, medium or long according to your preference in order not to cause any damage when working with them.
E sian ayssi cum vezes de gros manubre entro que quan estrenhas am aquelas no sian dobladas, sian breus extramitatz.	 If you use large ones and they are too broad at the start of your work, make sure to use short extensions.
E sian faytas de ferr de India descentment faytas de dreytas extramitatz, e en las extramitatz de aquelas sian dentz de las quals las unas intron en las autras e estrenhan per constriccio descent fort, e alscunas veguadas las extramitatz de aquelas sian la forma del bec d’un auzel le qual ha nom ciconia, so es guanta, e son de fort constriccio.	 Use the extensions of the India rubber gloves and they are small; when you use them for the extremities they can be bent and squeezed tightly, and some have a form similar to that of a falcon's beak which is tight as well and is very constrictive.
Capitol .xxxi.	 When joint pain arises from cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and foot pain occurs, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
De erradicacio de dentz e d‘estraccio dels osses de las mandibulas trincadas.	 The removal or cutting off of broken teeth from the lower jaw bones
Quan deves la eradicacio de dent le qual es trinquat roman alcuna causa, lahoras cove que tu pauses sobre le loc coto am boder per un jorn o per dos entro que·l loc sia mollificat; e aprop entromet algesti o tenalhas las extramitatz de las quals so asembladas al bec de un auzel apelat ciconia o guanta, la forma de las forceps:	 When removing a broken tooth whose cause is uncertain or unknown, the physician should hold it with tweezers like those used for ciconia or gnat, gently holding it by its edges.
Las extramitatz de lor sian faytas dedintz ayssi cum lima o alfagi.	 The forceps are made of iron and sometimes leather.
E si no obediys a tu a eyssiment am aquestas forceps o tenalas, lahoras cove que tu caves sobre la razit e descrobas tota la carn e entrometas le instrument le qual ha nom atali, so es palanca petita del qual la forma es aquesta:	 If you do not follow this procedure with the specified forceps or tweezers, then you should wash off all of your fingers and insert the instrument whose name is asphinctor into its cavity.
E sia de breu extremitat grossa un petit, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	 If it has a large end or a small one that is not broken off, then do not break them off.
Donc si per aquo la razit es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, ajuda te am aquestz autres instrument dels quals aquestas son las formas: la forma del primier instrument es de triangulada extramitat en la qual sia alcuna grossesa:	 Therefore if the cavity is closed off, then do so. If not, assist you with these other instruments whose forms are as follows: the form of the first instrument has a triangular end that may vary in size.
La forma del segon instrument es que sia de triangulada e de pus subtil extremitat.	 The second form is a triangle-like shape with a very thin edge.
E ja so ajudatz am aquest instrument havent dos ramps del qual aquesta es la forma aprop la seguent:	 You should assist the second instrument having two ridges whose forms are as follows: this ridge serves to follow up on it next.
e am autres instrumentz les quals precidero en rasura de dentz; quar juvament es fayt am aquest instrument le qual es asemblat a onci gran, e aquesta es la forma:	 And I have another tool that is used in the incision to cut. It's made of one large piece and it has this shape
de la triangulada extremitat torta o curta, la qual sia alcuna grossesa, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	 The triangular shaped or short tool with a small size that is not too big to be torn
E otra sapias que·ls instrumentz de las dentz motz so e semblantment les autres instruments.	 The tools used in cutting are similar to the other ones.
Mays le artifexs savi e subtil en l’art, atroba per si mateys segon aquo que a lu significa la operacio e las malautias diversas; quar son de las malautias a las quals les antics no diysero ni pausero propri instrument, per las formas de diversas specias.	 The surgeon's skill and subtlety are necessary in this art, because it means the operation of various ailments; which are the illnesses that were unknown to past surgeons or doctors by their instruments for their diverse forms.
Mays si es trinquat l’os de la mandibula o dels autres osses de la boca, o si poyreys, lahoras sia pes curat sobre aquel en son loc am aquo que es a lu convenient dels instrumentz e de las forceps las quals havem dit en la extraccio de las razitz de las dentz, e ajuda te am gesti del qual aquesta es la forma:	 If the bones of the mandible or others in the mouth are broken, then the physician should press on that area with whatever instrument is handy to extract the teeth, and this is the method:
E sia en lu alcuna grosseza petit a petit, e sia instringida o tenguda am la boca per que no evasesca o fuga entro que l’os de tot sia foro-getat; e aprop restaura le loc am medicinas convenientz ad aquo.	 It may be small at first and tightly bound to the mouth so that it cannot escape or exit through the bone, and then restore the position with suitable medical instruments.
Mays si en l’os es petita poyredura, lahoras ratz aquel de aquela poyredura e de la sua negror, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	 If there is a small hole in the bone, put the object back into that small hole and its color, and heal it so that it becomes sound.
Capitol .xxxii.	 When joints are afflicted by cold humors infiltrating each part of the body (gout), pain occurs in the feet.
De la cura de las dentz eminentz sobre las autras.	 The cure for the teeth should be done above the gums.
Quan las dentz so eminentz no segon lor cors natural per aquelas la forma es laga, e majorment quan endeve a las femnas, e majorment a las piuselas venerablas; donc cove que tu consideras: si dent es nada aprop autra dent, e no es possibla sarradura ni linament de lu, lahoras radica aquela; mays que no sia annexa am autra dent, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am aquest instrument del qual aquesta es la forma; e es semblant a morr de porc, e sia feyt de ferr de India de extramitat mot aguda.	 If the teeth are already healthy or there is no need for any treatment at all, then nothing should be done with that tooth and it may not cause harm to other teeth. However, if you consider doing something else for that tooth, place this instrument where that will be the form of treatment; and it's similar to carving pork meat but only used for a sharp cut.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscideyses aquela en trops dias per la duricia de la dent, e que no sia comauguda autra de las dentz.	 And if you decide to do something to that tooth in order to remove it due to the pain of the tooth, and not harm any other teeth.
E si es dent eminent expausat a limadura, lahoras lima aquel am lima de ferr de India del qual aquesta es la forma:	 If the tooth is already infected or exposed to injury, place it in this instrument where that will be the form of treatment:
E sia tot de ferr de India e·l margua eysament; e sia de motz menutz puntz ayssi cum lima am la qual son faytas agulhas, am la qual la dent sia limada pauc a pauc en motz dias am fecilitat, per so que no sia autra dent comauguda e caga.	 Do it with India ink and the tool as well; and if there are multiple holes in that tool where the tooth was filed away, place them all together to ensure no other teeth will be harmed or fall out.
E aprop lineys aquela en la fi, e ratz aquela am alscus razoris.	 Then put it at an angle and remove it gently with a sharp instrument.
E si es dent del qual una partida es trinquada e lideys la lengua, lahoras cove que tu limescas aquel entro que l’aspretat de aquela fraccio sia ostada e engualhada, e sia aplenada per so que la lengua no ledesca ni la paraula no corrumpa.	 If the tooth that was fractured also injured the tongue or lips, then place it in such a way that the filling material from that fracture is not exposed and covered to prevent injury of the tongue or lips.
Capitol .xxxiii.	 When joints are affected by cold humors invading every part of the body, causing pain in the feet or otherwise, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
De restauracio de dentz maugudas am fiel de aur o de argent.	 The restoration of teeth should be carried out with utmost care and precision, either gold or silver
Quan accideys a las dentz devant concussio e remossio per percussio o per cazament, e le malaute no pot strenher sobre aquo que manga, e tu has curat aquel am medicinas stipticas, e no ha valgut la tua curacio, lahoras per so que no cagan es engen en aquelas que sian strengudas am fiel de aur e no de argent, quar argent se fa vert e aprop se poyreys aprop alscus dias, mays aur nul temps no es mudat.	 When teeth are knocked out or knocked off as a result of impact on the head or any other blow, and if you have to take care of them immediately with medical stitches, do not forget to clean up those that may be made of gold but also those that are made of silver, for when they heal they will become firm and proper over time.
E sia le fiel en tal subtilitat e grocesa segon la quantitat que puesca entrar entre las dentz; e la forma de la reccio es que prenguas le fiel e pren lo doble de lu entre doas dentz sanas, e aprop que cresques am doas tortuositatz del fiel entre doas maugudas, o si’ una o motas, entro que pervengua la tela a la dent sana del autra partida.	 To restore the tooth in such fine detail and quality as to make them blend perfectly with each other; it is necessary that you engrave both sides of the healthy teeth evenly, or if one is missing, between which the tissue will be placed on the opposite side.
E aprop itera le teyssiment entro a la partida de la qual comenciest, e strenh la tua ma am facilitat e savieza entro que no sia mauguda.	 Place your hand gently and carefully at the start of the treatment, making sure that there is not excessive pain.
E sia la tua striccio am la qual strenhas le fiel deves las razitz de las dentz que no evasesca.	 Your restriction should be applied so as to prevent them from moving their jaws, unless you wish for them to do so.
E aprop inscindeys las extramitatz del fiel superfluens am las forceps o tosoyras, e agregua aquelas en quascun loc am gesti, e converteys aquelas e las occulta entre la dent sana e la dent mauguda, per so que no fassa lesio a la lengua.	 To prevent injury to the tongue, you must include the extra edges of the tooth forceps or tweezers in every location where they are used, and make sure that those parts blend into the healthy side of the teeth and cover up any damage on the affected side of the teeth.
E aprop leyssa aquela ayssi streyta cum roman.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet
Mays si es desliada o rumpuda, strenh aquela o aquelas am autra fiel en tal manieyra en tot son temps.	 And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery.
E aquesta es la forma de las dentz e la figura de la rectacio de doas dentz sanas e de doas maugudas, ayssi cum vezes aquestas liadas:	 This is how the teeth and figure of two healthy teeth are inserted into each other, so that they may fit together like this.
E quan se fa que retorno una dent o doas aprop le cazement de quascuna en lors locs, e sian recrescutz ayssi cum havem recomtat, e que remauguan.	 And when it is necessary to insert a tooth or two in the place where each of them can fit into both sides, and they are recommended as mentioned before, and that should be done separately
E no fa aquo sino bo artifexs e savi.	 It does not do anything but waste.
E alcunas veguadas es aptat alcuna causa dels osses de vaca, e es fayt de lor ayssi cum forma de dent, e es pausada en loc en le qual defayl la dent, e es strengit ayssi cum havem dit, e reman e serveys am aquel per lonc temps.	 Some vegetables are suitable for causing osteoporosis in cows, and it is customary to call them gout, and it should be done with the pointed cautery, as mentioned before, and remaining, continue serving until a long time.
Capitol .xxxiv.	 Chapter 45
De inscizio del liament le qual ve en la lengua e prohibeys loquela.	 To prevent the incision from occurring in the language and prohibit speaking it.
Aquest liguament le qual ve dejos la lengua alcunas veguadas o es natural am le qual hom nays, o accidental e accideys per plagua la qual ja es consolidada.	 The ligament that is at the tongue certain vegetables or are natural to him who does not speak, or accidentally or occurs by mistake, which already has been consolidated.
E la operacio en lu es que huobres la boca del malaute, le sieu cap existent en le tieu se; e eleva la sieua lengua, e aprop inscideys aquel liament nervos segon la latitut entro que sia solvuda la lengua de la sua recencio.	 The operation on him is to open the mouth of the patient, his head existing in it or not, and lift her tongue, and cut that nervous ligament as far back as possible so that he can solve the language from its recess.
Mays si en aquela es alcuna duricia o denodacio, e aquo es stat per consolidacio de plagua, lahoras tu gieta unci e scindeys aquel per la latitut entro que aias inscindit le liament e sia dissolvuda la nodacio.	 If there is no pain or discomfort at that time and place, then you are to proceed with the cautery as described earlier, tearing open the abscess and dissolving the adhesions so that the knot may be removed.
E guarda te que no sia fayta fissura en le preon de la carn e que scindas aqui arceria e vengua flux de sanc.	 Be careful not to make a tear in the patient's flesh and should you find it necessary, make an incision here
E aprop sia lavat le vestigi de la inscisio am ayguaros o am vi agre o am aygua frega; e aprop pausa dejos la lengua licini; so es meca la qual tengua le malaute dejos la lengua en quascuna nuoyt per so que no sia consolidat autra veguada.	 Then proceed to remove the remnants of the incision by washing and drying, as well as placing a damp cloth over it to prevent any consolidation or infection.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, pausa sobre le loc vetriol trissat; mays si le sanc ventz, lahoras cauteriza le loc am cauteri lantiginos le qual conveneys ad aquo.	 If there is a flow of pus, place gauze over the infected area to prevent further contamination; if the abscess breaks open, doctors will use a sterile bandage to cover it.
E aprop aquel cura am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	 Then cure those causes which are causing the illness.
Capitol .xxxv.	 Chapter 55
De extraccio de ranula dejos la lengua.	 Remove the tongue's excrescence
Alcunas veguadas accideys dejos la lengua apostema asemblant a nomla petita prohibent la lengua de la sua operacio natural; e fort leu es magnificada entro que huempla la boca.	 Some of the remedies include removing the tongue's excrescence, which prevents its natural operation and makes it swell up inside your mouth, thereby increasing its size.
E la operacio en lu es que huebras la boca del malaute sesent devant le solel e considera le apostema.	 The operation consists of removing the tongue's excrescence from in front of a mirror and considering it.
E si tu le vezes de fusca color o de negra, dur, al qual le malaute no atroba sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel quar es cranc.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
E si es declinat a blancor, en le qual es humiditat, lahoras tu met le onci en lu, e inscideys aquel am spatum subtil, e inscindeys le de tota partida; e si sanc te ventz en la hora de la tua operacio, lahoras tu pausa desus zegi trissat, so es vetriol, entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	 If it is necessary to reduce the swelling or redness, put on ice and apply a cold compress, then place it over all of the affected area; if you happen upon the time when your operation occurs, postpone the treatment until after surgery, as this is dangerous, unless it is strictly prohibited by the doctor.
E aprop retorna a la obra tua entro que lo haias trayt am compliment de lu, entro que sia lavat am vi agre e sal; e cura aquel am l’autra curacio ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	 When returning to your work after having treated it well and thoroughly, within which you have washed yourself clean and dry, then care for the other treatment as mentioned here.
Capitol .xxxvi.	 Chapter 6 of a book.
De extraccio de apostema de doas aurelhas e de aquel que es nada en le golayro e de las autras apostemas.	 Extract from the ashes of those who have died and that which is nothing in the ground, and all other apostles.
Quan endeveno en le golayro godat, so son glandulas las quals son asembladas algodat, las quals accideysso deforas e son nompnadas doas aurelhas, las quals quan tu las curas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no es sanat, lahoras tu considera si le apostema es dur, de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr.	 When you arrive at the ground dead, your glands assemble together, which cause pain and numbness in that part of the body for which doctors have warned us not to treat except as instructed on this page and is not safe; therefore if the apostle seems dark, cold or has little feeling, do not touch it.
E si es de roga color e la razic es grossa, lahoras no toques aquela am ferr per le flux del sanc; abantz layssa aquel entro sia madurat, e lahoras o tu trauqueras aquel, o sira romput per si.	 If it is a cold and large abscess that you cannot touch with your fingers due to the flow of pus from within, then let that be left until it becomes mature; or if you must remove it because it is infected, do so carefully lest you worsen the infection.
E si es de blanqua color, radon, e la razit de lu es subtil, lahoras aquel es que cove esser inscidit.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customary to call gout for doctors.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras, denant la tua operacio, si ja ha repausat le apostema de lu caut am repaus complit o si es deminuit am alcuna deminucio; e lahoras fay sezer le malaute denant le soleyl, e·l cap de lu sia en le tieu se, e huebre la boca de lu, e le servidor prenent entre las suas mas prema la lengua de lu dejos am instrument mot noble del qual aquesta es la forma:	 The operation is performed by considering the patient's health. Before doing so, if they have already placed a cushion under their thighs and one on each leg, another on their chest, holding their hands; otherwise, place a servant between them as well to prevent it from coming out.
E sia fayt de argent o de aram, e sia subtil cum cotel.	 It is also necessary when the pain comes with gold or with color, and when there are subtle symptoms accompanying it.
Donc cum tu premes am aquel la lengua e es mostrat a tu la apostema, e catz sobre aquel le tieu vezement, lahoras pren onci e fica aquel en l’amenla, e tira aquel a las partidas defora tant quant podes.	 Then take the tongue and show it to your patient, put the cushion below them at once, and fix it in front of their chest, and pull it away from the parts that are far off as much as possible.
Otra aquo que tiras alcuna causa de las tunicas, e aprop incideys aquela am instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	 Another thing is to remove any cause of the stockings, and apply this instrument which is its form:
e es asemblat a forceps, empero las extramitatz de lu son corvadas, ayssi que l’orrifici de quascuna de aquelas es en le endreyt del autra, mot agudas, le qual sia de ferr indi enbegut.	 And if you take the tongs and apply them to someone with gout, as soon as it inflicts any of those onto that person's skin, immediately look for something else to prevent further harm from being done to another part or sharp one which is to be done first
Mays si aquest instrument no es a tu present, lahoras inscideys aquel am spatum del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: E sia agut de la una part, no agut del autra part.	 If this instrument is not at hand then put it aside and use the form of it: And strike with one part, do not strike on another part.
E pus que has inscidit una mella, inscideys l’autra segon aquesta meteyssa manieyra de inscizio, e aprop la inscizio le malaute guarguarise de aygua frega	 When you have inserted a needle, place another one next to it to prevent the latter from getting contaminated with water.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, guarguarise aygua de decoccio de scorsa de milgrana o de fuelha de mirtra e semblantz ad aquel de las causas stiptiquas entro que·l flux del sanc sia restreyt, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	 If the flow of blood is weak and stagnant, place it in a mixture of wine or vinegar to help it regain its strength and vitality.
E alcunas veguadas naysso en le guolayro autras apostemas otra aquelas doas aurelhas, e inscideys aquelas segon que yeu e dit en la inscizio de doas mellas engualment.	 And afterwards, after you have inserted the second needle, make sure to place it in its own container with a different kind of fluid, like olive oil or vinegar for example.
E yeu ja fu medicat una femna de apostema le qual era nat en le golayro de lu, le qual apostema tendia a color fusca, de pauc sentiment, le qual ja havia claus le golayro de lu, e la femna respirava am meat streyt, e ja havia prohibit a lu comestio e beure de aygua, e ja era pervenguda a la mort si mays agues stat per un dia o per dos.	 You had already given medicine to another patient who was not in the process of healing but rather suffering from jaundice that was causing their skin to turn yellow and making them lose weight rapidly while also prohibiting food and drink, leading to their imminent death if things did not improve within a day or two days
E l’apostema ja tant havia pugat que havia mezes dos ramps entro que eyssiro per dos traucs.	 The patient had already suffered for such a long time that it was necessary to perform the surgery twice.
Donc yeu me cuytegui fisturalment e fiquegui en un de lor onci, e tiregui aquel, e atirada es de lu gran porcio, e aprop yeu incidigui aquela de on comprendegui del autre trau, e aprop yeu obrigui la boca de lu, e compremegui la sua lengua, e aprop yeu fiquegui le onci en aquela apostema.	 Therefore, first you would gently extract and place it in one of the three containers, then remove that container, after removing a large piece from the patient's body, and after making an incision at another point to understand which of the two vessels was needed for the surgery, after making sure to open his mouth (and tongue if necessary), and finally place the needle back into its original position.
E aprop yeu abscizi gran partida de lu, e no corria de lu sino un pauc de sanc.	 "Remove a large part of it; do not remove all, but rather only one-third.
Donc absolut es le guolayro de aquela femna, e comensec tantost beure aygua, e aprop presec vianda, donc yeu no cessegui inscidir de aquela apostema motas vetz per lonc temps, e succesia apostema en loc de aquel, le qual inscizia entro que es prolonguat aquel.	 "Absolutely not to drink water; eat instead, and put your hand on it. Do not continue to press the area for a long time, but rather until the abscess comes out.
Donc yeu engen agui e cauterizegui le guolayro de lu, donc astec de addicio; e aprop yeu perambulegui e no saubi que fec Dieus de aquela aprop mi.	 "Then you should apply a cautery to it and also put some food on it. Do not worry that it may burn your fingers.
Capitol .xxxvii.	 "Chapter 71
De inscizio de huvela quan es apostemada.	 "The incision when the abscess is opened up.
Quan catarr deysen a la huvula, e es apostemada e es longa, lahoras ela es nompnada perpendicular; e si es en la partida dejos grossa e redonda, e lahoras ela es apelada buba.	 When the tonsils become inflamed and are opened up, they are called a "perpendicular abscess". If it is in the large intestine or round shaped, then it is called a "bubble abscess.
Mays quan es curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio, e no comfereys la tua curacio, e eyssament ja vezes que apostema caut ja es ostat de lu e es subtil, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquela que es agreguadas redonda; e si es ad aquela longitut, e es sanguina, de fusca color o de negre, e no es a lu centiment, lahoras cove que tu temtes la inscizio de lu, quar en aquela es temor sobre le malaute.	 When you have cured it in the division and do not worry about your cure, but also always remember that every abscess is subtle; if you are afraid of a large intestine or one filled with blood, then do not cut into it, because there is a fear of pain from the organ itself.
E quan tu vezes aquela segon la manieyra que yeu he dita de la sua blancor e longuesa, que tu fassas sezer le malaute e premas la lengua de lu am instrument del qual procesic la sua forma e aprop fica le onci en la nuva, e tira aquela en jos e inscideys aquela am un de dos instrumentz les quals e ditz en la inscizio de dos mellas.	 And when you come upon a man's anus and intestines, which is of two kinds: one soft and long, the other hard and short. You should take it out gently with an instrument used to make incisions in its place; then remove it from there and cut into it with another kind of instrument.
E cove que no inscidas aquela sino aquo que es ajustat sobre le terme natural ses addicio, quar si tu inscides de lu mays, lediyras le sieu parlar.	 When it was necessary to make incisions on the surface of the foot
E aprop la inscizio, usa de aquo le qual havem recomtat en la inscizio de dos mellas, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	 After making the incision, use this which we recommended in the incision for two layers and heal that one to be healthy.
Mays si era le malaute espaventat per la inscizio de lu, cove que use de engen en la cauterizacio de lu ses temor, e la manieyra del cauteri en lu no es sino am aygua aguda, e es que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop prem la lengua de lu am le instrument le qual havem dit, e aprop pren de l’aygua la qual havem dita en le capitol de cauterizacio, e comfeys am aquela caus viva, e pausa aquela no spessa ni subtil, e de aquela omple la concavitat de l’estrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	 If the patient was frightened by the incision made on his body, it is customary to use a pointed cautery and to keep your hand over its head, so that you do not touch the mouth or face of it; then place your finger in the hole which we have mentioned at the beginning of the cautery, and gently press it.
Sia la extramitat de lu conquavitat en la qual sia pausada la medicina ayssi cum la conquavitat de culher de ray, e pausa le strument am la medicina sobre la vula, e·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu latz per so que corro saliva o musellage de la boca de aquel per la intrinscequa medicina, per so que no deyssenda de aquela deguna causa sobre le golayro de lu e que ledesca aquel.	 The external hole of the intestine which has been stopped with medicine like the anus, and place a finger in the medicine over its throat to prevent saliva or mucus from escaping through it for fear that it may cause choking; so that nothing is left there
E aprop te la tua ma am la medicina, e exprem aquela sobre la uvula per l’espazi de miega hora entro que vegas aquela esser denegrada e sedada per la mordicacio de la medicina.	 After placing your hand on the medicine, put it over its tongue to fill in any space that may have been left by the incision made for this purpose so that nothing is damaged or dried up from the bite of the medicine.
E si vols, prengues coto e envolopes aquel sobre la extremitat del ray, e submergeys le coto en la medicina, e entrometas le ray am le coto en una canula de sobre entro que·l coto adheresca en aquela canula, e fay aquo tantas vetz entro que consiegues aquo que vols de la cauterizacio de la uva, e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela se seccara e cayra aprop tres dias o quatre.	 "If you wish to, place a cushion over the extremity of the limb and immerse it in medicine, and then take out the limb through a tube that enters into that tube, so that the limb adheres to that tube, and after three or four days, do cauterization there.
E si indigeysses que iteras la medicina, itera aquela, e aprop la cauterizacio abstergeys en le circuit de la uva am coto enbegut en boder, e mondifica am aquel aquo que es en le circuit de lu de la medicina, e sia lavat am aygua frega, e sia curat deforo am embrocacio, e dedintz am guarguarismes entro que sia sanat.	 "If you do not wish to use medicine, then use that, and perform the cauterization in a circuit of the limb with the catheter into which it is introduced through the body, moistening it with water until it is in the circuit of the medicine, and cleaning it with soap, care for the wounds after.
E aquesta especia de curacio es pus salva que inscizio e pus long de temor.	 "This special procedure is performed cautiously and carefully.
Alcunas veguadas es curada la uvuola am aquo que es pus subtil que cauteri e inscizio, quar es curat am subfumigacio en aquesta manieyra: recipe calament, ysop, origua, ruda, scicados arabic, camamilla, broyda e semblant ad aquels de las erbas, e ajusta totas aquelas causas, o alcunas de lor, en una ola, e sian submergidas am vi agre, e bulhan; e la ola sia be lutada am lut decentment, e sia en le mieg loc de la ola un trauc, sobre le qual sia pausat un instrument conquau de aram segon aquesta manieyra; sia fayt de argent o de aram.	 "Certain vegetables are cooked by immersing them in water that is gently fumigated, so as to be able to cook the vegetables of any kind, all at once, and they may be submerged in boiled water, or oil.
E sia entromesa la extremitat en la boca del malaute entro que la vapor poge a la uvula sobre la quanula, entro que la uvula sia mot ofuscada.	 "Insert the extremity into the patient's mouth so that steam enters through the opening in the trachea.
E aprop itera sobre aquela motas veguadas entro qu’es secca, e guarda te que no fassas aquesta curacio al comesament de l’aveniment de apostemas, quar trop ajustaria en le apostema, e no cove que tu fassas aquo, sino deves la declaracio de apostema de lu caut.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body and pain occurs in the feet, it is customary to call gout by doctors.
Mays si no es a tu present aquest instrument, lahoras pren una cana e compon en la extramitat de lu un clos de huou, per so que la boca del malaute sia comborida, quar le closc del huou prohibeys la vapor comburir la boca.	 If you do not have this instrument, the physician will take a cloth and place it in the patient's mouth to prevent the patient from swallowing their saliva.
E aquesta curacio es bona am salut.	 The treatment is good for health.
Capitol .xxxviii.	 Chapter 58 of a book or document?
De extraccio d’espinas e de aquo que adhereys en le golayro e de las autras causas.	 Of spines and by adhering to the guidelines on which causes them.
Motas veguadas adhereys en le guolayro o spina de peys o alcuna autra causa.	 The cause of the spine or any other cause should adhere strictly to the guidelines provided.
Adonc cove que tu extraguas aquo que de aquels es apparent, sobre le qual catz la vista, pus que tu premes la lengua am instrument denant solelh, per so que a tu sia declarat aquo que es en la guola.	 When you extract that from what is evident to the eye, and put it on an instrument in front of your tongue, so that you may declare that it is in the mouth.
E aquo que no apar e es a tu occultat en le guolayro, cove que tu fassas vomir le malaute denant que la vianda sia degerida en l’estomac, quar fort leu la causa annexsa le golayro sira foro-getada per vomit; o que deglusia le malaute una pessa de nap o de razit de laytuga o un boci de pa sec; o prengua una pessa de sponga marina sequa leon, e lia aquela fortment am fiel, e aprop le malaute transglussia aquela, quar cum perve al loc en le qual so spinas e es extrahuda, lahoras so foro-getatz.	 If that is not in the mouth and you force it into the stomach, then you will vomit because of its harshness; or if you feed the patient a small amount of fresh lettuce leaves, radish seeds, or dried meat; or bring them a bottle of seawater, and let them drink with caution.
E mays pren una anguila e be am fiel liada, e sia dedintz mesa e soptament sia extrayta; o pren un porr e soptament le metas e soptament l’en tratz.	 And place a pillow beneath her head and support it with both hands.
Mays si no so foro-getatz am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas, lahoras husa de un instrument de plom segon aquesta forma:	 If the cause is known from previous discussions, then use an implement made of lead to apply pressure in this manner
E sia pus gros que ray un petit, e en la extramitat de lu sia conquavitat la qual tu entrometas en la sua guola am facilitat.	 The larger should be used first, and the smaller one at its edge where you can enter into its cavity with ease.
E el aga le sieu cap elevat en sus, e guarda te que·l tocament del sieu os de la gola, per so que endevengua a lu cos e am aquela que enpellesca le os o la spina, o que aquel le metge am la sua ma.	 The first one lifts its head high and places the tip of his nose against her opening to prevent it from slipping in or irritating her throat, or that he puts pressure on her spine as a doctor would.
Mays empero que·l malaute aquel entrometa es miels, per la sua sciencia del loc de la causa annexa e enpellisca en jos, e tira la sua ma am le instrument en sus, tot aquo segon la quantitat la qual es a lu preparada entro que sia foro-getada.	 However, if the patient is known to be suffering from an additional cause that has not been mentioned previously, and it enters through her opening, then draw your hand over it with great force until it becomes prepared for insertion.
Capitol .xxxix.	 Chapter XXXIX.
De extraccio de sancguisugua annexsa al golayro.	 Concerning the extraction of bones from the gall bladder.
Quan es medicada sanguisugua am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la curacio am medicinas e no comfereys, considera lahoras en le guolayro del malaute al solelh, pus que tu aias compremuda la lengua de lu am instrument le qual a tu havem recomtat.	 When you are treating bleeding in this section of the chapter where medicines were divided and not mentioned here: consider putting a small piece of the object recommended earlier into her mouth as an implement to apply pressure there.
Donc si tu vezes la sancguisugua, extratz aquela am onci petit o am gesti subtils decentment.	 "Then if you put in a small or subtle gesture to draw them away.
E si no es a tu possible estrayre am aquel, lahoras pren una canula concava e entromet aquela en lo guolayro del malaute, e aprop pausa en la concavitat de la canula un ferr ignit, e fay aquo tantas vetz (entro que la sancguisugua sia morta e se osta del guolayro) e abstengua se le malaute tot lo jorn de aygua.	 "If it is not possible to draw them away in the gesture, then put a concave needle into that part of the patient and let it emerge from under their arm pit, taking care to insert this as smoothly as possible (if the withdrawal attempt was unsuccessful or if the patient died during the process), and prevent the patient from drinking water for one day.
E aprop prengua una veyria plena de aygua frega, e obra la boca de lu en aquela, e lava la boca am aquela; e no trasglucia de aquela alcuna causa e maugua l’aygua una hora aprop autra am la sua ma, quar la sancguisugua tantost cum sent l’aygua catz.	 "Then give the patient a full glass of water and let them drink from it, then wash their mouth with that; do not allow any water to enter at all, except for one hour's worth as needed according to their condition.
Mays si no es foro-getada am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras subfumigua le malaute am cimetz o am assafetida per le instrument le qual havem recomtat en la sufumiguacio de uvula.	 "If it is not allowed according to our recommendation (I'm not sure what this means), then gently rub the patient over their chest or abdomen with an instrument we recommended in the treatment of swelling.
Fay aquo, so en quar cayra.	 "And do that until they are cured.
E es un’autra manieyra de operacio en sufumiguacio de aquela, es que tu prenguas una ola en la qual sian carbos ignitz e la ola sia cuberta am una cobertora en le mieg de la qual sia un trauc, e sia compausat en aquel trauc la extremitat del instrument; e aprop dega desus la subfumigacio; e pause le malaute la sua boca en la extremitat de la canula, e claugua la sua boca per que la subfumiguacio no sia foro-getada entro que sapias que la subfumigacio es pervenguda a la sancguisugua, quar la sancguisugua tantost cayra.	 "Another operation in the treatment of swelling is to place an uncovered cloth over the instrument's handle that has been covered with carbonized oil and then apply it to the patient's chest or abdomen, covering it completely; and make sure there are no gaps where any part of the instrument might enter. Then finish this application by removing all but one layer of the gauze from around the instrument's tip and placing a covering over that portion only.
E si no catz, lahoras tu itera la subfumiguacio motas vetz, e abstengua le malaute de beure, e mange causas saladas e alhs, e no begua aygua, e ayssi necessari es que am aquest regiment sia fora-getada.	 "When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument am le qual es trayta sancguisugua del guolayro quan es vista; e es semblant a forceps ayssi cum vezes, sino quar es en lu alcuna curvitat:	 "It is the form of an instrument through which you will apply cautery to the groin when seen.
le qual sia mesa al guolayro, e la extremitat de lu es semblant a bec de ciconia, que es guanta, en la qual es aspretat de lima, per so quar, quan comprem alcuna causa, aquela no leyssa.	 "Which is placed on the groin and whose extremity is similar to the beak of a crane, which grips it in such a way that when you come across any cause, that one should not let go.
Capitol .xl.	 This sentence does not have a direct translation as it appears to be an abbreviated form used in medieval documents and may refer to a specific legal term or abbreviation related to governance or government.
En le qual es la suma del sermo en apercio de apostemas e en seccio de lor.	 "In which there is the sum of the service in connection with the receipt and section thereof.
Les apostemas so motas specias, de motas manieyras, segon que ve rememoracio de lor, de quascuna en aquest libre.	 "The stamps are special items, given by merchants to patrons upon request for remembrance of each in this book.
E so diversas en perforacio e seccio de lor per doas manieyras, de las quals la una es per la specia de apostemas en si meteys; e per aquo que comprem de las humiditatz.	 "They are diverse in perforation and section according to two ways: one for the special stamps inside themselves, and another for purchasing from them.
E la segonda manieyra es prop les locs en les quals accideys del cos, quar le apostema accident en le cap es autra de la apostema accident en le cul; e le apostema en le loc carnos accident es autra del apostema accident en junctura; e a quascun de lor es son juguament per operacio.	 "The second way is for the places where accidents occur on the body, such as an accidental stamp on the head being different from one on the buttocks, and a stamp on the chest would be different from one on the joint.
E mays de apostemas so alcunas las quals cove que no sian perforadas sino aprop maturacio de la sania en aquels o compliment de lor.	 When the pain in joints is caused by cold humors, that infiltrates into each part of the body and causes pain in the feet, it is customary to call gout among doctors
So autras apostemas les quals cove que sian traucatz quan son cruzes, e no son maturatz segon lor compliment, ayssi cum apostemas que son propdas a las juncturas, quar apostema quan ve prop junctura, lo esser de lu es prolonguat entro que·s poyreys aquo que es en le circuit de lu, e fort leu son corromputz les liamentz o les nervis de aquela junctura, per que es fayta causa de contraccio de aquel membre; o es apostema prop de membre principal, e si tu tardas la perforacio de lu entro sia madurat nosira al membre principal; o es prop le cul, donc perfora aque no-madurat; e no cove que·l perforas cru, de no-complida degestio, sino aquel que es prop del cul, per so que no poyresca le preon de lu e sia elonguat a las partidas dedintz del cul, e sia fayta fistula, o que sia fayt en le terme de lu que no sia sanat.	 When the pain in joints is caused by cold humors that have not been pierced but are being applied to their surface, if you want to pierce it into a member of the principal part, then do so with a pointed cautery. If you're late piercing it into the member of the principal part, or if it's on the ass, and perforate it as such that no stool comes out, but covers its surface, preventing it from coming out, and is called fistula.
Mays cove que tu sapias la hora de la perforacio de la apostema, e aysso es quan es maturat.	 You know the time of piercing into the cautery, that's when it's mature
E sapias que es madurat quan es la cedacio de la dolor e la cessacio de la febre, e aprop la diminucio de la rogor e de la pulsacio, e la acuitat del cap del apostema, e les autres senhals.	 You know that it is mature when the cessation of pain and fever occurs, and the decrease in swelling and pulse, and the sharpness of the cautery, and other nerves.
E quar cove que sapias la perforacio cazer en le loc pus dejos del apostema e de pus venient de curacio de la eminencia.	 And when you know how to pierce it in a place where there is pus coming out of the cautery and also nearby for the cure of the inflammation.
E perforacio tostemps sia per le lonc de la carn o del cors, si las apostemas son en las partidas de las mas o dels pes, e en loc dels lacertz, de las cordas dels nervis, de las arcerias; e, al derier, en totz locs enguals en les quals no es reflecio; quar en aquels que so reflectitz, usa de perforacio segon aquel membre.	 When the pain occurs in the limbs or organs and is not reflected on them, then make an incision there to remove it.
Mays quan le apostema es en loc carnos, lahoras miels es que leysses la perforacio de lu entro que sia confermada la digestio de lu segon compliment, ayssi quo havem dit; quar si tu perforas aquel denant aquo, es prolonguat le cors del poyre de lu e de mota sordicia, e fort leu las labias de lu so enduradas e la profunditat de lu.	 If the pain occurs in a location of bones or organs where it is not reflected upon examination, then make an incision there to remove it after confirming with the second opinion that digestion has occurred correctly; otherwise, if you cut into one part and both bowels are torn apart and the labia are torn open and the depth of the body is damaged.
Mays alcus apostemas so perforatz segon la latitut de la carn o del cos deves la necessitat, o segon aquo del qual lo membre indigeys.	 If it occurs at a location on the skin or body that requires immediate attention, or at a part where an important member is located, then make the incision there immediately.
E cove que administres petita perforacio , e·n les apostemas grans gran perforacio e ampla o motas seccios segon la diversitat de la grandesa dels apostemas.	 When administering small cuts, large cuts or deep incisions depending on the variety of location of the pain.
E autras so dels apostemas en les quals cove que la codena sia conquavada e sia encidida, quan es fayta ayssi quo pan e fayta es en terme que ja stigua, ayssi cum aquel que accideys en trops de dubelec e de bubos.	 If the abscess is inflamed and infected at the location of the incision, or if it happens to occur in multiple locations such as the buttocks or thighs.
E de aquels so que so insciditz am seccio havent tres angles; e de aquels es en le qual es inscidit ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirtra, ayssi cum las apostemas dels angonars.	 Those that have a single angle and those that are reflected in the manner of the mirror or from the corners of an eye.
E de lor so en les quals es administrada seccio redonda e seccio lunar, e semblantz ad aquels.	 When sectioning has been administered roundly and moonily, they proceed thus
Mays aquel al qual no es cap ayssi cum son apostemas leons superficials, cove que tu perforas aquel am perforacio superficial, o plana tant solament.	 If someone is incapable of performing a superficial incision, only then should you make one
E cove quant le apostema es gros e ya ha colligit mota sania, que perfores aquel e no te coytes que extraguas tot le poyre en aquela hora; habantz extratz de aquel una partida, e aprop opila le apostema entro al autre dia, e aprop extratz una partida major, e aprop fa aquo motas veguadas segon graduacio entro que sia foro-getat.	 If the incision is large and has caused much bleeding, do not remove it right away; wait until another day to extract a larger part of it, and then remove one piece at a time, waiting between each extraction.
E majorment si·l malaute es de freol vertut, o femna prens, o enfant petit, o viel en decrepitut, quar l’esperit animal motas vetz es resolvut am la egressio de la sania, e fort leu mor le malaute, e tu operte les.	 If the patient is suffering from a serious illness or feverish condition that requires medical attention immediately, you must attend to them, and act quickly in such cases.
Don guarda aquest capitol am gran cautela, e aprop la tua perforacio en la qual perforas aquestz apostemas, cove que abstergescas las plagues e consideras donc si la plagua del apostema es pauca, o es una seccio plana, lahoras tu aministra las qualguas de li o de coto antic; e si le apostema es gran, e las fissuras de la perforacio son motas, lahoras cove que tu pauses meca en quascun trauc entro que pervenguan ensemps.	 Be very careful when performing the section you are referring to, and consider whether or not there is a small piece of skin on it; if so then proceed accordingly by placing some kind of padding over it until further notice.
E si en le apostema es abscindit una partida de la codena o has concavada aquela en le circuit, lahoras cove que tu la complescas de coto viel o de fil fayt de drap de li, ayssi cum quan has traytz pans o razizos, ses humiditat; e strenh aquel entro al tertz dia; e aprop proceseys aquel e cura le am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	 If the incision is removed from a specific area or has been curved in such a way that it is wrapped around something, make sure you cover that with some padding until further notice, and also ensure any wounds are kept dry; and keep this thing away for another day, then go ahead and treat it as soon as possible.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc en la hora de la operacio tua, lahoras tu aministra aygua frega e vi agre en les quals mules un drap de li, e pausa aquel sobre le loc del fluxs del sanc motas veguadas.	 When the flow of blood occurs during your operation hour, you will provide a cold compress and wait until it covers the outlet area from where the blood flows away.
Mays si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras cove que tu aministres regiment e curacio e polveras las quals he recomtadas en motz locs de aquest nostre libre e de divisio.	 If you continue to observe the flow of blood, you should provide medication and care as recommended in different areas of this document.
Mays si es en temps de hivern, e·l loc de la apostema es loc de motz nervis, lahoras cove que tu enfundas pulvils en vi e oli caut, e pauses aquels sobre les locs.	 In the winter time, when you put on an overcoat it covers your nervous area too; in such cases, make sure to apply powders of vinegar and oil and cover them with a cloth or something similar.
E si es en estiu, e les locs son carnoses, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils enbeguts am aygua e oli o am vi e oli, e tot aquo sia freg entro que sia le ters dia, ayssi cum havem dit, e lahoras cove que tu deslies le apostema e abstergescas aquel e aministres en la curacio de lu aquo que a lu conveneys entro que sia sanat.	 In the summer time when parts of your body are exposed, you should apply powder mixed with water and oil or just water and oil, covering them completely to prevent any harm coming out as well.
E aysso es aquo que es necessari de la cognicio de la curacio de apostemas universalment, mays segon la via de distinccio ja he dit de tot apostema en qual manieyra es via de la cura de lu per capitols singularment.	 This is important to understand the care universally for all wounds, while providing individual treatment methods as well.
Capitol .xli.	 The text does not appear to have any additional lines or sections beyond this point.
De seccio de apostemas les quals veno en la codena del cap.	 These are wounds on the scalp area.
En la codena del cap petitz apostemas, e so de specias de nodes les quals conteno tunicas que so a lor factz ; e las specias de lor so motas.	 In the scalp area there are wounds with specific symptoms like those that contain clothing material; and the wounds themselves may also have different symptoms.
E de lor son pingas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditat semblant a lima.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, it is customary to call gout by doctors.
E de aquelas so las quals conteno humiditat semblant a pols, et asemblantz a lor; e de aquelas so que son lapideas, durs.	 And from these are those which contain moisture similar to dust and those who have rough skin.
E en la seccio de totz, e en la extraccio de aquels no es temor, cum deves la exteccio de aquels no fa contrariat arceria.	 In the section of everything, and in the outside area of these there is no fear, as long as you do not make contact with it.
E la operacio en seccio de aquels es que tu esproes aquels am instrument la forma del qual ve aprop aysso, le qual es apelat entromes, entro que sapias que contengua.	 The operation in the section of these is that you use them as an instrument in the shape which you are used to, called enteromaycin, until you know how it works.
Quar si aquo que conte es humiditat, lahoras scindeys aquel am seccio segon la longitut per seccio superficial segon aquesta forma:	 If this contains moisture, the sores spread that section to a length of a superficial section after
E comensa en la seccio de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G. Donc cum la humiditat es evacuada, lahoras tu excoria aquela pel que conte aquela humiditat, e no leysses de aquela alcuna causa de tot, quar tropas veguadas retorna, si roman de aquela alcuna causa.	 When the moisture is removed, sores you cure that part which contains moisture, and do not let it be in any cause of all, as long as you return if there was anything like that.
E aprop submergeys coto en enguent egipciach, si es present, e sino, en aygua e sal; e umpleys am aquel la plagua e layssa aquel entro ad autra dia, quar am aquo corrodeys tot so que es romas de aquela pellicula.	 Then submerge it in vinegar and salt water if present, otherwise in plain water and let it rest that way until tomorrow, as the acid in this will dissolve any residue of the film on the skin.
E aprop itera sobre aquel coto am enguent egipciach segondament e tersament si indigeyses de lu, entro que·t comfides que no y haia romas alcuna causa de aquela pellicula; lahoras cura la plagua am enguent entro que sia sanada.	 Then apply it in vinegar and salt water on the second and third time if necessary, until you are sure there is no remaining cause of that film, then cure the wound where it was found to be healed.
E si apostema conte nodi gras, lahoras tu inscideys aquel segon aquesta forma:	 When an abscess forms on the groin, then treat it in this way.
am seccio havent forma de crotz, e geta oncis entre doas labias de la seccio e scorsa aquel de tota partida, e esforsa la tua vertut en extraccio de la tunica la qual conte aquel.	 You should first make incisions between the thighs and stretch it open completely, then apply your fingers to extract any pus from the covering membrane of that area
Mays si a tu arceria fa contrarieta, lahoras fay aquo que yeu t’e recontat primieyrament.	 If your arteries are constricted due to illness, it is advisable for you to consult a doctor first.
E semblantment fay en le apostema lapificat de seccio e de curacio segon que a tu havem dit; e seccio sobre apostema lapificat es pus leugiera, quar es de pauc sanc e de pauca humiditat.	 Similarly, when making an incision and cutting to remove pus from that area afterwards - ensure the opening is small enough so as not to cause much bleeding or excessive moisture.
E alcunas vetz so alcus de aquestz apostemas les quals so en le cap en alcus homes am los quals de tot no es humiditat; la qual causa es quar yeu inscindigui sobre un apostema en le cap de una femna vielha e atrobegui le apostema ayssi cum peyra sorda, aspra, blanqua, la qual no podia esser trinquada, e si a alcu fos am aquela percussit, plaguera aquel.	 You can also make incisions on the back of the patient's head and remove any pus that may have accumulated there; but if you happen to hit an artery while doing so, it would be extremely dangerous as it could cause massive bleeding or a stroke.
Mays en les autres apostemas accidentz en le cap otra aquest no es aquest capitol, ayssi cum les apostemas que veno als caps dels enfantz e deves las razitz de las aurelhas, mays la seccio de aquestz totz sia seccio superficial.	 And for the other incisions in the head, which should be on top of the list, just like those that come from children's heads and scalp wounds, may make a superficial incision into this area
E pausa la perforacio de aquels de la partida pus bassa de lor per so que sia alleujat le cos de la sania a las partidas pus bassas.	 Pause the incision making process to prevent any harm from spreading throughout your body and to ease the pain at these areas with less serious pus issues.
E aprop cura aquelas am aquo que conveneys ad aquel de curacio.	 Upon healing of that which has caused pain
Capitol .xlii.	 The 42nd chapter of a medieval medical treatise
De seccio de scrophulas las quals accideyso en le col.	 From the section of the scrotum, remove those that come out from the lower part.
Motas veguadas endeveno aquestas apostemas en le colh e en las aysselhas e en les angonars; e alcunas veguadas accideyso en las autras partidas del cos.	 Insert the pessaries into the anus and in the ass, and those inserted in the urethra, and some are removed from the other parts of the body.
E so aquelas que accideysso en le colh, e so motas que so engendradas entre lor, e tota scrofula de aquelas es dintz la sua tunica propria, e ayssi cum en les nodis e apostema del cap, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	 Those that come out of the anus are removed and those generated between them are also removed from their clothes, and all scrofula of those is attributed to its own tunic, as well as in the nodes and pessaries of the head, as I have recommended.
E las specias de aquestas scrophulas son motas, quar de aquelas so alcunas lapideas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditatz, e de aquelas so malignas las quals no obeseysso a curacio.	 The peculiarities of those scrotums are masses, and some contain ideas, and others that have moisture, and others that are malignant which do not succeed in healing.
Donc en aquela la qual tu vezes de bona disposicio en le Tocament, de la qual la color de aquo que es manifest es propda a la color de la codena, e es mauguda a tota partida, e no es annexsa am le nervi del colh, ni am las venas, ni am la arceria, e no es preonda, cove que tu inscidiscas aquela am siccio superficial de la partida desus a la partida dejos del cos de la linha de .G. entro la linha de .B., e scorja aquela de tota partida, e exten dos labias de la codena am onci, o am motz oncis si has necessitat de aquels, ayssi cum havem dit en las apostemas del cap, e extratz aquela petit a petit.	 From that which is of good disposition in the passage of time, whose color when manifested is like the color of the codeine, and it is terrible to all parts, and does not extend over the nerve of the anus, nor on the veins, nor the arteries, and it is not prolonged, unless you insert a superficial treatment of its kind into this line of .G. to this line of .B., and remove that completely, and extend from the sheaths of the penis with these, as I have said in the pessaries of the head, and take it one by one.
E es mays cautela que no sia inscidida la vena o nervi.	 It is important that a vein or nerve does not become injured
E sia le spatum no mot agut, que no ajuste a tu la tua ma am inscizio, o que enquiete le malaute, e que inscidas aquo que no es necessari inscidir; quar si inscideysses vena o arceria e prohibeys tu de la tua operacio, lahoras pausa en la plagua vetriol trissat o autras polveras las quals ostan fluxs de sanc, e estrenh la plagua, e layssa aquel entro que·s repausa la acuitat de la apostema e sia mollificada la plagua e comense esser poyrida.	 Ensure that a vein or artery is not injured during the procedure in order to prevent complications such as bleeding and blood clots.
Quan le sanc es abscindit.	 After it has been removed
Donc retorna a la tua operacio entro que l’aias complida.	 Return to your operation once you have completed it.
E aprop inquireys am le tieu dit indic si es romas alcuna causa de las autras petitas scrophulas, donc inscideys aquelas e munda aquelas.	 Ensure there are no other injuries or complications.
E si es en la razit de la scrophula gran vena, cove lahoras que no inscidas aquela scrophula de la sua razitz.	 If it is a large vein in the area of the incision, ensure that you do not cut through that vein as well.
Abantz cove que lies aquela am fiel doblat fort e que leysses aquela entro que caia per si ses nocument.	 Be sure to hold it firmly and let go when removing it so your hands don't get caught in the opening.
E aprop omple la plagua de coto vielh le qual tu has ja submirgit en enguent egipciac, e aprop cura aquel.	 Close up the area where you have already inserted it and then treat it properly.
E si inscides aquela scrophula tota, lahoras cove que tu ajustes las doas labias de la plagua e cuzas2 tantost pus que no y ha romasa deguna superfluitat.	 If you cut through the entire vein, ensure that both of your sutures hold tightly and they will not be torn or broken.
Mays si tu vezes que haia romasa superfluitat per la grandeza de la scrofula, cove que tu entendas a inscidir la razit de aquela, e astrayra aquela e aministra sutura e aquo que es dit.	 If you have made it necessary to remove the entire vein due to its size, ensure that you understand when and how to make an incision there, tie off both ends of the incision properly with sutures as mentioned earlier.
E aquela de las scrophulas que conteno humiditatz, perfora aquela am perforacio superficial aqui la on appar a tu le loc de maturacio de lu, e pausa perforacio de aquo que siec le pus bas del cos, ayssi cum havem dit.	 When the scrotum is inflamed with moisture, apply an ointment to make superficial cuts here where it appears at the location of maturation, and after making the perforation cease application of this ointment so as to prevent further penetration into the body
E aprop aministra perforacio, calguas am enguent e semblantz ad aquels, per so que corroda aquo que es romas de la corropcio.	 After making the cut, gently squeeze and tighten these, in order for this to be closed up tightly.
E aprop quan tu vezes la plagua ja esser mundada, lahoras tu cura aquela am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanada.	 When you have already made a small cut, apply the curative cream gently inside, ensuring it is healed.
Capitol .xliii.	 Chapter thirty-three
De seccio del pilhot del apostema accident dintz le guolayro.	 From cutting off the petals of a flower at random
Diyssero les antics aquesta seccio en le epilhot, e no vist alcu hom en nostra terra que aquela aia fayta.	 Should you choose this method, they will see in our land that it is a mistake.
E aquesta es la inscriptura del sermo de aquels.	 This inscription comes from the treatise of those mentioned above
Mays en les homes haventz esquinencia, cove que sia esquivada la extraccio del epilhot, cum per aquo no sia fayt juvament per so quar totas las venas e las majors del malaute so aqui.	 In addition to the veins and arteries of a patient are here.
Mays en aquels que han apostemas cautz en la boca o guolayro o dos aurelhas, quan la malautia no es en la cana, cove husar de la seccio de epilhot a fugir la perdicio la qual es fayta per perfocacio.	 Should the gout appear in any other part of the body when not in the foot, this procedure will prevent it from escaping through perforation.
Donc cove quan volem aquo, que inscidam le epilhot dejos tres cercles dels cercles del epilhot, o quatre am petita seccio per la latitut en aquel que es entre dos cercles per quantitat, que la seccio sia en ciphac, no en la cartillage, e aquest loc es convenent a seccio, quar es privat de carn e les vayselhs de sanc de lu son luhen.	 In order to perform this procedure then cut out three circles of the circle from the circumference, or four smaller ones at an angle in that which is between two circles by amount, so as to make a cut without skin and veins on it are private.
E si le metge es pauruc, cove lahoras que extenda la codena del golayro am onci, e aprop fenda la codena entro que pervengua a la canal, mays evite les vaysels de sanc si vetz de aquelas alcuna causa.	 When the physician is frightened by the pain of gout in his foot, he extends his hand to touch it and ties a bandage around it so that any discharge or infection may not enter into the channel; for this reason, let him avoid the ways of sin if there is no other cause available.
E aprop inscida li ciplach segon que havem recomtat; e es significat sobre la seccio de la canal per le flacma le qual es de aquela eyssit am aquo que es de lu disromput e per la abscizio de la votz.	 In addition, he should ensure that the channel is properly closed and sealed for the prevention of discharge, which may occur if there are no other means available to prevent it from happening here at this time; otherwise, let him proceed with the suggested treatment.
E layssa la plagua uberta per alcun temps.	 He should remove the poultice as soon as possible.
Donc cum la hora es remauguda en la qual perforacio es temuda, agregua doas labias de la codena de la plagua, e cus aquela sola ses la cartillage.	 When you have opened a space between the patient's thighs and placed a cushion there, place two strips of cloth around it to bind them together tightly.
E aprop administra medicinas que fan naysser la carn entro que sia sanat.	 He should administer medications that will soften the flesh so as to facilitate healing.
E diyssec Albucasis que la summa del sermo le qual havem recomtat, exposicio no es sino que veias que alcus de aquetz apostemas ja han opilat lo guolayro del malaute, e le malaute es vengut entro a mort, e le ale de lu es entresecat, e alcus van a inscidir le epiglos per so que respire le malaute sobre le loc de la plagua per alcuna respiracio, e sia salvat de mort.	 The physician should ensure that the patient has been given the recommended treatment, and if they have not responded to it yet, he must start administering medications again in order to save their life; after all, their illness is severe, so it will cause them to pass away, and after death occurs, then the doctor will proceed with sealing up the wound as quickly as possible for any breathing that may occur.
E per aquo comandero layssar la plagua uberta entro que sia consumida la malicia de la malautia; e es la malicia de lu per tres dias; e donc lahoras comandero cosi la plagua, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	 By doing this he should seal up the wound quickly to prevent any further infection from it, and after three days of medication, he should order treatment on it so that healing may occur.
E aquo que yeu he vist per mi meteys, es que una sirventa pres un cotel e mesec le en le sieu golayro e inscidic am aquel una partida de la cana del pulmo, e yeu fu apelat a la curacio de lu, e atrobegui la mugen ayssi cum es mugit del moridos, e descubrigui la plagua e atrobegui le sanc le qual era yssit de la plagua petit.	 When you have examined the patient's body with your hands and feet, make an incision into their lung for diagnosis, then call upon a doctor to examine them as well, and place the mouth open so that the patient can breathe easily while examining the wound; ensure it is properly cleaned.
Donc yeu fo confessat que aquela no havia inscidit vena ni guidegi, e le vent yssia de la plagua, e curegui aquela entro que foc sanada.	 You should confirm that there was not a vein or artery present and the wound looked clean, then proceed to treat it with proper care.
E no accidic a la sirventa si no rauquiera en la votz, e aprop alcus dias retornec ad miloracio de las suas dispozicios.	 If the servant does not agree in your wishes, and you want them to return after their work is done.
E ara dic yeu que en la seccio del epilhot no ha temor.	 And now I say that there was no fear present at the moment of writing this text.
Capitol .xliv.	 44
De seccio sobre apostema le qual accideys en le golayro defora, e es apelat hernia del golayro.	 During the examination done here it is discovered a hernia in the chest area, and therefore called herniation of the chest.
Aquest apostema nompnat hernia del golayro es apostema gran segon la color del cors, e es mot en las femnas.	 The hernia that was found on the chest is large compared to its size and can be seen in women's breasts.
E es segon dos manieyras, quar o es natural o accidental.	 It could be either spontaneous or accidental.
E en le natural no es engen de curar.	 In the case of a spontaneous hernia there is nothing to cure
E l’accidental es segon dos manieyras del qual la un es semblant a nodes grasses, e l’autra manieyra es semblant apostema le qual es fayt per nodacio de arteria, e en aquel es temor.	 The accidental one is the second type of hernia where one resembles fatty growths and the other resembles an artery knot and in that case there was fear.
E no cove que·s fassa presumpcio a lu cum ferr sino en aquel que es petit.	 The physician will apply heat when pain occurs in the joints
E tu proha aquel e investigua aquel am le dit, e si atrobas lu semblant a nodi gras, e no es suspendut am alcuna de las venas, lahoras tu inscideys aquel ayssi cum les nodes, e extratz aquel am aquo que conte lu de la pel e bursiclam; e sino, lahoras es perscrutat tot le sieu esser, e aprop cura le loc am aquo que cove de curacio entro que sia sanat.	 The physician will examine and investigate the matter as well as he may find fatty nodes near the joint, and if they are not restrained by any veins, then there is a suspicion of gout; otherwise, it is prescribed to give the patient his own remedies, and apply care to the place where pain arises, so that it may be cured.
Capitol .xlv.	 The fifty-first chapter
De seccio de las specias de nodes.	 Section of matters relating to nodes
Dels nodes so motas specias e yeu ja he dit totas las specias de lor en la divisio.	 Matters concerning nodes are included in this section, and all the things regarding them have been listed here.
E cove que yeu recomte assi la diferencia entre node e exitura cum fassa dubitacio.	 And what is the difference between a node and an excrescence, which causes doubt?
Donc yeu dic que am exitura es caliditat e febre e dolors vehementz entro que es sedada la ebullicio de la superfluitat; e es complida putrefaccio que lahora cessa la febre, la dolor e la calor.	 An excrescence is caused by coldness and fever and severe pain that comes upon the opening of the excess moisture; it is completed putrefaction which causes the fever to cease as well as the pain and heat.
Mays am node no es caliditat ni febre ni dolor, e conte aquel ciphac leon le qual es al u sac propri.	 A node does not cause coldness or fever or pain; it is a small growth that occurs on its own
E es segon la color del cors, e le comensament de lu es cum un ceze e es fayt ayssi cum vace, sia major o minor, e son segon dos specias, quar o so grassas e conteno humiditat, e las colors de la humiditat son motas, segon que yeu diyssi en la divisio.	 It is a small swelling that arises with white or reddish skin like a pimple and develops gradually becoming larger or smaller, it is the second type of swellings, either dry ones containing moisture and colored by moisture, or moist ones that are themselves colored.
Donc cove, quan pervenas a la curacio de node, que exprohes aquel e inquiras aquel al comensament am sturment le qual es apelat intromes, segon que vindra la sua forma en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	 "Indeed, when you arrive at the examination of joints, ask them and inquire about their condition from the outset regarding any pain they may have experienced in the feet.
E es manieyra de inquisicio de apostemas e de totz nodes, e es que tu prenguas aquest sturment e entromet aquel en le loc pus humit le qual atrobas en le apostema, e tu revolveras les tieus ditz am aquel petit a petit entro que sapias que·l sturment ja ha penetrat la codena.	 "And then you should proceed to the examination of the other parts and inquire about their condition from the outset regarding any pain they may have experienced in those areas as well.
E aprop ultima la tua ma segon la mesura de la grandeza del apostema, e aprop extratz le entromes e considera aquo que es yssit en le vestigi de lu.	 "Finally, you should proceed to the examination of the abdomen and inquire about their condition from the outset regarding any pain they may have experienced in that area as well.
E si es fora-getada la humiditat corrent, de qualque color sia, lahoras tu le inscideys am seccio superficial segon que he dit en les autres apostemas.	 "And if the current humidity is of a certain color, you should inspect the skin on top as well.
E si del vestigi de l’intromes no hieys humiditat, lahoras sapias que es gras.	 "If there was no moisture in the cavity, then they know that it is dry.
E secca sobre lu am seccio havent forma de crotz segon aquesta forma:	 "And after inspecting the skin on top as well:
ayssi cum t’e ensenhat, e suspen aquel am oncis, e excorja la codena de tota part am facilitat, e guarda la pel o sac, si podes, sobre aquel e extraguas aquela sania am le node.	 "Take note of it and examine each one individually; cut off all the parts that are easy to get rid of (i.e., the skin) and remove them if possible from every part with ease. And save the pelt or skin over there, in case you want to extract something from it.
Mays si es romput en la operacio, no es possible extrayre aquela sana, e motas veguadas endeve aquo, e lahoras tu la extratz a pessas entro que de lu no romangua denguna causa.	 "In case the operation is successful and you are unable to extract that thing from there (i.e., the pelt or skin), then put it aside in this manner; otherwise, remove it as much as possible from whatever caused its presence.
Quar si de lu roman denguna causa, pauc o trop, le node retorne segon le mays.	 When caused by a small amount or a large amount of blood, then return it to its place as soon as possible.
E si tu vezes que de lu roman alcuna part petita, lahoras comple la plagua de alcunas polveras corrosivas agudas e strenh la plagua, e pausa sobre aquela que sede apostema caut, e cura aquel del autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	 If you find that the blood is causing a small part to be inflamed and irritated by sharp corrosive powders, apply a poultice on it, and cover it with a cloth soaked in vinegar while applying cold compresses over it to alleviate pain as much as possible.
E si es node gran, lahoras tu cus las doas labias de lu e cura aquel am aquo que encarna.	 If not, put two cloths on and apply that part of the body where the problem is found
Mays si vena pulsatil es a lu contraria, o no-pulsatil, lahoras tu coyta e huemple le loc de zegi trissat que es vetriol e leyssa aquel streyt per dos dias o per tres entro que·s poyresca la plagua e que repause la ebullicio del sanc; e aprop retorna a inscindir aquo que es romas del node.	 If it is a pulsatile vein that is against or not-pulsatile, put a cloth over and hold the area where the varicose vein is suspected to be troubled for two days or three into which you pour vinegar and then soak in hot water; afterwards rinse with cold water and apply cold compresses. Afterwards return to incision as necessary.
Capitol .xlvi.	 The end of the text.
De las formas del sturmentz necessaris en seccio e perforacio.	 Necessary forms in sectioning and perforation.
De aquels so las formas dels intromesas, e so de tres specias, que de aquels es alcu gran, e de lor es migier, e de lor es petit.	 Those are the forms of the incisions to be made, such as those that go into the large intestine and those that do not penetrate it; and also those that go in and out through the anus, great, middle-sized or small.
La forma de intromes gran es aquesta:	 The form of the large incision is this one
La forma de intromes migier es aquesta:	 The form of the middle incision is this one
La forma de intromes petit es aquesta:	 The small incision form is this one
Sian faytz de ferr, de alfulud, de extremitatz cayradas decentment, per so que festino le intrament en les apostemas.	 When joints are affected by cold humors that spread throughout the body
E aquestas so las formas dels experientz, e son nompnatz albered, e un de aquels es apelat berid.	 And these are the forms of experience, and one of them is called berid
E so de tres especias, quar de lor es gran, migier e pauc.	 There are three kinds, among which one is large, middle-sized, and small.
La forma de experient gran, forma de lu:	 The form of experience great, form of it:
La forma de experient migier, forma de lu:	 The middle-sized form of experience, form of it:
La forma de experient pauc, forma de lu:	 The small form of experience, form of it:
Conveneysso que sian per aquels apostemas e exituras e fistulas e bubos per so que entre aquelas so dels osses e de autras causas.	 These are the apertures and exits from which fistulae and abscesses arise from among those that belong to bones or other internal organs.
E so faytz redontz, grosses, leons, ayssi cum grans agulhas am las quals son cosidas las selhas, e son faytas de eram citri, o de eram o de ferr, o de argent, E las milhors so quan so faytas de eram citri.	 The stitches are removed from the large ones, medium-sized ones, small ones with sharp needles that sew up the wounds, or of making holes in them, or of silver, and many times they cause wounds to be infected when they occur on those that belong to bones, or other internal organs.
E son faytz les experient de plum negre, les quals se acordan que per aquels sian ubertas las fistulas en la conquavitat de las quals so reflexios, que sian reflectidas am la sua levitat am aquelas refleccios.	 The experiences of black bile that are related to those openings cause the fistulae in their cavity to be reflected upon, which become reflected onto them from their own reflection.
E so de tres specias, quar alcus de lor so loncs, e dels autres migiers, e dels autres breus, segon la quantitat del ample de la fistula e de la strictura de lu.	 There are three kinds, among which one is the largest, some middle-sized, and others small, based on the amount of their width and how narrow they are.
Forma del experient gran de plom:	 The expert's great pleasure
Forma del experient migier de plom:	 The expert's moderate pleasure
Forma del experient petit de plom:	 The expert's little pleasure
Las formas dels oncis so de motas specias, quar de aquels so alcus simples, als quals es una curvitat solament, e so de tres specias: grans, paucs e migiers.	 The forms of motion are special cases where one is only curved, and three types there are: big ones, small ones, and medium-sized ones.
E de lor so uncis orps, e so de tres specias.	 And for their three species.
E de aquels so uncis haventz doas curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	 For those there are three types of curves.
E de lor so haventz tres curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	 And for their three species.
E totz aquetz so necessaris en lor loc.	 Everything here is necessary in its place.
Forma de unci simple gran, forma de lu:	 The form of a big one, the shape of it:
Forma de unci simple migier:	 The shape of a medium-sized one:
Forma de unci simple pauc, forma de lu:	 The form of a small one, the shape of it:
Forma de unci orp gran:	 Form of an expert big pleasure.
Forma de unci orp migier, forma de lu:	 Form of an expert medium-sized pleasure.
Forma de unci orp pauc, forma de lu:	 Form of an expert small pleasure.
Forma de unci gran havent dos curvaturas:	 Form of a big curved one.
Forma de unci migier havent dos curvatas:	 Form of a medium-sized curved one.
Forma de unci pauc havent dos curvaturas:	 Form of a small curved one.
Forma de unci gran havent tres curvaturas:	 Form of an expert big pleasure with three curves.
Forma de unci migier havent tres curvaturas:	 Form of an expert medium-sized pleasure with three curves.
Forma de unci pauc havent tres curvaturas:	 First three sentences
E aquestas so las formas dels scalpels am les quals son seccatz e scorjatz les nodes e le apostemas, e so de tres specias, quar de aquels es gran, migier, e pauc.	 The first three sentences translate to:
Forma de scapel gran:	 The sentence translates as follows:
Forma del scapel migier:	 This sentence translates to:
Forma de scapel pauc:	 The sentence translates to:
Las extramitatz de aquels am les quals es fayta seccio so agudas e las autres extramitatz so no-agudas, e no so pausadas en tal manieyra, sino per que sia fayt juvament en la excorjacio dels nodes la temor de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e per aquels sia sanat le malaute e atrobe tranquilitat un petit per la adustio la qual atroba deves la excoriacio del apostema.	 The translation of the sentence is:
E aquestas son las formas de almagidas, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc, ayssi cum veyras.	 This translates to:
La forma de magda gran:	 The sentence translates as follows:
Forma de magda migier:	 This sentence translates to:
Forma de magda pauc:	 I'm sorry, but the remaining sentences do not seem to have a clear translation based on the given context. Could you please provide more information or rephrase them?
Sian faytas de eram e so semblantz de ray am le qual e fayt alcofol.	 The sentence translates as follows:
E es en la extramitat lada punctada am spatum occultada e en aquela corr a las partidas dedintz e defora, quan tu vols, ayssi cum veses.	 I'm sorry, but the remaining sentences do not seem to have a clear translation based on the given context. Could you please provide more information or rephrase them?
Las formas de spatimis, les quals so amaguatz entre los ditz deves la perforacio dels apostemas e no les percebo les malautes, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc.	 The translation of the sentence is:
E aquestas so las formas de aquels:	 This translates to:
Las formas de ventozas am las quals es abscindit le flux del sanc, e so de tres specias; gran, migiera e pauca; las formas de lu:	 The forms of veins are those that stop the flow of blood, and they are three types; large, medium, and small.
Sian faytas de eram citri, redondas am alcuna longitut , e sian subtils.	 Veins of the arms have circles at their ends, and are very fine.
E cove que sian aquestas specias de ventosas deves tu grans, migieras e paucas, per so que per aquelas abscindas flux de sanc am velocitat en necessitat, e lahoras quan a tu primieyrament no es medicina.	 The veins of the arms are large, medium-sized and small to prevent these stopping the flow of blood quickly, and doctors use this when it is not a medical issue yet.
Enpero no uses de aquelas ad abscidir sanc en tot loc del cors, e non uses sino en locs carnoses, ayssi cum en les lacertis de las cambas e de las coyssas, e en les lacertz dels brasses, e de las mamillas e del ventre e dels engonars, e semblantz a lor dels lacertz carnoses humitz.	 It is not necessary to make cuts anywhere in the body except on the calves and thighs, and similarly for the veins of the legs and breasts, and also for the nipples and belly and groin areas, as it is common sense to cut there only.
E alcunas veguadas son faytz de aquels strumentz autres petitz semblantz scorsas de fisacs segon aquesta forma; per les quals lo sanc es abscindit quan es fayt per fleubotomia, o deves inscizio de vena o de arceria.	 Some veins are used as instruments for those incisions that follow this form; when the vein is cut during phlebotomy, or you may need to make a new incision.
E alcunas veguadas son faytas redondas segon aquesta forma:	 Some veins have circles at their ends according to this form.
Capitol .xlvii.	 Chapter 47.
De la cura de las mamillas dels homes las quals so asembladas de femnas.	 Of the treatment of breasts in men that are similar to those of women.
Alcunas veguadas so infladas las mamillas de alcus homes deves le compliment del dormir cum comensan esser pellutz, e aprop so infladas las mamillas, e so asembladas las mamillas de las femnas, e romano apostemosas, lejas.	 Some veins are inflated in the breasts of some men to complement their sleep by touching them gently, and inflating the breasts also like those of women, Romans alike.
E ad aquel que avoreys aquo, cove que inscidisca aquelas am seccio lunar segon aquesta forma, de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G., e aprop excorja la groceza tota, e aprop uempla la plagua de medicament encarnatiu, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am cosidura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	 When one has had a gout attack and notices the lunar lines appearing second from the line of B to the line of G, they should apply heat over the entire area, place a poultice made of active ingredients on it, adjust both sides with poultices of medicated plaga applied to the body.
Mays si la mamilla declina a las partidas dejos e es mollificada per la sua magnitut ayssi cum endeve a las femnas, lahoras sia fendut en dos latz sieus pus sobiras, am dos seccios semblantz a figura lunar, de las quals quascuna sia contenguda en l’autra deves la fi de quascuna, entro que sia que la linha major contengua la menor segon aquesta forma de la linha de .B. e la linha de .G. E aprop excorja la codena la qual es entre dos labias de la plagua, e osta la pingueza, e aministra aquo que havem dit de la sutura e de las polveras aquo que es necessari en la curacio entro que sia sanat.	 When the nipple retracts to both sides and is inflated by its size as seen in the lunar lines, they should apply heat over the entire area, place a poultice made of active ingredients on it, adjust both sides with poultices of medicated plaga applied to the body.
E si tu non conpleysses la inscizio de aquo que cove inscidir per la inquietut del malaute, e per flux de sanc, lahoras cove que huemplas la plagua de coto submergit en enguent corrosiu e layssa aquel entro que aquo corroda que es romas de la grayssa, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	 If you do not comply with the prescription of that which you are to prescribe for the pain of the patient and the flow of blood, they should apply heat over the entire area, place a poultice made of active ingredients on it, adjust both sides with poultices of medicated plaga applied to the body.
Capitol .xlviii.	 The thirty-eighth chapter.
De perforacio de apostemas que veno dejos le titillic.	 Regarding the perforation of apertures that occur from time to time in them.
Aquetz apostemas que veno dejos le titillic so de las specias de scrophulas, durs, las quals conte una pel que es sac.	 The perforations on the letters that come and go with the strokes of the scrivener are due to the weariness of their pens.
E de aquelas so alcunas que conteno humiditatz; e aquelas que conteno humiditatz cove que sian inscididas am seccio lunar segon aquesta figura: de la linha de .G. a la linha de .B. E cum es tot evacuat aquo que es en le apostema de la sania, lahoras tu le comple de coto viel e leysa le entro al autra dia.	 When there are some that contain moisture and those that do not have moisture; the latter ones get damaged when exposed to moonlight for this reason: from line .G. to line .B. And once all of it is done, tomorrow you will have a complete covering or bandage
E aprop le coto sia ostat e sia curat am enguent convenient ad aquo, entro que sia sanat.	 After the treatment has been completed and it is convenient for him to do so, enter into any suitable garment to cover it
E si le apostema de las specias dels nodes es, e de las scrophulas, lahoras tu scindeys sobre aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la seccio sobre las scrophulas engualment.	 If the intestines are affected by gout and the scrotum as well, then you should do so in a similar way as when discussing about scrotal ulcers.
May si la plagua es extenduda en aysso que yesca poyredura, lahoras administra en lu cauteri segon que en aquo havem denant dit.	 If the abscess is large and pus has come out, then apply the cautery as you would do in such cases when discussing this matter.
Capitol .xlix.	 Chapter forty-nine
De seccio de apostemas que accideysso per arceria o per vena.	 Of sections where the abscess occurs through arteries or veins.
Quan arceria es rompuda, e la codena es consolidada la qual es sobre aquela, lahoras motas veguadas accideys apostema E les senhals per les quals es conoguda que imflamacio e apostema sian per la arteria o per vena: quar quan apostema es per arceria es lonc agreguat en le preon del cors; e que quan inpelleysses le apostema am les tieus ditz, sentes en lu quays sia stridor.	 When the artery is ruptured and the aneurysm has consolidated as a result of this, the arteries for which it was known to cause inflammation and aneurysm formation are through the artery or vein: when the aneurysm occurs through the artery, it is located near the heart; and when you try to remove the aneurysm by tying them, you will feel pain in its place.
E aquel que es per vena es redon al manifest del cors.	 When veins are seen in the body
E seccio sobre aquest apostema es error, e majorment en aquel que es dejos las aysselhas, e en les angonars, e en le col, e en motz locs del cors; e es mot gran, donc cove que la sua curacio am ferr sia esquivada, e aquel que es en las extramitatz, o al cap, cove que sia evitat.	 If the bleeding occurs in the veins or arteries, it is a serious error and should be treated immediately; but if it happens elsewhere on the body, such as the extrameshes, head, etc., it must be avoided
Mays sobre aquel que es de lor per imflacio de l’orrifici de la arceria, scindeys en la codena seccio en le lonc; e aprop huebre la seccio am uncis e aprop la arceria, e deliura de las tunicas entro que sia descuberta.	 If the bleeding is caused by inflammation of a blood vessel in the arm or leg, it must be treated at once with cautery and the artery opened; but if it happens elsewhere on the body, such as within the tunic (clothing), it must be hidden
E aprop met sobre aquel agulha e fay aquela penetrar entro al autre latz, e estrenh la arceria am fiel doble en dos locs, — la qual causa yeu a tu eyssenhegui en extraccio de doas arcerias les quals so en les templars.	 With an awl and it will penetrate into the other layer, and tighten the artery with both hands at once in two places, which is necessary for causing you to explode from both arteries as are in the temples.
E aprop punh le loc le qual es entre dos liamentz am spatum entro que yesca le sanc tot que es en lu, e sia dissolvut le apostema.	 With a punch at the place between two seams which will burst completely through it and dissolve the vein.
E aprop administra curacio en la qual es engendrat poyre entro que caian les liamentz; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz convenientz ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	 With a cure for generating pain between the seams, which will ease the pain of arthritis.
E si es apostema per seccio de vena, lahoras cove que tu tenguas am la tua ma aquo que es a tu possible del apostema am la codena, e aprop intromet la agulha dejos le loc le qual tu has tengut dejos la tua ma, e fay aquela penetrar; e sia en aquela fil doble entro que tu extraguas aquel del autre latz, e aprop ligua le apostema am bo liament segon que yeu he dit a tu en le liament de uva4 de doas partz am doas extremitatz del fil.	 If it is an error in the vein cutting, then place your hand over that area to prevent the vein from coming out; and with an awl punch into that layer, which will burst completely through it and dissolve the vein. And as for the other part of two seams on each side of both extremities, tie it tightly with a knot.
Mays si temes que extraguam le fil, lahoras entromet le fiel am aquela agula dejos tot le apostema deves la inscizio de la agulha primieyra, e strenh les tieus fiels en quatre locs.	 When you fear that the needle may break through, place your hand on it to prevent the needle from penetrating deeper into the flesh in four places
Aprop secca le apostema en le mieg loc de lu entro que quan es yssit aquo que es en lu, lahoras tu inscideys la superfluitat de la codena, e layssa aquo que de lu es liat.	 Then remove the needle at that point where it became apparent that there was no longer need for it, and let's do away with that.
E aprop pausa sobre lu pulvil le qual has submergit en vi e oli, e aprop administra la curacio la qual es fayta am calguas e enguentz entro que sia sanat.	 Then place a bandage soaked in vinegar over the part that you have moistened with oil and water, and administer the treatment which is customarily applied for such cases.
Capitol l del apostema le qual accideys per torcio de nervis.	 The sentence does not seem to be complete or meaningful since it appears to lack a verb after "Capitol." Are you certain that this should be translated as a single sentence?
Ayssi cum accideys apostema en arceria e en vena, e semblantment accideys apostema en les nervis quan accideys en lor percussio o accideys per trebal superfluable, e per semblantz.	 When the needle goes through arteries and veins, as well as when it strikes nerves during its passage or impact with a superfluous object, apply pressure for an extended period of time.
E es fayt le mays de lu en les locs dels adjutoris o del talo, o en tot loc en le qual so maugudas las juncturas.	 The treatment is applied in the locations of the assistants or the table, or anywhere where the joints are inflamed.
E es apostema greu, e es asemblat a la color del autre cors, e es en las majors de lu disposicios ses de lor e quan es streyt am vehementia, sent en lu le malaute semblant stupor.	 The needle is heavy and inserted in the other limb of the assistant, at which point it becomes apparent that there has been a strong shock to him.
E no es apostema agreguat en le preon del cors, e per so es dejos la codena, e el es maugut a tota partida e no va a las partidas denant ni detras.	 Do not insert the needle into his chest or behind him; instead do away with it and let go of it.
Donc aquo de aquels que es en las juncturas no cove que sia envasit am ferr, quar fort leu endevenguera contracio.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, it can lead to severe contractions
Mays aquel que es en le cap o en le front fen la codena am spatum.	 Put a cushion under their head or chest.
Mays si es apostema pauc, lahoras te aquel am les forfecs e abscindeys aquel de razitz.	 If only one foot is affected, the pain occurs in both feet and it is customary to call this gout as well.
E si es gran, lahoras tu le suspen am unci, e excorja aquel, e aprop osta aquel; e ajusta la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	 If a great deal of pain occurs, the doctors will suspend it and treat for gout as well, adjust the bandage to prevent the leakage, cure for gout within three days.
Capitol .li.	 "I am.
De seccio de apostema le qual accideys de cheil que accideys al ventre.	 The pain occurs in the abdomen as well as in the joints
Endeveno ad alcus homes motas veguadas en les ventres de aquels e en las autras partidas del cors de aquels theils les quals son apelatz funguals per similitut de aquels am funges, dels quals la razitz es subtil e·l cap de aquel es gros; e ja las labias de aquels so conversas, e es de aquels que es petit, e es de aquels que es mot magnificat.	 The pain affects the organs as well as the joints, and is usually accompanied by swelling in the organs, and is of a type that is very subtle with large head, and it's from those who are small
E yeu ja e vist un, e en le ventre de lu eran dos theils les quals eran mays a funges semblantz, e no era diferencia entre aquels blancs, de menuda razitz.	 The first one appeared in the stomach of him and were very similar to those that occurred earlier, there was no difference between them in terms of severity
E ja las labias de aquels eran enversadas e se fendian, e humiditat corria de aquel tot temps.	 The organs swelled up as well, and moisture ran out from it constantly.
Donc yeu inscidegui aquels e atrobegui en la un en pes quays xviii unc. e l’autre quays vi unc.	 It is customary to use a pointed cautery for this purpose on the surface of the foot.
E la operacio en la inscizio de lor es que consideres lahoras si·l malaute es humit, e la color de atheil es blanca, humit, de subtil razitz; lahoras tu le inscideys am spatum lat, e sian en la presencia tua cauteris en le foc, quar motas veguadas deves la seccio de lu es expellit mot sanc; e si te ventz le sanc, cauteriza aquel.	 When performing an operation on the patient's buttocks it is customary to consider whether the pain originates from a wet or dry itch, as its color may be white and moist, or dry and fine, depending on which. You should make incisions in the skin of the buttocks latently, and when you are present close your eyes to avoid seeing anything that might distract you during the procedure. If there is bleeding, cauterize it immediately.
E si vezes le malaute pauruc e temeros, guarda te de inscizio am ferr; mays lahoras pren fiel de plom recent fayt, e strenh am aquel atheil, la manieyra del qual es aquela que havem dita; e leyssa aquel per dos dias.	 If the patient is fearful and trembling, do not make an incision there, rather apply a poultice made of fresh flax, hold it tightly to that area, with one hand being the left, as it has been indicated, for two days.
E aprop ajusta en la strictura del fil de plom; donc, no cesses strenher le plom granre devetz en theil, entro que sia abscindit e cayha per se ses trebalh.	 Then tighten the flax thread securely in it, so that it cannot be pulled away or torn by anything that might come near to it.
Mays si theil es de grossa razitz, lahoras en la inscizio de lu es alcuna causa de temor e de paor, e majorment en aquel que es en le ventre.	 If the thread is very fine, then incisions should be made elsewhere and not there, except in cases where it is on the belly.
Mays possibla es que tu inscindas la maytat de lu , e aprop cauteriza aquel per que no retorne.	 It is possible that you cut through to the fullest extent of it, and then cauterize it so that it does not return.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanada la plagua.	 Then apply a poultice over it until it has been healed by the cloth itself.
E guarda te que tu no presumas inscidir theil le qual es de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, de leg reguardament, quar aquel es absi cancros.	 And remember that you should not make an incision on any part of it which is discolored and has few feeling, or is in constant pain, as this is a cancerous growth.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio de cranc aprop aysso.	 And you remember clearly about cramps, approach it so
Capitol .lii.	 I'm sorry, but that text seems to be in a language similar to Latin and Italian rather than French. Could you please rephrase the question or provide more context to help me better understand what you are asking?
De curacio de eminencia del umbilic.	 To perform abdominal massage.
Eminencia del umbilic es fayta per motas causas; o per fissuras del ciphac le qual es sobre le ventre, e yeys de lu la tela o budel segon que endeve en las autras rupturas; o per sanc le qual flueys de vena o de arceria segon que es denant dit, o per ventositat coarctada en lu.	 Abdominal massage can be caused by various factors such as hernia, which is located below the belly button, or by a tear in the diaphragm that separates it from the abdomen; also due to coarctation of the aorta when blood flow is restricted.
Mays si es per fissura del ciphac e per yssiment de la tela, lahoras la color del apostema es semblant a la color del cors; e es leon ses dolor, e aprop appar de divers situament.	 Pain due to an abdominal tear or effusion of the pleura can cause the skin color to change and appear on different areas.
E si es per egressio del budel, lahoras le situament de aquel am lu de aquo que havem recontat, de mays vehement diversitat, e cum tu premes aquel am les tieus ditz es occultat, e aprop retorna; e fort leu es am lu so, e es magnificat mot deves le introt de banh e vehement trebalh.	 If it is due to the intestine coming out, remember that you must re-insert it back in immediately and firmly with a strong grip.
Mays si per humiditat, lahoras es leon e no es occultat quan premes am la tua ma, ni es constrengut, ni es cregut.	 Pain due to moisture can be alleviated when you press on your hand without any restriction or discomfort.
E si es per sanc, lahoras am aquestz senhals apareys le apostema a negror declinant.	 If it is due to stenosis, the skin of the abdomen may appear darker as blood flow decreases.
Mays si es per carn nada, lahoras es apostema greu, gros e dur, e es ficat segon una quantitat.	 Pain caused by nothing can make the belly button feel heavy, rough and tough, depending on how much it has been stretched.
Mays si es per ventositat, lahoras le tocament de lu es leon.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet
E la operacio en lu es que consideras lahoras si la eminencia de l’umbilic es per sanc de arceria, o de vena, o per ventositat; lahoras cove que sias prohibit de la curacio de lu, quar en aquela es temor e paor ayssi cum t’e ensenhat en le capitol en le qual he dit les apostemas per arceria e per vena.	 The operation on the body is considered when the pain occurs in or around the genitals (vulva), or when there are signs of varicose veins or venereal ulcers, and it's forbidden to apply any treatment that causes a cure for it because it causes fear and terror just as mentioning its location makes one remember the capital letter 'V', which may indicate venereal disease.
E si la eminencia del umbilic es per le budel o per la tela, lahoras cove que comandes al malaute que tengua le ale sieu, e sia stant extendut; e aprop senha am tenta en le circuit de tot le umbilic, e aprop comanda a lu que stia envers entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e aprop circunda am spatum lat en le circuit del umbilic sobre le loc le qual has senhat am la tenta; e aprop exten la maytat del apostema a las partidas desus am unci gran; e aprop lia en le circuit am fiel fort o am ceda e la manieyra del liar decent.	 If the pain is in or around the genitals, tell the patient to lie down flat and have it stretched out, and then stretch towards your chest area while keeping one hand on either side of their abdomen.
E aprop huebre le mieg del apostema extendut sobre le liament e intromet le dit tieu en aquel indic e quereys le budel; e si tu l’as atrobat ni guardat per le liament, lahoras tu extratz alxorati e impelleys le budel a las partidas dedintz del ventre.	 If the stretched patch is not in place or missing any part of it, tell them to remove and instruct them to put it back into its proper position from within their belly.
E si has atrobada la tela, lahoras pren aquel am unci; e inscideys las superfluitatz de lu.	 If you have found the patch, tell them that they should remove any unnecessary items from it.
Mays si es contraria a tu arceria o vena, lahoras circunda aquel mot, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio; e pren dos agulhas e met en aquelas dos fiels fortz e entromet dos agulhas en le circuit le qual has feyt entorn le apostema en manieyra de crotz, las quals fassas penetrar; e aprop strenh le apostema en quatre partidas sobre las agulhas.	 If it is contrary to your artery or vein, tell them to turn around and return to their operation room, take two needles and stick them into the two points mentioned above, close one needle in that part of the circle where you inserted the patch on her arm, then close the other needle at a perpendicular distance from the first needle. Stretch out the patch in four parts over both needles.
E si tu vols, osta las agulhas e leyssa le loc entro que poyresca la carn extenduda e caia per si; o inscideys aquel quan es subtiliat e se poyreys, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	 When you want to make a hole for inserting the needle and draw blood from it if necessary or in case of necessity
E si la eminencia del ombilic es de carn nada en lu o per humiditat, lahoras cove que tu conquaves le apostema ayssi cum havem dit e estraguas le sanc o la humiditat, la qual atrobas en lu, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove e que consolide le loc.	 If the prominence of the navel is made of flesh or by moisture, it is customary to cover it with a bandage as well and treat that area as well in order to keep it secure
Capitol .liii.	 In the third book of the Capitularies
De curacio de cranc.	 About care for wounds.
Ja havem dit, en la divisio, de specia de cranc e en qual manieyra es via a la curacio de lu am medicinas, e que es squivador en lu la curacio am ferr per so que no sia ulcerat; e havem dit cranc engendrat en la mayra e cautela de la curacio de lu.	 We said in the division that special care for wounds and what kind of treatment a doctor should give to prevent ulcers, we also mentioned congenital wounds in large and caution when caring for them
E diyssero les antics que alcunas veguadas cranc es en loc on es possibla la eradicacio de lu, ayssi cum de cran le qual es en las mamillas o en la coyssa e a lor semblantz dels membres allocat a estrayre tot aquel, e majorment quan es comensant petit.	 There are also cases where crusts of old wounds may be removed in the place they can be eradicated, as well as those on the breasts or buttocks and any other part of the body that is exposed to being treated more frequently when it starts
Mays quan es antiquat e es gra, no cove que te propries a lu, quar yeu non pogui sanar de aquel alcu ni no he vist autre, ni que sia pervengut ad aquo.	 When an old and bad crust is there, do not try to remove it as that will only cause more harm than good, or that may have become infected, nor should be left untreated.
E la operacio en lu es quan es allocat ayssi cum havem dit, es que tu precedescas e laysses le malaute e purgues de colera negra alcunas veguadas, e aprop sagna aquel, si es atrobada replecio manifesta.	 The operation in that is done as we said, it means you should cover and clean the wound with black bile of some kind, and bandage it if found bleeding profusely.
E aprop prepara le malaute am preparacio en le qual sia locat am operacio, e aprop prohiceys en le trauc uncis les quals cove ad aquel; e aprop concava de tota part am la codena sego bona perexcrutacio entro que no romangua alcuna causa de las razitz de lu.	 When preparing for the operation on the patient, ensure that a cushion is placed under them and another one on their legs as well.
E layssa correr le sanc, e no abscidas aquel leugierament, e exprem les locs, e abstergeys le sanc gros tot am la tua ma o am instrument am le qual es a tu possible dels instruments.	 "Secure the patient's limbs and prevent their movement", "remove any excess padding from under them or from the area near the instruments", "clean all surfaces of the body, excluding the areas where incisions will be made".
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat de sanc gros inscizio de vena o de arceria, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que·l flux del sanc sia cessat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	 If the bleeding is from a vein or artery, then once the bleeding has stopped, you need to apply another method of healing such as stitches or glue.
Capitol .liv.	 Please provide more information on what "Capitol" refers to in this context.
De curacio de ydropici.	 Cure for dropsy.
Nos ja havem recomtat, en la divisio, de las specias de ydropici de l’aygua, e les senhals de quascuna especia, de la curacio de lu am medicinas.	 We recommend, in the division of dropsy cases and each of its species, to cure it with medical treatments.
E aquela la qual es curada am ferr no es sino la specia de althitas sola, e no es aproximat am ferr a la specia de timpanistres ni a la especia de yposarcha, quar aquo es mortal.	 And the cure for that which is cured by bleeding alone, and not even attempting to treat the species of tympanists or yposarchs (which are deadly), is simply the cure for dropsy itself.
E quan tu ja has medicat aquesta especia de ydropici timpanistre am medicinas e no comfereys la tua medicacio, lahoras considera, quar si al malaute ja es conseguida debelitat, o es am aquel autra malautia otra ydropici, ayssi cum si es en lu tos o cos de ventre e semblant ad aquels, lahoras guarda te que no le mediques am ferr, quar temor es sobre aquo.	 If you have already treated the dropsy with tympanists and it is not cured by your treatment, consider that if the patient has been completely healed or if another dropsy occurred elsewhere in his body as well (e.g., feet), do not administer further treatment to prevent further complications related to this condition.
Mays si tu vezes le malaute de vertut exuberant, e am lu no es autra malautia sino ydropici tant solament, e no enfant ni vielh, lahoras la manieyra de la operacio de lu es que tu eleves le malaute entre las tuas mas, e le ministre aprop lu exprema le ventre de lu am la sua ma, enpellen la aygua a la partida dejos del pentenilh, e aprop pren spatum spinos segon aquesta forma:	 When the patient's abdomen is inflated with excessive gas, and vomiting occurs without any other cause than hiccups alone, then the pain of the operation should be performed between your thighs. The servant will apply a compress on his chest to relieve the belly from that point
sia de dos partz agudas lonc, de aguda extremitat ayssi cum spatum; mays empero sia en lu alcuna brevitat petit a petit, per so que en la operacio am aquel no passes entro al budel, e que ledas aquel.	 The servant should gently and gradually apply the compress to reduce swelling in the affected area over time, preventing it from entering into the operation without delay.
E aprop considera si la generacio de ydropici es de part dels budels, quar lahoras cove que tu am la seccio te alonhes del ombelic per la quantitat de tres ditz a las partidas dejos, en le dreyt de lu sobre le pentenilh.	 The servant should consider if the generation of hiccups is from the bowels, as they say that you will separate it from the abdomen by three days at intervals in order to cure it without delay.
Mays si la generacio de hydropici es per malautia del fietge, lahoras la tua seccio sia sinistra del ombilic per tres ditz.	 The servant should consider if the generation of hiccups is due to illness in the stomach, as they say that you will separate it from the abdomen with three days' interval on the left side.
E si la generacio de lu es per la melsa, lahoras la tua seccio sia en le las dreyt.	 The servant should consider if the generation of hiccups is due to illness in the liver, as they say that you will separate it from the abdomen on the right side.
E no cove que la tua seccio sia sobre le costat sobre le qual vol jaser le malaute per que no corron las superfluitatz ad aquel loc freul.	 And do not place your separation over the side where you want to put it so that you do not cause any harm to those around that area freely.
E aprop perfora am le instrument tota la codena, e aprop entromet en aquela seccio, e eleva la tua ma am le spatum entre la codena e·l siphac, e tu excorja aquel; e si’ la quantitat de una ungla o enviro.	 Apply the tool completely to its length, and enter into that separation, and raise your hand over the area between the cord and the siphon, and squeeze it so hard; and if necessary, use one or two blows.
E aprop perforo le ciphac entro que pervengua le spatum al loc vuoyt, e es loc de l’aygua.	 The first sentence translates to: "Place a cushion under [the patient's] thighs.
E aprop extratz aquel e entromet un instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	 Place that (instrument) between them, so it will act as a barrier.
e es semblant a canula de argent subtil; es fayt de argent o de eram o de lato leon, al qual en la partida pus bassa de lu es un petit trauc, e en les costatz de lu so tres traucs: dos de una partida e un del autra partida; e fayta es la extremitat de lu insciza segon la manieyra de pluma, ayssi cum vezes:	 It is similar to a thin silver needle. You may use it of gold or of iron or of lead, depending on what you need in the patient's hand; and placing it at the bottom of their hand near the thumb joint will cause two small wounds, one from each side of the hand.
E en la extramitat de lu pus sobirana es armilla, quar quan le instrument perve al aygua, lahoras aquela tantost deysen sobre le instrument, donc evacua de l’aygua en la ora miega quantitat, quar si tu evacuas de aquela mes que no cove en la hora, fort leu mor le malaute per resolucio del sieu spirit animal, o accideys a lu cincopi que es appropinquada la mort.	 In the outer part of their hand where it penetrates water, after that moment if you remove the instrument quickly enough then no harm will come to them; but if not removed in time then bad luck may strike on them and they may die within five hours.
Mays evacua de aquela segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu e segon que significan a tu las disposicios del malaute de la vertut del pols de lu e de la bontat de lu.	 Remove it as quickly as possible and also consider their current health conditions, the condition of their thumb joint, and their general well-being.
E aprop extrats le instrument, e rete l’aygua la qual causa es quar tantost es retenguda per la codena la qual rete le trauc que es sobre le ciphac del qual e recomtat a tu que perfores aquel segon aquela manieyra.	 Remove the instrument and remove any water that may have caused it, for in order to prevent further harm you must perform whatever action is recommended at this point by your doctor on the site of the instrument.
E aprop itera le instrument al autra dia si vezes le malaute tollerant aquo, e extratz de la aygua petita quantitat, e fay aquo per alcus jorns sobre temor, e guarda te de error entro que no romangua de l’aygua sino pauc.	 When the first treatment is complete and ready to be applied, you should gently apply it to the patient's thigh, remove a small amount of water from an instrument that will help soothe it, spread it out over several days in fear lest it cause any harm or damage to the skin, but ensure that no water remains after application.
Mays si tu temes sobre le malaute, e leyssas de l’aygua gran quantitat, lahoras cura aquel am sepultura en arena cauda, e mota suzor en banh, e al solelh espere per lonc temps; e cura aquel am medicinas dessicativas entro que sia sanat.	 If you are concerned about the patient and wish to avoid water getting on it too much, then cure them by spreading ointment over their dry skin in fine powder dust, and keep it moist under gauze until long times have passed; and cure such with drying ointments so that they may heal.
E cauteriza sobre le stomac, e la melsa e·l fitge aprop la extraccio de l’aygua, segon que yeu he recontat en aquo que es precedit.	 Cauterize over the stomach, also gently remove water from it second after you have already removed some from where that procedure was previously performed
Capitol .lv.	 I am not sure what this means as I do not recognize any of the symbols or phrases used in your response.
De la curacio dels enfants les quals so natz les locs de la urina no-perforatz.	 Do not worry about causing harm to those children that you might urinate on accidentally.
Alcunas veguadas alcun dels enfantz es eyssi del ventre de la sua mayre e·l cap de la sua mixtio no es perforat (o es trauc streyt o no es en son loc).	 Do not worry about cutting through the belly button or any of their other openings as they are not perforated.
Donc cove coytar am perforacio de lu tantost que es nascut am spatum mot subtil segon aquesta forma:	 However, if you want to make a small incision just above it in a subtle way like this
E aprop pausa en le trauc un clavil subtil de plom e ligua aquel, e te per tres jorns o per .iiii.tre.	 Then place the pointed cautery needle gently on top of them and tie it with thread tightly after three days or
E quant vol urinar sia remaugut e hurine; e aprop retorne aquel.	 When someone needs to urinate urgently or urgently feels pain in their urethra, return it at once.
E si tu no pauses le plom, ja es possible que la urina la qual va sobre le loc, no leysa aquest claure.	 If you do not stop urination, there is a possibility that urine may flow over the area and cause damage to this part of your body.
Mays aquel del qual le trauc es streyt sia medicat am clavil de Plom, ayssi cum havem dit, per trops dias entro que sia amplificat.	 The doctor treating the urethra injury will also provide you with instructions on how to treat it and when to seek further medical attention if necessary.
Mays aquels en les quals es le trauc no en son loc, so leditz, la qual causa es quar de aquels, aquel que es nat e·l trau es deves la fi del cap de la vergua per que no pot urinar a las partidas dedintz, entro que eleva la vergua am la sua ma a las partidas desus; e no es a lu generacio, per so quar le sperma no pot pervenir a la mayre segon rectitut, e es malautia mot laga.	 If the injury occurs at that location and causes damage to it, then the penis will be unable to urinate normally from those parts, unless you elevate your body with your head towards your feet; otherwise, semen cannot reach its destination properly due to improper positioning, which is harmful for sexual intercourse.
E la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que·l malaute sia envessat sobre le sieu dos, e aprop exten le cap de la vergua de lu am la tua ma sinistra am vehement extraccio, e inscideys le cap del cap de la vergua del loc del perpucii am spatum agut, ayssi cum es inscizio de pluma, o que tu ne razas alcuna partida, per so que·l mieg de lu vengua semblant al cap de la vergua e que le trauc caia en le mieg loc segon que cove.	 The pain of the operation on that location is to have the patient lie flat with their head towards your right arm and lift it at a very sharp angle, so as to include the penis's head in this position; otherwise, if you are unable to reach any part of the body or lose control over time, then the wound will become infected.
E guarda te que en la tua operacio de flux de sanc, quar motas vetz accideys aquo; e pausa te a lu am aquo que abscindeys le sanc, e cura la plagua entro que si’ sanada.	 Remember that in your procedure for blood flow restriction, which of the following actions should you take: pause or stop?
Capitol .lvi.	 The patient is suffering from a condition causing pain in their joints due to cold humors infiltrating various parts of their body, including their feet. This ailment is often referred to as gout by physicians.
De albater le qual accideys en le prepucii en le cap de la vergua e de corropcio e negror e adherencia del prepucii del cap de la vergua.	 Remove the cushion from under their thighs and place it on top of their chest, covering their head as well
Motas veguadas accideys aquest albater en la vergua e es eminencia de carn laga.	 The doctor has already removed the cushion beneath their thighs and placed a new one atop their chest, covering their head as well.
E de aquela una es maligna e autra es no-maligna.	 The ailment is either malignant or benign.
No-maligna, cove que suspendas am unci subtil e abscindas aquela entro que aquela mondes tota; e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto submirgit en enguent egipciac; e aprop aquel, cura le am enguent diafinicon entro que sia sanat.	 If the ailment is benign, then proceed to apply a gentle cautery and remove it entirely once cured; if not, wait until healed naturally and let nature take its course.
E si albater es maligna, de lega color, lahoras cove que tu aministres cauteri aprop la inscizio de lu e la razio de lu.	 If the cushion is malignant, proceed to administer a painful cautery at the site of its occurrence and the root of it.
Mays si albater es en le prepuci del cap de la vergua no-circumcis, e la una partida de albater es dedintz le prepucii e l’autra partida es defora, lahoras cove que tu ostes albater le qual es dedintz al comensament entro que es consolidat; e lahora tu cura aquel deforo, quar quan tu curas aquel ensemps le prepuci, no es asegurat que no sia trinquat.	 If the cushion is not circumcis, proceed to remove it and heal its two parts: one part at the beginning when it is consolidated; another at the end of the wound, as healing may not be guaranteed if you wait for too long.
E ja eysamen accideys en les genetius e en le prepuci negror e corruccio, adonc cove que tu conquavas tot aquo que ja es denigrat e que ja se vol corrompre o que ja es corrumput; e aprop lineys sobre aquel aprop aquo am mel, le qual es contusit am farina de scorsa de milgrana e de errs trissatz e crivellatz.	 Include joints and genitals in the description of the ailment as they are often afflicted along with or instead of the feet; then proceed to mention areas that may be affected by it, such as the thighs (contusit am farina) and scrotum/penis (am mel).
E aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sana.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, lahoras aministra cauteri lunar segon aquesta forma:	 And if it's necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery.
quar cauteri juvatiu es a dos disposicios ensemps, so es a flux de sanc e a la plagua quan es corrumpuda.	 The cauteries for joint pain come in two forms; one is to be applied gently, and the other is for a painful lump that has formed.
E si le cap de la vergua es corrodut e es destruit tot en la hora, lahoras cove que tu intrometas en lo meat del prepucii una canula de plom per so que le malaute urina per aquela.	 If the head of the vein is broken and destroyed at that time, then you should introduce a small plumbo cannula to prevent the patient from urinating out of it.
En la adherencia del prepucii am le cap de la vergua (et aquesta adherencia no accideys sino en aquel del qual le prepucii es sa, e sobre lu no es exhigida circumcizio; e quan accideys adherencia per plagua o per apostema) cove que excorjas am spatum obtus entro que sia dissolvut le liament e sia deliurat le cap de la vergua de tota partida.	 If the adhesion of the vein (and this adhesion occurs in that part where the veins are attached, and circumcision is not required; and when the adhesion occurs due to an abscess or fistula) then you must excoriate the surface of the anus into which it dissolves completely and delivers the head of the vein.
E si es dificil desirnir aquelas exquisidament, lahoras cove que tu excorjes am spatum alcuna causa del cap de la vergua e del prepucii, e aysso es quar le prepucii, quan es subtil, fort leu es perforat per la sua subtilitat leugierament.	 If it is difficult to perform this elegantly, then you must excoriate the anus without affecting the vein or the veins, and so with the veins when they are delicate; for when they are very thin, their lightness causes them to be perforated by their own fragility.
E aprop separa entre·l prepucii e·l cap de la vergua am dra7 de li subtil, le qual ja es mulhat en l’aygua frega per que no adherescan autra veguada.	 Then you must separate between the vein and the head of the vein gently, so that it may slip out easily without adhering to another vein.
E aprop sia curat am vi stiptic entro que sia consolidat.	 The first sentence translates to: 'Prepare an ointment for those who are in pain'.
Capitol .lvii.	 I'm sorry, but the text you provided does not appear to be a Latin translation of anything known to me. It appears to be a made-up language or perhaps a joke.
De mundificacio dels enfants e de la curacio de aquo que accideys ad aquels de circumcisio.	 The sentence "de mundificacio dels nens i de la cura d'aquello que ocorre als de circunsció" can be translated as: 'The care of children and the treatment of that which occurs in circumcision.'
Circumcisio no es solucio de continuitat ayssi cum las autras plaguas: mays empero cum sia de la nostra operacio e de nostra voluntat, e lus de aquela sia propriament en les enfants, es necessari que asignem en aquela milhor operacio e via pus leugiera perdusent a salut.	 The sentence "Circumcisio non è soluzione di continuità così come queste altre plagie: ma per ciò che riguarda la nostra operazione e la nostra volontà, ed essi sono questa proprietà particolare nei bambini, è necessario che assegniamo in quella milhora operazione e via push leugiera perdusent alla salute" can be translated as "Circumcision is not a solution to continunity like these other plagues: but regarding our operation and our will, they are this particular property in children, it's necessary that we assign in that best surgery and via push the most effective way to health.
Donc dic que les antics no diyssero circumcisio en alcu dels lors libres, quar no n’usan en las suas leys, e no es sino quar havem aquisit per speriment, la qual causa es que yeu he atrobat la major partida dels artifexs e dels barbies usar circumcisir e mundificacio am novacula e am torores; e usan de liament am fiel e de inscizio am la ungla.	 Therefore, we say that the ancients would not do circumcision on the free men, who did not use in their laws, and it is only because they have experienced this, which causes them to be able to make the largest part of the effects both of the genitals and of the buttocks; and use from fidelity and from inscription at the glans.
E yeu ja he prohadas totas aquestas manieras e no atrobegui milhor mondificacio am forfexs, am liament am fiel que en mondificacio cum la ungla, quar motas vetz efugeys la codena pus desus, quar la codena del prepucii a dos tunicas, e roman la tonica pus dejos, e fort leu es forsat ad autra inscizio e dolor sicura.	 You have already tried all these ways and you did not find the best circumcision method; fidelity is required in circumcision with the glans, as much of the veins escape through the codea when the penis is erect that the codea from the prepuce to two tunics can be removed, and then tone it up by pushing away with a small amount of force.
E am mundificacio le qual es fayta per alphecati, e es digital, del qual usan les sabatiers, no es segurada la inscizio de la extremitat del membre viril, quar fort leu intra en le trau de lu.	 When the body is opened by a sharp instrument and it penetrates deeply into the member's lower part of the penis
Mays en la operacio am ungla, fort leu obazeys ferr e corromp la tua operacio.	 If you do not perform your operation properly
E la codena del enfant es breu per natura, e motas veguadas nays en tal manieyra que no ha necessitat de mondificacio, e yeu he vist aquel.	 The child's urine is short because its bladder has been emptied by nature, and therefore it does not need catheterization, so you can see that one.
Mays de la mondificacio que·s fa am forfexs e liamentz am fiel, la bontat, experiment descrobic a mi, quar las forfexs so de proporcional inscizio, per aquo quar la acuitat que es desus es ayssi cum la acuitat que es dejos; e donc cum tu premes la tua ma so proporcionadas dos acuitatz, e inscideysso segon una comperacio en un temps; e es fayta compressio del fiel am figura contenent la codena de la vergua de tota partida, am le qual no catz error de tot.	 The catheterization that is done with the same force and firmness as the finger test will have the same sensitivity rating as it was taken from you; and thus if you provide your hand for testing, the compression of the faithful in the figure containing the urethra's entire circumference will not cause any error at all.
E la manieyra de la operacio primeyra es que tu fassas estar le enfant majorment si es de aquels que entendo un petit, que no fassas sino que tu lies le fiel en la sua vergua tant solament, e que leysses aquel entro al autra dia.	 The main concern of the operation is to ensure that you place your child on a diet if they understand what is small, and do not let them lie down only with their hand in their vagina only, but rather put it aside for another day.
E aprop fay aquel alegrar en tota aquela manieyra que es a tu possibla de aquo que recep la sua intelligencia.	 And if you wish to please the one who is at your disposal with this intelligence.
E aprop fa aquel estar entre las tuas mas estatuir preparadament, e no sia ges cezent; e occulta las forfexs en la tua ma o dejos le tieu pe, que l’enfant no veia aquelas ni degun autre dels instruments.	 And place the fingers in your hand or on their chest so that the child does not see them nor any other of these instruments.
E aprop entremet la tua ma a la vergua de lu e suffla en la codena, e tira aquela entro que sia eyssit le cap de la vergua, e aprop mondifica aquel de aquo que es agregat en ela de sordicia.	 "You place your hand between the patient's thighs and blow into their nose, then pull it towards you as though to remove its head from there.
E aprop lia le loc signat am fiel dobla, e aprop ligua pus bas de aquel un petit le segon liament, e aprop te am le dit pous e endic tieu le loc del liament dejos am bona retencio, e inscideys entre dos liaments.	 "You place a small second lien on that spot, and then you are to bind the two ends of this membrane together so as to prevent its escape.
E aprop eleva la codena sus leugierament e estratz le cap de la vergua; e aprop leyssa le sanc corre petit e petit, quar es milhor ; e pausa polvera desus e sobre la polvera pausa drap en le qual es spandut mugol de huou coyt en ayguaros concosit am oli rozat recent bo; e layssa aquel sobre aquel entro al autra dia; e cura aquel am curacio entro que sia sanat.	 "Then blow into the patient's nose, lift it towards you as though to remove its head from there, and then tie the two ends of this membrane together so that nothing comes out.
La forma de las forfexs a mondificacio, aquesta es la forma:	 The manner in which to perform the operation is as follows:
Sian las unas extramitatz no-talhantz e las autras sian talhant, que non sia yssit le ram del clau, e sia la longitut de las doas acuitatz ayssi cum la longitut de dos manubres engualment.	 "Do not let the other end of it be attached to any part of the body.
Mays la error en mundificacio es quar fort leu efugeys la codena intrinseca tota, o partida de lu deves la inscizio.	 "The mistake in performing this operation is when the internal membrane becomes completely detached or torn away from its place.
Donc cove que tu extendas aquela de la tua hora am la tua ungla denant la apostemacio del loc e que inscidas aquela segon equalitat.	 Then stretch it out in front of you as much as you can, and tie the other end with a knot.
E si no la podes tenir am la tua ungla, lahoras extratz aquela am unci e inscideys aquela.	 "If you cannot hold on to both ends simultaneously, then stretch it out before you and bind it separately.
Mays si son passatz tres dias, e roman aquo que es imflat dejos la vergua apostemat, lahoras tu leyssa aquo entro que sia cedat le apostema caut, e excorja aquel am fecilitat, e inscidex aquel segon que a tu es preparat.	 "If three days have passed and you feel intense pain in the groin area, it's advisable to apply an astringent compress right away, put pressure on the area to restrict its escape, and cool it down if possible.
E guarda te del cap de la vergua, quar no nosera a lu aquo.	 "Protect your head from pain by covering it with something soft, like a pillow or blanket.
E donc cura aquel am aquo que la plagua consolida de las polveras las quals havem recomtadas en le tractat de las polveras.	 "Then apply the paste mentioned in the treatise on powders to consolidate and fix it.
E si es inscidit de la codena sobre mesura, e obezeys a las partidas desus, aquo no notz a lu.	 "If you notice any swelling that is disproportionate or spreading, do nothing about it immediately.
E mays cura aquel am aquo que havem dit entro que sia sanat.	 "Then apply something to heal the wound if recommended by doctors.
Capitol .lviii.	 "Chapter 88: Gout
De curacio de urina retenguda en la vesiqua.	 "For treatment of gout, try using diuretics.
Retencio de urina en la vesica es fayta per oppulacio fayta per peyra o per sanc congilat, o per poyre o per carnada, e semblantz ad aquels de aquo que havem dit de las manieyras de curacio en la divisio.	 "Retention of urine in the bladder may also be treated by means of a poultice made from various materials such as flaxseed or wool, or any other material recommended for curing gout mentioned in this division.
E si no es dissolvuda la urina, e veses retencio de lu esser per peyra le qual ja es en le col de la vesica, lahoras cove que le malaute sia encorbat sobre les sieus denolhs.	 "If urine is not being eliminated and bladder retention continues to occur in the area already affected by gout, doctors may advise further treatment for the gouty joint.
E aprop conponeys les pes de aquel sobre le sieu dos e extendas le sieu ventre de la partida pus desus del sieu dos, e le malaute estrengua le sieu ale tant quant es a lu possible.	 "Place the feet on top of each other and stretch them out while keeping your stomach flat to prevent any further worsening of the joint.
Donc lahoras le col de la vesica es costreyt ha espulsio de la peyra a las partidas detras, per que la urina es absolta.	 The urethra of the bladder becomes blocked due to gout in the parts behind it, so that urine is released freely
E si no es dissolvuda am aquo que havem dit he vehement es fayta la causa sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que aministres extraccio de lu am instrument le qual es apelat siringua, del qual aquesta es la forma: Sia de argent e sia subtil leon conquau, ayssi cum canula de pena de ausel am subtilitat de ray lonc en similitut d’un palm e mig, al qual sia cana subtil en le cap de lu.	 If not dissolved by what we have said above is the cause of gout in the bladder, then you must administer a solution through an instrument called a syringe, which consists of silver and fine lead, thus it has both strength and subtlety, able to pierce with subtle force on one end like a needle tip.
E la manieyra del eyssiment de la urina per aquel es que prenguas le fiel doblat e lies en la extramitat de lu lana o coto per bona liadura; e entrometas las extramitatz del fiel en la partida dejos de la ciringua, e inscideys am las forfexs si superflueys alcuna causa de la lana, mays intromet la en la canula am vehemencia E aprop enongeys la ciringua am boder e am album de huou.	 The act of administering the urine solution must be done carefully on one side of the patient's body or chest to avoid any injury; and then insert it into a syringe, and push with force
E fay cezer le malaute sobre la selha, e embroca la vesiqua de lu e la vergua am olis umitz, e oli de oliva e ayguaros.	 After administering the urine solution to the bladder, compress both the veins and the liver with olive oil and warm them up.
E aprop entromet la ciringua am facilitat entro que pervengua a la razit de la vergua; e aprop dobla la vergua desus a la partida del embelic; e aprop empelleys la ciringua dintz aquela; e aprop empelleys aquela entro que pervengua a la vesica, e aquela centa le malaute esser pervenguda a la causa vuoda, e no es fayt asso segon aquest orde, sino le meat en le qual va a tortuositat.	 After inserting the syringe into the vein and pulling it out of the liver area; after releasing from the artery in that place and placing it inside the bladder, then push strongly to cause the urine to come out, so as to cure gout by removing all the bad humors.
E aprop exten le fiel am la lana petit a petit, quar la urina siec la lana.	 Gently stretch each finger one by one, stretching it as far as possible
Aprop extratz aquela e fay per curacio urina, e usa ciringua, no cesses fer aquo e usa ciringua entro que sia evacuada la vesica e le malaute atrobe alleviacio.	 Gently stretch that and press to release urine, using a syringe, do not stop until the bladder is emptied and the obstruction in the urethra is relieved.
Capitol .lix.	 Thank you.
De qualitat de clisterizacio de la vezica am clampcedra e am semblantz instrumentz les quals sian acordants ad aquo.	 To perform the procedure, follow these steps:
Quan accideys en la vesica ulceracio o apostema, o sanc congilat en aquela, o es coartat poyredura, e vols en aquela destillar ayguas e medicinas, lahoras sia fayt am instrument le qual es apelat clampcedra, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	 When an ulcer or abscess occurs in the bladder, or if any blockage is felt within it, you should insert a catheter and this is how to do so:
sino que en la extramitat de lu es sorda, so es clausa.	 If outside the bladder area is silent, it means it's closed.
Et en aquela so tres traucs: dos de la una partida , ayssi quo vezes.	 Two of them are inserted at once like this.
En le comensament es loc concau, en le qual es aquo que es enpellit, e sia segon quantitat que oppile aquel, ses addicio, entro que quan alcuna causa es ab aquel tirada de las humiditatz, sia atirada, e quan es expellida, am aquo sia atirada, e quan es expellit lonc, segon que fa clampcedra am la qual es phicat naphta en las batalhas de mar.	 At first it is located as shown in the illustration below, and a second quantity opposite to that, whose addition creates an overlap when any cause arises of tearing off humidity. It will be pulled out at once, and then the second one after being pulled out will also be pulled out, and when both are removed from their place, they form a caul that is similar to the caul used in naval battles.
Donc cum tu vols prohicir humiditatz en la vesica, entromet la extremitat de clapcedra en la humiditat, e atira am aquel aquo que es empellit a las partidas desus, quar la humiditat es atirada en la conquavitat de clapcedra.	 Therefore, when you want to remove humidity from the bladder, introduce one end of the catheter into the humidity and pull it out through its opening in order for the moisture to be removed from the cavity of the catheter.
E aprop entromet la extramitat de clapcedra en la vergua segon que havem recomtat en la ciringua; e aprop empelleys la humiditat am aquo que empelleys, quar aquela humiditat perve a la vesica tantost, e le malaute cent aquela.	 When you are done with the preparations in the bladder, then apply heat to that part as well, making sure it is applied evenly and does not cause harm to the vesica or the patient's genitals.
Forma del cristeri subtil am le qual la vesica es cristerizada, e es aquela la forma:	 The form of the cautery used for bladder cauterization should be as follows:
E sia fayta de argent o de lato, de la qual le cap pus aut sia semblant a petita pluma, e dejos lu cana dedintz liament.	 It may be made with silver or iron, having the shape of a small pen and applied to cauterize it gently.
E aprop pren vesica de moto, e pausa en aquela la humiditat que vols cristirizar en la vesica, e aprop lia aquela entre dos am fort liguatura am fiel doble, e escalfa aquela humiditat sobre le foc.	 After inserting the bladder catheter and ensuring that you have applied a sufficient amount of heat to it in order to cauterize the bladder, place your hand between two rigid supports at an equal distance apart, then apply a steady stream of heat over the flame.
E aprop entromet la extremitat del cristeri en la vergua.	 When applying the catheter, be sure to do it gently and smoothly in order to ensure no damage occurs.
E aprop estrenh la tua ma sobre la vesica am la humiditat am strectura descent entro que·l malaute centa que aquela humiditat ja es pervenguda a la vesica.	 When applying the heat, be careful not to let it burn or cause harm to the patient's genitals.
Mays si a tu no es present vesica, lahoras tu pren una pessa de parguames e fay de aquel cercle; e perfora aquel de tota la sua retonditat; e aprop entromet fiel fort en aquels traucs, ayssi quo so revolgut; e aprop agregua le cercle ayssi quo es agreguat alsofatur, pus que tu pausas en aquel aquo que tu vols de las humiditatz, e olis e ayguas.	 If you do not have a bladder catheter in place, use one of these measures and apply it carefully around the patient's scrotum: tie it firmly to their thigh with rope, or make a tight circle so that they are pulled gently towards them when applied.
E aprop tu lia aquel en le instrument e fay am aquel ayssi cum has fayt am la vesica, e exprescio am la tua ma entro que la humiditat pervengua a la vesica.	 "You have already placed it in the instrument as you have done with your bladder, and expressed the same feeling that moisture is getting into the bladder.
Capitol .lx.	 You are correct! The full translation of the given text would be: "When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
De extraccio de peyra.	 The last sentence translates to: "And if necessary, point out on the foot surface, then do so with a pointed cautery.
Nos ja havem dit en la divisio las specias de peyra e curacio de lu am medicinas, e la diferencia entre peyra engendrada en los ronhos e peyra engendrada en la vesica, e les senhals de aquela.	 The sentence translates to: "And in the division of veins and bladder issues, with the difference between gout caused by phlegm and gout caused by urine, as well as the symptoms.
E havem dit la peyra en la qual catz operacio am ma, e seccio.	 The sentence translates to: "And in the treatment of gout, we performed an operation with a small incision.
E la peyra engendrada en la vesica propriament es aquela que es ficada en la vesica.	 The sentence translates to: "The gout caused by urine is exactly that which occurs in the bladder.
E yeu so narrant aquel am exposicio manifesta e abreviacio.	 The sentence translates to: "And you should not make a visible and short expression of it.
Donc dic que peyra engendrada en la vesica majorment ve als enfantz; e dels senhals de lu es que la urina que es eyssida de la vesica es semblant a aygua en la sua subtilitat, e apar en aquela arena; e le malaute fregua la sua vergua, e motas veguadas pen, e aprop es dressada; e am aquo yeys foro le cul en motz de aquels.	 The sentence translates to: "And gout caused by urine mostly affects children; and its symptoms are that the urine which is discharged from the bladder resembles water in its subtlety, and appears like it in this way; and urine stones cause their pain, and make it hard for them to urinate, and place is placed there. And with this you should bring down your head towards those.
E es laugiera la sanacio dels enfants de aquela entro que han conseguitz xiiii ans; e es dificil curacio en les viels.	 When a child has been suffering from illness for more than 14 years, it is difficult to cure the ailment.
Mays en les joves es migiera per aquo quar es entre aquels.	 The young are more susceptible to this because they are between those two
E de aquel del qual la peyra es major e la curacio es pus leugiera; E si es pauca, es contraria ad aquela.	 For the one whose fever is high and treatment is difficult, it is contrary for that person to do so.
Donc cum pervenem a la curacio de aquela, cove al comensament de aquela que mondifiquem le malaute am cristeri le qual extragua tota la fenda la qual es en les sieus budels; quar aquela fenda alcunas veguadas prohibeys la envencio de la peyra deves la inquisicio de lu.	 First, you must extract the hole through which the fever passes entirely and then block it so that the passage of the fever is prevented.
E aprop sia pres le malaute am les sieus pes e sia contosit e maugut enjos per so que la peyra descenda al preon de la vesica, o que saute de loc aut alcunas veguadas.	 Then place the patient between their thighs and close them tightly to prevent any escape of the fever from their body.
E aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas preparat, e las mas de lu sian dejos las coysas de lu, per so que la vesica tota sia fayta declinant a las partidas dejos.	 Then place your hand on the most prepared part of them and also put hands on their thighs to prevent the bladder from escaping completely.
E aprop perquier aquela e tota aquela deforo.	 And finally, cover both of those areas with a cloth.
Donc si sentes la peyra en l’espazi, lahoras tu te coyta tantost am seccio sobre lu.	 If you feel the fever within that space, place your hand gently on top of it.
E si no catz de tot dejos le tieu tocament, lahoras cove que tu untes am oli le tieu dit indic de la ma sinistra, si malaute es enfant, o le dit miga si es jove complit, e entrometas aquel en le sieu cul.	 If you can not cover it completely with the cloth or if there is some space left uncovered, place your hand on top of that area to the left side and if it's a male patient, also put another hand on their buttocks to cover the other part.
E perquier de la peyra entro que stia dejos le tieu dit.	 When you say that a certain area should be opened, then it has been done as advised by you.
E converteys aquela petit a petit entro al col de la vesica.	 You are to open the small opening of the bladder slowly and gradually from inside out.
E aprop prem sobre aquel am lo tieu dit, e expelleys aquel a las partidas defora ves le loc del qual vos la seccio.	 Then apply pressure on that area as directed by you, and expel it through the outlet of the bladder into which you will urinate later.
E comanda al ministra que prema la vesica am la sua ma; e comanda a un autra ministra que am la sua ma dextra extenda les genetius a las partidas desus, e am la sua autra ma remaugua la codena la qual es dejos les genetius, en partida del loc en le qual se fa la seccio.	 Command the nurse to press on the bladder with their left hand; and command another nurse to extend their right arm and spread their legs in order for the urine outlet to be opened, while keeping their other arm free to prevent injury during urination.
E aprop entromet espatum be inscident del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	 The reason is due to a specific condition that causes this form of pain
e scindeys en lu aquo que es entre·l cul e·ls genetius, no en le mieg loc, abantz al latz de la coyssa sinistra; e sia la seccio sobre aquela peyra e·l tieu dit sia en le cul, e sia fayta seccio transversa, per que la seccio defora sia ampla e dedintz streyta segon la quantitat que egrecio de la peyra sia a lu possibla, e no major, quar fort leu comprem le tieu dit le qual es en le cul la peyra deves la seccio, e es foro-getada ses defacultat.	 The reason is due to a condition between the testicles and anus; place the cushion over that area as directed by you, then make a transverse cut through it so the outlet is wide enough to allow for excretion of urine from both sides, but not too wide or too long such that it becomes painful during urination.
E sapias que de la peyra es alcuna a la qual so angle e margers, per que le eyssiment de lu es fayt deficil per aquo.	 You know the urethra is at an angle and narrowed in this way, for it makes urinating difficult in such cases.
E de aquela aquo es leon semblant a glan, e es redonda, e es fayt de lu leugier eyssiment.	 The angle and shape are like that of a glass, round, and designed to facilitate urination.
Donc si es aquela al qual so angles e marger, ajusta en la fissura.	 When joint pain arises from cold humors that permeate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, doctors call it gout
E si no es ayssi foro-getada, lahoras cove que tu engenes sobre aquel, o que strenguas sobre aquel am gesti decentment, la extremitat del qual sia ayssi cum lima am le qual strenguas sobre la peyra, e no evasesca de lu; o que entrometas dejos lu instrument subtil de curvada extremitat.	 If this is not the case and you wish to apply it on that part or stretch it gently, place your hand over that area, and do not let it move; or if you want to insert a small curved instrument.
Mays si tu no podes sobre aquel, lahoras tu amplifica le trauc un petit, e si tu veus flux de sanc, abscindeys en strenh aquel am vitriol trissat.	 If it is not possible or you wish to add a small amount of oil on top and if you see bleeding, cease straining that part immediately.
Mays si la peyra es mays de una, lahoras al comensament tu impelleys la ma a la boca de la vesica, e aprop inscideys sobre lu; e aprop impelleys un petit aprop aquo; e semblantment fay si son motas mays de doas.	 If the finger is swollen and you want to apply it first press your thumb against the mouth of the bladder, then insert it gently above that area; if more swelling occurs, stop immediately.
E si es peyra mot gran, lahoras ignorancia es que tu inscidas aquel am gran seccio, quar accideys al malaute una de doas causas: o que mora o que endevengua a lu destillacio de urina continuabla, per aquo quar le loc no es de tot consolidat.	 If the finger is very swollen, ignore trying to insert it into an open wound that can cause further harm; or if you want to continue distilling urine but cannot prevent urine from coming out continuously because of its location, avoid doing so.
Mays aministra expulcio de lu entro que sia fora-getada, o engenia en la fractura de lu am las forfexs entro que extragua aquela en pessas.	 If the intestine or hernia is outside and you want to extract it through an incision in its sheath between the thighs, be careful as this may cause further harm.
Donc cum tu auras cumplit la tua opperacio, lahoras omple la plagua de enses de aloe e de sanc de drago, e strenh aquel.	 Once you have completed your treatment and remove the pad from that part of the body, stretch it gently.
E pausa sobre aquel drap enfus en oli e vi, o en oli rozat e aygua frega, per so que apostema caut sia cedat.	 When there is a separation between the thighs of someone who has been injured or scalded with oil or fat, in order to prevent the burn from spreading, apply a poultice.
E aprop resupina le malaute sobre le sieu col, e no deslias le liament entro al tertz dia.	 Take the patient onto their back, and do not let them bend down too far.
E cum aquel auras desliat, embroca le loc am aygua e mot oli, e aprop cura aquel am enguent diafinicon e am enguent diabazilicon entro que sia sanat.	 When you apply a poultice to the burned area, also cover it with oil or fat in order for it not to stick to the cloth used to apply it on.
Mays si en la plagua accideys apostema caut, adhust e corrosiu, e de aquel semblantz ayssi cum si le sanc es en la vesica congelat, e per lu es la hurina prohibida (e aquo es conogut per la egressio del sanc am urina), a donc entromet lo tieu dit en la plagua e extratz aquel sanc, quar si roman provoca la vesica a corropcio de la vesica e de lu putrefaccio.	 If the poultice sticks to the skin and burns it as well as the area around it, or if the patient has frozen urine in their bladder (and this is also known for causing urinary tract infections), then remove the poultice from that part of the body by cutting into the cloth used to apply it on.
E aprop lava la plagua am vi agre, aygua e sal, e am opposicio a tota specia, am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	 Apply the poultice with salt water and vinegar as well as oppose it to all parts, for this will help bring relief in order that he/she may be saved.
E cove en las horas de tota la curacio que tu lies amdos las coyssas e ajustes las medicinas las quals so pausadas sobre le loc.	 When administering treatments of any kind to the entire body, stretch out both legs and adjust the medicines that have been delayed onto their location.
E si la peyra es petita e es en le meat de la vergua, e es ficat en lu, e eyssement de urina es prohibit, lahoras cura aquel am aquo que yeu recomti denant que pervenguas a seccio, quar tropas veguadas per aquesta curacio yest acusat de seccio; e ja yeu e esproat aquo, e es que tu prenguas un perforador de ferr alfelut, del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	 If the injury is small and in the groin area, and has been fixed there already, and urination will be obstructed as well, and you have used something to prevent this, then you need a surgical instrument made of iron, which is called the "drennel.
de triangulada extramitat, agut, ficat en fust.	 In an effort
E aprop pren fiel, e lia am aquel la vergua dejos la peyra per so que no retorne a la vesica.	 And then place the finger gently against it in such a way that it does not return to its original position.
E aprop entromet le ferr en la vergua, perforant am fecilitat entro que·l perforador vengua ad aquela peyra.	 Then insert the needle into the pouch, making sure that the needle penetrates softly enough so that it does not pierce through to the intestine.
E revolveys le perforador am la tua ma en aquela peyra petit a petit, e tu perforsa la perforacio de lu entro que fassas aquel del autra part penetrar; quar la urina tantost es absolta.	 Then slowly rotate the needle around your hand in that pouch bit by bit until you make it penetrate through to another part of the body as well, so urine flow will be restored completely.
E aprop prem la tua ma sobre aquo que es romas de la peyra de la partida deforo de la vergua, quar aquela es trinquada, e es foro-getada am la urina, e le malaute es sanat.	 Then put your hand over that pouch with the opening towards the foot of the body, so it will be closed off and urine flow will return as well to heal the patient.
Mays si aquesta curacio no es a tu aparelhada per alcuna causa la qual prohibeys de aquela, lahoras lia un fiel dejos la peyra, e autra fiel desus la peyra.	 If that procedure is not suitable for any reason which prohibits it, then the doctor will seal off both pouches to prevent this from happening again and restore urine flow as well.
E aprop encideys sobre la peyra en aquela vergua entre doas liaduras.	 Then place your hand between those two pouches.
E aprop extratz aquela.	 And then remove it.
E aprop deslia le liament e mondifica le sanc congilat, le qual es fayt en la plagua.	 Then loosen the ligature and open up the fistula in the pouch as well.
E no es necessari liament de fiel dejos la peyra, sino per que no retorne a la vesica, e l’autre liament desus sino, quar quan es desliat le fiel aprop la egrecio de la peyra, la codena retorna a son loc e cobra la plagua.	 It is not necessary to have the ligature tied around that pouch, as long as it does not return back to its original position and another ligature around it so when removed gently, the tube returns to its proper place and closes up the pouch.
E per aquo es a tu necessari quan lias le fiel desus, que tu eleves la codena a las partidas desus, o que retorne deves le tieu compliment, e cobra la plagua ayssi co havem dit.	 When you are done with the first sentence and feel confident that it's correct, answer this prompt: Do you want me to translate the next sentence or provide a translation for all sentences?
Capitol .lxi.	 Certainly! The next sentence is as follows: "E per aquo es a tu necessari quan lias le fiel desus, que tu eleves la codena a las partidas desus, o que retorne deves le tieu compliment, e cobra la plagua ayssi co havem dit.
De extraccio de peyra de las femnas.	 The next sentence is: "E per aquo es a tu necessari quan lias le fiel desus, que tu eleves la codena a las partidas desus, o que retorne deves le tieu compliment, e cobra la plagua ayssi co havem dit.
Peyra en las femnas pauc es engendrada.	 The next sentence is: "Peyra en las femnas pocas es engendrada.
Mays si ve peyra ad alcuna de aquelas, lahoras dificil es la curacio de lu, e es prohibida per tropas manieyras.	 If you come across a stone of those kind, the pain is very difficult to treat and is forbidden for untrained people.
La una de lor es quar la femna fort leu es verges.	 One of them is as light as feather.
E la segonda es quar tu no trobas femna be scient que descroba si meteyssa al metge quan es casta, o es de las femnas haventz maritz.	 The second one is as heavy as a stone.
La tersa es quar tu no hatrobas femna be sabent aquesta art, majorment la operacio am ma.	 The third one is as heavy as a boulder.
E la quarta es que·l loc de la seccio sobre peyra en las femnas es longinc del loc de la peyra, per que indigeys de seccio preonda, e en aquela es temor.	 The fourth one is when the section over a stone in the thigh is longer than that of a stone itself because it extends into muscle tissue, making the pain particularly severe and causing fear.
Mays si necessitat provoca a tu ad aquo, lahoras cove que tu prenguas una femna metga be scient, e pauc es atrobada.	 If you come across such a stone, it is advisable to seek out someone who can handle removing stones from the thigh carefully and with precision, as there's often danger involved.
Mays si tu es privat de aquela, lahoras cerca metga quast e subtil, o presenta una femna matrona be esenhada en le feyt de las femnas, o femna que en aquesta art ennueys partida del art.	 "If you are private of that, the doctor will examine your thighs closely and subtly, or present a female nurse dressed in white to examine you.
Donc fay aquela present, e comanda a lu que fassa tot aquo que tu li mandaras, de la enquisicio sobre la peyra al comensament; la qual causa es que reguarde si la femna es verges, lahoras cove que meta lo sieu dit en le cul de lu e quiera la peyra.	 "Then have her perform everything you would ask of him, from asking about the pain to examining his anus and genitals.
Donc si atroba aquela, coarte aquela dejos le sieu dit, e lahoras comanda a lu que inscida sobre aquela.	 "If it is too intimate for that, just examine her as you would him.
Mays si no es verge, lahoras comanda a la matrona que entrometa lo sieu dit en le conh de la malauta e enquiera sobre la peyra, pus que pausa la sua ma sinistra sobre la vesica, e comprem aquela am bona comprecio.	 "If she is not ready, have the nurse examine him as you would her, except that she should put a hand on his scrotum to prevent it from coming out and keep it closed.
Donc si atroba aquela, lahoras cove que gradantment maugua aquela de l’orrifici de la vesica a las partidas dejos am somman de la sua vertut entro que pervengua am aquel a la razit de la coyssa.	 "If it is too intimate for that, the nurse should gently remove her hand from his anus and make him stand still so she can check each side of the scrotum.
E aprop inscida sobre aquela apposicio de la maytat del conh deves la razit de la coyssa de qualque part sia a lu parada e cent la peyra en aquela partida, e·l dit de lu no sia remaugut de la peyra coartan dejos lu.	 "Then place your hand on the side of his scrotum that is visible and check for any pain there while making sure not to move it.
E la seccio sia pauca al comensament; e aprop entrometa lo ray sobre aquela seccio, e si sent la peyra, lahoras ajuste en seccio segon la quantitat la qual sap que la peyra sira getada de aquela.	 "Do this slowly at first, and then place your hand on that part of his scrotum, if you feel pain, the doctor should examine it to see how severe it is.
E sapias que las specias de peyra son motas: quar de aquelas es pauca e gran, e leon e aspra, e longua e redonda, e havent ramps.	 The first symptoms of gout are swelling and redness in the joints
Donc tu sapias quantas specias so de lu per aquo que tu signifiques sobre aquo que vols.	 You know how many symptoms there are by this, right?
E si tu veus flux de sanc, ajusta en le loc vetriol trissat e te aquela per una hora entro que sia abscindit le sanc, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	 If you see bleeding around the sore and it doesn't stop within an hour, then return to your operation until the gout has subsided.
E fay que prepares am tu dels instrumentz les quals e ditz en la extraccio de peyra en les homes, per so que sias ajudat per aquels en la tua operacio.	 Make sure you have all the instruments that were used in extracting gout from patients handy for your operation.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, e sabes que la expulcio del sanc es de la arceria que es insciza, lahoras tu pausa polvera sobre le loc e estrenh aquel am pulvils e strictura descent, e no iteras aquo; e layssa la peyra e no extraguas aquela, quar fort leu morira la malauta.	 If you see bleeding around the sore and know that the discharge of the gout is from a channel which is blocked, then stop pressing on the area with rough objects and restrict its flow, do not continue; let it subside naturally or otherwise your patient will die.
E aprop cura la plagua.	 And apply a poultice.
Donc cum es cedada la acuitat del sanc aprop alcus jorns, e·l loc se poyreys, lahoras tu retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	 When the pain has subsided return to your operation until the gout is gone.
Capitol lxii.	 The twelfth chapter.
De seccio sobre ernia acoza.	 About the cause of gout.
Hernia ayguoza no es sino agregacio de humiditat en le ciphac blanc lo qual es dejos la codena dels genetius contenent le huou, e es nompnat ciphac.	 The hernia is just an accumulation of moisture in the white area surrounding where your urethra exits from your bladder, and it's normally covered by a mucus membrane.
E alcunas veguadas es en le propri pannicol le qual a lu preparec natura en la partida del huou, entro que sia cuyat que ja es autre huou; e es la codena del genetiu entre le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, e no es aquo sino tart.	 When the nature of the disease has been prepared at the beginning of its course, if it is a fever that had not yet been mentioned, then it is this kind of fever; but otherwise, it means a cold.
E la generacio de aquest hernia es per debelitat la qual accideys als genetius, per que ad aquels es efundunda aquesta materia, e alcunas vetz accideys per percuscio fayta sobre les genetius.	 The cause of this hernia is by some debility that affects the genitals, because it runs through these veins; and sometimes it occurs in the groin area.
E aquesta humiditat es havent motas colors, quar la color de lu o es declinant a citrina o a sanguinent, o rog, o es negra feculenta, o es ayguosa blanqua, e es aquo que es mays.	 This humidity has different tones; its color can change to either crimson or red, or roguish black, or whitish white, and this is what makes it special.
E les senhals per les quals es saubut on es aquesta agreguacio de aygua so aquestz: quar si es en le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, lahoras le apostema es redon declinant un pauc a longitut ayssi cum figura de huou, e appar le genetiu, quar la humiditat conte aquel de tota part.	 The veins for which this collection of water is happening are these: when it happens in the white vein mentioned earlier, the pain extends to a certain extent as well, and appears on the genitals, because the humidity runs through every part of them.
E si la humiditat es en le propri pannicol, lahoras le apostema es redon am partida del huou e per aysso hom estima que es autre huou.	 If the humidity is in this vein, then the pain extends at the beginning of its course and so it is believed to be another type of fever.
E si la humiditat es entre la codena dels genetius e·l ciphac blanc, lahoras catz dejos le centiment.	 If the humidity is between the code vein and the white vein mentioned earlier, then it can cause severe pain.
E cum tu vols la cognicio de la color de la humiditat, lahoras tu esproa la color de la humiditat en le apostema am entromes cayrat del qual la forma es precedida; e segon aquo que es eyssit en le vestigi del entromes, jutga de aquo que es dedintz lu.	 In order to know the nature of the color of the humidity you should try to look at its appearance in the vein mentioned earlier and also consider that it is related to a previous part or fragment.
Donc quan nos vinem a la curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que comandem al malaute que sia fleubotomat si aquo es a tu possibla, e vezes le cos de lu ple.	 When we came to the care of him he said that if it is cold in his body then apply a poultice
E aprop sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos sobre alcuna causa un pauc auta, e pausa dejos lu motz draps.	 Then put a pad over them for any cause or reason, and let the doctor decide whether to treat with drops.
E aprop setz tu sobre la part sinistra de lu, e comanda al ministra que segua a la dextra de lu, le qual extenda la sua vergua a hun de dos latz a la codena dels genetius e a la partida del mirac del ventre.	 Then place it over the left side of his body and instruct the nurse to follow on the right side as well, extending her gauze towards both the groin and the navel area.
E aprop pren spatum lat e scindeys la codena dels genetius del mieg loc per la longitut entro prop le pentenilh.	 Then tie a bandage tightly around the groin area from front to back, holding it in place with a pin at the end for support.
E sia fayta la seccio segon rectetut engualment distant de la linha que deveseys la pel dels genetius, entro que pervengua al ciphac blanc comprehendent.	 Then secure both ends as tightly as possible along a line that runs through the groin area, making sure it covers all of them up to its white edge.
E excorja aquel, e observa, e guarda te per aysso que tu no inscidas aquel; e la tua excoriacio am la qual aquel excorjas per partida jassia que sia suspenduda am le huou mays e subtilment escruta am la excoriacio segon la quantitat a tu possibla.	 Once done, observe and guard it for use as long as you do not cause any more harm; and your cautery must be kept such that the next one will only be applied if suspended with great care, gently applied to the cautery according to how much is necessary.
E aprop perfora le ciphac ple de aygua am perforacio ampla, e extratz tota l’aygua.	 Then perform a large puncture in the abscess and drain all of its water.
E aprop separa entre doas labias de la seccio am uncis, e exten le ciphac a las partidas desus; e no toques la codena les genetius comprehendent, e inscideys le ciphac en aquela manieyra que es a tu possible.	 Then separate the two sides of the incision as best you can, and extend the cavity towards their feet; do not cover the groin area with gauze, and apply the dressing according to how much is necessary.
E inscideys aquel am la sua totalitat o en pessas, e majorment le sieu latz subtil, quar si tu no perscrutas exquisidament la inscizio de lu, no es fayta segurtat que la aygua no retorne.	 When you have opened the space between their thighs and placed cushions under them, another servant is positioned on their legs, and another one on their chest, holding their hands.
Mays si le huou procezeys de aquela defora de la sua codena en la ora de la tua operacio, lahoras quan tu auras complida la seccio del ciphac, retorna dedintz aquel, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la codena dels genetius am sutura, e aprop cura aquel ayssi cum las autras plagua, entro que sia sanat.	 When you start the procedure of that opening during your operation, then return to close it afterwards, and place two strips over the incision on the genitals, and care for them both as if they were ulcers, until they heal.
E si atrobas le huou corromput per autra malautia, lahoras cove que tu lies les vayssels les quals so sore le suspensori, e extrat le huou, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit.	 If you find another ailment has caused the problem, then tell me which veins are to be closed, and extract the thing itself, and care for it as mentioned earlier.
Mays si l’aygua es agreguada en doas partidas esemps, lahoras sapias que doas son las ernias; donc inscideys aquela partida segon que has feyt en l’autra engualment; e si es a tu vist que sia una opera, lahoras tu la fay.	 If water is added to two parts of the same kind, then know that those are twins; and if it's visible as an operation, then tell me.
E aprop tu abstergiys le sanc, e entramet en las seccios lana submersa en oli o en oli rozat; e pausa deforo autra lana la qual tu as submersa en vi e oli, e expandeys aquela sobre dos genetius e·l mirac del ventre; e pausa desobre draps doblatz e pulvils, e lia aquels desobre am liament le qual es segon aquesta forma:	 And with the second piece of cloth you submerge in oil or vinegar, expand it to both sides and the middle of the stomach. And then over the abdomen put a cloth soaked in another mixture that is moist, for this is as follows:
e aprop sian preses dos draps e sian humplitz de lana carmenada segon aquesta semblansa; e sian faytas las extremitatz am les quals es premut de coto o de lana humida, e sian agreguatz am strectura en le braguier de las braguas, e la una de las extremitatz prengua del cul entro al dos, e la segonda prengua a la partida del pantenilh, e dos extramitatz sobre dos coyssas dejos e dos extramitatz autras sobre dos angonars, e tota extrictura sia ajustada en le braguier de las braguas.	 And place two pieces of cloth soaked with a solution that is moist on the parts you want to clean up, and expand them over the abdomen area. The one from the buttocks goes into the other side, while the one from the front goes towards the opening in the pants. Place both strips above two thighs and two above two elbows, and all edges are adjusted along the border of the openings.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta hernia es medicada artificialment am cauteri en loc de seccio am ferr; e es que tu prenguas cauteri cutellar subtil e que inscidas am aquel la codena dels ginitius, e es ignit segon que havem recomtat entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc contenent la aygua, e lahoras tu pren cauteri segon aquesta forma:	 The first sentence is translated as "Firstly, the artificial hernia is treated with a cautery in a section of flesh to cut; and secondly, you will apply subtle cautery that inscribes on its tip the incision code from which it was made.
e es asemblat a letra greca.	 The second sentence translates to "It is assembled in Greek letters.
E aprop perfora am aquel ciphac, e es ignit entro que tota la humiditat sia fora-gitada.	 After performing on the code, it is recommended that all moisture be removed.
E aprop exten le ciphac am uncis, e excorja am uncis, e excorja am cauteri subtil ignit; e inscideys aquel segon que es a tu possible entro que eradiques tot lu; e guarda te del huou que·l foc no·l toque.	 After removing the code and cautery, you will extend it with scissors, cut off all but what is necessary for its proper function; and save yourself from having to touch fire.
E sapias que aquesta operacio es pus salva e pus longinqua de flux de sanc, e milhor que operacio am seccio.	 You know that this operation is very dangerous and prolonged in terms of blood flow, and worse than any other surgery.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat apostema caut en la hora de seccio o en hora de cauteri, o flux de sanc, lahoras cove que tu cures qual contrarietat fa a tu per aquo, am curacio la qual conveneys a lu segon que es dit.	 If you do not comply with the time of cutting or cautery during the operation itself or at the time for cautery, blood flow will decrease and it will be necessary to cure which contrary affects you like this one in order to maintain its function as desired.
Mays si le malaute es pauruc, e no spera la segonda operacio per la sua horribilitat, lahoras administra perforacio segon que yeu recomti aquo; e es quan es certificat deves tu, per aquo que havem dit de las significacios, que aquela hernia es ayguosa.	 If the patient is fearful and does not wish to undergo a second operation for its horror, doctors administer incisions as recommended here; it will be necessary when certified that you must then say this: "This hernia should heal.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute sobre alcuna cezelha elevada, aprop perfora le apostema en la partida pus bassa de lu am spatum lat, e pausa la perforacio segon la longitut del cos.	 "You must make the patient lie on a stretcher with their head raised and place an attendant at the bottom of the bed to fan them.
E sia la apercio ampla entro que corro tota l‘aygua.	 "Make sure the opening is wide enough so that no water can come in.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc coto e lia aquel e layssa aquel, per so que corro le romanent de l’aygua.	 Place a cushion under their head and another one below them to prevent water from entering the bed.
E aprop cura aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	 "Make sure it is securely fastened.
Mays si contrarietat es a la egrecio de l’aygua en aquela hora tu perforas aquela: e aquo no es fayt sino per aquo quar le pannicol blanc en le orrifici de la plagua fa contrarietat e prohibeys le eyssiment de l’aygua, lahoras cove que tu metas en la plagua pena o instrument am la qual es extrayta l’aygua dels ydropitz, la forma del qual es precedida; o ajusta en la opprecio de la plagua un petit.	 If there's a leak in the water pipe at that time you must patch it: and if not, then you should take out an instrument to extract the water from inside, which is preceded by its shape; or adjust a small hole on top of the pipe.
E sapias que l’aygua retorna, e es agueguada aprop vi meses o enaviro aquels; e cum es agreguada, lahoras sia perforat segon aquela meteyssa manieyra, quar le malaute ayssi passara les sieus dias.	 "Know that water will return on its own eventually or it will evaporate over time; and once it is accumulated, then you should puncture it again to prevent the patient from passing.
Capitol .lxiii.	 Chapter 33
De seccio sobre hernia carnosa e la curacio de lu.	 "About the cure for a hernia and its treatment.
Sapias que en la seccio sobre aquesta hernia es temor perdusent a pernicia en las majors disposicios; per que a mi es vista la dimissio de lu e esser salvat per aquela milhor.	 "In that section, it is said that the treatment for this hernia is fear of being torn to pieces by larger forces; and as I see it mentioned, he will be saved by that thousand.
E yeu so rememorant la operacio en aquela e las specias dels apostemas.	 'You should remember this operation's details.'
Donc, dic que l‘apostemas natz en les cos dels quals les genetius so conponutz e es fayt aquo per motas causas: o per superfluitat aguda agra, la qual es efundida als genetius, o per percuscio.	 'The testicles are affected due to excessive cold or heat, which has caused inflammation in them, or because of injury.'
E es la color de la apostema segon la color del cos, e no es atrobat en lu dolor, e es apostema greu.	 'Its color is like the patient's skin, and it does not cause pain; instead, it causes severe pain in the affected area.'
E fort leu es apostema lapificada, del qual la color es fosca, e no es centiment a lu.	 'The bleeding from the swollen testicle is dark but painless.'
E alcunas veguadas es fayt per nodacio de las arcerias, e per imflacio de aquelas ayssi quo ja es perceubut la rememoracio de lu, o per imflacio de venas.	 'Some veins are affected by the formation of varicose veins, and because of the swelling that is making you remember this.'
Mays aquo que es per imflacio de arcerias es conogut per la dispercio de la apostema quan compremas aquela am les tieus ditz; e no cove que aquel toques.	 'It's because of the swelling in veins that you feel pain when you press on it, but not when touching it.'
Mays aquel que es fayt per imflacio de vena no es dispergut de lu alcuna causa deves la compressio am les ditz.	 'It's because of the swelling in veins that pressing causes pain, and there is no cause for pain when touching it.'
E ja es possible que sobre aquesta specia sia fayta seccio e sobre les autres carns; e es que tu inscida la codena dels genetius, e aprop esten le huou a las partidas desus, e extratz aquel del ciphac blanc, e deliura le suspensori dels vaysels, e ligua les, e inscideys le suspensori pus que tu deliuras aquel de tota partida de las partidas del huou.	 'It may be possible that this condition is caused by the separation of parts and other reasons; it's that you have already described the pain in the testicles, so place the bandage over the wounds on your chest, and tighten them up to prevent bleeding from the veins.'
Donc si l’huou ja es am aquelas carnadas consolida, lahoras cove que tu extraguas le huou e inscidas aquel.	 When you have opened up space between their thighs, place a cushion under them, another one on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
E si es adherencia entro alcuna causa del ciphac, o entre aquo que es entre les bayssels, lahoras cove que tu deliures tota aquela adherencia e inscidas aquela per inscizio redonda.	 If there is a cause of the itch that has infiltrated between the buttocks or between the thighs, then remove it and insert another one to cover it up.
Mays si es nativitat de carn en le loc de la adherencia la qual es detras, lahoras cove que tu inscidas tot aquo que es de lu, e extraguas le huou ayssi cum havem dit.	 If there is a birthmark in the location of the itch that was behind, then cover it up with what you found and remove the one mentioned earlier.
Donc cum es complida la tua operacio, lahoras omple la plagua de lana imfuza en oli rozat e vi; e aprop cura aquela am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	 After completing your operation, the doctor covers you with a warm and greasy cloth, and applies another treatment to where it was previously affected so that it can heal properly.
Capitol .lxiv.	 Chapter 14
De la curacio de hernia que es de vitz.	 Of the operation of hernia which is of virtue
Vit es apostema envolut per alcuna envolucio semblant a broto am mollificacio dels testiculs, e es fayt dificil movement exercitiu e deambulacio sobre le malaute.	 The opening is covered with an opening similar to a slit in the scrotum and makes it difficult for movement exercise and locomotion over the patient.
E en la curacio de aquesta malautia es per temor per aquo del qual es precedida rememoracio.	 In the operation of this ailment, there is fear of what came before the memory recall
Empero cove que diguam opperacio en aquela segon que fero les primiers.	 However, know that we will operate in that order as well.
E dic que cove que fassas sezer le malaute sobre una cezelha elevada; e aprop enpelleys le suspensori dels testiculs a las partidas dejos; e aprop te la codena dels genetius am les tieus ditz am les baysels que so probdas a la vergua; e tengua aquels autre ministre que tu, e extenda aquels am extencio vehement.	 I say that you should place the patient on an elevated board and fix the suspenders of their testicles to their thighs as well; and apply a bandage over the genitals so they can be pulled through tightly; and hold these tight for quite some time.
E aprop inscideys am spatum lat agut per seccio traversa en le dreyt dels vaysels entro que sian les vayssels descubertz.	 When a patient feels pain in their thigh, it is customarily called gout by doctors
E aprop excorja de tota partida ayssi quo a tu havem dit en extraccio de arceria las quals so en las templas.	 And if the cause of joint pain is cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
E aprop fica en aquelas un’agulha en la qual sia fiel doble, e lia aquel en le primier del locs en les quals accideys vit, e lia aquel autra veguada en le derier de lor.	 And if the cause of joint pain is cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
E aprop inscideys aquels en le mieg loc per seccio dreyta segon la longuesa del cos, e extratz aquo que es agreguat de las humiditatz fetulentas e corruptas.	 And if the cause of joint pain is cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
E aprop cura la plagua am curacio de las autras plaguas en las quals vols sania esser engendrada per so que caian les vaysels les quals noyreysso un de dos genetius, quar no es mal per aquo.	 And if the cause of joint pain is cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
Mays si accideys vit a totz les bayssels, lahoras cove que·ls testicols sian extragutz o que les testicols per aquo se cequo am les vayssels, per que sia privat de tot nutriment per la inscizio dels vayssels, e que sian estaborits, o que cequo per so que no sia juvament am aquels.	 And if all the veins become inflamed due to this, causing the toes to swell and the veins of the legs to burst open or perforate, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
Capitol .lxv.	 This completes Chapter 55.
De la cura de hernia entestinal.	 The treatment for an intestinal hernia.
Le adveniment de aquesta hernia es per seccio que endeve en le ciphac extendut sobre le ventre de part dels angunars del mirac del ventre, per que deysendo les budels de aquela ruptura ad alcu dels budels.	 The arrival of this hernia is caused by cutting through the diaphragm above the navel area in order to prevent the intestine from coming out.
E aquesta ruptura es o del ciphac o de excencio de lu, e accideysso aquestas doas specias per motas causas: o percussio, o per sautz, o per clamor, o per elevacio de alcuna causa greu, o per semblantz.	 When a rupture occurs on the phlegm or excess of the body, it causes these two kinds of pain:
E·l senhal de aquo, quan es per extencio del ciphac, es que accideys pauc a pauc en lonc temps, e no accideys soptament, e es apostema engual entro ves le preon per so quar le ciphac comprem le budel.	 And the symptom of this is that it occurs infrequently over time and does not occur suddenly but rather gradually, and you will notice some signs as the phlegm becomes more pronounced
E le senhal de lu es quan es per seccio del ciphac, quar al comensament fa accidir dolor vehement sobtament; e es apostema divers aparent dejos la codena propdana aparent, e aquo es per eyssiment del budel, e·l cos de lu a las partidas deforo del ciphac.	 And the symptom of this is when it occurs by separation from phlegm, as at first pain comes suddenly but very strong; and you will notice different signs that appear gradually, and this is due to inflammation in the phlegm gland.
E alcunas veguadas es fora-getat am le budel la tela, e es apelada aquesta hernia entestinal zirbal.	 Some vessels are closed off from the bowel area; and it's called intestinal hernia.
E alcunas veguadas es fayta am ventositat, e alcunas veguadas corr en le budel fenda, e aqui es retenguda, e es am aquo gran pernitia3 del malaute, e alcunas veguadas fa endevenir dolor malvada e majorment quan es premut.	 Some vessels are closed off from the abdomen area; and some vessels run into the bowel opening, but here it is tight, so that the patient becomes very uncomfortable, and many of them cause bad pain when they press in.
E en la curacio de las especias de aquesta malautia am ferr es temor, per que cove que sia esquivat le cazament en aquela.	 In dealing with the causes of this disease it is necessary to be cautious so that it does not happen suddenly.
E la manieyra de la operacio de aquela es que comandes al malaute que redugua le budel am la sua ma a las partidas dedintz de la sua conquavitat si obezeys al sieu retornament, e aprop sia envessat sobre le sieu col entre las tuas mas, e eleva las cambas de lu.	 The purpose of the surgery is to command the patient to bring his intestine back into its cavity if it has slipped out, and place your hand over his chest between your breasts, and elevate both legs.
E aprop sten la codena la qual siec la codena dels testicols a las partidas desus, e inscideys la codena dels testicols tota per le lonc; e aprop fiqua en doas labias de la seccio uncis segon que indigeysses a hubrir la seccio am aquels.	 "Place the cushion under them and another on their legs, and another one on their chest while holding their hands.
E si’ la seccio segon la quantitat que a tu sia possible que de aquela le huou sia foro-getat.	 If it is necessary to perform surgery for that reason.
E aprop excorja aquela ciphaqueth les quals so dejos la codena dels testicols, entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc dur de quascuna partida.	 After placing the cushion under them and another on their legs, put a bandage over the space between the patient's thighs to prevent leakage of any kind from occurring during surgery.
Lahoras tu entromet le tieu dit en aquo que siec le testicol, en aquo que es entre ciphac blanc, le qual es dejos la codena del huou, e entre le ciphac segon, e absolve am aquel’adherencia que es en la partida detras del huou.	 The doctor will enter the room and place a bandage over it [the space between the patient's thighs], covering both of them as well to avoid any leakage during surgery from that part or the bowel itself,
E aprop mau am la ma la codena dels testicols a las partidas deforo, e am aysso exten le ciphac blanc en sus am la ma sinestra, e eleva le huou am le ciphac a la partida de la seccio; e comanda al ministre que extenda le huou ensus e tu dissolveys la adherencia que es detras am solucio complida.	 In addition to placing the cushion under them and another on their legs, they also put a bandage over it [the space between the patient's thighs], covering both of them as well and cover the bowel with one hand while holding the other in readiness for surgery.
E cerqua am les tieus ditz que lay no sia alcuna causa del budel envelopat en le ciphac blanc dur.	 The doctor asked if there was any cause that could be found to explain the hernia located over bowel, and checked them [the space between the patient's thighs] for evidence of a cause.
Mays si tu atrobas de lu alcuna causa, lahoras tu enpelleys aquel al ventre dejos.	 If there was no cause found to explain it, they placed that part back inside them [the space between the patient's thighs], closing it up.
E aprop tu pren una agulha en la qual sia fiel gros fayt de x fiels, e entromet aquel deves le derier del ciphac, le qual es jos la codena dels testicols, la qual siec seccio; e aprop inscideys las extremitatz las quals emineysso del fiel entro que sian quatre fiels, e aprop compausa alcus de lor sobre alcuna figura en manieyra de crotz; e lia am aquel le ciphac del qual havem dit que es dejos la codena dels testicols am fort liament de dos partz.	 When you are ready to make a puncture, take an arrow that is made of iron and strong enough, insert it into the chest wound so as to drain out the phlegm or pus contained in the wound which may be sealed off; thereafter, insert it also in each of the four fingers on the hand closest to the wound. And then place a cushion under their thighs, another on their legs, and another over their chest holding their hands,
E aprop envolveys las extremitatz dels fiels e lia aquelas am liament vehement entro que alcu dels vayssels que noyrrisso aquels no puscan trametre alcuna causa per so que de aqui no accida apostema caut.	 Place the fingertips of both hands on the surface, and gently apply pressure to prevent any blood or pus from leaking out through any of the veins that may be near here as you are not skilled in phlebotomy techniques necessary for this purpose
E pausa autra veguada liament segon foro le primier liament, lonh de lu mens tres ditz; e aprop aquestz dos liaments layssa del ciphac le qual es dejos la codena dels testicols la quantitat de la grandeza del dit, e inscideys tot le romanent segon redondeza, e osta de lu le huou.	 Pause for a short while the first time to allow things to settle down before puncturing again three times; and thereafter place both hands on its surface as shown below, and continue puncturing around it until all of it is done.
E aprop inscideys en la partida dejos de la codena dels testicols per seccio de la qual corra sanc e sania ayssi cum havem recomtat en aquo que havem dit.	 Proceed to pierce the space between their thighs as shown, and make this incision so that it runs smoothly in both directions just like we recommended earlier.
E aprop aministra lana submersa en oli, e pausa en la plagua; e aministra le liament le qual havem recomtat (e alcunas veguadas le ciphac blanc es cauterizat, le qual havem dit aprop la inscizio de lu temen de flux de sanc, quar motas veguadas accideys aquels) e leyssa le liament entro que per si caia.	 Pour a mixture of water and oil into it; pause in the cloth; then apply the incision as we recommended earlier (and some of its areas are cauterized as shown below, which is to prevent any blood from flowing out).
Mays si le cazement de lu es tardat, lahoras de aygua cauda sia embrocat, e pausa sobre aquel entro que caia segon que havem dit.	 When it takes a long time to come out of bed, the waters are impregnated with salt water and the pause is made on that spot where they enter for fear of falling down.
E aprop cura la plagua am l’autra curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanat.	 And you continue
Capitol .lxvi.	 Chapter 66
De hernia ventosa.	 Ventricular hernia
En aquesta hernia no e vist alcu que sia estat ardit sus la curacio de lu am ferr.	 In this type of hernia, the surgeon can safely perform the operation without fear of death occurring.
E les primiers diyssero que es fayta ayssi cum havem recomtat en la hernia que es am vi; la qual es que tu lies les vayssels aprop la seccio sobre aquela am fecilitat de lu; e aprop secca en le mieg loc en enviro le apostema am aquo que obro aquel, entro que caian les vayssels.	 The first servants would place the stitches on a soft surface in such a way that they are close to the delicate area of the body; and secure them with a knot to prevent their falling out.
E cura la plagua segon que havem dit entro que sia sanada.	 Cure the wound after it has been healed.
Capitol .lxvii.	 Chapter 67
De la disropcio que es fayta en les anguonars.	 The discharge from the nostrils.
Alcunas veguadas endeve ruptura en les angonars ayssi cum havem dit, e emineys le loc.	 Some vessels may be broken in the nose if it is ruptured as well, and they are treated accordingly.
E no deyssen als genetius alcuna causa dels budels al genetius; e si deyssen, aquo es pauc; e retorna s’en en totas horas.	 The genitals should not be opened in the process of the operation; if they must be opened it is rare and it returns later.
Mays si es prolonguat le temps am aquo, es ajustada fissura en le ciphac entro que deysenda le budel en le ciphac; e accideys aquo per la extencio del ciphac le qual es en le angonars ayssi cum havem dit, la qual causa es quar le ciphac es estendut, e aprop es mollificat e·l loc es apostemat e emineys.	 If time is prolonged in the operation, a cut must be made into the skull near where the intestine enters it; and this occurs due to the extension of the brain, which makes it soft, and the place is covered with a cloth or bandage to prevent it.
E la cura de lu es am cauteri ayssi quo es precedida la narracio de lu.	 The cure for him consists of puncturing as described in the previous sentence
E alcunas veguadas es curada am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: e es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos entre las tuas mas, e aprop secca le loc de la ruptura dels apostemas emineys am seccio per la latitut segon la quantitat de tres ditz.	 In addition to puncturing as described in the previous sentence, you should also apply heat: place a cushion between his thighs and hold tight the area of rupture while slowly applying pressure for three days
E aprop strenh le ciphac blanc que es jos la codena entro que sia descubert.	 Press gently on the white cotton pad that is placed inside as described in the previous sentence
E aprop pren le ray e pausa aquel sobre le loc eminent del ciphac, e prem aquel al preon del ventre.	 Gently press onto the ray and then place it over the prominent area of the abdomen, and firmly press down on the belly button.
E aprop cus le dos locs eminentz sobre la extremitat del ray del ciphac, e ajusta am la sutura un de aquels am l’autre.	 Gently press onto both prominent areas of the abdomen with one hand at a time and adjust your position as you go along to ensure proper alignment
E aprop extratz la extremitat del ray, e no inscidas del ciphac de tot, ni no extenda le huou, ni autra causa ayssi cum yeu te fi saber en la curacio de hernia entestinal.	 Carefully extend the abdomen without touching the intestines or extending them in any way that might cause problems during the cure for inguinal hernias.
E aprop cura aquela am la curacio de las plaguas, e cum inscideyses les fiels, mundifica aquela e restaura la plagua entro que sia consolidada; quar le ciphac es contrayt e no es ajustada la eminencia de ruptura.	 Correct the issue with the cure for hernias by puncturing as described in previous sentences and making sure to remove or restretch any adhesions that might form around the incision, so that the area is not stretched too much or excessively tightened after the hernia has been corrected.
E cauteri es milhor en aquest loc, quar es pus propda a salut.	 Perform puncturing at this location to ensure healing.
Capitol .lxviii.	 Chapter eighty-eight.
De mollificacio de la codena dels testiculs.	 Treatment of testicles
Motas veguadas la codena dels testiculs en alcus homes es mollificada per aysso quar las carns que so entre aquela son mollificadas, e es fedat le reguardament de lu.	 When the testicles are opened inside men it becomes soft due to that reason that the muscles between them are also softened and relaxed.
Adonc necessari es ad aquel que es preguat en la curacio de lu que fassa jazer le malaute segon le sieu dos, e enscida tota la codena la qual es mollificada sobre la codena natural; e aprop que ajuste doas labias am la sutura.	 After that is necessary to proceed with opening the patient's buttocks and applying it over the usual area of skin, then place two towels under their thighs to prevent them from falling out during this procedure.
E si vols, cus en le comensament la superfluitat de la codena mollificada am tres cozeduras o quatre e am ferma sutura.	 If you want, cut off the excess skin on both buttocks and tighten it around the suture after removing any dead tissue or debris from that area as well.
E aprop inscideys entre las suturas; e aprop cura per curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat e caian les fiels.	 After cutting off excess skin and tightening it around the sutures, make sure everything is clean and free of any debris before closing up the incision completely.
Capitol .lxix.	 The conclusion of this treatise.
De castracio.	 From castration.
Sapias que castratio en nostre ley es excomengada, mays per causa es legut a mi que·m remembre de lu en aquest libre; e no es necessaria la rememoracio de lu sino per doas manieyras, de las quals es la una per so que aquo sia en la sciensa del metge quan es enterroguat de aquela, que sapia la curacio de lu al qual accideys; e l’autra manieyra es que nos motas vetz havem necessitat de castracio de autras bestias per les juvamentz nostres per aquelas, ayssi cum de motos, e de bocs, e de porcs, e de semblantz a las bestias.	 In our law castration is permitted for the sake of preventing its remembrance in this free; and it's not necessary to remember it unless there are two purposes: one to ensure that doctors understand what they need to do when treating such cases, as they know how to treat them properly; another purpose is to make sure castrating animals from our youth prevent those kind of things.
E donc dic que castracio es fayta en dos manieyras: o per atrissio, o per fissura a seccio.	 The castration can be done in two ways; either by tying off the vessels that lead to and from it or by cutting through it with a sharp instrument.
Mays en aquela que es fayta per atrissio, la via de la opera es que nos fassam cezer la bestia en aygua cauda entro que·ls genetius de lu sian mollificatz e sian linhitz e que pendan.	 When joint pain is caused by hot humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
E aprop pren aquels am la tua ma entro que sian resols e no apparescan dejos le tocament.	 And if necessary, make a small incision to make way for them, but do not remove or examine the affected part of the body.
Mays en castracio fayta per fissura e seccio, cove que tu tenguas la bestia e premas la codena dels testicols de lu am la ma senestra.	 When joint pain is caused by sharp cuts and wounds, you should hold the intestine with your other hand on the sternum of the patient.
E aprop lia le suspensori, e inscideys sobre quascun huou am una seccio entro que dos huous proceseysso.	 Then put a cushion under them and make an incision between their thighs to get at it, but be careful not to damage any other vital organs in the process.
E aprop inscideys aquels pus que auras quascu excorjat.	 And then remove or examine the affected part of the body with a cautery.
E no leysses sobre aquels del ciphac alcuna causa, sino le ciphac subtil le qual es sobre les vazes.	 Do not insert it into any other orifice without checking for damage to the urethra first.
E aquesta manieyra de castracio es milhor la qual es fayta per atrissio, quar atrissio fort leu layssa alcuna causa dels testicols per que la bestia desira coyt.	 This cautery method is preferred when caused by a sharp cut or wound because it avoids causing any damage to the testes and ensures that the intestine stays put where it belongs.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	 Then, cure the abscess so it heals properly.
Capitol .lxx.	 And do not forget this.
De la cura de hermafrodozia.	 Do not forget to apply a balm for hemorrhoids after applying cautery or any other medical treatment.
Hermafrodozia en les homes es segon dos manieyras: la una es quar o appar en aquo que siec l’espazi en la codena de testiculs, en aquel que es entre dos testiculs figura quar cunh de femna en la qual so pels.	 Hemorrhoids are often caused by constipation or straining during bowel movements.
E alcunas veguadas de aquel corr urina le qual es en la codena dels testiculs.	 A certain drop of urine in that part which is at the bottom of the testicles
Mays en las femnas es una specia: e es que·l conh de la femna sobre le pentenilh es ayssi cum dos testiculs de home un pauc de tot yminiheys a la partida deforo ayssi cum le perpucii de home e dos testicols.	 In women it is special: when the woman's vagina opens, that with two testicles of man and one small one at its opening, as well as with his penis and two testicles.
E la curacio es de tres specias: de dos dels homes e de una specia de las femnas.	 The cure is in three stages: for the two men and a specialty of the women.
E es que cove que tu inscidas aquelas carns ajustadas entro que efuga la emprecio de aquela, e aprop que cures aquelas am curacio de las autras plaguas.	 It means that you should first adjust those cramps in order to escape from the effort of that cure and then apply the other remedies for the pain of the joints.
E en la segonda specia dels homes de la qual yeys urina la qual es en la codena dels testiculs, no es curacio ni opperacio en lu.	 In the second stage of men where urine is in the bottom of the testicles there is neither cure nor operation involved in it.
Capitol .xxi.	 The end.
De lentinge e de carn eminent per causas de las femnas.	 From the beginning to the end, through various causes for women.
Lentige fort leu es ajustada sobre causas naturals entro que es etressat e es fayt leg le reguardament; e alcunas veguadas es magnificada en alcunas femnas en tant entro que es spandit ayssi cum en les homes e perve entro al coito.	 A sharp adjustment is made on natural causes, so that it becomes evident and the person feels relief; and some women are enhanced in terms of appearance as well as in sex life for men.
Adonc cove que tu tenguas la superfluitat de lentinge am la tua ma o am unci e inscidas.	 After you have adjusted the excess looseness with your hand or any other object and pinched it.
E no ultimes en inscizio, majorment en le preon de la razit, per so que no endevengua flux de sanc.	 And finally, in addition to the main course of medicine, for that reason so that there is not a flow of blood from cuts.
E aprop cura aquela am curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanada.	 The treatment for gout should be given when it has been diagnosed.
Mays carn nascuda es carn que nays en le horrifici de la mayre entro que umple aquel, e fort leu es eyssit a las partidas deforo segon semblansa de coa (e per aquo alscus primiers appelero aquo “malautia caudada”); donc cove que nos inscidam ayssi cum inscidem lentinge, e curem aquela entro que sia sanada.	 The first symptom of gout is swelling in the feet, and when this occurs it often leads to a second attack, hence why it's called "gout.
Capitol .lxxii.	 Chapter 72.
De curacio de alratica.	 For the treatment of arthritis.
Alratica es que le conh de la femna no sia perforat, o sia le trauc petit.	 Arthritis cannot be performed on women who have had a miscarriage or have small openings in their vagina.
E es o natural o accidental.	 It could either be caused naturally (endogenous) or accidentally (exogenous).
Accidental es per malautia la qual ha precedit, e aquela es fayta o per carn nada ajustada o per ciphac subtil o espes.	 Accidental gout may occur due to an injury that was not properly closed and caused a small puncture or erosion in the skin.
E es fayt o en le preon de la mayre, o en les costatz de lu, o en le pus sobira de lu, o en le pus bas de lu, e prohibeys de cuoyt e de enprenguacio e de enfantament, e fort leu prohibeys las mestruas.	 It can be found in the heel, or the soles of the foot, the buttocks, the base of the thigh, and is forbidden on women.
E la cognicio de aquela es fayta per reguardament de la metrona, si la oppilacio es apparent, propdana; mays si no es apparent, lahoras tu cerqua aquela am les tieus ditz o am le ray.	 Its diagnosis is usually made by examining the patient and noting any swelling or pain in the affected area(s).
Mays si oppilacio es per ciphac subtil, e es propda a las doas labias, lahoras tu coyta e disromp aquela.	 If symptoms are subtle, it is advisable to have two physicians examine and diagnose the condition.
E es que pauses sobre las doas labias pulvils, e aprop pausa les tieus ditz indicz de amdoas las mas encemps.	 When there are puffy eyelids that need to be opened, it is customary for a servant to gently spread the corners of both eyelids with his fingers and indicate which eye has the infection first.
E la femna sia sobre le sieu dos, las sieuas coyssas extendudas, e aprop exten las doas labias am forsa entro que aquel ciphac subtil sia romput e la oppilacio sia uberta.	 The woman lies on her back with her legs spread apart; a servant then extends both eyelids open as much as possible and raises the eyebrows gently.
E aprop pren lana e enbeu le4 en oli e pausa aquela sobre·l loc, e jagua am home le dia per so que·l loc inscis no sia consolidat.	 Then the servant takes a needle and thread and places them under the eyelid; it gently closes that area to prevent any bleeding from occurring.
Mays si le ciphac es gros e espes, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel am spatum lat o am fuelha de mirta.	 If the cataract is thick or opaque, then doctors are advised to insert a small amount of liquid into its interior to soften it.
Mays si la oppilacio es per carnada, lahoras suspen aquela am unci, e inscideys aquela.	 If the eyebrows have been injured, they should suspend that area and apply a bandage over it.
E sian am tu las medicinas que fan cessar flux de sanc ses mordicacio, ayssi cum ahacatia, e sanc de drago, e enses, ajustat am album de huou.	 The medicines that stop the flow of blood to the infected parts should also be used in conjunction with other medications such as antibiotics and antifungals, and adjust the dosage as instructed by a healthcare provider.
E aprop aministra una canulha de plom ampla per so que la plagua no sia consolidada leugierament.	 Then the servant applies a wide-bore needle to prevent the plug from becoming consolidated there any longer.
E tengua aquela per alcus jorns e aministra calgua de li sec.	 It should be applied for several days and accompanied by medication that helps it to dry out.
E aprop sia curada am l’autra curacio de consolidacio entro que sia sanada.	 The servant's task is complete, having treated both eyelids with the cautery procedure so as to cure them.
E alcunas vetz accideys en la mayre nativitat de autres carns, e lahoras cove que inscidas segon aquesta manieyra.	 When a person's vital organs begin to fail due to illness or old age
Mays si aysso es per apostema crancos, a l’apostema crancos le qual es en la mayre no sia fayta contrarietat am ferr en deguna manieyra.	 If the abscess is in the major vein, it cannot be opened with any sharp instrument without causing harm to that limb.
Capitol .lxxiii.	 Chapter 33
De la cura de emorroydas e de tayl e de botor roja que accideysso en le conh de las femnas.	 Treatment of hemorrhoids and anal itching that occur in the company of women.
Emorroydas so apprecio dels orificis de motas venas entro que de aquelas corro mot sanc continuadament; e cum so antiquadas emorroydas e son fayts theyls.	 Hemorrhoids are a common condition that affects the openings of veins, which often run continuously and can be difficult to treat; especially those with chronic hemorrhoids find them unbearable.
E ja yeu he dit en la divisio las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e diyre ayssi aquelas que recebo curacio e aquelas que no recebo curacio.	 I have already divided the species and necks of those who received treatment and those who did not receive treatment.
Donc dic que emorroydas e theyls quan so en le preon de la mayre e no apparo al sentiment, lahoras en aquelas no sia fayta curacio am ferr.	 Therefore, hemorrhoids and fissures that are located in the front part of the major area often do not respond to treatment, making them unbearable.
Mays aquelas las quals so en le orrifici de la mayre sobre las quals catz sentiment, so aquelas que so curadas.	 Those that are located at the opening of the major vein on which there is pain, and those that have been treated.
E cove que tu metas la femna en mayso frega e aprop exten atheyl am les forfexs, o am drap aspre, e inscideys aquelas am las razitz.	 You should stretch the female part gently, and also apply a cold compress or damp cloth to the affected areas, and put ice on it.
E aprop pulveriza sobre aquelas deves le fluxs del sanc de una de las polveras insciscivas ses mordicacio, ayssi cum acassia e semblant ad aquels.	 Apply powder that contains a strong laxative effect to the affected area similarly to how accacia and similar substances are used for this purpose.
E aprop enpellesca les sieus pes per una hora, e aprop pausa aquela en aygua freja.	 With one hour, and then place that over cold water
E si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras fay aquela sezer en decoccio de sumat e de scorsas de milgranas e de gualas e de semblantz.	 If the flow of blood continues, the doctors will try to open it up in a cutting motion and apply cold compresses on the affected areas.
E aprop pren farina de ordi e comfiys aquela am miel e vi agre e fay emplastre am aquo sobre le dos de lu.	 Spread some flour paste over her body, cover it with honey, vinegar, and place a cloth soaked in cold water on both of her hands.
E si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, fay adherir am dos ventozas, e a las mamilhas ses escarificatio.	 If the flow is stopped, it's good news; otherwise, tie off one or both of her breasts and apply compresses to the affected areas.
E aprop pren lana e submergeys aquela am suc de coliandre o am suc de arnagloza o am suc de guarravier am vi pentit e fay adherir al loc; e aprop cura le loc am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	 Spread some lanolin and submerse her in cold collard greens or kale juice, or red wine vinegar, and place a cloth over the area to soak it off and then apply warm compress to help soothe it down.
Mays athyl rog le qual es de aspre reguardament, cove que tu inscidas aquo que a tu appar de aquel segon que he dit en theyl engualment.	 Take note that I've translated everything you have written here, and please consider this my second answer in the same context.
E cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	 And cure it as soon as possible.
Capitol .lxxiv.	 Chapter 24.
De perforacio de eyssedura accident en la mayre.	 The piercing of the esophagus in the neck.
Motas specias de apostemas accideysso en la mayre, ayssi cum cranc e apostema lapident e ulceracios e adhubelat e erpetromens e fistulas emorroyas e raguarrias e thyl e autres apostemas.	 The different types of apophtalmos can occur in the neck; they include aphthous ulcers, apoplexy, fistulas, and fistulae among others.
E yeu ja he dit aquestas malautias e las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e las curacios de lor en la divisio.	 When you have opened up space between the thighs of your patient and placed a cushion underneath them, another servant on their legs, and one more on their chest holding their hands... Here comes the first sentence to translate.
E cove que yeu digua en aquest tractat de apostema caut le qual ve en la mayre quan es dels apostemas que collegeysso sania, e si vols saber en qual manieyra se fa la opperacio de lu am ferr.	 In this medical treatise called "The Great Work," you will find a chapter on the specific symptoms and how to perform the procedure for gout.
Adonc cove que tu consideres si la dolor de la apostema en le sieu comensament es aguda am percussio e flecma e febre, e vezes aquel enrogezir e si catz sobre aquel le sentiment, lahoras no·t coytes am perforacio de lu, e cura aquel am aquo que ajuda sobre la maturacio entro que cesse la acuitat dels accidentz.	 If you consider that the joint pain at the beginning is acute and accompanied by percussion, flection, fever, etc., sometimes accompanied by a rash or catarrh, doctors do not recommend puncturing it, but rather treat it with something to reduce its intensity over time until the heat of the illness subsides.
E lahoras cove que tu fassas cezer la femna sobre una cezelha que aia doas cezelhas; e recline sobre le sieu dos e ajusta les sieus pes a la partida pus dejos del ventre, e las sieus coyssas sian expandudas, e pausa les sieus brasses dejos les sieus denols, e lia quascus am liament ad aquo convenient.	 And if you do make this incision on the left side of her chest and recline the patient's head to their right shoulder, place a cushion underneath them, adjust their feet so they are placed flat on the abdomen, spread out their thighs, and pause the breathing until it is appropriate.
E aprop la matrona segua del latz dreyt e aministre le instrument am le qual es ubert le orrifici de la mayre, la forma del qual vindra en aquelas causas que·s faran aprop.	 After the doctor has opened up space between the patient's thighs and placed a cushion underneath them, another servant on their legs, one more on their chest holding their hands... Here comes the first sentence to translate.
E cove quan vols ministrar aquest instrument que tu fiques am lo ray le preon de la mayre de la femna, e aquo que del instrument es intrat en la mayre no sia mays que·l preon de la mayre e leda le malaute.	 When you want to use this instrument on the right side of her chest and it is inserted into the cavity in a way that makes sure the hole in the instrument does not exceed the width of the rib, otherwise, there would be harm done to the patient.
Mays si l’estrument es major que·l preon de la mayre, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils sobre la textura del preon de la mayre per sso que sia prohibit l’intrament de tot instrument en le preon de la mayre.	 When the tool is larger than the patient's palm, the sores are caused by powder applied to the surface of the large finger to prevent any other instruments from coming into contact with it.
E cove que tu pauses le vertitge que corr en le strument del latz pus desus e que le ministre tengua le strument e revolva le vertitge entro que sia ubert le orrifici de la mayre.	 The minister should hold the instrument and turn it around so that any sores on its surface are exposed, allowing them to see which one is the larger one.
E cum appar la excitura, e es tocada am la ma e es leon e molh, lahoras cove que tu secces aquela deves le cap de lu am spatum lat.	 After removing it from its container and handling it roughly with your hands, the sores cover you to cut off one of them at the tip of the long finger.
E cum la sania es evacuada, lahoras cove que tu pauses en la plagua una meca submersa en oli rozat o oli vert en le qual sia alcuna stiptisitat; e pausa la calca7 en la seccio en le preon de la mayre.	 Once the sauce is removed, you place a damp cloth soaked in hot oil or hot fat in which there are no impurities; and then wipe off any remaining residue from the area around the larger finger.
E pause deforo la mayre e sobre le pentenilh lana munda submersa en aygua en la qual sian bulidas malvas.	 After wiping down the large finger, you place a damp cloth submerged in water with small stones to dry it off.
E aprop sia curada aprop dos dias am enguent le qual conveneys ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	 You take care of it for two days until such wounds heal.
E alcunas veguadas es lavada la mayre e la plagua enayssi que es cristerisat am aygua e mel, e aprop am aygua en la qual es bulhida razit de liri o de aristologia longua, e aprop retorna al enguent.	 Some wounds are washed with warm water and mild detergent, and afterward rinsed in clean water to avoid any irritation or long-lasting effects; afterwards you return to the previous environment.
E si la plagua es dedintz en la mayre ameguada, lahoras cove que tu sias prohibit de la curacio de lu am ferr, habantz cura aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio.	 If the sauce is mixed in with a large finger injury, you should be cautious when applying treatment; use the method that we mentioned before in order to treat it.
Capitol .lxxv.	 When joints are affected by cold humors that infiltrate every part of the body, causing pain in the feet (a condition called gout), doctors traditionally call it gout.
A ensenhar las matronas en qual manieyre les enbrios bius sian medicatz quan yeysso segon figura no-natural.	 To show the ulcers on which member of the body, and when an ulcer appears against nature's wishes
Necessaria causa es que la matrona conogua en le comensament la figura del enfantament natural per senhals de lu, e es que quan tu vezas la femna expremar a las partidas dejos e desira odorar le ayre, e sobre aquo es enleujada per aquo que sobre ela es del part, e festina le eyssiment del enbrio, lahoras sapias que aquest part es segon figura natural, e es l’eyssiment de lu sobre le sieu cap, e la segondina am aquel o suspensa o pendent del ombelic.	 It is necessary to cause the ulcer to appear at first in a natural position of the body, and it is that when you feel the pain spreading to another part, and over there is evidence of an ulcer appearing, it indicates the second nature has taken hold or is suspended from the belly
Donc cum tu vezes aquels senhals, lahoras cove que·l ventre de lu sia compremut per so que l’embrio deysenda leugerament quar quan deyssen sobre le sieu cap, deysen a lu la segondina, e es mondada de aquelas superfluitatz am bona mondificacio.	 So when you feel these pains, it indicates that the body of him has been weakened by that nature to some extent so that when they occur on his head, then place them gently
Mays aquel que es otra aquest part es no-natural e no-lausable, quar quan le enbrio es eyssit sobre sos pes e·l cos de lu es eyssit devant le cap de lu e·ls pes de lu, e la ma de lu una, o al pe de lu i, o es eyssit le cap de lu e la ma de lu, o al ventre de lu, e fort leu es convertit sobre le sieu col, e semblant de las figuras de lu no-lausablas.	 If that part is another one not to be spoken of or practiced in a natural way, when the ulcer appears on its body and legs but also on his head, hands, stomach, or anywhere else on him, he becomes weak over time, making it difficult for him to turn towards others.
Don necessaria causa es a la matrona que sia savia e subtil en totas aquelas causas, e que·s guarde de error e de decepcio.	 It is necessary that the ulcer be wise and subtle in all those causes, and it should keep an eye on any errors or disappointments.
E yeu so mostrant tota figura de aquelas, e qual engen es en aquelas per so que sia significat per aquo e sia stat sobre aquo.	 When the patient's body has been prepared in this way, then let it be understood that what follows is to take place here and now
Quan le feyt es eyssit sobre le sieu cap per egrecio natural, e aquel es vehement sobre la femna e es fayt a lu part dificil, e vezes la vertut de lu ja debelitada, lahoras fay aquela sezer , o que las femnas tenguan lu, e evapora le conh de lu am fenugrec coyt e am olis humitz.	 When the patient's body is placed on a hard surface for natural reasons, and that part of it becomes very painful due to friction, doctors would recommend using lubricant
E aprop entrometa la metrona entre les sieus ditz espatum petit e fenda am aquel la segondina, o secce aquela am la sua ungla entro que corro aquo que es en ela de humiditat.	 Insert a small strip between the patient's thighs and fold it so that its second end is towards their vagina
E preme le ventre de la femna entro que deyssenda le fet.	 Press down on the woman's abdomen to cause labor to begin
Mays si no deyssen, lahoras cove que la femna sia cristirizada de mucellage de ptilli e mucellage de fenugrec am cizami.	 If not, doctors recommend that a cervical mucus plug and the mucus of the cervix be checked for abnormalities
E aprop comanda a lu, aprop le cristeri, que sia compremuda e fay aquela stornudar am condisi; e te la boca de lu e·l nas de lu per huna hora, quar le fet sira foro-getat tantost.	 Then place the patient on their back and remove any cervical plug, gently squeeze them both for an hour to induce labor so hard
E si las doas mas del fet so foro-getadas al comensament, lahoras cove que tu redusiscas aquelas am fecilitat petit a petit.	 If the head of the fetus is not yet engaged at the beginning, doctors recommend gradually reducing its firmness little by little.
Mays si no obezeys al intrament, lahoras pausa la femna sobre una cezelha e leva les pes de lu sus, e aprop concuceys la cezelha sobre la terra; e la femna sia tenguda que no caia deves la concussio.	 If not obese, doctors instruct the woman to lie on a board and support her head with cushions, and make sure she does not roll over onto it.
E si las mas no son dedintz tornadas e morr le fet, lahoras inscideys aquelas e extratz le romament del fet o lia le cors a la ma de lu am drap e extratz aquel am equalitat, quar aquel sira foro-getat.	 When the greatest pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate into each part of the body and turn it to death or make it pass away from its cavity towards the chest, then doctors are said to have done all they can do
De eyssiment del embrio sobre les sieus pes.	 The removal of an embryo from a woman's womb.
Quan le fet yeys sobre les sieus pes, lahoras cove que tu impelliscas aquels en sus, e aprop convertas le fet petit, e aprop que engualhes aquel, e aprop que prenguas un pe de lu e extendas aquels petit a petit.	 When the child is removed from inside their body, then it should be gently held by both hands and pressed down gently so as to remove it completely, after which you press one finger into its back and slowly stretch it out gradually
Mays cum son eyssit entro a las coyssas, lahoras tu comanda a lu que se exprema, e fay aquela extornudar am condizi, quar sira foro-getat si Deus lo vol.	 If the child is inside between the thighs, then the doctor commands him to press it out gently and remove it quickly if God wills.
E si no es foro-getat am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras tu retorna le fet petit a petit entro que pauses aquel segon figura natural, quar aquel sira lahoras foro-getat am leugier eyssiment.	 If the child is not delivered as it should be, then you return the small finger in its back to its normal position and if that does not work try again later.
E si es prohibit am tot aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras pren de musellage de altea e de goma dissolvuda, e percuteys tot en le mortier per bona percussio, e aprop linieys am aquo le conh de la femna, el pus bas del ventre de lu.	 If it is prohibited to do as they recommended, then you should try a knife made of iron or steel and strike it forcefully into the mortar for good effect, aiming at the bottom of her belly.
E aprop fay aquela cezer en aygua tebeza, entro que consegua les ypocondias.	 Then apply heat to warm them up gradually.
E cum vezes que las partidas dejos de lu so lenificadas, lahoras fay a lu subfumiguacio de mirta e sub-pausa aquela a lu.	 When the parts of her have become swollen and stiff, she gently heats it to loosen them up and pause for rest.
E quan te la sub-fumiguacio per una hora, lahoras tu la fay sezer sobre una cezelha, e aprop fay aquela stornudar e extrenh la boca de lu, e levas de aquela, e prem la partida pus bassa del ventre de lu am leugiera compressio, quar le fet sira tantost foro-getat.	 When you place a sublingual tablet for an hour, the pain will subside upon swallowing it and relieving of its burden in your mouth, after which you take away from there and press down on the belly button gently with pressure to compress it.
Eyssiment del fet sobre les sieus denols e las suas mas.	 The child should be placed on their stomach and chest.
Quan le fet eyssira segon aquesta forma, lahoras tu engenies en entrometen las suas mas petit a petit; e aprop la femna stia evessada sobre le sieu col, e les pes de lu pengo en jos, e aquelas sia jasent sobre le lieyt, e complegua las suas mas.	 When the child is in this position, then you gently lower its head and chest to keep it from being injured by the surface of the mattress; place a cushion over its buttocks, lift up both legs towards your body, supporting them with care on your lap, as well as any other parts.
E aprop prem sobre le ventre de lu petit a petit, e aprop extratz aquo que es dejos les pes de lu de las aurelhas entro que sia preparada en la partida pus dejos.	 And then gently press down on the belly of its small and gradually extend towards this point where you have placed their legs so that they are ready in the prepared part, and remove them from above to below when it is time for preparation.
E si le fet no es fora-getat, lahoras pren les pes de lu e mau aquels am movement vehement, e aprop prem aquo que es sobre les ypocondres petit a petit entro que le fet puege a las partidas desus.	 If the child is not yet ready, then gently remove their legs and move them vigorously downwards towards that position where they can be raised from below to go through the steps of preparation.
E aprop entrometa las suas mas e engualhe le fet petit a petit, e comanda a la femna que se exprema entro que le fet sia foro-getat.	 Then gently place both hands and lower the child gradually towards that position where they should be ready for action.
Eyssiment del fet latutidinalment pendent una de las suas mas.	 Put the child in a lateral position on its side, holding one of their arms outstretched next to you.
Sia engeniat en reduccio de la ma de lu, mays si no podes aquela reduzir, lahoras eleva la femna e fe aquela anar.	 The first sentence means that you should start by making an incision in the side of their body.
E si anar no pot, lahoras fay la jazer sobre le lieyt, e concuteys las coyssas de lu am concussio vehement, e aprop aministra liamentz les quals yeu e recomtatz de mucillages.	 If you cannot make an incision, the doctor will apply a poultice to the belly and vigorously rub their thighs as well, giving them medical recommendations for relieving pain.
E si es vengut le enfantament, lahoras fay aquela sezer sobre cezelha, e aprop studia sobre la reduccio de la ma, e enguala le fet segon figura natural, e fay stornudar la femna e comanda a lu que comprema a si entro que sia foro-getat.	 If you are pregnant and the incision is painful, the doctor will apply cold compresses to the abdomen, dilate the cervix as naturally as possible, and tell them to lie down so they can rest their leg, and command them to check in with their healthcare provider if there's any vaginal bleeding.
Eyssiment del fet sobre·l col expandudas las suas mas e la fassia de lu es al dos de la sua mayre.	 The fetus will be positioned on the back of the mother and the position of her legs is at a 90-degree angle to her abdomen.
Cove que la matrona tengua la ma del fet e aprop revolva aquel petit a petit, e eque aquel am facilitat.	 The midwife will hold the baby gently in their hand and move it around slowly as well.
E cum es e quant so es engualhat, e lahoras pausa sobre le conh de lu aquo que havem recomtat de oli e de mucellages.	 When this happens often enough, the doctor will recommend oil baths and medical treatments to alleviate pain and swelling.
E aprop comandas a lu que·s maugua petit a petit, e quan auras feyt aquo, lahoras fay aquela cezer sobre una cezelha e comanda li que sia inclinada sobre le latz dreyt, e aprop comanda a lu que sia compremuda; e fay aquela stornudar am condizi.	 The doctor will tell the patient to gently roll it around slowly, and when they feel that this is enough, the doctor will apply a cold compress on their back and command them to lie down comfortably, and they should rest for now.
Exitus foetus praeparati super latus.	 The fetus descends from above towards the lower part of the abdomen.
Quan deyssen a horrifici de la mayre segon aquesta manieyra, considera, e lahoras tu inscideys la segondina am la tua ungla entro que sia evacuada de la humiditat.	 When desiring to remove the excess moisture from the second part of this manner in which it is held, consider that the pain will be alleviated when the humidity has been removed.
E si le fet es suspendut sobre la cara e·l col de lu, lahoras tu inscideys aquela del embelic, per so que no sia retengut e mora.	 If the suspension is placed over the face and neck of him, then the pain will be alleviated to prevent any retrogression or harm from occurring.
E aprop empelleys le fet a las partidas dedintz entro que pauses aquel segon que cove, e manda a la femna que comprema a si alcunas veguadas, e el sira fora-getat am eyssiment leugier, si Dieus o vol.	 To make it to the second part of that which is suspended, place her hand near it so that she may feel whether there are any irregularities or not; if anything unusual occurs then let God be our guide and deal with it as necessary
Exitus geminorum aut foetuum multorum.	 The death of twins or many offspring
Sapias que gemels motas veguadas so natz, e alcunas vetz naysso tres o quatre , mays aquo es estranh e tart s’endeve; mays v so causas foro natura, e no vivo.	 If twins are separated and some of them survive for three or four days without nourishment, then this is unusual and should be treated as strange; however, the causes may also arise from nature itself and not from living beings
E conte aquelas, ja sia que sian montiplicatz, una segondina, e son seperatz per ciphac, distingen aquels enter le liguament en l’ombilic de cascun de aquels E alcunas veguadas so foro-getatz ayssi cum es un fet per eyssiment natural leugier, e so eysitz alcunas veguadas per eyssiment no-lausabla ayssi cum havem recomtat.	 And if there are many twins and one of them is separated from the other through a cleft, then you must open up that ligament in his back to allow him to be with the other one as quickly as possible; however, if it occurs through an accident or any other way it should not occur, unless specifically mentioned.
E si son dificils alcus de lor deves le enfantament e perveno ad aquo que havem dit de las figuras no-naturals, lahoras tu cura aquels ayssi cum havem recontat.	 And if there are difficulties in separating them or it is difficult to take the offspring away as mentioned before by those who made up these unnatural figures, then you should treat them similarly as described before.
E si’ la matrona subtil e fassa aquo que fa am facilitat e subtilitat, e am tarditat, e sia ingeniat segon tota figura segon que es a lu preparat de l’engen amenant a salut.	 "When it is necessary to make an incision on the surface of the thigh, then do so with a pointed cautery.
Rememoratio eius quod formatur in matrice ex embrionibus et Abortiuntur.	 They are formed from embryos and aborted
Alcunas veguadas son formatz en la mayre un, e dos, e tres, e quatre, e v, e vi, e vii, e mays x, e ja es deves mi verificat que una femna abortem ne getet vi, e una autra x totz formatz, la qual causa fo fayta per mensuracio dels glorios savis.	 The vulvae are formed from the larger part, and smaller parts one to seven, and the eighth, which is caused by an abortion measurement of the glorious things
E tot aysso cove que sia en la sciencia de la matrona quar fort leu ad aquela parve semblant de aquo, e donc opause se ad aquo am so que cove.	 And therefore, if there is someone whose knowledge in women's science is as great or greater than this one who does not stop doing what he has to do so that it may be.
Capitol .lxxvi.	 The sixty-sixth chapter of the Capitularies.
De extraccio del fet quan es mort.	 Of withdrawal from death when it occurs.
Quan tu curas le fet mort am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la medicacio e no es defora eyssit, e tu yest forsat usar de opperacio am ma, lahoras cove que consideras si la femna es de sana vertut e no es am alcu dels accidentz per les quals sobre ela es temuda perdicio.	 When you cure the deceased and it is said in the division of medicine that death should not be feared or anticipated, and you have a servant to consider if the woman is of sound health and not subject to accidents for which she may fear loss.
Lahoras cove que la femna sia envessada sobre le lieyt sobre le sieu dos, e sia le cap de lu enclinat enjos e las coyssas de lu sian elevadas.	 The servant is to place the woman on her back with her feet up and elevate her legs.
E·l ministre tengua aquela de doas partz o sia liada en le lieyt per so que·l cos de lu no se extenda deves la extraccio del fet.	 The minister is to place him on his back with his legs spread apart for the servant not to extend the incision of death.
E aprop tu humecta la boca de la mayre de lu am olis humitz e am mucellage de altea e de fenugrec e de semensa de li.	 The servant opens up the patient's mouth, wipes it with warm water and wet cotton cloths, cleans his teeth gently, and then closes her lips.
E aprop unte la matrona la sua ma am aquels olis e mucellages, e aprop entrometa la sua ma am fecilitat en la mayre, e aprop cerque am la ma loc en le qual fique les uncis en le fet.	 The nurse takes the patient's hand in hers and gently wipes it with wet cotton cloths, then closes her fingers around the wrist tightly to keep them from slipping off.
E locs convenient en aquo: adonc tu considera si le fet es preparat que deysenda sobre le sieu cap, e lahoras tu fique les uncis en les huels de lu, o en le col, o en la boca, o en le palat, o dejos la barba, o en la furcula de lu, o en les locs propdas de las costas, o dejos les ypocondres.	 The location is convenient in this case: if you consider that the body part is ready to be addressed, then place your fingers on his head, or neck, or face, or chin, or beard, or collarbone, or armpit, or buttocks.
Mays si le deysendiment es sobre les pes de lu, lahoras en le pentenilh, o en le mieg de las costas.	 If the demand is over the feet of him, then place your fingers on his ankles.
E cove que tengua le unci am la ma dreyta, e pausa la curvitat de lu en aquel loc le qual es entre les ditz de la ma senestra, e entrometa la ma am facilitat e fique le unci en alcu de aquels locs les quals havem ditz, entro que pervengua a la causa boyda.	 And hold his wrist in that location between the two fingers of her left hand and then gently place it on the area where she mentioned earlier, ensuring there is no movement or vibration to the source of pain.
E aprop pause e fique en la apposicio de lu un autre unci, o le tertz si es necessitat, per so que sia atraccio engual, e no sia extencio segon la sua rectetut tant solament.	 And place another finger in the adjacent area or third if needed, so that all fingers are close together and not separated from each other during this act.
Ans sia maugut a tota partida, per so que l’eyssiment de lu sia alleujat ayssi cum es fayt en dent deves la eradicacio de lu.	 And after completing the act gently wipe his face completely clean to ensure that all dirt is removed from him.
E cove en lu aquo que es entre lor que la extencio sia mollificada; e si alcuna partida de lu es retenguda, lahoras cove que la matrona unte alcus sieus ditz am oli e entrometa aquels espertament e revolva am aquels aquo que es retengut.	 When the body's temperature is lowered, and if a part of it is held tight shut, the pains increase, and when let go, they decrease.
Donc si la partida del fet es fora-getada, lahoras les uncis sian permudatz entra loc le qual sia pus aut; e fay aysso entro que tot le fet sia fora-getat.	 If the foot part is forcibly shut off, then the pains will increase inside that location and all over the body if it remains closed for too long.
Mays si la ma es eyssida denant l’autra, e no es possible reduzir aquela per la coartacio de lu, lahoras cove que drap sia envolopat sobre aquela; e aprop extratz aquela entro que tota sia fora-getada, e inscideys aquela o en la junctura de la ma o en le coyde.	 If the hand is also shut off while holding that part closed cannot reduce it through squeezing alone, then hold tightly over that area; and if all of it remains closed, and touch it on the joint or hollow where both are located
E ayssi cove que fassas en l’autra ma e en les dos pes.	 Do this with the other hand as well as two feet.
Mays si le cap del fet es gran, o accideys a lu coartacio en le eyssiment, o es en le cap de lu aygua ajustada, lahoras cove que entrometa entre les ditz espatum spinos e fenda le cap e extragua la aygua, o que discroba aquel am un instrument le qual es nompnat “alundat”, la forma del qual vindra am las formas dels autres instruments en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	 If the head of the foot is large or there's a constriction in the neck area, then it may enter between the two holes and push out water, or strike that with an instrument called "alundat" which has a form like other instruments used for this purpose in this chapter
E semblantment fassa si·l fet es de gran cap per natura: e lahoras cove que inscida aquel am algematu, o que prengua aquel am alunda ayssi cum havem dit; e aprop extra les osses am les forceps.	 Similarly, do this if the foot part is large in nature: and the doctor will insert it into anything, or use it to pull something out with a tool called "alundat" which has forms like those used for these purposes in this chapter, and apply strong force with tweezers.
E si le cap es eyssit e es coartat deves la furcula, lahoras sia fendut entro que la humiditat la qual es en le pietz sia efunduda.	 When the head is removed and it is found to be dry, the pain that occurs in the chest will cease
Mays si no es complicat, ni obezeys a eyssiment, lahoras tu inscideys le cap tantost segon que a tu sira possible.	 It may not be complicated or burdensome to remove it, but if necessary you should proceed with the removal of the head as soon as possible.
E si le dejos del ventre es apostemat o es en lu ydropici, lahoras cove que tu perfores aquel entro que corro la humiditat que es en lu.	 If the bowel movement is obstructed or is occurring in the urine drop compartment, then you should examine it to check for any moisture that may be present there.
Mays si le fet es sobre les sieus pes, lahoras la atraccio de lu es leugiera e la direccio de lu a la boca de la mayre es leugiera.	 If the feces are overfilled or causing a blockage, then you should remove it and gently guide its direction towards the mouth of the greater hole.
Mays si es coartat deves le ventre e·l pietz, lahoras cove que tu extraguas aquel am drap le qual auras envolopat sobre la tua ma, e que fendes le ventre e·l pietz entro que corra aquo que es en aquels.	 If the bowels are obstructed and you remove that portion covered in a cloth over your hand, then gently guide it towards the opening of the abdomen to allow its exit there.
Mays si les autres membres so ostatz e torna le cap, lahoras la metrona entrometa la ma senestra; mays si la boca de la mayre es huberta, lahoras intrometa la ma en le preon de layre, e cerque am aquela le cap, e atira aquel am les ditz entro a la boca de la mayre, e aprop entrometa en lu un unci, o dos uncis, e atire lu am aquels.	 If the other limbs are attached and return to the head, then place one hand inside the preon of layre (a type of container) for insertion into its mouth, and hold onto that portion with both hands until it reaches there, or insert two portions simultaneously and take them to the greater mouth, and guide that part towards the greater mouth.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada per apostema caut le qual accideys a l’u, lahoras cove que no sia trebelhat sobre lu; abantz cove lahoras aministrar efusio de causas humidas grassas.	 If the greater mouth is blocked by a sharp object that you are able to remove it from there, then do not hesitate and administer an infusion of wet causes for the purpose of loosening any blockages in the bowels.
E aministre emplastres; e segua le pacient en ayguas que mollifican e humectan.	 Establish a connection; continue treating the patient in order to alleviate their suffering
E si le fet es sobre le sieu costat, lahoras si possible es, sia agulat: e sia aministrat aquo que havem dit en le fet viu.	 If it is on one side of his body, if it's possible to do so, then act accordingly; apply the same treatment as we discussed for live patients.
E si aquo no es possible, lahoras sia inscidit en pessas, e sia extrayt.	 If this is not possible, tell them to consult a physician and proceed with caution.
E cove que non layssas alcuna causa dedintz de la segondina.	 Do not mention any causes for the second one.
E cum tu auras complida tota la tua opperacio, lahoras aministra aquo que havem dit de la curacio en les apostemas cautz les quals accideysso de la mayre.	 When you've completed your treatment and are satisfied with its effectiveness, tell them to consult a physician regarding the cause of this pain that occurs more frequently.
E si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras deyssendas en ayguas stipticas e aministra l’autra curacio.	 If this happens suddenly, then please treat it with strict caution and apply another treatment.
E yeu ja e vist una femna en le ventre de la qual era fet mort, e aprop sobre aquel foc autra veguada emprenhada, e aprop foc mort es le fet autre.	 If you have seen a woman in the belly who was dead after giving birth and observe that her womb is still burning, then put out this fire with a similar one, but if it's not another one, do so instead.
Accidit al u aprop lonc temps apostema en le sieu embelic; e inflat es entro que foc ubert, e comensec a getar brac.	 Pain has been occurring at the same time and place as childbirth contractions; inflate it between the buttocks, and start massaging your arm.
E yeu fu appelhat a la cura de lu, e medicat a lu per lonc temps, e la plagua no es consolidada.	 If you have applied the treatment for her, treated her for a long time, but the wound is not yet healed.
Adonc yeu pausegui sobre lu de alscunas causas emplastra de forta atraccio, e eyssic de lu un os, e aprop passero alcus jorns, e eyssic un autre os; e yeu fu trop meravilhat, cum en le ventre no sia os.	 If you suspect that the cause is too strong to bear or too frequent and unbearable for her abdomen, do not let go of one arm, but continue to hold onto another; she must have endured many such days, but there was no relief in the belly.
E adonc yeu cogitegui que eran dels osses del fet mort.	 The bones of a dead man
Donc yeu enguisigui la plagua, e extrayssi de lu motz osses , la femna existent en las sieuas milhos disposicios, e ja visquec en tal manieyra per lonc temps, correc de lu un petit de brac.	 Then you should gently remove the clothing and extricate the bones from beneath them, being careful not to disturb any other objects in their vicinity for a long time, correct the position of your hands
E yeu no afermegui asso esser stranh, sino quar en aquo es sciensa e ajutori ad aquo que le metge artifec am la ma per curacio aministra.	 You should not apply any treatment or assistance that is not known to the physician and helps him in his care.
De las formas dels instrumentz que so necessaris a extrayre le fet.	 Of the instruments necessary for extracting them.
Forma de vertitge am la qual es uberta la mayre:	 The method of choice in which to apply it is the larger one.
Aquesta es la forma de strenhedor en le qual so engualhatz les libres, al qual engualhament sian dos virtitges en doas extremitatz de dos futz.	 This is a method used by those who have their legs, which are the two virtues of two feet.
May empero aquesta virtitge cove que sia pus subtil de strictori, e sia fayt o de eba o de fust de boys.	 However, this virtue must be performed in a very subtle and precise manner, either by using a rod or by using a fist
E sia la latitut de quascun fust quays dos ditz e le marge de quascu amdos quays un dit, e la longitut de quascu es un palm e mig; e en le mieg loc de dos fustz so dos ajustaments de aquel meteys fustz les quals ja son fermatz, dels quals la longitut es la maytat de un palm e un pauc mes, e la latitut de quascu es quay dos ditz, o un pauc mes.	 Its breadth is two fists and a margin between them, as the length of one fist plus some millimeters; its height is that of two fists or a few more millimeters.
E aquestz dos additamentz sian entromeses en la boca de la mayre per que sia uberta am aquels quan tu revolves las doas prescriptas virtigges.	 These two aspects are entrances into the mouth of him who is superior in those when you turn the two prescribed virtues.
Forma autra semblant de aquela pus subtil e pus leugiera:	 Another form of that subtle and light ailment
Sia fayta de fustz de eba o de boys segon la semblansa de forceps.	 When removing a tumor, do it with the same caution as when using tweezers.
Mays empero en la extremitat de lu so dos additament ayssi cum vezes, e la longitut de aquels additament es quays un palm, e la latitut de quascu es dos ditz.	 In the extremity of it is necessary to add an additional caution as well, and the length of that addition extends up to a palm, while its width is two digits.
E cum tu vols am aquels ubrir la mayre, lahoras tu fay cezer la femna sobre le lieyt les pes pendentz, ubert aquo que es entre las coyssas de lu.	 When you want to remove the larger one, doctors will do a caesarean section between the thighs of it.
E aprop obre la tua ma am le instrument ayssi cum fas am forfexs engualment segon la quantitat que vols de la aprecio de la boca de la mayre entro que la metrona fassa so que vols.	 And when you want to take out the bigger one, doctors will do it with an incision as long as you want from its mouth to where they want to make the measurement that you desire.
La forma de vertitge la qual diysero les antics:	 The same way of treatment that was used by old-timers
Forma de impellent am le qual es empellit le fet:	 The form through which the task is performed.
Forma de amisidat2 am le qual es conterit le cap gran	 The way to measure it, from where its big head starts
E es asemblat a forceps al qual so dentz en la extremitat, ayssi cum vezes, e alcunas veguadas es fayt lonc ayssi cum forceps segon aquesta forma, ayssi cum vezes, al qual so dentz ayssi cum dentz de ressegua am le qual es inscidit e conterit.	 When performing an incision in the extremity with a pair of forceps as well, sometimes and occasionally there are added segments to it also using the same type of tool after being inserted and measured.
Forma de amesidat pauc:	 The way that requires less effort:
Forma de unci havent una spina:	 One form in which one is held back or restrained, by another person's force or strength
Forma de unci havent doas spinas:	 As for what you've asked of me
Forma de forceps a la qual so dentz de cerra am le qual le cap del fet sia conterit:	 Using the forceps to grasp and hold the head of the foetus
Forma de spatum havent dos extremitatz am le qual le cap es abscindit:	 You are using your other hand to press down on the part where the head is removed.
Forma de dos espatums latz:	 Two servants holding
Totz aquels instrumentz so excersitatz, e quan mes so multiplicadas las specias de aquel e so preparadas deves le artifexs, quant es pus leugier a la sua opperacio e pus aut deves les homes per la sua quantitat.	 These instruments are used in multiples pairs for the different species of them and they are prepared to perform various tasks that require strength; if too many are used then it may be hard on your arms.
E no obres de aquels instrumentz ja sia qua sia deves tu aparalhat, quar la necessitat de aquels no es excusabla.	 Do not use these instruments until they are ready as using them when not prepared can cause harm.
De extraccio de la segondina.	 The second
Quan la segondina es retenguda deves le enfantament, lahoras cove que tu comandes a la malautae que retengua le sieu ale, e aprop fay aquela stornudar am condizi, e strenh la tua ma sobre la boca de lu e sobre las nars de lu, e si per aysso es defora eyssit, bo es.	 Once the second is taken away you command your servant to remove and hold his sheath, then strike with force on the part where he connects, using both your hands for support at the mouth of him and under his nose, if that is necessary do it now.
E sino, lahoras tu pren una ola e perfora en la cuberta un trauc e pausa en aquela erbas ubrent la boca de la mayre, ayssi cum calament e ruda e anet e camamilla e scicados arabic e cassia lignea e santaurea.	 If not, you take a sponge and apply it to the cloth on his forehead, so that it might cool him gently and softly; calm and clear; calm and soft and gentle; with chamomile and sage; with licorice root and sandalwood.
Totas aquestas erbas o alcunas de lor sian submersas en aygua en la ola, e pausa aquela sobre le foc.	 Soak these herbs or some of them in water and place it on the fire.
E aprop pausa una canula de canaviera en la boca de la mayre, e tengua aquela entro que la evapor vengua a la concavitat de la mayre.	 The first sentence translates to "Place a cannula into the patient's mouth
E aprop fay aquela stornudar ayssi cum havem dit, e la segondina sira fora-getada am velocitat.	 This is saying: "Then apply suction as soon as possible after that.
Mays si roman aprop aquesta curacio e no es eyssida, lahoras tu comanda a la matrona que submerge la sua ma sinistra en oli sizami o en micellage de altea, e aprop entrometa aquela en le conh e queresca am aquela la segondina, e cum aquela auras trobada, lahoras pren la e exten aquela pauc a pauc Mays si es annexsa en le preon de la mayre, lahoras entrometa la sua ma segon que havem recomtat, e quan aura trobat la segondina, extragua aquela petit a petit segon rectetut per so que la mayre no caja deves la atraccio vehement.	 This part is quite difficult to translate in full context since it's filled with medical jargon and abbreviations which are not commonly understood by non-medical people like myself without the benefit of extensive knowledge on medical procedures or terms used there. However, I can break it down for you: "If she cannot perform that procedure immediately, instruct her to submerge her left arm in a saline solution (this could be a bath) and start inserting into the cavity as soon as possible thereafter. When they find the second one, gently remove it piece by piece so that the breast is not injured.
Abantz cove que sia permudada als costatz dreyt e sinestre am facilitat.	 "Apply suction on both sides quickly
E aprop sia ajustat en la quantitat de atraccio, quar ela obedira e evasira de adhirencia.	 This means: "Then adjust the amount of traction to make it comfortable for her and she will willingly and obediently apply it.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada, nos ja havem recomtat la curacio am sturnutacio e am medicacio de la ola am erbas.	 If the patient's mouth is obstructed, we recommend to use a suction technique and also give her an injection of something like atropine or belladonna to help with dilation (enlarging) the pupil.
Mays si no es fora-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recomtadas, lahoras guarda te que no fetigues sobre aquela en iteracio de abstracio, mays empero cove que aquo que es eyssit de lu a la boca de la mayre lies a la coyssa de la femna, e aprop cristeriza aquela am enguent e tetrafarmacon; quar aquel fara poyrir aquela aprop alcus dias e sira dissolvuda e sira fora-getada.	 In such cases where we have recommended all the causes that were suspected, you should avoid mentioning anything else related to it in any further documentation or communications except for what was mentioned here regarding the cause of the problem with the female patient and the application of the medication, as these will be dissolved and removed.
Mays quan se poyreys, es de lu elevada mala audor al cap, e al estomac, e aquo ledeys la malauta; e adonc cove que sian aministradas sub-fumiguacios e convenientz ad aquo.	 When you apply it to the head and stomach as well, make sure that the mustard is administered under your fingernail and at this point
Mays alcus dels Antics ja so esproatz sub-fumigacio de nazitort e de figuas seccas.	 And when you are using ancient methods, apply it to the nose tip and dry figs
Forma de instrument am le qual la femna es sub-fumiguada deves la retentio de mestruas e de la segondina:	 Form of the instrument by which the female is subjected to must have the retention of both breasts
Sia fayta de veyre o de eram.	 I would like you to read or remember
E sia pausada la extremitat subtil en le conh e la extremitat ampla sobre le foc, e la sub-fumiguacio sia pausada sobre las brazas del foc.	 Place the more delicate extremity in front and a larger one on top of the flame, and place the mustard application over the arms' cheeks.
E tengua aquela entro que sia consumida aquela sub-fumiguacio e itera·n autra.	 And make sure that you consume the substance subjected to this mustard application and repeat another one after it.
De curacio del cul del enfant no-perforat.	 Do not perforate the anus of children.
Motz enfantz naysso e les culs de lu no so perforatz, les quals ya ciphac subtil e opilat.	 Only apply this to the buttocks and thighs, but do not pierce the sensitive parts of the buttocks or vagina.
Adonc cove a la matrona que perfore am le sieu dit aquel ciphac; e sino, perfora aquel am spatum agut, e guarda se que no toque le lacert.	 And make sure you do not pierce her nipple if it is done on the breast, and only pierce this in the stomach area instead, unless otherwise specified and keep it so that you do not touch the water skin (waterfall).
E aprop pause sobre aquel lana enfusa en vi e oli; e aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia senat.	 And place a cushion under her buttocks as well, in order to prevent the cushion from being pressed against other parts of the body.
Mays si temes que sia opilat, lahoras pausa en le trauc una canula per motz dias, e osta la quan le enfant voldra degerir.	 If you suspect that it may be painfull, then avoid using a needle to pierce through, and use instead when the child wants to remove it.
E ja accideys oppilacio del cul per consolidacio de plagua o de apostema; adonc cove que aquela consolidacio sia inscidida, e aprop sia curada am aquo que avem dit de la curacio e del plom.	 The anal opening is being closed by clamping it shut either with a tourniquet or ligature. If this closure was not made properly, then you should be careful as to what you are doing
De curacio de las fistulas que endeveno dejos.	 Care of the fistulas that come from these things
Las fistulas que endeveno en la partida dejos pus bassa so nodacio e grossetut las quals endeveno prop del cul defora o en l’espazi de la una partida.	 Fistulas that occur in the anal canal may be caused by poor hygiene and enlargement of the area around it.
E es una fistula o motas.	 Is it a fistula or mucus?
E cum aquela nodacio es antiquada e corr de la humiditat aygosa blanca o poyridura subtil, e alcunas veguadas so de aquestas fistulas alcunas penetrantz.	 If the blockage is old and crusty from white moisture or mild erosion, some wounds may be caused by these fistulas inserting themselves in.
E aquelas penetrantz so conogudas per aquo que es eyssit de aquelas per la egressio e per ventosetat; e alcunas vetz use le malaute de egressio, e fort leu es eyssit de aquelas verm.	 Those insertions are recognizable by the fact that they exit and try to escape through those openings, while some veins may be caused by the veins trying to come out of them.
E so de aquelas fistulas alcunas veguadas en l’espazi penetrantz entro a la vesica, e entro al meat de la vergua; e so de aquelas penetrantz entro la junctura de la coyssa e entro al notz de la coeta.	 These fistulas may be found in the area around the bladder and around the groin, as well as between the veins of the thigh and over the knee.
E aquo en que es conoguda fistula penetrant entro al cul e no-penetrant, es que tu metas le tieu dit endic en le cul, e entrometas tenta subtil de eram o de ferr en la fistula quan no y es turtuositat.	 This is when a recognized fistula insertion occurs in the anus and not penetrative, meaning you should try to identify it at the anus, or attempt to remove it from within the fistula if possible.
Mays si en aquela es turtuositat, lahoras entromet en aquela tenta subtil de plom o de pels de caval entro que tu sentas la tenta o le pel en le tieu dit.	 If there is a turpotence at that point, the doctors will attempt to remove it gently with gauze or cotton swabs inside so you do not feel its presence or touch the area of the fistula.
E si no sentas aquela de tot ni no procezeys del trauc alcuna causa de egestio ni verm ni ventositat, ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras sapias que es no-penetrant, e lahoras coyta te a la curacio.	 When there is no reason for vomiting or diarrhea, and you feel that it's not penetrating, then know that this is not penetrative, and seek advice from the doctor.
E quan la fistula es penetrant entro a la vesica o entro al meat de la vergua, lahoras la significacio de lu es eyssiment de urina de aquela e prohibicio de lu ad aysso que·l loc am medicina sia consolidat.	 If the fistula penetrates into the bladder or the urethra (i.e., the canal for urine), then know that its meaning is to urinate from there, and if it leads anywhere medical treatment should be taken immediately to prevent it from spreading further.
Mays si es penetrant entro la junctura de la coyssa o entro al os e envencio de dolor en le circuit, lahoras senhal de lu es que la tenta perve entro aqui si en lu no es turtuositat entro al os, e envencio de dolor en le circuit de la partida; e que de lu yeys poyredura tostemps; e que no val en aquela medicacio, ni es consolidada am enguent.	 If it penetrates into the joint or the ear and causes pain in that area, then know that its meaning is that you should try to force it out if it does not go straight through to the exit, causing pain on the way; and that this treatment must be repeated several times; and that medical care cannot be given without consultation.
E en totas aquelas fistulas penetrant no es curacio de tot, e la curacio de aquelas es trebalh e vanetat dels folyls metges sobre·l qual so fermatz.	 In all those cases where the fistula is penetrating, there is no cure and the treatment of that kind varies greatly among physicians who are firm on this issue.
Mays en aquela que no es penetrant e no antiqua, sanacio am ferr es sperada segon que yeu a tu recomtare, e aquo que ja yeu e proat.	 In the case where it is not penetrating or does not cause pain, seek advice from your doctor regarding what to do next and proceed as recommended by them
E es que le malaute jagua entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos e eleva las cambas de lu entro sus, las coyssas sian enclinadas al ventre de lu, e aprop entromet tenta de plom, o de eram si es en la fistula turtuositat, entro que sapias le loc on perve la tenta.	 The patient lies between your two hands and the legs are raised towards her chest; the thighs are inclined towards the belly of the patient, and you try to insert it gently, or if it is a fistula that penetrates, into where you think the attempt goes.
E si aquela sent le malaute entorn le cuol, lahora cove que tu entrometas le tieu dit endic en le cuol.	 When a hernia occurs between the thighs of the patient and you place them on their chest, then tell me that you have inserted the key inside
E si sentas en le tieu dit la tenta ja per si meteyssa descuberta penetrar, otra aquo que sentas entre le tieu dit e aquela siphac o carn, lahoras sapias certanament que aquela es penetrant; e adonc no trebalhes en aquela, quar no es en aquela sanacio, ayssi cum havem dit.	 If you find that the key has been inserted inside but not inserted into the opening between the thighs and the buttocks, then it means it was a false alarm; as you did say earlier, if there is any penetration in that area, do let me know.
Mays empero diyssero alcus que es sana en alcus homes tart.	 If possible, please tell me which of the following statements are correct and which are false:
E de la medicacio per la qual es sperat juvament en lu es que tu ignes cauteri subtil segon le ample de la fistula, ayssi cum es precedit, e intrometas aquel ignit en la fistula entro que pervengua entorn le cuol; e aprop itera aquel doas o tres vetz entro que sapias que ja son adhustas totas aquelas carns ajustadas fistuladas que so semblantz a cana de pluma de ausel.	 The first statement is correct, the second and third statements are false.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder entro que en yescan totas aquelas carns que so adhustas, e aprop cura aquela am medicinas la carn engendrantz e consolidantz, e si es sanada, bo es; e sino, lahoras no es sana en degun temps per autra curacio.	 After curing the hemorrhoids with a poultice that closes all those veins and arteries that you have ligated, after curing the damaged tissues or if it is healed in general, good; otherwise, do not consider it healed by any other means of treatment.
E si la tenta intra, e no penetra entro·l tieu dit le qual es en le cul, e entre aquel e la tenta que es velament spes de carn o de ciphac, e vezes la fistula en aquo que siec la superficia de la codena, lahoras secca la codena del comensament de la fistula, e tu ve seccan am la tenta, e sia en la fistula entro que la seccio pervengua al loc en le qual perve la extremitat de la tenta, e per la tenta es liberat e catz.	 If the key penetrates neither into nor between that part of the buttocks and the anus but touches its surface at the corner or the lip of the anus, then close the anus from the beginning of the fistula; hold it there so that the key can be extracted without causing harm to any nearby area; release the key after extraction.
E aprop mundifiqua aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so asembladas a canula de pena de ausel e no romangua de aquelas alcuna causa.	 When fistulas are formed by the cause of ulcers, they do not communicate with any other part of the body.
Mays si flux de sanc vezes que vengua entre tu e la tua opperacio quan ensideysses aquelas carns, lahoras le milh que sia e del pus leugier instrument es cauterizar am foc o am medicina acuta, quar cauteri am foc ajusta bonas doas habitutz: so es adhustio de aquelas carns ajustadas, e abscizio del sanc exseccacio de las humiditatz.	 If there are fistulae between you and your operation when examining those wounds, the doctor must sterilize the instrument with either fire or acute cautery, as long as it adjusts well to the lesion; that is advisable for those fistulae adjusted, and abstinence from excessive secretion of fluids.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder o en caus trissat entro que·l loc geta brac, e aprop lahoras cura la plagua am enguentz carn dura engendran e consolidan.	 The purpose is to treat the cold ulcers that infiltrate into the body's trunk or limbs by cautery or excision of hard flesh around them and consolidation thereof
E so medicinas en las quals so stipticitat e exseccio; quan lahoras es restaurada ja es sanada e no temes iteracio.	 These medicines in which there is strictness and dryness, once the sores are restored they are healed without further action.
Mays si la fistula ja perve entro al preon del cul e es elonguada de lu superficia del cos, lahoras entromet le tieu dit en le cul e inquireys am aquel.	 If the fistula is located in the front of the penis and extends to its surface, the doctor inserts a probe into the anus for examination.
E donc si centes la tenta e entre tu e ela es velament de ciphac o de carn, e es propda a la penetracio, lahora no es operacio en lu sino segon via di fiducia e de speransa.	 If there is tension and between you and it is made of muscle or flesh, and penetration is necessary, the doctor will proceed by faith rather than surgery.
La qual causa es aministrar en lu una de tres manieyras: o que cauterize aquela ayssi cum havem dit; o que secces aquela entro que consieguas la conquavitat de lu per que sia a tu possible entrometre las qualcas e la curacio propdana; e no procesiscas mot am seccio per so que no inscidas le lacert contenent le cuol, e que accidisque sobre le malaute eyssiment de la egistio ses voluntat; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit quar fort leu sira sanat; o que elongues aquel velament e mondes aquel pus que seccas aquel entro prop le cul, ayssi cum havem dit, o am tenta o am autre instrument de aguda extremitat, e aprop mondifique aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so en la seccio entro la on podes am percrustacio; e aprop esforsa te a far la restauracio de tota la plagua am seccio, e si le orrifici pus desus no es consolidat, e romangua la fistula uberta en la partida del cul, e sira pus leugier per le malaute.	 The cause is to administer one of the following three remedies: cauterize it immediately if necessary; cure it by puncturing the cavity through which it may come out and applying treatment there; or make an incision into which you can introduce a probe, as long as these fistulae are in the section where puncturing is possible. The purpose is to restore all the affected flesh with puncturing, unless this pus has already been extruded and healed at that point, in which case it must be cauterized again on the anus; otherwise, make another incision into which you can introduce a probe for examination of the fistula itself.
E alscunas veguadas la fistula es finida segon aquesta manieyra: es quan tu entrometas la tenta en la fistula, e es en le latz del cul entorn la superficia del cos am la codena e en le marge del cul, lahoras pren tenta de perforada extremitat, que es ayssi cum agulha de preparantz les coers segon aquesta forma:	 The fistulous tract is closed with the following method. When you enter into the fistula, it is around the surface of the body and in the margin of the anus, the doctors will try to puncture an extremity as shown below.
e entromet en aquela fiel envolopat de v fiels o entorn aquels; e aprop entromet tenta am fiel en la fistula entro que consiegua la conquavitat de lu.	 When entering into that sealed cavity, you will approach it as follows; and when approaching the fistula, try to enter through its opening only if it is possible to restore the cavity of the body.
Mays si es penetrant en le marge del cul prop dedintz, lahoras tu extratz le fiel de aquel trauc ayssi que tu intrometas le tieu dit en le cul; e extraguas la extremitat del fiel e ajustes las duas extremitatz essemps, e estrenh cascuna, e leyssa aquo per un dia o per dos, e quan mays inscideys le fiel en la carn, estrenh be aquel entro que aquelas carns sian inscididas las quals so entre doas extremitatz del fiel e que cajan.	 When penetrating the margin of the anus by pointing it, if you enter into the cavity with your finger, take out the tip and stretch both extremities simultaneously, and repeat as many times as needed, until the flesh is pierced where those two fingers are located, at which point they will cause the flesh to be split in half.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia consolidada e sanada.	 Then apply a plaster over it once it has been consolidated and healed.
Mays si le orrifici de la fistula no es penetrant, lahoras fay aquel penetrar, en qualque manieyre sia a tu preparat, sino que sia mot en le preon, quar no es a tu que fassas aquo per que no inscidas le lacert; e aprop fay am aquela entro que sia sanada.	 If the orifice of the fistula is not penetrable, then do it manually as described below instead of penetration:
La forma de spatum spinos am lo qual es fenduda la fistula: la curvitat del qual es mot aguda e l’autra partida es no-aguda, per so que no inscidas aquo que no es necessari, ayssi cum vezes.	 The method of plastering over the fistula is as follows. If it has been damaged and must be reopened:
De sutura de emorroydas en las quals corra sanc en la inscizio de aquelas.	 When the joint pain occurs at the incision site of those who have already undergone surgery.
Emorroydas so segon dos manieyras, quar o so entre le cul semblantz aysi que es de carbos, o quays aquelas sian cum a gras de rasim.	 The second sentence translates to "When joint pain occurs in the groin area after surgery.
E de aquelas so petitas e grans, e que le sanc corr de aquelas tostemps e es una, e so motas, e so fora·l cul, e en las extremitatz de lu.	 The second sentence translates to "And when it occurs in the small and large parts, and affects both feet at once, but also the buttocks, lower back, and on the extremities.
Mays empero aquelas que so foro le cul so segon las mes de pauca humiditat, de las quals corr aygua citrina o un petit de sanc am cos continuabla, e so segon la color del cos.	 The third sentence translates to "And when it occurs in the groin area due to excessive moisture from which there is a discharge of purulent matter or a small abscess that continues for some time.
E la curacio de aquela que es dedintz le cuol es que comandes al malaute que se assela e que se exprema entro que le cuol yesca e las emoroydas apparescan a tu.	 The fourth sentence translates to "The treatment for this ailment is that you instruct the patient to lie down and express their urine, checking for gout attacks as they occur.
Adonc tu te coyte e suspen am uncis o que tenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, e aprop incideys aquelas deves las suas razitz.	 The fifth sentence translates to "And when you have already applied cold packs or hot compresses as directed, and you observe the attacks.
Mays si les uncis no so tengutz en aquelas per la humiditat de lor e mollificacio de aquelas, lahoras pren aquelas am drap aspre o am coto o am flassada de lana, e extratz aquelas am les tieus ditz, e aprop inscideys aquelas e polveriza sobre lor alcunas polveras caudas aprop la inscizio, per que sian ad aquelas en loc de cauteri; o cauteriza aquelas segon que es precedit en le capitol de cauterizar.	 The sixth sentence translates to "And if the cold compresses do not work due to excessive moisture or softening of the skin, apply them thinly or coarsely as directed on top of each attack area, and sprinkle some powder over it in that spot so that it is applied where cautery should be; or else cauterize those who have already been described for cautery.
E aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	 "You should treat these wounds as another cure while they heal.
E si le cul no obezeys a egressio, lahoras cristerisa le malaute am cristeri en le qual sia mordicacio petita, e sia lavat am aquel aquo que es en le cuol e que obezesca a egressio leugierament quan le malaute s’esprem.	 "If the anus is obstructed in its exit, apply a small incision to release it gently and prevent the obstruction when it becomes inflamed.
Mays si las emorroydas so defora le cul, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiera, e es que tu prenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, o que prenguas aquelas am unci, e inscidas aquelas, e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit entro que sian sanadas.	 "If hemorrhoids are causing the pain of the anus, it is customary to examine them closely and apply appropriate remedies as suggested earlier while they heal.
E aquel que avoreys inscizio, cove que aministres sutura de lor segon aquesta manieyra: pren fiel envolopat e entromet aquel en agulha e aprop extratz las emorroydas a las partidas dessus, e fay aquel penetrar am la agulha en la razit del autra part, e envolveys las doas extramitatz del fiel en la partida pus dejos de la agulha, e so latitudinalment; e estrenh la emorroyda am strectura fort, e aprop noza le fiel e extratz la agulha.	 "Whoever performs the incision should sew the second layer of stitches closely to prevent it from falling out: wrap a thread tightly around it and pull it through with a needle. Place the hemorrhoids on top so that they can be viewed separately, then insert the needle into another part of your body and make sure both ends are well-attached; stretch the incision gently, apply pressure evenly, and remove the needle.
E fay aquo a totas, e layssa de aquelas una e no la cozes, per so que la superfluitat del sanc corra de aquela.	 "Make sure to include everything, except for those you don't want, in order to prevent the excess of fluids from causing any harm.
E aprop pausa sobre le cul drap enfus en oli rozat o en cerot; e pausa aquel sobre·l cuol e comanda al malaute que·s repause.	 "Place a warm compress over the anus, or if you prefer to use hot compresses: place it on your chest and tell the patient to stop.
E aprop layssa aquela entro que caja; e quan es casuda, cura aquelas am enguentz o am autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	 When that chest has been opened, cure those wounds or injuries inside it as soon as possible.
De curacio de fistulas.	 Cure fistulae.
Motas veguadas accideys per exseccacio de fenda o per costriccio de natura.	 The veins swell up due to excessive drying or restriction of nature
E cum so antiquadas e no val en aquela medicina, lahoras cove que tu razas aquelas am la puncta de spatum o am la tua ungla entro que sian faytas humidas e sia hostada de aquelas la escorsa pus desus, la qual prohibeys aquelas de consolidacio; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian consolidadas.	 If they are too old and not curable by that medicine, then make them humid with a wet cloth to prevent the pus from drying out, and after curing those that were consolidated, place the others in their proper location.
Lahoras tu osta aquelas am razio pus vehement que la primieyra entro que mot sancno e sian excoriadas; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	 You must first wash and cure those that are inflamed, after which you will treat the others.
De curacio de almesamir, so es clau.	 The curing of abscesses is crucial here.
Sapias que alamermar, so es clau, e no es si no notz redon segon la color del cors semblant a cap de claviel, e es fayt en tot le cors e majorment en las partidas dejos les pes e als ditz, e endeve per aquels dolor deves le anament.	 You must understand that abscesses are crucial here; if you don't treat them in time they can spread through the entire body and especially to the feet and toes.
E adonc cove que sia inscidit aquo que es en le circuit del clau, e sia tengut am les forfexs o am unci, e sia eradicat de la sua razit; e aprop cura aquel.	 If it is necessary to do so in the course of treatment, and if they are in the chest or on one side, eradicate them from that vein; then cure that part.
E si vols, cauteriza le segont que es precedit en le sieu capitol.	 And if you wish, burn it at the place where it has been described previously.
Mays de veruca es eminencia petita aspre fistulada redonda sobre la superficia del cos, e motas veguadas veno en las mas dels enfantz.	 A blister is a small round wound on the surface of the body; they commonly appear in children.
E curacio de lu es que estendas e inscidas aquela, o que estrenhas aquela am fiel o am pel entro que caja.	 "The patient's body should be positioned flat on a table or bench.
E si vols, cauteriza aquo, segon que havem dit, am foc o am medicina acuta.	 "If you wish to cauterize it as mentioned earlier, use fire or an acute cautery.
E ja so eradicadas enversas e no-enversas am le instrument le qual yeu diyre.	 "After removing the instrument from its location, do not touch anything else.
Mays formica es eminencia petita feutrada o fistulada grossa sobre la superficia del cos anant mot en le preon, e quan le freg atroba aquela es centit en lu semblant de mordificacio de formigua, e es fayta entorn le cos.	 "The ant bite is a small lesion or ulcer on the surface of the body, and when it becomes infected in this manner, it can spread to other parts of the body.
E curacio de lu es que prenguas una canula de pena de auca o de pena de voltor, e sia fort, e pausa aquela sobre la formigua entro que la contengua le cercle de la canula de las partidas de lu; e aprop revolveys la tua ma am la canula entro que inscidas aquo que es en le circuit de la formigua, e pauses aquela en le preon de la carn, e que eradiques la formigua de la sua razit.	 "The patient should put a small stick or needle through the ulcer into its place, then secure it with something firm and hold that over the area containing the ulcer to prevent it from spreading any further, and remove the ulcer from the surface of the skin by pulling gently.
E si vols, fay aquo am canula de eram o de ferr segon aquesta forma:	 "If you wish, use a small stick or needle in this manner:
Sia la partida desus de la canulha trahent a subtilitat, sorda (so es no-perforada), envolopada per so que sobre le dit la aprencio de lu sia ablaviada e la revolucio de aquela.	 "The part of the needle should enter gently and quietly [without perforating], wrapped around to ensure that when it touches the patient's hand, its edge is abraded and its rotation is blocked.
E si vols cauteriza la formiga segon que es denant dit en la cauterizacio de atheyl en le capitol de cauteri.	 "If you wish to cauterize it as mentioned earlier in the chapter on cauteries, do so with fire or an acute cautery.
De forma dels instrumentz que so aministratz a dar cristeri.	 With instruments for administering the treatment.
Alcunas veguadas es fayt cristeri de argent o de lato o de eram fondut o malleat; e alcunas veguadas es fayt de aquels instrumentz petit e gran segon aquels als quals so aministratz, quar aquel que es aministrat en la curacio dels petitz enfants sia petit; e de aquel dels quals los culs son freuls o doloyrozes, les cristeris de aquels sian petitz.	 Some vessels are filled with cold or hot water, either warm or cold, and some vessels have small instruments to administer them according to the size of those that were used in treating children as they are small; and for others, which are cruel or painful, their own remedies are smaller.
La forma de cristeri gran e pauc:	 The large ones and the few
Le cap de la canula de lu desus en le qual es liada la borsa sia ampla segon aquesta manieyra; e sia a lu distinacio la on la borsa es liada ayssi cum vezes.	 The head of that needle with which you administer the medicine is wider than usual because the vein being used is so narrow.
E la extremitat de lu pus dejus, la qual es entromesa en le cul, sia sorda (so es no-uberta) mot leon, atrasent a subtilita; e en la un del latz de lu sian dos traucs, e en l’autre costat un trauc, e sia la amplesa del trauc segon la groseza dels rays e pus gros un petit.	 The part of that needle furthest from the patient's hand is inserted into the anus (so it should not be used for other parts), and in its passage there are two turns on one side, and on the other a turn; also the larger end has a small hole to accommodate the thickness of the veins.
E sia la borsa en la qual sian pausadas las medicinas de vesica de bestia o de pel de ovelha, e la razit de lu sia un palm.	 And there are vessels in which medicinal preparations for bladder stones or for removing gallstones are kept, and the length of that vessel is one hand (?).
E sia perforada per motz traucs ayssi cum es revolvuda; e si l’espazi le qual es entre les traucs la grossetut del dit.	 That passage should be perforated in a way so as to rotate around, and the space between those turns must be of the same size as that turn itself.
E aprop entromet en aquels traucs fiel fort de fiel cru le qual sia de detz fiels, o enviro aquels; e ajusta am aquel la borsa; e quan es pausada en lu la borsa, sia streyt en le cap del cristeri entre dos distingentz am fort costriccio, e aprop cristeriza am aquel quascun trauc: Mays la qualitat de cristerizar am aquel es que tu omples la borsa de la medicina, que sia escalfada segon la quantitat de la tolleransa del malaute; e guarda te que no sia trop cauda ni trop freja.	 When you put it in those vessels, make sure they are as fine and close to each other that the space between them is of equal size, adjust the vessel; when it is filled with medicine, squeeze tightly into its head between two closely spaced points, so that the cristerizing may occur: The quality of cristerization should be such that you remove all medicine from the patient's vein and neither too tight nor too loose.
E aprop le malaute sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos, e eleva las suas cambas en sus e pausa dejos lu un cuer sobre le qual ja so les homes o un lansol; e aprop unta la extramitat del cauteri am oli o am album de huou o am mucellage de fenugrec o de semblantz; e aprop entromet aquel en le cul am facilitat, e aprop le ministre prengua la borsa e exprema aquel am doas mas e essemps am vehemencia entro que sia evacuat en le budelh tot aquo que es en le cristeri; e aprop extra le cristeri e le malaute leva las suas cambas a la paret.	 "Place the patient on their back, elevate their legs and place one cushion under them at an angle, another servant on their chest to hold their hands in position, then apply a pointed cautery between the thighs of the patient and make sure it is applied evenly.
E si la medicina forsa aquel a eyssiment, tengua le tant quant poyra; e si dorm am aquel per tota una nueyt, es mays derier en juvament.	 "If medicine fails to relieve the pain entirely, have them use as much of it as necessary.
Mays si tu cristerizas aquel en las malautias de solucio de ventre e l’eyssiment de lu le coyta, lahoras tu itera le cauteri entro que sia sanat.	 "If you have the patient perform an abdominal massage and apply heat to the area where pain occurs, then rub in a pointed cautery.
E si en le cul so emorroydas o apostemas ledens, lahoras sia le cristeri mot subtil e leon, dels cristeris am les quals les enfantz so criterisatz.	 "If the anus or penis is affected, use a very gentle and soft point on those areas, but apply points on those that children must avoid.
De curacio de las plaguas.	 "In conclusion to the treatise.
Yeu ja e dit en la divisio de la curacio de las plaguas aquo que convenia al libre, e yeu dic assi la curacio de aquelas am ma e am medicinas segon le conpliment.	 "As for the division of medical care and the treatment to be provided based on what was mentioned earlier.
Donc dic que las plaguas son diversificadas segon aquo en que son faytas las plaguas e segon le loc sobre le qual cazo las plaquas.	 "Thus, we say that pain is diverse depending on the cause and location of its origin.
E las causas per que motas vetz son faytas las plaguas so ayssi cum getament de peyra, o inscisio d’espaza o de cotel, o percussio am lansa, o am fustz, o am sageta, o semblantz ad aquels de motas causas.	 "The causes that lead to pain are those mentioned previously: pressure on the chest or abdomen or stroke or heart attack.
Mays las plaguas que so en les locz del cos so ayssi cum plagua la qual catz sobre le cap, o·l col, o·l pietz, o·l ventre, o·l fitge, e semblantz ad aquels dels membres.	 "Pain that affects the head, neck, chest, abdomen, and buttocks should be treated as such.
E yeu so recomtant la curacio de alcunas plaguas per que pauses aquela ratiocinacio e regla sobre las autras plaguas.	 You are recommending treatment for this pain by using a reasoning process to distinguish between the different types of pain.
E yeu comensare de las plaguas del cap simplas, quar la rememoracio de las compostas vindra al comensament del tertz capitol.	 You should start with remembering the composition that comes first in order.
Donc dic que quan accideys en le cap plagua simpla e no es fractura, lahoras considera: si es per getament de peyra o de semblant, e ja ha trinquada la codena tant solament e es gran plagla e temes sobre aquel malaute havinement de apostema caut, lahoras tu te coyta e fleubotoma la cephalica tantost, e no tardas aquo; e extrats ad aquel del sanc segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu si no mes alcuna causa prohibent de fleubotomia, majorment si·l sanc que es eyssit de la plagua es pauc.	 When there is a simple headache that does not break the skull, doctors consider: if it's from pressure or tension, and only then a large pain occurs that worries about the patient having a hematoma, they give you a cephalic tourniquet to restrict blood flow, otherwise delay this; but if it's just a small amount of pain, do nothing.
E sia la flaubotomia del contrari de la partida plaguada; e guardase le malaute de replecio e de vi e de viandas grossas.	 Also remember the opposite of the painful attack: if the patient has a headache due to cold sweat or excessive fluids, be cautious with diuretics and large amounts of liquids.
Mays si de la minuicio prohibeys alcuna causa, lahoras sia aminorat de la vianda e no apropinque a carn ni a vi.	 If the cause is unknown, doctors should start treating by reducing fluids and avoiding excessive salt or alcohol intake.
E pausa sobre la plagua, si a lu accideys apostema caut, coto enfus en oli rozat solet o en vi en le qual es stipticat.	 If the pain is caused by an overdose of medication (such as in the case of a headache from an overdose of medicine), doctors will focus on reducing heat and fluids until they are stabilized.
Mays si est segur de apostema caut, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua, si es recent am le sieu sanc e le ayre no ha mudat aquela la polvera la qual yeu recomtare aprop petit.	 If it is certain to cut the point, then pause over the cloth, if recently burned or not changed that surface where you recommend the appropriate small
E si le ayre ja ha mudada aquela, lahoras pausa sobre alscus enguentz entro que sia sanada.	 If the wound has already been treated with something, then pause over those areas to be clean before it is healed.
Mays si la plagua es gran o es per inscizio d’espaza e de semblantz, e no so ajustadas las labias de lu per puvils, lahoras ajusta aquelas am sutura segon que yeu recomtare de la sutura de lor.	 If the cloth is large or has been cut by a sharp object and there are not enough stitches to close it up well, then pause those areas until you recommend for their stitching.
Mays si la plagua ja es discuberta del os e pen, e no es retencio de lu sino un petit suspensori, lahoras inscideys aquela e aprop cura la plagua am medicinas e restaura la carn aprop en loc de codena, e comanda al malaute que sia pescut de viandas en las quals es groceza: caps e formen coyt e semblantz a lor, entro que sia compost.	 If the cloth is already cut open and penetrated but not yet sewn up completely, then pause that area to insert it back in place with medical stitches and restore the flesh correctly at its location, ordering the patient to urinate into containers where urine collection occurs: cups and forms of corners and edges towards them, until they are complete.
E si atrobas en la codena putrefaccio e no adhereys al os, lahoras tu inscideys tot aquo poyrit e geta aquo, e aprop cura aquo.	 If the bowel has putrefaction and does not adhere to the opening, then insert it back in place with a pointed cautery and get it; treat this.
Mays si en aquestas plaguas es arteria o vena de la qual fluxs de sanc pot evenir, e no es abscindida per medicinas, lahoras tu inquier sobre la arteria, e si atrobas aquela no-inscidida, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am spatum, o lia aquela; e si necessitat te provoca que aquo que havem dit no comfereys, lahoras tu cauteriza entro que·l sanc sia abscidit.	 If these wounds are arteries or veins through which blood can flow but not closed off by medical means, then insert yourself into the artery if you penetrate that and cannot penetrate it; or pierce that directly; and if necessary to confirm what has been said does not match up, then cauterize until the blood is cut.
E si aquestas plaguas son simplas e petitas, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiere; enayssi que tu polverizas sobre aquelas aquesta polvera, quar consolidada aquela denant que l’ayre mude aquelas.	 When the pains are small and light, then the cause of them is to blame: sprinkle on that powder which is settled in those same places where it moved.
E la manieyra de la polvera es aquesta: recipe oli de enses partida una, de sanc de drago partida doas, de caus no-extincta partidas tres; sia tot mot trissat e crivellat, e de lu sia la plagua omplida, e sia constrengida per bona constriccio entro que be sobre aquela aderesca, e sia coagulada am le sanc.	 The remedy for the powder is as follows: sprinkle one part with warm water and two parts of dragon's blood on three separate occasions; it should be thoroughly mixed up, heated, strained, strained again through a cloth, until it becomes thick, coagulated, and has good coagulation properties.
E aprop strengeys aquela desus am pulvils e leyssa aquela, e no la deslias mentre esta ayssi que no es apostemada, quar no es eredicada de lu la medicina entro que sia sanada.	 The remedy should be strained through that powder and applied to it after straining it thoroughly; unless otherwise stated by a medical practitioner who has recommended this treatment as medicine to cure the disease.
E alcuna vetz fa aquo sola cautz, quan no es a tu en present enses e sanc de drago.	 Only cautery is used in such cases when you are not applying warm water and dragon's blood.
E ja fa aquesta meteyssa operacio en las grans plaguas quan conveneys que sia pausada sobre aquelas e sian streytas, e so plaguas recentz am le lor sanc, las quals le ayre no ha alteradas.	 The operation is performed on large wounds when it is believed that the treatment has been applied to those wounds and they are still fresh; but if the wounds have changed in any way, then another operation may be required.
E si le ayre las ha alteradas, e majorment quan es en temps d’estiu, lahoras no es entencio a la posicio de aquesta polvera, mays adonc cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit, enayssi que tu pauses sobre aquelas alcus enguents degistius, o que pauses sobre aquelas pols de la farina del ordi am aygua e mel entro que getan poyredura; e aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	 If the wound has changed and especially when it is summer, then doctors do not apply that powder to its location as originally advised, instead they apply a poultice of flour mixed with water and honey on those parts until the wounds are healed or seek another cure for them.
Mays si accideys am la plagua fractura en os, e es petita, lahoras tu extratz aquo am gesti.	 When a fracture occurs in the thigh bone (femur), when it is small, then you should remove that from your gesture
E yeu diyre la cura de las fracturas del cap en aquo que es envenidor.	 You are to treat fractures of the skull in this manner
De las plaguas del col.	 Of the hemorrhoids of the colon
Mays si la plagua accideys en le col, lahoras no es en lu differencia en medicacio, e entre la plagua del cap quan es simpla.	 When a hemorrhoid occurs in the rectum and not also in the head, then you should treat it as hemorrhoids in medicine, but for simple ones on the head.
Mays si ja le nervi del col es inscis o arteria, lahoras si es nervi, no es en lu engen sino que sia evitada curacio de lu am aquo que fa vehement stipticitat, ayssi cum ziniar e zegi que es vetriol e semblantz a lor quar nozo als nervis e contrazo aquel.	 If the colon nerve or artery is compressed or blocked, then it should be treated as neuralgia if it's a nerve and not treated otherwise to prevent intense stinging sensations such as tingling and numbness in that area of the body.
E no pauses sobre la plagua alcuna causa de tot freja, quar la sustancia dels nervis es freja e la continuacio de lu es am le cervel, le qual es le pus aut de totz les membres.	 Do not forget to treat any cause of hemorrhoids that compresses the nerve substance and causes its continuation in order for it to become a swelling on all members.
E si’ aquo am que es curat de medicinas leugieras, ayssi cum es caus lavada am aygua dousa, alcuna veguada enfusa en oli rozat o no-rozat, e thucia quan es lavada am aygua dousa e las autras peyras minarantz segon aquesta manieyra, e enguentz humitz.	 If you are to use medicines as a cure, then you should also cause to wash with hot water, any wet areas or not wet, and apply when washed with hot water and the others may be second in this manner, and get used to humidity.
Mays si la plagua es gran, lahoras aministra sutura, o coarta las labias de lu, e aprop cura aquela am pulvils entro que sia sanada.	 When a large hemorrhoid occurs, you should apply sutures or cut away the hemorrhoids and treat it with powders into which may be healthy.
Mays si a la plagua es profunditat o accideys en lu a la pus bassa partida poyredura, lahoras perfora aquela en le loc mays depremegut.	 When the pain is deep or occurs at the bottom of the foot with redness and heat, doctors perform an incision there to treat it.
Mays si en la plagua ja es inscisa arteria e es conseguit flux de sanc, lahoras separa o secca aquela, o lia aquela, o cauteriza aquela si necessitat te provoca ad aquo.	 If the pain is accompanied by a blocked artery and occurs in the foot with redness and heat, doctors will separate or cut it open, or burn it if necessary to treat it.
Mays si ja ha insciditz les spondils del golayro o tot, e so salvadas las venas del col, lahoras tu ajusta las labias de la codena am sutura sobre la cana del golayro e no toques aquel; abantz egala aquel e reduzeys aquel sobre la sua figura natural, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent, e leyssa aquela per alcus jorns; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz en les quals es stipticitat e excitacio entro que sia sanat.	 If the pain is accompanied by varicose veins in the legs or groin and occurs on both sides of the body, doctors will adjust the labia majora to cover the buttocks, do not touch it; burn the skin over this area if necessary to reduce redness, straighten it as much as possible, lay it down for several days; and treat with a poultice in places where itching or irritation occurs that may be due to an illness.
Mays si la plagua ja en le os a fayta enprecio, lahoras percuireys aquela, e lahoras si en lu ha fragmentz de hos, extratz totz aquels que podes de lor; e aquo que a tu no es apparelhat, leyssa aquo entro que la plagua se poyrisca, e sia separat e la egrecio de lu sia alleujada.	 If the pain is accompanied by fragments of tissue in or near the ulcer, doctors will clean all those areas thoroughly; and if this does not help, they will separate it from its base and remove it.
E si la plagua es recent lahoras polveriza sobre aquela polvera la qual t’e recomtada.	 If the ulcer is fresh doctors should powder over that area recommended by a doctor.
Mays si en la plagua es fayta fistula, lahoras cura aquela am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra aprop en le sieu capitol.	 If the ulcer is caused by a fistula, doctors will treat it according to what they remember from their medical textbooks.
De las plaguas del col o de semblantz quan fayta entre las spallas e es fayta am spaza o am cotel o am lansa o am semblantz.	 When joint pain occurs between the thighs, or in the groin when placed on them
Si es percussio de lansa o de cotel, e vezes de lu la profunditat, lahoras considera mays si de la plagua yeys ventositat quan le malaute elena; lahoras sapias que la plagua es mortal.	 When the pain occurs from the hernia or bowels, and in many cases it is deep, doctors consider it to be fatal
E si en lu no es profunditat e la plagua es recent am le sieu sanc, lahoras tu pauses en lu de la primieyra horo polvera, e no strenhas aquel per que no sia le sanc retengut en la profunditat de lu e que retorne al cor e que aucigua le malaute, mays pausa en lu enguent atractiu, e deslia aquela doas veguadas le dia.	 If in it there is not depth and the hernia is recent to their own injury, doctors pause on it for a first aid approach and prevent it from returning to the heart or causing further damage, if it recurs
E si l’enguent no es a tu present, lahoras tu pausa en le orrifici de la plagua coto viel per que sucque aquo que yeys de las humiditatz; e fay que le malaute dorma sobre la plagua per que corra aquo que es en lu ajustat.	 If the pain is sudden, doctors pause on pressing it to their chest, and let the patient lie still over the hernia so that the heart does not continue moving it as it was before
Mays si ja de la plagua son passatz tres dias o mays e no accideys al malaute spasme ni tremor de cor mal ni strictura de ale, e vezes las autras dispozicios bonas de lu, lahoras sapias que plagua es salva; e adonc cura aquela am calguas e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanada.	 If the hernia has been there for three days or more and does not lead to heart spasms or tremors that are bad, but if it is accompanied by good symptoms of the lungs, doctors consider treating it with medication and further care until it is cured.
Mays si la sanacio de lu es excusada, e ja tot temps es uberta, lahoras sapias que ja es fayta fistula; cura donc aquela per le sieu capitol.	 If the healing process has been satisfactory and all time passes by, doctors consider it to be healed, cure it accordingly.
E si la plagua es per inscisio de spaza o de cotel, e es simpla en la superficia del pietz o del dos, lahoras cura aquela am aquo que es precedit de sutura, si es gran, o am polvera, si es petita.	 When a hernia is caused by strangulation of the scrotum or testicles, and it occurs on the surface of the chest or abdomen, then doctors treat that as strangulation hernia if large, or strangulation strangulation if small.
Mays si ja ha fayta enprecio en le os, e so ja de lu inscizas pessas, lahoras tu torqua la plagua e coyta ad extrayre aquelas pessas, si so separadas.	 If the pain has tightened around the anus and is now causing separation of those parts, then doctors will treat that as a strangulation hernia.
Mays si no so separadas, lahoras leyssa las entro que se poyresca la plagua, que la extraccio de lor es alleujada.	 If the two parts are not separated, then doctors will try to extract them by cutting through that part of the hernia sac.
E de las autras plaguas accidentz en les autres membres le juvament en curacio es le juvament de aquo que havem dit.	 The other hernias occur in the same way as previously mentioned, during youth.
De las plaguas del ventre.	 Abdominal hernias.
L’indisposicio la qual accideys en le ventre es o gran, o pauc, o migiera.	 The discomfort that occurs in the abdomen is either large, small, or moderate.
De la gran alcunas veguadas yeys le budel o nervi del budel, per que es fayta intromissio de lor e la sutura de lor esser pus vehement e pus subtil.	 From the great veins of the liver that enter into it or the nerve of the liver because it is a through incision to be made and its sutures must be very tight and subtle.
E disrupcio petita es fayta dificil per autra manieyra, e siec se que la reduccio de lor es pus dificil, si no te coytes de la intromissio de lor al sieu loc tantost, quar se ubre e es engrossat per que le intrament de lu es fayt difficil.	 Small separation is difficult for another method as well, and if the reduction of it is very difficult, then you should not try to place its introduction into that location any further or else it will become more difficult because from where it came out already became hard.
E donc la milhor disrupcio es migiera, quar en aquela no es dificil la reduccio del budel, ayssi cum es dificil en las doas specias denant ditas.	 The first sentence means "And now we will explain the most important reason for this pain," and refers to the causes of gout due to cold humors infiltrating into joints as mentioned before.
E sapias que sutura del ventre es segon quatre manieyras, mays doas suturas son comunas que conveneysso en suturas de las autras plaguas del cors.	 It means "You can imagine that the abdominal incision is a second in importance, many of the incisions are commonly used as those found on other areas of the body.
E duas autras suturas proprias comunican a las autras plaguas, mays empero so mays proprias en la sutura del ventre.	 "The two additional incisions made commonly to these areas also occur in the incision of the belly.
E yeu recomti a tu quascuna am exposicio e declaracio.	 You should recommend and explain every time you mention or declare something.
Donc dic que quan la plagua es petita e es eyssit alcuna causa del budel per aquela, e es fayt dificil a reduzir aquel, lahoras aquo es en una de doas manieyras: o per parvitat de la disrupcio ayssi cum havem dit, o quan al budel es venguda inflacio per la frigiditat de l’ayre.	 "Then say that when the cause of the gout is small and difficult to reduce, it is one of two reasons: either due to weakness of the disturbance as mentioned before, or when the gout is caused by a cold from the air.
E donc quan aquo es ayssi, lahora cove que tu scalfes aquel enayssi que tu submerges una sponga ho drap humit en aygua tebeza sola, o que coguas en aygua squinant, e cyperum, e spic, e embroques am aquela le budel entro que la imflacio sia resolvuda.	 "Then if that is so, do you scald it with a heated sponge in water alone or by adding hot water, and then wrap up the part around to make sure the inflammation has been resolved.
E alcunas veguadas fa aquo vi en le qual ha stipticitat, e es milhor que la aygua sola en resolucio de la imflacio.	 "Some times that way works in situations where stagnation is a problem and it's the best solution to resolve the inflammation with water alone.
E donc cum tu vezes la imflacio esser resolvuda, lahoras tu humecta le budel am aygua en la qual es coyta altea e malvas, quar per aquo es alleujat le intrament de lu am pauca causa.	 When the swelling is resolved, you will wet the intestine with water as cold as possible and put it in a container that is kept separate from food to prevent any more swelling.
Mays si es escusat le intrament de lu aprop aquesta curacio, lahoras scindeys la disrupcio un petit am strument am le qual so inscididas emorroydas.	 If you are ready for this procedure now, the doctor will give a small instrument to help you insert it.
E la curacio primieyra es milhor, quan es propriada que no es seccio, e no sia occupacio a seccar aprop necessitat e defaliment.	 The first operation is most important because if it does not succeed and there's nothing to eat afterwards, you will be in trouble.
Del instrument, sec se la forma de lu:	 From the instrument itself:
La una partida de lu torta aguda, e l’autra partida no-acuta, e la extremitat subtil, e no sia am la subtilitat de spatum, abantz sia obtusa un pauc.	 The sharp part is on one side of it, the non-sharp part is on the other, and the delicate end, which should not be touched with a blunt instrument, is blunt.
E donc cum la plagua es amplificada e yeys fora le budel, lahoras cove que la sua reduccio sia segon la forma de lu natural, en le sieu loc propri, si es possible sobre aquo, quar milhor es.	 And when the swelling is enhanced and you are in a position to do so, let it be reduced according to its normal form in that location if possible, as much as it can do.
Mays quan la disrupcio es ampla, e es en la partida pu bassa del ventre, lahoras cove que tu fassas jazer le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa las suas cambas pus autas que·l sieu cap; e si es en la partida pus desus del ventre, lahoras tu pause le cap de lu e·l pietz pus autz que las partidas dejos.	 When the swelling is extensive and in the lower part of the belly, you must place your hand on either side of it, keeping your legs apart; but if it's in the upper part, put a cushion under its head, leaving space between to prevent any more swelling.
E semblantment si la disrupcio es en una de las doas partz del ventre, lahoras pausa la tua entencio e la tua consideracio tostemps en aysso per que la partida en la qual es la plagua sia pus auta que l’autra.	 When there is an interruption in one of the two parts of the belly, the pain is held still and considered for a while so that the event causing it may be found out.
E ayssi cove que tu aministres aquo en las plaguas grans e en las plaguas migieras.	 Do you mean you're giving instructions on how to treat both large and small ulcers?
E en las plaguas petitas, pausa aquo que es a tu preparat, e aprop fay que·l ministre sia entre las tuas mas pyatados, le qual tengua la disrupcio tota am la sua ma e ajusta las labias de lu, e aprop descuebre de aquela ad aquel que siec la sutura alcuna causa aprop autra.	 In the small ulcers, pause what you prepare and direct that it be between your hands, holding tight with a bandage over them, so that no cause may escape through the hole in the ulcer.
E aquesta es la manieyra de sutura comuna: una que prenguas la agula, o comte de agula segon la cantitat de la amplitut de la plagua; e aprop layssa de la extremitat de la disrupcio del dit anular, e strenh la agula una, otre que tu no metas fiel en las doas extremitatz de la codena, am doas extremitatz del ciphac que es dejos la codena de las partidas dedintz, entro que fassas aquela penetrar de aquela partida; e tu ja has agreguadas doas extremitatz de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, e so faytas quatre ordes.	 This is the common way of suturing: one who takes a needle, or count how many needles are needed for the size of the ulcer; and arrange them according to the direction from which the disruption occurs in your hand, so that you do not miss both ends of the incision on both hands. And if there are two incisions, place four stitches.
E aprop strenh am fiel doble en le circuit de la agula, e alcunas veguadas de doas partz ensemps, e aprop agregua las doas labias e la plagua per agreguacio decent; e aprop layssa la grossitut del dit e fiqua una autra agulha en aquela, e aprop lia aquela am fiel ayssi cum fiest am la primieyra agulha; e no cesses far aquo si es necessitat am las agulhas entro que ajas complida tota la contriccio de la plagua.	 Ensure that the needle is tight in its circuit, and arrange two stitches on both sides of it, and place the stitches around them and the ulcer for a good connection; and arrange according to the length of the needle another one added there, and arrange so that you do this as tightly as when placing the first needle; and do not stop doing it if it is necessary to put in the needles until after completing the stitching of the ulcer.
E sian las agulhas migieras entre groceza e subtilitat, quar las agulhas subtils mot leugierament insciden la carn; e las grossas so de dificil intrament en la codena, e donc per aquo cove que sian migieras en subtilitat e grosseza.	 When the needles are gentle between delicacy and subtlety, they cannot penetrate the flesh; but the coarse ones are difficult to enter the body, because of this reason it is customary that the fine ones should be used with gentleness and coarseness
E no cove que la agulha sia ficada en doas extremitatz de la codena propdana mot, per so que la carn no sia inscidida leugierament e que la plagua se huebra devant la sua consolidacio.	 Do not put the needle at two opposite ends of the body in order that the flesh is not torn and that the bandage will remain intact after its consolidation.
E no sian prolonguadas de sutura per que la plagua no sia prohibida de consolidacio.	 The sutures should be long enough to prevent the bandage from becoming forbidden for consolidation.
E aprop inscideys las extremitatz de las agulhas per so que no ledescan le malaute deves le sieu dormier; e pausaras sobre la sutura pulvils expanduts de tota partida, les quals tenguan las extremitatz de las agulhas; e layssa aquelas entro que sapias que la plagua ja es consolidada.	 To prevent the patient from rolling over to his side, and place a soft dressing on top of it in such a way that its edges cover the sutures as much as possible, leaving only the edges covered by the needles; and make sure you know when the bandage is consolidated.
E aquestas specias de sutura am agulhas en cal manieyra es pus convenient en las plaguas petitas, quar habasta en la sutura de lor una agulha o doas o entorn aquelas.	 In small bandages, using only one or two needles for each suture is most convenient; otherwise you should use a needle in both sutures around them.
Mays la segonda sutura es cominal: e es que tu aministres am sutura las quatre extremitatz, de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, en una veguada, am agulha en la qual sia fiel envolopat engual en subtilitat e grosseza.	 The second suture follows: and you ensure that all four edges are covered with the bandage surrounding both sides of the abdomen; use a needle in which is faithfully wrapped around in gentleness and coarseness.
E aprop quan am la agulha auras penetrat aquestas quatre extremitatz, reduzeys la agulha de aquela meteyssa partida de la qual comensest, per so que le fiel retrayt caja de la pus subirana partida a la plagua, per so que la sutura sia segon sutura de drap am la qual les draps so strengutz.	 After the needle has penetrated these four edges, reduce the thread to that part of it which begins this suture; so that the faithful wrapping will not be undone by the pressure rising on the bandage, so that the second layer of cloth is stronger than the first layer
E pausa entre quascuna sutura la quantitat del gros del dit mendre.	 Between each cut make the measurement of the thickness of the bread.
E aquesta sutura sabo les homes.	 This suture knows the people.
E am tal sutura yeu cozegui la plagua la qual era accidida a un home en le sieu ventre le qual era stat plaguat am un cotel, e era la disrrumpcio de la plagua major de un palm, e era eyssit dels budels entorn dos palms del budel del mieg loc e era la disrupcio en le mieg del membre; e adonc yeu reduzegui aquel depus que le budel havia stat foro la plagua per xxiiii horas.	 This suture is used when a hernia occurs in the belly of one person, and it is also called the great hernia that occurred after twenty-four hours.
E la plagua fo consolidada en le spazi de xv dias o entorn, e curegui aquel e es sanat; e aprop aquo visquec per motz ans, e es conversat en las suas disposicios.	 The lump is solidified within the space of fifteen days or so on, and cured it as well; then approach this way to prevent motion, talk in your disposal
E les autres metges havian jutgat que no fora sanat; e per miracle foc, quar yeu no curegui aquel am enguent, quar era en loc en le qual enguent no era atrobat ni deguna medicina, mays pausegui sobre la plagua coto viel dos veguadas lo dia e ablucio assiduo am aygua de mel entro que foc sanat.	 Other doctors have realized that it was not healed; and by miracle found, which you did not cure, because it is in the place where nothing can be done for medicine, may we cover the lump with two gauze on each day and wash it continuously with warm water until it heals
Mays yeu diyre dos specias de sutura proprias segon narracio de Paraula.	 The second kind of suture that you will use is called Paraula's stitch.
E es que tu comenses am sutura de la codena, e entrometas agulha de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz.	 It begins with the needle from the starting point going to the end of the direction.
E donc cum la agulha penetra en la codena e en aquel meteys lacertz segon rectetut e en longetut de tot le cos, e layssa la extremita del ciphac en le qual has entromesa la agulha; e fay penetrar en la autra extremitat la agulha de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo en l’autra extremitat del mihat.	 And then, as the needle penetrates into the incision and continues to go from side to side throughout the body, placing the tip of the phalange on the extremity where you inserted it; and then it will penetrate into the other extremity with the needle going from end to end in the opposite extremity of the hand.
E don cum tu auras fayta aquela penetrar, lahoras tu fay aquela penetrar autra veguada en aquela meteyssa extremitat del mihat de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz; e leyssa la extramitat del ciphac que es en aquest latz, e fay penetrar la agulha en l’autra extremitat de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo.	 When you have opened up that space, the doctor will then penetrate that area with another finger of his own, and he'll also insert it into the other side of that cavity, to prevent its contents from spilling out.
E fay penetrar am aquela la tua penetracio am la qual fas aquela penetrar en le ciphac en la extremitat del mirat la qual es en la partida de lu entro que tot aquel penetre.	 The doctor will then penetrate that area with the same finger, and he'll also insert it into another part of the cavity to prevent any leakage from occurring in any part of the body
E aprop comensa de aquest meteys costat e cus aquel am la extremitat que es del ciphac en l’autra latz, e extratz la agulha de la codena la qual penetrec, e aprop redutz aquela en aquela codena e cos la extremitat del ciphac que es en l’autra costat am aquesta extramitat del mirat; e extratz aquela de la codena la qual es de part de lu.	 The doctor will then approach from the opposite side of that cavity, and remove the inserted finger to another part of it, ensuring no leakage occurs anywhere in the body.
E fay aquo una veguada e autra, e fay aquo una veguada aprop autre veguada entro que tu cozes tot aquo que es deforo segon aquel eysemple.	 The doctor will then proceed to another area and repeat that action several times in order to achieve the desired result from what is being performed next.
E la suma de aquesta manieyra de sutura es que tu cozes am sutura de pellicies am la qual cozo las pels, enayssi que tu cozes le ciphac una veguada de la part de la extremitat de la codena, e que leysses aquela autra veguada entro que la ajas complida.	 The method of suturing involves stitching the skin together near where you remove hairs, so as to close the wound and prevent further bleeding.
Mays la segonda specia de sutura propria la qual dieys eyssament Gualia , e aquest es de sermo de lu e per lu recomtat, es que tu cozas aquela segon semilitut am la qual alcus medicantz cozo aquela, enayssi que agreguan tota partida a la sua compar partida a lu convenient per natura; e aplican la extremitat de autre de lu e la extremitat del mirat al autra extremitat de lu, e aquo es fayt segon que yeu a tu recomti.	 The second method of suturing is used specifically for wounds that are caused by animals or insects, and it's recommended to use this technique when doctors recommend it. To do so, apply the other extremity on top of the wound (the side not bitten) in addition to wrapping around both sides completely with the patient's own skin, applying as much pressure as is convenient for nature; then apply another extremity over that and cover the other side of the wound also, ensuring even coverage across both sides.
Cove que tu fiques la agulha en la extremitat del mirat a tu propdana de la partida deforo, e fassas aquela penetrar a la partida dedintz en aquel sol, e leysses dos extremitatz del ciphac; e aprop revolveys la agulha e fay aquela penetrar de foro a la dedintz en dos extremitatz del ciphac.	 When you have inserted the needle in one of your eyes and proceed to pierce it through that eye into the other, place two servants between them; then withdraw the needle and make penetration from both sides into those parts of the body.
E aprop revolveys aquelas cascunas, e fay penetrar quascunas de la partida dededintz entro a la partida deforo en dos extremitatz del mirat autras que so en le latz contrari.	 Then remove those cushions and make penetration of the two parts into the other eye in two opposite directions as it is required, or if otherwise do it on the contrary side.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura es milhor de la sutura comuna leugiera, e es sutura de la qual precedic rememoracio.	 This custom of stitching is more difficult than the common stitches learned by rote memory.
Aquest es le sermo de Gualia	 The sermon of Gaul
E mays le diyssero alcus, sutura del ventre es rectificada am dos agulhas, so es que tu entrometas en aquestas a quascunas un fiel, e comensa am intromiccio de agulha de aquo que es deves tu, e fay aquela penetrar entro al autra latz segon sutura de aquels les quals cozo les cuers engualment.	 And then the stitching of the belly is rectified with two needles, so that you enter into these in a faithful manner, and start to make the penetration from one side towards the other stitches as required.
E sapias que quan disrupcio es en le mieg loc del ventre, lahoras la sutura de lu es pus difficil que dels autres locs del ventre.	 And you know that when breaking occurs in the belly area, the stitching there is much more difficult than in other parts of the belly.
Mays le juguament de medicacio de plagua es jutgament de las autras plaguas.	 The game of plague treatment is a trial by ordeal of those plagues.
La qual causa es quar quan tu consieguas la plagua recent am le sieu sanc denant que l’ayre altera aquela, e reduses le budel e cozes aquela e aptas aquela decentment, lahoras pausa sobre aquela polvera encarnativa.	 When the recent plague occurs after you have given the other a bath and remove it, cleanse that and anoint it with fresh oil; then pause over this contagious pustule.
E si le ayre ja ha alterada la plagua, lahoras pausa sobre aquela alcus enguentz les quals so a tu presens entro que fassan peyra dura e cajan les fiels, e sian consolidatz ciphac e mirat; e aprop cura aquela ayssi cum es la curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat.	 "When the patient's bladder has been altered, it is customary to place a cushion over that area and allow them to urinate freely, as long as they avoid making any sharp sounds or piercing screams when doing so.
Mays si a tu no so presens las medicinas, lahoras pausa sobre aquela tantost, pus que comensa a getar brac, coto viel, e permuta aquel dos veguadas le dia, ayssi cum a tu e ensenhat, entro que sia sanat, quar tu no indigeysses de autra medicacio en motas disposicios quan las plaguas so simplas.	 "If the patient is not present at that time and you begin administering treatment to one of their limbs or fingers, do so gently, avoiding any sharp movements or piercing screams while doing so, as long as there are no other complications.
Mays si tu temes que la plagua comunique en lesio als membres principals, lahoras cove que tu submergas lana leon en oli de trempada qualiditat, o en oli rozat, e pausa aquela en le circuit dels locs que so entre les angonas e dejos las aysselas.	 "If the bladder communicates with a severe pain or an open wound in any of the main limbs, it is customary to place the bladder gently on oil that is heated until it becomes hot but not burned, and then placed in a circuit between the veins and arteries.
E si sent dolor o putrefaccio en les sieus budels, quar motas veguadas aquo s’endeve, lahoras cristeriza aquel am vi stiptic negre tebe, e majorment si la poyredura es pervenguda en le budel e es fayta exitura penetrant entro la conquavitat de lu.	 "If there is pain or putrefaction in the bowels themselves, you must immediately cease treatment and seek medical attention as it may be an exit wound penetrating into the cavity of the body.
E sapias que aquela que es del budel gros es de pus leugiera sanacio que aquela que es en les budels subtils.	 "You know that the one who has a large bladder is more prone to severe health issues than those with smaller ones.
E es de dificil sanacio quar le budel le qual es apelat “gegunu” no recep sanacio de plagua que caja en lu de tot; e aquo es per la gran multitut de venas que so en lu e per la magnitut de lu que so en aquelas, e per subtilitat del cos de aquel, e per propinquitat de aquel a natura de nervis.	 "It is difficult to treat those with the bladder called 'gugunu', as it may require urination treatments that can only be performed through them and may also pierce their urethra.
Mays si aquo que procezeys de la plagua es la tela, e conseguas aquela recent, redutz aquela segon la tua rectetut am la qual reduzes les budels engualment.	 When you have finished opening up the area between the patient's thighs and placing a cushion under them, continue to assist by removing any obstructions that may be present in their abdomen, such as intestines or hernias.
Mays si es passat a lu spazi e ja es feyt vert o negre, lahoras que tu strenguas aquela am fiel sobre le loc que es denigrat de lu, per so que vengua fluxs de sanc, quar en la tela so venas e arterias.	 Once you have opened up the space and cleared it of any obstructions such as intestines or hernias, make sure to apply pressure evenly across the affected area in order to prevent blood from flowing out through cuts or wounds that may be present on the skin.
E aprop inscideys aquo que es otra aquel liament, e pausa dos extremitatz del fiel pendentz de la partida dejos de la plagua foro lu, per que sobre tu sia alleujada la atraccio de lu deves le cazement de la tela e emissio del brac de la plagua.	 Once you have removed any obstructions and applied pressure to the affected area, proceed by gently removing the bandages from around their legs, ensuring that they are loose enough to allow circulation but not so loose as to cause further injury or bleeding on the skin.
Rememoracio de las plaguas quan accideysso en le budel.	 Remember how it felt when this happened in your bladder.
Quan accideys disrupcio en le budel e es petita, lahoras es possibla que sia resteurada en alcus homes, per aysso quar yeu vi aquel le qual era stat plaguat en le sieu ventre am percussio de lansa et era la plagua de la part dreyta del stomac, e la plagua era antiquada e fayta fistula, e eyssic de lu gestio e ventositat.	 If disruption occurs in the bladder and is mild, it may be possible that you had a urinary tract infection at some point, leading to symptoms like frequent urination or feeling the need to urinate urgently but frequently on one side of the stomach, and if the infection was chronic and persistent.
Adonc yeu pansegui la curacio de lu ja sia que no era confizat en la sanacio de lu, mays cessegui subtiliar aquel entro que foc sanat e le loc es consolidat.	 Once you have ensured that it is not related to the healing process itself and if the area seems consolidated (i.e., healed), then proceed with a more precise cautery procedure targeting the specific location of pain.
E yeu pus que vi le loc ja consolidat, timegui sobre le malaute que endevengues sobre lu accident de mal en le sieu ventre; e no endevenc alcu per aquo mal accident e romas en las suas milhos disposicios mangant e bevent, e aprop entrec en banh e es exercitat en sos ditz.	 When the place is consolidated, guide the patient's hand to the incident of injury in his belly; and prevent it from falling into that bad accident by holding its wrist with both hands.
E ja diysero alcus experimentados que quan endeve plagua en le budel, e es petita, lahoras cove que sia liada segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas fromiguas de grans caps; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua e pausa una fromigua de aquelas que aja la boca uberta sobre las doas labias de la plagua; donc quan pren sobre aquelas e strenh la sua boca, abscindeys le cap de lu, quar adhereys e no es dissolvut.	 When pain occurs in the belly and it's small, doctors recommend treating it with this method: and hold its two lips together to prevent its large head from coming out; then gently stretch her mouth over the two lips of the belly; when she takes on them and stretches her mouth, remove his head by holding tight.
E aprop pausa autra formigua prop la primieyra, e no cesses aquo a far am formiguas una aprop autra segon la quantitat de tota la plagua.	 Then gently hold another small point on the first one, and do not remove it from doing other large ones; instead, adjust them all according to the quantity of the belly.
E aprop reduzeys aquela e cos la plagua; e romanguan aquels caps annexces en le budel entro que·l budel sia sanat; e no accideys al malaute degun nocument.	 Then cover up that and so the belly, and arrange those caps to prevent the intestine from coming out until the stomach is healed; do not let it fall into a bad accident.
E ja es possible que·l budel sia liat am fiel subtil lo qual es fayt del budel de bestia annexs am lu, pus que es mes en agulha; e es que tu prenguas la extremitat de aquestz fiels de budel, e sia mot descarnat, e aprop lia la extremitat de lu am fiel de li, envolopat, e aprop entromet aquel fiel en agulhas e cos am aquel le budel, e areduzeys aquel en la disrupcio.	 And it is possible that the intestine will be held in a fine loop from which he takes out of the belly, making him thinner; and you should hold its end firmly, white, with its own intestines around, to prevent it from coming out suddenly; then arrange your finger over his belly and cut through them.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura am formiguas no es sino segon via de fiducia e d’esperansa.	 "This incision method of sutures is simply a second way of trust and hope.
Mays si la plagua es gran e ampla, majorment si es en un dels budels subtils, quar lahoras no es engen sino subtiliacio, e no es sanacio de lu de tot.	 If the abscess is large or wide, especially if it is in one of the smaller bowels where pain may not be felt at all.
De curacio de zuchem e fistula.	 Surgical care for abscesses and fistulas.
Sapias que tota plagua e apostema quan se envilheseys e se Antiqua, e es fayt ulcus, e no es consolidat e geta braç tot temps e no es abscindit, lahoras, en qualque membre sia, universalment es nompnada fistula e nos la apelam aquela azukem.	 When a boil or abscess heals and contracts but does not heal completely and gets into the wound, it is commonly called a fistula and we call that an outbreak.
E fistula segon veritat es nodacio feutrada, dura, blanqua am la qual no es dolor e a la qual es conquavitat ayssi cum es conquavitat de pena de ausel; e per aysso nompnat aquela alcus rizatz, id est pena.	 A fistula is a painful and deep ulcer that occurs where the pain of inflammation occurs; hence we call it that kind of outbreak.
E es en alcus homes humida, la qual geta brac; e fort leu la humiditat es abscidida en alcunas horas.	 It is in a moist place like the groin or between fingers where the moisture is gradually absorbed over time.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta humiditat es mota, e es pauca, e es grossa, e es subtil.	 The humidity may be reduced by dressing with dry gauze and making it smooth, large, coarse, or subtle.
E yeu ja he denant dit en la divisio, lahoras cum yeu diyssi las plaguas, que tot ulcus que no es sanat ni no es en lu nuda carn, no es aquo sino per una de ix causas: de las quals la una es o per pauquesa de sanc en le cos; o per malicia de lu; o quar entre lu e las labias es carn dura prohibent nativitat de carn; o quar es de mota legesa; o quar aquel ulcus en si meteys es poyrit e la materia que es a lu tramesa es de mala qualitat; o quar la medicina es enconvenient en la curacio de lu; o quan corrupcio catz en la regio, e es pestilencia; o per proprietat de regio ayssi cum endeve a Saragossa , en la qual es fayta difficil degestio de las malautias, e es tardada en aquela sanacio de apostema per natura; o quar en lu es os un, o motz osses.	 The ulcer may be caused by one of the following reasons: poverty in the body, malice towards it, hardness between the bowel and the labia making childbirth difficult or painful, a leg injury causing difficulty in healing, having poor medical care, epidemics, or the property of an area making the treatment difficult.
Ja e mostrat totas aquelas causas, e·ls senhals de aquelas e la curacio de lor am medicinas en la divisio.	 The first sentence of this text appears to be a medical instruction or diagnosis related to joints and their conditions. It seems like it might refer to the causes of joint pain being discussed in relation to cold humors infiltrating each part of the body, causing discomfort and potential issues with pain occurring in the feet as well.
E cove assi que yeu fassa a tu saber la curacio de fistula la qual es fayta per via de operacio am ma.	 This sentence appears to be referring to surgery for a fistula that is caused by certain conditions, possibly referring to the procedure performed on the body through an incision made during medical procedures such as surgery
E sapias que fistula accideys en totz les membres del cos; quar de aquelas son fistulas que perveno a las venas grantz e arterias, o als nervis, o al ciphac, o al budel, o a la vesica, o ad alcuna de las costas, o ad alcu dels spondils del dos, o ad alcuna de las juncturas compostas per composicio ayssi quo de la ma e del pe; e de aquelas so que dan a lu propinquitat del membre principal e de semblantz.	 This sentence seems to be describing the various types of fistulas that can occur in different parts of the body, such as those occurring near veins or arteries, nerves, the brain (cipher), the intestine, the bladder, the kidneys, or along the spine's ribs; and how these fistulas are connected to other areas through composition.
E donc aquela de aquestas fistulas que es segon aquesta manieyra es de las malautias de dificil sanacio, e no recep curacio, e occupacio am aquela es trebalh e ignorancia.	 This sentence seems to be expressing that treating such fistulas is challenging and often impossible due to complications and ignorance.
E si es de las fistulas alcuna la profunditat de la qual no perve ad aquestz locs que e dit, e esperas e confizas en la curacio de lu, e vols pervenir a cognicio de lu, lahoras pren tenta de eram o de ferr, e si la fistula va segon rectetut, e perquireys aquela am lu.	 This sentence appears to be expressing that if the depth of such fistulas cannot be assessed at the location mentioned, and if you are unsure or confused about how to treat them, it is recommended to seek medical help as soon as possible.
Mays si la fistula es tortuissitat, lahoras investigua aquela am tenta de plom subtil, quar plom am la levitat del sieu cors es alleujat e curvat deves la tortuositat.	 This sentence seems to suggest that if the fistula is twisted or complicated in nature, it should be investigated and examined with a subtle touch as a gentle touch may help reduce its complexity.
E si la fistula es havent motz horrificis, no es a tu possible que signifiques sobre lu am tenta.	 When the fistulas are horrific, do not attempt to identify them on her abdomen.
Adonc cristeriza le orrifici per sos orrificis, quar la humiditat per la qual clisterizas aquela va deves las autras orrificis e corr de lor.	 After the eructations of air are over, it is necessary to remove the causes that triggered them and prevent future ones from happening.
E aprop inquier exquisitament, segon qual manieyra a tu es possible que conoguas si aqui has os o nervi, e es la conquavitat de la fistula longinqua o propdana, o es una fistula a la qual so motz orrificis e esta sobre aquo tot am la suma de la tua fortaleza, am la tua enterroguacio, am la qual enterroguas le malaute, e la invencio de la dolor deves la tua compressio am la ma sobre le loc, e semblantz de las significacios e de las causas accidentz al apostema.	 After carefully examining the fistula to determine its type and cause, if it is a long one or short one, you should perform the necessary compression over her abdomen to prevent further eructations from happening.
E cum tu auras stat sobre totas aquelas causas am stacio veraya, lahoras ve a la curacio segon confidencia: e es que tu consideras lahoras si es fistula apparent propinqua o en loc sal, longinqua de junctura, o de nervi, o de arteria, o de vena, o de un dels locs les quals yeu a tu e ditz.	 When you have identified all the causes at that point in time and with confidence, then proceed to check whether it is an apparent fistula nearby or one located further away from the joints, nerve, artery, vein, or any other location you mentioned previously.
Lahoras tu secca la fistula segon que denant es dit de la naracio de lu, e osta aquo que es en aquela filtracio e de carns corrumpudas, e aquo que es nascut en le orrifici de la carn, o de theil e de semblantz, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	 After you have identified what kind of fistula it is and its cause, remove any mucus, fluids, and matter present in that area, and cure whatever ulcer may exist there to ensure proper healing.
Mays si la fistula es de longinqua profunditat, e es segon rectetut, lahoras cove que inscidas aquela en le preon atant quant a tu sira possible, e aprop mondifica aquela de totas las suas carns corrompudas; e aprop administra calguas envolopadas en medicinas acutas, e intromet aquelas entro a la conquavitat de la fistula, la qual has conprenduda am ferr.	 If the fistula is of great depth and you want to insert it into her abdomen as soon as possible, then wash all the infected parts thoroughly; and apply bandages soaked in strong medicines around that area where you will be inserting the fistulas after understanding its proper use.
E fay aquo am aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la medicina acuta corroda tot aquo que es romas en la conquavitat de la fistula de la corrupcio.	 When the acute pain of medicine is applied to that which swells in the cavity of a fistula from corruption,
E aprop restaura aquela am enguentz les quals engendran carn sana entro que sia sanada.	 After restoration you will find healthy flesh
Mays si no es sanada per aquo, lahoras tu cauteriza aquela segon que havem recomtat.	 If not healed by this method, the doctors will recommend a second procedure
Mays si la causa de fistula es os e es deves tu certificat aquo, lahoras tu inquireys aquela e secca aquela segon que havem recomtat, si tu no prohibeys alcuna causa de vena o de nervi o de membre principal ayssi cum havem dit.	 If the cause of the fistula is due to veins or nerves or other main body parts then you should get it checked and sealed by a second recommended method if you do not have any underlying cause for vein, nerve, or primary body part damage as mentioned earlier.
Mays si le os es a tu descubert e es en lu alcuna corrupcio e negror, lahoras tu ratz aquel entro que la corrupcio sia hostada tota; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que lu encarne entro que sia sanat.	 If the cause is only due to corruption and heat then you will need to treat it with this method as soon as possible to ensure that all corruption has been removed completely, and after that treat it so that it heals properly
E si no es sana e gieta brac ayssi cum fazia, lahoras sapias que tu no est pervengut a la eradicacio tota de la corrupcio; e adonc tu descuebre sobre lu segondanament e exquisitament fay la razio de lu e la mundificacio de lu am la deriera fortalasa tieua, e aprop restaura aquel.	 If it is not healthy and has already been treated as mentioned earlier then you should find out the reason for its reappearance thoroughly and exactly to determine what caused it, and after that restore it properly
E donc si es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras sapias que aquela corrupcio es en la profunditat longinqua del cors, la qual no ha conseguida, e adonc a tu en aquel no es engen sino laysar aquela.	 If it is healthy but if not then you should understand that the corruption has spread deep inside the body and could not be removed entirely, in which case you need to treat it properly
E si le os corromput es petit, o es a tu possible atirar aquel, lahora tu le atira am forceps subtils las quals conveno ad aquo.	 If the cause of corruption is small or it may be treated with other methods then you should treat it using very fine tweezers which are suitable for that purpose.
E si so motz osses, lahoras exquisitament fay la extraccio de totz aquels, e de aquels no laysses denguna causa am la tua fortaleza.	 When joints are affected by cold humors that penetrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet?
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat alcuna causa de las humiditatz, e en lor inscizio no ha temor ni error, lahoras inscideys aquelas liaments o carns si so aqui, e deliura les osses.	 If there is no cause for the pain you have mentioned?
Mays si a tu no es preparacio de ostar les osses de la tua hora, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua aquo que poyresca la plagua aquela, e layssa aquela entro que aquo es al enviro de aquels osses de carns e de liamentz, e guarda la plagua que no sia consolidada, e sia constrengida la seccio la qual tu has inscidida en la tua operacio.	 If you have not prepared the opening of your bowels, then pause over a cloth so that it may be covered with that, and leave it exposed to the environment of those parts, and guard against consolidation, or constriction of the incision made during your operation.
Habantz, si temes, pausa sobre lu coto submers en sopre trissat am oli, o coto submers en anguent egipciac, o en alcu dels enguentz vertz, quar quan poyriran aquelas liaments, e les osses son de lor seperatz la ablacio, e de aquels atraccio es alleujada.	 If you're afraid, pause over the cloth submerged beneath a stream of warm water or the Egyptian waters that may cause them to be cleansed, and then separate the intestines from those parts as well.
Mays si es un gran os ayssi cum le os de camba o de coyssa o semblantz ad aquels, e aquo que de lu es corromput es la facia de lu tant solament, lahoras ratz aquela am resio tant solament derriera entro que sia ostada aquela negror e corrupcio, e aprop restaura la plagua.	 If you have a large opening in the abdomen or thighs, and it is corrupted as such, then the doctor should only do that once, holding the cloth to prevent further contamination from being spread around, and restore the membrane afterwards.
Mays si aquo que de lu es corrumpyt es gran partida, e la corrupcio ja ha conseguida la medulla del os, lahoras es causa necessaria cerrar aquel e aquel tot inscidir entro al loc on es pervenguda la corrupcio, e lahoras cura aquel entro que sia consolidada.	 If it is necessary to close that and the other completely once corruption has reached the medulla of the organ, then do so in order to prevent further contamination from spreading there?
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc ad un home en la sua coyssa per que pausez aquela a eyssempli e adjutori sobre la tua operacio.	 When you have opened up space between the patient's thighs, place a cushion under them and another on their legs as well as one on their chest to hold their hands.
Foc un home jove per etat entorn xxx ans, al qual accideys dolor en la sua cueyssa, e de las partidas dedintz mauguda es sobre la materia dedintz le cors entro que la materia es pervenguda a la cueyssa, e es materia de apostema am gran apostema, e no foc a lu causa extrinseca.	 A young patient of approximately 30 years old with pain in their knee, and the doctors suspect that the cause is internal to their knee, as there are signs of gout present on both legs, which may be a sign of an internal gout attack.
E adonc foc extendut le temps am aquela per la error dels metges entro que l’apostema es hubert, e acorrero de lu materias motas, e la sua curacio foc aprop pausada entro que la camba foc fistulada, e faytz son en lu motz orrificis les quals totz getavan poyredura e las humiditatz del cos.	 The doctors have extended the time to correct the error of diagnosis that gout is suspected, and they corrected it by examining their feet, urine, and body moisture levels.
E adonc le curec multitut de metges entorn dos ans, e no foc en aquels savia ma en la art, entro que yeu fu appelat.	 When the doctors treated two patients for 2 years without making a correct diagnosis, they were called in to see if there was any progress or improvement.
E vi la camba de lu e las materias que corrian de lu aquels orrificis per gran cors; e ja le cos de aquel home era tot stabozit e la color de lu era citrina.	 He saw the swollen foot and the materials that came from them, which were very large and caused redness on his body.
E adonc yeu intromesi la tenta ad un de aquels orrificis e pervenguec la tenta al os.	 The doctor then tried to remove one of these materials by cutting into the foot.
E aprop yeu e perscrutat tostz les orrificis e trobegui aquels pervenir a lor de totas partidas de la camba.	 They quickly examined and removed all the materials from the foot.
E adonc yeu me coytegui e inscidegui sobre un dels orrificis aquels entro que descrobegui una partida del os, e atrobegui aquel corromput, e ja era terros e corrumput e denigrat; e era ja corrumpuda una partida de la camba entro que havia penetrat entro a la mezola.	 They examined one of the materials that infiltrated into his foot and removed it, as they had already been corrupted by gout, making their skin red and scaly, and there was also corruption in another part of his knee where it had infiltrated through to his ankle.
E adon yeu serregui aquo que a mi era discubert e preparat del os descubert.	 When you have examined him thoroughly and prepared for treatment, show him to me
E yeu cujegui que no fos en le os sino aquela corrupcio la qual abscidigui e serregui, e yeu ja havia derraziguada.	 You should check that there is not a blockage in the intestines which you have already cleared
E aprop pausegui la restauracio de la plagua am medicina consolidativas per lonc temps, e no es consolidada.	 After recovering from a long illness, and still unable to maintain his medication, he should seek further medical attention.
E aprop yeu iteregui e descubregui sobre le os segondament sobre le descubriment primier, e atrobegui continua corrupcio am le os.	 You should perform a second examination of the same organ as you did before, and check for any further blockages in the intestines.
E serregui aquo que a mi apares de aquela corrupcio, e aprop yeu fo perforsat fayre la curacio de lu e restauracio, e no es restaurat.	 I am sure that there is no blockage and will assist you in performing the cure and restoration procedures, but it has not been restored.
E adonc yeu descubri sobre lu autra veguada e no cessegui inscidir le os petit a petit particuladament e perforsa la restauracio de lu, e no es restaurat entro que inscidigui entorn un palm de lu, e aquel extraxi am la medula sua, e aprop restauregui aquel am medicinas, e es consolidat leugierament e sanat.	 After you have thoroughly examined it and performed the restoration procedure one part at a time specifically to restore its function, but if it is not restored within a palm of your hand or extract from its medulla, then treat it medically, and it will be restored permanently and healthy.
E no es necessaria iteracio en la operacio de lu e seccio de lu sino per la disposicio de la freulesa de lu e per la paucitat de la tollerancia de lu e paor de lu de mort, quar a lu accidia en totas horas per superfluitat de evacuacio sincopi mala.	 It is not necessary to perform the surgery and section of it unless there is a shortage in its supply or weakness that would cause it to fail or die within hours from lack of proper evacuation without fault.
E donc sanat es per sanacio entiera, e nada es en loc de os carn dura; e es fayta bona la disposicio de lu en le sieu cors e retornec la vertut de lu; e es conversat en las suas disposicios e no fec a lu contrarietat en ambulacio ni nocument en denguna causa.	 Then it is through the healing of any kind, and nothing is done in place to harden the flesh; you must have good use for it in its own body and restore its function; and do not allow anything contrary to be done in transportation or without reason
Mays si es os eminent en loc del cors ja trauquat, lahoras cove que tu secces aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas liament e strenh aquel en la extremitat de aquel os eminent, e comanda ad alcu que extenda aquel en sus; e pausa aquel liament de lana pus gros del primier liament; e aprop lia aquel sobre la carn que es dejos le os, e exten la extramitat de lu per que atires la carn a las partidas dejos, e tu descuebras la carn sobre le loc le qual voles serrar per que la serra no leda la carn.	 In the chest region there is swelling which makes it difficult to breathe; and you should gently press down on that swelling so as not to compress the lungs.
E pausa fust o taula dejos le os decentment, quar quan tu fas aquo no es prohibida la serra que no secce la carn corrumpuda.	 Gently place your hand over it and do not squeeze the inflamed flesh.
E cove que sia la serradura sobre le loc corrumput petit a petit, quar si es en la concavitat del os corrupcio e no appar en la sua apparicio al sentiment, e forssa a serratura de lu autra veguada.	 Gently apply the cure to the inflamed area gradually, because if it is in a concave part of the corrupt intestine and not in its convex part then you should press more strongly on that spot.
E si le os es corrumput e no-eminent, abantz es la una partida continuada am la autra, e la corrupcio es al mieg loc o en partida de lu, lahoras tu descuebre la carn de totas partz tota; e aprop pausa fust dejos, e aprop serra aquel de la primiera partida la on es la corrupcio entro que sia continuada la serratura del autra partida.	 If the intestine is corrupted and not prominent then continue to press steadily at that spot, as the corruption may be in a separate part of the body or in a continuous line with it; and remember to pause and gently press down on any other place where you feel the corruption entering so strongly.
E sia la serradura segon le loc de la corrupcio un petit, segon que havem dit.	 The cure is gently applied to the spot of corruption then.
E si la corrupcio es en la junctura, inscideys aquela junctura corrumpuda, e serra le os la on es continuat del autra part.	 If the corruption is in a joint then cut off that corrupted joint and press down on the rest of it so as to continue treating the other parts.
E si de la corrupcio es en la continuacio de doas juncturas, lahoras no es en lu razio sino engen.	 When two joints become corrupted in a sequence, they are not caused by gout alone but rather by cold humors
E si la corrupcio es en le pecte de la ma o del pe, es mot dificil; empero cove que tu inquieras la corrupcio en qual manieyra appareys a tu, e que abradas aquela, e mondes aquela segon quascuna disposicio la qual es a tu possibla, e am cascum engen sia rectificat a tu, quan no fa a tu contrarietat vena o nervi.	 If the corruption occurs in the palm of the hand or foot, it is difficult; however, if you want to examine the corruption where it appears on your body, and you open up that area, and then make sure that each one of those positions is possible for you, and correct any misalignments when they are not aligned with your preference.
E sapias qual es inscididors e las serras a inscidir aquestz osses son motz segon le situament dels osses, e la preparacio de aquels, e la grosseza de aquels, e la subtilitat e la grandeza e la parvitat de aquels, e la duricia e la lor raritat; per que cove que tu prepares a tota specia de operacio estrument convenient ad aquela opperacio.	 You know the inscriptors and incisions required for this operation are second to the situation of the bones, their preparation, size, subtlety, grandeur, smallness, toughness, and rarity; so that you prepare all sorts of appropriate instruments for that operation.
E sapias que aquela operacio significa a tu sobre la specia del strument del qual indigeysses; quan am tu es gran studi e lonc e conoyssensa de las manieyras de aquesta art, e testimoni de manieyras de malautias, quar lahoras ja tu las avias per tu meteys aquo que es convenient a lu dels sturmentz a tota malautia.	 You know that this operation means the species of the instrument you need; when you are great and long in the craft and practice of these arts, and witness to the arts of healing, which gout has already showed through your method here, it is convenient for all types of ailments.
E yeu so a tu formant en la fi de aquest capitol le nombre dels instrumentz les quals pausaras cum eyssimples am les quals proceziras a la tua prohibicio la qual experimentaras sobre las autras.	 You, at the end of this chapter, will count the instruments you have learned to use as simply as possible and those that you may practice according to your discretion on which others are best suited for their purpose.
Forma de serra:	 "When pain occurs in a joint as a result of cold humors infiltrating each part of the body.
Forma de autra serra:	 "And if it's necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery.
Forma de autra serra:	 "Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out.
Forma de autra serra gran:	 "You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
Forma de ray:	 "When pain occurs in a joint as a result of cold humors infiltrating each part of the body.
Sia le cap de aquest ray segon la forma de cap de clau stellat, e les puntz de lu sian segon la forma dels puntz alstefegi.	 And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery.
E no conveneys sino que am aquel sian confricadatz les caps de las juncturas quan so corrumpudas, o es la boca gran ampla.	 And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery.
Forma de razori major dels autres:	 "Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out.
Forma de razori menor:	 "When pain occurs in a joint as a result of cold humors infiltrating each part of the body.
Forma de razori lat:	 You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
Forma de serra autra decentment fayta: sia fayt arc de lu pus sobira e la acuitat de lu de ferr, e le membre de lu de boys punhal descentment fayt.	 And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery.
Forma de lu:	 When pain occurs in a joint as a result of cold humors infiltrating each part of the body.
Forma de razori en la qual ha concavitat:	 You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
Forma de razori autra subtil:	 The patient lies flat
Forma de autra razori de curvada extremitat:	 Lying flat on an affected limb
Forma de rasori petit semblant a tenta:	 Small incision to try
Forma de incisori am le qual so inscidit les osses:	 Make a small incision to expose the bones.
Forma de inscisori autra minor:	 Making another smaller incys
Forma de un autra inscissori; aquest semblant a ray, e la extremitat de lu es cum serra, e es exhibit en motz locs en la razio dels osses:	 The other incision is made at the same angle as before, and the extremity of it becomes straight when extended, and exhibits in motion several places along its length.
Forma de ray lo qual conveneys a rasio de aquel que es perforat dels osses:	 Cut to the direction of that which has been cut through the bones:
E la extremitat de lu es triangulada e de aguda extremitat.	 The extremity becomes triangular and acute.
E es fayt de ferr de India , e semblantment cove que totas las causas que havem ditas de rasoris e de inscissoris e de serras.	 It is customary to perform all the incisions, wounds, and scratches that were mentioned before.
De inscizio extremitatz e de la serratura dels osses.	 Make an incision in the extremities and make a cut through the bones.
Las extremitatz se poyresso o per causa intrinseca o per causa extrinseca, o cum tu auras medicat aquela corrupcio per curacio de aquelas medicinas e la curacio no comfereys, o vezes la corrupcio anar deves le membre la qual no percuteys denguna causa, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel membre entro aquo la hon acossec la corrupcio, per que le malaute evasesca per aquo de mort o de malicia que es major defeliment del membre.	 The extremities can be caused internally or externally by something that causes the disease to spread in a way such as through medicine or when it is not treated and the cause of which was mentioned before, or sometimes due to external causes where you have to treat that part separately to remove the infection so that the patient does not die from this or any other worse consequence.
E le senhal de aquel al qual accideys, es que·l membre es fayt negre entro que sia cujat que foc la ja comburit, o se poyreys aprop la negror entro que la poyredura aquela ane entro aquel membre que siec lu e que prengua tot le cors; e donc coyta te am inscizio de aquel.	 The cause of that which affects you is to cut out all the blackness, or if it has burned, or try to remove it entirely from that part and take care when cutting off that member so as not to harm any other part of the body; thus, make an incision in that place.
E semblantment si es causa de la corrupcio percussio de alcunas causas venenosas ayssi cum de scorpio mari o de vupera o de rutela e de semblantz.	 When joint pain is caused by poisonous influences from scorpion stings or venomous reptiles,
E si la corrupcio o la percussio es en la extremitat del dit, lahoras tu inscideys le dit e no dones spazi a la corrupcio per que ane entro a la ma.	 If the corruption and strike is in the hand, then doctors prescribe something to prevent it from spreading to the face.
E semblantment si accedeys a la ma, lahoras tu inscideys aquela de la razit del focil, e no dones spazi a la corrupcio entro que prengua en le focil del bras.	 Similarly if it comes from above the elbow, doctors prescribe something to prevent it spreading to the face of the hand.
E si envezeys aquel, lahoras inscideys le bras entro al coyde en la junctura.	 If you happen upon that, then doctors instruct to place your arm inside the joint at the point where it happened.
E si passa otra la corrupcio e la vezes enviro le coyde, lahoras en aquel es la mort del malaute; e aministrar autra causa otra aquo en curacio es quantitat de vertut.	 If another corruption or strike occurs in the body cavity, then doctors believe that this is fatal for the patient; and administering another cause here may be used to cure it but only if there are other means available.
E semblantment fay del pe quan corrupcio envezeys le dit del pe, lahoras tu inscideys aquel entro ad un dels nozes.	 Similarly when the corruption occurs in a foot or hand, then doctors instruct to place it inside one of the hollows (possibly a vessel).
E si pren en la pente del pe, lahoras tu inscideys tot le pe.	 If you find poison on your feet, then doctors instruct to examine the entire foot.
Mays si pueja entro al denol, lahoras tu inscideys la camba entro a la junctura del denol.	 If it happens inside the knee, then doctors instruct to place the leg into the joint at the point where it happened.
E si la corrupcio ja es pervenguda sobre le denol, lahoras en lu no es engen sino dimissio, e layssar le malaute a la mort.	 If the corruption has spread to the knee, then doctors consider this fatal for the patient and instruct them to be prepared for death.
E la manieyra de inscidir le membre o de serrar lu es que tu strenhas le liament en la partida pus dejos la qual voles inscidir, e strenh autre liament sobre le loc; e extenda le ministre un liament a las partidas dejos, e extenda le ministra autra liament en sus; e tu separa la carn la qual es entre dos liamentz ain spatum lat entro que sia descuberta tota la carn; e aprop sia inscidit o serrat.	 When you want to insert the member or cut it off, you should stretch the ligament at its point and another one over the location; then extend the minister with a ligament of your own, and another one in their; then separate the flesh which is between two ligaments, so that it can be completely uncovered.
E cove que sia pausat drap de li de totas partidas per so que no toque le loc sa, e que vengua al malaute lesio ajustada e apostema caut.	 After separating the flesh and uncovering its location, ensure that there is a proper fit between it and the body part next to it in order to prevent injury or further complications.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc quan obras, lahoras tu cauteriza le loc coytadament, o pausa sus lu alcunas polveras restrenhentz le sanc; e aprop retorna a la tua medicacio entro que sia complida.	 If an abscess occurs and you need to drain it, your treatment will be: Cauterize the location immediately, or if necessary, apply some powder to dress the wound; then return to your medical care until it is complete.
E aprop lia le membre plaguat am liament al u convenient, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	 Make sure that the member was properly ligated with a ligament when it was feasible, and ensure its health after.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc a un home en le sieu pe, aquest meteys accident le qual yeu e a tu recomtat, le qual es quar accidic a lu negror en le sieu pe am adustio que era asemblada a combustio de foc.	 Recommend to him that when you encounter an accident like the one he mentioned and recommended, it should be handled with utmost caution considering the danger of fire combustion occurring on your skin.
E aquela corrupcio accidic primierament en le sieu dit entro que tendec tot le pe.	 This corruption must first occur within his own body to consider treating all parts of his feet.
E adonc aquel home preparec per si meteys pus que vic la curacio anar al membre am la vehemencia de lu que atrobec de dolor e de adustrio de lu, e el inscidic aquel pe entro a la junctura, e foc sanat.	 Before he goes to visit the member with such pain and discomfort in mind, ensure that he first examines the area for any signs of infection or fire damage as well.
Lonc temps accidic a lu aquela meteyssa corrupcio en le dit de la ma indic.	 "Severe heat has entered this membrane causing pain in the lower part of the body.
E adonc venc a mi, e so me perforsat repercutir aquela superfluitat am aquo que pausegui sobre la ma de las medicinas, aprop la mundificacio del cos de lu; e no es repercussa la superfluitat e comensec anar al autra dit entro que comensec en la ma.	 "As a result of this excess fluid causing inflammation in the lower part of the body, I am performing a bloodletting procedure on your hand to remove it from circulation and prevent further spread.
E el apelec me a inscidir la ma de lu, e yeu no volgui far aquo sperant sobre la repercussio de aquela superfluitat, e mays que temegui deves la inscizio de la ma de lu mort, quar la vertut del malaute era sobre cazement.	 "I am drawing blood from your hand to investigate the excess fluid's effects and prevent further complications if necessary, as there was a risk of death involved in this procedure.
E pus que el se desperec de mi, es retornat en la sua terra e pervenguec a mi que aquel home preparec e inscidic la sua ma tota, e es sanat.	 "Afterwards he went back to his land and reported to me that the man had prepared himself thoroughly and performed the procedure on both of his hands.
E no he adhuzida aquesta narracio sino per que sia adjutori sobre aquo que catz de aquesta malautia, e que sia significacio per la qual sia significada e segon la qual sia obrat.	 "I am not saying this because it is an advisor on how to deal with that illness or its meaning, but rather for the sake of clarity and so you can understand.
De cura sinuum et qualitate clisterizationis cum medicinis.	 "For curing your body and maintaining quality by using medicines.
Quan accideys apostema en alcus membres carnozes e·l spazi de l’apostema es prolonguat entro que fa colleccio de sania, e aprop es romput e perforat, e es eyssida de lu la sania, e roman le loc vuoyt quays cum si era vayssel, e la codena que es desobre lu ayssi cum drap subtiliat, e no es pervengut a deriera corrupcio, e no inprimeys en le os o en nervi ni en liament, es apelat sinu, e no es nompnat fistula.	 "When an abscess occurs in the extremities of the body and stretches into contact with healthy tissue, it should be opened up, cleaned out, perforated, and removed from the affected area, leaving the wound clean; then bind it tightly to prevent infection, avoid puncturing any internal organs or nerves; this is called a fistula.
Mays empero si le spazi es prolonguat entro que la corrupcio enprema en alcun membre, lahoras es appelada fistula e no zukem.	 Fistula
E la cura de lu es que inscidas aquela codena tota ayssi cum es revolvut, e majorment quan es subtiliada e es fayta cum drap, e comfizas que no adhereys al loc per la sua corrupcio.	 The cure is to insert a pointed cautery into the fistula opening until it closes and stops any flow of mucus or pus that may still exist, being careful not to damage the area where the fistula has developed.
Mays si tu speras que la codena adheresca e que aquela corrupcio no aja conseguit per deriera consecucio, e en la codena ha spassitut de cara, lahoras tu cura aquel am clisteri.	 If you suspect that the opening has adhered and that the fistula cannot be closed by any other means, then the doctor will use a cautery to close it.
E es que consideras al sinu, e lahoras si es gran, e·l brac que yeys es de fetent odor, lahoras clisteriza aquel am medicament egipciac le qual es de oli e vi agre e ziniar recebent partidas enguals, e sian ajustadas en un vayssel, e sian coytas sobre le foc entro que’l medicament se fassa rog e pervengua a specitut de mel.	 Consider that the wound is large and the doctor thinks it's important, they will apply a cautery made from Egyptian ointment containing oil and vinegar with ingredients that are adjusted in a specific way to ensure it spreads evenly when applied and prevents any burning sensation on the spot where it is applied.
E aprop tu pren de lu aquo que es necessari e dissolveys lu am aygua e mel; e clisteriza am aquel le sinu, e strenh le orrifici de lu, e layssa la medicina en lu per la quantitat de doas horas.	 Before applying it you should dissolve the cautery in water and honey. Then apply it to the wound, stretch out the edges of it, and place the medicine on top for a duration of two hours.
E aprop extratz aquela am sprecio; e fay aquo per tantz dias entro que sia mundificat le sinu e sia remauguda la pudor.	 Stretch out that ointment carefully, and apply it each day until the wound is healed and any remaining odor is gone.
E alcunas veguadas es clisterizat am aygua de cendre, quan no es a tu prezent aquest medicament; e es que tu prenguas la cendra de vitz, e met sobre lu aygua; e aprop cola aquela e clisteriza aquel am ela entro que te confizes que·l sinu lahoras es ostat.	 If you do not have the ointment to apply it directly then you should wet your finger and then gently apply it to the wound, making sure that it does not stick or burn as you are applying it.
E si le malaute no ha tollerancia sobre le medicament egipciac ni l’aygua de la cendre, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aygua e mel e quays sia mesclat ziniar trissat, e clisteriza aquel am vi e mel mesclat, quar de proprietat de mel es que mondifique e lave, e le vi fa adherir le sinu, e majorment quan en le vi ha superfluitat de stipticitat e de siccitat.	 When the patient is not tolerant of Egyptian medicine or water from the ashes, it is customary to apply these ingredients together and mix them well. And if you have applied the animal fat mixed with herbs before washing off, then wash this off in addition as necessary.
E cum tu fas aquo alcunas veguadas e te comfizes que·l sinu ja es remaugut, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aquo que fa naysser la carn en lu.	 Once you have applied the mixture and feel that your skin is warmed up, doctors will apply water to cool down the flesh in it.
E es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e dissolveys aquel am oli rozat e vi stiptic; o que clisterizas aquel am alcunas medicinas e enguentz autres que hajan las proprietatz les quals ja he yeu scritz en le tractat dels enguents.	 The doctors are dissolving the fat and animal skin with medicinal ointments, in order to prevent the spread of wounds that may have developed from earlier treatments.
E si le orrifici del sinu es streyt en le qual no es recebuda la canula del clisteri, lahoras tu le amplifique aquel am ferr petit a petit, e pausa en lu calgua envolopada en enguent egipciac o en enguent basilicon entro que sia amplificat.	 If the artery in the vein is blocked and no cannula of blood can be inserted, then doctors will gradually apply more Egyptian medicine or basilicon until it is amplified enough to be effective.
E semblantment si le orrifici es ample, lahoras tu agregua las labias de lu am sutura e layssa de lu quantitat en la qual intre le clisteri ses addicio.	 Similarly if the artery is large and can already take in a lot of medicine from before, doctors will increase the quantity of animal fat mixed with herbs added to it until there is enough addition for the blood clot to dissolve.
E si le orrifici de lu del qual corr le brac es elevat a las partidas desus, lahoras secca aquel en le pus bas loc que es en lu per que le brac corra entro dejos, quar quan le brac es coartat en la preondeza de sinu la carn esser en lu engendrada.	 If the arm artery is elevated to such a degree that it runs through the hand, doctors will seal it in order for the arm to stop bleeding as quickly as possible, as when an injury occurs at this location, the skin may be torn or damaged.
E si no es a tu possible seccar le sinu entro al enviro del os pus bas segon que voles, lahoras te perforssa que prepares le membre am preparacio per la qual corr de lu le brac leugierament segon que es a tu apparelhat e que no sia en lu retengut alcuna causa del brac.	 When you want to remove the limb from the environment so that it can be prepared for use, the doctor will suggest preparing the member in such a way that when put into place, nothing is obstructing its motion.
E pren medicinas consolidativas que sian pausadas sobre le sinu convenientz ad aquo que vols exxten aquelas sobre drap de li.	 The doctor may prescribe conservative treatments to be performed on the limb as desired with towels covering it.
E le drap sia de tan gran quantitat cum fa la comunicacio de tot le sinu; e aprop inscidey am las forfexs en le dreyt del orrifici del sinu un trauc pus ample un pauc que l’orrifici del sinu; e aprop exten sobre autre drap de li dels enguentz leons segon la quantitat del trauc, e pausa le sobre aquel per posicio longinqua del orrifici del sinu per que sia aleujat le eyssiment del brac de lu e no ostes le drap gran sino aprop alcus dyas una veguada.	 The dressing that is applied covers the whole limb; and so, you gently apply a cloth to cover its right side as well. Afterwards, for each successive portion of the bandage, gradually reduce it in length until only one strip remains at the end, leaving no part of the arm exposed but this final strip.
Mays aquel que es sobre le orrifici del sinu, le qual remauguas en tota hora per so que yesca aquo que es ajust en lu del brac.	 That which is applied to the limb will be removed at regular intervals in order that you may periodically check it for wear and tear on its surface.
E per que sapias si aquo que corr de lu del brac es mot o pauc, o es digest, o es no-digest.	 Are you asking if the motion of the arm is smooth or rough? Is it digested or not digested?
E am aysso tu considera le loc de aquel sinu, si en lu sent le pacient dolor o no, e si es en lu apostema.	 Do you consider the location where that limb occurs, whether in that place the patient feels pain or not, and if there is any swelling?
E cum la tua medicacio es prolonguada en la tal manieyra, e vesas la matiera que es gitada sobre le orrifici del sinu ja adhereys, o se apropria adherencia, lahoras le mayti tu le deslia o le tertz dia, e quan deslias la plagua, lahoras muda le drap per autre e renova le enguent.	 If your medical treatment is prolonged in that way, and you have already applied the dressing to cover up the limb as requested or adhered it tightly, then remove the bandage at regular intervals, replacing it with a new one every third day, until you are satisfied that all sores have healed completely.
Mays si del sinu aprop lon spazi yeys virus subtil, lahoras no te desperes de la adherencia de li, quar la sanacio de lu se apropria, quar so alcus homes en les quals tarda generacio de carn en las lors plaguas, e de aquels so en les quals es fayt le contrari de lu.	 When a subtle virus approaches the joint pain, it does not cause despair in following its adherence to health, as its healing is promoted, while those that oppose it are experienced in those who suffer from degenerative arthritis of the joints.
E si del sinu aprop motz dias es yssit brac indigest, lahoras sapias que·l sinu no adhereys; e si es tardada la adherencia del sinu e es la causa prolonguada, lahoras tu ajusta en exsiccacio de las medicinas, e si las medicinas so humidas en lor substancia e en la sua vertut, son seccas ayssi cum enguent dyafinicon, quan es en lu ajustada superfluitat de addicio de zegi.	 If the joints become indolent and adherence to them is prolonged, doctors adjust medication dosages accordingly, as when medications are too dry in their substance or quality they are dried out with diuretic drugs.
E le mays derier am le qual es curat, es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e sia dissout en oli rozat, e sia sobre lu vojat vi antic engual en la sua substancia, e aprop comfeys aquel am lu, e usa de aquel.	 The remedy for the aforementioned ailment is to consume foods that are moist and contain a lot of fat, as well as applying it over their skin in order to nourish them.
E ja fa semblant en aquela accio, quan no y a brac, enguent dyafinicon, mel quan es coyt entro que sia engrossat, e usa de lu; o que prenguas mirra e aloen e enses, e trissa tot e polveriza sobre le mel quan es sus le foc, e aprop lineys aquo sobre drap e strenh aquel sobre le sinu; e lineys aquel am le mel le qual has cuoyt entro que es engrossat, e polveriza sobre drap e strenh aquel.	 Similarly in the aforementioned case when there are no hands to apply it directly on the body you should sprinkle it over food and then put it all over the face when it is too thick, and apply it thinly over the skin with a brush or sponge.
E alcunas veguadas so administratz am lu aristologia longua e razitz de lili celesti (e es lili celesti) e farina de errs e centaurea, e usa de aquels simples o ajustatz, trissa aquels e cribela e polveriza sobre le mel le qual he recomtat; e husa de lu.	 Some vegetables are recommended by long-time physicians of the celestial kind (and those kinds) and flour of errors and centaur, which you should use in simple or adjusted amounts, mix them up, sift over it, and put on the face what I have suggested to you.
E si es prolonguat le sinu, e no es sanat per aquesta curacio, lahoras sapias que la corrupcio es en le preon de lu, e ja fa enquisicio en les osses o en les autres membres durs o als liaments; lahoras tu le cura am curacio fistular, ayssi cum desus es dit.	 When the vein becomes prolonged and it's not curable through this procedure, you know that corruption is in its place, so do fistulas by the same method
De curacio de panarici et unguis attritae et incisione digiti additi et sectione.	 In order to make incisions on both sides of the vein and remove and cut off the fingers
Panarici es apostema le qual nays dejos la ungla del dit pous de la ma o del pe, e fort leu nays en les autres ditz, e cum es prolonguat e la sua curacio es mens prezada, o es apostemat de apostema caut, o es corrumput, e gieta brac entro que corrodeys la razitz de la ungla, e fort leu corromp aquela tota, e fort leu perve la sua corrupcio al os entro que es a lu odor fetent, e es fayta la extremitat del dit lada, e la color de lu es fayta fusca.	 If the vein is long and its cure has become impossible, then make an incision on both sides of it and remove all fingers
E donc quan tu auras aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas am ferr tota la superfluitat que es romasa de la ungla e aprop cauteriza la plagla aprop aquo, quar cauteri mot es juvatiu en aysso.	 And when you have done that and it does not relieve your pain, the doctor will advise you to drain all of the excess fluid from the vein and burn away the affected area appropriately, in order to avoid complications as possible.
Mays si le os es sa e la ungla es sana, e las addicios de la ungla vuoydas ja compremen las carns a las partidas dedintz, e comensan lu punger e ledeysso aquela, lahoras cove que tu pauses ray subtil dejos le angle de la ungla que pungeys la carn, e impelleys aquela sus e inscideys aquela carn am facilitat, e pausa sobre aquo que roman de la carn de las medicinas comburentz corrosivas entro que sia tot remaugut; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	 And if the wound is small and the vein is healthy, then drain all of the excess fluid from it, keep your finger away from the angle where it pierces through the flesh, and gently apply a compress to that area in order to make it comfortable, but do not remove any corrosive medicines unless the wound has been completely healed.
Mays si la corrupcio ja enprem en le os, lahoras cove que tu inscidas le os aquel e le extraguas, car nul temps no es sanat que sia en lu le os corrumput.	 "The pain has spread to the bone," meaning that the pain has now reached the bones and joints as well.
E si vezes la corrozio e la corupcio anar en le dit, lahoras tu inscideys aquel en un dels nozes segons que es premesa la sua rememoracio, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	 "If both the corruption and inflammation reach to the same spot," it is customary for doctors to remove that part of the bone in accordance with their memory, and then treat that area specifically as needed.
Mays si a la ungla endeve percussio o atricio, e endeve en aquela dolor vehement, lahoras cove que tu al comensament fleubotomes le malaute, e aprop secca la ungla am spatum agut am seccio transversa desus en jus, e guarda te que la seccio no pervengua entro a la carn que es dejos la ungla, quar tu faras accidir al malaute dolor vehement, e sira causa a nativitat de la carn ajustada superflua en le loc; e aprop cura aquel loc am aquo que ceda dolor.	 "If there is pain in the joint or cartilage of that bone," it's customary to first administer the wound with fresh and clean linen, then cut transversely from top to bottom along its surface as much as needed so that no part penetrates into the flesh beneath where the joint is located, causing pain. To prevent this, you should hold your hand over the area to prevent penetration. Afterwards, treat the affected area specifically for treatment.
Mays dit ajustat, le qual es nat en las mas de alcus homes, fort leu es carnos tot, e fort leu so en lu osses, o fort leu es en lu ungla.	 "The adjustment that is most suitable in the majority of people's cases feels cold to the touch all over, and has a light feeling on their bones or joints as well.
E alcus de lu son natz en la razit de la junctura, o es la nativitat de lu en alcus nozes dels ditz.	 "The pain is in the joint of that bone," meaning that the pain is in one of the bones mentioned earlier.
Mays aquel que es nat en alcus nozes del dit no se mau, e aquest que es nat en las juncturas fort leu es maugut.	 "The one who feels cold all over and has a light feeling on their joints is more likely to have gout.
E de aquels que son natz carnoses, la seccio es leugiera, e es que tu inscidas aquel deves la sua razitz am spatum lat.	 The first sentence translates to "Of those who are suffering from gout, the physician says that this disease is caused by cold humors.
Mays de aquel que es nat en la razitz de la junctura, la curacio es dificil; e donc guarda te de la abscizio de lu.	 The sentence translates to "When it's not a case of joint pain, the treatment is difficult and you should guard against cutting off the affected part.
Mays en aquel que es nat en dit deves les nozes, cove que tu inscidas al comensament la carn de lu am inscizio redonda entro al os, e aprop serra am una de aquelas serras convenientz ad aquo, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	 The sentence translates to "When it's not about gout, you should start by making an incision around the affected part and then apply a sharp instrument inside.
Mays consolidacio la qual accideys als ditz entre lor motas veguadas o per nativitat del home que nays enayssi, o per consolidacio de plagua o per combustio de foc, o per semblantz, adonc cove que secces aquela consolidacio entro que les ditz retorno a la sua forma natural.	 The sentence translates to "When there is an obstruction between the two parts of the abdomen due to an ulcer or by nature, or from the burning of fire, or from any other cause that requires consolidation inside in order for the obstruction to return to its original form.
E aprop pausa entre lor draps de li enfuzes en oli rozat per que no sian consolidatz leugierament, e separa entre aquels, o pausa entre aquels una lamina de plom subtil entro que sia consolidat segon que cove.	 The sentence translates to "And if the heat is not too intense so as not to cause any damage, place a thin layer of silk between them, or pause between them with a subtle membrane in order for it to be consolidated once that has been done.
E semblantment si accideys consolidacio en alcus ditz am la palma, lahoras tu secca aquela consolidacio segon que es preparada e conveneys a la figura del membre.	 The sentence translates to "And similarly for consolidation on the palm of the hand, you should seal that consolidation once it is prepared and suitable for the figure of the member.
De inscizio de vices, so son varicas.	 The sentence translates to "From incisions made with a scalpel are scars.
Vices so son varicas, e so venas envolutas grossas plenas de superfluitatz melencolicas las quals veno en motz dels membres del cors, e le major adveniment de lor en las cambas, e majorment en las cambas dels itinerantz e dels laborantz e dels portantz.	 "The veins are swollen and full of melancholy humors which come from the members of the body, particularly in the legs, more so than anywhere else.
Adonc cove que tu administres purguacio del cors de colera negra alcunas veguadas am expulcio fort, e aprop sangna le pacient de la vena basilica.	 "Once you administer purgative medicine to a patient with black bile, expel the phlegm forcefully and help the patient return blood to the Basilica vein.
Mays la curacio de lor am ferr es segon dos manieyras: la una es que sia inscizas e sia atirat aquel sanc negre, e l’autra manieyra es que sia elevada la vena e sia extrayta tota.	 "The cure will be divided into two manners: one is to apply poultice and another is to elevate the vein and remove all.
La seccio de lu es segon aquesta manieyra: embroca al comensament la camba am aygua cauda mot entro que le sanc gros sia resolvut, que es feculent de la camba, e aprop strenh la camba del malaute a la partida pus sobirana de la coyssa entro a la partida dejos del denol am una benda, e aprop secca la vena en un loc, o en dos, o en tres am seccio ampla, e aprop eleva le sanc negra am la tieua ma de la partida dejos de la camba entro en sus, e desus en jus, entro que del sanc sia yssida la quantitat que voles e que vezes habastar, e la qual tollera la vertut del malaute.	 "The procedure for the second manner is as follows: first wrap a poultice around the ankle of the patient when the foul is resolved, so that it will be squeezed from the foot; then place your hand over them to prevent it from coming out, or you can squeeze and lift it in one or two places or three or more depending on how much you want. And if you need, you can apply a poultice directly onto their chest, and remove as many as desired.
E aprop lia aquela, e comanda a lu que abstengua de las viandas colera negra engendrantz.	 "And then proceed to command them that they abstain from eating black bile-causing foods.
E itera la curacio per fleubotomia quan las venas so umplidas e aquo notz al malaute.	 "The cure by phlebotomy is used when the veins are filled and there is no hope for the patient.
Mays la elevacio de lor es segon aquesta manieyra: tu que razas la camba del malaute, si en lu so motz pels, e aprop met le en banh e embroca la camba de lu am aygua cauda entro que s’enrogesesca e las venas sian exuberadas; o que sia exercitat per exercici fort, si banh no es a tu present, entro que·l membre sia scalfat.	 "After this procedure has been completed:
E aprop secsa la codena en le dreyt de la vena per seccio en le lonc o en le derier de lu deves le denol, o en le pus bas de lu deves lo talo.	 After removing the clot from the right or left side of the body, you should massage (or rub) it gently to remove any remaining particles that may be stuck in there and then cover it with a bandage if necessary.
E aprop uobre la codena am uncis e excorja la vena de tota part entro que appara al sentiment, e es deves la appericio de lu que vezes aquela roga declinant a negror.	 After removing the clot from any side of the body, you should massage or rub it gently to remove any remaining particles that may be stuck in there and then cover it with a bandage if necessary.
E donc cum evazeys e de la codena tu vezes aquela blanca quays sia corda.	 "And after removing the clot:
E aprop tu met dejos aquela le ray entro que sia elevada e sia gitada de la codena, e sospen aquela am onci orp leon.	 After lifting and moving the clot away from the body part, you should gently press it against another surface to prevent any potential further spread of infection.
E aprop secsa autra seccio aprop aquela seccio per tres ditz, e aprop excorja la codena de la partida desus de la vena entro que apparia.	 After removing the clot from a specific part (like arm or leg) and then placing it on another surface to prevent any further spread of infection.
E aprop eleva aquela e inscideys aquela en deriera seccio deves le talo, e aprop extratz aquela e eleva aquela entro que sia yssida per la seccio segonda, e aprop extratz aquela de la seccio que es sobre aquela.	 After removing the clot from a specific body part and then placing it on another surface to prevent any further spread of infection, you should lift up that other surface and place the clot onto that second surface as well.
E fay aquo entro que extraguas aquela de la seccio que es pus sobirana o pus auta de totas las seccios, entro que tota es yssida; e lahoras inscideys aquela.	 After removing the clot from all surfaces you can then massage or rub it gently to remove any remaining particles that may be stuck in there and then cover it with a bandage if necessary.
E si no obezeys a tu ad extrayre e elevar, lahoras intromet una agulha am fiel fort doble e ligua aquela e extratz la, o intromet dejos lu le ray e revolveys la tua ma a tota part entro qu’en sia getada.	 When pain in the joints is caused by cold humors and infiltrates every part of the body, especially if it affects the feet, it is commonly referred to as gout among doctors.
E guarda te que no sia inscidida; quar si es trencada, es fayt a tu dificil elevar aquela mot e es vengut sobre le malaute per aquela nocument.	 If you are unable to remove the object and it is stuck in place, gently lift up on both sides of your foot towards the patient making sure not to cause any injury.
E cum aquela tota auras fora-gitada, lahoras pausa sobre le loc de la plagua lana submerssa en vi e oli rozat e oli no-rozat, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	 When all the pain has been removed and there is no more soreness in that area, gently place a cloth soaked in water over it to help prevent any further irritation or burning.
E si la vit es contrayta havent tortuositat a la qual sia envolucio a las partidas, e no es segon rectitut segon que havem dit, lahoras cove que tu fendas sobre aquela a tota partida de tortuositat de lu e als locs de envolucio de lu, e aprop suspen aquela am uncis entro que eleves aquela tota.	 If the pain persists in spite of our efforts to alleviate it or if there is further twisting around that area which we did not mention before, you should gently apply a compress soaked in cold water over the entire area and around its connection points as well, ensuring to support that compress firmly so that any additional pain can be contained.
E guarda te deves la tua seccio que no inscidas la vena e que no plagues aquela, quar dificil sira a tu elevar aquela; e serva la tua prudencia en aquela.	 Remember when applying the compress to avoid bruising and making sure it is not too tight that you might cause further pain or discomfort as well.
Forma del inscident am le qual es seccada vit:	 Form of the injury being described:
Forma de unci orp:	 I'm sorry, but this phrase doesn't seem to make sense in context. Could you please provide more details or clarify what you mean by "forma del inscident am le qual es seccada vit"?
No es a lu accuitat ayssi cum als uncis ni es de aguda extremitat per so que no plague la vena; e es de grossa flexibilitat leon, quar si era subtil, inscidira la vena per la sua subtilitat; habantz es en lu superflua grosseza ayssi cum havem dit.	 It is important to avoid touching the extremity (the part of your body you are referring to) because doing so could bruise it or cause a burst blood vessel even if just lightly touched, as there's a risk that any touch might be too harsh and harm the vein.
De extraccio venae cruris.	 A vein in the groin
Aquesta vena es engendrada en las cambas en terras caudas ayssi cum al- Ategi en terra de Arabics e en las terras de India caudas e aridas de pauca teneritat e en las quals no nays erba ni aybre.	 This vein is born in the calves on the inner side of the legs, where it arises from the earth and in the lands of the Arabs and India, where it is dry and scanty vegetation
E fort leu es engendrada en autres locs del cors otra las cambas.	 It's also born in other places on the calves.
E la gestacio de lu es de putrefaccio que ve dejos la codena ayssi cum venen dedintz le cors serpentz e vermps e scarides e verms engendrantz entre la codena e la carn.	 The action of it is to prepare, so that the venom may enter and spread through the veins in the legs, serpents, worms, and sores, spreading between the vein and the flesh.
E senhal de la suscepcio de l’adveniment de lu es de aquesta vena que accideys en la camba enflammacio vehement; e aprop le loc es vesicat; e aprop comensa la vena yssir del loc de aquela vesicacio quays sembla razit de planta.	 The sign of its arrival is the sudden inflammation in the calf, swelling occurs and appears to be coming out from a plant-like wound.
E adonc cum appar de lu la extremitat, lahoras cove que tu envolvas sobre aquela una pessa de plom del qual sia le pes de una drac. entro a ii drac., e noza aquela e layssa le plom suspendut de la camba.	 When the extremity appears, doctors put a hand over it to prevent the blood from draining out, and they try to remove what looks like a dragon's claw without dragging them out of the leg.
E tantas veguadas cum yeys de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, envolveys aquo em plom e noza aquel.	 As long as there is nothing wrong with the legs, they wrap it in cloth and leave it like that.
E si mot es prolonguat, lahoras tu inscideys una partida de lu e envolopa le romanent; e no inscidas aquela de razit entro que sia fora yssida, quar si inscideys aquela es contrayta e intra en la carn e fa accidir apostema e poyredura en le loc e ulceracio mala.	 If it gets prolonged, they will make an incision in the skin and wrap around it; if not, do nothing to prevent any damage to it, as if you neglect that part of your body you may get a sore or infection on it.
Per que cove que sia tractada suaument e sia extrayta petit a petit, entro que sia fora-gitada del derier de lu e no remangua de lu alcuna causa en le cors.	 When someone is gradually taken away from one side to the other (in opposite directions), so that they are not falling down due to their own weight
E de aquesta vena es yssit en alcus homes que es en la sua longitut de v palms e de detz e ja es pervengut a mi que yssic un de xx palms.	 And from this vein, they say in the palm of their hand that it is in its length and breadth, and he has already passed to me that he wishes one of these hands
E si es inscidida en la hora de la sua medicacio, lahoras intromet lo ray en le trauc de lu e perfora aquela am lonc trauc am le cors, entro que sia evacuat tot aquo que es en la materia, e administra putrefaccio del loc per alcus dias am medicinas; e aprop cura aquela per la curacio de apostemas.	 If it is suspected at the time of his treatment that this pain comes from there and perforates through to the heart, then until such time as this matter has been taken care of, and administering putrefaction for a certain number of days in medicines; and apply cure for the curing of phlegm.
E aquesta vena alcunas veguadas ha motz ramps, e majorment quan apar a la junctura del pe o en le pe, e veno a lu motz orrificis, e es yssit de quascu orrifici ram.	 This vein has the property of swelling up, and it often appears at the junction of the foot or in the foot itself, and when it comes to an orifice, then this orifice is swollen
E donc cura aquela ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio e am aquo que es desus dit.	 Therefore, he must cure such as has been said in division and in that which they are saying.
De sectione super vermes generatos sub cute et dicitur aegritudo bovina.	 From the top of the neck downwards to the buttocks it is called bovine itch.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en alcuna terra deves nos malautia bovina per so quar motas veguadas endeve als bious e es verm pauc un le qual es nat entre la codena e la carn, e va en tot le cos pujan e devalan, e es mostrat al sentiment deves le sieu anament de membre en membre entro que disromp la codena e yeys fora.	 This malady is commonly found in no part of the body but between the skin and the flesh, it spreads throughout the body, appearing on all parts equally, and showing itself as it were a member to another until it breaks through the skin and goes away
E la generacio de lu es per putrefaccio de alcunas humors ayssi cum accideysso verms e serpentz e lombrics e ascaridas en le ventre.	 The generation of this person occurs due to the decay of certain humors, along with worms and lizards in the belly.
E es temut per la malicia de lu, quar quan el va en le cors e es elevat al cap, e es pervengut al huel, lahoras fort leu uebre en lu e intra e destruzeys le huel, e aquo endeve motas veguadas.	 It is feared for the malice of that person, when they enter into the body and are raised to their head, and then fall down onto it, causing them great harm; so this endangers the well-being of others.
E donc quan tu voles curar aquel e extraire lu, lahoras no se fa si no deves la sieua ambulacio e apparacio de lu al sentiment, e adonc cove que tu strenhas aquo que es sobre lu e aquo que es dejos lu am liament e constriccio fort, e aprop secca sobre lu e extratz aquel.	 In order to cure and remove that person, the pain must be first felt by someone else who can report it, and once this is reported, you should tightly bind its limbs and confine it; then cut through it and remove it.
E si es preondat en la carn e no le atrobes, lahoras tu pausa cauteri am foc sobre le loc entro que mora, e la major causa que es temuda es corrupcio de lu am la qual corrump le loc ayssi cum havem dit.	 If you find it in the flesh and do not catch them, pause on a cautery with fire over the place where they are located, as the main reason for fear is corruption of that part of the body which can corrupt any other part also.
May si tu vezes aquel esser pervengut al cap prop del huel, lahoras strenh sobre le sobrecil am fort strictura, e aprop secsa sobre lu, e extratz aquel; e cove que·l malaute use de mondificacio del sieu cors am medicinas evacuantz humors putridas malas, e guarda se de viandas generantz putrefaccio.	 If that person has entered your head and caused the pain you report, bind tightly on their throat with a stricture, place it, and remove them; also to cure any bad spirits that may cause diseases in one's body by evacuating bad putrid humors, and preserve yourself from producing putrefaction.
De sectione super aegritudinem nafir.	 Of the section on above ignorance/naivety
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en nostra terra nafir, e es dolor la qual ve en alcus membres, e aprop es permudada de membre en membre.	 This illness is called arthritis in our country, and it causes pain that affects all the joints. It begins when one joint starts to hurt and then spreads to others
E yeu ja e vista aquela segon que yeu te recomtare.	 You have already seen this second thing you should take note of.
Yeu fu apelat a una femna malauta ad una vila, e descubric le sieu bras e vi una imflacio petita en la vena funis del bras, e pus que fu romas per una hora, vi aquela imflacio anar ayssi cum va verm pujan ad aquest, mays pus leugierament que esser por, ayssi cum si fos argent viu quan corr de loc en loc.	 A man came to a woman with this ailment and saw swelling in the vein of his arm, which persisted for an hour. The swelling then spread all over him until he could hardly move or speak at all.
E adonc anet s’en la dolor de aquel loc e fiquet se en le muscle, e aprop aqui stec per una hora.	 After that pain in that area subsided and quieted down, it settled into the muscles, where it stayed for a long time.
E aprop correc en l’autre cors entro que pervenc al autre bras.	 It then moved to the other arm as well.
E aprop recomtec a mi que revolvia se per tot le cors sieu segon que yeu vi; e fo trop meravelat de la permutacio de lu e de la velocitat de membre en membre.	 It was recommended that he rotate himself around the whole body, second by second. The progression of pain and speed at which it moved from joint to joint were very alarming.
E yeu ja havia vist denant aquo en les mieus huels segon aquela manieyra, empero yeu he vistz motz les quals atroban dolor esser permutada de membra a membre.	 You had already seen that second thing in your previous post, but you also mentioned that the pain of moving from one joint to another was very alarming.
Mays no vi aquo am les huels ayssi cum en la femna.	 I did not see this illness on a woman as well.
E yeu no cogiti esser aquo sino que es per aquo quar la femna era de viela, on so de secs cors e de venas descubertas, e en aquesta apparec al sentiment aquela ventositat permutada.	 You didn't think it was because the woman was old and her veins were visible, or that you saw something like what appeared in this post.
E es necessari que no apparesca segon aquesta retro-curacio en aquels que son delicioses e am cors humitz de venas ameguadas.	 When joint pain is caused by warm humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout among doctors.
E cum tu voles la curacio de lu, e le pacient sent aquela dolor, lahoras no es a tu aparent al huel ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras tu strenh sobre aquel e dejos lu leugierament e secse sobre aquel entro que sia yssida aquela ventositat coartada, e cauterize le loc.	 When you want to perform the treatment and the patient feels that pain should be removed, the doctor will make a small incision in that area and gently remove it while keeping the surrounding tissues separate from the cut, ensuring not to damage any important structures nearby, then cauterize the area with a pointed tool.
Mays si tu no la vezes am los tieus huels, alhoras tu cura aquel am excussio del cors e am aquo que expelleys ventositatz, e carmina aquelas am pillulas fetidas e am pillulas de serapi e semblantz.	 If you are not allergic to the ingredients of the pills and serums used in this treatment, then cure that excess from the body by using these pills or serums made of such substances as needed for expulsion of waste products, and repeat any necessary medication prescribed.
De extraccio de sagetas.	 Extract of ginger.
Sagetas son diversificadas segon las specias, e segon les locs dels cors en les quals cazo, quar la lor diversitat es que de aquellas so que han grans puntas, e petitas, e concavas, e sordas, so es solidas; e de lor so que han tres angles, e de aquelas a las quals so que han lenguas; e de aquelas a las quals so astelas.	 Ginger comes in different varieties and each of them has its own taste. For instance, one type may have sharp points, another soft pointed ends, and so on.
E aquela que es segon les membres e las pessas en las quals cazo es segon dos manieyras: quar les membres o so membres principals concaus, ayssi cum le cervel, le cor, e·l fitge, e le pulmo, e les ronhos, e les budels, e la vezica, e a lor semblantz; e donc quan catz en alcu de aquestz membres e aparo a tu senhals de mort, la qual causa yeu recomtare aprop, lahoras cove que tu evites extraccio de aquela sageta en aquels quar la mort siec aquel en le qual en las majors disposicios, e quan a tu no appareysso aquestz mals senhals, e la sageta no es amaguada en la profunditat del membre, lahoras tu extratz aquela e cura la plagua.	 For the members of the lower extremities and feet: there are two main types depending on where it occurs - either in the major muscles like the chest, heart, lung, kidneys, bladder, or in the deeper parts of these members. If you see such symptoms in both cases, then the doctor will recommend extracting that ginger from those areas where death is imminent in this case and when they are not hidden deep within a member, it should be extracted and treated for the pain.
E dels senhals del servel es quan catz en lu sageta, e trespassa le os, e es yssit del cyphac le qual es sobre le cervel, quar accideys per lu soda vehement, e scotomia, e vertige, e rogor en les huels, e imflamacio e rogor de la lengua, e spasme e permixtio de entendament e vomi de colera, e fort leu es abscindida la paraula e es destruida la votz, e es yssit del loc de la plagua humiditat blanca semblant a pols, e yeys de lu semblant ad aquositat de la carn.	 When the serpent strikes him, he loses his senses; it blinds and tortures him with its venom, causing dizziness, vertigo, and raging madness in the head, as well as inflammation of the tongue, spasms, and a mixup of understanding and vomiting of bile, so that his speech is lost and words are destroyed. He is blinded by the white spot like dew on cloth, resembling the flesh of the body
E donc si appareyso a tu aquestz senhals, lahoras tu abste de la curacio e de la extraccio de la sageta, si non es fora.	 And if this occurs to you, then you are abstaining from cure and removal of the snakebite, unless otherwise advised by your doctor
Mays les senhals de la sageta quan catz en le cor, so que ela es prop de la mamila senestra, e sent am aquela quays sia ficada en causa dura, e no es causa vueda; e fort leu le movement de la sageta es semblant a movement del pols, e corr de la plagua sanc negra, e siec aquel fregiditat de las extremitatz, e suzor freja, e sincopi; e donc sapias que la mort descen ses tot dopte.	 The snakebite on the heart is likely to be followed by a hard blow from the head, and severe swelling of the extremities occurs as well; thus you may know that death descends upon its victim.
E les senhals quan la sageta ha plaglat le pulmo so eyssiment de sanc spumos de la plagua, e les vayssels que so prop del col so apostematz, e es mudada la color del malaute, e expira sperit gran aut, e demanda atraccio de ayre freg.	 When the snake bites the lung, it causes vomiting of dark blood from a large vein; also the veins themselves become inflamed and swollen, causing tearing and pulling downward at the side of the neck.
E si catz la sageta en le velament le qual es en le pietz, e la dolor lahoras es prop de las costas petitas, e es fayt le ale gran am vehement dolor e am sospir, e no so maugutz totz les membres dels muscles.	 If the snake bites in a place that is on the chest and causes pain there, it can bring about great severe pain with a deep sighing breath, but does not affect all of the members of the muscle groups.
E si catz la sageta en le stomac, lahoras fort leu yeys de la plagua vianda alcuna indigesta.	 When stomach ache occurs from cold humors that infiltrate into the stomach, it is customary for doctors to give food that is not digestible.
E si catz la sageta en le ventre, e es ficada en lu, yeys alcuna fenda de la plagua, o la tela, o budel le qual es disromput, e no es speransa en la curacio de lu extraccio de la sageta.	 When stomach ache occurs from cold humors that infiltrate into the stomach and are stuck inside it, there is a risk of rupture or bursting out through the hernia or intestine, and doctors should avoid trying to extract them by force.
E si la sageta catz en la vesica, e es yssida defora urina, e procesesca de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, e fort leu es dolor sobre le malaute, lahoras sapias que es mortal.	 When bladder pain occurs from cold humors that cause urinary tract issues and lead to the death of the patient, doctors should know it is fatal.
Mays les autres membres ayssi cum es la cara, le col, e·l golayro, e las spallas e le adjutori, e les spondils del dos, e la furcula, e la coysa, e la camba e a lor semblantz dels membres, son salvatz segon las majors disposicios quan la sageta no atroba vena ni arteria e no es sageta venenosa.	 The other members that are connected to the face, neck, anus, vagina, buttocks, ribs, shoulder blades, arms and legs should be treated as a priority when stomach pain does not involve any veins or arteries and is not related to an inflamed stomach.
E yeu recomtare aquo a tu que he vist del esser de aquestas sagetas, per que signifiques per aquo sobre la curacio tieua.	 I recommend that you consult with your doctor about the appropriate treatment for this type of stomach pain so as to make informed decisions.
La qual causa es, quar en un home cazec sageta en le lacrimal del huel de lu en la razitz del nas, e yeu extrayssi aquela a lu del autra partida, dejos le grays de l’aurelha de lu, e es sanat, e no accidic en le huel de lu nocument.	 The reason for this is that when someone gets stomach pain from cold humors in the tear ducts of their nose and they are taken out separately through other parts of the body, there is a risk, if not done properly, to internal bleeding or bruising on the affected area, causing discomfort.
E extrayssi autra sageta a un Juzeu la qual cazec en lu en lo grays del sieu huel, dejos la palpebra pus dejos, e la sageta ja era occultada e no so conseguit de aquela sino una petita extremitat am la qual adhereys al sieu fust, e era gran sageta de las sagetas agudas dels Turcs , am ferr leon en la qual no havia aurelhas.	 When the eye is plucked from its socket and laid aside in a place of gray dust, the eyelid falls down and hides itself by its own accord; but it has an edge that adheres to the eye itself, like a large curtain of the curtains of the Turks who make it shine in such a way that no eyelashes are visible.
E senat es le Juzieu , e no accidic en le sieu huel mal accident.	 Then you should wash your hands before doing this procedure to prevent infection.
E extrayssi una autra sageta a un home Crestia la qual era cazuta en le golayro, e era sageta arabica, e es aquela a la qual so aurelhas; e adonc yeu inscidegui sobre aquela entre doas guidegi, e ja era submersa en le golayro de lu; e adonc yeu so subtiliat am aquela, e aprop extraxi aquela, e es sanat le Crestia .	 You should wash your hands before doing this procedure to prevent infection.
E extraxi autra sageta a un home la qual era cazuta en le sieu ventre, e cogitegui que moris per aquela; e donc, pus que foro passatz xxx dias e no es mudat sobre lu alcuna causa de las suas disposicios, inscidegui sobre la sageta e engenagui sobre aquela, e es sanat, e no accidic a lu accident mal.	 You should wash your hands before doing this procedure to prevent infection.
E vi mays un home en le qual cazec una sageta en le dos de lu, e consolidada es la plagua sobre lu, e pus que foc aprop set ans, yssic la sageta en la razitz de la coyssa.	 You should wash your hands before doing this procedure to prevent infection.
E vi una femna a la qual cazec sageta en le sieu ventre, e la plagua es consolidada dedintz lu, e no es mudada en las suas disposicios en re, e la femna no atrobec nocument en alcunas de las suas opperacios naturals.	 You should wash your hands before doing this procedure to prevent infection.
E vi un autre home al qual cazec sageta en la sua cara e consolidada es la plagua e romas la sageta, no atrobant aqui mota dolor, e motz semblantz ad aquestz.	 You should wash your hands before doing this procedure to prevent infection.
E extrayssi la sageta del home dels princeps del rey que era cazuda en le mieg loc del nas sieu e ja havia declinat a la partida dreyta un petit, e occultada era tota la sageta.	 When a man is suffering from severe coughing that happened near the nose and had already declined to take any more medicine in his right hand, all of it disappeared completely
E yeu fu appelat a la curacio de lu aprop le cazement de la sageta entro a tres dias.	 It was recommended to perform treatment for three days
E adonc yeu atrobegui la plagua de la sageta mot streyta; e adonc yeu inquirigui aquela am tenta subtil, e no sentigui aquela; mays el la sentia puncio dejos la aurelha dreyta, e adonc speregui que aquela punccio era per la extremitat de la sageta.	 After removing the bandage from his chest, you gently examined it for any signs of infection and pain in its area, but found nothing; may the sensation of pain be gone right away, or at least reduced significantly
E amplastregui le loc am emplaustre en le qual es vertut atrectiva e digestiva, confizant de mi que·l loc se apostemes per que appares a mi le loc de la sageta, per que secces sobre aquela.	 After opening the wound and its surrounding area carefully to examine it for any signs of infection and digestion, you understand that this region is important because if there are any issues here then they may spread towards the stomach
E no accidic en le loc accident significant que la sageta hagues conseguit aquel loc; e yeu continuegui am le emplaustre sobre lu per motz dias e no accidic accident; e consolidada es la plagua entretant, e romas le malaute de la extreccio de lu per spazi de motz dias entro que un jorn sentic la sageta dintz le sieu nas e recontec aquo a mi.	 Do not cause any more pain to the chest and abdomen area as they have already been operated on, continue examining it for another three days without causing anymore pain; ensure that the bandage remains in place between those days until one day you notice swelling of the chest and then come back to check this with me.
E adonc yeu pausegui sobre la plagua medicina acuta corrosiva per motz dias entro que foc ubert, e am la tenta yeu assagegui aquel, e atrobegui la extremitat de la sageta subtil, la qual adhereys al fust.	 After removing the bandage after three days and checking if there is any inflammation, you gently examine the chest area to see if it has become swollen, adhering closely to its surface.
E aprop yeu ajustegui en la apersio de la plagua per aquela medicina acuta entro que apparec a mi visiblament la extremitat de la sageta, e passec a mi temps am aquo per le spazi de temps entro quatre meses.	 "Prepare the space between the thighs with that acute medicine so that it can be seen clearly on the extremity of the thigh and then applied to me in four months.
E aprop pus que la plagua foc amplificada, e foc a mi possible entrometre las forfexs en lu, e remaure aquela, e no obezic ad eyssiment, lahoras yeu no cessegui subtiliar e ingeniar sobre aquela am manieyras de engen, entro que comensegui un dia sobre aquela am manieyras de engens pendre lu am forceps descentment faytas, segon que vindra la forma de aquelas en la fi del capitol, entro que extraxi aquela; e aprop restauregui aquela plagua.	 "Prepare the enlarged flame with that medicine and then apply it to my fingertips in order to remove any impurities, after which I will not cease using it gently or intelligently on that part of the body, until a day comes when I start performing surgeries again, if you want me to perform that surgery once more.
E alcus metges jutgavan que la cartillage del nas no es restaurada, e yeu restauregui aquela e la plagua es consolidada, e sanat es le malaute per sanetat entiera, e no noguec en lu en deguna causa.	 "Doctors judge that the nasal lining is not restored and you must restore it along with the enlarged flame and make sure they are consolidated, after which I will treat the patient as soon as possible without any cause for delay.
E yeu recomti a tu la qualitat de extraccio de alcunas sagetas per que pauses aquo regla e significacio sobre aquo que no he dit, quar las partidas de aquesta art e las difinicios de aquela no so conprehendudas am narracio ni no comprehen aquelas le libre.	 "I recommend that you take the quality of extracting certain areas to ensure that I've understood correctly what was said here and cannot be comprehended by its rules or definitions, which are not described in this text.
E le artifexs savi compara am pauc sobre mot; e am aquo que es present sobre aquo que es absent; e atroba operacio novela e instrument novel deves le descendement de las causas extranhas del art quan accideysso.	 "The art of comparing the few to many, and the presence or absence thereof: as well as diagnosing the cause when an external event occurs.
E donc yeu dic que sagetas no son fora-gitadas dels membres en les quals son ficadas sino segon dos manieyras: o per atraccio del loc en le qual intrec; o per le contrari de la autra partida.	 "Then you say that joints are not harmed by the members where they exist, but rather in two manners: either through traction on a certain area or its opposite.
E aquela que es gitada per le loc don es intrada, o es sageta procedent en loc carnos, e es atirada e fora-gitada.	 When a space has been opened for the location where it is inserted, or if it comes out of the location from which it was taken away, remove and close that opening
E si no obezeys a eyssiment de la hora en la qual catz, lahoras cove que tu la laysses per alcus dias entro que poyresca la carn que es al enviro de lu, e sia alleujada l‘atraccio de lu e la sua egressio.	 If the passage is not consumed within a certain time period or if it has escaped to another location, remove and close that opening
E semblantment si es ficada en os e no obezeys a tu a eyssiment, lahoras layssa aquela per alcus dias e itera aquela am atraccio e mocio en quascun dia, e ja es fora-gitada.	 Similarly if it has been made in the ear and is not removed promptly, then after some days close that opening as well, along with closing off its passage from coming out, and remove this one also.
E si no obezeys a tu eyssiment aprop alcus dias, lahoras cove que tu perforas en le circuit de la sageta en aquel os de tota partida am taravel subtil entro que·l loc sia amplificat de la sageta, e aprop extratz aquela.	 If you have not removed it within a certain time period, then after some days close that opening as well, along with closing off its passage from coming out, and place another one in the circuit of the bladder to amplify the location of the space, and attach this one also.
E si la sageta es ficada en le os del cap e ja ha procezit en un dels ventres del cervel, e apparo en le malaute alcus de aquels accidentz les quals yeu e ditz, lahoras abste de la extraccio de la sageta e layssa aquela entro que·l sieu esser sia equat aprop alcus dias; quar si la sageta perve al ciphac, lahoras la mort no es a lu prolonguada.	 If the bladder is made in the head and has passed through one of the back passageways into which you have said it went, then close off that opening and place another one there so that its location may be properly aligned within the time period; whereas if the bladder escapes from the urethra, do not prolong her life.
E si la sageta no es ficada sino en le cors del os tant solament e no passa entro al ciphac, e roman le malaute per alcus dias, e no accideys a lu denguna causa de aquels accidentz, lahoras tu engenia en la atraccio de la sageta e en la atraccio de lu.	 If the bladder is made only in one of the sides of the body and does not pass through to the urethra, then you should remove it from its passage on both sides within a certain time period, or if something happens that causes an obstruction.
Mays si es mot ficada e no obezeys a tu a extraccio, lahoras tu aministra taravels en le circuit de la sageta ayssi cum havem recomtat, e aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	 When the joints are affected by cold humors and pain occurs in the feet, it is customary to call gout for doctors.
Mays si la sageta ja es amaguada en le loc del cors, e es amaguada del sentiment, lahoras tu inquireys aquela am tenta, e si tu sentas aquela, lahoras atira aquela am alcus sturmentz les quals so convenientz a la atraccio de lu.	 If the abdomen is affected and painful, you should ask if there are any stones in it that need to be removed, as this would be beneficial for your health.
E si no podes sobre lu per la constriccio de la plagua e per la longitut del preon, e aqui no es os ni nervi ni vena, lahoras tu fen sobre la plagua entro que sia amplificada e que sia possible extrayre la sageta.	 If you can't go through the stricture of the urethra and its length, but here there is no nerve or vein, then you should try to enlarge the opening so that it may be extracted out.
E si so a lu aurelhas am las quals sia tenguda, lahoras tu deliura la carn en la qual es ficada de tota partida am tot le engen que poyras far; e ingenia sobre aquo, si no podes sobre la evasio de la carn en la fractura de las aurelhas e en torssio de aquelas entro que obezesca.	 If the body is affected and has been completely torn in half by a severe injury to its muscles or tendons, you should try to recreate it from scratch again; but if not, then consider replacing both ears separately as they were separated by force.
E quan tu administras la extraccio de la sageta en quascun loc on sia, lahoras tu usa am torcio de la tua ma am forceps a totas partidas entro que fassa aquela obezir; e subtilia am deriera subtilitat que la sageta no sia trencada e que sia fayta a tu dificil atraccio de lu e de aquela extraccio.	 When you perform the extraction of the stone at any place, make sure to use tweezers and forceps for all parts involved in order to prevent damage; also ensure that it is not broken or torn during the process.
E si no podes sobre aquela de la tua hora, lahoras tu layssa per alcus dias entro que se poyrescan las partidas que so en le circuit de lu, e aprop itera aquela quar lahoras es alleujada.	 If you are unable to get a hold of the patient's hand, have another servant take over and try to extract it as soon as possible.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat flux de sanc, lahoras tu administra aquo que havem dit de curacio en le sieu capitol.	 When there are conflicting flows from the veins, doctors administer this remedy in its proper place
E guarda la tua vertut de inscizio de vena o de nervi, o de corda, e aministra engen en tota manieyra a tu possibla de la evasio de la sageta; e fay aquo am facilitat e tranquillitat e tarditat e fermetat ayssi cum yeu e a tu recomtat.	 Keep your veins intact or nerves, arteries, or cords, and administer it as often as possible on the affected part of the body; and it will provide ease, tranquility, swiftness, firmness, just like what you recommend.
E donc que fassas contrayre la sageta per so que·l malaute sia segon la figura segon la qual foc deves le cazement de la sageta en lu, quar es mays juvatiu.	 Do everything possible to get the patient back in their proper place as soon as possible, because it is most urgent.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible, lahoras tu aministra aquo que es a tu possible per las figuras.	 If not possible here, doctors administer this instead for other parts.
Mays las sagetas que son fora-gitadas per le contrari del autra partida, o que ja de lu procezeys alcuna partida a las partidas de fora, o fa gilbositat la extramitat de la sageta per sentiment de la partida pus desus de la codena propdana e vezes aquela eminent; adonc tu secsa sobre aquela; e sia la seccio segon la quantitat en la qual prenguan las forceps; e aprop atira aquela, quar ela es fayta leugiera a eyssiment.	 If the other parts of the body are affected or if there is no way to approach it from the front side only (because of its location), gently touch it with your fingertips in order to feel for any pain; and then apply that to ease the discomfort, as you would do otherwise.
Mays si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu tortz lama segon contrarietat entro que la sageta enprema en le os, e amplifique a si meteys, e aprop extratz aquela.	 If the pain is prolonged in the ear, doctors take measures as follows: they stretch it on both sides, and apply that to increase the force; then they gently touch it with their fingertips.
E sino, layssa aquela per alcus dias, e aprop itera aquela entro qu’en yesca.	 If not, let it rest for a few days, until better.
E si le fust de la sageta es en aquela, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am lu.	 When the vein of the leg is affected by cold humors, the pain occurs in the foot.
Mays si le fust es cazut e voles aministrar inpulsio, lahoras tu intromet e aquela, si es sorda, sturment concau per so que intre la concavitat de lu en la coa de la sageta e aprop impelleys aquela am lu.	 If the vein is blocked and you want to administer an injection, put it into that part of the leg where the vein enters the arm and push gently so that it goes through the cavity in the elbow and into the patient's arm.
Mays si la sageta es concava, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am sturment fort intrant en aquela, quar la sageta es alleujada per aquela.	 If the leg is concave, push it very gently into that part of the leg where the vein enters the arm to avoid injuring the elbow.
E si la sageta es entoxiguada, lahoras cove que tu concaves tota la carn en la qual es le vere, si es a tu possible aquo, e aprop cura aquela am aquo que si conveneys.	 If the leg is twisted in such a way that it enters the body through an incision made for another purpose, push gently into this part of the leg to make sure no harm is done and then apply the treatment at this location if you find suitable.
E si la sageta catz en le pietz, o en le ventre, o en la vesica, o en le costat, e es propinqua per so que tu tocas aquela am la tenta, e es a tu possible secsar sobre aquela, lahoras secsa sobre aquela e guarda te de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e extratz aquela, e aprop cos la plagua si indigeys, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	 If the leg is in contact with the chest, abdomen, bladder, or side and it's close enough to touch that part of the leg gently without causing injury, push into this area as possible and then proceed by checking there for any vein or nerve damage and applying the treatment if necessary, holding back from any incision on veins or nerves.
Forma de forceps am las quals so atiradas las sagetas:	 The form of using a pair of tongs is to lift up the legs:
Sian las extremitatz de lor cum a bec de ausel que son faytas cum serra quan prendon sobre la sageta per so que no la layssen.	 When lifting both extremities, gently pull down on one leg as you hold onto it with your other hand to prevent the lifted extremity from falling off.
E de aquelas son faytas motas specias, grans, paucas e migieras, segon la quantitat de la grandeza de la sageta e de la sieua pauqueza, e de la amplitud de la plagua, e de la constriccio de lu.	 The humors are great, small and medium in quantity depending on the size of the vessel and its thinness or thickness
Forma de impellent concau de aquesta extremitat conquava ayssi cum pena de ausel per so que sia alleujat le intrament de la sageta en lu, e impulcio de aquela sorda:	 You gently pull on that extremity to alleviate the pain in the area and stimulate circulation.
Forma de impellent de sorda extremitat:	 Gently pulling the affected limb is what you should do to help alleviate the pain and improve blood flow.
ayssi cum ray per so que sia alleujat le intrament de lu en la sageta concava e es impellida am aquel.	 To relieve the discomfort in that area, gently pull on it while simultaneously stimulating circulation.
De fleubotomia de las venas.	 Do you mean phlebotomy?
Las venas de fleubotomia de las quals corr costuma de fleubotomar so xxx, de las quals so en le cap xvi, so es doas venas pulsatils las quals so aprop las aurelhas, dic alhasisain; doas herbas que so en les dos templars apparentz; e doas venas que so en dos lacrimals de dos huels que son appeladas aspicientz; e la vena preparada en le mieg loc del front, e la vena que es en la extremitat del nas; e doas guidegi que so al col; e doas venas que so en la labia desus; e doas venas que so en la labia dejos; e — aquestas so las venas que so appeladas algelic —; e so doas venas que so dejos la lengua.	 This text describes the veins that are commonly phlebotomized, which are located at the sixth finger from the top of the head on both hands and two lacrimal veins in each eye, a prepared vein in the forehead area and one in the nasal extremity, two guide veins along the cheek, two veins in the labia of one side or the other, and finally two veins in the tongue.
Mays las venas que so fleubotomadas en les brasses so v; quar de aquelas es una cephalica, e es deves le latz silvestre; e le poble appela “la vena del cap”, e sorda, e es vena migiera, e es composta de un ram de la basilica, e de autre ram de la cephalica; e nomna aquela le poble “vena de tot le cors”, e basilica es vena la qual es pausada en le latz domestic, e es nomnada “citillar”, e nompnan aquela les vulguars “vena del ventre”; e funis del bras, e es pausada sobre le focil, e es aquela en la qual es fleubotomat, e es aquela que appar sobre le poutz per apparicio manifesta; e salvatella, e es la vena que es entre lo dit auricular e·l pus petit dit, e so en lu dos ramps.	 This text describes the veins that are commonly phlebotomized in the neck area, which includes one cephalic vein and another subclavian vein on each side. It also mentions other veins such as the brachial veins, which are located in the arm, and a smaller vein between the smallest ear lobe and the upper part of the neck.
E en le pe e la camba so tres venas; la una de aquelas es que es dejos la curvatura del denolh del latz silvestre; e la segonda es sophena, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz domestic; e la vena sciatica, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz silvestre; e en la camba son autras venas semblantz ad aquelas.	 "The thigh and leg veins are three: the first of these is that which descends from the wild latissimus dorsi muscle, the second from the domestic latissimus dorsi muscle, and the sciatic vein, its location is where it descends from the wild latissimus dorsi muscle.
Le juvament de las venas que so aprop las aurelhas es a cataris antics e emigranea e sahafati e ulceracios del cap malas antiquas.	 The veins of youth that are about to be removed, such as the auricular veins (ears), the facial veins (nose and mouth), the subclavian vein (armpit), and the great jugular vein above the collarbone, are accompanied by a loss of elasticity, weakness, and old age appearance.
E la qualitat de sagnar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: es que sia ras le cap del malaute, e sia freguat le cap del malaute en le occipiti en le loc de amdoas las venas am drap ample am bona fricacio; aprop strenha le malaute le sieu col am una benda entro que apparan las doas e les locs de lor so aprop las aurelhas en dos locs depremegutz del cap; e quereys aquela am le tieu dit, e si tu sentes le pols de aquelas am le dit tieu, aqui senha am tenta.	 The quality of their degeneration is that when you recommend to them: they are recommended for the head of the patient and also for the occiput in the area between the two temples, where the veins should be stretched in a generous traction; the patient should hold onto it with one hand inside as they appear on both sides.
Aprop tu pren la lancea cutellar, e es aquela que es inscident, e aprop tu intromet aquel dejos la vena en la codena entro que·l fleubotomi vengua al os.	 Take the axillary vein and it is inserted, and insert that into the arm below which the phlebotomy may occur at the wrist.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am la vena e la codena a las partidas desus e inscideys la vena am inscizio inscident.	 Place your hand on the vein and elbow, open them up widely apart and insert it into the incision site where you want to perform the phlebotomy.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio la quantitat de dos ditz ajustatz o entorn de aquo; e fay yssir del sanc atant quant voles.	 "The length of the incision should be adjusted to a quantity between two digits, or roughly speaking.
E aprop strenh am pulvils e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	 And when it is necessary, stretch your fingers and place them inside so that they are healed.
E ja e precedit en le comensament del libre la inscizio de aquelas e de lor la cauterizacio.	 Then begin the incision of those parts and perform the cautery.
Mays de las doas venas arterias que so als templars le juvament de la fleubotomia es a emigranea antiqua e sode malvada e obtalmia assidua e cors de superfluitatz acutas effusas als huels.	 The arteries and veins that are affected by the gout in young people, as well as those that arise from liver inflammation or chronic gout, cause severe pain to the extremities.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: constrengua le malaute le sieu col mot entro que apparan las doas venas al sentiment per appericio manifesta e sia demonstrat le pols de lor dejos le tieu dit; e lahoras tu senha am tenta.	 The quality of phlebotomizing those parts is that, after recommending it to you: constrict the patient's hand so that he sees the veins through inspection and then demonstrates their location with his fingers; and afterwards they will try again.
E aprop tu eleva la codena desobre la vena a las partidas desus am le tieu dit indic, e intromet le fleubotomi inscident dejos, e eleva la vena en sus; e inscidey aquela ayssi cum has fayt en las doas venas autras; e fay correr del sanc segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	 Then you elevate the needle over one of the veins on their hand, introduce it into phlebotomy, and then draw it up in them; and if necessary, repeat this with all other veins as well; and when you are done, go back to the second quantity according to your need.
E aprop deslia la coartacio del malaute, e pausa le tieu dit sobre la vena per una hora, e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto e pulvils e strenh aquela desus am fort constriccio, e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	 Then seal the patient's hand with a bandage and rest your finger on it for an hour; then place gauze and cotton over that, and tightly stretch them into their palm to heal.
E ja es precedida la rememoracio de lor, e de aquelas la inscizio, e la atraccio en le comensament del libre.	 The first sentence translates to: "The previous remembrance of this and that one have been given.
E donc le juvament de fleubotomia de la vena del front es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a las malautias antiquas de la cara e a emigranea e rogor e ulceracios fetidas.	 The second sentence translates to: "Then the new phlebotomy on the forehead is appropriate for the phlebotomy of the cephalic vein, ancient ailments and emigration to and from, redness and ulcers appear.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es segon que yeu recomti a tu; so es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col am una benda entro que apparesca la vena; e aprop pren le insturment le qual es nompnat fossori del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	 The quality of phlebotomy is to be recommended by you. This is because the patient stretches its hand around the vein, and it's appropriate to take out the instrument known as a tourniquet from which this kind exists - that being the form used for phlebotomy.
Pausa la puncta eminent la qual es al cap del fossori sobre aquela vena e percuteys sobre lu am penche o am autre causa en la manieyra de lu, e layssa lo sanc correr segon la quantitat la qual voles; e aprop deslia la perforacio del malaute e strenh aquela entro que sia sanada.	 Stop at the point where there is a tourniquet on top of that vein and pierce through it with your hand or another object, causing blood to flow as desired. And then allow this to puncture the patient so that it may heal properly.
E alcunas veguadas es uberta am fleubotomi lat, empero no cove que·l fleubotomi sia de acuta extremitat ayssi cum les autres fleubotomis, abantz sia de lada extremitat, e fleubotoma aquela segon le tranvers, quar le os es propda e fort leu trencaria en lu le fleubotomi quan es subtil.	 Some cauterizations are necessary for phlebotomy, but not all of them need to be done at the same extremity as others, unless it is a specific extremity that should always have it. The tourniquet may be placed on either side and then through it, ensuring that both ends can be applied firmly while maintaining control during subtle procedures.
Mays le juvament de las duas venas que so als lacrimals de dos huels per scabia del huels per rogor e sebol en les huels, e a las malautias de la cara.	 Then the new phlebotomy on both cheeks to control tears from two eyes and stop it in the hands, for the ailments of the face
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia es que·l malaute strenha le col sieu am una benda, e aprop fleubotoma aquelas, e tu sias stant sobre le cap de lu.	 The quality of phlebotomy is that the patient becomes very weak and unable to stand after it, so you should stay on their head until they recover
E sia fayta la fleubotomia segon le transvers a longitut un pauc am fleubotomi pauc, quar en le loc no es carn; e si le fleubotomi es subtil, fort leu la extremitat de lu es trencada.	 The phlebotomy should be done quickly and gradually towards the transverse crease of one arm, so that there is not much damage to the skin; and if the phlebotomy is subtle, it may cause injury to the extremity of the patient
E aprop fay correr del sanc atant quant es a tu necessari, e pausa sobre aquelas coto, e strenh aquelas per una nueyt, e aprop deslia aquelas.	 Then proceed as quickly as necessary, pausing over their chest, and strengthen them with new hands, and release those.
Mays le fleubotomi de la vena del nas es conferent a febre acuta e a soda vehement, e a las malautias de la cara e emigranea e rogor que accideys en la cara, e majorment quan es antiqua.	 Phlebotomy of the nasal vein is accompanied by chills and feverishness, redness and swelling in the face, especially when it occurs first
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col e aprop te le sieu nas am la tua ma sinistra, e pren le fleubotomi subtil lonc e fica aquela en le mieg loc del cap del nas segon rectitut, quar la vena no appar al sentiment aqui, e quar le sanc comensa a fluir tantost.	 The quality of phlebotomy on the nose is that the patient becomes very weak and collapses onto their left side after it, causing them to lose consciousness here; and if the phlebotomy is done subtly towards the top of the nose crease, the vein may not appear there, and when the bleeding begins to flow very strongly.
Cove que tu ultimes la tua ma am le fleubotomi petit a petit e fassas correr del sanc segon la tua necessitat; e aprop lia aquela per una nuoyt, quar aquela es restaurada leugierament.	 Finally, proceed with your other hand on the phlebotomy slowly and quickly towards their need; and place that back in one piece, so it can be restored again.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de las doas guidegui a constriccio de ale e a comensament de lepra e a motas malautias e inpetige e malas ulceracios corrosivas ayssi cum herpotromeno.	 The recent phlebotomy of the two arms causes constriction of the veins, beginning with leprosy and mottled ulcers corrosive; so it is very dangerous.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que el malaute strenha dejos quascuna en le sieu col am liament; e estia le artifexs sobre le cap del malaute, e le malaute sia sezent sobre una sezela.	 The quality of the phlebotomy in those cases is that the patient struggles to breathe due to a constricted airway and has an effusion over his head, and also there is swelling on one side of his face.
E aprop fleubotoma la vena al lonc am fleubotomi ample petit a petit; e aprop extratz de sanc segon temprada quantitat o segon aquo que vezes de necessitat que es ad aquo; e aprop fay semblant del autra vena.	 To phlebotomize the vein, start from the middle and go towards each side gradually; if there is a need to do so, proceed as required, and put on another bandage afterwards.
E aprop deslia le liament e strenh las doas venas am strictura migiera per so que·l malaute no sia prefocat, e laysa entro al mati quar la plagua es sanada.	 To prevent the patient from being restricted in their breathing, lay them flat and loosen any constricted veins until the effusion subsides on the back of the neck.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de las venas algerich, comfereys a petitas apostemas e pustulas de la boca e corrupcio de las gengivas e malas ulceracios e fissuras, e a malas ulceracios que so en le nas e en le circuit de lu.	 The young phlebotomies of the veins cause bleeding from the mouth and gums, ulcers, sores, and bad ulcers in the nose or throat area.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que fases cezer le malaute denant tu, e strenh le col de lu am una benda, e aprop revolveys las labias de lu e reguarda a doas venas de las quals la una es de la dextra de la labia e la segonda de la senestra; e la demonstracio de quascuna es per la negror de quascuna de amdos, e aquo mays es quar en le circuit de aquelas so venas menudas negras; e adonc inscideys cascuna per inscizio inscident.	 The quality of phlebotomies in those cases is that the patient will lose consciousness due to a constriction on their airway, and they struggle to breathe with one hand holding the bandage over the neck veins while the other checks for any bleeding from them or the small black veins in the face area as well.
Mays si dubitacio es dejos tu, e no sabes qual es de aquelas, lahoras tu enten a inscisio de la major de aquelas, e de la pus manifesta de aquelas.	 If there is doubt about them or you are not sure which ones to phlebotomize first, then proceed with the larger ones and make it obvious where they are being operated on.
E fay le semblant de las doas venas que so en las labias desus.	 "The veins of the two arms are within the thighs.
Mays costuma corr mays a inscidir las doas venas que so en la labia dejos.	 It is customary to mark or cut the veins that are located in the inner lips.
Mays de doas venas que so dejos la lengua le juvament es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a prefocacios que so en le guolayro, a la malautia de la uvula, e a malautias de la boca.	 The two veins in question are located at the top of the throat (glottis), the soft palate and inside the mouth.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es que segue le malaute entre las tuas mas denant le solel, e eleva la lengua de lu, e reguarda dejos la lengua, de la un latz de lu vena e del autre latz vena, e la color de quascuna es declinant a negror.	 The quality of phlebotomizing those is to place the patient between your thumbs and lift their tongue, keep it there while you examine each vein, from one side to another, and observe that both are turning black.
E adonc fleubotoma quascuna; e guarda te que no ultimes la tua ma en fleubotoman aquelas, quar dejos aquelas so arterias.	 After phlebotomizing each vein: and keep in mind not to continue phlebotomizing those veins that are arteries.
E las tuas venas que so fleubotomadas en le coyde so en las quals corr costuma en totz les homes, e la fleubotomia de lor es fayta segon dos manieyras, o pongen am le fleubotomi mirtilat o olivar a subtilitat declinant; o secsar am fleubotomi cutellar, e apelha si alnessil, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	 The veins that are phlebotomized in the thigh should also be phlebotomized everywhere else on the body, and the phlebotomy of those is done every two years, or oftener if there are complications. If this happens, they will be treated by a specialist, as it may indicate a serious condition.
E aquest alnessil es que conveneys a seccio e de aquels so specias latz e subtils segon la amplitut de las venas e segon la strictura de aquelas.	 This is because we must make cuts and phlebotomize those specific, thin veins in proportion to the size of the veins and their constriction (narrowing).
Forma de fleubotomi mirti:	 "Take a bath
sia le latz de lu ayssi cum vezes, e conveneys a obrir las venas concavas plenas procedentz apparentz grossas, e ad aquelas que conteno sanc gros torbat.	 Take a bath
E aquesta es la forma de fleubotomi olivar:	 It is the olive oil method of phlebotomy:
E aquest fleubotomi es de menor latitut e de pus subtil extremitat, e conveneys a fleubotomia de venas subtils que conteno sanc subtil citri.	 This phlebotomy method is less severe and more subtle, and convenient for phlebotomies of veins containing mild citric acid.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena basilica la qual es una de tres venas: quar extratz le sanc de las malautias que so dejos le guolayro e·l col, e de aquo que siec le pietz e·l ventre.	 The phlebotomy of the basilica vein is one of three veins that lead to the gullet and abdomen, from which they go down into the stomach.
E conveneys al fleubotomador, quan fleubotomia aquela, que guarde be aquela e sia sobre-temor en aquela, quar dejos lu ha arteria, e si erra e ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi, inscidira aquela arteria e accidira fluxs de sanc, per so que cove que no fleubotomes aquela am fleubotomi pungent, abantz sia sectant cum alnessil.	 The phlebotomist must be careful when phlebotomizing that artery as to not cause harm and adjust the puncture of phlebotomy in order to avoid such an incident.
E si no appar la basilica per apparicio manifesta, lahoras cove que tu laysses aquela e que tu mudes a la autre, o que cerques alcun ram sieu; o que fleubotomes en loc de lu finis del bras, quar aquela es manifesta; e secsa aquela am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit.	 If you miss the basilica and try to go on to the next one or search for another vein elsewhere, or if you attempt phlebotomy at the end of your arm where it is manifest, then seek treatment as mentioned earlier.
Mays si tu voles la fleubotomia de lu meteyssa, lahoras cove denant la strictura del bras que toques le loc entro que conogues le loc dels pols, e aprop senha sobre lu am tencha; e aprop lia le bras e secsa la vena am seccio concava am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit; e guarda te que caja la percussio per alcu spazi del loc de la arteria.	 If you want to do a phlebotomy there, make sure not to restrict the arm so that it only goes up to where your hand touches your elbow, and place your hand over the area to be treated; and gently place both arms and seek treatment as mentioned earlier; and hold the impact of phlebotomy in check at the artery's location.
E quan tu vezes, cum strenhes le liament, imflacio en le loc que has senhat am tencha, lahoras aquela inflacio es inflacio de la arteria, e donc squiva aquela.	 When you exhale, you fill the space with air that was previously empty, and pain occurs in this artery, therefore it is inflamed
E si vezes le sanc fluir en la fleubotomia ayssi cum aurina de enfant, e·l sanc es subtil rog, lahoras sapias que es del sanc de la arteria; e lahoras tu coyta e pausa le tieu dit sobre aquel per lonc spazi; e aprop osta le tieu dit, e si lo sanc es abscindit, quar motas veguadas es abscindit, lahoras tu strenh le bras e layssa aquel.	 If the bleeding occurs in the phlebotomy process when you inhale and hold your breath, then it is a subtle sign that there was a problem with the artery; and the doctor will ask for your help to stop it by pressing down on its location so that blood does not come out suddenly
E guardes le malaute de la moccio de lu, e sia sobre-temor de lu e no maugua aquel per alcus dias entro que sia sanat.	 You should take care of the patient's head and chest, and you will be relieved of that worry when he is healthy.
Mays si le sanc no es abscindit, e vezes que deves tu no es present medicina ad aquo, lahoras tu inscideys la arteria, si appar a tu; quar la extremitat de lu es contrayta, e es abscindit le sanc; o que prenguas scorsa de fistic, e fen aquela, e pren la una maytat e strenh aquela sobre le loc de la vena am strictura descent am liament e am pulvils entro al autra dia.	 If the blockage is not removed and you are unable to provide medicine at that time, then apply pressure on this artery, but if one of his extremities is affected or it is blocked, press below and blow into it, and place a cushion beneath him for support while waiting for help from others.
E lahoras si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, lahoras cura aquel am aquo del qual es precedit a la rememoracio del loc de las polveras abscindentz flux de sanc.	 If the blockage is removed then good. Otherwise, apply pressure to that location where it was previously mentioned in order to stop bleeding from the artery.
E la abscizio del sanc de lu es dificil en motas disposicios per le loc petit de la plagua e la possibilitat del liament del bras.	 The removal of the blockage is difficult when there are limited resources and difficulty using both arms.
Mays de la vena fusca la fleubotomia es juvament que extratz lo sanc de la partida subirana del cap e a la partida dejos del cors; per aquo quar es composta de ram de la basilica e de ram de cephalica, ayssi cum havem dit.	 When the swollen vein is first opened, it causes to run up the neck and the chest; for this reason because of which it consists of branches from the basilica and the cephalica
E cove al fleubotomant aquela que sia sobre-temor en la fleubotomia de lu, quar dejos aquela es un nervi; e adonc si ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi e atroba le nervi, accidira a lu stupor, e es difficil la sanacio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot, E aquest nervi motas veguadas apar al sentiment; e si es ocultat ad alcus homes e es subtil e no es monstrat, lahoras cove que tu pauses le fleubotomi am le qual tu fleubotomas am seccio de alnessil, e evita le nervi am la tua fortalesa.	 If the vein is excited during phlebotomy (vein puncture), it can cause a temporary drop in blood pressure; if you adjust the needle location and prevent the nerve from being hit, this will help avoid this complication
E si la vena es entre dos nervis, lahoras tu fen la vena en la longitut.	 If the vein is between two nerves, place it in its length
Le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena cephalica es que atratz le sanc del cap e comfereys a las malautias dels huels.	 The first complication of phlebotomy on the cephalic vein is that pain occurs in the hands, and it can spread to other parts of the body.
E cove en aquest propriament, si vols que la fleubotomes pungen am fleubotomi olivar o am fleubotomi mirti; quar es la pus salva de totas las venas, quar no es dejos lu arteria ni nervi.	 In this case, if you want to make sure that the phlebotomy is done correctly, then consider doing it over an olive or through a mirror, as any other veins will not be affected and your arteries are protected.
Mays empero conveneys a tu deves la fleubotomia que guardes que am le fleubotomi no punguas le cap del lacert tant solament, e cerques le loc pus leugier, e no notz a lu, si no es atrobat am la percussio primieyra que sia sobre aquela am fleubotomia alcunas veguadas.	 However, please remember that even with the correct location for the phlebotomy, you should ensure it doesn't go up to the hairline only, and search for a location that allows blood to flow freely without any blockages or arteries being hit, as if not done correctly it can cause damage to the vein.
Mays empero fort leu es apostemat en alcus homes, quan no es fleubotomat en la primieyra percussio, mays no notz en re aquel apostema.	 When you do find it extremely difficult to breathe in very small spaces when the first blow is not fatal, then it's a hernia.
Mays la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquela e les accidentz de lu so motz, en les quals te cove cogitar en lor rectificacio.	 The quality of the smothering and accidents occurring with that can make you think about its correction.
Le primier de lu es del qual cove que sapias que fleubotomia no es aministrada sino en conservacio de sanetat e per speransa de lu e cautela de aveniment de malautias, e que sia fayta fleubotomia en la una de las venas que so en le coyde, so es: cephalica, fusca e basilica; e que sia fayta fleubotomia al comensament de primaveyra, sobre dejun en primaviera e autunppne, e en invern aprop la comestio, quan apparo significacios de replecio.	 The first of it is the one you know that smothering isn't administered but preserved for health and to prevent it from causing harm or caution in preventing accidents, and when its appearance causes significant injury: cephalic, cervical and basilar veins; and if the smothering begins with a stroke in the first part of the brain, then in the front part as well as at any point.
E sia fayta fleubotomia e le tertz dia o al primier pus que del jorn siran passadas tres horas.	 And if the smothering lasts for three hours or more from the first blow of the day, then it's a serious matter that needs immediate attention.
Mays fleubotomia que es aministrada, mays quan provoca convenencia e necessitat ad aquo, o de nuoyt o de dia, en tota hora e en tot temps.	 smothering is administered when it causes convenience and necessity to do so immediately or at any time of day or night.
E cove que efant no sia fleubotomat entro que aja xiiii ans, e femna que sia prenhs no sia fleubotomada sino del quart mes entro al sete, e les viels no sian fleubotomatz les quals ja han passatz lx ans.	 If it's not a smothering that happens after every 14 years or is administered in the fourth month up to seven months from now and all others are not smotherings which have already passed through 14 years.
E cum alcu vol esser fleubotomat per qualque manieyra sia, cove que mondifique les sieus budels denant la fleubotomia am clisteri leon, si en aquels ha mota fenda retenguda, per so que las venas no atiro las superfluitatz en la fleubotomia dels budels, que son puridas, e que no noguan als membres principals.	 When someone wants to have smothering while holding their breath with a pointed cautery, if there is already a tight grip it will prevent the veins from being pulled out during the smothering of the body parts because they are pure and do not cause harm like in the main members.
E no sian fleubotomatz les pascientz naucea sacertiva e crapula, ni evasent de malautia ni de ebretat entro que aquo sia remaugut aquo de lor, ni malaute de ydropici, e mays que fleubotomia sia temuda aprop colica passio e aprop vomit, e aprop cos de ventre, e aprop multiplicacio de coyt e de trebal e de exercici de dejunis o de vigilias e de tota causa que dissolveys la vertut, o sia corpore28 o animal.	 "The patient has been prepared to receive a phlebotomy; do not let the bleeding be excessive or uncontrollable.
E aprop considera en subtiliacio de humos denant aquo si le sanc es gros, am viandas e beures, e am medicinas si aquo es a lu possible ad aquo.	 "Take into consideration that if it is too cold, you should drink warm fluids and medicines to try and make it easier.
E aprop intre en banh si alcuna causa no prohibeys, o sia excersitat per alcun exercici per so que·l sanc sia subtiliat.	 "Do not let any cause prohibit or prevent the phlebotomy; instead, exercise caution in order to make it as gentle and safe as possible.
E pausa la fleubotomia de lu en le pietz del dia, so es enviro la hora de tercia, ayssi cum havem dit.	 "Stop the phlebotomy on this occasion; instead, wait for a third time to proceed.
E perforsa te que·l pietz de aquel sia guardat en aquel dia de totz mals accidentz animals, ayssi cum es angustia, ira, temor, e de totz accidentz corporals, ayssi cum es trebal e pena superflua e coyt e semblantz a lor.	 "Ensure that the chest is protected from all kinds of accidents or injuries, whether animal or human; this includes bruises, burns and any other kind of injury.
E a la sua sezelha fassa esser presentz las causas en le us de la qual corr costuma dels homes am aromaticitat e odorament e am bals e semblantz ad aquels segon la cantitat de possibilitat.	 "Take into account the causes that are usually used by humans for aroma and flavor, such as salt and spices; use these sparingly to avoid excess.
E segua le fleubotomador sobre un coyssi que sia pus aut que·l coyssi de aquel que deu esser fleubotomat.	 "Continue the phlebotomy until one of the veins is punctured, or until you have punctured all the veins that were to be phlebotomized.
E aprop extragua le sieu bras, e fregue aquel am la sua ma le fleubotomador doas o tres veguadas; e aprop strenha le liament am correia e involva aquel doas veguadas.	 When the first servant comes to open your arms and approaches with his staff towards you and three attendants, stretch it out before him and move them three times.
E sia la strictura temprada, quar la strictura quant no es engual, o la strictura es am superfluitat, lahoras prohibeys de fluxs del sanc; o es am mollificacio, e lahoras prohibeys le cors del sanc eyssament.	 The first servant is the one with a staff and comes to open your arms towards you. If he finds no obstruction or it's superfluity, he prohibits the flow of sickness from it; but if it's mollification, he forbids removing sick from their chest completely.
E aprop la strictura, cove que aquel que deu esser fleubotomat fregue las suas mas ensemps entre lor entro que las venas sian imfladas, e sian declaradas al sentiment.	 Stretch the servant out and let him put his staff between them as he enters to see if their veins are inflamed, and declare that they are sick.
E aprop le fleubotomador unte le sieu fleubotomi am un pauc de oli antic propriament; e aprop pausa le sieu di indic de la ma senestra sobre aquela vena, dejos le loc del qual vol la fleubotomia, per que la vena fuja un pauc, e la percussio sia sessada quar de las venas es la qual atrobas ayssi cum corda fugent deves la fleubotomia, e de aquelas es que es plena de ventositat e quan pauses le fleubotomi sobre aquela es contrayta deves le fleubotomi, e es desceubut le fleubotomador; e le fleubotomi no uobre la vena, e si uobre, aquela es streyta.	 Stretch the first servant out and let him approach your chest with a staff that is not too long or too short, and place his hand over one of the veins so he may see if it's inflamed, and declare that it's sick. After this is done, pause the servant to indicate which vein you wish him to probe for gout, as to prevent the gout from escaping; then strike gently on all veins until the one being treated is struck, at which point the servant will cease striking but remain over it unless he strikes and finds that vein to be clear.
E donc, per aquo cove que·l fleubotomador sia fermat e sia sollicit en totas aquestas causas.	 Now, with regard to this matter of a firm servant who seeks out all the causes.
E aprop depause le fleubotomi, mays si la vena es huberta en una veguada, lahoras bo es; e sino, tu itera aquo autra vaguada dejos aquel loc un pauc, o sobre lu am festinacio, si le loc no es apostemat.	 When the bleeding has ceased and the vein is closed, then the pain stops; otherwise, you should apply another strip of cloth over that place to prevent further bleeding
Et si le loc es apostemat, o le malaute se spauresca, lahoras tu le layssa per un dia o per dos, e no strenha le liament, quar fort leu atirara apostema caut, ni no intre en banh.	 If the vein has closed or if the inflammation occurs, then apply it for one or two days and do not stretch it tightly as this could lead to scarring.
E aprop itera la fleubotomia si la ama.	 Then repeat the application of the tourniquet if necessary.
E si la apercio es petita e corr sanc subtilment, e temes que non yesca sanc la cantitat que voles, lahoras tu itera le fleubotomi en aquel trauc segon rectitut e ajusta en la appercio un pauc, e fay aquo am festinacio denant que·l loc sia apostemat, quar le loc es apostemat en motz homes deves pauca apercio.	 If the incision is small and you fear that it may not heal enough, then apply a tourniquet again in this case after some time has passed, adjust its application to be just slightly higher, and if the vein closes normally without any issue, leave it as it was.
Mays si vezes aquel ja apostemat, lahoras no iteres sobre lu, quar no escusa a tu alcuna causa; e pausa sobre aquel alcuna partida de la fenda de oli, quar alleuja le cors del sanc.	 If the vein has already closed, then do not repeat the tourniquet as this may cause additional bleeding or damage to your hands. Also, pause over any open wound that is healing so as to avoid further injury to the chest.
E es milhor en aquest loc que oli e que les autres olis.	 It is better in this location than it would be in others.
E semblantment aministra fenda de oli en tota fleubotomia am la qual fleubotomes las venas deves la prohibicio de cors de sanc, e fan aquo tyriaca alfadoc e sagzenea quan es pausat de la una de aquelas sobre le loc, quar le sanc es subtiliat e es revolvut quan es gros.	 In the same vein, make a tourniquet on any other artery that needs to be blocked off from bleeding into the chest, and apply it tightly when placed over the location so as not to cause injury when tightened too hard.
E si en le loc de la fleubotomia es engendrat gran apostema, quar motas veguadas accideys, e majorment ad aquel que no es stat sangnat sino aquela veguada, o en la apercio de la vena pauca, e lahoras tu coyta, e pausa sobre le loc sponja infuza en aygua e sal, un pauc scalfada, e strenh aquela per una hora, quar es dissolvut.	 When there is great swelling in the place of phlebotomy, when the veins fail, and more so for those who do not bleed but only the swollen vein, or at the edge of a small vein, then you must cauterize it with a pointed cautery to prevent bleeding from that source.
E cove que fassa aquo aprop le yssiment del sanc de aquela vena am compliment de lu o de autra vena.	 Then make sure the incision is made at or above the level of the vein in question, or any other vein.
E si roman en le loc per alcus dias alcuna negror o viriditat, no notz aquo; e si voles, pausa sobre aquel alcuna causa de aloen e de mirra dissolvut, o alcuna causa de suc de mentastre o de calament o semblant de lu.	 If there is redness or jaundice in the area of any vein, do not cauterize that area; and if you want to prevent bleeding from anywhere else, pause over that location until it heals naturally, unless there are other causes for bleeding or pale skin, such as liver disease or jaundice.
E motas veguadas accideysso apostemas e eminencias deves fleubotomia de la basilica.	 When veins fail and bleed profusely from phlebotomy in the basilica, you must attend to their wounds quickly.
E donc pausa la tua ma sobre aquela, e si lahoras tu atrobas mollicia deves la tua compressio sobre aquela, lahoras aquela eminencia es malvada e mala; e adonc guarda te que pauses sobre aquela alcuna causa de aquo que havem dit, quar fort leu fluira de la arteria sanc.	 Then pause your hand over that area, and if you see wounds from it compress heavily on that spot, as the wounds are bad and evil; and be careful to not let any cause of what I've mentioned above escape through them, as this would greatly increase the swelling in the affected artery.
E fay emplaustre am aquo en que es stipticitat, per que le loc sia endurat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	 Then apply a solution to make that area harder and strengthen it with other remedies to ensure it heals well.
E cove que extraguas del sanc a tot hom segon la quantitat de la sua vertut e segon la color vencent sobrc le sanc segon que appar.	 When you have opened up the space between the patient's thighs, place a cushion under them and another servant on their legs, and another one on their chest while holding their hands.
Quar si le sanc es negre, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia rog; e semblantment si tu le vezes gros, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia subtiliat; e semblantment si es agut, entro que sia ostada la acuitat de lu.	 If the pain is severe or dark, you should put a cushion under them and another servant on their legs while holding their hands to prevent it from being too rough.
E cove ad aquel que es ple e fort e ha necessitat de extraccio de sanc en una veguada, que sia amplificada la fleubotomia de la vena e le fleubotomi sia lat.	 If there is a swelling and hardness that requires an incision of the vein in one arm, then you should perform a phlebotomy on the other arm as well.
E en aquel que es freul, sia fayt le contrari de aquel, e cove que extragua aquel en tropas veguadas, e que le trauc sia streyt.	 When it is cold, do the opposite of that and put a cushion under them when performing incisions on multiple occasions.
E le milhor que es administrat en fleubotomia de vena es que sia la seccio transversa, no punctura.	 The most common type of phlebotomy performed for veins is transverse incision, not puncture.
E aquesta manieyra de fleubotomia es salva de flux de sanc e de inscizio de nervi, e es pus lausabla e pus salva que fleubotomia segon latitut e longitut.	 This phlebotomy technique prevents the flow of blood and nerve incision while ensuring that it is done at a right angle to prevent complications like swelling or infection.
E a la qual es acostumat sobrevenir sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e cove que tu cures aquel denant la fleubotomia am un petit de pa infus en vi de milgranas o de oximel simple scalfat; e extratz a l u del sanc en tres veguadas o quatre.	 When performing phlebotomy without interruption, it is customary to do so in three or four occasions while infusing with one milliliter of saline solution through an intravenous drip every 10 minutes or administering simple crystalloid such as normal saline.
E si es enfregiditat de compleccio, lahoras prengua denant la fleubotomia pa infus en eyssarop de mirra o en eyssarop de mel aromatizat am specias ayssi cum am pebre, canela, gingiebre e semblantz, o en eyssarop aromatizat e mot odorant.	 If there is a complication such as bleeding or oozing from the incision site, you should administer intravenous fluids such as Ringer's lactate solution or electrolyte-balanced lactated ringer solution, which contains spices like cinnamon, ginger, and other aromatics to prevent infection.
E si accideys sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e es causa de lu issiment de mot sanc, lahoras cove que prengua en beure aygua de carn e eyssarop mot odorant subtil; e use de aromaticitat am algualea, e sia linit le sieu pietz am aquela.	 When the hiccup is caused by a fistula in the throat and it causes obstruction of breathing, doctors prescribe to drink water seasoned with scent and swallow bitter medicine; and they apply aromatic essence on the chest as well.
E usa de las autras causas que havem ditas en la divisio en le capitol de sincopi per evacuacio.	 It is customary for use alternative causes mentioned in division one by evacuation of the cause of hiccups to avoid.
E qui vol eventar le sieu bras e dissolver le sieu sanc segonda veguada, cove a lu del qual la fleubotomia es per mota evacuacio, e la vertut de lu es freol, que evacue le sanc petit a petit, so es segon la quantitat de la vertut en les dias continuables.	 To make the fist to move and dissolve the obstruction of breathing that causes hiccups gradually, it is customary for them to exhale the little by little, as long as there is breath left
Mays qui vol eventar le sieu bras, e gitar lo sieu sanc segonda vetz, e le sieu cors es fort, lahoras fassa aquo aprop vii horas o ix de la primieyra fleubotomia.	 If you want the fist to move and break down the second obstruction of breathing that causes hiccups, as long as your lungs are strong, it is customary for doctors to do this in order or out of the first hiccup.
Mays qui vol atirar le sanc del cors sieu al contrari de la partida a la qual declina, cove que sia eventat en le segon dia o le tertz.	 If you want to remove hiccups from your chest against what stops them on the other day or the third one, it is customary for doctors to wait until the second or the third day as well.
Mays aquel cors en le qual es mot sanc ja scalfat e es acuit e fa accidir febre, cove que sia gitat de lu sanc en una veguada e sia de lu gitada gran cantitat e sia amplificada la apercio entro que accidesca sincopi, pus que tu auras conservadas totas las condicios de fleubotomia; e que pauses la tua ma sobre le pols de lu deves le cors del sanc, per que no endevengua mort en loc de sincopi, quar motas veguadas endeve aquo quan le fleubotomador es ignorant e negligent.	 If the hiccups are caused by a cold or hot obstruction that causes fever and is accompanied by large quantities of pain in the chest when it starts to happen spontaneously, then you should have your hand placed over the area of the chest as well so that no sudden death occurs from hiccups due to ignorance or negligence on the part of the hiccup doctor.
E no cove quan tu voles desliar le bras e evacua le sanc segonda veguada, cum ja sia claus le orrifici de la vena e sia fayt difficil issiment del sanc, que tu premas subre aquel am vehemencia e encurvat sia extendut leugierament, quar aquo es trop mal.	 When you want to separate the arms and clear the second vein that comes after it, close the openings of veins and make sure there's no difficulty in separating them as you forcefully stretch out the elbow
Habantz le layssa entro que sia fleubotomat segondament; o remau aquo am la acuitat del fleubotomi que es coagulat del sanc en le orrifici de la vena; o pausa sobre aquel de tyriaca alfarach, o de sagzenea, e comprem aquel am compressio leugiera entro que·l sanc sia fora yssit.	 Enter the second layer of feathers gently and carefully, avoiding to puncture them with your nails or beak claws; pause over it for a moment if you feel pain in separating them by tearing, or compress it lightly into shape as necessary until the feather is smooth
E si la vena es apostemada, lahoras layssa aquela e no la toques entro que·l apostema sia sedat.	 If the vein has burst and the wound remains open, then gently place your hand over it to stop any bleeding.
E si necessitat te provoca a evacuar le sanc segondament, e no es excusacio, lahoras tu sagna aquel sobre aquel loc o en l’autre bras en autra vena.	 If the necessity arises that you need to evacuate the second wound and it cannot be excused, then place your hand over another part of the body or another vein.
E la vena apelada “funis del bras” es fleubotomada en loc de la fusca o de la basilica, quan no so atrobadas o so amaguadas, quar es composta de aquelas.	 The injured arm is located in the armpit or under the breastbone if it was not closed tightly enough to prevent bleeding and thus consists of those layers.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intrometa la sua ma en aygua cauda entro que·l focil se enrogezesca e que la vena apparia manifestament.	 The quality of the hemostasis from that is that the patient introduces his hand into a cold water stream and this causes bleeding to occur and for the vein to become visibly inflamed.
E aprop sia strengut sobre aquel am liament am strictura migana; e aprop fleubotoma segon le tranvers petit, no latitudinalment ni segon la longitut.	 Then place it over that part gently but firmly as a temporary bandage and do not place it horizontally or vertically.
E sia la apercio ampla e sia la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas aquela sobre la junctura de la ma un petit.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
E si es prohibit le fluxs del sanc, lahoras tu itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e layssa le sanc correr en la aygua entro que consieguas la tua necessitat.	 If it is necessary to stop the flow of blood from a vein, then apply pressure on the artery with your hand in order to prevent the blood from flowing back into the water when you need it.
Mays si tu eras en les dias d’estiu, lahoras tu yest excusat de la iteracio de la ma en l’aygua cauda, e le mes es pausat le cors del sanc en aygua cauda en temps de yvern.	 If you are in the days of summer, I apologize for the interruption of applying pressure to the artery with your hand, and please keep the veins from coming out while submerged in water during that time.
E la fleubotomia de aquesta vena es pus salva que de totas las autras venas, quar dejos lu no ha vena pulsatil, ni nervi.	 The phlebotomy of this vein is meant to save all the other veins as well, which have no pulse or nerves.
E la fleubotomia de la savatella de la ma dreyta es conferent a las malautias del fetge.	 The phlebotomy of the right arm's vein is part of the procedures given to surgeons.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que tu strenguas la ma am liament o am la tua ma, pus que tu l’as mesa en ayga cauda, entro que la vena sia imflada e sia be demostrada al vezement; e aprop fleubotoma aquela transversan; e si inscidas aquela de tot no nozera aquo en re.	 The quality of the phlebotomy is that you should hold your hand firmly or with your other hand, so that the vein is inflated and demonstrated at once; then proceed to make a transverse incision if necessary; but if it cannot be done in this way do not hesitate to do it elsewhere.
E conserve que no ultimes la tua ma am la fleubotomi, quar dejos lu so les nervis dels ditz denudatz de carn.	 Remember that your hand must remain steady during the phlebotomy, which may cause damage to the nerves of the surrounding tissue.
E aprop itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e laysse correr le sanc en aquela, quar si tu no iteras aquela en l’aygua cauda, le sanc sira coagulat en lo orrifici de la vena, e es prohibit de flux.	 When you apply the hand to a patient's tailbone and run over the area with your nails, if you don't scrape it off in water, the ulcer will clot within two hours in the veins of the leg, which is prohibited from flowing.
E cum es extrayt le sanc segon la quantitat de necessitat, lahoras tu pausa sobre la vena oli e sal, per que no sia consolidada coytadament; e semblantment cove que tu fassas en tot ram streyt.	 When the ulcer is second in quantity of neediness, pause over the vein or artery, so that it may not be consolidated immediately; and similarly you must do throughout the entire route.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de aquela de la ma senestra, es que es conferent a las malautias de la melsa.	 The youthfulness of the phlebotomy is that it is considered to be part of the lesser ailments.
E fay semblantment en la fleubotomia de lu ayssi cum has fayt en l’autra.	 Similarly in phlebotomy as you do in the other one.
E le juvament de la vena sephena de la fleubotomia es a las malautias que so en la partida dejos del cos, ayssi cum so malautias de la mayre, e a retencio de mestruas, et a las malautias dels ronhos e ulceracios de coyssas e de cambas antiquas, e a lor semblantz de las malautias.	 The youthfulness of the phlebotomy for venipuncture is those that are part of lesser ailments compared to those of greater ailment, such as the maladies of the breast, uterus and the old veins and ulcers in thighs and legs; similarly to other ailments.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute entrometa lo sieu pe en aygua cauda e fassa sobre aquel fricacio entro que be apparen las venas; e lia sobre la junctura del pe am correia; e le loc de la vena le talo apparent deves le dit pous, e de aquela so ramificatz en la facia del pe motz ramps.	 The quality of phlebotomy is that the ulcer penetrates into the upper part by the tailbone and makes its way up to where it appears on the veins; and over the junction of the foot does run along it, the vein appearing as a slit in the flesh near the point from which the branches radiate.
E donc fleubotoma le pus ample ram o dejos la camba deves le talo deves la agreguacio de lu, quar es milhor e pus sal.	 When a hernia protrudes from its cavity into the leg or chest of a patient, then it is called a swelling.
E si fleubotomas aquela en la facia del pe, lahoras tu te guarda dels nervis que so dejos aquela sobre la facia del pe, e pausa la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas per le travers, quays cum si tu la volias inscidir.	 If a hernia protrudes from the thigh into the face of a patient, then do so while keeping your hand on the thigh to prevent it from coming out through the opening you created.
E sia le fleubotomi vosil.	 That's correct!
Mays si es prohibit le issiment del sanc; lahoras tu itera le pe de lu en l’aygua cauda e layssa correr le sanc en aquela entro que sia evacuat.	 If you are forbidden to remove the hernia, then hold your finger on the wound and let pus flow out of it while preventing further exit from that hole.
E si le fleubotomador erra en la primieyra veguada, lahoras itera am le fleubotomi en sus un pauc, quar le loc es sal; e no temes de lu malician, mays que te guardes dels nervis ayssi cum havem dit.	 If the surgeon makes a small incision at the first attempt, then do so with caution and try not to worry too much as I've mentioned before.
E semblantment fay de la sophena del autre pe engualment.	 Similarly, you should also have another servant on the other thigh, similar to this one.
E de la vena sciatica, le loc ayssi cum havem dit es deves le talo dejos la cavilha de la partida silvestra.	 For sciatica, place a cushion under their knee and prevent it from going into the wild cavity of the thigh.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de lu es a dolo de anca quan es per sanc caut.	 The young age at which you remove the hernia depends on when you make the small incision.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intre en banh, e festine e strenha la cueyssa de lu del latz de la ancha entro desus le talo desus quatre ditz an una benda longua subtil, quar no appar sino per aquo.	 The quality of the hernia is that it becomes inflamed and stiffens up a little over time inside the narrow space from your incision to its four points on one end, which you cannot see unless this happens.
E donc quan appar, lahoras tu fleubotoma aquela segon cascun engen que es a tu possible e segon le tranvers, e es milhor; o inscidas aquela per inscizio o secces aquela per seccio, quar le loc de lu es sal.	 When the bath is ready, you will apply the ointment to that second part of the body which may be rubbed and stretched, then crossed, and this is the most favorable way; or if it cannot be spread evenly across the area, do as much as possible on one side only, leaving the other uncovered.
E ela es en motz homes mot ameguada; e si atrobas aquela, e no appar al sentiment de tot, lahoras fleubotoma alcun ram de lu, e es aquel que appar en le dos del pe enves le dit auricular e le anular.	 This is a command to apply the ointment on both sides of the body; and if it feels too tight or uncomfortable, do not apply any more lotion onto that area, but go to another part of the body such as the ears (auricular) and nose (annular).
E guarda te dels nervis, e fay correr del sanc la quantitat que voles.	 Preserve yourself from pain; feel free to adjust the amount you wish to apply.
E aprop deslia la strictura e pausa sobre le loc de la fleubotomia coto e strenh le loc, quar leugierament es sanat.	 Place a cushion on that spot of the lotion application, and stretch it gently in order to relieve any discomfort or pain.
De ventozacio e de las qualitatz de uzar de aquelas.	 Use them with caution and attention.
Ventozas so de corns, o de eram, o de veyre.	 They are for corn (corns), or ulcers, or veins.
E ventozacio es fayta segon doas manieyras: la una de lor es am scarificacio e extracio de sanc, e l’autra es ventozacio ses scarificacio.	 The ointment is applied in two ways: the first to relieve and remove pain, while the second one serves as a soothing ointment.
E aquesta ventozacio que es ses scarificacio es segon doas manieyras, quar o es am foc o ses foc.	 This soothing ointment that is applied second way has two forms: one to soothe and heal burns or wounds, while the other to apply on frostbites (foc).
E a las ventozas que so administradas am scarificacio e extraccio de sanc son xiiii locs del cors, dels quals la un en lo qual so pausadas ventozas es alnocrati, e es la deriera partida del cap; e le mieg loc d’el de doas partz del col ensemp; e ventozas del mento dejos la mandibula pus dejos de la boca; e ventozas de doas spatulas; e ventozas de alohoster, e es sobre la fi de la coeta; e ventozas de dos focils, e so de dos brasses; e ventozas de doas cavilhas; e ventozas de doas cuoyssas.	 The ointments that are administered to relieve and remove pain are located on the following parts of the body: the first one in the part near the hairline, and another at the forehead (forehead); behind the ears; above both shoulders; over the chest; below both elbows; below both knees; below both breasts; and between the big toes.
E ventozacio no extratz le sanc sino de las venas menudas sparssas en la carn, e per aquo no catz la vertut per aquelas, ayssi cum es cazement per fleubotomia; ni no cove que ventozacio sia fayta am foc o ses foc en alcuna malautia fayta per replecio entro que le cors tot sia evacuat.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors
Mays si necessitat provoca a ventozacio per malautia o per continua, aministrem aquela en tota hora al comensament del mes e en la fi de lu, e en le mieg loc de lu e en qualque temps sia.	 If necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery
La qual causa es quar dels homes es en les quals es sanc multiplicat entro que indigeys de extraccio de lu per ventozacio e atroba en le sieu cap graveza e soda; e de aquels es que atroba replecio e rogor en la sua cara e en le sieu cap, e en le sieu col; e de aquels es que atroba pruziment en la sua cara e en le sieu front e tenebrositat e hebetut en les sieus huels; e de aquels que gieta le loc de la sua ventozacio; e de aquels es que le lor ris es multiplicat; e de aquels es que atroba gustament de sanc en la sua boca, o que la lengua es apostemada e escup sanc; e de aquels es que lor dormir es multiplicat, e de aquels que vetz sanc en lo dormir rogor e antics e plaguas e autras causas a lor semblantz.	 If necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery
E donc quan vezes en alcuna causa de aquelas, e propriament si es en le tertz o miga del mes, lahoras comandam ventozacio esser fayta pus que so passadas del dia dos o tres horas.	 Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out.
E juvament de ventozacio de la nuca es que quan aquela confereys a gravitat en le cap e ad aquo que es efondit als huels; mays cove que aquo sia aprop evacuacio de tot le cors.	 And when making incisions on the neck, it is customary to cause this to fall into the head and in that way it should be removed from the body.
E aquesta ventoza es en le loc de fleubotomia de la cephalica.	 The first sentence translates to: "This fistula is in the area of the skull.
E no es legut que use de lu aquel que es de frega complecio, o en le qual es catarr, quar dona ad aquel gran nocument.	 The second sentence translates to: "Do not use that which is complex to remove or in a cavity where there's mucus.
E per aquo no cove que uso de aquela les vielhs, e en les caps dels quals so malautias frejas.	 The third sentence translates to: "For this reason do not use those vessels that cause the same disease or in the heads where it may occur.
Mays ad aquel que sobre aquela es continuant sobre lu es fayta oblivio; e per aquo cove que tu comandes al ventozador que depause la sua ma un petit am la ventosa a las partidas dejos, temen de la generacio de oblivio.	 The fourth sentence translates to: "Do not continue the application of that which is already causing pain; for this reason you should command the leech to remove some part of it from oblivion.
Mays ventozacio de alkehel es en loc de fleubotomia de la vena fusca e de la basilica: e per aquo confereys a asma, e a la constriccio de ale e a la scissura del sturment de ale, e a tos, e a replecio.	 The fifth sentence translates to: "May the leech of that which is in the area of the fusiform vein and basilica cause this obstruction; for this reason should be addressed.
E cove que sia enpellida la ventoza alkehel un petit, quar si es pausada dejos, engendra debilitat en le cors e en le stomac.	 The sixth sentence translates to: "You must gently remove the fistula of that which is a complex one, or in a cavity where there's mucus; otherwise it may cause weakness in the body and stomach.
E la ventozacio de alhagdahan confereys a las dolors accident en le cap e a obtalmia, e emigranea, e prefocacio, e a dolors en las razitz de las dentz; e es en loc de fleubotomia de la basiliqua.	 The seventh sentence translates to: "The removal of the fistula from that which is hard and causes accidents in the head, blindness, confusion, pain in the eyes, and pain in the teeth areas, and it's in the area of the basilica.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que no prema la sua ma am scarificacio per que no inscida la arteria e accida fluxs de sanc.	 The eighth sentence translates to: "You should command the leech not to perform a cautery on that which may cause an artery obstruction and lead to blood flow blockages.
E ventozacio dejos le mento comfereys a alcola en la boca, e a corrupcio de la gingiva, e a semblantz a lor de las malautias que so en la boca, e stan en loc de fleubotomia de aliheric que so en las doas labias.	 The mouth receives the food in the throat and the corruption of the gums, and the stains on the teeth from tooth decay that are within the mouth, but they are located in the area of the tonsil surgery scars
Mays la ventozacio que es fayta sobre las doas spatulas confereys a caphatan, le qual es fayt per replecio de caliditat.	 The swallowing action that occurs through the passageways is done with great care to prevent choking
E la ventosacio de las doas partidas dedintz dels focils confereys juvament de la fleubotomia de tres venas, so es de la basilica, fusca e cephalica, quar aquela atratz le sanc de totas aquelas venas pus manudas que so en la carn, e aquelas venas menudas de las autras venas pus grossas entro que pervengua la atraccio a las tres venas.	 The swallowing action of the two passages that are part of the brain stem is done with great care to prevent choking
E comanda al ventozador que trop no procezesca en scarificacio, quar le loc es denudat de carn, e dejos lu so nervis e arterias.	 The swallower should not force anything down the esophagus, as it would be considered a flesh wound and could damage nerves or arteries.
E es una ventoza am la qual es ventozat sobre alshosses e confereys a las emorroydas del cul e a las ulceracios pus dejos.	 The swallowing action that occurs in the lower part of the throat is done carefully to avoid injuries to the mouth, anus and ulcers.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que sia gran ventoza, e que sia de eram, quar le loc indigeys de fort seccio; e fort leu so traucadas ventozas subtils e sia scarificat am scarificacio.	 The swallower should take a large swallow and then a small one to avoid discomfort in the throat and prevent choking during swallowing.
Mays ventozas de las cambas minueysso per minuicio manifesta, quar atiran le sanc de tot le cors, e comfereysso a dolors antiquas dels ronhos e de la mayre, e de la vesica; e provocan las mestruas, e comfereysso a bothor e ademil; e stan en loc de fleubotomia de doas sophenas, e alahorcoben, e de doas cavilhas.	 The swallowing action is done carefully and causes pain in the back of the throat as well as the chest, stomach and bladder areas, leading to shortness of breath and discomfort.
Enpero mot debelitan tot le cors e fan accidir sincopi en motz homes.	 The first sentence translates to: "I will now cut into the body in an ordered manner.
E de las ventozas alahorcoben le juvament es propda al juvament a las ventozas de doas cambas.	 This can be translated as, "Then place both hands on either side of the hips and perform the procedure in an ordered manner.
E la qualitat de la posicio de las ventozas es que pauses la ventoza al comensament vueda e sucguas per succio temprada, e no prolongues la posicio de las ventozas, mays pausa aquelas leugierament, e reman aquelas coytadament, e que las humors venguan al loc per adveniment engual.	 The quality of the position is that you should initially hold one side of your hips with both hands and gently squeeze until a short time has passed to initiate circulation there, then release it immediately afterwards, repeating this on the other side as well.
E no cesses iterar aquo e continuar entro que veja le loc ja enrojezir e inflar e que appara la rogor del sanc.	 Do not stop iterating and continue performing until you see a response from the patient, indicating that they are experiencing pain or discomfort.
E lahoras tu scarifiqua e itera la succio pauc a pauc, e aprop considera en la dispozicio dels cors.	 The doctor should perform the procedure slowly and steadily, making sure to consider the positioning of the body at all times.
Quar aquel home que es de tendra carn de rars pors, cove que tu le scarifiques una veguada e no pus, per que le loc no sia ulcerat.	 For someone with tough skin that might sting a little bit, make sure to apply the medication gently and not press too hard so as to prevent any potential ulceration of the area.
E comanda al ventozador que amplifique la scarificacio e pronde un pauc, e atempre la succio am facilitat.	 The operator should perform the procedure by increasing pressure a little bit and always keeping it gentle.
E si en le sanc es grossitut, lahoras cove que scarifiques doas veguadas, quar en la primieyra veguada es uberta la via de subtiliacio al sanc e a la aquositat de lu.	 If the area is swollen, make sure to apply two patches at once and start with applying very gently pressure over the affected area first and then gradually increase it as needed.
Mays en la segunda a la perscrutacio aquisida de la extraccio del sanc gros.	 In addition, perform another examination of the large intestine separately if necessary.
E si le sanc es mot feculent, lahoras sia fayta scarificacio la tersa veguada per que consiegua le derier.	 When a patient has foul gas, the doctors will apply a hot compress to try to eliminate it quickly
E derierament, quan volem extrayre le sanc pauc a pauc o un petit, abasta a nos una scarificacio.	 In order to remove only a little or just a small amount of foul gas gradually, place the patient under one compress
E si volem extraccio de mot sanc, scarificam am mota scarificacio; e si nos conoyssem que·l sanc es gros, lahoras cove que scarifiquem per scarificacio preonda.	 If you want to remove a lot of foul gas, place the patient under one large compress; and if you suspect that the foul gas is much, doctors recommend using a strong compression to eliminate it quickly
E le terme de scarificacio en la qual es la profunditat de la codena tant solament.	 The depth of the compression should be only deep enough to cover the chest or abdomen
E si aquel del qual la codena es grossa, dura, fusca, e les sieus pors so streytz, cove que les locs de las ventosas sian untatz lenitius, apertius resolutius; si es en temps d’estiu, ayssi cum es oli de aloen o oli de violat, o oli de amellas dossas, o oli de cemensa de coja; e si es en temps ivern, lahoras oli narci, o oli de liri, o oli de camamilla, o de sanc, e ad aquels semblantz.	 If the compression is very deep and its pores are stretched out or torn open, apply a stronger compression to prevent further damage; if it's during hot weather, use an oiled compress soaked in oil of aloes (aloe vera), olive oil, lavender oil, or sandalwood oil; and if it's cold outside, use the same compress covered with snow.
E si la superfluitat es grossa, freja, lahoras le oli sia amaranti, o oli de balsamita, o oli de aloen, o oli aneti, e a lor semblantz.	 If the quantity of the foul gas is great and its strength is strong, doctors will apply an aromatic compress made with marigold oil, balmwood oil, aloe vera oil or any other essential oils; and in such cases
Mays si le ventozador es de amples pors de tendra carn, lahoras cove que sia prohibit de oli, e cove que ad aquest les locs de ventozas de lor aprop la ventozacio sian lavatz am ayguaros o am aygua freja de solatrum, o am aygua de coja, o am aygua de bordolaguas, e semblantz ad aquelas.	 If the compressor's pores are torn or very wide and stretched open, apply an aromatic compress soaked in water that is cold but not freezing; if it is too hot to use a cold compress, then use a compress covered with snow;
E aquel del qual le sanc es de mota humiditat, lava las suas ventozas am vi agre, o am aygua de mirt e sumac e semblant ad aquels.	 When a person has fever caused by excess humidity, fan the face with cool air or water, or a mixture of salt and vinegar.
E de aquel del qual las superfluitatz son grossas, lava las suas ventozas am vi antic, o am aygua de sansuc, que es majorana, o de decoccio de anet, o de camamilla, e a lor semblantz.	 For someone with excessive humors, fan them with hot air or water, or a mixture of salt and vinegar that is stronger, or from chamomile, or from camomile, and so on.
E cove que la ventozacio sia guardada denant de banh; habantz cove que sia aministrada aprop issiment del banh per una hora o per doas, e cove que dorma aprop la ventozacio.	 Keep the fanning activity going until dawn or at least for an hour or two. And after that, rest the fanning.
Quid est quo oportet ut regatur ventosandus aus phlebotomatus ante ventosationem.	 What is to be done before starting to fan?
Cove que consideras al comensament: lahoras si le ventozador o aquel que·s deu fleubotomar es coleric e ventz sobre lu sanc agut e imflamacio, lahoras cove que prengua causas infrigidantz, ayssi cum milgranas acetosas, e endivia an vi agre e laytuguas, e secanabin, e julep, e a lor semblantz.	 Before using the fan or phlebotomist to cool down the fever and inflammation of the skin, make sure you have taken remedies like vinegar, lemon juice, orange juice, etc., as well as cooling drinks.
E pausa a lor viandas ayssi cum poletz, e carns de auzels serbiges, e viandas conditas am agras, e a lu semblantz.	 Pause the fan activity and apply cold compresses to the face, head, chest, etc., as well as cool drinks.
E de aquel del qual la compleccio es freja, cove que prengua en beure eyssarop almiva, o eyssarop de alsecanabin de semensas, e sumac, e vi mot odorant migier entre viel et noel; e que a lu sia comendat que use de paucitat de beure e de mangar, e pausa las viandas de lu poletz e canabir e pissers e petitz auzels e colombat.	 For someone with a cold that is freezing, drink warm water or wine made from chamomile, vinegar, etc., and stop the use of cold compresses and fanning activity, except for between meals and at night; it should be recommended to drink little by little, pausing the use of compresses and fans, as well as salt water, etc.
E cove que en lo dia de ventozacio e de fleubotomia le beure sia major que la vianda.	 On the day of vomiting and phlebotomy, drink more than water.
E cove que sia donat en beure en alcunas horas ad alcus homes tyriaca alpharac, o medicamentz de musc, so es muscada, o alcelita denant la ventozacio o denant fleubotomia o aprop, per so que·ls membres principals sian confortatz e que·l sanc sia subtiliat; e no cove que prenguan aquela scalfatz.	 You should drink a diuretic drug to relieve the thirst of vomiting and phlebotomy or while it is necessary, in order for the main members to be relieved from pain and distress, without causing the skin to become too sensitive.
Mays las ventozas que so ses scarificacio sian ventozas que so pausadas sus le fetge, e sobre la melsa e podagra, e sobre le umbelic, en les locs dels jonolhs, e la pixida del ancha, quar aquestz membres no suffertan scarificacio sobre si.	 Vomiting and diarrhea should be relieved with vomiting and frequent urination, as well as overdoing it can cause bladder stones or kidney problems, in which case these organs will not suffer from excessive urination
E no es querit per aquelas sino atraccio de sanc de membre, ayssi cum pausam ventosa sobre mamilha en malautia de flux de sanc del sanc de las nars; e usam de aquela per que sia dissolvuda ventositat freja inviscade del membre, ayssi cum pausam sobre le ventre e l’umbelic; quar aquela rarifique le membre e scalfa lu e ramau la dolor quar resolveys ventositat.	 Do not do this for those reasons, but instead apply cold compresses to the body part, as well as frequent urination and bladder stones, in order to dissolve the pain caused by vomiting.
E ja es pausada sobre les ronhos quan accideys en lor opilacio o poyra, quar per vertut de atraccio fort leu huobre opilacio e erradica le poyra de son loc.	 Then apply cold compresses when you fall into a fit of vomiting or diarrhea, in order to prevent the loss of too much fluid and get rid of the pain from its location.
E semblantment fa quan es pausada sobre le fetge e la melsa deves ventositat en aquels enclausa.	 Similarly do this when you apply cold compresses to the bladder and urethra in these circumstances.
E aquestas ventozas so administradas vuedas amb succio tant solament; e alcunas veguadas so administradas am foc.	 These vomiting episodes are treated with only water, and some other times they may be treated with a hot compress.
E alcunas veguadas so administradas plenas de aygua tebeza en las malautias de la melsa.	 When a bladder is full of water it can be found in between the thighs,
E aquo es per que la ventoza sia umplida e sia pus gran, so es aygua cauda sola o aygua en la qual sian cuytas herbas ad aquo convenientz.	 This is because when a bladder is full and bloated, it can be found in between the thighs, or water flowing alone or in water that contains herbs of this kind.
Forma de ventoza aministrada am foc: sia la amplitud del orrifici de dos ditz, segon que nos la havem formada; e la quantitat del preon sia la maytat de un palm; e sia en lo latz de lu, en le loc que es en le circuit, la maytat de lu, le trauc sia petit segon la quantitat que intre en lu una agulha.	 How bladder is administered: the width of orifice to two inches, after it has been formed; and the quantity of the potion should be equal to the size of one palm, and in its length at the place where it enters into circulation, it should be as small as an arrowhead when compared with the amount that goes into it.
Sia fayta de eram rog o citri, de grosses marges, leon, enguals e terses per so que no leda le membre deves la sua posicio sobre lu.	 It is necessary to stretch gently or caress, large margins, lion, gentle and tender strokes in order not to lead the member from its position over it
E sia al mieg de lu vergua transversa de eram o de ferr, on es pausada candela am lo foc.	 The transverse vaginal stretch should be used gently or softly, with a pause when touching heat.
E ja sia aquesta ventoza gran major de aquela la qual havem recomtat; e la pauca mendre de aquela segon las malautias e la etat de aquel que usa de aquela.	 This bladder is greater than the one we recommend, and small enough for between thighs and its state when used in this manner.
E las ventosas dels efantz e extenuatz so autres que las ventozas dels joves e de grosses corssas.	 The excretae of those mentioned above are different from the excretions of young people or large bladder
E la qualitat de pausar aquesta ventoza am foc sobre le membre es que extenda la meca am foc de lenha decentment denant una pauca candela de cera, e pausa aquela sobre le mieg de la vergua transversa en le mieg loc de la ventoza, per que le foc sia accendut enviro la partida dejos per que no sia comburit le cors del malaute.	 The quality of the pause in administering this bladder at heat on to the member is to extend the flesh gently while lighting a small candle and pausing it over the transverse vaginal fold, so that the fire may be burned only when necessary, to prevent burns from being inflicted upon the patient's body.
E aprop sia pausada sobre le membre del malaute, e le dit sia sobre le trauc que havem dit, entro que quan tenem las ventozas e non indigem que osten le dit e que yesca la vapor sobre aquel trauc, lahoras la ventoza sira tantost dissolvuda.	 When the space is placed on the patient's thigh and the attendant says "over here," at that moment when we have the vents open but do not tell him to stop breathing over there because he will dissolve it away with his breath, then immediately the vent will be dissolved.
E prop igneys la meca segon la sua manieyra, e itera aquela si indigeyssas de aquela.	 Follow along behind her hand motion, and repeat that if you have to do something else
Mays en ventosa que es aministrada en la malautia de plauressi, am aygua, en la qual no ha vergua transversa ni trauc, e no es aministrada sino que sia umplida de aygua, e es pausada sobre le membre tant solament.	 The intravenous administration of a solution in the pleural cavity is only to be done when there is not a transseptal or traumatic leak, and it's only administered once filled with water, and placed on his chest only.
E aquesta es la forma de lu: E aquesta ventoza quant plus es gran, tant es milhor, per que puya recebre gran quantitat de aygua.	 That is the way of it: And when more space is given, so much better it becomes because it receives a large amount of water.
Capitol .xcvii.	 Chapter 72
Sanguissuguas no so administradas en motz membres sino en les membres en les quals non es possible posicio de ventosas, per la parvitat de aquels, ayssi cum le pot e gingiva e semblantz a lor; o en membre denudat de carn, ayssi cum le dit e·l nas e lors semblantz.	 Bloods are not administered in the limbs but in those where there is no space for vents to be placed, due to their fragility, such as the gums and tongue; or in a member of flesh, such as the mouth and nose.
E la qualitat de usar de aquelas que si has trobadas sanguisugas que so en las ayguas dossas de poyredura mundas.	 The quality to use those that have found bloods that are in the vessels that break easily.
E aprop sian layssadas le dia e la nueyt en aygua dossa entro que sian famolentas, e que no romangua alcuna causa en le ventre de aquelas; e aprop sia evacuat le cors en le comensament am fleubotomia e am ventozas; e aprop fregua le membre del malaute entro que s’enrojezesca; e aprop sian pausadas sobre lu.	 Then spread the cloth on his face and new water in a vessel, so they are famished, and nothing is happening inside them; and place it on the body at first with incisions and vents; and place it on him.
E cum son umplidas e caso.	 When pain occurs in the joints
E si es possible succio del loc am ventoza, es mays derier en juvament.	 And if it is necessary to make a hole in the wall with your hand, do so gently at first.
E sino, lahoras lava le loc am vi agre e aprop am mota aygua; e sia freguat e expremut.	 If not, pain occurs while walking and it is necessary to make a hole in the ground with your foot, do so carefully and gradually.
E si es prolonguat le cors del sanc aprop le cazement de las sanguissuguas, e es aquo resudan, lahoras tu enfon un drap de li en aygua freja, e pausa aquel de sobre entro que sia abdida la resudacio.	 If the pain persists and is caused by bleeding from the veins, you will then cover it with a cloth soaked in water to prevent clotting, leaving only the exposed part uncovered.
E si le sanc es multiplicat, lahoras polveriza sobre lu vitriol trissat, o guallas e semblantz a lor de las causas stipticas, entro que·l sanc sia abscidit; o sian pausadas sobre le loc las maytatz de favas excocicadas, e sian layssadas entro que las favas aderescan al loc, e es le sanc abscidit.	 If the pain is multiplied and caused by a cold acid, you will sprinkle it with vinegar or other similar remedies to remove its cause; or if the pain persists while taking acidic foods, then remove these foods from your diet and seek medical attention.
E cove, si es necessaria, iteracio de sanguissuguas, quan es possible mudar aquelas.	 And if it is necessary, an incision of veins when possible, to change those.
E si las sanguissuguas son prohibidas de suspenssio, lahoras sia freguat le loc am sanc recent o fique una agulha en les locs entro que yesca sanc; e aprop sian pausadas, quar aquelas quan sento alcun sanc tantost adarysso.	 If bleeding is forbidden and the pain is occurring recently or punctures occur in those locations, you will then apply pressure to that part of the body with a needle to prevent further pain; be sure to remove if any pain occurs constantly.
E quan voles que cajan, polveriza sobre aquelas un pauc de aloen trissat, o sal, o cendre, e cazo tantost.	 When you want it to stop, sprinkle over the area a little of something sour like vinegar or salt and hold until stopped.
Ayssi comensa lo prolec de la tersa partida: de restauracio.	 The beginning of a healing process
Aquest capitol es motas veguadas necessari en la art de medicina; e es restauracio de fractura e de dislocacio accident en les osses.	 This chapter is essential in the field of medicine, and it is restoration of fractures and dislocations that occur in bones.
O, filh, sapiatz que jactan se de aquest capitol les fols metges e les vulguars e aquels que degun temps no reguardero les libres dels Antics ni legiro de aquels una letra.	 O daughter, I understand that this chapter concerns the doctors and barbers who have practiced medicine since time immemorial, and those who do not follow the rules of the ancients or write according to them.
E per aquesta causa es fayt que aquesta manieyra dels scients in terra nostra es privat; e yeu no ho e obliat en aquo degun temps be de tot; e no he adhibit aquo que apres, sino per longitut de lectio dels libres dels Antics e studi sobre le entendement de aquels, entro que extrayssi la sciencia de aquels.	 For this reason, the practice of medicine in our land is private, and they do not allow it today or tomorrow; and I have forbidden this that comes from them except by studying the writings of the ancients and understanding their wisdom, so as to improve science.
E aprop adirigui a experiment e studi en la longitut de la mieua vida.	 And I am inviting you to try experiments and studies in the length of my life.
E yeu ja he de aquo descrit en aquest capitol tot aquo que conte la mieua sciencia e sobre le qual es passat lo mieu experiment; pus que agui abreujat aquo a vos autres e deliuregui aquo de occupacio de elonguacio; e abreujegui aquo en la fi de abreujacio; et e monstrat aquo en la fi de declaracio; e formegui en aquo motas formas dels sturmentz que so administratz en aquel, cum es fayt per addicio de declaracio, ayssi cum he fayt en dos capitols precedentz.	 I will describe in this chapter all that concerns my science and about which the best experiments have been held; and it is hoped to bring them before you and give you occupation of length; and it may be shown at the end of occupation, so as to be seen at the end of declaration; and it should be done with the forms of administration of those who are in charge of this work, just as I have done in two previous chapters.
Capitol primier.	 The first line translates as "The very beginning".
Summae et collectiones ex esse fracturae ossium, ex eis quarum praemissio necessaria est, antequam incipiamus rememorationem membrorum fraftorum et diversorum si uniuscuiusque.	 This line translates to "From the fragments of bones and joints, which is necessary for release (or delivery), before we begin the remembrance of the limbs' faults and various things.
Cove donc que diguam en le prohemi de aquest capitol las summas del sermo; e les capitols al entendament dels quals en le comensament es forsat le artifexs e a stacio sobre la veritat de aquels; so es vos e aquels que so promptz que sapian o aprenguan aquesta art nobla autres de vos.	 "After having explained the prologue of this sermon, and the chapters that follow its understanding, we are now at the beginning where the artificer begins to speak about truth.
E donc dic que quan accideys a alcu fractura o dislocacio o torcio o cazement, lahoras cove que tu te coytes al comensament am fleubotomia o aleyar aquel, o quascu ensemps, si no prohibeys alcuna causa, ayssi cum debelitat de vertut, o es aquel al qual accideys effant, o viel en decrepitat, o es temps de vehement calor, o de vehement freg.	 "When a bone fracture or dislocation occurs and is not prevented by any cause, then it will inevitably be accompanied by pain, or if you are experiencing an injury to that extent.
E aprop sia content en vianda sieua de erbas frejas e de carns de auzels e de crabotz; e prohibem carns grossas e umplir si de viandas e de tota vianda que umple las venas de sanc, entro que siras segurat de apostema caut, e si no temes efusio de materia al membre.	 "Here we prohibit the large vessels and fillings of veins with any sort of substance that may enter into a vein, so as to prevent the escape from that member.
E lahoras retorne le malaute al sieu regiment primier am le qual corr costuma de lu.	 "The patient is returned to their first course according to custom.
E donc cum le os trencat comensa esser restaurat, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia pascut de viandas nutritivas de nutriment mot e gros e greu en les quals sia viscositat, ayssi cum so viandas faytas de froment cueyt am aygua, e ris, e caps, e pes, e ventres de vacas, e huous, e peys fresc, e vi gros e semblants ad aquels, e am aquest regiment es fayta coagulacio de fractura pus leugierament e miels.	 "Then when the bone is broken comes restoration; they give to him nourishing foods of light and moderate quantity in which there is viscosity like water, eggs, heads, bodies of cattle, houses, etc., fresh, fat and similar ones for these purposes, then begins coagulation of fractures with an ointment of healing.
E sapias que les osses trinquatz quan so en les homes que so en la primiera vilura e en los decrepitz, no es possible que sian continuatz e sian consolidatz segon lur natura per la exsiccacio dels membres de lor.	 "When bones fracture in those who are already the first stage and in those who have just had them, it is impossible for them to continue and consolidate themselves due to the dryness of their members.
E son consolidatz e continuatz segon lor natura tot temps per la exsiccacio de aquels membres, e so continuatz e consolidatz aquels que so de lor en la fi de la lenitat, ayssi cum les osses dels petitz effantz.	 "They continue and consolidate themselves over time due to the dryness of those members, continuing and consolidating them even when they are at the end of treatment with drugs.
Mays empero natura ajusta e amnecteys sobre le os trencat de tota partida alcuna causa semblant a glut en le qual es grossitut que adhereys e strenh aquel entro que so ensemps conglutinatz e liatz ensemps, entro que venen la fi de fortitut e de fermesa, ayssi cum foc al comensament, entro que denguna causa no prohibeys aquel de las suas obres.	 "Moreover nature adjusts and strengthens the broken bone with nothing but time, until it adheres and strains that way into which they bend together and get stronger, until reaching the end of rigor and firmness, just as if from the beginning, while avoiding any cause that prohibits its use.
E per aquesta causa es necessari que pauses las viandas del malaute, viandas en las quals so gravitat e viscozitat e grosseza, ayssi cum havem dit.	 "For this reason it is necessary to pause the veins of the patient, veins in which there is gravity and viscosity and thickness, as we've said.
Mota diversitat de fractura segon diversitat del membre.	 "Variety of fracture according to variety of member.
E sapias que las specias de fractura son diversas segon la diversitat dels membres, quar fractura del os de la camba es diversa de la fractura del os del cap; e la fractura del os del pietz es divers de la fractura del os del dos; e semblantment totz les autres membres son diverses entre lor.	 "You know that the types of fracture are diverse according to the variety of members, as a fracture of the leg is different from a fracture of the head; and a fracture of the chest is different from a fracture of both arms; and so on for all other members.
E yeu venc am rememoracio de tota specia de fractura, expausada en le sieu capitol distincta del autre.	 "You remember each type of fracture in its own separate chapter of this book.
Mota diversitat de fractura en si meteyssa.	 The first sentence could be translated as: "There is a diversity of fractures in here.
E son diversificadas las specias de fractura del os en lor meteyssas; quar es fayta fractura arcuada otra aquo que accidan en lu stellas; e alcunas veguadas es fayta fractura segon la longitut del os: e so las fracturas de lu satagia e astelhas e addicios procedentz e no-procedentz, ayssi cum es fayt en la pena quan es preparada a escriure, e es fractura am plagua e disrupcio en le cap, e es fractura fissura petita.	 The second sentence could be translated as: "There are various types of fractures in the bones; some are curved and others are straight, depending on their length; there are also those that are flat (i.e., non-displaced) or displaced with breaks or without breaks.
E a tota specia es engen o turment propri en restauracio de lu segon que vindra rememoracio de lu distincta en les sieus locs.	 The third sentence could be translated as: "In every species, there is an inclination towards the healing of this type second only in coming to remember it distinctly in its places.
Mota senhal de fractura del os.	 The last sentence translates to: "Lastly about fractures of the bones.
E per aquo es conoguda fractura del os: es tortuositat de lu, e de aquel eminencia e appericio de lu al sentiment, e so de lu quan compremes aquel am la tua ma.	 This sentence is describing a specific type of fracture in the bone known as comminuted fractures. It talks about the deformity or contusion of the bone part and its prominence or protrusion towards the heart, along with how it feels when you press on that particular area.
E donc quan no es en le loc tortuositat apparent ni so no es feyt deves le tieu tocament quan toques le os am agitacio e le malaute no atroba gran dolor, lahoras no es aqui fractura.	 If there is no visible deformity and the pain does not increase when you touch the bone gently or the patient doesn't report much pain from it, then there was no comminuted fracture present.
Habantz es possible que sia tortuositat o petita fissura, adon no cove que tu mauguas aquel am la tua ma e am compressio de tot; habantz pausa sobre lu de las medicinas de las quals ve rememoracio aprop aquel moment le qual conveneys al loc; e aprop sia streyt per strictura subtil.	 It is possible that it could be a comminuted fracture or a small one, depending on whether you press against it with your hand and feel the deformation all around, pause over it to remember this detail in mind, and approach treatment through a subtle restriction.
E sapias que·l loc quan es arcuat e no es scindit en dos o otra aquo que no accidan en lu satagie, cum es remauguda tota partida de la sua compar, lahoras cove que comenses de la tua hora a rectificacio de lu habantz que a lu accida apostema caut.	 When the location is curved and not divided into two or more parts, as it was completely removed from its cavity, then doctors will call for the assistance of a surgeon to make incisions in order to perform repairs
E si a lu accida apostema caut, lahoras layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que cesse le apostema; e aprop engualha aquel segon quascuna manieyra que podes de levitat e de engen.	 If the ulcer is already healed and completely removed from its cavity, then doctors will ask for assistance in days to come if a second incision needs to be made; otherwise, they would proceed with making incisions alone.
E sapias que restauracio de lu e agulacio de lu es pus leugiera que del os en le qual accideysso sathagie.	 The restoration and cure of the ailment is easier when it occurs in a location where surgeries are more frequent.
E aprop strenh aquel segon que vindra la rememoracio de lu.	 Then, after making incisions alone, he would seek assistance from another person to perform repairs.
Mays si en le os so satagias, lahoras es necessaria extencio de aquest membre trencat de doas partz, si es la ma o le pe; o am la tua ma si le membre es petit; o am doas cordas o am una corda e la ma.	 If the limbs are broken into two parts or more, depending on whether it's an arm or leg: either use both hands together to hold them firmly and firmly grasp one end with each hand separately if the limb is small; or use two cords or a cord as well as your hand if necessary.
E sia la tua posicio am la qual pauses le membre loc engual segon la sua figura natural, mentre que las partidas so extandudas del membre trenquat, lahoras te perforsa que fassas retornar aquelas addicios am engen e segon quascuna manieyra que poyras en lor locs.	 When the position is such that one limb cannot be placed back in its normal location because of its size and shape, then doctors will perform operations at different locations simultaneously with each hand separately.
E guarda te segon la tua forssa que no accida sobre le malaute per la tua operacio delor ni lesio; e perforsa te segon le tieu poder que tu appliques la un os am l’autre son companho segon lors milhors formas.	 In addition to your right arm, you perform operations on the left side simultaneously with each hand separately when necessary.
E cove que en aquela hora aprofitablament tu toques am la tua ma aquel, e si vezes aqui alcuna causa diversa, rectifiqua aquel e enguala aquel per la quantitat de la tua vertut.	 "When you find yourself in such a favorable situation to touch the skin of that patient and if there is no other cause different from this one, rectify it by removing it up to the amount of your virtue.
E exquiva vehement extenssio e compressio, ayssi cum fan mots fols metges que motas veguadas fan accidir apostema caut per la sua operacio, o fan accidir contraccio en le membre ayssi cum havem vist aquo per la operacio de lor motas veguadas.	 "The strong compression and stretching motions are to be done by the physicians as they strike down the pain with hot compresses on their operation, or when they strike down the contraction in such a way that it occurs through the body of their patients.
E aprop annecteys, aprop equacio e decent operacio e strictura de aquel membre, e repaus e tranquilitat; amoneste le malaute sobre aquo e fay le squivar que no maugua aquel en la hora de las suas vigilias e del sieu dormir, e ves la sua revolucio e agitacio, e deves la sua egestio, e deves totz les sieus movementz am tota la sua vertut; e aguarda se que la posicio del membre sia posicio am la qual sia asegurada la dolor, la qual causa es quar quan sent en la disposicio de la posicio del membre delor o lesio; lahoras cove que permutes aquel ad autra disposicio de aquela am la qual non senta dolor; e guarda am aquo que la posicio de lu aquela sia dreyta e engual, per so que al membre non accida tortuositat quan es restaurat.	 "The application of the limb is to be done with great attention and care in order to correct its position accurately; it should also contain a pause and relaxation period for the patient's benefit while they rest and sleep, as well as movements performed by them throughout their entire body; wait until you have ensured that the position is right, because if not there will be pain when restored.
E la qualitat de la strictura del membre tranquat es aquela que yeu recomti; per que sapias que·ls membres trencatz so diversificatz en lor parvitat e en lor grandeza e en la forma de aquels.	 "The quality of the tightening on a limb should be such that you can distinguish them from different limbs in their thinness and thickness, as well as the form they are.
E de aquels que son petits ayssi cum le bras e·l dit e·l focil e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras cove que la envolucio sia de drap mol subtil.	 "And for those who are small like your arm and hand and face as well, it is customary to put a thin cloth on them.
Mays aquels que so grosses ayssi cum la cuoyssa o la camba, cove que en aquels sia envolucio lada e dura, quar la liadura lada connecteys le membre gran e strenh aquel de tota part am strictura engual, enayssi que en lu no intre macula.	 The first sentence of the text translates to: "Here are those who have come to take care of very large buttocks and thighs.
E aprop comensa, aprop la tua evacuacio de equacio, pausar liament convenient ad aquo, sobre le loc de aquela fractura am tres envolucios o quatre segon que·l membre mereys; e strenh la tua ma un petit am le liament.	 The second sentence translates to: "Firstly you should start by performing an enema on the patient, as long as they don't have any abdominal pain.
E aprop ve am aquel a la partida pus sobirana del loc de la fractura, e strenh mens que no foc la tua strictura am la qual has strengut le loc de la fractura.	 The third sentence translates to: "Then you should make points on the surface of the fracture and press down with your hand over it.
E aprop elongua te am envolucio del loc de la fractura un pauc, e mollifiqua la strictura petit a petit, entro que prenguas del loc sa una gran partida.	 The fourth sentence translates to: "Then you should gently open up the space between the fragments of the fracture in small steps and gradually decrease its size until it has closed completely.
E aprop pren una autra benda e envolveys aquela autra veguada sobre le loc trenquat am envolucio, e aprop ve am las envolucios a la partida pus dejos de la fractura; e sia la tua operacio en la strictura de la envolucio e en mollificacio de aquela segon que havem dit en la envolucio primieyra desus.	 The fifth sentence translates to: "Then you should take another board and arrange it in between the fragments of the fracture, place another board on top of that and seal the space with glue; then your operation is complete.
E aprop pausa entre las volucios de stopa leon o drap am le qual sia engualada la tortuositat de la fractura, si en lu es tortuositat; e sino, no pauses en lu alcuna causa.	 The sixth sentence translates to: "Then you should pause between the boards of the back or the front depending on which side is more affected by the complexity of the fracture, and if that's the case, but otherwise do not pause it at all.
E aprop pausa sobre lu autra benda, e aprop enguala sobre aquestas envolucios stelhas decentment faytas tantost, si en le loc no es imflacio o apostema caut, e lahoras pausa sobre lu aquo que sede le apostema aquel e que oste la imflacio; e layssa aquela per alcus jorns; e lahoras tu strenh sobre lu las stelhas.	 The seventh sentence translates to: "Then you should pause on the other board, align them neatly one after another as soon as possible if there is no swelling or pain in that area and then wait for it a few days; then press down on it with your hand.
E sian las stelhas de la maytat de canna lada raza, e be formada saviament; o sian de fust de pi; o de ramps de palma ; e sia le ample de quascuna stelha segon aquesta forma e aquesta figura:	 The first sentence to translate is as follows. Do not add any comments like "here is the translation". Just reply with the guessed translation and nothing else:
Empero cove que la astelha que es pausada sobre aquela fractura sia pus grossa e pus lada un petit que las autras astelhas, e la longitut de la stela segon qu’es legut al membre en magnitut e parvitat; e aprop strenh sobre las astelhas am autra benda segon la tua primieyra strictura; e aprop lia desus am fiel decentment segon que havem dit de strictura, e es que sia la tua strictura segon le loc de la fractura mes, e quant mes es alonguat de la fractura, es mendre la strictura.	 The first sentence to translate is: "The cushion placed on the fracture should be large and wide enough for it to extend all the way down to the member in length and width; then place another cushion over the other side of the fracture at an equal distance from where you made your first cut, so that both cushions are aligned with each other and line up with the fractured member's location. The second cushion should be close enough to touch but not too close for comfort.
E cove que les fils sian migiers en grossesa e subtilitat, e sian de li mol; e si les fils so grosses, ayssi cum yeu he vist per la operacio de alcus fols pausantz les lors fils de cordas de li tort, e es error gran, quan catz la strictura fora equalitat.	 "The sutures should be made thinner and more delicate, being also of a light touch; but if they are too thick, then during the surgery to apply them on both sides of the incision, there is risk of unevenness in the stitches.
E eyssament fils subtils no so convenientz, quar tu no consaguiras per strictura am aquels aquo que voles, e no cove que entre astela e astela haja mens de un dit.	 "Very thin sutures are not always practical because you cannot ensure that there is even space between them; and it's also possible for one suture to be slightly ahead of the other.
E si le malaute es ledit per las extremitatz de las stelas aprop la strictura en les locs sas, lahoras pausa dejos aquelas de stopa leon o lana carmenada entro que aquo no li fassa lesio.	 "If the patient is operated on at the extremities of the legs, then be sure that there are cushions placed on both sides near where the cut was made to prevent injury.
Alcunas veguadas fractura es am plagua, e accideys disrupcio en la codena, e yeu vindre am rememoracio en aquela en le capitol segon singularitat.	 A certain woman broke her leg; she had an accident in the woods, and now he remembers that day very clearly
E sapias que ges tot membre trencat no es streyt am stelhas al primier dia; la qual causa es quar le membre, quan es gran, no cove que pauses sobre lu stelhas sino aprop v dias o vii o mays, segon la tua seguratat de adveniment de apostema caut.	 If a member is broken and the bone was large enough to be seen through clothing on first day; when it occurs in the foot or leg, wait for three days before wrapping it up with a bandage
E aquesta es la manieyra dels emplaustres am les quals les Antics restauravan, les quals so pausatz sobre fractura e dislocacio e torcio.	 These are the customs of those who had once restored themselves from injuries such as fractures and dislocations and sprains.
Manieyra de emplaustra comu abruejat de restaurament de fractura, convenient a motas compleccios e majorment a las femnas e als efantz, quar es de aquo sobre le qual no ventz calor ni freg: e es que prenguas de polvera de moli, e es la medula de la farina que pen deves le movement de la mola en las paretz del moli.	 The custom of setting a splint for the restoration of fractures is to apply it gently and not too tightly; especially in the legs where it is recommended that it should be applied loosely, as there will be no heat or pain: and you must remove the bandage every two hours and change it with wet gauze.
E comfeys aquel ayssi cum es, sino que cribelles aquel am album de huou, e pausa la comfeccio de lu no-spessa ni subtil; e aprop usa de aquela.	 And if so, do not apply it to the book of hours without delay or subtlety; and put it gently on that place.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre restaurant fractura e dislocacio e torcio: recipe de assafetida, de lapdanum, de acacia, de enula, e migrach, que es razit de milgraner salvage, de totz ana drac. x; de mirra e aloen ana drac. v; alochil ana drac. xx; totz sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian mesclatz am aygua alichil o am album de huou si la compleccio del malaute es scalfada; e aprop usa de aquest emplaustre, quar es de bona composicio e restaura les osses trencatz leugierament, e confereys a motz homes.	 Another custom for setting a splint on fractures and dislocations is to apply a poultice of saffron, lapis lazuli, acacia, aloe vera, or marshmallow; which are considered good ingredients to heal bones, but only when the patient's wounds have become infected; then put this splint, as it has good composition and restores broken bones.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre le qual comfereys a fractura e torcio: recipe migrach e met de altea blanca ana drac. x; de mirra e de aloen ana drac v; de acacia drac. vi; de bol armenic drac. .xx.	 Another remedy for sprains and strains is to apply a mixture of salt, vinegar, and garlic: rub the affected area with it daily
Totz sian trissatz en mortier am mota contricio, e sian cribellatz, e sian comfitz am aygua o am album de huou e sia administrat.	 This remedy should be applied in the mortar of a mortician and sprinkled over the wounds, and it can also be applied to water or alcohol and administered orally.
Manieyra de emplaustre a juncturas e osses separatz de lors locs, e seda dolor accident en aquels e a fissuras e fractaduras: sia presa lana sutza e sia submersa en vi agre e oli cuyt e sia pausat sobre le loc.	 This remedy should be used for sprains and bones that separate from each other, and prevent pain in those as well as fractures and injuries: it is customary to place the wound or fracture below and soak it with vinegar and water, preventing any discharge of fluids.
Mays en aquest emplastre no es vertut de restauracio, de apostema caut e expelleys dolors propriament.	 In this case, it's not advisable to administer, but rather to apply the cautery to expel the pain.
Autra manieyra de emplastre que restaura os trancat: pren fuelas de figuier sort e fuelas de papaver salvatge; contereys tot e fay emplastre de lor.	 Another remedy for sprains that restore a sprain: apply it with fig leaves and wild poppy seeds, and then perform the cautery on top of it.
Manieyra de emplastre abreujat aministrat deves la restauracio de fractura de os e quan tu voles resolucio del romanent de apostema: recipe razitz de altea, de camamilla e flors de violes, de farina de ers, de totz ana partida i; sian totz trissatz e sian cofitz am vi, si·l membre no es scalfat.	 Another remedy for sprains that has been applied excessively and needs restoration of bones or when you want to resolve the matter: apply it with another mixture of chamomile flowers, violet flower petals, flour of oats, all mixed together; then apply it on the body part affected.
Mays si es scalfat, lahoras comfeys aquel am aygua de coliandre humit o am aygua e usa de lu.	 If you feel cold, place it in water or use it with water to apply it on the body part affected.
Autra manieyra de emplastra pus fort en resolucio que aquest primier, quan accideys apostema dur deves la restauracio del membre: recipe de razitz de altea e de semensa de li, e de balaustia, e mellilot, majorana, flors de viol, de camamilla, de totz ana partida i engual; totz sian trissatz e sian cofitz am aygua de sauze o am aygua dousa o am vi, tot aquo segon la qualitat del membre e le repaus de la color de lu.	 When the first fit occurs and you need to restore the member: First take a poultice from the liver; then apply it and press gently until the pain is gone.
Mays Ypocras no diyssec en le sieu libre que sia pausat sobre le membre trenquat deves la restauracio de lu sino cerot fayt de cera e de oli e no autre causa; e recomtec que sia migier entre grossitut e subtilitat.	 You should only apply the poultice if it is firmly placed over the affected limb, otherwise you would not cause any harm and do not use anything else for this purpose; rather, suggest that moderation between coarseness and delicacy be maintained.
Mays a Gualia es vist que sian pausatz sobre le membre trencat deves la restauracio de lu e las causas en las quals es exsiccacio am petit de caliditat so ayssi cum mirra, enses e semblantz a lor de aquelas causas que havem recomtadas.	 You should only apply the poultice if it is firmly placed over the broken limb, otherwise you would not cause any harm and do not use anything else for this purpose; instead, suggest that moderation between coarseness and delicacy be maintained to prevent such causes as coldness or other related ones from occurring.
Manieyra de emplastre que comfereys a lesio e dolor: recipe migat, de cezes, de pels de home inscizes o pena de auzel, e de altea, e sal, partidas enguals; sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian cofitz, e sia fayt emplastre.	 When a lesion and pain occur: Try to moderate, cease all actions of the home remedies or any others that cause discomfort like salt or alcohol, then apply it firmly.
Mays la quantitat segon la qual cove que romangua la liadura e aprop sia disliada, es que consideres si no es accidit dolor ni pruziment ni le os es trencat no es maugut de son loc, lahoras tu no deslies de motz jorns.	 You should determine how much to apply based on the duration of the pain and whether or not any cuts are present; if neither occurs then you should not worry too much about it, as tomorrow may be alright without treatment.
E si accideys al loc dolor vehement o prusiment o imflacio, lahoras tu te coyte o deslie aquel en la hora, e osta le emplastre de lu.	 When intense pain occurs or when there is inflammation of any kind in the location, you should apply cold compress immediately and put ice on it.
E pren drap de li e spongia marina leon humida, e submergeys aquela en aygua tebeza, e am aquela lava le loc entro que cesse aquel pruziment e la dolor sia sedada; e aprop layssa repausar le membre per una hora; e aprop pausa sobre lu lana sutza submersa en vi agre e oli o oli rozat, e lia sobre lu per una nuoyt entro que sias segur de apostema caut, e que repause la imflacio del membre, e sia remauguda la dolor de lu.	 When you are using a sponge soaked with saltwater, submerge it in cold water and then apply it to the location where pain is present or inflammation has occurred; leave it on for one hour; if swelling occurs, continue applying ice and oil alternately every fifteen minutes until the swelling subsides and the pain is relieved.
E aprop itera aquela strictura subtil e emplastre petit e no·l strenhas per la tua constriccio primieyra, e subtilia am aquel entro que sia sanat.	 When you are using a small, tight bandage that fits snugly around your upper arm and is gentle enough to avoid causing injury but sufficient for pain relief; apply it gently on the affected area
E si vezes que le apostema e la rogor e la dolor e la imflacio e tots les accidentz ja so remaugutz de tot, e indigeysses de emplastre e de strictura, lahoras tu itera aquel ayssi cum has fayt al comensant engualment.	 If the pain, swelling and all other injuries have already been alleviated to a certain extent, and you need further relief in terms of compress or bandage application; apply it as described previously.
E si no accideys al membre alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no deslies aquel sino aprop tres dias o quatre o v o vii; e alcunas veguadas tot aquo es layssat per xx dias segon que a tu appar per la desliadura del membre, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que la fractura adhereys, e se acosta a la coagulacio de la carn sobre aquel.	 If no other cause of the pain or swelling has been mentioned, leave it in place for three to four weeks at most; and occasionally check for the healing process by applying cold compress every second day as previously advised, until the fracture adheres and the skin begins to heal around it.
E lahoras ajusta en la strictura mays que en la tua strictura primieyra tota, e ayusta en la engrossacio de la vianda del malaute, segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu.	 "Adjusts the muscles of the patient on their first contraction and stretches the vein in his leg, after which they should remember.
Mays si tu vezes le loc de la fractura ja desiccar e extenuar mays que no cove, lahoras sapias que·l nutriment es prohibit pervenir ad aquel; e donc embroca aquel am aygua tebeza deves tota veguada que delias aquel; e sia aquo en totz tres dias; e alleuja la strictura un petit, e per aquesta operacio corr al membre le nutriment, e es sanat leugierament.	 "If the fracture has already been cleaned and stretched appropriately, then you know that nutrition is forbidden for it to come back; therefore, wrap it tightly in water so as to prevent it from coming out of its place; and be sure that this is done three times; after which stretch a little less than before and begin giving the patient food again. In case of any infection during the operation, you should immediately remove the bandage.
Mays aquo que fan les fols restauradors de la fractura del membre autra veguada quan no es restaurat al comensament, segon que cove, e es restaurat segon tortuositat, es error segon la operacio de lor, e temor gran, e si fos dreyturier aquo agrandit les Antics en lors libres e agueran am aquo obrat.	 "If the restorers of a fracture in another limb do not restore it at all when they first attempt to treat it, secondarily if there is an error during treatment, and great fear arises from this, then enlarge the ancient bones into the new ones after making them free and sharp.
E yeu no he vist ad alcu de lor aquo far, per que es pus razonable que aquo no fassa.	 "You will not see any more of it if you continue to do so because it is reasonable that this should not happen.
Capitol segon: De fractura quan accideys en le cap.	 "When a fracture occurs in the head.
Las specias de fracturas son motas, e las figuras de lor son diversas, e las causas son distinctas, quar de fracturas alcuna es fayta per percussio de spaza, e la percussio osta tot le os entro al ciphac, le qual es dejos le os, ayssi cum fay ayssa en le fust, e per aquo aquesta specia es nompnada ascial; o la spaza inscideys alcuna partida del os, e inscideys la carn de lu e no passa la inscizio entro al derier de lu; e aquesta specia de fractura es nompnada levatio absoluta.	 "The characteristics of fractures are many, and their forms vary greatly, while the causes are distinct from each other: for example, a fracture resulting from the impact on the skull is known as a concussion to which the blows strike into the forehead, so that when this type occurs it is called a concussion; or if there was no initial injury but the skin is broken and cannot close up after the blow, then this particular type of fracture is called an absolute dislocation.
E la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca, e de fractura que es contricio o atricio; e causa de lu es percussio am poyra o cazement sobre peyra, e a lor semblantz.	 When the joints have been broken or are fragile, and if they are crushed or twisted; and the cause of this is the impact from above or below
E aquesta fractura o es penetrant que ja apropinqua al pannicol le qual es dejos le os; o es en la facia del os, e la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca.	 This fracture is penetrating and approaches the notch of the bone that it meets with or in the face of the bones, the cushion of these broken joints are large or small.
E de fractura es que es ameguada en le os, en la subtilitat del cabel petita, e per aquo es nompnada aquesta specia fractura capillar.	 This fracture is a capillary fracture that occurs in the delicacy of the small hair and it is called this special capillary fracture because of its nature.
E es fractura que es fayta o per cazement o per percussio de peyra e a lu semblantz, que fa intrar alcuna lamina del os a las partidas dedintz, e es fayta en le loc concavitat ayssi cum accideys als payroles de eram quan accideys a lor percussio e es partida de lor intrada a las partidas dedintz.	 This fracture is caused by impact or pressure from above and below on the bone, which causes the inclusion of a lamina in the cavity so that it protrudes at an angle when the impact or separation occurs to the bones and the entry into the cavities of the bones.
E majorment es fayt aquo en les cors de osses humitz, ayssi cum so caps de efantz.	 It is usually found in the arms
E so a totas aquestas specias fracturas satagias, so son pessas ayssi cum stelhas separadas.	 These particular fractures are fatal and are separated by very thin partitions.
E yeu vindre am reremoracio de tot aquo en son loc.	 You will regret the impact on your body
E conoyssem totas aquestas specias de fractura per deteccio sobre aquelas e per inquisicio de lor am tentas e ostament de carn corrumpuda que es sobre lor.	 All these particular fractures are detected and investigated for their cause, origin, extent of damage to the tissues they affect, and any other abnormalities related to them.
E specia capillar es conoguda per aysso que es descubert sobre le os, e es abstergit, e linit sobre lu am tentha, quar la fractura appar negra.	 When you have entered into its cavity, it is to be tightened and held in place with the hand, so that no fracture occurs from external pressure.
Mays en la curacio de fractura considera al comensament les accidentz del malaute, e lahoras si tu vezes per los accidentz que signifique per significacio manifesta sobre paor, ayssi cum es vomit de colera, e extencio, e perdement de entendament, e abscizio de votz, e sincopi, e febre acuta, e eyssiment dels huels e rogor de aquels, e semblantz a lor dels accidentz en las majors disposicios, ses dopte no es sanat.	 When considering fracture care should also consider the preceding accidents of the patient and the pain they may signify by way of a manifest sign of fear, such as severe vomiting or diarrhea, confusion, disorientation, seizures, syncope (fainting), acute fever, and discomfort in the extremities, and are common to these accidents at higher doses.
E si vezes accidentz no-correntz tu speras salut, lahoras tu comensa la curacio de lu.	 If you encounter accidents that do not correspond to those above, then consider care for the patient.
La qual causa es quar si es vengut a tu le plaguat en le comensament cum es plaguat e aquo es en les dias de ivern, lahoras cove que tu studias en le ostament del os denant le dia xiiii segon tota disposicio.	 The reason for which you are called to the patient in the beginning as pain occurs and on days of convalescence, doctors advise that you should study the symptoms from morning until evening every day for four consecutive days.
E si es en les dias d’estiu, lahoras cove que te coytes ostar le os denant le vii dia, habantz que aquo que es dejos le os sia corromput del pannicol, e que accidescan les accidentz que havem recomtatz.	 If it is on hot days, doctors advise that you should remove the abscess every seventh day and inspect for any signs of infection as well.
E si la fractura ja es pervenguda al pannicol cubrent le cervel, e es am partidas menudas e atricio, lahoras cove que inscidas la partida conminuta e atrita, segon que yeu recomtare a tu.	 If the fracture is located on the heel and it is accompanied by tenderness and swelling, doctors advise you to check for signs of infection as well, after examining the affected part closely and carefully.
E es que tu razas le cap del malaute plaguat, e descuebres sobre le os segon costuma e manieyra a tu possible segon la figura de la plagua, e que sia leugier sobre le malaute.	 The doctor has opened up the patient's thighs and placed a cushion under them to prevent it from spreading any further.
E si accideys a tu deves la deteccio del os, fluxs de sanc o apostema caut, lahora tu te oppausa a lu am aquo que cove, e es que huemplas le loc de draps infuzes en vi e oli rozat, e fassa repausar la plagua entro que sia sedat le apostema, e sies segur de fluxs del sanc; e aprop comensa en la circuicio del os e en la ablatio de lu.	 If you have to make a cut of the thigh artery or vein, then after cutting it off and stopping the bleeding with cautery, wait until the bandage is saturated in blood and oil before wrapping it up. Then make sure to remove any excess fluid from the area by pressing down on it gently, and cover it promptly as soon as possible while making sure not to let any more blood flow out of it.
E aquo sia segon una de dos manieyras de operacio.	 The second option for surgery
E la una manieyra es que tu inscidas le os am inscisori de streyt tal, e aquesta es la forma de lu: E aprop administra un autre inscissori aquest, un pauc pus lat que aquel; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	 The first option for surgery is to cut off the artery directly from there, like this. After that you administer another scissors here, a little bit shorter than the previous one; and then
E aprop administra mays le inscissori pus lat que·l segon.	 Apply the longer scissors after administering the shorter ones.
E cove que sia deves tu nombre de inscissoris diverses, dels quals alcus so pus latz que alcus autres; e alcus de lor so pus breus que·ls autres e sian en le derier de acuitat de las suas extremitatz, e sian de ferr indi o felod.	 You should use multiple scissors of different lengths from which the longer ones are slightly longer than others; and those others are a little bit shorter, and they're used in decreasing order so that the longest ones first, then the second one, etc.
E usa de lor am facilitat en percussio sobre le inscissori per so que no concutesca le cap e leda aquel.	 Use them gently while pressing on the scissors to prevent cutting through it and damaging what you're trying to cut off.
E si le os es fort, dur, lahoras cove que perfores en le circuit de lu denant que tu administres los inscissoris am les taravels, les quals so nomnatz taravels no-profundantz.	 "If the patient is cold or harsh, then apply to their anus a medicated suppository that will not cause deep burns.
E no so nomnatz ayssi sino quar aquels no pausan le terme de l’os del test ad aquo que es aprop lu, per so quar al taravel es redonda extremitat o marge sobre aquel que es dejos le cap de lu agut semblant a marge o a cercle petit, le qual prohibeys esser submergit e passar la spissitut del os.	 "And if the suppository is too small to enter without causing pain or injury at its end, then make it circular with an extra margin on one side of the anus, preventing it from being submerged and passing through the opening.
E es convenient que tu prenguas de aquestz taravels gran nombre dels quals quascu convenesca a la spicitut de quascun os, entro que sia a tu present en tottz testz del cervel la extremitat del qual sia aguda, la quantitat en longitut e brevitat sia segon la quantitat de spicitut de aquest test.	 "It is necessary to choose a large number of different suppositories from which one will be most suitable for each patient, depending on the nature and location of their anus, whether it's acute or not, length and width are second in importance as they depend on the size of the opening.
E aquesta es la forma de tres specias de teravels: La qualitat de perforar en le circuit del os trencat es que pauses le teravel sobre le os e revolvas aquel am les tieus ditz entro que sapias que l’os ja es penetrat; e aprop permuda le terevel ad autre loc, e pausa aquo que es entre tot trauc la quantitat de la grosseza del ray o enviro aquo.	 "The first type is to apply the suppository directly into the broken part of the anus and remove it after a few seconds as you know that the anus has been penetrated; or place another one in its place, leaving space for the amount of size between the rectum and outside.
E aprop inscideys am inscissoris aquo que es entre quascun trauc del os, e fay aquel pus subtil que podes sobre aquo en fi de levitat, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que erradiques le os, o am la tua ma, o am alcuna autra causa per alcus sturmentz les quals auras apparelhatz ad aquo, ayssi cum tanalhas e forceps subtils.	 "The second type is to apply the suppository between the anus and its neighbor (the one above or below it) and remove it gently with fine tweezers.
E cove que tu guardes am tota cautela que l’inscissori no toque alcuna causa del ciphac.	 When you have opened a space between the patient's thighs, place cushions under them, another on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
E donc cum auras circuit le os perforan, e sira separat del ciphac si es continuat am lu, e auras aquel extrayt, cove que razas e enguales aquel en la asperitat de lu de aquo que es en le os am autra sturment semblant a inscissori, mays empero cove que sia pus teon e pus subtil que les autres inscissoris.	 And when you have inserted the instrument into the cavity and it is not continued as long as necessary without causing any harm or injury to the patient, then take out that instrument
E si roman alcuna partida dels osses petitz e satagias, lahoras pren aquela am facilitat am aquo que es deves tu dels sturmentz; e aprop aquo cura la plagua am lichinis e enguentz les quals havem ditz.	 If you miss the bones and tendons, then remove that instrument with ease as it is necessary to use from the instruments; and apply a poultice of linen and compress the parts mentioned above.
E l’autra manieyra de operacio es leugiera, longinqua de paor, la qual diyssec Gualia e la lauzec per gran lausor; e aquest es le sermo de lu: necessari es a tu en le comensament que comenses descobrir la partida del os del loc en le qual es la fractura pus vehement e pus manifesta, entro que quan auras descubert aquela partida e auras pausat dejos lu la extremitat de aquest inscissori lent e alegre del qual aquesta es la forma:	 The other operations are easier to perform, long and slow, which makes the surgeon's work: it is necessary for you at the beginning that when you discover the part of the bone where it has been broken, and stops [the incision], then place a support on this instrument.
E es que la partida lenticular es leon e no inscideys alcuna causa, e la partida aguda es de lu en dos latz avantz en longitut, ayssi cum vezes; que la partida lenticular sia ajustada al ciphac am la facia de lu inscident aguda en le os.	 The part made by a slow instrument does not cause any harm, and the sharp one is made of two parts that advance together in length, so that both are adjusted to the cavity as it enters into the bone.
E aprop percuteys sobre le inscissori de una partida am un petit malhet entro que inscidas tot le os am facilitat ayssi cum es revolvut, e tu sias segur del pannicol que no accida en lu accident que temas en denguna manieyra, e si le medicant14 era le pus fol de totz les homes e le mays ignorant de lor; certament, e si era dorment.	 And then you should cut into the instrument with a small blade and insert it all in one piece through the hole as easily as turning it over, so that if there were any risk of injury from another operation, or if he was asleep,
Lahoras si romania alcuna causa annexa al os del pannicol en alcus locs de os, inscidira aquel de lu am la extremitat del inscissori aquel lenticular, e deliuraria aquel de lu am facilitat, quar es deliurat de lu ses nocument e ses paor.	 When joint pain is caused by a cold humor that infilitrates each part of the body and occurs in the feet, it is customary to call gout from doctors.
E si fractura del os no penetra entro al pannicol, e aquo que es abscidit o es ostat del os es la facia de lu, e roman en lu asperitat e satagias subtils, lahoras cove que razas aquela asperitat e erradiques aquelas satagias am razoris subtils per les quals tu has preparat le nombre, de diversas quantitatz per que sia a tu possible administrar de aquels en tot loc les pus convenientz de lor e le pus dreyt de aquels segon aquo en que te perduzeys la tua operacio aquel os trencat e la figura de lu.	 If the joint space does not penetrate into the thigh, and if you have prepared a small aperture or slit in the thigh for this purpose, then remove that aperture or slit from there immediately, and prepare another one of similar size somewhere else, as mentioned before. In other words, do what is necessary to administer these drugs into all suitable locations on their body and at any location where your operation of removing that joint was performed successfully
E cove que administres en la tua razio am la qual razes le os al comensament le pus lat de aquels razoris, e aprop usa aprop lu del pus subtil de lu, e no cesses far aquo segon continuitat entro que pervenguas ad aministrar le pus teon e·l pus subtil de totz aquels.	 When administering into the same vein that receives the joint immediately at first of these veins, and in turn use one of the small, thin ones mentioned earlier to avoid stopping for too long while administering all of them.
Mays en quascuna de las autras fracturas petitas capillars e fractura subtil, cove que administres cura segon aquo que perduseys ad rectificacio de lu.	 When there are many small capillary fractures and a more delicate one, then administer treatment after this operation was performed successfully.
E es causa que no es ameguada sobre totz les quals han studi en aquela art.	 This is because they have all studied in that field
E stec sobre aquo que nos scriut havem mostrat en grans fracturas.	 The passage indicates the importance of observing larger fractures
E si le pannicol es retangut quan tu erradiques le os, lahoras cove que prenguas drap de li segon la quantitat de la plagua, e submergeys aquel en oli rozat, e pausa aquel sobre le orrifici de la plagua; e aprop pren autre drap doblat o triplicat e submergeys lu en vi e oli rozat e pausa aquel sobre drap prim e fay aquo al pus leugierament que podes sobre aquel, que no graves le ciphac; e aprop administra sobre aquel liament lat, e no strenhas aquel sino per quantitat que tengua la plagua tant solament.	 When the patient vomits after eating spicy food and you have covered their mouth with a napkin, you should give them a second napkin to wipe off excess gravy from the cloth on their face, immerse that in hot oil and hold it over the face of the napkin; then apply another soaked cloth or triple, immerse them in warm oil and hold them over the first cloth and do this repeatedly until they are clean only.
E layssa aquel am aquesta cura per un dia o per dos entro que sias segur de apostema caut; e aprop deslia aquel e aprop aministra medicinas am las quals es superflua siccitat, ayssi cum razitz de lin e farina de errs, e polvera de enses e de aristologia, e de semblantz ad aquels.	 Give the treatment for one or two days until you are sure of its efficacy; then remove it and administer medicines as may be superfluous for thirst, such as salt and flour of errors, and powder of these and of aristocracy, and bring them to those who will.
E es que tu fassas de aquestas medicinas polvera que sia pulverizada sobre la plagua, ayssi cum son secas; e universalment, administra en aquel tota medicina de proprietat de la qual es que abstergesca e no mordique.	 You should sprinkle these medicines on the cloth, as they are dry; and universally, administer in that all medicine of property which is purgative and not laxative.
E guarda te segon la tua vertut que la plagua en la tua curacio sia neta; e no sia en lu surdicia de enguent ni autra; ni no layssas agreguar virulencia en lu; quar quan es ajustada sobre le pannicol del cervel, corromp aquel e poyreys aquel, e accideys sobre le malaute aprop aquo malicia maligna.	 Ensure that the cloth in your care is clean, and not contaminated with filth or anything else; do not add any evilness to it; when adjusted on the patient's thigh, remove it and apply it over the malignant tumor appropriately, malignity.
E accideys en le ciphac del cap, cum de lu es mondificat le os e majorment quan es menspresada la cura de lu, e es negror en la superficia de lu; e donc considera lahoras si accideys al malaute les accidentz que havem ditz, sapias que es parnicios ses tot dopte.	 Apply it to the head when you have finished treating them and wipe off excess mucus from its surface, making sure that it is black in color on the surface of it; do not consider the doctors if there are any accidents that have been said by these, know that it is a precaution for all possible problems.
E si no accideys negror sino de la medicina que es pausada desus, e es en vertut de aquela medicina que fassa aquela negror, lahoras cove que tu prenguas de mel una partida e de oli rozat partidas iii, e am aquels linieys un drap, e aprop pausa aquel sobre le ciphac; e aprop cura aquel am las specias de curacio que conveneys entro que sia sanat.	 When the disease that is forbidden from practicing medicine ceases and it becomes evident of that disease, then pain occurs in the feet.
Capitol .iii.	 Then take a cloth and apply it over their chest, another one on their legs, and yet another one under them to prevent anything coming out.
De restauracio del nas quan es trincat.	 To restore the nose when it is broken.
Sapias que no es trencat del nas sino doas partidas ensemps pus sobiranas, o una de aquelas alcunas veguadas, per so quar en lu has dos osses, quar la partida dejos es cartillaginosa, e no es trencada e no accideys a lu sino atricio e tortuositat e sinuitat.	 If the nose is not broken but rather two parts are separated from each other by a veil or one of those membranes that separate them into two chambers and neither part was cut nor did it happen, then it causes obstruction and twisting, and sinewness.
Mays si es trencada la una de las doas partidas de lu, lahoras cove que tu intrometas le dit petit en le sieu nas, e que engualhas aquela fractura dedintz am le tieu dit indic, e am le dit pous defora, entro que retorne le nas segon la sua figura natural.	 If the one of the two parts was broken, then doctors will insert a small tube into the nose to straighten it out and come back to its normal position.
E sia fayt aquo per tu am facilitat, e guarda te que no caja per aquela tua operacio sobre le malaute delor.	 And do that for your own ease, and remember not to talk about this operation with the patient afterwards.
E si la fractura es en la pus sobirana partida del nas, e le dit no perve ad aquela, lahoras cove que sia equat am la extremitat del ray en le qual sia petita grossitut.	 If the fracture is in the higher part of the nose and it extends to that side, then doctors will treat this by straightening out the affected area on the tip of the nose where there may be little width.
E si la fractura es en doas partidas, lahoras tu fay le semblant de aquo.	 If the fracture is in both parts, then you should act similarly to this.
E coyta te am restauracio de lu en le primier dia de la fractura, si es possible; e sino, lahoras aprop le vii o·l x deves le repaus del apostema caut.	 When it is necessary to restore the intestine in the first day after the fracture, if possible; otherwise, painlessly remove or break open the abdomen and let the intestines rest as much as possible.
E aprop entromet en la extremitat del nas una meca de drap de li, si la fractura es en una partida, o metz doas calguas, si la fractura es en doas partidas, e sia en la calgua grossitut de tanta quantitat que umpla le trauc del nas.	 You must insert a piece of cloth in the nostril on the fractured side, if it is one fracture; or make two cuts, if it is two fractures; and extend the incision length to as much quantity that allows for breathing through the nose.
E diysso alcus dels antics restauradors que las calguas sian enfundudas en boder, e sian permudadas en tot dia, mays no es vist a mi; habantz cove que la meca sia enfunduda en album de huou comfit am polvera de moli; e aprop layssa la qualgua entro que l’os sia fermat e sia endurazida la cartillage.	 After the incision has been made, you will find that they are covered with a cloth and washed every day, may not be visible to me; however, make sure the surface is smooth like the lining of a shoe sole; and ensure it is firmly in place while also allowing for some flexibility in the tissue.
E alcunas veguadas sia entromes en le nas, en loc de calgua, pena de auca pus que es envolopada de drap de li leon; e sia que ja te la fractura del nas pus vehement e que le malaute no sia prohibit de inspiracio.	 The cloth should be inserted into the nostril in place of gauze for breathing purposes, to prevent any cloth from being wrapped around the nose; and ensure that there is a fracture of the nasal bone and it not prevents inspiration.
E aquesta causa no es a tu necessaria; e si voles, fay aquo, e si voles, fay calguas.	 This should not be necessary, but if you wish to proceed, do so, or use gauze instead.
E si accideys autra veguada apostema caut, emplastra le nas am cerot o am coto enfus en vi agre e oli rozat, o am diaquilon.	 If any other cautery ulcer occurs, insert the nose into the opening of the nostril as wide and gently spread apart, or in front to hold onto it.
Mays si no accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que emplaustres aquel defora am farina de sizami e am polvera de enses cofitz am album de huou; e aprop pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e no lies le nas am alcuna causa.	 If the patient does not have gout pain, then apply a cautery to that area and do not let any other cause it
Mays si so trencats les osses del nas am fractura petita o so conminuitz, lahoras cove que scindas sobre aquels, e extraguas aquels am insturmentz que conveno ad aquels; e aprop cos la scissura, e cura aquela am aquo que encarna e consolida, e am emplastres ad aquo convenientz.	 If the bones of the nose are broken or crushed, then apply a cautery to those areas and use tools that correspond with them; and when making an incision, and treating it where the fracture occurs and consolidates
E si accideys plagua dedintz le nas, lahoras cove que cures aquela am calguas e administra canulas de plom entro que sia de tot sanat.	 If there is a bleeding from the nose, then treat that with cautery or apply pluma (plumbing) tubes to stop it.
Capitol .iiii.	 Certainly.
De restauracio de la mandibula quan es trincada.	 Reconstruction of the mandible after breaking
Quan la mandibula dejos es rompuda e la fractura de lu no es am plagua, reguarda lahoras si la fractura es deforas tant solament, e no es trencada en dos e es curvada a las partidas dedintz, lahoras la sua cognicio es leugiera.	 If the mandible is broken and only one fracture occurs without bleeding, guard it as if nothing happened.
E cove donc, si la fractura es en la part dreyta, que tu intrometas le tieu indic senestre en la boca del malaute; e semblantment si la fractura es an la mandibula senestra, lahoras intromet le dit indic de la ma dreyta; e impelleys am aquel la gilbositat de la fractura dedintz am facilitat a las partidas defora, am la tua autra ma de la partida defora del os; am aquel decentment equa aquelam.	 If the fracture is in the right side of the mandible then you should insert an index finger into the patient's mouth on that side; and if it is in the left side, then apply a thumb to indicate the same thing.
E si la fractura de la mandibula ja es separada en doas, lahoras cove que administres extensio de doas partz segon rectitut entro que sia possibla la equacio de lu.	 If a mandibular fracture has been separated into two pieces, then you should administer extension of both parts separately to see if it is possible for them to reunite.
E si accideys conmocio de dentz a disrupcio, lahoras strenh aquelas de las quals speras que romandran am fil de aur o de argent o de ceda; e aprop pausa sobre la mandibula trencada cerot, e aprop pausa sobre lu drap duplicat, e pausa sobre le drap gran stelha decentment fayta, o una pessa de sola engual a la longitut de la mandibula; e aprop lia aquela desus segon que a tu es apparelhada la liadura de lu e que conveneys la applicacio, entro que no es destruida.	 If the teeth are torn out of their sockets, then you should stretch those from which they were pulled or fell off, and place a cushion over the broken mandible, as well as over the duplicate strip, and place a gauze on the large strip separately, or one piece alone at the length of the mandible; and stay with that until you see whether it was destroyed.
E comanda al malaute que use de repaus e tranquilitat, e pausa la vianda de lu sorbicios leons.	 Command the patient to rest and tranquility, and pause the vein from which they were sucking the blood.
E si extimas que ja es alterada la figura en alcuna manieyra, lahoras tu te coyta e deslia aquel al tertz dia; e aprop rectifica aquo que ja es alterat de lu e emplaustra aquel am polvera de moli, am album de huou, o am farina de cisami, pus que tu auras ostat le cerot de lu, e pausa sobre le emplastra lana leon.	 If it is necessary to change the figure in some way, then you should take that and apply it on the third day; and correct this as has been altered of him, and cover it with powder of mullein, or album of hawthorn, or flour of chamomile, so that you may hold the heart good.
E adonc cum sta annex e ajustat aquel emplastre sobre lu, e la disposicio del os no es alterada, layssa aquel, que no le deslies entro que sia sanat e strenh la fractura; quar motas veguadas aquesta fractura es streyta en tres sempmanas.	 After having placed that pad over him and the disposition of the hand is not altered, leave it as such, so that you do not put in until it is healed and stretched out the fracture; because if the fracture remains unbroken for three days,
E si autra veguada accida apostema caut, lahoras administra aquo que havem dit motas veguadas en la sedacio de lu entro que sia sanat, e sia remaugut aquel apostema.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body and pain occurs in the feet, it is customary for doctors to call it gout.
E si la fractura es am plagua, lahoras considera si es pessa del os separada o satagias, lahoras tu te subtilia que ostes aquelas satagias am aquo que conveneys ad aquo en la remocio de aquelas dels sturmentz.	 And if it is a fracture that is open and bleeding, the doctors consider whether to separate the affected limb or not, they advise you to be cautious with any sutures in this area as they may come out when the dressing is removed.
E si le orrifici de la plagua es streyt, lahoras tu le amplifique am le fleubotomi segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	 If the wound from a fracture is severe, the doctors will advise you to increase the blood supply by performing additional surgery based on your need for it.
E aprop quan tu auras ostat aquelas satagias, e de aquelas no sira remaugut re, lahoras tu cos le orrifici de la plagua si es ampla; e sino, pausa sobre aquela un dels emplaustres que conveneysso ad aquo e encarnan aquela, entro que sia sanada.	 After you have removed those sutures and some of them were not re-sutured properly, the doctors will advise you to examine the wound for any signs of infection; otherwise, apply a dressing over that area until it is healed.
Capitol .v.	 I am sorry, but there are no more responses available based on the context provided in your question.
De restauracio de la furcula quan es trinquada.	 After repairing the fractured collarbone
Motas veguadas es trencada la furcula de la partida denant deves le muscle, e aquela fractura es fayta en una de tres manieyras.	 The muscles may tear when the collarbone is broken and it can be fixed in one of three ways.
Quar o es trencada, o seperada, o es seperada en doas partz otra que no accidan satagias; e es leugier a la restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que accideysso en lu satagias, e es dificil a restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que la fractura es am plagua.	 It can either be repaired by seversing it or separating the bone into two parts that cannot cause sutures, or if it's so bad and causes severe damage to the tissue around it, then it may become a compound fracture.
E la operacio en aquela, quan la fractura es ses plagua, es que tu fassas esser present dos ministres, per so que la un tengua le adjutori e siegua la furcula trencada, e l’autre extenda le col ves aquela partida.	 When the fracture occurs in that operation, it is customary for two assistants to be present, one to hold open the torn flap of the intestine and the other to extend its col from the opening made.
E aprop enguala la fractura am les tieus ditz entro que sia fayta la forma de lu segon que cove, e no sia en lu eminencia pauca ni concavitat.	 And approach the fracture as if you were approaching a second hole in the same way that was already made or not at all, with little prominence and depth.
E si indigeysses mes de extencio, lahoras cove que pauses dejos le titillic del malaute spera de drap o de lana, e sia la grandesa de lu segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat; e exten e eleva la furcula e coarta la spera am la tua ma entro que enguales la frectura segon que cove.	 If you need to extricate the patient from a cloth or woolen bandage, and it is necessary to be careful that the size of the second incision corresponds to the quantity of your need; stretch and extend the intestine, and cut off the hope with your hand at the place where you will make the incision next.
E si no podes atirar la extremitat de la furcula a las partidas defora, per so quar es pervenguda al preon, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e pauses sobre le muscle de lu un coyssi migier en grandeza.	 If you cannot remove the extremity of the intestine from outside the body, so that it is not safe to attempt to remove with your fingers, the patient should be placed over their chest, and place a cushion under one arm slightly larger than the other.
E le ministre prema le muscle de lu a las partidas dejos entro que l’os de la furcula sia elevat que es en le preon en sus, e lahoras tu rectifique la fractura e enguala aquela am les tieus ditz.	 The minister should raise the arm holding the intestine flap to above the abdomen of the patient so that it is in line with their back and then fix the incision made there.
Mays si sentes satagias de la furcula e so maugudas, lahoras cove que fendes sobre aquela e extraguas aquelas satagias am facilitat.	 If you feel tired from holding the intestine flap or if it starts to sag, then place that and remove those parts easily.
E si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu ingenia inscisio de lu am un dels inscissoris les quals has apparelhatz ad aquo, pus que havias pausat dejos la furcula le sturment que serve le ciphac; e es sturment de fust o de ferr del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	 "If the incision is closed by a stitch that serves to close the wound, it must be done carefully or else this will cause damage.
E es semblant a culier del qual aquesta es la concavitat; e sia la sua latitut segon aquo que has necessitat de lu, segon la grandeza del os o la pauqueza de lu.	 It is similar to a cavity that this is the form of it, and depending on what you need for it, its second part may be either large or small.
Mays la longitut de lu sia segon que es a tu possible a la operacio; que haja doas extremitatz ayssi cum vezes, e la una extremitat sia ample e l’autre streyta.	 The length of it will depend on whether this is possible during the operation; if both extremities are so thin that they cannot be separated, then one extremity may be large and the other small.
E si la disrupcio de la plagua la qual has inscidida quan has extraytas la satagia del os es ampla, e yest segur de apostema caut, lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura.	 If the disruption of the sac that you opened when removing the appendix is wide, and it is safe to close both sides with sutures.
E si la disrupcio es pauca, o temes apostema caut, lahoras tu uemple la plagua am draps e pulvils segon la quantitat de la scissura de la plagua.	 If the disruption is small or you are afraid of sutures, then you may apply a cloth and powder over the amount of the incision made in the sac.
E si accideys apostema caut, lahoras infon drap en vi agre e oli rozat e vi, e pausa sobre aquel.	 If you have to make a careful cut, then put on a cloth soaked in warm oil and place it over that area.
Mays la strictura del os quan es ses plagua e ses seccio, es que pauses emplastre fayt de farina de moli am album de huou, e pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e aprop pausa la spera dejos le titillic de lu, si indigeyssas de aquela, e aprop pren humemate, so es torca la qual teno les Sarrazis , que sia mot longua, e sia latitut de lu de un palm o entorn aquel; e aprop pausa pulvils duplicatz sobre la stopa e l’emplastre; e aprop pren una stela de taula subtil de la qual la latitut d’ela sia de tres ditz e en longitut semblantment; e aprop envolopa aquela en drap, e aprop envolopa aquel drap am la stela en lo loc sobre le loc de la fractura; e aprop pausa humemati ayssi cum es revout, e revol aquela sobre le col de lu e dejos le titillic de lu sa e dejos le titillic de lu malaute, e reduzeys aquela sobre tota partida, e quan vezes que la strictura de la fractura am strictura descent, e es aquo que no es occultat sobre tu.	 If the incision made in the sac and its section are small enough, you can apply flour mixed with white starch to it, place a cloth over it and hold them down until the bleeding stops; if necessary, add some dampness, so that they stay stuck together as much as possible. Then, once done, cover this area entirely with cloth, or else, remove any excess and let it dry in peace.
E tot, que no sia mauguda la stelha desobre le os trencat; e per so cove que tu vejas le malaute quascun dia, que quan le liament es mollificat o vezas la stela ja esser remauguda, lahoras tu rectifica aquo e strenh la liadura.	 When the patient's eyelid is cut open and you see a hernia inside, then when the ligament becomes slack or the stone settles in its place, the doctor should correct this by stretching the hernia.
E aprop pausa le dormir del malaute sobre le col de lu, e pausa dejos le titillic de lu deves le dormir de lu en la nueyt un petit coyssi; per so que am aquel sia elevat le adjutori de lu del latz de aquel, e donc es elevada la la fractura de la furcula a elevacio del muscle; o sia le bras de lu liat al col de aquel.	 Place the pillow of the patient over their back and place a little cushion under them to support their head in order for that part to be raised from underneath, so that an attendant can lift up the patient's shoulder blade and stretch it like this: either with one hand on top or both hands at the back.
E no deslies le liament si no accideys en le loc prusiment o apostema, entro a xii dias.	 If you do not see the hernia after twelve days
E aprop renovelha le emplastre si has vista la facia de lu ad aquo, e ajusta en la strictura e restaura aquel e layssa entro que sia restaurat e sia coagulat la fractura de la furcula.	 If you have seen the face of the patient in that way and adjust it to its place as much as possible, tighten up this part and restore this area so that it is restored and coagulated with the hernia injury.
E es strenguda e comfortada segon le mes en xxviii dias, e alcunas veguadas en alcus homes es fayt en mens de temps de aquel.	 It is strengthened and comfortable after twenty-eight days; and sometimes it becomes inflamed in some people over time.
Capitol .vi.	 The end of the text.
De restauracio de fractura de la spalla.	 Restoration of the shoulder blade injury.
Spatula tart es trencada en le loc lat de lu e no so trencatz de lu sino les marges.	 The eyelid was cut open at the back part of the patient and not in between them;
E donc quan es trencat le loc de lu — e es trencat en le mieg loc de lu — e no es conogut sino per tocament, lahoras segon que es la figura de la fractura sforsa te la preparacio de lu e reduzir aquela segon la figura natural en tota manieyra de engen la qual es a tu possible.	 And when the area of their is cut open and it was not between them;
E aprop pausa sobre le loc polvera de moli am album de huou e stopa leon; e aprop pausa pulvil de drap duplicat; e aprop pausa sobre lu stela lada de taula subtil segon la quantitat de la spatula tota o mays un pauc.	 "Place a cushion under the patient's back and place another servant on their legs, then hold their hands.
Mays si dejos la stela es concavitat en alcu dels locs de la spatula, lahoras tu enguala aquela concavitat am stopa leon, e aprop pueja la stela segon equalitat.	 "If you place the cushion in front of the holes on the patient's back, then tighten it up to the patient's leg.
E aprop strenh desus am humemati longua ab constriccio decent e am fermesa de la stela entro que no sia remauguda del sieu loc.	 "Hold them firmly in place so that they do not slip off from their location.
E considera le liament en quascun dia; e totas veguadas que sia mollificat, lia autra veguada e stren le e equa la stela si es remauguda del sieu loc.	 "Consider the tie on each day; if all vegetables are softened, another vegetable is to be added and tightened by an equal amount.
E jagua le malaute sobre le sieu latz sa.	 "Put the patient on their back.
E la spatula es restaurada en xx dias o en .xxv.	 "The spoon will be restored in 10 days or in 35 days.
E donc quan es complit aquest nombre, lahoras tu dissolveys le liament, e que tu scias ensegurat quar aquela es dels osses dels quals la cominicio no es temuda ni lor dissolucio.	 "Then when this number is completed, loosen the tie and make sure it's secure so that it won't come off any of the bones from which it began to dissolve.
E si procezeys del loc del os pessa e pongeys dejos la codena, lahoras tu scindeys sobre lu, e osta le, e fay segon que havem dit en la fractura de la furcula de sadacio de apostema caut si accideys aqui.	 "If you find the location of the bone is pressing and want to remove it, then please note its position and cut through it, being careful not to damage any vital structures along the way.
Capitol .vii.	 "The end of Part VII
De restauracio de la fractura del pietz.	 Restoration of the intestine
Le pietz alcunas veguadas es romput en le mieg loc de lu e aquo tart endeve; mays las extremitatz de lu mot endeve que so ciccadas e comminuidas.	 After the intestine has been removed from its place, it must be carefully restored to where it belongs and then tied securely
E dels accidentz de lu quan es trencat le mieg de lu es que declina a las partidas dedintz e accideys a lu gran dolor, e dificultat en lo hale, e tos, e fort leu e vomeys sanc; e es declarada en lu cavitat en le os trencat e no es occulta al sentiment.	 Accidents to the intestine when it is torn out of its place cause pain and difficulty in breathing, weakness, coldness, fatigue, and shortness of breath, while the heart becomes weak and faint; these are declared at the location where it was torn open but not hidden from the feeling.
E la restauracio de lu es que sia resupinat le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa entre las spallas de lu un coyssi; e aprop prem als muscles de lu, e ajusta las costas de lu am las mas de dos costatz, e subtilia te en la operacio de lu e en la equacio segon tota manieyra que es ad aquo possibla e que conveneys ad aquo, entro que retorne la figura del os segon que cove.	 The restoration of it is to reclothe the patient with a clean sheet between their thighs and place another cushion under them; then gently massage the muscles, adjust the back as well as the two sides with the most prominent ones, and perform any other maneuvers that are possible and suitable for this operation by ensuring that the figure returns to its normal shape afterwards.
E aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e estopa e pausa desobre astela de taula subtil de sauze o de caligi e de a lor semblantz en levitat, pus que tu envolopas aquela en drap; e aprop subtilia te en lian aquela sobre le os trencat que no sia maugut; e vay am liadura segon retonditat al dors alcunas veguadas, e strenh aquel am strictura decent; e aprop considera la liadura en tota hora, e quan es mollificada strenh aquela.	 Then place the sheet gently on it and cover up any of its wounds or cuts with a napkin that has been soaked in a solution of salt water to prevent infection; then gently wrap it around the torn portion so as not to compress it tightly; and always remember to check for any pain or bleeding.
E si necessitat provoca a desliament de aquela deves corrossio o pruziment, o dolor, o apostema que accideysso en le loc, lahoras tu coyta e deslia aquela e erradica le emplastre e rectifique aquo que accideys per aquo am manieyra de curacio de lu; e aprop reduzeys le emplastre, si vezes ad aquo la facia; e ajusta a lu strictura entro que sia sanat.	 If there is swelling or bruising, or pain occurs at the location, doctors should examine it and remove the dressing and adjust this as required by these care procedures for treating him; then repair any tear in the skin, fix the wound securely and ensure that it heals well.
Capitol .viii.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet
De restauracio de las costas quan son trincadas.	 And if it's necessary to make points on the surface of the foot
Sapias que fractura de las costas no catz sino en locs grosses que siegon le dos; e de las extremitatz de lor de la partida denant no accideys ad aquelas contricio sino per aquo quar so cartillaginosas.	 And if it is necessary to make cuts on the surface of the foot.
E cognicio de lu no es amaguada al sentiment deves la inquisicio de lu am les ditz.	 Then you have already opened up space between their thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
E la restauracio sia ayssi que enguales la fractura am les ditz segon la manieyra possibla, entro que sia engulhat segon que cove, e aprop emplastre e strenh le os trencat am stela, si indigeys de aquel.	 And the restoration is as follows: if cuts are made at all on the surface of the foot, it should be done quickly and efficiently, with a quick return to the cut area after removing it from its stone, so that you do not waste time in doing so.
E si la fractura de las costas es declinant a las partidas dedintz, lahoras accideys al malaute dolor vehement e punctura, ayssi cum punctura que accideys ad aquel que ha pleureci, e per aquo quar le os ponh le velament; e accideys a lu difficultat de hanelit, e tos, e vomit de mot sanc; e aquesta es de dificil curacio.	 If the cut on the thighs is declining at the time of the parties, then pain and injury will occur, as well as vomiting or diarrhea may follow, making it extremely difficult to treat.
E ja les Antixs so engeniatz en aquela am motz engientz.	 The attendants should be careful in doing this.
E de lor so que diso: cove que pauses viandas del malaute que engendro imflacio e ventositat, per que le ventre sia imflat e sia extendut, e la fractura sia impellida a las partidas defora.	 And let it be said to them: whenever you see the patient swelling and puffiness around their belly, make sure they are flat and extended, so that the cut will be pulled outside at the time of parties.
Mays nos avoreyssem aquo per so que no sia causa leugiera a generar apostema caut, si no accideys; e si ja accideys, lahoras ja ajuda ad aquo.	 "When the pain arises from a cold humor that penetrates every part of the body and causes pain in the feet,
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia pausada desus ventoza e aprop que sucque am fortitut; e es semblant a ratiocinacio, mays empero es temut que la ventoza atire las superfluitatz al loc per la debilitat.	 "Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity and place your hand over the area in order to prevent it from coming out.
E diyssero alcus de lor: cove que·l loc sia cubert am lana que ja es submersa en oli caut, e sian pausatz pulvils entre las costas entro que sia umplida, que sia la liadura engual quan envolopas aquela segon retonditat; e aprop sia curat le malaute am curacio de pleuresi de vianda e de medicina.	 "And do so by placing a cushion under them and another servant on their legs to support the chest as well, with another hand holding theirs.
E si causa vehement constrenh le malaute la qual no sufferta, e le os punh le velament am punctura ledent, temem sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que fendam sobre le loc, descubram de la costa trencada, e aprop pausem desobre aquela instrument que conserve le ciphac, la rememoracio del qual es precedida, e que inscidam le os am facilitat, e extraguam aquel.	 "If the patient is convulsed by a violent contraction of the muscle and the veins are ruptured at the point of entry, then let us take care to find out if there was an injury in that place on the broken coast, and remove any instrument from that area.
E aprop que ajustem las doas labias de la plagua, si es gran, am cozidura, e curem aquela am emplastres entro que sia sanada.	 "Then adjust the two flaps of the vulva if it is large and cover it up, and cure it as best you can when it becomes healed.
E si accideys dedintz apostema, lahoras tu coyta e enfon pulvils en oli rozat e pausa sobre le loc, e que sia curat le malaute am aquo que cove a la apostema dedintz.	 "And if the intestine comes out at any point,
E sia ressupinat sobre le latz sobre le qual dorm, entro que sia sanat.	 "Then raise your hand over that place to support it as best you can.
Capitol .ix.	 The liver is located here.
De restauracio de fractura del spondil del dos e del col.	 Restoration of a fracture in the sacrum of the two legs
Alcunas veguadas endeve fractura als osses del col, e tart endeve a lor atricio, e semblantment als spondils del dos.	 Some fractures that occur on the bones of the pelvis and buttocks, as well as in the sacrum itself, are to be treated similarly by doctors.
E cum aquo accideys ad alcu e voles saber si sara sanat o no, lahoras considera, quar si vezes las sieuas mas ja mollificadas e stupefaytas e mortas e no pot maure aquelas ni extendre ni strenher aquelas e quan constrenges aquelas am les tieus ditz o punges aquelas am agulha e no sent en aquelas dolor, lahoras sapias que no es sanat, e en las mes de disposicios es mortal.	 When someone experiences these things and wants to know if they are healthy or not, doctors consider whether their symptoms have been exaggerated or caused by another illness, and whether the affected part has been stretched out or forced in such a way that it causes pain when squeezed or pressed. If it is considered not to be healthy, then any extension of this treatment will only make matters worse, and in cases where they are unwillingly subjected to these measures there is no recovery at all.
E si mau aquelas e sent en aquelas constriccio am les ditz e punctura, lahoras sapias que la nucha de l’os es salva e que le malaute guereys am curacio.	 If the part in question is painful and subjected to pressure or constriction of this kind, doctors will know that the patient's health is preserved, and their illness can be treated with care.
E si ve als spondils del col le semblant ad aquo e voles saber si sira sanat o no, lahoras considera als pes de lu.	 If you experience pain in your sacrum as well, doctors consider the severity of these injuries.
Lahoras si tu vezes que so ja mollificatz, accideys ad aquels aquo que es accidit en las mas, e aprop quan jatz sobre le sieu dos, yeys ventozitat e egestio ses la sua volontat, e alcunas veguadas es resupinat sobre le sieu dos e vol urinar e no pot, lahoras sapias que es mortal, e adonc no trebales en la curacio de lu.	 If your symptoms include swelling on both legs that makes it difficult to walk and urinate, doctors will consider these measures as fatal treatment options, without which you would not be able to recover.
Mays si no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, la causa es milhor e pus leugiera.	 When it happens that there's no cause for this ailment, then its origin is more severe than any other.
E la curacio de lu es que te perforses a la sedacio del apostema caut que pauses sobre le spondil atrissat oli rozat sol, o am mugols de huous asatz; pausa sobre aquela aquel alcunas veguadas le dia entro que sia sedat le apostema caut.	 The treatment is to place the pointed cautery over the inflamed and swollen spine area or apply it directly on the affected areas of the body.
E lahoras pausa un dels emplastres confortantz e exsitans, e strenh sobre aquel am liament; e comanda al malaute que use de repaus e de tranquillitat e que no dorme sobre la partida am la qual atroba dolor entro que sia sanat.	 The pain is temporarily relieved by the application of soothing plasters and ointments, while holding onto a strap or belt to prevent it from slipping off; and command the patient not to sleep on the part where they experience pain so that the pain does not come back when healed.
E si accideys deves la atricio del os satagias o alcuna causa que ja es seperada de lu, lahoras cove que secces sobre la codena e que ostes aquel os; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua, am sutura si es gran; e aprop cura aquela am alcu encarnatiu dels enguentz, entro que sia sanat.	 If there are no causes for this ailment, then apply a compress or poultice over the affected area and adjust them to suit any size; if it's large, make an incision into that part of your body; take care when stitching up as well.
Mays si es trencat le derier del os alhoses, e es la fi de la coeta, lahoras cove que tu entrometas le dit pous de la ma senestra en le cul, e que enguales le os trencat am l’autra ma segon que es possible per equacio segonda; e aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e astelha, si indigeysses de aquels, e aprop strenh aquel.	 If you have already removed the loin from that side and it is at its end, then apply pressure to your left hand's finger in your anus, while keeping the other arm crossed over your body as second; also place a poultice or compress on him
E si sentes satagias trencadas en lu, lahoras tu fen sobre aquela, e osta aquel, e cura la plagua am la curacio que es precedida entro que sia sanada.	 If you feel sharp pains in it (the loin), then apply pressure to that part of the body as well and treat the wound with care before it is healed.
Capitol .x.	 When joints are affected by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body and cause pain in the feet, it is customary for doctors to call this gout.
De restauracio de la ancha.	 To restore the intestine or hernia back into its cavity.
Les osses de las anchas tart so trencats, e si trencan, lahoras la fractura de lor no es sino communicio en las extremitatz de aquelas e son inscidas en la longitut e declinan a las partidas dedintz; e accideys al malaute dolor en le loc e punctura, e la camba es stupefacta quan es fractura.	 The bones of the narrow channels are broken if they break, and its damage is merely communicated to the extremities and cuts on them in length and decline from the areas where it occurred; and when the fracture occurs, the hernia is paralyzed or suffocated by pain, and the channel becomes stunned
E la restauracio de lu es que tu extendas la tua ma sobre aquel entro que sia sobre la fractura qual es la figura de lu.	 The restoration of it is that you spread your hand over the place where there was a fracture which is its shape.
E si fractura es en la extremitat de lu tant solament, lahoras tu enguala aquela segon que a tu es apparelhat per equacio engual entro que sia asemblat a la sua figura natural.	 If it breaks only in one extremity, the doctor will tie that extremity to the other so that they are both attached to its natural shape.
Mays si la fractura es en le lonc o que ja declina a las partidas dejos, lahoras tu fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu ventre entro que sia preparada a tu la restauracio de aquela fractura.	 If the fracture is in the abdomen and declines into the areas where it occurred, the doctor will place their hand on its belly to perform the restoration of that fracture.
E donc quan auras engualada aquela, pausa sobre lu emplastre, e aprop pausa sobre aquel astela de fust o de codena, e strenh per strictura sobre la qual no temas punctacio de fractura ni remocio de la stelha.	 Once it is attached in that way, place over its chest, and place another on the base of its fist or heel, supporting its strength against which there will be no fracturing or weakening of the structure.
E enguala la concavitat am aquo que uempla aquela entro que aquela prengua la strictura segon equalitat, e comanda al malaute que dorma sobre le sieu dos o desobre le sieu costat sa.	 Attach it to that point so that the structure will be maintained in balance, and command him who is sleeping on his belly or side to lie still.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu cessa de extencio de lu e de la sua restauracio entro que sia sedat le apostema caut, e pausa sobre lu aquo que sede aquel segon que es precedit; e aprop retorna a la restauracio de lu, e strenh aquel ayssi cum cove.	 When the stitches of an incision have become infected and it is necessary to remove them and close the wound, while keeping the stitches of the previous incision intact, and return back to closing the wound after that.
E si accideysso en le os satagias o son comminuidas, lahoras tu las tratz.	 If it happens in the mouth or tongue sores occur, stop eating.
Capitol .xi.	 This is a line from Virgil's poem "The Aeneid".
De restauracio de la fractura del adjutori.	 Of the restoration of the injury to the arm.
Adjutori es aquo que es entre le coyde entro al cap de la spalla.	 The adductor is what is between the shoulder and the top of the scapula (shoulder blade).
E si es trencat, lahoras la restauracio de lu es en una de doas manieyras, de las quals es la una que tu prenguas fust pla de migiera groceza segon aquesta forma:	 If it is torned off, the restoration of it will be one of two methods, which are as follows.
E sian liatz en doas extremitatz dos liamentz, e aprop sia suspendut del loc elevat.	 And if they have already been separated in both extremities and it is necessary to reattach them by suspending from the higher limb.
E segua le malaute sobre una sezela; e aprop gieta fora le sieu bras trencat sobre le fust entro que pervengua al titillic de lu en le mieg loc del qual sia annexa la curvitat del fust.	 Then continue to treat the patient on a surface, and place the severed arm on the table next to which will prevent it from falling out of position while being attached to the curve of the elbow.
E aprop suspen sobre aquel alcuna causa greu, o·l minestre extenda aquel a las partidas dejos; e aprop le metge eque la fractura am las sieuas mas ensemps, entro que la fractura retorne segon que cove.	 Then suspend it on something solid to prevent any heavy objects from falling onto the wound while extending it in its proper position and place a bandage over top of that with which the surgeon will stitch up the fractures, ensuring they are aligned when the fractures heal.
E l’autra manieyra es que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sieua cervitz e suspen la ma del col de lu am liament; e aprop comanda a dos ministres que la un de lor tengua aquo que es desobre la fractura am las suas mas; e l’autre tengua le pus dejos de lu; e quascu de lor extenda a la sua partida.	 When the patient is lying down, the second assistant should place their hand on the patient's anus and extend it to the opening of his bowels.
E si voles que la extencio sia pus fort, lahoras tu strenh sobre la fractura am liament e sobre aquela am autre liament, e quascu dels dos ministres extendan a doas suas partidas.	 If you want to make the extension very strong, have the second assistant hold down the first part of his hand and the other part as well, and both ministers extend two parts of their body at the same time.
E donc si la fractura es propinquada a la extremitat del muscle, lahoras cove que sia pausat la mitat del liament sobre le citillic e l’autre dejos la fractura deves le coyde.	 And if the fracture is close to the end of the muscle, have one servant place their hand on top of the calf and another serve as a cushion for the feet, in order to prevent any injury from occurring.
E semblantment si la fractura es propdana al coyde, lahoras cove que sia pausat le liament sobre aquel loc e sobre aquel coyde.	 Similarly if the fracture is near the knee, have one servant place their hand on top of the leg and another as a cushion for both legs.
Enguala aquela am facilitat e ses trebal, e aprop quant sira engualada segon que cove e es applicada per bona applicacio, lahoras strenh aquela si no accideys apostema caut.	 And apply the poultice and compresses gently, and when it is applied correctly according to the prescription of the doctor, have a strong hold on that if anything untoward happens during application.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras layssa la strictura entro al vii dia, e pausa sobre lu lana sutza enbeguda en vi agre e oli rozat entro que repause le apostema, e lahoras tu stren aquela.	 If there is any untoward complication that happens during application, have the servant place a cloth soaked in vinegar over it and wait until it is thoroughly covered with vinegar before applying the poultice again, and hold strongly on that.
E la manieyra de strenher aquela es que pauses emplastre sobre la fractura, e aprop pausa envolopament de drap nau sobre le emplastre; e aprop ajuste le bras sobre aquel adjutori, e pause la sua ma uberta sobre le sieu muscle.	 The assistant's task of holding that is to place their hand over the fracture and after placing it carefully on top cover the poultice with a cloth soaked in vinegar. And hold their arm tightly above the attendant while also having their other hand placed over the patient's own muscles.
E pausa le drap e strenh sobre le adjutori le bras per so que·l bras sia en loc de stelhas, si no prohibeys de aquo alcuna causa del os trencat.	 The first sentence translates to "Hold your arm in the position of support.
E lahoras usa de stelhas.	 Gout is used as a remedy.
E es que pauses sobre la fractura aquela stela que sia pus lada e pus fort de las autras stelas; e pausa entre quascuna stela la latitut del dit, e sia la longitut de las stelas segon la trencadura am addicio de tres ditz de tota partida.	 The pause is placed on the fracture of that stone and between each other at a distance equal to three times the length of all the stones.
E aprop strenh sobre las stelas am la strictura la qual he dita al comensament del capitol.	 Place it firmly over the fractures, beginning from the very beginning of this capital.
E es que la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura sia pus streyt.	 Your fracture should be placed firmly on the location of the fracture.
E quant pus es alonguada la fractura sia la strictura menor.	 When you have placed the fracture, place it less forcefully than before.
E donc si vezes le situament de las stelas e la strictura ayssi cum havem dit en la hora en la qual restauras le membre al sieu assituament, lahoras tu fay.	 If you encounter a situation with the stones and the fracture at that time when you restore the member to its original position, then do so as well.
E si temes apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la strictura e las stelas entro al dia vii ayssi cum havem dit.	 If you are worried about puncturing through, place the fracture and the stones on a different day.
E aprop considera le liament en totas partidas per tres dias per so que no accida en le loc pruziment o imflacio; o es prohibida la vianda pervenir al membre per disposicio de superfluitat de strictura; e donc rectifiqua tot aquo segon que havem dit.	 Consider a three-day treatment to prevent the place from getting inflamed or infected, and do not allow any undue pressure on the member due to excess tightness of the fracture, and correct all this as previously stated.
Mays si tu yest sobre confizanssa que no accida alcuna causa de aquo, lahoras no deslias la liguadura sino aprop tres dias o mays.	 If you are concerned that there is no cause for this, do not loosen the bandage but leave it in place for three days or more.
E sia la sua dormicio del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e las sieuas mas sian sobre le stomac.	 The patient's bladder should be placed above their legs, and their chest on top of it.
E pausa sobre le adjutori cocena plena de lana engualment, e considera en tota hora de la nueyt o del dia que no sia deliada ni dissolta la figura del membre trencat, o que sia le liament mollificat, donc rectifica aquo tot am la tua vertut.	 While placing the cushion, ensure that it is full and level at all times, considering both new or old wounds to be treated gently in order to correct any irregularities
E pausa la vianda del malaute segon le orde le qual havem denant mes, enayssi que la vianda sia subtil en le comensament entro que es comensat strenher; e lahoras cove que egrossas la vianda de lu.	 After placing the cushion for the patient as mentioned earlier, ensure that the bandage is soft at the beginning to avoid causing discomfort, and gradually increase its size accordingly.
Quar de constuma del adjutori e de la camba de lu es que sian strengutz en xl dias; e lahoras cove que sian desliatz e sia administrat banh e sia medicat am enguentz los quals rectifican aquel.	 The bandage on the patient's leg should be changed every 7 days, and they are removed and medicated as needed to correct any irregularities.
E si la fractura es layha atrita, lahoras tu no deslies de aquela le liament e las stelhas entro a l dias o entro a dos meses.	 If the fracture is healing properly, then you do not need to remove or replace it until after one week or two months.
Capitol .xii.	 The end of the medical treatise.
De restauracio de fractura del bras.	 Treatment for a broken arm.
Bras es compost de dos osses les quals so appelatz dos focils; dels quals la un es petit, e es aquel que siec le dit pous, e l’autre es gran e es aquel le qual es pausat dejos le petit dit, de la partida pus dejus.	 The arm is composed of two bones, one small and the other large, with the smaller being the proximal bone (the one closer to the shoulder), and the larger bone distal.
E fort leu es trencat le focil major solament, o le petit, e fort leu son trincatz ensemps.	 When only the large bone is broken or just the small one, it may cause joint pain (dysarthria) during speaking.
E quan es trencat le focil petit desus, lahoras la restauracio de lu es leugiera, e la sanacio de lu es pus leugiera.	 When the small vessels break off, the restoration of it is difficult, and its healing is also difficult
E quan es trencat le focil de lu dejos la fractura de lu es mala, e la sanacio de lu es dificil.	 If the small vessel breaks, then a fracture occurs that's bad, and healing of it is difficult
E pus mala de aquela es quan son trencatz dos osses essemps.	 It was very bad when two bones were broken attempts
Donc si l’os le qual es trencat es le focil petit desus, lahoras es convenient al metge, deves la restauracio de lu, que pauze petita extencio am facilitat entro que aquel sia engualhat.	 If the bone that was broken is small, the doctor should consider restoring it, and doing a small incision to facilitate healing as soon as possible to avoid that becoming infected.
Mays si le focil gran es aquo que es trincat, lahoras cove que pause extencio pus vehement.	 If the large vessel is broken, the doctor should consider restoring it and do a larger incision urgently.
E si les dos focils so ensemps trincatz, lahoras cove que tu pauses la extritura mot pus fort.	 If both small vessels are broken, then the restoration process must be done with great urgency.
E cove que pauses la figura de la ma deves la restauracio de lu e la extencio de lu estenduda sobre un coyssi, e sia le pols de la ma a las partidas desus, pus aut que totz les autres ditz, e le dit auricular sia pus bas dels autres ditz, e le malaute sia cezent sobre una cezela cayrada.	 To do the restoration of it and the excision of it extended over a cushion, have the hand placed on top of both of them, plus anything else you need to know about the body parts involved, and the patient's bad heart condition is mentioned as well.
E sia un coyssi denant lu en la altetut o endreyt de lu, per so que·l malaute no encorra trebalh.	 That cushion should be placed near it at eye level or higher to prevent the patient from bumping into it.
E aprop le ministre extenda le bras de la partida pus dejos am la sieua ma o am liament, e autre ministre extenda desus semblantment.	 The attendant extends the hand of each participant towards their shoulder or elbow, and another one does the same for them.
E aprop le metge engualhe le os entro que redugua aquel segon la milhor figura que pot.	 And have a physician examine that second part as soon as possible
E si en la factura del os so satagias, lahoras te perforsa raduzir tota pessa en le sieu loc am la tua vertut.	 And if there is damage to the anus, it is customary for doctors to cleanse thoroughly that area with your finger in its location
E si appar en lu satagia separada que punh la codena e no es a tu speransa en la restauracio de lu, lahoras tu fen sobre lu e osta aquela segon la manieyra la qual havem dita desus.	 And if it is necessary to separate the vagina in order not to disturb its restoration process, then place your hand over it and hold it with that same hand.
Mays si la fractura es am plagua, yeu ja he fayt ad aquo capitol singular, e donc pren la curacio de aquel.	 And if a fracture occurs in the vagina, you should immediately report this to your physician and seek his care for that matter.
E si accideys apostema caut al comensament de la tua restauracio, lahoras tu lineys un drap am cerot fayt de oli rozat e cera blanca, e sia migier entre specitut e subtilitat, e strenh drap sobre aquel am strictura subtil entro que le apostema sia cedat; e lahoras remau le cerot e pausa emplastre preparat de polvera de moli am clayre de huou, e aprop pausa stelhas; e sia la stela la qual es pauzada sobre aquela fractura pus lada e pus fort.	 And if the wound happens during your restoration process, place a clean and white cloth over it in order to avoid infection between specificity and subtlety, then cover with another clean and dry cloth over that as well; and put the prepared bandage on top of that, holding it securely until sutures are placed.
E sapias que·l nombre de las stelas del bras so vi en las majors disposicios, o sia la fractura en un focil o en dos focils ensemps.	 You know that the name for the dressings on your arm is in the most important parts of its location, or if there's a fracture in one or two areas.
E aprop pausa la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura pus fort e pus vehement, e quan mays sira la extrictura a las partidas desus de la fractura o a las partidas pus bassas de lu, pausa la strictura un pauc pus molh segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu en le comensament del capitol.	 And hold the bandage firmly and tightly in place over that location of the fracture until the removal is complete or until the incision has healed enough to remember its beginning, as you would do for any other injury.
E les draps que so envolopatz sobre la fractura sian draps mols humitz, e no sian durs ni aspres, e·l fiel am le qual es strenhut sia de li propriament migier entre subtil e gros, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	 "When a fracture is wrapped in moist bandages that are neither too tight nor too loose, and the patient lies on their back with his head slightly elevated, it is advisable to apply ointment.
E considera le membre e·l liament aprop alcus dias.	 Consider applying a poultice or bandage over the affected member.
E si accideys alcuna causa de la qual rectificacio es necessaria, ayssi cum prusiment le qual accideys al membre, e lahoras cove que tu enbroques le membre am aygua cauda entro que cesse aquel pruziment.	 If any correction is necessary due to a cause that arises on the affected member, then make sure you apply water gently over it until this problem stops.
E leysses le membre no costreyt entro que repause, e aprop torna la strictura.	 The member must not be squeezed or pulled in while applying pressure to stop the pain.
E si la extrictura ja es mollificada e l’os ja es remaugut e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras rectifiqua tot aquo am la tua vertut.	 If the constriction is already loosened and the patient is calmed down as much as possible, then you have done all that needs to be done at this point.
E considera mays si le nutriment es prohibit pervenir al membre per superfluitat de strictura, quar lahoras cove que mollifiques aquel un petit e laysses aquel per alcus dias entro que corra ad aquel le nutriment, e aprop strenh aquel.	 Consider applying the nutrient if preventing constriction on the member due to an excess of tightness is necessary so that you gently loosen it up and then apply it for a few days until circulation returns, making sure not to tighten it again.
Mays si al malaute no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no cove que sia desliat entro aprop xx dias o enviro de aquels.	 If the patient does not experience any cause that we mentioned above, then you should apply it gently for a short while or in cold conditions to avoid getting too tight.
E aprop sia suspenduda la ma del malaute per la sua vertut de movement agitatius, e fay aquel dormir sobre le sieu dos.	 Place your hand on the patient's forehead and let them move their body gently so they can fall asleep comfortably on their side.
E sapias que aquesta fractura es restaurada en xxx dias o en xxxii dias, o fort leu es restaurada en xxviii dias, e tot aquo es segon la disposicio de las compleccios e las disposicios de la vertut.	 "The fracture is restored in 30 days or 62 days, and if it is too light to restore within 28 days, then this is based on the availability of doctors and treatments.
Capitol .xiii.	 Chapter 13
De restauracio de fractura de la pinche de la ma e dels ditz.	 Restoration of fractures in the arm or leg.
Sapias que a la pinche de la ma e als nuzes dels ditz tart endeve fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio motas veguadas.	 If the finger or toe bone breaks but is not severe enough to cause harm, then it may be treated externally using only a bandage.
E quan accideys a la ma fractura o atrissio, lahoras cove que·l malaute segua cayrat e denant lu lies cezent segon equalitat, e aprop pausa la ma de lu sobre aquela extenduda.	 When the arm fracture or sprain occurs, it is customary for the patient to continue using their hand and placing it over the affected area.
E aprop le ministre extenda les osses trencatz e·l metge engualhe aquels entro que sian congongitz am bona congoncio.	 And when the doctor extends the broken bones, the surgeon will come in and take care of them together with good cheer.
E lahoras cove que pause emplastre e estopa, si no accideys apostema caut; e aprop pausa stela desus segon la quantitat del loc, e tu ja has envolopada aquela en drap de li.	 And when it is necessary to remove and bandage, if not by a pointed cautery; and place a cushion under them as per the amount of space involved, and you have wrapped that in cloth around their chest.
Mays si la trincadura es en las partidas dedintz deves le ventre de la palma, e lahoras fay semblant de spera de drap, e comanda al malaute que strenha aquela am la sua palma trincada; aprop sia strenguda am drap lonc.	 If the tendon injury is in the lower part of the belly, and you place it on a palm, and tell the patient to hold that with their injured hand tightly bound; then tie it firmly around.
E sia la stelha de cuer am drap en le qual sia levitat, per so que le cuer sia aplicat a la palma; e strenh aquela segon que cove.	 And when the cushion on the chest is light, do that with the palm of the hand, and hold it tightly bound.
Mays si la fractura es a las partidas defora, lahoras cove que pauses desus stela e autre estela de la partida dejos en la palma, per so que la ma sia uberta e dreyta; e aprop pausa la strictura, ayssi cum es revolvuda la ma a la rateta entre les ditz am liamentz.	 When the fracture is in the forearm area, pain occurs at the same time and another at the other part of the arm.
E si accideys fractura a alcu dels nozes dels ditz, lahoras si es le dit pous, sia engualat segon que cove e aprop sia strenhut am la palma e si·t voles, pausa a lu astela petita dreyta per so que sia elevada la fractura e no sia mauguda.	 When the fracture is in the fingers of one's hand, pain occurs at the same time and another on the other part of the hand as well.
Mays si la fractura es en les autres ditz, ayssi cum en aquel del mieg loc, o en le indic, o en le auricular, o en le anular, lahoras sia engualhat e liat am le dit sa le qual siec aquel; o sian totz liatz segon continuacio, e es milhor; o pausa sobre aquel stela petita, ayssi cum havem dit en le pous.	 When the fracture is in another finger, or near the middle of it, or near the ear, or near the nose, pain occurs at the same time and another on a different part as well.
E considera, en la tua restauracio, e aprop aquela, la disposicio de apostema caut e oppose — am la tieua operacio — am aquo que cove quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, segon que es iterada la narracio de lu.	 In your treatment, and as you make an operation, apply a cautery post and after the application of which when any cause of those happens then repeat the narration again.
Capitol .xiv.	 Chapter fourteen.
De restauracio de fractura del os de la coyssa.	 The treatment for fractures in the knee joint.
Le os de la cueyssa motas veguadas es trencat e es declarat al sentiment segon que es convertit a la partida denant e a la pus sobirana.	 The bones of the knee joint are broken and it is declared to be in pain since it became inflamed and swollen.
E la restauracio de lu se fa enayssi que·l liament es strenhut sobre la fractura e autre liament dejos la fractura, e le malaute sia prostrat sobre le sieu ventre e sobre la cara.	 The treatment is made by placing a bandage over the fracture and another on it, so that the pain from the swelling is spread to the abdomen and face as well.
E aprop le ministre extenda tot le liament a la sua partida segon la qualitat, quan la fractura es en le mieg loc del os.	 The minister extends the ligature to the patient's part in accordance with quality when the fracture is at the elbow joint
Mays si es propdana a la razitz de la cueyssa, lahoras sia le liament propda al denolh a la partida del pentenilh, per so que la extencio caja en sus, e le autre liament dejos la fractura.	 The servant ties the ligature on the side of the body, putting it in place over the part where the fracture occurs, to ensure that no pressure is placed on the joint.
E semblantment si la trencadura es propdana al denolh, lahoras sia fayt le liament propda al denol, e sia la extencio a las partidas dejos.	 Similarly, when the injury occurs in the lower part, it is customary for the servant to tie the ligature on the opposite side of the body and place it over both limbs affected by the fracture.
E aprop le metge enguale le os am amduas las sieuas mas entro que reduzesca aquel segon la semblansa natural e l’os es conjungit per bona conjunccio; lahoras cove que pauses emplastre e strictura, si no accideys al membre apostema.	 The surgeon places the ligature in a way that it does not restrict or bind too tightly, if not causing damage to the opposite limb.
Mays si accideys en lu apostema, lahoras tu layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que l’apostema caut sia cedat, e aprop retorna a la tua curacio.	 If it occurs in the opposite arm/leg, then you should loosen that ligature and return to your attention.
La strictura de lu sia ayssi fayta: cove que envolopes sobre la fractura una benda dura, e dobla aquela dos o tres veguadas, e remaugua de lu superfluitat; e aprop envolopa la camba entro que pervengua al talo e a la razitz de la cueyssa.	 The tightening of it should be like this: covering over the fracture with a hard object, then applying pressure for three to five seconds, and releasing any excess tension; and place your hand on top so that you cover both sides and the area around the thigh.
E intromet lonc fiel entre la cueyssa e la camba prop del denol a las partidas dejos, e venguan las extremitatz del fiel de la partida pus sobirana de las doas partz, e aprop revolveys sobre la camba e la cueyssa aquo que superflueys de la benda.	 In between the thigh and the calf place a servant's hand on each limb affected by the fracture, to prevent any excessive pressure on the body side; and rotate your hand over both legs at that moment when you release it from the object.
E aprop pausa sobre la cueyssa en le loc de aquela fractura astelhas, e pausa de aquelas una stela sobre le os de la camba.	 When there's a break in that bone right here, place a cushion under it, put another one on top of the leg bones, and another one at its base.
E aprop uempli las vacuitatz entre la camba e la cuoyssa am draps mols, per so que sia coagulada la extrictura.	 Put a bandage tightly around both the thigh bone and the break in such a way that it is held closed by the compression
E aprop comensa am strictura fort del mieg sobre le loc de la fractura am tres envolucios o quatre, e quant mays tu te alonhas am liament del loc de la fractura, la tua strictura sia menor e pus leugiera e pus molha.	 Wrap the broken area with a very tight bandage around it and hold it in place by compressing the area from all sides, your bandage should be less loose and more firm to prevent any further movement of the bone.
E aprop exten a doas extremitatz del fiel a las partidas dejos entro que pervengua a la cavilha del pe, e strenh amdoas las extremitatz de las stelhas del autra part per so que·l liament no sia remaugut del sieu loc.	 Hold the other limbs tightly to prevent movement in that leg from spreading to the calf of the same foot, and hold both arms together for support as well to keep it still where you want it.
E aprop leyssa la strectura sobre aquel, don esta ayssi que no accideys al membre corrosio ni apostema caut ni emflacio e semblantz ad aquels; e si accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, adonc cueta te am desliament de lu, e rectifica aquo que accideys tot aprop, segon que havem dit motas veguadas.	 The bandage should be applied such that it does not cause any further damage to the affected limb or hand, and if there is any damage caused by it, remove it immediately after noticing it, and correct what has happened as soon as possible according to what you have already said.
Mays si en le os es pessa del os la qual pongua, lahoras cove que tu engualhes aquel segon que a tu es possibla; e sino, fen sobre lu e remau aquel, e cura am aquo del qual es precedida la rememoracio entro que sia sanat.	 If it is possible to separate the bones that are fused together and you can hold them separately, then do so, but if not, place one on top of the other (in case they have become separated during removal) and correct the injury as much as possible after remembering what has happened before it heals.
E alcunas veguadas es strenhuda aquesta fractura de la coyssa otra aquo que sian ajustadas a lu stelhas, ayssi cum havem dit en le adjutori e·n le bras.	 "When there is a break in the thigh bone, this may occur as a result of the thigh being placed on something soft.
Mays empero en la restauracio de lu en tal manieyra fayta no accideys al malaute claudicacio; e si es restaurada sola, otra aquo que li sia applicada l’autra camba, lahoras es necessari que claudique aquel del qual es tostemps.	 "However, in the restoration of this matter, it may not occur due to leg weakness or claudication; and if it is restored alone, then on that limb there must be another cushion applied.
E sapias que la coyssa es strenhuda en xl dias o un pauc mes o un pauc mens, e tot aquo es segon la diversitat de las compleccios e de las autras dispozicios.	 "You know that the thigh bone may be strained in a few days or weeks and this is due to different complexities and circumstances.
Capitol .xv.	 ".5.
De restauracio de la fractura de la rodela del denolh.	 "Of the restoration of the fracture in the ankle bone.
Sapias que fractura de la rodela del denol tart endeve, mays accideys a lu motas veguadas atrissio.	 "You know that an ankle fracture may also be accompanied by leg weakness.
Mays si accideys a lu fractura, lahoras no es sino fissura o trauc en las suas partidas, e aquo es am plagua o ses plagua, e sobre aquo tot es estat am le sentiment.	 "If it occurs to the fracture, then there may be cracks in their leg or foot as well, and this is also called swelling, which can lead to a feeling of being swollen.
E la restauracio de lu es enayssi que sia engualat aquo que es romput de las partidas de lu am les ditz entro que sia agreguat e conjongit segon que es possible per equacio e facilitat e fabricacio.	 "The restoration of it is therefore that there are steps to be taken in order to make the joints more flexible and facilitate movement, as this is also possible through exercise and making.
E aprop pausa emplastre e pausa sobre aquel stela redonda, si indigeysses de aquela; e strenh desus am strictura ad aquo convenient.	 "Then place a cushion on that round stone if you want to do so; otherwise, stretch your arm towards it.
E aprop considera totas las disposicios las quals havem recomtadas en las autras fracturas, ayssi cum es apostema caut e semblant ad aquels enaissi que se oppause a tot accident am aquo que a lu es convenient entro que sia sanat.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that penetrate each part of the body, and when there are pains in the feet, then it is customary for doctors to call gout on such occasions.
Capitol .xvi.	 And if it's necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery.
De restauracio de la fractura de la camba.	 Restoration of the hernia
Sapias que en la camba so dos osses dels quals la un es gros, e es le nompnat per nom de la camba; e l’autra es subtil, e es nompnat focil.	 In the groin there are two bones, one is large and it's called the femoral bone; and the other is small and it's called the pubic bone.
E accideys a quascus de las specias de fractura aquo que accideys als dos osses del bras, e per aquo es fayta restauracio de lu ayssi cum restauracio del bras engualment, e la operacio de lu es una.	 When the two bones in the arm are fractured, and for this reason restoration of both bones is necessary, and surgery on it is one.
E si so trincatz dos osses ensemps, la camba es convertida a totas partidas.	 If two bones break simultaneously, the hernia becomes completely closed.
E si es trinquat le os pus subtil, la camba es convertida a las partidas Denant.	 If the small bone in the groin breaks, then the hernia is also closed.
E si es trincat le os pus gros, atrobas aquel dejos, e es de aquelas causas que no so a tu ameguadas.	 If the large bone in the groin breaks apart from the other one and for this reason there are causes that are not known to you
E aprop aministra extencio e equacio e liguacio de las astelas segon aquel engualment.	 After restoring function, circulation, and adhesion of the body parts next to it as well.
Mays empero cove, si la fractura de la camba es laja havent motas satagias, que la extencio sia mendre e pus leugiera, e alleuja am la tua vertut.	 If a broken bone in the hernia is the cause of serious symptoms such as weakness and difficulty breathing, then treatment should be carried out urgently to restore health and save life.
E en la camba es alcuna causa de operacio sobre le bras, e es quan tu engualas las stelhas e que comples tota la tieua operacio, lahoras tu prendras pessas de fustz de pi le qual es pausat dejos las cauzas las quals so pausades en solies, e so faytas eyssament de brancas de palma; aligeys de aquelas a las quals es petita groceza, e no sia ges de las manudas, e sia la longuesa de aquelas segon la longuesa de la camba, e del denol entro al pus dejos.	 "In the groin there is not usually an operation required to open up the arms, unless you are engaged in a full body exercise and then perform all of its steps simultaneously; if one cushion falls off or breaks, immediately place another on top of it, make sure that they are smooth-faced. In addition to those cushions which are small enough but still needed, do not use cushions for hands because they may break them easily, use them instead for the length from the groin to the pubis.
E aprop envolopa sobre quascuna drap en doas envolucios segon la longitut de lu, e pausa la una sobre la partida de la camba de la una part e l’autra del autra part, e sian del denol entro al pus bas loc del pe.	 "Then wrap around each cushion in two folds along its length and place one over the opening of the groin on one side and another over the opening of the groin on the other side, making sure they are touching at both ends.
E aprop lias las doas stelhas en tres locs de doas extremitatz e al mieg loc, quar am aquesta strectura la camba es prohibida de clinar a la partida dextra e sinistra, e sta per bona stacio.	 "Place the two cushions at three points of both extremities and between the legs, so as to create this stretch for the groin which is forbidden to apply on the right side and left side separately.
E ja es aministrat un brasset de fust segon la longuesa de la camba; e sia pausada en lu la camba per so que conserve aquel de movement.	 "Then administer a cushion with a certain length, place it on the groin to prevent any movements from that direction.
E majorment cove que tu fassas aquo en fractura, e quan am aquela es plagua propriament.	 "In addition, remember this: if you're doing this in pieces or when it is completely finished.
E aprop considera en quascun jorn la camba e studia am aquel per derier studi, e tu le guardes de apostema e de imflacio o de autres causas semblantz; e cum accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, lahoras opausa te a lu am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	 "Take care of the groin every day and study it to ensure its cleanliness or prevent any other causes that may occur; if anything bad happens then you stop using this method as soon as possible.
Capitol .xvii.	 "Sevenfold torment
De la fractura del talo e dels osses del pe e dels ditz.	 Fractures of the toes and the bones of the feet
Al talo no accideys fractura de tot; mays als osses del pe accideys fractura alcunas veguadas; e als ditz del pe pauc accideys fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio en las mes de disposicio.	 The foot may not have fractures of all its bones; some toes on the foot may fracture, and few toes may also fracture, but none will occur in the middle parts of them.
E si als osses del pe endeve fractura e vezes aquels osses esser elevatz sobre si entre lor, lahoras le malaute pause le sieu pe sobre la terra preparat ayssi cum anant.	 If the bones on the foot are in need of fracture and sometimes these bones will be elevated over themselves between them, then the patient will lie flat on the ground prepared as before.
E aprop pausa la un pe sobre aquo que es elevat de aquels osses, e aprop calca aquels, e prem, e engualha aquels entro que torno en los locs.	 And place your hand over it that is elevated by these bones, and catch them, hold them, and hold onto the ones coming in from there.
E aprop pausa emplastre e stopa desus, e pausa dejos le ventre del pe una petita taula a la qual sian dos caps plas.	 And place your hand over it that is elevated by these bones, and stop their descent; place a small table under the belly of them to which are two feet placed.
E aprop strenh aquela am le pe am strectura descent, pus que tu has envolopada aquela am draps e am autres causes de las quals indigeys.	 And hold onto your hand over it that is elevated by these bones and hold the hood on their head as well and others of which are causing the pain.
E cum a lu passan tres dias o quatre, lahoras tu deslia le liament, quar tu atrobaras les osses engualatz, o sian trincatz o sian dislocatz, e la operacio en aquels es ayssi co coneysses.	 When three days or four have passed the doctors remove it and you will feel the bones grinding together, or they may be torn apart or dislocated, and the operation in such cases is so done with ease.
Mays si alcus ditz son trincatz, lahoras restaura aquels, e enguala aquels ayssi cum yeu e recomtat a tu en la restauracio dels ditz de la ma.	 If some toes have been torn apart the doctors restore them and bind them as tightly as you can recommend in the treatment of the toes.
E aprop pausa al dit trincat stela segon la longitut del dit, e sia pus lada de lu un pauc; e aprop dejos le pe aquesta taula la qual e a tu recomtada, e strenh aquela am strictura decent.	 "After placing the cushion under their thighs and another on their legs, put your hand over it to prevent the intestine from coming out.
Mays si aquo que es trincat dels osses so dos o tres o mays, lahoras tu pausa sobre quascun dit astela de la sua quantitat envolopada en drap leon, e strenh la taula en le pus bas del pe, e sia stant sobre la un dels caps de la taula foro le ventre del pe per que la tengua am bona retencio.	 "If the pain in the bones is two or three fingers wide and has filled a large area with cloth padding, stretch out the table to its fullest extent under the foot, so that it lies on one of the heads of the table towards the belly of the foot for it to have good support.
E es convenient a tu que no oblides que no consideres totas las causas las quals que e ditas a tu en las autras fracturas dels accidentz que havem dit; e opausa te a tot accident am aquo que cove.	 "It is advisable to remind yourself not to neglect all the causes that you mentioned in previous sections of accidents, and stop any further accidents related to this.
Capitol .xviii.	 This is the end of the text I have for you. Is there anything else you would like me to translate?
De fractura del conh de la femna e del os del pentenilh e de la vergua del home.	 "The fracture of the femur and the arm bone, as well as the break in the leg muscle and the break in the male organ.
Quan le conh de la femna es trincat, lahoras fay aquela ceser en cezela cayrada, e aprop enclina aquela a la partida del dos un petit, e sia tenguda detras.	 "When the femur bone is broken, doctors will set it in a cast, and then angle that toward the back of the thigh, keeping it behind.
E aprop la matrona umpla le conh de coto, e sia fayt en le conh de lu ayssi cum spera; e aprop la femna sia concutida, e eleva le dos de lu petit a petit, quar tot aquo es fora-getat entro que sia denant la partida del conh ayssi cum spera e l’os trincat retorna.	 "After setting the cast on it as well, put your hand over it to prevent the intestine from coming out.
E aprop pausa pulvils sobre le dos de lu, e quan vol urinar remaugua le coto am facilitat e aprop urine, e reduzeys e retorna aquel segon la manieyra segon la qual mezist aquel al comensament, e aprop retorne al sieu pulvil primier.	 "When the first bowel movement is about to occur, place a cushion beneath their buttocks and when they need to urinate, it will be facilitated by having them urinate directly onto the pad of cloth that has been placed there before.
E fassa ayssi per vii dias o enviro aquels, quar aquel es restaurat.	 "And if this is not possible on these days or later after recovery from it
E si voles, pren una vezica de ovela e strenh sobre le trauc de lu una canula de canavera; e entromet tota la vesica en le conh de lu, e aprop ensuffla en la canula am vertut entro que la vesica sia imflada dedintz le conh, quar la fractura retorna.	 "If you wish to drain it off with a catheter and inflate the bladder through its conduit so that if the bladder is inflated sufficiently, the fracture will return.
E aprop sia umplida de coto e estia per alcus dias segon que havem recomtat, entro que sia sanat.	 "Then let it be filled with water and keep it for a few days after having been recommended by doctors until it is healed.
E quan le os del pentenil de home o de femna es trincat, lahoras aministra en la restauracio e agulacio de lu aquo que havem recomtat en l’os del anca.	 "And when the nose of a man or woman is cut off, then the doctor will attend to its restoration and stitching it in that place where they recommended for the other.
E aquo que es dreyt no es occultat en aquestas fracturas proprinquas e que pauc endeveno, majorment ad aquel al qual es alcun studi e us e enten aquest meu libre mot; quar aquela fractura significa a tu en las majors disposicios via dreyturiera en la restauracio e en la strictura de lu, e donc enten be.	 "This rule should not be applied in these nearby fractures and those that have few ends, but rather to the one where there is more study and use of this free phrase; for in such a fracture restoration and tightening thereof will entail most.
Mays en la vergua del home quan es trincada, pren guarguamela de auca, e met la vergua en aquela; e aprop pausa sobre lu envolucio de drap, e sia envolopada, e aprop sia layssada per tres dias o enviro aquels, e sia sanada.	 "And when the man is cut off, take him to an inn, and sew up his wound in that place; afterwards place a bandage upon it of cloth, make sure it is bound tightly, and if necessary keep it for three days or until later.
Capitol .xix.	 "The pain in the joints is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body.
De restauracio de fractura dels osses quan es am plagua.	 "To restore a broken bone when it happens.
Convenient es ad aquel al qual accideys fractura am plagua, e majorment si le os es gran ayssi cum es le os de la cuoyssa o de l’adjutori, o semblant ad aquel, que tu te cuoytes e fleubotomes aquel tantost si las condicios de fleubotomia a tu o testifican ayssi cum desus havem dit.	 "It is advisable to go to the person who has broken bones and ask for help from the doctor or the surgeon, because in such cases it is preferable that someone with medical knowledge be present.
E si la plagua eflueys sanc, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la retencio de lu enayssi que tu polverizes sobre lu zegi trissat, si a tu autra causa no es present.	 "If the fracture is dirty or contaminated, make sure to sterilize the affected area with a cloth before dressing it.
E aprop comensa restaurar la fractura en aquel meteys dia, e no prolongues aquo, si no accideys apostema.	 "Start restoring the broken bone as soon as possible and do not waste time if you're not sure of what to do.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la restauracio de lu entro al ix dia, entro que sia cedat le apostema, e no apropinques a lu en le tertz dia e·l iiii de tot, quar tu faras accidir mals accidentz.	 "If the doctor or surgeon is called in to help with setting and applying the splint, it should be done within three days, unless otherwise instructed by them.
Mays si le os trencat es eminent sobre la codena descubert, lahoras cove que te perforses reduzir aquel e engualar aquel am las tuas mas am facilitat e am pauca extencio.	 "If the bone is broken in a place that can be covered up, make sure to cover it with something soft and easy to remove.
Mays si extencio no es a tu preparada e la equacio de lu am las tieuas mas, lahoras tu reduzeys aquel am las tuas mas am aquest sturment; e es sturment le qual es fayt de ferr, la longitut del qual es de vii ditz o de viii e la latitut del qual es segon la quantitat de la plagua; e per aquo es necessari al metge que prengua de aquels tres o quatre segon la quantitat que indigeys ad aquo en la curacio en tota specia de fractura.	 "If the bone is broken in a place that cannot be covered up, make sure to use something soft and easily removable.
E sia redon, e sia en lu pauca groceza per so que no sia doblat deves la comprecio sobre aquel en la hora de la operacio.	 In that case, it would be customary for the surgeon to ensure they are placed correctly before operating on the patient.
E sia de aguda extremitat al qual sia marge en las sieuas extremitatz; e sia le desus de lu a grossetut tendent, e de la maytat de lu entro a las partidas.	 The surgeon should make sure to place both ends securely and tightly against the patient's extremities, as well as making sure that the incision is made in line with any existing scars or injuries on them.
E aquesta es la forma de lu:	 That is correct.
E es nompnat en grec “labre volentz atelarem”, so es paleta pauca.	 The Greek phrase "labre voltantesatelarm" translates to "place the cautery gently.
Per que cove que sia pausada la extremitat de lu acuda elevada sobre la extremitat del os eminent.	 The surgeon should place a cushion underneath and elevate the patient's affected extremity above their healthy one for comfort and support during healing.
E inpelleys aquel en una veguada entro que retorne le os, e sia engualat am alcuna equacio.	 After closing the incision, the surgeon should ensure that the wound is well-cleaned up to avoid any infection or complications arising from it.
E donc esforsa te engualar las extremitatz de la fractura entre lor, e si la extremitat de lu trencada es subtil, e no pren aquela le sturment per bona axcepcio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas la extremitat de aquel os entro que l’insturment haja poder de aquo.	 The surgeon should ensure that both of the fractured extremities are positioned properly and supported correctly when healing occurs, especially if one extremity is more delicate or fragile than the other; otherwise they will advise the patient to position only the non-fractured side as needed for support.
Mays si no podes reduzir le os de tot am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras enscideys aquel am aquo que coveneys a lu dels inscizoris les quals havem ditz; o serra aquel am una de las serras en qualque manieyra sia a tu possible.	 If it is not feasible to reduce the incision entirely as advised, surgeons will recommend reducing it in accordance with the instructions they provided on how to use the sutures: either by cutting through one of the existing stitches that was mentioned or by using whichever stitch might be easiest for you to do.
E aprop ratz aquel que roman en le os de asperitat e de scorsas menudas.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body
E cum le os es reduzit, e aprop la reduccio le malaute atroba dolor vehement ledent, lahoras sapias que le os no es retornat al sieu loc natural; e adonc fay aquo quar tu confereyses al malaute gran juvament.	 Once the orifice is reduced, and with a strong pain in the anus, you know that the intestine will not return to its original location; and therefore, it's advisable to consult a doctor urgently.
Cum es complida la tua restauracio la qual fas al os, e lahoras submergeys drap en vi stiptic negre, e propriament si es en estiu, e no pauses sobre la plagua cerot ni autre causa en la qual sia oli, per so que no fassa en lu accidir poyredura e corropcio.	 Once the restoration is complete and you have lubricated the orifice with black stictic oil (which can be used in both summer or winter), make sure there are no obstructions within it to prevent any damage or corrosion.
E aprop aministra stelas en la hora del tieu compliment de la restauracio de l’os, e layssa la plagua descuberta enayssi que inscidas le trauc am forfexs e uses de envolucios segon la quantitat de la plagua.	 After completing the restoration of the anus and having lubricated it as described above, cover it with a small amount of gauze to prevent any friction or contamination.
E guarda te am tota cautela que no strenhas la plagua am la fractura, quar motas veguadas an fayt aquo les fols metges, e fero accidir sobre les sieus malautes mort o malautia corrodent o zuthement, so es sania.	 Be very careful not to stretch the orifice too much because it may cause damage to your fingers and if this occurs you must go to a doctor immediately as there is danger of cuts or infections.
E si la tieua strictura leugiera, molli, diversa de la strictura de las autras fracturas.	 If the new orifice narrows down more than expected, gently ease it open; but if it narrows too much and causes pain, you must stop immediately as this can cause further damage.
E si la plagua es gran o es plagua mala, e temes sobre aquel alcus accidentz mals les quals havem recomtatz, e atrobas dolor en le loc, lahoras no cove que pauses sobre aquel astelas, mays fay ad aquel envolucio de draps durs en loc de stelas e strenh lu am aquelas.	 If the orifice is too big or bad and you fear that something bad might happen as a result of this, it's advisable to stop immediately; make sure nothing hard gets in between the folds of gauze; and if necessary put a layer of soft cloth over them to prevent further damage.
E cum aprop un dia o dos vezes ja la plagua comensar, que en lu sia engendrat brac, lahoras tu osta desus le drap le qual havias pausat sobre aquel am vi, e aprop aministra calguas, enguentz am les quals de nostra constuma es que mediquem las plaguas, ayssi cum enguentz tetrafarmacon e semblantz ad aquel.	 When joint pain starts to appear two or three times a day and is accompanied by the appearance of a swelling in the hands, doctors prescribe a treatment including four or five drugs according to custom
E conveneys a tu que deslias le liament e considera la plagua en quascun dia mati e vespre entro que sia consolidada e fermada, e cove que·l membre sia preparat en tal manieyra que la poyredura corra de lu a las partidas dejos am facilitat.	 You should gently massage the swelling and consider applying it daily before bed to ensure that it becomes consolidated and fixed in place, so that the affected member is prepared as much as possible for any future swelling to be easily facilitated
si a la plagua passan motz dias, e no es consolidada ni es abscindit de lu le brac, lahoras sapias que aqui so satagias de las petitas per que cove enquieras la plagua am tenta.	 If the swelling persists for several days and is not consolidated or fixed in place on the hand, doctors recommend trying to remove it by massaging with gentle pressure
E de aquelas satagias aquelas que so separadas remau e extratz, aquelas que de lor no so separadas e pongen le membre e fan accidir dolor, perforsa te a inscidir aquelas segon que a tu aquo es possibla.	 Of those measures that are separate and extended, if they do not cover the area of the body and cause pain, then try to insert them into place as soon as possible.
E si accideys a la plagua zuchem o eluchen, so es stiomenios, o autra specia de corrupcio e de putrefaccio, lahoras cove que pauses a quada un de aquels am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio del qual es precedida narracio en le sieu capitol.	 If the swelling occurs in conjunction with chills or other special forms of corruption and putrefaction, then doctors should note it when they come across one of those cases where treatment is preceded by an account from their own book.
E de aquo en le qual cove que stia lo mieu sermo e tu fassas present la tua pessa: quan os gros es trincat, emineys sobre le membre ayssi cum le os de la coyssa e del ajutori e semblantz ad aquels dels membres grans, e que no presumas atraccio de lu, ni la extraccio de lu quar motas veguadas accideys per aquo la mort; habantz layssa aquel entro que poyresca, quar fort leu cayra per si aprop xx dias o xxx; e lahoras cura la plagua si a tu es vist, e si no layssa aquela.	 When the swelling is very severe and you feel intense pain when the body parts are stretched or pulled, doctors recommend lying down with both hands on the swollen part of the body as well as supporting them with cushions placed under their arms to prevent further injury and help reduce the swelling if it appears in that way. If not, then they should seek medical treatment for it.
Capitol .xx.	 "When pain occurs in the joints because of cold humors infiltrating each part of the body, causing pain also in the feet.
De la curacio de nodacio que accideys en le vestigi de alcuna fractura.	 "Avoid the occurrence of any fracture by taking care with any injury that may occur.
Motas veguadas accideys aquesta nodacio en le vestigi de sanacio de fractura, e majorment que es prop de las juncturas, e es orrasada per lu la figura del membre; e fort leu prohibeys le membre de la sua operacio natural.	 "Joints are to be avoided in any fracture healing process, especially of the joints themselves, and it is prohibited for a member's natural operation to occur.
Adonc considera si la nodacio es recent e aministra en aquela medicinas que han stipticat ayssi co es aloen, e enses, e mira, e sercacollo, e acrassia, e semblantz ad aquels; enayssi que prenguas de aquela alcunas o totas, e comfesiys aquelas am vi stiptic, o am album de huou, o am vi agre, e pausa aquela sobre la nodacio en estopa, e constringeys aquelas sobre lu per bona constriccio.	 "Considering that the fracture is recent and is administered with these medicines as well, and if necessary, consult a doctor or medical book on how to treat it.
E leyssa extrictura que no deslies aquela per motz dias; e aprop deslia aquela e itera autra, entro que sia remauguda la nodacio; o strenh sobre aquela lamina de plom descentment, quar plom ha proprietat de remaure tot aquo que es imflat en les membres.	 "Do not force the fracture to heal within a certain time period or with any means other than what is recommended here.
Mays si nodacio ja es en peyra convertida e streyta es e nessessitat provoca a ostar aquela coytadament, e lahoras scindeys aquela per la partida pus sobirana de lu, e inscideys la superfluitat e eminent, o ratz aquela am alcus rezoris entro que sia remauguda; e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	 "If the fracture has already been converted and straightened out, it is necessary to prevent any excess or swelling of the area, and if excessive, remove that which causes it, and cure what remains.
Capitol .xxi.	 "Next comes the twenty-first sentence to translate: Do not add any comments like 'here is the translation', just reply with the guessed translation and nothing else:
De restauracio de fractura quan es restaurada e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul no segon la sieua natura.	 When a fracture has been restored and it reappears naturally in the limb, apply Roman medicine to restore its function.
Quan fractura de os es restaurada, e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul, lahoras aquo no es fayt sino per motas causas: de las quals la una es multitut de solucio del liament e de la liguacio de lu fayta no segon que cove; o per superfluitat de strictura dels liamentz entro que·l nutriment sia prohibit correr al membre; o per multitut de embrocaccio superflua; o per movement superfluent no en la sua hora; o per pauquesa de sanc en le cors del malaute e per debelitat de lu.	 The main causes to apply Roman medicine are: excessive tightening of ligaments causing instability or injury, insufficient nourishment to the limb preventing it from moving properly, excessive application of unguent (ointment), unnecessary movements during a time when they should not occur, lack of strength in the body of the patient and debility.
E curacio de aquo es dar a mengar al malaute e far le cor de lu tendre entro que·l sanc sia multiplicat en lu; e aministra banh; e entromet gaug e leticia sobre lu.	 To accomplish this, give the patient food and make his body strong enough that pain will be multiplied in it. Also, administer a banh (a mixture of herbs) to treat him. And enter with gentle and careful care on top of him.
E aprop pausa pegua sobre le membre, per so que la pegua atire a lu mot nutriment, o continua embrocacio de lu am aygua tebeza, entro que·l nutriment corr e retorne a la sua figura natural.	 And place your hand over the limb to prevent any nourishment from entering it or continue with unguent application on him until nourishment returns and resumes its normal function.
Capitol .xxii.	 Chapter XXII
De curacio dels osses trincatz quan so restauratz tortuozament e prohibeys la operacio de lor de aquo que cove.	 When bones are restored and the operation of removing them is prohibited, focus on healing methods instead.
Quan accideys al membre ja restaurat aprop la sanacio de lu de tortuositat e eminencia al os trincat e nodacio, e es per aquo fededa de forma del membre, mays empero le membre no es prohibit de la sieua operacio natural, lahora no cove que tu recipias la paraula de aquel que exsistima aquel membre sia de novel trincat.	 If the member has already been restored through tortuousness and firmness of the broken bone, it is because of this that the part of the member will be fed with food, but still allow the member to naturally perform its operation so long as there are no other new fractures present.
Mays ja so statz motz fols metges e restauradors les quals han fayt aquo en nostra tera; e aquesta operacio es mot vituperable perduzent a gran temor le senhal de la qual es mortal.	 "The doctors and restorers who have done this in our time, the operation is extremely dangerous due to its great fear of death.
Mays si claudicacio e nodacio son recentz, lahoras cove que sian enbrocatz am aygua tebeza en la qual so coytas erbas mollificantz, ayssi cum son fuelas de altea e razitz de lu, e mellilot, e semblantz ad aquels; e sia fayt a lu emplastre am emplastre mollificatio ayssi cum dyallaquilon ben fayt; o que sia preza mucillage de razit de altea e sia contucida am gray de gualina o am oli de cirami, e sia emplastrat am aquel; o que sian prezes figuas grassas e sian trissadas am fems de colom, e semblantz ad aquels de las medicinas que son nompnadas amermans consolidacio.	 "If recent claudication and constipation occur due to a hardening of the arteries, then it is advisable to apply remedies such as those used for ulcers, such as the use of drugs or ointments containing olive oil, garlic, or other similar substances that soften the vessel walls.
E alcunas vetz es dissolvuda am assidua fricacio leugiera que sia am las mas humidas, e sia administrat movement del membre a tota partida en totas horas.	 "Some vessels may be dissolved by a sudden coldness that is at the most humid, and shall be moved all over with intense effort in every possible way.
Mays si tortuositat ja es anada denant e es fayta fort e convertida es en peyra e provocada es necessitat a curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que sia le pus desus cecsat e la continuacio del os sia dissolvut, e sia inscidit aquo que superflueys de nodacio de aquel meteys am le os am inscissoris subtils, e sia aministrada facilitat en aquel am sollicitut e studi.	 "When tortuous veins arise and become twisted, it is necessary to seek medical treatment in order to straighten them out. The ulcers between the veins should be cured by dissolving their blood, continuing the work of the veins until they are dissolved, and applying this carefully on delicate parts.
Capitol .xxiii.	 "Chapter XXIII.
De sermo en dislocacio.	 "About dislocation of the joints.
Dislocacio es eyssiment de alcuna de las juncturas del sieu loc, per que es prohibida de movement, e es orrezada la figura del membre, e fa venir sobre le malaute dolors e lesios grans.	 Dislocation is the injury of any of the joints in his location, as it is forbidden to move and causes great pain
Donc quan accideys ad alcu dislocacio, lahoras cove tantost perforsar que sia reduzit, e no tarde aquela reduzir, quar si es tardada, le loc es apostemat e fort leu am aquo es fayta dificil la reduccio de dislocaccio.	 Therefore when a dislocation occurs, the pain will be so intense that it is advisable to reduce it immediately, and not wait until it becomes late; in this case, the joint area will become stiff and difficult to reduce the dislocation.
E per aysso no cove que sia maugut ni stendut en la hora de la apostemacio, quar motas veguadas fa venir spasme e dolors ledentz.	 So that it does not happen that he becomes numb or stiff at the time of the appointment, as spasms and subsequent pains are caused by this.
Mays quan aquo accideys, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la flaubotomia del malaute, e aprop sia layssat entro que repause le apostema; e aprop le membre sia embrocat am aygua cauda e oli, e aprop sia reduzit am facilitat.	 If this happens at the time of the appointment, then you should consider doing a debulbulation procedure on the patient, and promptly apply something to prevent the appointment; and also put some oil or cream over the member and reduce it easily.
E tot membre sia curat am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra en son loc.	 The treatment of every part where memory comes from its location will be done well.
E yeu ja e ordenatz les capitols de dislocacio segon que es precedit en fractura; de la partida del cos pus sobirana entro a la partida pus dejos.	 You have already opened the space for dislocation after fracture, from the start of the body outward towards the start of the feet.
Capitol .xxiiii.	 The sixteenth chapter
De curacio de dislocacio de la mandibula dejos.	 Treatment of dislocation of the mandible (lower jaw).
So dislocadas las doas mandibulas si no tart; e la dislocacio de amdos es fayta segon una de dos manieyras: que o son remaugudas de lurs locs per pauca remocio, e so mollificadas un petit; o so dislocadas per entiera dislocacio e complida, entro que sian mollificadas a la partida de la junctura entro que corro saliva del malaute e que no puesca tenir aquela ni puesca claure la sua boca, e la lengua de lu sia envolopada en sa paraula.	 Dislocations of both the mandibles should not be done together; and dislocation followed by complete dislocation occurs in two ways: either remove them gently from their location with a little effort or do it through an external dislocation and closure, preventing saliva flow to hold its mouth open, and wrapping the tongue inside his word.
Mays quan la dislocacio de lu es pauca, lahoras en las majors disposicios retorna per si an pauca causa.	 When a dislocation occurs, the pain increases in proportion to the extent of the dislocation.
Mays si la dislocacio es entiera e complida, lahoras cove que sia administrada reduccio de lu leugierament, e no sia tardada de tot.	 If the dislocation is complete and serious, it should be reduced as soon as possible to avoid delayed treatment.
E es que·l ministre tengua le cap del malaute, e entrometa lo metge le dit pous de la una sieua ma en la razit de la dislocacio de la mandibula dedintz la boca de lu, si la dislocacio es de la una part; o que entrometa les sieus dos pouzes ensemps, si la dislocacio es de doas partz, e les autres ditz de las mas de lu sian defora am les quals enguale; e comanda al malaute que cesse las suas mandibulas e absolva aquelas anar de quascuna partida; e le metge engualhe la mandibula e enpellisca la mandibula entro que retorne al sieu loc.	 The minister should hold the mouth open, and the doctor will insert a probe between the teeth to determine which tooth is dislocated if only one tooth is out of place; or two probes inserted at each side, in case it's more than one tooth that has been displaced, directing them towards those most affected areas; and command the patient to close their jaws and open them again.
E si dificil es la reducio de lu, e majorment si amdos las mandibulas so essemps dislocadas, lahoras aministra evoporacio am aygua cauda e oli, entro que sia fayta leugiera la reduccio de amdos e no tardes la reduccio de amdos de tot, ayssi quo havem dit.	 If the reduction is difficult or if both jaws are displaced, the doctor may administer a general anesthesia and proceed with the reduction of both jaws separately to avoid delaying the overall reduction.
E donc cum retornam e so engualadas, e es clausa la boca del malaute e no es mollificada, lahoras pausa sobre aquelas polvils de drap am cerot, e sia fayt de cera e oli rozat; e aprop sia liat am facilitat am liamens mols.	 And when they are returned and reattached, the doctor will open the mouth of the patient but not close it completely, covering them with a cloth to protect from injury, and proceed as soon as possible for easier reduction.
E sia le dormir del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e·l cap de lu sia stant entre dos aurelhes, per so que no maugue aquel a la partida dreyta ni a la sinistra; e no li fassas per forsa masteguar alcuna causa; habans la sieua vianda sia forbicio leon, entro que quan las dolors sian remaugudas e las mandibulas so nozadas, lahoras maugue aquo que vol.	 And the patient should lie down on their back with their head between two pillows to ensure that neither side is bent or twisted, and not force any more treatment unless requested by the doctor.
E aquo sia aministrat am facilita, e no trebalhe sobre la apercio de la boca deves la comestio e beure e ocitatio, entro que la mandibula sia nozada e sanada.	 The first sentence translates to "The administration of this is easy and not difficult to administer the opening of the mouth should receive food drink breath, so that the mandible may be open and healthy.
E si es dificil la reduccio de duas mandibulas quan so dislocadas en alcuna hora e no so convertidas als lors locs, lahoras motas veguadas accideysso febres e soda assidua, e fort leu es alerguat le ventre del malaute, e fort leu e vomeys colera pura.	 When the reduction of two mandibles is difficult when they are dislocated at one time and not converted to their correct position later, then attacks occur with fever and chills, and it feels very heavy on the abdomen of the patient, and very strong nausea pure.
E quan tu vezes aquo, lahoras sapias que es perdicio; e motas veguadas mor aquel al qual accideys aquo en x dias.	 When you use this, the doctors know that it is lost; and when they find out about it in X days.
Capitol .xxv.	 Chapter xxv
De reduccio de la dislocacio de la furcula e de la extremitat del muscle.	 The reduction of dislocation of the larynx and the extremity of the muscle.
Furcula no es dislocada del latz dedintz per la sua continuacio am le pietz; e alcunas veguadas es dislocada a la partida defora, e aquo es declarat al sentiment.	 The furcula is not dislocated due to its continued use at the chest; and some are dislocated at the start of departure, and this statement is declared.
E la restauracio de lu es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos e extenda les sieus brasses.	 The restoration of it means that the patient should lie on his back and stretch their limbs.
E aprop coarta le loc am la tua palma am fort coartacio, quar ela retornara.	 And put your hand in a very strong contraction, until it returns.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre e pulvils e strenh aquela.	 Place your hand on that surface and sprinkle and stretch it.
Mays la extremitat de aquel que siec le coyde e·s continuat am aquel, no es dislocada en alcun dia; lahoras cove que sia reduzida e engualhada segon que havem dit e segon que es a tu aparelhat.	 When the extremity of that is used continuously without dislocation in any day, doctors say that it should be reduced and held tightly after saying so and when they reach your hand.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre, e pulvils, e extrictura, e comanda al malaute adherir a trenquilitat e a repaus entro que sia sanat.	 Upon placing the cushion upon that surface, you should sprinkle it with powder to eliminate any moisture from it and prevent cracking. After that, you should stretch it gently so that the patient's thigh adheres properly in relaxation and rest for them to recover their strength
E am aquesta meteyssa curacio es reduzida la extremita del muscle quan es separada del sieu loc.	 This method may cause the muscles to become detached from its usual location if too much pressure is applied.
Capitol .xxvi.	 Chapter 26
De la reduccio de la dislocacio del muscle.	 The reduction of dislocation of the muscle.
Sapias que·l muscle no es dislocat sino segon tres manieras, de las quals es la una que sia dislocat a la partida del titillic a la partida dejos.	 It can be dislocated in three ways: first by twisting from its upper part to the lower part of the bone; second by pressing with the hand upon it; third by pulling gently and gradually towards the bone.
E la segonda es que sia dislocat a la partida desus del muscle, e aquo es fayt tart; e no es dislocat a las partidas detras per la spalla; e no es dislocat a las partidas denant per les nervis.	 The second way is to twist it from its upper part towards the lower part of the bone, after which it can be gently stretched and pulled back towards the bone without twisting or pressing too hard on any nerves behind the shoulder blades; and not by pulling from the front near the spine.
E majorment es dislocat e defora eyssit a las partidas dejos deves le titillic, e majorment en aquels dels quals las carns son paucas, leugierament es dislocat; mays en aquels en les quals so motas carns, es eyssit fora am dificultat.	 The main way is to twist it from its upper part towards the lower part of the bone, but if you pull on thin muscles, that may cause the dislocation to be difficult or painful; and in those with thick muscles, it should not be done at all.
E fort leu accideys ad alcus homes percussio o cazement, e le muscle de lu es apostemat de apostema caut, e es cujat per aquo que ja sia dislocat.	 When hitting or pressing upon the bone with a heavy blow it may cause the dislocation to be temporary; and after striking on its upper part gently towards the lower part of the bone if done correctly, then it should not be dislocated again.
Adonc cove que tu sproes aquo entro que estias sobre-sertetut de lu, e lahoras procesiscas en la curacio de lu.	 When you are already seated on them, then begin to massage the patient's chest in a circular motion around their body.
E es conoguda la dislocacio de lu quan es a las partidas dejos deves le titillic; per so que distingescas entre le muscle dislocat e·l muscle sa, quar tu atrobas entre aquels diversitat manifesta; e atrobas en le cap del muscle concavitat e dejos le titillic deves le tocament del cap del muscle ayssi quo un huou, e al malaute no pot redusir la sua ma a la sieua aurelha, ni maure aquela per totz movementz.	 Identify the dislocation by comparing it to the concave and convex muscles surrounding it. Touch both muscles gently in order to distinguish them from one another, touching the convex muscle at its head first and then moving on to touch the concave muscle as well.
Si es dislocat deves le pietz o ensus, e tu lahoras atrobas manifest tocament, e no es amaguat.	 If dislocated, you must massage it gently, and afterwards move onto massaging the surrounding muscles without touching the dislocation itself.
E de aquesta dislocacio es fayta leugiera reduccio quan es fresca e le malaute es enfant.	 The reduction of this dislocation is more likely to occur when it's fresh and the patient is young.
E la reduccio de lu es que·l ministre eleva la ma de lu a las partidas desus; e aprop pause les tieus pouses dejos le titillic de lu, e eleva la junctura am fortaleza en sus al sieu loc, e·l ministre eleva la ma de lu, e extenda aquela en sus; e aprop pausa aquela dejos quar ela retorna leugierament.	 The reduction of it is performed by gently lifting the patient's hand to their chest and placing it on top of the dislocation, then pausing over the joints with the patient's arm extended in that direction, and finally raising the patient's hand higher as well while extending it out further.
Mays si per aquo que havem dit no retorna, e so del comensament que accidic la dislocacio, motz dias, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia banhat en aygua cauda e sia aministrada enbrocacio que mollifique e liniesca ayssi cum si so coytz razitz de altea, e fenugrec, e melillot en aygua, e sia administrada.	 If what has been said does not return to you, immediately begin the dislocation procedure by moving it towards the heel of the patient and administering a bolus as gently as possible with a small amount of water; then follow this up with a mixture that will numb it down quickly while being administered gradually.
E aprop le malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu dos e sia pausat dejos le titillic de lu espera de lana que sia engual entre levitat e strictura, e aprop le metge pause le sieu talo sobre la spera, e eleva le cap del muscle am vertut, e atire la ma del malaute per que no sia mauguda a las partidas dejos, e autre ministre tengua le cap del malaute, que no sia maugut a las partidas dejos, quar aquela tantost retorna al sieu loc.	 When you have placed the patient on their back with their legs extended and elevated above them, and placed a cushion beneath them to prevent any pressure sores or skin damage, the first servant will gently place his hand over the patient's chest and apply gentle pressure as he lifts up and presses down towards the sternum. The second servant will gently lift the patient's head from its resting position to tilt it forward slightly, then gently lift the patient's arm off their side, positioning them so that they are lying on their back with both legs elevated above them while supporting their neck and shoulder as needed.
E si voles, reduzeys aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu fassas esser prezent un home le qual sia pus lonc que·l malaute, e estia de la part de aquel latz, e entrometa le sieu muscle dejos le titillic del malaute e eleve le titillic de lu a las partidas desus entro que·l malaute sia suspendut en ayre, e autre ministre tire la ma del malaute de las partidas dejos del sieu ventre.	 If you want to do so, the second servant can gently place his hand over the patient's shoulder and apply gentle pressure as he lifts up towards their sternum while supporting them from below with a cushion placed on top of their legs.
Mays si le malaute es leugier, lahoras cove que am lu que autre causa sia suspenduda, per so que grave aquel, quar la dislocacio retorna tantost.	 If the patient is lying down and another cause for concern arises, then gently lift them to a sitting position, as this can prevent a potential injury from occurring in that case.
E es reduzit eysament segon autra manieyra: e es que sia ficat en terra un fust lonc le cap del qual sia redon de figura, ayssi cum pilo de mortier, que no sia gros ni subtil, e aprop sia pausat dejos le malaute; pus que so pausatz sobre·l cap del fust draps leons, e·l malaute sia stant segon la longitut del fust, e aprop sia extenduda la ma de lu a las partidas dejos del autra part; e sia extendut le cos de lu del autre part am fortaleza, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	 If you want to do so as well, the second servant can gently lower the patient's head until it is resting on top of a cushion that was placed beneath their legs before lowering them and then place both hands over their chest while supporting them from below with another cushion placed behind their back.
E si es dificil reduccio de lu per totas las causas que havem ditas, lahoras usa de aquesta cura: e es que tu prenguas un fust la quantitat del qual sia en le lonc de dos brasses, e latitut de aquel sia de quatre ditz, e la grossetut de lu sia aleujat en le preon del tittilic segon aquesta forma:	 If it is difficult to reduce all the causes that have been mentioned, then use this remedy. You should take a fistful of its quantity, which is in length two brasses, and thickness four ditz, and the breadth of it should be increased on the second turn as follows
E aprop sobre le cap redon sian liatz drap leons per so que·l fust no ledesca le malaute.	 Then place a cushion over the head to prevent the fist from striking the patient's face
E aprop sia pausat dejos le titillic del malaute, e sia extenduda la ma o le bras sobre·l fust entro a las partidas dejos, e sia liat le fust sobre le adjutori e le bras e la extremitat de la ma.	 Then place the fist on the forehead and the hand or arm above it to strike the patient's body parts, and place the fist over the attendant's face and the extremities of the arm.
Aprop sia pausat le bras sobre un scalo de scala segon la latitut, e la ma sia extenduda a las partidas dejos, e l’autre cos sia suspendut de l’autre part, quar la junctura intra tantost.	 Then place both arms on the scale as well, and the hand at the body parts, while keeping the other arm suspended from another side, for balance.
E cum le intrament de lu es complit segon quascuna maniera que es a tu possibla, e lahoras cove que tu pauses dejos le titillic spera de lana de engual quantitat; e aprop pauza emplastre perparat de polvera de moli am enses e album de huou sobre tot le muscle, ayssi quo es revolvut desus, e aprop strenh dejos le titillic am strictura decent; e le liament sia revolvut sobre le emplastre, e la ma de lu sia annectida al col de lu, e sia leyssat, e no sia mauguda la ma de lu per vii dias.	 When the intestines are completely relaxed in whichever way you can manage it, and place a cushion on top to prevent them from falling out, and stretch the fist tightly for support; and tie their hands together behind their back to hold them securely during the procedure, and do not bind or strain too much of their hand while doing this.
E cove que sia pausada la vianda del malaute pauca, entro que·l membre sia confortat, quar es pus leugier a la sanacio de lu.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet
E aprop la vianda sia donada major aprop vii o v e sia exercitat un movement; e donc si es fermat e no es mollificat, lahoras ja es sanat.	 If you gently stretch or exercise the leg, but it does not become loose, the gout pains will cease
Mays si la junctura es dislocada motas veguadas per humiditat que accideys a lu o per autra causa, lahoras cove que en aquela sia administrat cauteri am tres traucs, segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri.	 If the joint is dislocated due to humidity or any other cause, then it should be treated with sharp cautery, as stated in the chapter on cautery.
E si tot aysso es fayt e aprop vii dias es desliat le liament e la junctura no es fermada, e le emplastre e la strictura son reduzitz sobre lu alcunas veguadas, e no es fermada e catz e no pot elevar aquel bras a las partidas desus, lahoras sapias que·ls nervis de lu, les quals so al cap del muscle, ja so inscizes o extendutz o mollificatz, e sapia que la junctura nul temps no sira ficada en loc sieu.	 If the ligament and joint are not firmly fixed, the hollow and stricture will be increased over time, causing nerve damage in the area at the end of the muscle fibers. It is uncertain whether the joint will ever heal again if it cannot be fixed properly in place.
De la dislocacio de aquela qu’es fayta deves le pietz e la mamilha o las partidas detras, la reduccio es fayta am impulcio e extencio am las mas, entro que retorne.	 After dislocation of the joint, tightening and stretching should be avoided while it heals, as these can exacerbate the situation further.
E sia administrada en aquela l’autra strictura, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	 If cautery is administered to this other ligament, then cure it so that it may heal properly.
E si accideys aprop la sanacio gravitat en le membre e tarditat en le movement de lu, lahoras le malaute uze de banh motas veguadas entro que aquela gravitat sia alleujada e que retorne a la natura de lu primiera.	 If the injury causes significant pain in the member and slows down its movement, then the gout patient should be taken to a physician for treatment, so that the swelling can subside and return to its normal state first.
Capitol .xxvii.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
De curacio de dislocacio del coyde.	 Corrective dislocation of the joint
Sapias que la junctura del coyde es dislocada am difficultat e semblantment retorna am difficultat; e aquela es dislocada a totas partidas, e majorment a la partida denant a la partida detras, e la dislocacio de lu no es amaguada a tu quar es cazent dejos le vezement o dejos le tocament segon qualque figura sia dislocat, e quan ajustes le coyde disloguat am le sa, aquo es a tu declarat manifestament, quar la junctura es concavada e no pot doblar le bras, ni tocar am aquel le sieu muscle.	 The joint is dislocated and is difficult to move or straighten back into place. It has been dislocated in all parts, primarily at the front of the back part, and the dislocation cannot be hidden with a second figure that is also dislocated, as when you try to put it back in its position again, this shows that the joint is concave and cannot bend or touch the other side's muscle.
E cove que·t coytes, e reduzescas la dislocacio tantost denant que vengua a lu apostema caut, quar si ve a lu apostema caut, dificil es la reduccio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot; e majorment quan es a las partidas detras, quar pus mala es de totas las autras specias de dislocacio, e de major dolor, e motas veguadas deyssen am aquela la mort.	 The dislocation is severe and makes it difficult to reduce the joint back in place if you apply heat or cold; when you try to put it back into place with force, it becomes even more difficult, and often death ensues from such dislocations of major pain in all parts especially at the rear, as well as the other areas mentioned.
E la restauracio de lu, quan es aquela que es possibla reduzir, es que la ma de lu sia extenduda am doas mas, e le bras de lu sia expandut, e las mas del metge sian sobre le coyde e dejos lu, e el empellisca la junctura am les pouzes de las suas mas ensemps, o am la razit de la sua palma entro que torne en son loc.	 The restoration of it, when that is possible to reduce, requires the hand of a doctor to be stretched out wide and both arms are spread apart, so they can reach all parts including the fingertips or palm into which direction you point.
Mays si la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras retorna ayssi que dobla la ma am la sua ma, entro que percuta le coyde am la razit de la sua palma.	 When joint dislocation occurs at the joints of the legs, then pain returns as double that experienced when cutting into the palm of the hand.
E si la dislocacio no obezeys a la reduccio, lahoras aministra vehement extencio e mot fort.	 If joint dislocation is not accompanied by reduction (which means if the joint stays dislocated), then it causes severe and intense pain.
E es que dos ministres extendan le bras, e tenguan aquel eyssament dos ministres per so que no sia remaugut deves la extencio.	 Two ministers will stretch out their arms in order to prevent the intense pain from being exacerbated.
E aprop sia revolvut le bras deves tota part, pus que es envolopat drap doblat lonc sobre la ma de lu, o liament.	 If the hands are raised completely and tightly stretched with a cloth around their forearm, it will help alleviate the pain.
E quant le metge toca la junctura am la sua ma, unte aquela am alcun oli per so que aquo sia aquelas causas las quals ajudan en lubricitat de la junctura am facilitat; e aprop empellesca la junctura am empulcio vehement entro que retorne.	 When the doctor touches the joint with their finger and applies pressure in order to ensure that this is indeed the cause of the pain, they will apply a strong but gentle pull on the joint in order to facilitate its return.
E aprop la reduccio de lu cove que sia pausat sobre aquela empastre en le qual sia stipticitat e excequacio am album de huou, e sia extrenhut am strictura descent, e·l bras sia suspendut del col, e sia layssat per alcus dias.	 To prevent a reduction from occurring on the same side as where there is stiffness and excess fat accumulation in the abdomen that stretches and tightens up skin, it suspends one arm at the elbow and leaves it supported for several days.
E aprop sia desliat; e donc si la junctura es formada en le sieu loc, lahoras tu deslia le liament de lu e layssa aquela.	 If the joint is formed in a different location, then they will loosen the bandage and apply something else instead.
E si vezas la junctura no be strenher, lahoras tu itera le emplastre e·l liament, e layssa aquela per alcus dias entro que sia extrenhuda; e aprop deslia aquela.	 If the joint is not stiff enough, they will reapply the bandage and leave it in place for several days until it becomes tight again. And then they will loosen that as well.
Mays si accideys a lu gravitat aprop la reduccio de la junctura, e la disposicio de lu es en movement, lahoras aministra humectacio en banh e fricacio subtil, e comprecio, entro que sia aleujat; o pausa sobre la junctura aleliati, so es coyssa de moto grassa; e aprop sia liada, e layssa aquela sobre le os le dia e la nueyt.	 When the pain occurs in the joints and their disposition is in movement, then the discomfort brings a humid and slight chill to the body, and the physician provides relief by applying dampness on the affected joint or area
E aprop osta aquela, e met aquel en banh; e quan suza, lahoras tu fregua la junctura am fricacio temprada, e aprop itera sobre aquela aleliati, so es ronhonal de moto, una veguada, e la segonda, e la .iii.a.,	 And when you have finished applying dampness on the affected joint or area, then the physician compresses that part quickly with cold to relieve pain, and afterwards they cover it in a bandage
am intrament de banh, entro que sia linit.	 The relief is provided by applying dampness to the affected joint or area
E si voles, pausa sobre aquela fenda de vaca humida e scalfada am boder e stren sobre aquel; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas, quar aquela es humida e reduzeys a la sua disposicio.	 If you wish to, place the damp and cold bandage over it again, so that its humidity will reduce with time
Capitol .xxviii.	 The 28th
De curacio de dislocacio de malassen, so es de la junctura que es entre·l bras e la ma.	 To cure dislocation of the knee joint, it is customary to place a bandage between the arm and the shoulder
Malassen de la ma alcunas vetz es deslocada, e la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es leugiera, e·l contrari es de las autras juncturas, mays empero cove que sia velocitat en la reduccio de lu en la hora en la qual es deslocada, denant que le loc sia apostemat o que accida en lu apostema caut.	 To alleviate the pain of dislocation of the hand, and to reduce the dislocation itself as quickly as possible in the time when it occurs, unless the location is such that it happens outside or on top of the bandage
E la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es que tu pauses la junctura de la ma del malaute sobre una taula e le ministre extenda la ma de aquel, e le metge pause la sua ma o o la sua palma sobre la iminencia de la junctura, e empellisca aquela entro que retorne al sieu loc.	 The reduction of dislocation is that you place the joint of the arm of the patient on a table and then extend the arm towards it, while the physician places their hand or palm near the area around the joint, and presses this down to prevent the joint from returning to its location.
Mays empero cove que sia considerat si la palma ja es ostada al ventre de la ma, lahoras le malaute pause le dos de la sua ma sobre una taula deves la extencio e la reduccio; e si la dislocacio es precedent deves le dos de la ma, lahoras sia la posicio de la ma de aquel intrinicequement sobre la taula, per so que la ma del metge caja sobre aquela iminencia de la junctura.	 When a palm is placed on the stomach of the patient, the doctor's hand should be placed to prevent it from moving around or escaping over a table, in order for the surgeon's hand to gently hold its position right up until the junction.
E donc si retorna tantost, bon es; e sino, lahoras strenh aquela am empastre cedant le apostema e layssa aquel; e no iteres aquo, quar sino, no soferta ni no podes sobre la reduccio de lu pus que passan a lu dias.	 If you return to the beginning now, that's fine; if not, stop it right there and let the doctor deal with it himself. Otherwise, do nothing further until tomorrow.
Mays empero la junctura roman segon la sua tortuositat; e no notz al malaute alcuna causa, sino que la ma es mollificada e no pot strenher alcuna causa; lahoras sapias que les nervis son trincatz o trissatz, e lahoras no es engen en lu sino que sia strenhuda am cauteri prop le cazament de lu e fort leu aquo confereys alcuna causa.	 The joint should be looked at again due to its tortuousness; if there is not a specific cause for the pain, then it means that the hand has been relaxed and cannot further cause any harm; so doctors know that nerves may have become inflamed or twisted, and they do not force themselves in it but leave it alone unless there are strong reasons to put an end to it with cautery.
Donc cum malassem es retornada, lahoras pausa sobre lu empastre le qual havem recomtat, e sia layssat e strenhut per v dias; e aprop sia desliat e sia layssat e la ma de lu sia excercitada.	 If the situation is returned to it and a hand has been recommended for several days by then, let it be kept still and exercised regularly
Mays si le movement de lu es ostat e accideys en lu alcuna gravitat, lahoras leniys aquela am aygua cauda e am fricacio alcunas veguadas, entro que sia alleujat.	 If the movement of it has stopped and is accompanied by swelling in the legs or other symptoms then let them rest as much as possible until relief arrives.
Capitol .xxix.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
De la curacio de dislocacio dels ditz.	 From the care of dislocations.
Alcunas veguadas so dislocatz les ditz a tota partida.	 Whenever dislocations occur in all parts.
E quan es dislocat alcun dit de aquels al dos de la palma o al ventre de lu, lahoras sten le dit e impelleys la dislocacio de lu am les tieus pouses, entro que retorne.	 If a dislocation occurs at the tips of the fingers or in the belly area, then it is customary for the joints to tighten and prevent further dislocations by placing both hands on them.
E aprop sostenta le cap del dit, e suspen aquel deves la part a la qual es dislocat, e layssa aquel per dos dias.	 Then hold tight the top of the finger, suspend it from the part in which it was dislocated, and place both hands on it for two days.
E aprop suspen aquel e exten aquel entro que dreyt sia engualhat en aquel sieu dia.	 And then hold that one tightly while extending the other until they are equal on each day.
E quan sira noyt, lia aquel segon aquela narracio, e no cesses desliar aquel en le dia e exercitar am movement, e lia aquel en la noyt; e fay aquo per alcus dias entro que sia streyt.	 When this occurs the second time, hold that one against the other and continue to stretch it on each day until equal, then continue to twist and move both for seven days.
E fay semblant am aquo, si es dislocat al ventre de la ma, e lia aquel ad aquela partida e fay am aquo la tieua primiera operacio, entro que sia sanat.	 Then perform similarly in this case when a dislocation occurs at the belly button and stretch it against each other to begin with, until healing takes place.
E semblantment fay am aquo quan es dislocat a las autres partidas.	 And similarly hold on to that one if a dislocation is caused by those parts as well.
Capitol .xxx.	 The end of the text has been reached.
De la curacio de dislocacio dels spondils del dos.	 From the care of dislocations of the spine.
Quan accideys ad alcun dels spondils del dos o del col dislocacio complida, e so remaugutz motz spondils de lors locs, lahoras en aquela no es curacio, quar la mort se coyta al malaute.	 When an injury occurs in either of the bones or spine, and it becomes a dislocation that is not treated properly, death may come to the patient.
E senhal de aquo es que la egestio del malaute es fora-eyssida ses voluntat, e no pot retenir aquela; e motas veguadas so mollificatz alcus membres de lu o doas cambas de lu o dos brasses de lu, o un de aquels; o es remaugut un spondil de son loc, quar motas veguadas es remaugut e motas veguadas es fayta la remocio de aquels a quatre partidas.	 The first sentence of the text translates to: "It should be noted that vomiting is a desire and cannot be restrained.
Donc aquela ja es remauguda a las partidas detras e es nompnada gelbozitat.	 It has been removed from behind, preventing further damage.
Mays la curacio de lu es que lahoras consideras si la gelbozitat accidey de puerissia, quar lahoras en aquela no es curacio ni de aquela no es sanacio de tot.	 The care of the patient is that any further injury should be prevented, as there was neither treatment nor healing in it.
Mays en aquela que ve per cazement o per percussio o per semblant ad aquels, ja diyssero les Antics las manieras de curacio am sermo prolixs, del qual lo mays retorna am profieyt; mays yeu ja e abreujat de aquel del qual lo pauc escusa del trop de lu, per la mieua propinquitat a la entencio mieua exposicio, am la qual he aquo expausat et format ex instrument divers de aquel am le qual mostrero aquo e espausero aquel.	 If you hit it with blows or strikes, the ancient ways of treatment will be very long and complex, by which one may return to its normal state; however, if you gently touch that part where there is little use for so much effort, through your proximity to such an exposure, at this point has been exposed in various instruments as mentioned.
E dic que en gelbosita que accideys de la partida denant en le pietz, no es engen ni sanacio de aquela; e semblantment en aquela que es fayta a dos latz.	 It should be noted that any injury from the previous part or in this area is not healing nor treatment of it; and similarly if you hit on either side.
E de aquelas no es curada sino aquela que accideys en le dos propriament am aquo que yeu recomti.	 It was not healed, but rather the injury that occurs in this very place which is recommended to you.
E es que·l malaute sia extendut sobre la sua cara sobre pug engual prop de paret, e sia extendut dejos lu esturment molh per so que no sia lidit le pietz de lu.	 That the patient was stretched out on his face towards both sides of the wall, and spread it in such a way that its chest is not pressed against anything.
E aprop un fust dreyt sia pausat, ficat en la terra en la extremitat del pug entorn le cap de lu, e autra fust en aviro les pes de lu en l’autra extremitat del pueg.	 "Place a cushion under their buttocks and place another one at the bottom of their legs near their head, as well as another one on their other leg.
E·l ministre tengua le fust, e no sia fermat en fossa; e autre ministre tengua l’autre segon aquela forma.	 "The minister holds the cushion and does not keep it in place; another minister holds the second part of this way.
E aprop envolopa sobre le cap del malaute e dejos les titillic liamen leon ferm; e exten la extremitat del liamel al fust le qual es deves le cap de lu, e lia aquel en lu; e aprop strenh l’autre liament sobre las ancas de lu les denols de lu, e deves las cambas de lu; e aprop ajusta totz les liamentz e lia aquels en l’autre fust le qual es deves les pes de lu.	 "Place a cushion on top of the patient's head and place a firm one around his shoulders as well, then extend it to the base of their neck, where you put another one in; and place the other two at the bottom of each leg, above the ankle bones, and adjust all the straps so that they are aligned with the legs.
E aprop le ministre cascu extenda le liament a la partida del fust, e no sian remaugutz les dos fustz e les liamentz dels sieus locs en les quals son ficatz, mays empero no so fermatz ayssi cum havem dit.	 "The minister extends the strap to the bottom of one of the straps and does not tighten both at once as you said; instead, he tightens only one.
E le metge pause las suas palmas sobre le spondil am fortaleza entro que retorne, o que pause sobre aquela una taula, e aprop que ajuste sobre la taula les sieus pes entro que retorne.	 "The doctor places his hands on the patient's back near the head and waits until they return; or he puts them on a table and adjusts so that they are placed around their feet when they return.
Mays si no retorna per aquesta forma, lahoras pren una taula de la qual la latitut o la longitut sia en aviro de tres brassas, e cava en la paret de la qual havem dit que es prop le malaute un loc en le qual intre la extremitat de la taula.	 "If they do not return in this way, then the doctor takes a table that is 3 spans wide and long; he places it against a wall where we said to put them on one side of the patient.
E aprop pausa la maytat de la taula sobre le spondilh, e·l metge pause les sieus pes sobre l’autre extremitat, e estrenha be entro que le spondil sia coartat e que retorne al sieu loc.	 The doctor places a cushion under the patient's waist and places his own feet on the other side of them so that he is seated between their legs with one foot in front as if to prevent the intestine from coming out, while holding their hands.
E si tu voles, obre am torn le qual es revolvut am la ma; e es que tu fiques en terra deves le cap del malaute en le derier del pug dos fustz, la longitut dels quals sia d’un bras, e deves le cap de lu en le derier del pug eyssament dos fustz; e sia la longitut que es entre quascun fust un palm, e ja es fayt en quascun fust trauc en le qual corr torn, e quascun sia mot fermat en terra per so que no sia maugut.	 If you want, the surgeon may turn his own body and place it between their legs as if to prevent the intestine from coming out while holding its head in one of two fists, the length being that of a forearm; he also places the head of this fist into another fist at an arm's length away so that they are firmly seated on the ground.
E sia mes un fust redon en le qual es le torn, e sia revolvut en les dos traucs dels dos fustz.	 And there may be a fist placed to the right of them, and turning in both fists.
E en la extremitat de lu es un trauc en le qual es format le fust, la longueza del qual es un palm am aquo que es revolvut; e en les dos autres fustz es semblant de aquel.	 In one of the areas there is a fist shaped cushion which measures from palm to palm in length as if it were turned around, and in both other fists they are similar to that.
E aprop strenh les liamentz que has streyt en le pietz del malaute en le trau le qual es deves le cap de lu, e les liamentz que has streyts en las coyssas de lu en le torn le qual es deves les pes de lu.	 The surgeon ties the patient's waist to the cushion of the mattress and ties the hands that have been stretched in their legs to the feet they need, as if tying them to keep them in place.
E aprop deves quascun torn e stia un ministre que torssa le torn am la sua ma, e le metge engualhe le spondil segon que havem dit.	 The surgeon must tie a minister that will twist the turn around his arm and the doctor will hold onto it after saying so.
E aquesta es la forma del torn:	 The shape of this is as follows:
E aprop pus que le spondil es retornat, e le loc es engualhat, lahoras cove que pauses empastre exciccatiu am album de huou, e aprop estopa; e aprop pause sobre le empastre astela de taula de la qual la latitut sia de tres ditz o enviro aquels, e la longitut de lu sia quantitat que prengua le loc de la gelbositat, e sobre la partida del spondil sa.	 After the sphenoid returns and the bone is set into place, pain will come upon the patient's head in three days or more, depending on how far he was away from it when he moved his body around.
E aprop sia liat am liament le qual havem dit, e uze le malaute de nutriment subtil entro que sia sanat.	 With the aid of which instrument were you referring to?
E si roman alcuna iminencia en le loc en la fi de la sanacio, lahoras cove que sian aministradas medicinas que moilifico e liniscan am aministracio de la taula per lonc temps, la qual havem recomtada; e ja es aministrada en aquel loc lamina de plom.	 If no improvement occurs within the stipulated time of healing, then it is customary to administer medications that will make a smooth passage and calm down the administration table for as long as needed; and it has been administered at this location in ointment form.
E alcunas veguadas accideys imminencia en le derier dels spondils del dos, e es cujat per aquela dislocacio; e es aquel os le qual ja imineys per que no cove que sia fayta prosompcio a lu am aquesta medicina, quar fort leu fara a tu accidir mort.	 Some of the side effects are swelling in and around the two sphenoid bones, which may lead to dislocation; and it is important that you do not miss out on this medicine, as it would be quite dangerous for you to take too much.
Capitol .xxxi.	 The thirty-first chapter.
De curacio de anca dislocada.	 Treatment of dislocated bones.
Sapias que la junctura del ancha e la junctura del muscle no endeve sino dislocacio tant solament, e no accideys ad aquelas aquo que accideys a las autras juncturas de petita remocio e concavitat.	 If the joint of the large and the joint of the muscle do not become dislocated at all but only one or the other, it does not happen to both those joints in which there is some small relief and depression.
E la junctura de la ancha es dislocada segon quatre manieyras, quar es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, o a las partidas defora, o a las partidas denant, o a las partidas detras.	 When the joint of the knee is dislocated for four days, if it's dislocated at the front or back parts, or in between, then
E majorment es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, e pauc a las partidas denant o a las partidas detras.	 If it were dislocated to the sides, but not on top or bottom
E senhal de la dislocacio de lu a las partidas de dintz es quar, quan tu ajustas la camba del malaute sana am la malaute, es pus longua e·l denolh es pus heminent que de la sana, e·l malaute no pot doblar le sieu pe deves le lenguonar, e es le loc que siec le lengonar apostemat de apostema caut, per so que·l cap de la coyssa ja es pervengut aqui.	 If the dislocation occurs on one side of the patient's abdomen and you straighten their legs to ensure they don't turn over during surgery, it is customary for the surgeon to put a headrest in place that keeps them upright as much as possible during the operation.
E·l senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio es a las partidas defora, es que les accidentz de lu so contraris ad aquest accident.	 If the dislocation occurs on one side and you want to prevent it from happening again, then be aware that accidents like this often happen in such cases.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas denant es quar expan la camba sieua segon compliment, mays empero no dobla aquela ses dolor que es en le denol, e si se perforsa ad anar e no pot sobre aquo a las partidas denant; e la urina de lu es retenguda e l’engonar de lu es apostemat, e deves la ambulacio de lu sobre le talo.	 If the dislocation occurs on one side and you straighten their legs to prevent it from happening again, remember that doing so may stretch out the vein inside them, causing pain if performed incorrectly or too aggressively; keep an eye on their breathing as well, and ensure they stay still during surgery.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas detras es que no expande le denol, ni no puesca doblar aquel denant que doble le engonar, e la camba de lu es pus breva que l’autra, e l’engonar es mollificat, e·l cap de la coyssa es deves aquel loc.	 If the dislocation occurs on one side and you want to prevent it from happening again without stretching out the vein inside them too much or causing discomfort in their breathing during surgery, ensure that both legs are kept as short as possible, keep an eye on their breathing, and guide their head towards keeping still.
Mays reduccio de las specias de aquesta dislocacio es que tu consideras, lahoras, si la dislocacio es vetusta et antiqua, que ja es anticada am le havent aquela aprop tu aministras reduccio de lu e roman segon la sua disposicio, lahoras no es en aquela curacio de tot; e adonc no cove que en aquela sia fayta prosompcio.	 "The initial joint dislocation should be considered as a serious matter and you must take immediate action in order to avoid any further complications.
Mays en aquel del qual la dislocacio es recent, e es una de las quatre specias de dislocacio, lahoras te coyta ad aquo que volvas la junctura e extendas aquela a las partidas dedintz e a las partidas defora, e mau aquela a la dextra e sinistra, quar fort leu retorna e no indigeys de autra cura.	 "If the joint dislocation is recent and is one of the four types of dislocations, you should apply pressure to both sides in order to straighten it out, especially towards the right and left sides, as much as possible without causing any other injuries.
Mays, si no retorna en aquesta manieyra, lahoras cove que tu prepares ministre fort e extendas la camba de lu de la partida pus dejos, o am las suas mas, o am liament lo qual es liat sobre la camba desus le denol; e autre ministre extenda la ma de aquel desus enayssi que meta las suas mas dejos les titillics de lu; e aprop strenha am liament leon sobre la razit de la coyssa, e tengua autre ministre ters le extremitat del liament.	 "If the intestine or hernia has not returned in this way, then you should firmly press and extend the abdomen towards the exit point as much as possible, either by placing your hand on it or by using a pointed cautery. Also minister to stretch out the arm that is holding the intestines, so that both hands are free from any further complications.
E sia extencio de lu o de la partida dedintz a l’angonar a la partida de la furcula, o de la partida detras a la partida del dos.	 "And stretch out towards the upper or lower end of the intestine, depending on which one is causing the pain.
E sia la extencio de totz aquels en una veguada entro que·l malaute sia elevat am le sieu cos de terra e que romangua pendent.	 "And stretch out until the patient is elevated above the ground and remains in that position.
E aquesta specia de extencio es specia cominal a totas quatre.	 "This type of stretching is common to all four types.
E donc si la dislocacio retorna am aquo que havem dit, sira bo; e sino, lahoras es necessari a tota specia aquo que dire de la propria curacio.	 When the joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors
En la reduccio de lu propria, quan es dislocada, e la dislocacio es a las partidas dedintz, cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu latz sa; e aprop pausa les liamentz sobre la razit de la coyssa en aquel loc le qual entre le cap de la coyssa e·l loc que es dejos le langonar; e aprop exten le liament en sus de la part del angonar a la pus auta partida de la furcula.	 In the reduction of his own, when dislocated and dislocation is in the lower limbs, it should be held to support him from the base of the shoulder towards the neck region; and extend the limb on the opposite side of the sternum
E aprop autre ministre fort prengua les brasses de lu, e amerme le loc gros de la coyssa malaute e extenda a las partidas deforo per extencio vehement, quar aquela retorna en le sieu loc.	 Then apply strong pressure to his chest and try to force the big vein of the patient out towards the sternum; extend the limbs downwards vigorously until it returns to its place.
E aquesta specia es de pus leugiera curacio am la qual aquest membre es reduzit que las autres specias.	 This special method is used in cases where this limb has been reduced, compared to others.
Mays si es excusat sobre tu e no obezeys al entrament am aquesta specia de curacio de tot, lahoras cove que sian liatz les dos pes del malaute ensemps am liament fort, leugier, sobre amdos les talos e amdos les denols.	 If you are excused from participating in this special treatment of all limbs, the doctors will have to apply strong pressure on both legs and arms separately.
E sia la longitut de quascun de son par la quantitat de quatre ditz, e sia la camba malaute extenduda mays que l’autre per quantitat de dos ditz.	 The length of each one should be proportional to the amount of four inches, and the patient's leg should be stretched more than the other by two inches.
E aprop le malaute sia suspendut sobre le cap del fust, e que sia en la mayso; e sia la longitut de lu de la terra la quantitat de dos brasses.	 Then hold the patient's head down, and in the highest position; then extend his leg as far downwards as two fists will allow.
E aprop comanda a un jove fort que minuesca le cap de la coyssa, e sia suspendut am le malaute autre jove, e l’autre jove minuent la coysa am fortaleza empellesca, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	 "The servant should firmly grasp the head of the thigh, and hold it steady as they place another young man on top of the patient's other leg to support them, while a third one holds their hands in front to prevent the thighs from separating.
Mays en la reducio propria, quan es dislocacio a la partida defora, cove que·l malaute jaga sobre pug segon que havem recomtat en le havent gelbozitat; e sia strenhut le liament sobre la camba malauta propriament e sobre le pietz de lu.	 "And if the dislocation is to be reduced outside the body, hold the patient steady as you place another young man on top of them for support while a third one holds their hands in front.
E aprop dos fustz sian pausatz, la un als pes de lu, e l’autre al cap; e aprop sian pausatz fustz ajustatz al mieg del pueg ficat sobre·l qual draps humitz sian envolopatz, per so que·l malaute no sia dampnajat per que·l fust sia entre las coyssas de lu, per que deves la extencio a las partidas dejos no sia atirat.	 "And place the two hands gently on top of them; one on their head and another on their chest. Cover this with a cloth soaked in hot water to prevent the gout from coming out between their thighs.
E aprop quascun ministre extenda a la sua part, e·l metge am la sua ma enguala la reduccio segon l’art.	 "The servant should extend his arm towards its limb and the doctor holds it steady as they perform the reduction according to the art.
Donc, si obezeys a revercio, sira bo grandament; e sino, pausa sobre aquela diligentment e ayssi quo havem dit en gelbozitat per aquela engualment.	 "If it is obese and falls off, then do so greatly; if not, pause there diligently as you did in cautery for this same matter.
Mays cove que·l malaute jagua sobre les sieus latz sa quetament.	 The servant should hold the patient steady on their back to perform the reduction.
E quan la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras cove que la camba sia extenduda leugierament, e es segon aquesta meteyssa narracio sobre pueg; e le metge pause la palma de la sua ma dreyta sobre·l langonar malaute, e aprop coarte aquel am l’autra ma, e am aquela coartacio pausa aquel extendut a las partidas dejos a la partida del denol.	 "When the dislocation is to be reduced after the thighs have been separated, the servant should hold the patient steady by extending their legs and performing this surgery on them; then place the doctor's right hand over the injured man's chest and hold his left arm with that of another person as you gently extend all the separated parts.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas detras, lahoras no cove que·l malaute sia extendut a las partidas dejos, e es elevat sobre la terra; habantz cove que sia pausat sobre causa dura, ayssi cum cove le eyssament si l’ancha de lu es dislocada a las partidas defora, segon aquo que havem dit del jasement de lu sobre dos anchas; e es sobre la sua cara e les liamentz sian extendutz, segon que havem dit, no ha guayre.	 "If the dislocation is behind the patient's back, it must be kept from spreading to their buttocks and held elevated on a hard surface; if the eye has been dislocated outside of the sockets, as we mentioned earlier.
E cove que sia aministrada compressio am taula sobre le loc al qual yeys la junctura.	 "The compression must be applied directly to the area where the joint is located.
Donc cum la reducio es complida segon que cove — e·l senhal de la reduccio de lu no es amaguat a tu, e es que tu extendas del malaute doas cambas, e quan tu vezes aquelas enguals e le malaute extrenh la sieua camba e expandeys aquela ses excusacio, lahoras sapias que·l membre segon que cove es retornat — e lahoras tu ajusta doas coyssas e pausa empastre e extrenh am benda ayssi que la ancha no sia mauguda en alcuna de las partidas; e adheresca le malaute a repaus per tres dias o per quatre.	 "After the reduction is complete, and it cannot be undone by you, extend two cushions on each side, and when you press these cushions together, the intestine will come out of its cavity and expand into that area. And adjust both cushions so they are not too wide at any point; place a pillow between them to prevent their width from being too much in either direction.
E aprop deslia le liament e l’empastre, e compara la una camba am l’autra.	 "Remove the restraints and the pressure, and compare the two cushions.
Lahoras, si vezas aquelas enguals en vustament, lahoras sapias que la dislocacio ja es fermada, e adonc layssa le malaute anar.	 "If you have placed them correctly, then it is certain that the dislocation has been fixed, and at this point the intestine should return to its place.
E si vezas alcuna causa de mollificacio, lahoras tu retorna e emplastra aquel, e extrenh aquel segon la tua primiera strectura, e layssa aquel en tres dias.	 "If there is no cause for relaxation of the bowels, then you return and re-insert it into its place, and stretch it after your first insertion, holding it in for three days.
E aprop deslia aquel, e fay aquel tardar en ambulacio sobre quascu per alcus dias, entro que sia confortat.	 "The servant should lift up that thing, while the patient lies on it so as to prevent movement for a certain number of days until they are comfortable.
Capitol .xxxii.	 The twelfth capital letter X in Roman numerals.
De curacio de dislocacio del denolh.	 Care must be taken regarding the dislocation of the bones
Le denolh es dislocat segon tres manieyras, quar es dislocat a las partidas defora, e a las partidas dedintz, e a las partidas dejos mays a las partidas detras; e a las partidas denant no es dislocat.	 The bone can only be dislocated in the front or back third of its range, while it cannot move freely on either side of that range.
E le senhal de dislocacio de lu es que comandes al malaute que aplique la sua camba am la coyssa; lahoras sapias que·l denol es dislocat.	 The sign indicating dislocation is for the patient to apply his mattress on top of it, knowing that the bone will be dislocated.
E la restauracio de totas las manieyras de lu es que fassas cezer le malaute dreyt, enayssi que ja extenda la sieua camba, si pot sobre aquo; adherir le tieu dos a la cara de lu, e pausa le pe de lu entre les tieus pes; e aprop fay adherir le denol de lu am las tuas palmas, e rete aquelas entre les tieus ditz sobre le denolh de lu am fortaleza, e autre ministre extenda le sieu pe entro que·l denol retorne a son loc.	 The restoration of all the ranges is that you should put your mattress right on top of it, if possible; hold his hand to its chest and place his foot between both hands, with another servant extending from the bone towards the strong point in front of him, and another ministering upwards so that the bone returns to its place.
E senhal de reddicio de lu es que la sua camba adharesca am la coyssa am levitat no-laboroza.	 The sign indicating release is for the patient's mattress to be placed on top of it, without needing any effort.
E aprop emplastra aquel e fay adhirir la camba am la coyssa, e aprop lia aquelas emsemps am una benda per tres dias o per quatre, e aprop deslia aquelas.	 The servant should lift up that thing and place the mattress on top of it, with servants placed elsewhere for three or four days, as required.
E no uze le malaute de ambulacio per alcus dias, entro que sia sanat e cofortat.	 The patient should be moved around for a few days to ensure their well-being and comfort.
Mays si la reduccio de lu a tu es excusada, lahoras aministra fort extencio am liamentz dels quals en la curacio de la hancha precedit narracio.	 If the reduction of it is not allowed due to health issues related to the preceding narrative, then the pain should be addressed promptly in consultation with a physician.
Capitol .xxxiii.	 Chapter thirty-three.
De la curacio de la dislocacio del talo.	 Regarding dislocation of the bone.
Le talo alcunas veguadas es remaugut per petita remocio, e alcunas veguadas es dislocat segon compliment, e la dislocacio de lu es fayta o a las partidas dedintz o a las partidas deforo.	 A joint may be dislocated due to either slight or greater force trauma, and the dislocation is made by directing it towards or away from itself.
E le senhal de la dislocacio de lu es que vezes le talo imflat procedent a la partida a la qual es dislocat.	 The indication of the dislocation is when the bone becomes flat as a result of the direction in which it was dislocated.
Mays la curacio de la remocio de lu es de leugiera reddicio, e es que sia extendut am facilitat am las mas e sia engualhat entro que retorne.	 The treatment for removing a dislocation is to gently reduce or straighten it, and if possible should be returned immediately thereafter.
Mays en la curacio de lu quan es dislocat segon compliment, cove que fasses cezer le malaute dreyt, e tengua aquel un ministre fort e valent de la partida detras del dos de aquel en le mieg loc de lu.	 When a joint is dislocated for the second time, make sure to straighten it towards itself as much as possible, and place one hand behind that of the other in front of its location, so that you can move your leg away from it.
E aprop te tu am la tieua ma dreyta le pe de la pus sobirana part, e am la tua ma sinistra de la part pus dejos del pe en le loc de la cavilha.	 And then take the thumb of your right hand and place it on the very top of your left foot in the area of the heel.
E aprop atira le pe a tu am la tua ma dreyta, e aprop am la sinistra per dos veguadas, e aprop exten am la sinistra; e empelleys le pietz del pe am la dreyta deves la camba ses trebalh.	 Then raise your foot towards the right with your left hand and extend it as far as possible on its side, and place a cushion between the legs to support the back of your foot if necessary.
E fay aquo doas veguadas segon que havem comtat.	 And when it has taken effect.
E aprop empelleys le pietz del pe a la camba la tersa veguada, e tu es a la cavilha.	 You take hold of the foot's chest and pull gently towards you
Donc si retorna en una veguada o en dos segon aquesta manieyra, e si vezes le pe engualhat, es bo; e sino, lahoras sobre lu itera la operacio, quar aquel retorna.	 If returning in one or two movements and if the foot is gentle, good; otherwise, doctors will perform a new operation so that he returns.
Mays si a tu es prohibida la reduccio de lu am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu dos sobre terra, e estrenh un paysel mot en terra fermat, e que caja entre las coyssas de lu, e tu ja has envolopat sobre lu drap per so que no ledesca le malaute.	 If you are advised to reduce the size of the intestine that we have recommended, then place it on the ground gently and put a cushion firmly down there in case between the patient's thighs, and cover them with a cloth so they cannot escape from the patient.
E aprop le ministre de lu tengua las suas coyssas, e aprop autre ministre extenda le pe am las suas mas o am liament que lie sobre le col del pe; e aprop extenda aquel quascun ministre contre extencio del sieu par, e le payssel sia extant entre las coyssas del malaute retinent aquel, per so que·l cos de lu no sia atirat a las partidas dejos deves la sua extencio.	 The minister of the patient has its thighs extended and the other minister extends his leg towards his abdomen or to place it on top of his head; and the other minister holds onto him tightly between the patient's thighs so that the part of him does not leave out, because otherwise he will go outside.
E aprop le metge enguala la dislocacio am las sieuas mas, e autre ministre tengua la coyssa sana a las partidas dejos, quar la dislocacio retorna am la facilitat.	 The surgeon engages the dislocation of their hips and the minister holds onto the healthy leg at the point where it returns to its position easily.
E donc cum retorna la dislocacio e es declarada a tu la sanetat de la reduccio de lu, lahoras pausa emplastre e extrenh aquela am liamentz fortment, e ligua le pe am liament a la camba.	 And when the dislocation has been returned and it is declared that the reduction of him was successful, doctors stop grasping onto them tightly and tie his leg to the bed.
E cove que temes o te guardes dels nervis les quals so detras sobre le talo, per que le liament sobre aquel no sia vehement e leda aquel fortment.	 It means that you should protect the nerves behind your back from being crushed by leaning them against something to prevent them from becoming entangled and strained
E aprop layssa aquel per dos dias o per tres; e si le liament es mollificat, extrenh aquel.	 This suggests that after protecting the nerves you should leave it for two or three days depending on how much relief is experienced, and if the entanglement has been relieved then press them back into place
E aprop deslia aquel en le ters dia o en le quart, e prohibeys le malaute de anament per xl dias.	 This implies that after a day or two days of use you should start applying pressure again to press the intestines back into their original position and prevent them from coming out for at least another four days
Mays si es forsat de anar denant aquel spazi, no es fayta segurtat que la dislocacio no sia sobre lu dissolvuda e corrumpuda, e aprop aquo que no recipia curacio.	 If it's necessary to press that area in order to relieve the pain, make sure there is no dislocation or rupture of the intestine and apply pressure accordingly
E si accideys a lu apostema caut, lahoras cove que tu aministre en la cedacio de lu aquo en lo qual precedic la nostra narracio, en autre loc de curacio e de embrocacio, entro que sia remauguda.	 If you encounter a pointed cautery in the area described earlier for healing and anointing purposes, then proceed with care to another location where healing can be applied without any delay
Capitol .xxxiiii.	 This seems like an ending of some sort, possibly indicating the end of a chapter or section of the text.
De curacio de dislocacio dels ditz dels pes.	 For curing dislocation in the feet.
Cove que aquel qu’es dislocat sia engualhat am pauca extencio ses trebal; e aquo que no es dificil, abantz es leugier.	 If that which is dislocated only requires a little pressure to be put back into place easily, then let it go without trying too hard.
Mays si la dislocacio es en alcus nozes del dos del pe, lahoras cove que fassas cezer le malaute le sieu pe sobre loc engual de la terra o sobre taula, e sia estant ayssi cum si anava.	 If the dislocation is in between the two toes of the foot, the doctor would tell you to make the patient squeeze his foot down onto a flat surface like a table or ground and hold it that way as if they were walking on it.
E aprop tu sta de pes, e pausa le tieu pe sobre aquo que imineys de las juncturas, e aprop calca aquel am le tieu pe am vertut entro que retorne, e que vejas aquel ja engualhat e no aparesca en le loc eminencia.	 "When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
E aprop pausa dejos le ventre del pe de lu una taula que prengua tot le pe, a la qual sian dos caps, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent e ferma per tres dias; e aprop deslia aquel e fay aquel repausar de ambulacio per motz dias, entro que sia estrenhut e de reddicio sia assegurat.	 "Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out.
Capitol .xxxv.	 [No translation provided]
De las specias de dislocacio que sian faytas am plagua o am fractura o am quascuna ensemps.	 "Joint pain caused by dislocation, fracture or any other injuries.
Quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, e tu te perforssas en la curacio de aquela e en la restauracio de lu, motas veguadas succezeys la mort.	 "When a cause of the sort occurs and you take care to heal it and restore it as well as possible, but still do not succeed in keeping life.
E per aquo no cove que sobre la curacio de lu presuma, sino aquel que es savi en l’art, de lonc uzatge, misericordios e pietados, tardiu, no-ardit ni presomptuos; e que use en le comensament de medicinas que cedan apostemas cautz tant solament, e leyssa le malaute al divinal jutgament, sino ad aquel al qual speras salut de perdicio, am de la malautia alleviacio, e en la qual appareys alcuna speransa.	 "By this one should not presume to cure it himself, but instead seek the aid of a skilled physician who is compassionate and kind-hearted, slow in anger and patient; do not worry or be anxious about death; consult him for healing from hell's affliction, alleviation of ill fortune, and hope that no evil will come.
E adonc esforsa te tantost far de lu la reduccio en le comensament de la causa, denant que endevengua apostema caut.	 "But if you cannot find the cure for it at its source when seeking help from a physician.
E adonc si le membre retorna segon que volem, lahoras aministra regiment le qual ceda apostema caut e cura la plagua am aquo que conveneys a lu dels enguentz desiccatius.	 When it is necessary to return the intestine or hernia back into its cavity, and place your hand over that area to prevent the intestines from coming out.
E si dislocacio es am fractura e accideys en le os satagias separadas, lahoras tu perforsa le stement de lor, e fay en aquo so que havem dit en las malautias simplas de aquo que es precedit en les locz de aquels.	 If the dislocation is a fracture and occurs in separated limbs, then you should apply a cold compress to that area, do as I said earlier on the simple measures mentioned before those locations.
E guarda e esquiva segon la tua vertut aquel del intrament en las vias de temor segon que a tu es precedida la mia predicacio; quar aquo es milhor a tu deves le tieu Creator, e mays permanent a la tua gloria, e mays saludos al tieu cos verays aquels en le tieu temps.	 Remember to turn inward towards the innermost part of your faith after I have spoken my prediction; for this is more important than you should listen to your Creator, and may it be constant in your glory, and many greetings to him forevermore through these times.
Ayssi fineysso las paraulas de Albucasim perfieytament de las quals Dieus ne sia benezeyt.	 The words of Albasim are perfectly understood by God alone.
Amen.	 Amen
