Ayssi comensan las paraulas de Albucasim .	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body,
O, filhs, pus yeu he a vos complit aquest libre, le qual es le derier de la sciencia de medicina, per le compliment de lu so consequit la fi en lu, e per las exposicios de lu, e per las declaracios de lu, es a mi vist que yeu complesca aquel a vos am aquest tractat, le qual es partida de la operacio am ma, so es cyrurgia.	 Certainly, O fellow! Please complete this book which is the last of science and medicine for its completion in it and through its disclosures, and by its declarations, I urge you to please comply with that towards this treatise, as it is a part of surgery itself.
Quar la operacio am ma es prostrada en nostre regio e en nostre temps de tot privada, entro que fort leu peric la sciencia de lu, e le vistigi de lu es ostat; e no romasero de lu sino alcunas petitas descripcios en les libres dels Antics, les quals mudero las mas e endevenc ad aquels error e heyssitacio entro que son clausas las entencios de lu e es elonguada la forsa de lu e l’art.	 Certainly, O fellow! The operation is now closed in our region and time of private disclosure; it is very light on the science itself, and its witness has ended; and except a few descriptions in ancient books, which can be found, they will correct any errors and clarify any doubts about what we have learned from it and what follows.
E es vist a mi que yeu vivifique aquela am ordenacio de aquest tractat en aquela segon la via de exposicio e de declaracio e de abreviacio; e per que vengua am las formas dels ferramentz de cautheri e dels autres instrumentz de la obra cum sia per addicio de la declaracio, e per preparacio de lu, la qual causa es necessaria.	 Certainly! You should now translate this treatise following the way of disclosure and declaration, as well as abbreviation; and to be added are the forms of cautery tools and other instruments of that work with its addition of declaration preparation which is necessary.
Mays la causa per la qual no es atrobat bo artifex am la sieua ma en aquest nostre temps, es quar la art de medicina es longua, e que cove le sieu actor denant aquo esser excercitat en la sciencia de anotomia la qual recontec Gualia entro que sapia les juvament dels membres e las formas de aquels, e la conjunctio e la separacio de lor; e haia la conoyssensa dels osses, dels nervis e dels lacertz, e·l nombre de aquels, e la egrecio de lor; e de las venas pulsatils e de las quietas, e dels locs del eyssiment de lor.	 Certainly! The reason for which the artifex failed in our time is that the art of medicine is long and to know from which actor practicing this science anatomy as we continue with Galen into knowing the youth members forms and how they are connected, separated, and have their names listed with their roles.
E per aquo ditz Ypocras que am u nom es mot, mays en l’obra petit, e majorment en la art de la ma.	 "And for this reason Ypocras says that it is called 'major' in the small arts and 'minor' in the large ones.
Mays nos ja avem dit de aquel en l’introit de aquest libre; quar qui no es scient aquo que li avem dit de anotomia, no es evacuat que no caia en error per la qual siran mortz les homes, ayssi cum yeu he vist trops de aquels, quar alscus son formatz en esta sciencia e gettan se de aquela ses sciencia e ses experiment.	 "For those who do not understand the anatomy of this matter, they are in error and may die from it as well, just like someone has seen many examples where such things happen frequently when people have no knowledge or understanding of these sciences.
Quar yeu vi un metge folh e enperit aver incidit un apostema escrophilos en le colh de una femna, e incidic alcunas arterias del colh per que fluic gran sanc entro que la femna cazec morta entre las mas de lu.	 "When a surgeon found an abscess in the groin of a woman and incised some arteries from it to prevent large blood loss that could kill her among many.
E vi un autre metge que pres que el traguera una peyra d’un home le qual avia procesit en sa etat, e la peyra era gran, e venguet a lu e trayssec aquela peyra am un tros de la vesiqua, per que aquel home al tertz dia es mort.	 "Another surgeon decided to remove the tumor of a man in his state, and it was large, and he cut off part of his bladder so that the man would not die on the third day.
E yeu ja apelat fuy a estrayre aquela, e vi que per la grandesa de la peyra e per la disposicio del malaute conogui subre lu que morira.	 "You have already appealed to separate that, and saw that because of the size of the tumor and the condition of the patient, he would die.
E vi un autre metge le qual prenia stipendic de un duc de nostra terra per cyrurgia, e endeven a un crastrat negre le qual era deves lu fractura en la coyssa de lu; e perparec le metge am la sua ignorancia, estrayssec la fractura, sobre la plagua, am pulvinas e astelas am forta strectura, e no layssec a la plagua espiracio.	 "Another surgeon who took a stipend from our country for surgery, even set on a black castrating that was to be fractured in the chest of him; and because of his ignorance he fractured it instead over the lungs and the heart, causing him great pain.
E aprop le desliet segons los sieus desiriers, e aprop le relieg, e aprop le leyssec per alcus jorns e comandec que nos deslies le liament; e estec ayssi entro que la coyssa e·l pe foro apostematz, e pervenguet a perdicio.	 When the patient's desires are known and approved by you, open the door to the bedchamber, make preparations for intercourse, remove any coverings of the body, and after washing yourself properly, enter into it with your partner.
E yeu fuy apelat a lu, e aparelhegui a desliar le liament, e conseguida es tranquilitat e enayssi amermet de sas dolors.	 You have called upon him and he will open the door to make love, after which you both will find tranquility and forget your pains.
Mays empero ja corrupcio era confermada en le membre, per que no pogui refrenar aquela, e no cessec perambular la corrupcio en le membre entro que·l malaute peric.	 However, if the corruption is already established in a member and cannot be removed without causing harm to that member or any other part of his body.
E vi un autre metge le qual perforec un apostema cancros, e fo ulcerat aprop alscus dias, entro que foc magnificada la malicia de lu am lo senhor de lu.	 Another doctor who performed a cautery also inflamed the patient's feet after several days, and it was noticeable that he had malice towards his lord.
La qual causa es quar le cranc caut es pur de humor melencolic, lahoras no cove que pervengua a lu am ferr de tot, sino que sia an membre le qual suffertes que de tot fos hostat.	 The cause of which is cold humors is purely accidental and not all parts are affected; instead the part that suffers most from this is the one that was covered in it.
E per aquo, filhs, necessari es a vos que la operacio am ma sia devisada en dos devesios: so es en operacio a lu qual es associada salut, e en obra am la qual es perilh en las majors disposicios.	 For this reason you are advised to make two operations: one is for the member that is associated with health and another is for the part that is in greater danger.
E yeu ja he exsitat aquo en tot loc de aquest libre en le qual venc opperacio en la qual es error e temor; per que necessari es a vos que guardetz aquo e layssetz aquel, per que les folhs no atrobo via a parlar e a vos desonestar.	 You have already succeeded in this matter at that place where an operation was performed which was an error and fear: so you must keep it safe as well, to prevent others from speaking against your order or striking you.
E donc prenetz las vostras armas am sollicitut e am proteccio de Dieu , e les vostres malautes am falicitat e am fermetat.	 When you have opened a space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands, here comes
E usatz de la milhor via per la gracia de Dieu perdusent a salut e a lausabla successio, e laysatz las malautias terriblas de difficil sanacio, e ostatz las vostras armas de aquo que vos fa temer, per so que ysitatio en vostra fe e en le vostre nom no vos evasisca: quar mays es remanent a la vostra gloria, e pus aut en le mon e en derier a las vostras sanctitatz.	 Through the grace of God, may you find salvation and success in your lives, bear terrible evils with ease in healing, and bear your weapons that now cause terror upon you, so that through faith and by the name of Jesus Christ you will not perish: for how much more shall remain to your glory, and with the one and other among your saints.
Gualia ja diyssec en alcunas sieuas monicios:	 In regard to certain matters which
“No mediquetz malautia mala, per so que mals metges no siatz nompnatz”.	 No matter illness shall not be called ill doctors.
E yeu ja he devesit aquest libre segontz tres capitols.	 And you have to decide on three capitals.
Comensa la divisio del libre, e primier de la primieyra partida.	 Begin the division of liberty, and first of all choose a starting point
Le primier capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, en las formas dels instrumentz e en les ferrementz dels cauteris, e de aquo que necessari es en la opperacio.	 The first capital ordered from the bottom of the foot, in the forms of instruments and in the movements of the cautery, and that which is necessary for operation.
La divisio de la segonda partida.	 The division of the second part.
Le segon capitol, de siccio e perforacio, e de ventosas, e de plaguas, e de extractio de sagetas e de semblantz ad aquelas, tot capitolat e ordenat de las formas dels instrumentz.	 The second capital, from which hole to make a perforation, and of the vein, and of the plague, and of the extraction of scales and of the arrangement with those on top, all capitals ordered in the forms of instruments.
Divisio de la tersa partida.	 Division of the thread
Le tertz capitol, de restauracio e de dislocacio, e de curacio de torcio e de semblantz ad aquels; capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, e de las formas dels instrumentz.	 The third capital is to repair and move around it, and the act of straightening and straightening it.
De cauteri am foc e am medicina aguda e rememoracio de la opperacio.	 Cautery warm up and acute medicine and the memory of the operation.
Am aquel comensa le tractat de tot le libre.	 At that point, start the treatise on everything free.
Cove que yeu digua la qualitat dels juvamentz de aquel cauteri e dels noccumentz de lu, e en qual compleccio sia prohibit cauteri.	 Determine what kind of incision you need to make with cautery and how deep it should be, and in which combination is prohibited cautery.
Donc dic que·l sermo de la qualitat del juvament de cauteri e del noccument de lu es sermo lonc e prolixs, e subtil per sciensa, e secret amaguat; e ja de lu a parlat gran multitut de savis, e de lu se son desacordatz, et a mi abasta un petit dels sermons de lor, temen perlonguacio.	 The vocabulary of the quality of youth and the quantity from it is long and prosaic, subtle in nature, and secret.
E donc dic que cauteri comfereys a tota compleccio universalment la qual es am materia o ses materia, exceptat dos compleccios, las quals son compleccios caudas ses materia .	 Cautery is used universally as the material or materials it contains, except for two combinations.
En la compleccio cauda e secca am materia se desecordero; quar alcus dyssero que cauteri es juvatiu ad aquela, e les autres dyssero le contrari de aquel, que cauteri no es convenient en malautia la qual es per qualiditat e per siccitat, quar natura del foc es qualiditat e siccitat, e enconvenient es que malautia cauda e secca am aquo que es caut e sec sia sanada.	 In the combination of dry and hard materials it is burned; if any one of them should be too young to that, and others should be contrary to that, cautery not suitable in bad weather due to its quality and dryness.
E diysec aquel que ditz le contrari de aquel, que per cauteri es fayt juvament en tota malautia cauda e secca que ve en les cors dels homes, quar quan tu comparas le cors de home e las humiditatz de lu a la compleccio del foc, atrobas le cors de home freg.	 And so it is contrary to that, because for cautery is always young in all bad weather hard and dry parts of the body where when you compare the body of man and the humidity of him with the combination of fire, you see the body of men burned.
E yeu dic per le sermo de aquel, que esperiment aquo ja a mi alscunas vetz a descubert.	 When the pain of the joints is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, then it is customary to call it gout among doctors
Mays empero no cove que vengua sobre aquo aquel que ja es exproat e excersitat en le capitol de cauteri per derier exercici, e a conogut la diversitat de la compleccio dels homes e la disposicio de las malautias en lor meteyssas, e las causas de aquelas, e·ls accidentz de lor, e l’espasi del temps de aquelas.	 This sentence is very difficult to translate since it doesn't have a direct equivalent in English and its grammar and structure are not similar to Latin or any other language I can think of at the moment. It seems like an attempt to convey complicated medical information, possibly related to joint pain or exercise routines for some ailment that affects men specifically.
Mays en las autras compleccios, no es sobre vos temor, e majorment en las malautias fregas e humidas, quar ja totz les metges se son acordatz sobre aquels, e no so desecordatz en le juvament am cauteri en aquelas.	 This sentence suggests that complications arise in the joints when cold humors or damp conditions are prevalent and doctors often agree on this issue but may not always prioritize it early during examinations for other ailments.
E sapiatz, filhs, que del secret de curacio per cauteri am foc e de la bontat de lu, so sobre cauteri am medicina comburent, es quar le foc es simple, la accio del qual no perven sino al membre le qual es cauterizat e no notz al autre membre am lu ajustat sino am petit nocument.	 This sentence implies that when focusing on care and curing of ulcers, the warmth or heat applied during cautery is crucial for its effectiveness but only to the part being treated and not spread to other parts of the body unless specifically intended as a preventive measure.
Mays la accio de medicina comburent perven ad aquel en les membres le qual de lu alunhat, e fort leu fa venir en le membre malautia de dificil sanacio e fort leu ausit.	 This sentence suggests that the application of medical remedies is applied to those affected members and may cause side effects or complications in other parts of the body if not used carefully.
Mays le foc, per la sua sublimitat e de la sua substancia bontat, no fa aquo sino que superfluisca E ja es a nos conogut per experiment e per longitut de servitut de studi am l’art sobre le veritat de las causas; e per aquo yeu so excusat de la longitut del sermo E si no fos que no es legut al mieu libre en aquest pausero a vos secret amaguat am le foc, e la qualitat de la operacio de lu en les cors e de la sieua expulcio per la qual expellis las malautias, am sermo philosophic demostratiu, le qual siria acuit en las vostras pessas.	 This sentence suggests that heat has its own properties and substance that are beneficial but can also be harmful if not used properly. It encourages experimenting with different methods of truth discovery related to its effects in the body's organs or expulsion of ailments, as the text implies it would be demonstrated by philosophers as a virtue in illnesses.
E sapiatz, filhs, que els se desacordan del temps en le qual es convenient far cauteri e pausan le milhor temps de primaveyra.	 When doctors decide to perform cautery it should be done at a moment that is most advantageous in terms of healing time
E yeu dic que cauteri es convenient en tot temps, per so que le nocument per le temps accident es submergit en le juvament de aquo que am le cauteri es atirat, e majorment si le cauteri es per dolors o de dolors necessaries, fortz e fistinas, las quals no suffertan tarditat per so que es temut de aquelas que vengua malicia, que es major que petit nocument entrant per lo temps.	 You are saying that cautery should be performed at any time, in order to prevent the discomfort caused by waiting for a longer period of time, especially when it's about urgent pains or necessary pains which would otherwise take too long and cause discomfort, therefore making it advisable to perform cautery quickly.
E aysso no catz en vostras pessas, o, filhs, aquo no estiman sino le poble vulguar e les fols metges, so es que ad aquela malautia que es sanada per cauteri no es redicio tot temps, e pausan aquel consequen.	 You are saying that doctors should not perform cautery on those who do not accept or support the general population and its physicians, because if cautery were to be performed when necessary it would cause long periods of waiting time for healing which could lead them to regret their choice.
E la causa no es ges ayssi quo els cuydan per aquo, quar cauteri no es sino en loc de medicina la qual altera la compleccio e esicca las humiditatz las quals son causa per que veno las dolors.	 The cause is that the cautery procedure itself changes the body composition and affects the humidity levels which are a cause of pain
Mays empero cauteri superflueys sobre la medicina per volicitat de la sua valitut e vertut de la sua operacio e grandesa del sieu senhor.	 However, cautery should be performed very carefully to ensure the well-being and health of its patient as it involves a significant surgical operation.
E es possible que la sua malautia retorne en alcuna hora del temps, segon la compleccio del malaute e la locacio de la sua malautia, e la vertut de lu, e aquo que es preparat en le cors de lu de la agreguacio de las superfluitatz en lu, e aquo que es pervengut a lu en la sua acquisicio en viandas e semblantz de aquelas causas; sino que la malautia en la qual sia aministrat cauteri sia malautia subtil en membre de paucas superfluitatz e humiditatz, ayssi cum cauteri de dent per dolor e semblantz ad aquel, possible es que en lu no retorne aquela dolor, mays aquo se fa en petitz.	 It is also possible that the pain may return at a later time due to the composition of the patient and its location within the body, as well as the fluids in their body which have caused the pain, therefore it would be advisable not to perform cautery if necessary, so that there will never be any pain recurrence.
E mays sermo vulgar es que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, e es sermo dreyturier, no ad aquo que els entendo en lu, quar els crezo que no es curacio que aprofieyta am medicina ni am autra causa aprop cauteri.	 When the vulgar language is about cauterization being a remedy for medicine, it seems rather strange that I cannot understand what you mean here as to whether or not you believe this to be an appropriate use of cautery in addition to medical care.
E la causa es en contrari de aquo; e la entencio que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina no es sino quan administram las manieyras de curacio en alcunas malautias, e aquelas medicinas no conferieysso, e aprop en la fi de la causa aministra hom cauteri, e aprofieyta ad aquela.	 The cause is contrary to this; and I understand that cauterization being a remedy for medicine only applies when administering the methods of cure in certain ailments, such medicines do not confer benefit, and at the end of the cause administer cautery along with it.
E lahoras de aqui cat16 que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, no segon la entencio la qual entendo les vulgars e trops dels fols metges.	 The pain caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body is known to doctors as gout.
E diyssero les antics que cauteri am aur es milhor que cauteri am ferr, e no diyssero aquo sino per la equalitat del aur e sublimitat de la sua sustancia.	 The ancients believed that cautery was the most important treatment for cauterizing, and they did not do it only for its equality in nature with its substance.
E diyssero que le loc de cauteri no fa brac, cum aquo no sia absolutament vertat, quar yeu ja he aquo proat e he atrobat que aquel no fa aquo sino en alcus cors ses les autres, e cauteri am aquel es bo e milhor que am ferr ayssi quo els diyssero; mays empero quan tu fas cauteri am foc am de aur, no es a tu declarat, quar es egnit segon la quantitat que tu vols per la rugor de l’aur, e quar prepara a recebre freg; e si ajustas sobre lu ignicio se fon l’aur per le foc, e caso en le foc alcunas laminas per que le artifex catz per la occupacio de aquel.	 When performing cautery with fire on the eye, make sure not to declare it and prepare to receive it; if you adjust over it ignites it in the fire, which may cause blisters from the cauterizer causing an occupation of that part.
E per aquo es fayt cauteri am ferr deves nos pus leugerament e pus propdanament a rectitut de operacio.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
E yeu ja he ordenat aquest capitol en le cauteri segon capitols, et he ordenat aquels del cap entro les pes, per so que aleugo le demandant aquo que vol de lu.	 You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
De cauteri de dolor de cap per frigiditat e humiditat.	 To cauterize the pain in the head due to coldness and humidity.
Le capitol primier.	 The first sentence.
Aquesta cauterizacio confereys a la humiditat e frigiditat sobre le servel accident de la qual so doas causas, so es causa de soda e multitut de flux raumatic, apelat corissa, del cap a las partidas dels huelhs e de las aurelhas fluent, e multitut de dormir, e de dolor de dentz e del guolayro, e universalment de tota malautia que ve per fregiditat, ayssi cum paraliticament, sodo e apoplexio, e semblantz en aquelas malautias.	 This cauterization is caused by coldness and humidity on the surface of the body which can lead to a variety of symptoms such as severe headaches from the top of the head to the soles of the feet and palms of the hands, difficulty sleeping, pain in teeth and gums, and overall weakness throughout the entire body.
La forma de aquesta cauterizacio es aquesta, que primieyrament comandes al malaute que sia evacuat am medicina lacsativa le cap mondificant, per tres o per quatre nueytz, segon que exhigeys la vertut del malaute e la edat de lu e la sua costuma.	 The form of this cauterization is to command the patient to remove himself from a hot bath for three or four days next until exhaustion and then examine his face, ears, eyes, nose, throat, and other areas to ensure that he has no other ailments.
E aprop comanda li que raza le sieu cap am razor, e aprop fay aquel sezer entre las tuas mas sobre una banca cayrada e que pause las suas mas sobre le pietz sieu.	 You command him to shave his head and place a bandage between your hands on the table so that you can place it over his chest.
E aprop pausa la razit de la tua palma aprop le pous sobre la razit del nas entre les huels sieus.	 Place a cushion under their thighs, another on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands
Mays empero, cum le tieu dit del mieg loc es pervengut, signa aquel loc am tenta, e aprop igneys le cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma:	 And if the tongue was found in a different location, please note that location and try to use olive oil as the cautery.
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le loc senhat am tenta, a manieyra que descent, am la qual la tieua ma sia constrengida petit a petit, e tu revolveys aquel.	 And place it on top of that location, make sure you're standing straight and try to gently move it there.
E aprop leva la tua ma leugerament e reguarda le loc, e si veses ja del os esser descubert alcuna quantitat del cap, ayssi cum la quantitat de gra de errs, lahoras eleva la tua ma, e si no torno la tua ma am aquel ferr, am autre de aquel, si es enfrigidat, entro que sia vist del os aquo que yeu he dit a tu.	 And gently lift your hand and look at the location, if you find that there is some amount of fat on top, then increase the size gradually as well, and if it does not come off easily, try another part or method, depending on whether they are frozen or not.
E aprop pren un petit de sal e disolveys aquel sobre le loc e leyssa aquel per tres jorns.	 And sprinkle a little salt over the location and leave it there for three days.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto enbegut en boder e leyssa aquel sobre lu entro que sia destrusida la scara del foc.	 And place it on top of your forehead and let it sit there until the area is completely dry from the heat.
E aprop cura le loc am anguent tetrafarmacon entro que sia sanat.	 And take care of the location with tetra-farmacón, which should be safe.
E ja diyssero que quant la plagua roman uberta, tant mielhs geta le brac, per que es milhor e mays juvatiu.	 When the plague is gone and many people get better quickly, it's most fortunate and most youthful.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia cauterizada la codena entro al os, e sia tengut le cauteri entro que sia adhurida alcuna partida de la specitut del os.	 And do not let the cautery on top of your nose become too dry and cause any damage to its surface.
E aprop sia ras aquo que es adhust del os, e aprop sia curat.	 When pain occurs in the feet (gout), it is customarily called gout by doctors.
E diyssero autres que am lo cauteri pervengua al derier, entro que enprema en le os forta enprecio entro que le os caga, e aquesta es la forma de alphecati petit:	 When a pointed cautery is used on the buttocks to release pain that has spread there.
E estiman de aquel loc expiran la vapors del cap.	 It's believed in this location the cold humors are released.
E sia tenguda la plagua uberta per lonc temps, e aprop sia curada entro que sia consolidada.	 The bandage was applied for a long time and is now cured.
Mays a mi no so vistas aquestas doas specias de cauteri de tot, sino en alcus homes segon via de temor; e layssa aquel, deves mi, milhor es am salut, quan es; quar le cap es develitat per solucio de continuitat de lu ayssi cum havem testificat en les autres membres, e majorment quan le cap del malaute es de freul natura.	 If you do not find any specific cautery points anywhere else, but if the head is affected in a way that worries or frightens you, and it is necessary for the solution of continuity to continue as has been testified by other members more frequently when the head of the patient is naturally flat
E la specia de cauteri primieyra es mays salva e milhor deves mi; e de aquela husi e am aquela obra am salut.	 The first specific cautery point to be used should be saved, and in this way best possible solution is given.
Capitol segon.	 Second.
Del cauteri del cap.	 Of the head cautery points.
Quan en tot le cap accideys dolor cronica e longua e aquo es en le malaute prolonguat, e usa de gerras e de cochias e de capipurges e de emplaustres e de guatz e de cadels e de gualinas e de semblantz, e majorment si ja es cauterizat am un cautere le qual recontam e no aprofieyta a lu deguna de aquelas causas, lahoras considera quar si le cap del malaute es de fort creacio en la sua natura; e no es freul et atroba mot gran freg, lahoras aquel cauterisa am autra cauteri dejos aquel un pauc.	 When the chronic pain of the head becomes prolonged and it is in a patient with a flat head, use cauteries such as cauteries on the legs, buttocks, back, chest, elbows, wrists and forehead. And most often if the cause was cauterized to another cautery that does not heal or remove the causes mentioned above, doctors consider whether the head of the patient is naturally flat. If it is not flat, they would cauterize with another cautery from below.
E aprop cauterisa aquel sobre le corn del sieu cap am cauteri entro que la codena es partida.	 When it concerns the forehead between two people who wish to kiss each other's cheeks, then an opening is made by a pointed cautery.
Incisa la codena e sia descuberta del os la quantitat la qual havem recontat e cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en la partida deriera del cap en le loc le qual es apelat vas, — e es aquel loc en le qual es pausada ventosa.	 Insert the opening and let it be opened by a pointed cautery in the part of the head where it is called "the parting" - and this opening is being held shut
Et alleuja la tua ma en aysso, e no descobras le os, quar le malaute per aquo atroba mot gran dolor diversa de la dolor de totz les autres cauteris del cap.	 And spread your hand in that way and do not open the mouth, because the patient is experiencing great pain from this different to all other cauteries of the head
E yeu diyre aquest cauteri en son loc, quar cove que·l cauteri am le qual so cauterisatz les corns del cap e le occiput es pus subtil cauteri que aquel am le qual es cauterisat le mieg loc del cap; e aquesta es la forma de lu.	 You are to direct this cautery to its place, which is the cautery of the head and the occipital area that has a more subtle kind of cautery, as such one located at the back of the head; it's called the occipital cautery
Capitol ters.	 And there you are
De cauterisacio de emigranea no-antiqua.	 Cautery procedure is not antique.
Quan endeve en la partida del cap dolor sodo, o es stenduda dolor entro al uelh, sia evacuat am medicinas le cap mondificantz, e sia aministrada l’autra curacio, la qual yeu he dita en las devesios de las malautias; e tot no aprofieyta, lahoras cauterisacio en lu es en dos manieyras: o cauterisacio am medicina acuta comburent, o am ferr.	 When the pain in the head is severe or occurs between the eyebrows, then the patient must be treated with a strong medical treatment, and if necessary another cure will also be applied; it's not preferable to wait until the pain stops, because the cautery procedure should either involve acute medicine, or
Mays cauteri am medicina comburent es que tu prenguas una dolsa de alh, e escorgas aquela e abcindas las extremitatz de lu de amdos les caps.	 The cautery procedure using acute medicine is that you press a small amount of alum into the patient's hand and apply it to both temples of their head.
E aprop incideys le loc de la dolor en la templa am una lanceta lada entro que sia en lu feyt loc dejos la codena, entro que sia occultada.	 When joint pain infiltrates each part of the body, causing pain in the feet, it is traditionally referred to as gout by doctors.
E aprop strenh sobre lu am stopada per descent constreccio, e layssa aquel per le spazi de tres horas; e aprop deslia le e tratz le alh, e laysa la plagua per dos o per tres jorn, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto submergit en boder entro que le loc fassa brac.	 Then tighten the bandage around the affected area, leaving it in place for three hours; and apply a poultice with two or three times daily, keeping its surface moist to prevent maceration of the skin at the site of application.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	 Then take care of him as soon as he is well.
E si tu voys, fe aquo am alcunas medicinas comburentz las quals yeu he scriutas en le douse tractat de medicinas comburentz.	 If you have any medicines that you used in the previous treatise on medical remedies, please list them here.
Mays la cauterisacio am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: igneys per cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	 The second method of cautery should be as follows: apply a cauterizing device of the type mentioned below to the affected area
e es apelat claus clavilhs, quar le cap de lu es ayssi cum forma de clavel en le qual es alcuna curvitat, e·n le mieg loc de lu es eminensia petita.	 It is called a corkscrew, in which shape the head of it resembles that of an awl and its middle part is slightly bent.
E aprop pausa sobre loc de la dolor, e rete la tua ma — per que no sia adhurida la arceria la qual es dejos — e revol le ferr petit a petit am velocitat.	 Then pause on the affected area, and remove your hand - to prevent injury from applying too much force  - and gradually reduce its size over time.
E si la quantitat de lu que es adhurida per la specitut de la codena ayssi quo la maytat de lu, e elava la tua ma per so que la arteria no sia adhurida la qual es dejos, per so que no vengua flux de sanc.	 If the amount of force required to puncture the bandage is greater than what your hand can apply without causing injury, remove it and reapply a new one until there is no further bleeding.
E aprop enbibeys coto en aygua de sal e pausa aquel sobre le loc, e layssa aquel per tres dias; e aprop pausa coto mulhat am boder, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	 When you have opened the space between the patient's thighs and placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands, you will now administer a decoction of salt water to that area for three days; and after that, treat with mulhat oil on the body part so as to make it whole again.
E si voys, cauterisa am la extremitat del cutellari segon cauteri, e guarda te de incisio de arteria en aquesta emigranea propriament no-antiqua.	 If you are going to burn the extremity of the finger with a cautery, make sure that artery incision is not made in this part of the body especially on an ancient site
Capitol quart.	 The fourth quarter.
De cauterizacio d’emigranea antiqua.	 Ancient artery cautery.
Quan tu curas emigranea am aquo que havem dit de la curacio precedent, e aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias, e no aprofieyta la curacio, e vezes per la malautia que no abasta a lu aquo que havem dit del primier cauteri am medicina o del cauteri am foc, lahoras cove que tu igniscas le cauteri cutellar entro que sia albificat, pus que significas sobre le loc de la dolor am linha de longuesa de la qual sia la maytat del dit, o quays aquel; e depausa la tua ma per una veguada e strenh aquela entro incidiscas la arceria e pervengua entro al os.	 When you cure an emigrane artery as described in the previous care and in the divisions of malautias (the same as before), but if you fail to do so, then pay attention that this cautery should be used only when the ulcer or hernia is healed well enough for its incision to heal properly. After placing your hand over the site of pain along the length of the ulcer or hernia, apply a poultice and wait until it becomes warm and stiff; then gently cut into the artery and pull out through the nose.
Empero necessari es a tu que guardes de la continuacio de la mandibula, la qual es mauguda deves la masticacio, e que le lacert no sia adhurit e le nervi le qual mau aquela, e que no s’endevengua espasme.	 However, it is necessary to also guard against the continuation of the mandible which can cause difficulty in chewing and may irritate the nerves that control that area, and prevent a spasm from occurring.
E si es sobre la custodia e cautela de flux de sanc de l’arteria que es abciza, quar en la abcizio de lu es temor, e majorment ad aquel le qual ignora aquo que fa e no es studios e esproat; e layssa la operacio en lu al comensament.	 When the arteries are blocked with cold and hard blood flow occurs in the patient, who is terrified, and most importantly, those who do not know what to do and are unprepared, let this operation begin
E yeu vindre am rememoracio del regiment de flux de sanc accident de la arceria segon la sieua manieyra, en le sieu loc de aquest libre.	 You will remember the order of blood flow accidents in the arteries following a particular method
E si veses de aquesta malautia que no abaste aquest cauteri e veses le cors del malaute tollerable, cauteriza aquel en le mieg loc del cap ayssi cum havem recontat, e cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	 If you find that the disease is not controllable with this cautery and you find it necessary to cauterize elsewhere on the head as well
E si voys, aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le capitol de streccio de arceria am cauteri havent dos cotels, e es milhor cauterizacio aquesta e mays conferent.	 If you find that there are two blockages in the arteries of the chest as well, and it is more advisable to perform this operation here than elsewhere.
Capitol .v.	 The heart
De cauterisacio de las dolors de aurelhas.	 Cauterization of the pains of the heart.
Quan en la aurelha ve dolor per freg e es curat am causas lacsativas e am l’autra curacio la qual he dita en la divisio, e no es remauguda la dolor, lahoras igneys le cauteri, e es aquest le qual ha nom puncta, del qual aquesta es la forma:	 When the earache arises from cold and hard causes that cannot be cured with the previous cautery or another cauterization done in a division, if the pain is not relieved by this one either, doctors will call it a point
E aprop puncta aprop la ignicio, e sia menat al enviro de tota la aurelha ayssi cum roda es revolguda, o en le circuit de quascuna essemps si la dolor es en quascuna.	 Then apply the pointed cautery to all parts of the ear so that it is turned around or in the circuit of each attempt if the pain occurs in any one part.
Alonga te am le cauteri de la razit de la aurelha pauc a pauc pus que aias senhat le loc am tenta.	 "When you hold it tightly on the edge of her navel, you will feel its tip approaching.
E si le cauteri de detz puntz en tota aurelha, e quays aquela, e aprop cura les locz entro que sian sanatz.	 If you place a point on the entire areola and also above it, then apply pressure to the spots inside where they are sore.
Capitol .vi.	 13
De cauterizacio de turtura.	 Treatment for burns
Turtura la qual es curada e am cauterizacio no es sino de las specias las quals veno per flecma, segon que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias.	 Burn treatment is the application of ointments and cauteries that come from the veins as we mentioned in the sections on wounds.
Esquiva cauterizacio de la specia que endeve per siccacio o per spasme del nervi.	 Cautery for a rash or spasm caused by dryness or nerve tension.
Quan tu curas aquela specia de turtura am jerras e capipurgi e guarguarismes, e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas le malaute am tres cauteris: la i deves la razit de la aurelha, e·l segon un petit dejos le sieu templar, e le ters deves la conjunccio de doas labias.	 When you treat this rash with care and attention, apply three cauteries in a specific order: first the edge of her navel, then place another on your temple, and thirdly place two more on both lips.
E pausa lo tieu cauteri per le contrari de la partida malauta, quar mollificacio no ve sino en la partida que apar sana.	 Pause before applying any cauteries to prevent the rash from worsening in the part that has already been affected.
E la forma de cauterisacio es que cauterizas aquel am le cauteri en le dreyt de la extremitat de la aurelha pus sobirana un petit sobre le corn del cap, e en le templar autre, la longuesa del qual sia segon la longitut del dit pous, e depausa la tua ma am cauteri entro que sia comburida la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena.	 The way to apply the cautery is to put it on the right side of her areola and above a small portion of her forehead, then another on her temple, making sure that the length of it corresponds with the length mentioned earlier, as well as applying pressure until all the moisture from the affected area has been evaporated.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri, e es specia del cutellari, la forma del qual es denant mesa.	 This is a method of cauterization, especially for the surgeon's use, which we call mesha.
Mays empero pus subtil es que aquel un pauc ayssi co vesas; e cove que cotel en lu de superflua groceza un pauc.	 The caution is that excessive moisture may cause a small amount to be superfluous fat.
E aprop cura le loc am aquo que es denant procezit entro que sia sanat.	 And you should apply it with great care, so as not to cause harm when performing the procedure.
Capitol .vii.	 Thank you!
De cauterizacio de apoplextia antiqua.	 The ancient method of cauterization for apoplexy
Quan apoplextia es antiquada e curas aquela am aquo que havem dit e no confereys la tua medicacio e le malaute no ha febre, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris: sobre totz les corn del sieu cap; e am cauteri e le mieg loc del cap, ayssi cum havem dit; e am cauteri en le coguot.	 When ancient apoplexy occurs and you follow that method without contradicting the physician's advice or the patient not having a fever, then cauterize all the veins of his head; also cauterize the place on the top of his head where it was mentioned; and cauterize in the groin.
E la manieyra del cauteri es fayta segon que es desus dit.	 The method for cauterization is as stated.
E ja es cauterizat sobre la boca del estomac; e es mays derier; e aprop sia curat am aquo que procezeys.	 It has been cauterized on the stomach's mouth, it is being performed by many doctors and with great care.
Capitol .viii.	 Thank you!
De cauterizacio de obblivio fayta per flacma.	 The ancient method of cauterization for oblivius in a flare-up.
Cove que sian donatz al malaute en le comensament jerras grans e pilulas le servel mondificantz.	 Give the patient large and small pills, so they will swallow the bitter medicine easily.
E aprop ras le cap tot del malaute e pausa sus le coguot de lu emplaustre de cetre descrit en le tractat dels emplastres.	 Apply it all over the body of the patient and place a cloth on his groin as described in the treatise on ulcers.
E pausa aquel alcunas veguadas, quar aquel es manieyra de cauteri.	 When the joints ache due to cold humors, each part of the body will suffer from it, especially in the feet.
E fay aquo segon aquel meteys orde le qual ja he dit.	 And here comes another symptom that I've already mentioned.
E donc si per aqueles sanat bo es; e sino, lahoras fay a lu tres cauteris en la deriera partida de sieu cap, les quals sian deysendentz de la partida pus sobirana del cap entro a la partida pus dejos del col.	 If the patient's health is good (except for gout), then do three punctures on the forehead, between the eyebrows; one above and below each ear;
E pausa entre quascun cauteri la grossetut del dit, e aprop cura lo cauteri am aquo que es procedit.	 Wait a moment while I make the puncture with that needle which has been used for this procedure.
Mays si tu vos addicio e le malaute es aquo tollerant, lahoras fay a lu cauteri en le mieg loc; e si voys major addicio, lahora cauteriza aquel sobre les dos corns.	 If your patient is tolerating the pain very well then make a puncture in the middle of his legs; and if you find that they are more sensitive, make two punctures on both sides of their groin.
Aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat; e sia le cauteri olivar segon la forma denant donat.	 Here comes another sentence to translate. Do not add any comments like "here is the translation", just reply with the guessed translation and nothing else:
Capitol .ix.	 When the joints ache due to cold humors, each part of the body will suffer from it, especially in the feet.
De cauterisacio de parazili e de mollificacio de tot le cors.	 The cauterization and the application of a hot compress over all the body.
Cove que tu procesiscas en mondificacio del cap am jerras e am aquo que havem dit; e aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap, e am cauteri sobre totz les corns del cap, e am cauteri sobre la deriera partida de lu, e am tres cauteris sobre les spondils del col.	 Make the punctures on both temples between the eyebrows; one above and below each ear; do it on the forehead in front of his head, and make two punctures on both sides of his groin; do three punctures on the back and the spine of the buttocks.
E si es necessari en la malautia de mollificacio del cors de trops aquel e les malautes tollerantz e la malautia es fort, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e dererament am cauteri entro que sia comborit de la codena mot de lu, e aleva la tieua ma.	 "When the pain in gout is severe and affects both legs, doctors apply four points on either side of the knee.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat, e aquest sia cauteri olivar.	 "Then they carefully remove it from there, wiping off any remaining fluids with a cloth or paper towel.
Capitol .x.	 I am sorry, but the text you provided seems to be incomplete and difficult to translate accurately without further context. Could you please provide more information about what comes before this sentence?
De cauterisacio de epilemcia.	 "The removal of all four points from around the knee.
No es cauterizat le epilemtic sino aquella epilemcia es per flecma.	 "It is not cauterization but epilation that comes next.
E donc cove que mondifiques le cervel de lu al comensament de lu am yeras e am l’autra curacio la qual havem dicta en la divisio quan le malaute es gran e es tollerant la exceperacio de las medicinas.	 "Then, after examining the cause of their pain and considering whether to perform an operation or not, they explain that in case of a severe gout affecting many joints, the excision of all four points is performed.
E si es enfant le qual no sufferte las medicinas, lahoras aministra guarguarissmes e mastiguatoris le servel mondifican, denant aquo per motz dias, am bonifficacio de las viandas.	 "If the medicine does not work and they are still suffering from severe pain, doctors apply a treatment of fasting and diet to improve their health.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en le mieg loc del cap segon la manieyra precedent, e am autre cauteri en le occiput de lu, e sobre quascun corn del cap sieu cauterisa.	 "Then they carefully open the top of the patient's head, and apply a point on each side at the temple behind their ear. Then another point is applied to the occipital area.
E si le malaute es fort e es tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteris les quals he ditz, en havent paraliticament e mollificacio del cors sobre les spondils del col e les spondils del dos.	 "When the pain is very severe and affects many joints as well, doctors perform cauterization at each side of the hips and legs.
E sia cauteri olivar segon qu’es precedit.	 And here begins the second part of it...
Mays si le malaute es enfant, lahoras pausa cauteri subtil segon aquesta manieyra.	 If the patient is a child, the doctor should apply a subtle cautery after this manner
Capitol .xi.	 Chapter 10.
De cauterizacio de melencolia.	 The cautery for melancholy.
Quan las causas de melencolia so humiditatz corrompudas e flacma gros, lahoras cauteriza aquel am les cauteris les quals havem ditz en le havent paralisi.	 When the causes of melancholy are moist and flaccid, the doctor cautorizes that area with the cauteries which were mentioned in Chapter 9.
E si la causa de melencolia es superfluitat declinant a melencolia, e le cors del malaute es humit, lahoras da ha beure aquo que mundifica le cervel de lu segon aquo que ha precedut en la divisio.	 If the cause of melancholy is to decline into melancholy, and the body of the patient becomes wet, the doctor should drink this which purifies the brain after what has been done in the division before.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop fay tortora decentment fayta de li sobre le cercle, e aprop depausa aquela en le mieg loc del cap.	 Then put a bandage on the patient's head and gently place it over his forehead, and then let him rest for this to take effect at the location of the head.
E le malaute sia sesent cayrat, e sia tengut de tota partida.	 If the patient has lost consciousness entirely.
E aprop pausa liniment; et es pus digne de boder antic de ovelhas.	 Then apply cold compresses to bring back circulation.
E escalfa aquel sobre le foc per calefaccio temprada per mesura, le qual le dit sufferta quan es mes en lu.	 Then heat that over the fire until it becomes hot and measure how long it takes to reach its temperature which is mentioned here.
E aprop vuo’ aquel en le mieg loc del cap de lu en le cercle, e leysa lu entro que sia enfregidat.	 Then apply this to the head location with a bandage and let him rest until he becomes cool.
E fay aquo am le malaute en tota semmana una veguada, am le autre regiment de lu bo entro que sia sanat; o si vols, cauteriza aquel fazen petitz puntz segon lo mays de lu, sino que tenguas la ma am un cauteri ayssi ordenat: aquesta es specia de cauteri la qual humecta le cervel am equalitat.	 Apply this to the patient every 7 days as another treatment, or if you prefer, cautorize that area at points after a certain amount of time, unless you have already been cautorizing it in such an organized manner: this is a special cautery which cleanses the brain equally
E aprop pausa aquel coto enbegut en boder o en grays de gualina.	 And place a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
Capitol .xii.	 The following sentence has been translated as "In the second book of the Capitol.
De cauterisacio de aygua descendent en le huel.	 A pointed cautery is descending into his body.
Quan a tu es declarat le comensament de aygua en le huel per les senhals les quals yeu he ditz en la divisio, lahoras comensa e dona en beure al malaute aquo que mondifique le cap de lu, e guarda aquel de totas humiditatz.	 When a patient declares the onset of gout in his throat and says that it has occurred at the division point, then pain begins to occur as he drinks from the illness and keeps all moisture away from him.
E fay aquel suzar en banh en degu per alcus jorns.	 Place a cushion under their head for days ahead.
E aprop comanda a lu que raza le sieu cap, e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap; e aprop cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre dos templas si es le comensament de ysement de aygua en dos huels, o de la un latz si es comensamen de l’aygua en un huel.	 Order that servant to hold the patient's head steady and perform a pointed cautery at the location of the skull; order another servant to perform the cauterization on two temples if it is the onset of gout in both ears, or one temple if it is from one ear.
Incideys am cauteri totas las venas e arcerias las quals so dejos la codena; e sian les cauteris en aquela lonh en la latitut de las templas.	 Order all the veins and arteries that are to be cauterized, arranged in order on that line in the latitude of the temples.
E guarda te de fluxs de sanc quan es cauterizat; e si veses de lu fluxs de sanc, osta le am alcuna medicina, la qual es a tu possible.	 And keep an eye on his blood flow after he is cauterized; if you see that the blood flow has ceased, apply another medicine that could be possible.
E yeu vindre am savieza la qual es en extraccio de arcerias e am abscizio de aquelas e cautela de fluxs de sanc.	 And add a vein to the extract of veins and arteries as well as cut away from those, and also watch his blood flow.
E alcunas vetz es cauterizat en le cervitz dejos dos osses am dos cauteris dererament produzitz.	 When two bones are cauterized in the same cavity at once, it produces a certain effect
Capitol .xiii.	 Chapter Thirteen
De cauterizacio de lacrimas antiquas.	 About the cauterization of old tears
Quan lacrimas dels huels so antiquas assuduament e per las venas e arterias las quals so en le loc manifest del cap defora e es verificat que aquo es superfluitatz frejas flecmatiquas, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri le qual havem recontat en le capitol de comensament de aygua cazent en les huels, e am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos templas, e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos osses.	 Cauterization of old tears is discussed in this chapter
E si indigeyses de addicio, lahoras cauteriza aquel en tot latz de la coa del huel sobre la extremitat del sobrecilh am petit cauteri.	 If it is necessary to add more points, the physician will cauterize that on all of the surface of the foot with a small cautery
Capitol .xiiii.	 Chapter Fourteen
De cauterizacio de fetor de nas.	 About the cauterization of nasal mucus.
Quan tu medicas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no aprofieyta la tua medicacio, lahoras tu aparelha e dona en beure al malaute las cochias per tres noytz; e aprop ras le cap de lu, e cauteriza le am cauteri migier am cauteri olivar.	 When the physician does not take advantage of his treatment and applies it to a patient as described in section two but instead uses it on himself, the doctor will apply three ointments; place his hand over his head, and cauterize with a small cautery.
E aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri clavelh am dos cauteris sobre les dos sobrecilhs dejos les cabels un petit.	 Cauterization of the abdomen with two large cauteries on both sides of his head and a small one over the eyebrows.
E guarda te de la arceria que no incindas aquela.	 If you are not careful, it may happen
E del cauteri clavilh aquesta es la forma.	 This is how the cautery of his chest works.
Capitol .xv.	 "When a person experiences severe pain in one or both of his or her legs (perhaps also in other parts of the body) which cannot be relieved by any remedy that doctors usually employ, it is called gout.
De cauteri de mollificacio de palpebras dels huels.	 Cautery to reduce swelling on the hands
Quan la palpebra del huel es mollificada per malautia o per humiditat, lahoras cauteriza aquela palpebre1 am un cauteri am aquest cauteri lunar; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	 When the eyelid is swollen due to illness or moisture, doctors usually cauterize that eyelid with a small cautery like this one.
E si vos, cauteriza aquel sobre les dos sobrecils un petit am dos cauteris en tota partida, e sian elonguatz de las timporas.	 If you cauterize both eyelids with two small ones in total, they will be healed quickly.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la quantitat del sobrecil.	 The length of each cautery is proportional to the size of its target area.
E no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri, mays segon la quantitat que la tersa partida de la palpebre sia adhurida.	 Do not use too many cauteries, or else it will be difficult for them to heal the eyelid properly.
Capitol .xvi.	 "When a patient experiences severe pain in one or both of his or her legs and cannot find relief from any remedy that doctors usually employ...
De cauteri de la palpebre del huel quan les pels so convertitz a las partidas dedintz e punho le huel.	 Cautery to reduce swelling on the eyelid when the eyelids are swollen due to illness or moisture, and it is rubbed with the fingers and thumb of one hand.
Quan les pels del huel son convertitz a las partidas dedintz ayssi que pungo le huel, cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, quar cauteri o es am fer o es am medicina comburent.	 When the eyelids are swollen due to illness or moisture and you rub them with both hands separately, then use two small cauteries or apply another remedy that is recommended by doctors.
Si am cauteri de lu am foc, comanda al malaute denant aquo que leyse les sieus pels ayssi cum aquels les quals les mundan, entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz; e si punho aquel deves le lor naysement, lahoras tu strenh les huels de lu am una benda per so que no sia maugut entro que·ls pels sian nascutz.	 If you use a cautery on the eye itself when the eyelid is also affected by that, then keep it for some time as if they were the eyelids themselves, until they are healed; but if you do not apply it, doctors recommend using something else to prevent them from becoming swollen.
Donc cum siran nascutz e engualhatz, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop senha sobre la palpebre dels huels de lu am tenta, am senhal le qual sia segon la figura de fulha de merta, e sia le comensament del senhal prop dels pels.	 "When the surgeon is ready and has made an incision, he pauses at the patient's neck to prevent blood from flowing into it; then places a cushion on each of their thighs in order to support them during the operation, after which they place one servant over the eyeholes through which air enters the body.
E aprop pausa coto enbegut en album de huou o en mucillatge de ptilli sobre le huel.	 Then he places a cushion on each of their hips to support them during the operation, after which they place one servant over the eyeholes through which air enters the body.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu.	 Then, having placed the pointed cautery that is appropriate for this, he makes an incision on each side of their abdomen, in order to make a large enough opening and remove as much of it as possible without tearing or damaging other organs
E aprop cauteriza sobre la figura la qual as senhada, petit a petit, em motas veguadas, entro que sia comburida la superficia de la codena la qual es ayssi cum fuelha de mirta, tota aparent propriament.	 Then he uses the pointed cautery to sear away any exposed flesh on the surface of their abdomen that may seem inflamed or infected, making sure not to damage other organs in the process.
E senhal de sanetat de la tieua obra es que tu vegus la palpebre de l’huel ja esser contrayta e·ls pels de lu esser elevatz deves la punctura del huel.	 The servant of health, after having made the necessary incision and paused at their neck to prevent blood from flowing into it, then proceeds to make an opening on each side of their abdomen in order to expose as much of it as possible without tearing or damaging other organs.
E donc eleva la tua ma e laysa aquel per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eredicada la scara.	 Then he raises their hand and places it over the opening for three days, after which he pauses at its border to ensure that no part of the abdomen is exposed or damaged.
E aprop cura aquela am enguent entro que sia sanat.	 After having made the incision on each side of their abdomen and ensuring there was not any damage done, he then proceeds with the cautery to sear away any exposed flesh as well as possible without damaging other organs.
Mays si retorna per les pels alcuna causa aprop lor naysement e la palpebra es mollificada, lahoras fay autra vetz le cauteri sobre aquel tot ayssi cum avias fayt primieyrament.	 When it is necessary to return the intestine or hernia to its cavity and place your hand over that area to prevent it from coming out, you have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
Mays si les pels so en la palpebra dejos, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que sia elevada al sieu loc natural e sia engualhat e que les pels no punhan le huelh.	 When it is necessary to return the intestine or hernia to its cavity and place your hand over that area to prevent it from coming out, you have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
Mays le cauteri am medicina comburent aquest es que comandes al malaute que leyse les pels entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz, e aprop sia fayta de carta de drap la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	 When using a pointed cautery as medicine for the patient, it is customary to command them that they hold tightly on their hands and spread open the flaps of skin with which you make incisions so that they may be closed up again after making an incision
E aprop pren de sabo conogut e de caus viva ana unc. i, o quays aquo, e aprop mescle3 aquelas causas be, e fay aquo am festinacio per so que no sia enfregidat; e aprop expandeys de aquo sobre la carta la qual es fayta ayssi cum forma de fulha de mirtra, e pausa aquel sobre la un huel od amdos; e pausa dejos le huel coto enbegut en album de huou, e el cap del malaute sia en le tieu se.	 When it is necessary to return the intestine or hernia to its cavity and place your hand over that area to prevent it from coming out, you have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
E pausa le dit sobre le medicina e prem aquela un petit e no la mauguas entro que lo malaute senta la mordicacio de la medicina, quar mordicacio es en lu ayssi cum de foc.	 When it is necessary to return the intestine or hernia to its cavity and place your hand over that area to prevent it from coming out, you have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
E donc cum percevera aquo que el atrobo mordicacio, lahoras leyssa la medicina e mau aquela am le tieu dit; donc cum cessa la mordicacio, lahoras remau la medicina he lava le huel am aygua; e lahoras considera si vezes la palpebra ja es levada ayssi cum es lavada deves la costriccio am foc o am incisio, quar lahoras esta be; e si no torna sobre aquela de la medicina sobre le loc en le qual no ha empremut la medicina e no se denigra entro que sia engualhada la tua operacio e sia contrayt le huel.	 "When the attack occurs (?), pain arises (?) in the feet.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eradicada la codena de la adhustio, e aprop cura aquel am enguent deafinicon o am autre entro que sia sanat.	 Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent it from coming out.
E es necessari a tu, deves la tua operacio que guardes am pervigil diligencia que en le huel no caia re de la medicina, e si la palpebre aprop alscus dias es mollificada e alcuna causa dels pels punh en le huel, lahoras itera la tua medicina sobre aquel loc le qual de la palpebre es mollificat, e propriamen ayssi quo as fayt al comensament, e aprop enaviro lu entro que sia sanat.	 Then return the medicine to its usual treatment if there are no other signs of infection in the area where the eyelid is mollified.
E aquesta es la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	 This is how the medical procedure should be performed.
E sapias que les huels dels homes son diversificatz segon la magnitut e la parvitat, e donc segon aquo es fayta la tua contraccio.	 The veins of men are different depending on their size and shape, so please tailor your incision accordingly.
E no sira amaguada la via de rectetut ad aquel al qual es studi en aquesta art.	 Do not be limited by the methods used in this art.
Capitol .xvii.	 The text you provided is from a medieval medical treatise, specifically Chapter XVII of an unknown work that covers various topics related to medicine and health practices during that time period.
De cauterizacio de fistula que es en le lacrimal de l’huel.	 Cautery on the eyelid area
Quan tu curas fistula am aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquela segon aquesta manieyra: comanda al malaute que pause le cap sieu en le tieu se, e tengua le cap de lu alcun ministre entre las tieuas mas en tal manieyra que no sia maugut ni agitat am le sieu cap.	 When treating fistula on the eyelid area as mentioned in the previous instructions, first have the patient close their eyes tightly, and place a cloth or gauze between their two hands to prevent any movement of the head during the cautery procedure.
E aprop pausa coto enfus en album de huou o en mucellage de ptilli sobre le huel de lu.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customary to call gout among doctors.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	 And if it's necessary to make a point on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery.
le qual sia conquau, ayssi cum es forma de cana o de pena de voltor, de la una extremitat am la qual es fayta lo cauteri.	 And if it is necessary to make points on both sides of the foot, you should do so with a pointed cautery from each side where the cautery was placed.
E si voys, sia penetrant entro a la autra extremitat.	 If one penetrates into the other extremity as well.
E si vols sia sort ayssi cum tenta.	 And if you want to do so with both hands as well.
Mays empero aquel que es concau es milhor a la tieua obra.	 However, anyone who does this must be careful when performing it on the patient's abdomen.
E aprop prem la fistula si es uberta, e tra de lu sania et exsicca aquela.	 And after placing it if it is necessary to press hard on the fistula and remove all moisture from around it.
E si no es uberta, lahoras obre aquela e extratz la poyredura de lu.	 If not, then open that and extract any remaining pus.
E aprop pausa sobre lu le cauteri le qual sia be ignit, e te am aquel la tieua ma un petit deves le cauteri del huel a la partida del nas, per so que no erre la tua ma o le malaute sia enquietat, e lahoras pausa le cauteri en le grays del huel e corrompas aquel.	 After burning the cautery and placing it on your palm, put that hand over the patient's nose, such that neither their hand nor the patient is burned, and place the other hand in front of their mouth to prevent them from being burned as well, then remove the cautery from around the nose and burn it.
E donc si al comensament del tieu cauteri perve entro al os, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera le cauteri una veguada o dos, si mestiers era; e layssa aquel ayssi per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre aquel coto am boder e enviro lu am enguent exsiccatiu entro que sia sanat.	 If the cautery enters through the nose at first time, it's fine; if not, place it another way or two times as needed; and leave that for three days, after which you should then put it on the body surface to be dried out until it is dry enough so that it will not harm.
Mays si eran passatz xi dias e no es sanat, lahoras pausa sobre lu medicina aguda corrosiva entro que l’os sia descubert e sia ras segon que conveneys en le sieu capitol.	 When there is a feverish illness without any signs of healing, then the doctors wait to apply a caustic medicine within those two hours that were mentioned in their article.
E es autra manieyra de cauteri de fistula la qual alscus primiers diysero: enten al loc de la fistula e fen aquela e aprop pausa en aquela fissura camaen subtil del qual es la forma de lu: E fon en aquela la quantitat de i unc de plom fundut; e te la tua ma am camaem am bona retencio, e no sia maugut le malaute per so que le plom fundut no pervengua al huel de aquel; e cove que pausas sobre le huel del malaute coto enfus en album de huou o en aygua, quar plom adhureys le loc de la fistula e sana aquela per sanacio meravilhora.	 Another form of cautery for sealing the opening is to enter into it and then hold it closed with a pointed cautery in that small gap from which it occurs; and after doing this, place your hand over its hole as mentioned above or below, so that the pointed cautery does not come out through the hole.
E si la fistula es sanada am aquo que havem dit del cauteri e de la curacio, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari aministrar trauc del nas e reduzir la fistula al cors del nas segon que vindra en son loc propri.	 If the fistula has been cured with cautery and care mentioned above, then yes; otherwise, it is necessary to administer a nosebleed treatment to reduce the fistula down to its original location.
Capitol .xviii.	 Chapter XVIII
De cauterizacio de la fendedura des potz.	 Cautery of wounds.
Motas veguadas accideysso fissuras en las labias, e majorment en las labias dels enfantz.	 The boils often break out on the thighs and especially in children's legs.
Donc cum tu curas aquelas fissuras am aquo que nos havem dit en las divisios e no aprofieyta la tua cura, lahoras igneys le cauteri petit cutellar segon aquesta forma que s’ensiec:	 Therefore, if you do not follow the instructions mentioned in the sections and don't apply your treatment properly, then doctors recommend applying a small cutaneous cautery as follows
E sia la conquavitat de lu segon la subtilitat de cotella.	 And for hernia of it to be second only to its subtlety.
Aprop pausa aquel init cuytadament en aquelas fissuras entro que·l cauteri pervengua al preon de las fissuras.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout
E aprop cura aquel am cerotz entro que sia sanat.	 And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery.
Capitol .xix.	 Thank you for translating this text for me!
De cauterizacio de fistula en la boca.	 Cautery incision in the mouth.
Quan en la razit de uvula o en le paladar o en las razitz de las dentz endeve apostema e aprop fa brac, e aprop es rompuda, e aprop es antiquada, e corr brac e es fayta fistula, e aprop tu curas aquela e no aprofieyta a curacio, lahoras cove que tu igniscas cauteri segon la quantitat que sia receubuda en la fistula, e aprop met aquel ignit en le trauc de la fistola, e te la tua ma entro que pervengua le ferr ignit al preon de lu, e al derier de lu fazen aysso una veguada o dos; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que nos havem dit de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	 Cautery incision in the throat or tongue or on teeth. If you want to prevent cauterization, do not cut the fistula and leave it open for healing, and if necessary perform the cautery while measuring the amount of blood that has been collected from the fistula, place a finger inside the track of the fistula so that the bleeding stops at the other side, apply pressure over the area with your hand to prevent any more bleeding. And do this according to what we have told you about the healing process.
E donc si la sania es abscindita e es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari de descubrir le loc e hostar le os corrumput segon que vindra en son capitol.	 And if there is no bleeding, it's good to go ahead and close the wound with pressure over the area using your hand.
Capitol .xx.	 Thank you for translating this text!
De cauterisacio de las dentz e de mollificacio de las angivas.	 Cautery incision on teeth and mouth sores.
Quan las angivas son mollificadas per humiditat e las dentz son maugudas, e curas aquelas am medicinas e no confereys, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra aprop aysso, enayssi que tu pauses la quanula sobre la dent e entromet en aquela le cauteri ignit festinantment, e te la tieua ma un petit entro que·l malaute cente la calor del foc a la razit de la dent esser pervenguda.	 When the mouth sores are mollified by moisture and the teeth are swollen, cure these wounds with medicinal ointments and do not hesitate, put your head down in this position, and apply the cautery as described, making sure to avoid puncturing the tooth while inserting it into the sore, touching both inside and outside of it. If you misspoke, place a hand over the area of the mouth to prevent any more heat from reaching the tongue or teeth.
E aprop leva la tua ma, e aprop itera le cauteri alcunas veguadas segon que vols.	 Place your hand gently, then apply the cautery in small quantities as you want
E aprop le malaute huompla la sua boca de aygua de sal e tengua aquela per una hora, e pueys stupa aquela, quar la dent mauguda es fermada e la gengiva mollificada es strenguda e la humiditat corrompuda es exsiccada.	 Apply the mouthpiece to the patient's mouth with water and salt, holding it for an hour, then remove it; after that, soak it in a solution of vinegar or wine, so that the rotten tooth is hardened, and the soft gum is strengthened, and the dampness corrupted is dried up.
Capitol .xxi.	 The twenty-first chapter
De cauterisacio de dolor de dent.	 Treatment of toothache.
Quan dolor de dent es per fregiditat, o en lu es freg o verm, o no comfereys la curacio am medicina, lahoras cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am boder de vacas, o cauteri am foc.	 When toothache is caused by coldness or dampness, heat it with hot water and/or vinegar; if no treatment works from medicine, then cautery on the surface of a foot will be applied as a second option
Cauteri am boder es que tu prenguas boder de vacas e bulhas aquel en culhe de ferr , e aprop pren coto e envolopa le sobre la extremitat de la tenta, e aprop enmergeys aquel am boder bulhit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolorosa festinantment entro que sia enfregidat.	 Cautery on the surface is to put a hot foot pad over it and apply it on the painful tooth with a finger, making sure that you do not burn yourself while doing so, until the tooth becomes cold.
E aprop itera aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la vertut del foc pervengua a la razit de la dentz.	 Then apply the cautery in small quantities as needed to bring heat from the fire towards the root of the tooth.
E si voys, submergeys lana o coto en le boder desus dit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolent, e pausa sobre aquel ferr ignit entro que·l ferr pervengua al preon de la conquavitat de la dent.	 If so, place the pad or cloth over it and apply heat until the fire goes out of control towards your own body.
Mays empero la cauterizacio am foc es que tu atendas a la quannula de eram o de ferr, e sia en le cor de lu alcuna grocesa e la acuitat del foc no pervengua a la boca del malaute.	 When performing cautery on the patient's genitals, be careful not to touch any part of his body other than those parts being treated and avoid causing burns in his chest area or increasing its heat as it could cause pain at the patient's mouth.
E aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra, e pausa aquel sobre la dent e te la tua ma entro que·l cauteri sia enfregidat; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas quar la dolor sira remauguda o en aquel dia o en l’autre dia.	 Make sure the form of cautery is correct, place your hand over it to make it cool down, and do this several times as pain may increase or occur on different days.
E cove que per empressio de aquel cauteri que·l malaute umpla la sieua boca de bon boder e tengua aquel per una hora e aprop scupa le; e aquesta es la forma del cauteri.	 To perform the cautery, make sure to prevent the patient from spitting and hold his mouth open for one hour while also placing it on their chest so that they can breathe easily during this time. This is how the cautery should be performed.
E cauteriza am qual que tu voys extremittat segon que a tu es possible.	 Cautery may need to be done in such a way as not to cause unnecessary harm.
E aquesta es la forma de la cannula:	 The form of the needle is this:
Capitol .xxii.	 Chapter XXII
De cauterizacio de extrophulos.	 On cautery for external parts.
Quan extrophulos so de flecma e de humors fregas e no so hobedientz a digistio per medicinas e tu voys la digistio de aquelas leugerament, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri conquau la forma del qual es aquesta seguen, havent dos extremitatz hubertas per que yesca le fum deves le cauteri per l’autra extremitat, e pausa aquel ignit sobre aquel apostema una veguada, e autre si indigeyses de aquel, entro que pervengua al preon del apostema.	 When external parts are affected by cold humors and not treated with medication, you should perform cautery in the manner this form is given to ensure that it does not spread to another part of the body through smoke from burning one hand on fire while holding the other; pause the flame over the first part for a moment, then ignite on the second part as well.
E si l’apostema es pauca, lahoras pausa le cauteri segon la quantitat del apostema, e aprop leyssa le per tres jorns e pausa sobre lu coto enfus en boder entro que sia remaugut aquo que·l foc ha comburit.	 When the patient's anus is small, the physician pauses the cautery according to the length of the incision, and places it on for three days and covers with a cloth until the heat from the body has subsided
E aprop cura aquel am enguent e tentas e draps entro que sia sanat.	 Then apply ointment between the thighs, and wrap them tightly while the patient is healing
E la forma de la cannula o deu cauteri a tal es comveyter.	 The manner in which the cautery was applied or used
Capitol .xxiii.	 33
De cauterizacio de rauquiera de votz e de constriccio de ale.	 Cauterization of veins and arteries
Quan las humiditatz veno sobre le quanal del pulmo, e majorment quan aquo es am fregiditat de compleccio, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia evacuat al comensament am medicinas laxativas, e aprop cauteriza aquel deves la razit del golayro en le loc depremegut.	 When the patient's urine is very dark in color and accompanied by dryness of the whole body, doctors will order that the bladder be evacuated with laxatives, and then burn it at the spot where it was found.
E guarda te que no pervenguas am le cauteri al golayro ni no comburas de la codena de lu sino un pauc.	 Be careful not to apply too much of the cautery on the bladder, and do not comb the incision either, just a little
E cauteriza aquel am autra cauteri deves la junctura del col en le derier espondil de lu.	 Burn another cautery into the junction between the rectum and the thigh.
E·l cauteri de lu sia clavilh sego la maniera precedent.	 The cautery of him shall be done in the same manner as before.
E aprop cura aquel am aquo que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	 Then apply that which was done previously until healing is complete.
Capitol .xxiiii.	 34
De cauterizacio de malautia del pulmo e de tos.	 Cauterization of pneumonia and coughs
Quan tos e malautia de pulmo so de humiditatz fregas e le malaute no ha febre ni tisic e es malautia antiqua, lahoras cauterisa aquel am dos cauteris sobre la furcula en les locz depremegutz leontz e buoytz; e am autra cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz entre dos mamillos; e sia le cauteri clavilh segon la forma precedent.	 When the pleurisy from the lungs causes dampness and the patient does not have a fever or chills, and it is an ancient ailment, doctors will burn the skin with two points on either side of the breastbone in those places where they breathe out air forcefully; and another point between the breasts.
E si vols, sia la tua cauterizacio punctan am le cauteri que es apelat puncta, la forma del qual precedeys en la ponctacio de dolor de aurelhas.	 If you wish, then place your cautery points in the same location as where pain occurs at the joints.
E sian puntz entro cays ad aquels; e aprop cura aquel am aquo meteys que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	 The points are placed inside that area and you apply a remedy to alleviate any subsequent pain there.
E ya sia le cauteri haventz tres ramps quar cauterizacio es am aquel: am una veguada podes far tres cauteris segon aquesta forma:	 And if the treatment for those points is threefold, with three points in this manner:
Capitol .xxv.	 xxv
De cauterizacio de titillic que es le cap del ajutori.	 The cautery for the top of the thigh.
Quan le cap del ajutori es dislocat per causa de humiditatz lubricas e no es fermat en la hora del sieu retornament deves la sua dislocacio entro que sia a lu aquo costuma de retornar, e aprop per un petit movement es deslocat ayssi que s’endeve, ayssi cum nos havem testificat, lahoras cove que primieyrament redusiscas la dislocacio, e aprop le malaute sia reversat sobre le sieu dos o sobre le latz sa; e aprop eleva la codena la qual es en la partida dedintz del citillic a las partidas desus am les ditz de la tua ma sinistra, si la junctura es dislocada a las partidas dedintz.	 When the top of the thigh is dislocated due to dampness and cannot be fixed at the time of its return you should place it in that position until it returns on its own, then gently move it slightly so that it can do as we have stated, doctors will say that first reduce dislocation, then put the intestine back into its cavity or hernia.
E aprop igneys le cauteri havent dos caps; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	 And prepare the pointed cautery as follows
E aprop cauteriza la codena entro que penetre aquela entro al autre latz; e vindra la figura de cauterizacio lahoras de iv caps cauteris.	 And pierce another hole into the other lateral, then arrange the cauterization of the two holes
e so aquel subtils segon la quantitat de tenta; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	 Then make a small second incision for the attempt, and do this so
E alcunas veguadas es ajustat segon aquest comte i per que son les cauteris .viii.	 And adjust the amount of attempts accordingly, following these rules.
E aprop pausa sobre le cauteri porys cuytz am sal, e aprop fay adherir le malaute a trenquilitat, e lo membre no sia maugut per alcun temps entro que sia confortat.	 Then put your hand on the patient's forehead and gently press down to stop any bleeding, ensuring that the limb does not move while being supported.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas desus e tart es fayt aquo, lahoras cauteriza sobre le muscle am cauteri clavilh o am motz cauteris puntan, quar la junctura es confermada e la humiditat es romauguda e le malaute es sanat.	 If the dislocation is at joints of the extremities and the pain is confirmed, then doctors burn onto a muscle with a pointed cautery or between the fingers to confirm that the joint is fixed and the humidity has been increased and the patient feels better.
Capitol .xxvi.	 This completes the sixteenth chapter of our medical treatise.
De cauterizacio del stomac.	 The treatment for stomach ulcers.
Quan veno en l’estomac freg e motas humiditatz entro que aquel extrazo de la sua compleccio e so multiplicatz raumases a lu, e si tu continuas las manieyras de curacio e no confereyso, lahoras cove que le malaute sia sobre le sieu dos ressupinat, e extenda las suas mas e las suas coysas, e aprop cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris: an un cauteri dejos le pietz per la quantitat d’un dit am cauteri clavilh, e am dos cauteris dejos del dos costatz del cauteri, entro que vengua la figura de cauteri triangulada; e elonga entre els que no sian ajustatz que faran poyredura.	 The treatment for stomach ulcers: when you feel pain in the abdomen and notice excessive mucus, take three punctures between the ribs or costal cartilages of the ribcage to confirm the diagnosis, then cauterize each hole with a triangular shaped cautery as follows: puncture one hole for the amount of one digit on the forefinger tip, two holes between the two ribs, such that it forms a triangle; and extend them so they do not come together.
E si la profunditat del cauteri la quantitat de les dos terses de la grocesa de la codena.	 When making incisions for a curettage procedure, make sure to measure the depth of the two blades used in order to prevent any complications from occurring during surgery
E sia la figura del cauteri segon aquesta forma ses addicio, E si vols, cauteriza am gran cauteri en le mieg loc del estomac segon aquesta forma; et aquest sia un cauteri segon la forma de cercle segon aquesta forma:	 The shape of the cautery should be chosen according to this form. If you wish, a larger cautery may also be used on the stomach in that form, and this is another cautery in the shape of a circle for that same form
E sia cauterizat l’estomac punctan ad aquel que de aquest cauteri es spaventat: e es que tu senhes sobre l’estomac punt segon la quantitat que voles am tenta, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en les puntz; e aprop cura aquel am la curacio qu’es precedita entro que sia sanat.	 If you wish to use the cautery on the stomach, puncture it with that same cautery and, afterwards, if necessary, apply another cautery in its points. And make sure any previous cauteries are removed before proceeding.
Capitol .xxvii.	 The capital of Rome is the 27th letter of the Latin alphabet.
De cauterizacio del fietge fret.	 Cautery procedure for the foot
Quan endeve en le fietge dolor per fregiditat o per humiditat o per grossa ventositat entro que de la sieua normal compleccio sia getat per egressio superflua, e es curat le malaute am aquo que havem dit e no comfereys, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e senhes am tenta tres cauteris segon aquesta forma et aquesta quantitat meteyssa sobre le fietge dejos dels ipocondres, la hon perve le decubit de home.	 When the foot gets pain due to cold or dampness or excess moisture inside its normal structure, and it is necessary that the patient's bowels are being treated in order for an excessive discharge from them not to occur, then place the patient on a couch with their head elevated so that they do not have difficulty lying down.
E sia l’espazi le qual es entre quascun cauteri segon la grossetut del dit, e sia le cauteri segon la longitut del cors dreyta.	 The space between each cautery should correspond to the breadth of the fingers and the length of the chest.
E no compremas la tua am le cauteri mot.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, it is customary for doctors to call this gout.
E si la quantitat de aquo que es adhurit la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena, e no y sia pus ajustat; e si le malaute stant sobre les pes de lu; e si no es estant, lahoras sia jassent, le qual ja ha extendudas las suas coysas, e eleve les sieus brasses.	 The quantity of the gout that is applied on the surface of the foot should be appropriate in quantity to the length of the finger's span, and not too much; if the patient is lying down, then the gout will spread out and stretch his legs.
E es aquesta la forma del cauteri:	 This is how the cautery should be done:
E a tu es possible que cauterizes aquestz cauteris am cauteri cutellar, quan es am tu subtilitat e prudencia en l’art.	 If it's possible to use cauteries of this type on the cutaneous cauteries when one has both subtlety and prudence in their art.
E guarda te que trop no procesiscas en la cauterizacio, e sia adhurida la specitut de tota la codena per que sia adhurit tot le cors e pervengua entro als budels, quar la codena aqui es subtil; e sapias aquo.	 Remember that you should not overdo it in the cautery, and apply a sufficient amount of the ointment all over the body so that it covers the whole body and penetrates into the bowels as well, for this is subtlety; remember this
Capitol .xxviii.	 Chapter xxviii.
De perforacio de apostema del fietge am cauteri.	 About making a hole in an artery with a cautery.
Quan endeve excitura o apostema en le fietge e voles saber si aquel apostema es en le carn del fietge o en la tunica de lu, lahoras si es en la carn del fietge, le malaute atrobo gravitat e dolor ses acuitat.	 When you want to cut an artery in the leg and wish to know if it is in the muscle of the leg or in the tunic of the patient, doctors will tell you that it is in the muscle of the leg; pain arises from this.
E si es en la tunica del fietge, am la dolor es acuitat gran e vezes que ja afatiguatz les metges la cura de lu.	 If it is in the tunic of the leg, and the pain is great and sometimes doctors get tired treating them.
Donc cove que·l malaute sia enversat sobre la sieua cervit; e aprop senha le loc de l’apostema am tenta; e aprop igneys le cauteri le quel es asemblat a rag, la forma del qual a precedit en l’autra pagina.	 When the patient is lying on his stomach and you place your hand over the anus to try to stop it from coming out (the bowel movement).
E cauteriza am aquel i cauteri entro que tota la codena sia comborida, entro que pervengua al ciphac, entro qu’en yesca sania.	 Then apply a point on the surface of the foot and do so with a pointed cautery to cauterize it if necessary (if bleeding occurs).
E aprop cura aquel per curacio dels autres apostemas entro que sia sanat.	 And then care for other hemorrhoids by curing them as well, if they are also sick.
E no cove que de aquesta forma de cauteri use sino aquel del qual le estudi en l’art de medicina es prolonguat, e en las mas del qual motas malautias an conogut; mays aquest am esperiment alcunas veguadas sia ardit sobre aquesta operacio, mays empero leyssa aquela deves nos, e es miels.	 Do not use this cautery method unless you have studied the art of medicine in depth and understand it well, otherwise you may cause harm to yourself or others.
Capitol .xxix.	 [No text provided]
De cauterizacio de plauresi.	 Bleeding control (bleeding stop).
Diyssero les antics cauteri de las razitz de aristologia a plauresi frega segon aquesta manieyra esser fazedor, e es aquest que tu prenguas de las razitz de aristologia longa secca una razit pun longua que es trobada, e sia de la grossetut del dit.	 You should apply the ancient cautery of phlebotomy to stop bleeding from this artery rupture. If you find a clot that is stuck in an artery, it may be necessary to cut through it as well, and remove it if possible.
E aprop submergeys aquela en oli e eysen aquela al foc, e aprop cauteriza per un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre la continuacio de la furcula am le col; e am dos cauteris petitz dejos guidazi, un pauc declinans a la partida que es dejus la barba, e am dos cauteris en aquo que es declinant entre la quinta costa e la cizena, declinant un pauc a las partidas detras; e am autre cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz; et am autre sobre l’estomac, et am tres cauteris de las partidas detras; et am un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre las dos spallas, e am dos cauteris dels dos latz del pietz, dejos le cauteri le qual es entre doas spallas.	 You should submerge the object in oil and ignite it with a fire to cauterize that place between the fork of your arm and the neck; and also apply two cauteries near where there is a decline between the fifth rib and the chin, declining only slightly behind, and also apply two cauteries near where there is a decline between the fifth costal margin and the sternum. And also do a cautery on that place of the stomach, as well as one above it, and three cauteries in back from the spine; and another below the sternum, among two ribs of the breast, apply that cautery which is between two breasts.
E no cove que compremas la tua ma am le cauteri, ans sia en le manifest de la codena en obra.	 When you have opened up space between the patient's thighs, placing cushions under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest holding their hands, here comes to apply the first cupping glass on the patient's back.
E ja diyssero alscus antics que so alscus dels homes les quals uson de cauteri de ferr semblant a ray e igneysso aquel, e meto aquel en aquel loc le qual es entre las costas, entro que pervenguam am aquel ad aquel apostema e sia foragetada sania, ayssi cum havem dit en l’apostema del fietge.	 And they would apply the second glass in the same manner as those who do cupping to make it similar to ray and thus put that one into place between the shoulders, so that it may be applied from both sides simultaneously just as is said by the physician of medicine.
Mays en aquesta perforacio am cauteri no es ses temor, quar hu mor tantost ho accideys en le loc fistula a la qual no es sanacio.	 If this incision has been done properly and there is no fear that it will cause any harm to the place where the fistula occurs which cannot be healed
Capitol .xxx.	 The end of the text
De la cauterizacio de la melsa.	 From the cupping procedure for the left arm.
Quan tu curas la malautia de la melsa am aquo que havem dit de la curacio en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cauteri en lu es segon tres manieras, las quals totas son dreyturieras, de las quals la una es que fassas tres cauteris o quatre linhan segon la longitut de la melsa segon la figura dels cauteris del fietge, la figura dels quals ha precedit.	 When you cure the gout of the left arm in this way as we have said for its cure in division and do not observe your cure, then apply cupping in that limb using these two methods, which are correctives, one of them is to make three cups or four lines on the length of the arm according to the figure of the cups of the body, the figure of which precedes.
E sia entre quascun cauteri la grossetut d’un dit o un pauc mes, e la manieyra del cauteri sia la manieyra la qual havem dita en le cauteri del fietge engualment.	 And in each cup make the diameter of one or two inches, and the hand movement of the cupping be the same as that which we have described for the cupping of the body.
E no compremas la tua ma am le cauteri; e le malaute sia eves sobre lo sieu dos.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
E es autra manieyra de cauterizar, so es que tu igniscas le cauteri haventz dos vertimentz, la qual causa havem dita en le capitol de dislocacio del muscle, e elava la codena la qual es en le endreyt de la melsa la hon perve le jazer del malaute sinistre.	 Another method of cautery is to use a heated object, such as a hot iron or a cautery tool, which causes the vein in question at the muscle's origin to harden and contract, thus preventing dislocation.
E sia la tua elevacio am la qual elevas la codena segon la longuesa del cors, per que sian faytz cauteris segon la latitut del cos.	 Your elevation should go from the chest down towards the length of your body in order to place the cautery as close to its location as possible.
E aprop entromet les dos vernimentz, ignitz mot, en aquel entro que am aquels penetres la codena de la autra part.	 Place both hands on the patient's thighs between the two incisions, ensuring they are placed directly in front of the other incision.
E aprop extrayt le cauteri; e donc son faytz quatre cauteris.	 Remove the cautery and apply four more cauteries.
E si voys, cauteriza am cauteri havent tres vernimentz.	 If you want to use three points of cautery, cauterize at least three incisions.
E aprop tu cura le cauteri pus que aia laysat de getar brac per trops jorns, quar mays es comferent que las autras causas precedentz en la curacio.	 Ensure that the previous cauteries are taken care of before using more cauteries to prevent complications in treatment.
Capitol .xxxi.	 Chapter 21
De cauterizacio de ydropici.	 Cautery of dropsy.
Cauteri no catz en ydropici sino en alcinte3 propriament.	 Cauteries should not be performed in dropsy, unless specifically indicated by a doctor.
Quan tu curas le ydropic am las manieyras de curacio las quals havem ditas en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que aquel cauterizes am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic e am un cauteri sobre l’estomac, e am autre cauteri sobre le fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa, e am dos cauteris entre les spondils del dos, e un cauteri en lo dreyt del pietz, e am autre cauteri sobre l’estomac.	 When curing dropsy using different methods of treatment that are not compatible with your care, the pain will come from four cauteries placed on the abdomen, a cautery over the stomach, another over the liver, and two between the shoulders, one at the right side of the chest, and another over the stomach.
E la quantitat de la profunditat del cauteri sia propdana a la spicitut de la codena.	 When making incisions for cauterization, the depth of the incision should be proportional to the urgency of the situation.
E aprop layssa le cauteri ubert per so que gete brac per lonc temps.	 The cautery is being placed over the area in order to prevent the hand from coming out for a long time.
E no evacuas le malaute de curacio aprop le cauteri am aquo que cove per que sian agreguadas a lu doas entencios, e sira festinada a lu am ajutori sanacio.	 After making incisions, attach the intestines to the cautery with these stitches so that they are joined securely and the operation can begin.
La forma del cauteri am lo qual es cauterizat lo ventre sia clavilh segon que la forma de aquel es desus precedent, e es aquel am le qual es cauterizat le dos sia olivar segon qu’es precedent a la sua forma.	 The form of the cautery is like that used for cauterizing the belly but slightly different from its previous use and similar to the one previously used on the thighs.
Capitol .xxxii.	 Chapter 22.
De cauterizacio de pes e de las coyssas.	 Cauterization of the body parts and thighs.
Quan les pes so apostematz en ydropitz e so repletz de aygua sitrina, cove que cauterisas les pes sobre le dos del pe in nocrati aquo que es entre le auricular e le anular, e eleva la tua ma am le cauteri e no torses aquel; e aprop eleva la tua ma, e no retornes aquela de tot, quar l’aygua satrina rezuda.	 When removing the stitches and applying new ones with water, make sure to cauterize the buttocks by between the ear and the nose, raising your hand over the cautery to prevent it from twisting away; then raise your hand again without returning the previous one that was used for strangling.
Es le cauteri segon aquesta forma: E aprop fay sobre las doas coyssas dos cauteris, e en quascuna coysa sia feyt cauteri am la extremitat del cauteri cutellar.	 The second form of the cautery is as follows: And in each thigh there should be a cautery located at the cutting edge of it.
E sia le cauteri segon la longitut de la coyssa: i dejos le denolh e l’autre jos le mieg loc de la coyssa; e sobre quascuna coyssa dos cauteris.	 The second form is that the length of each thigh should be taken into account, and put one cautery on top of the other at the joint point between the thighs; for both legs.
E layssa la plagua uberta ses curacio per lonc temps per so que alcuna aygua resuda de lu.	 The first sentence translates to: "With a long time hold it in place, ensure that no water leaks out.
E aprop cura le am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas.	 With the causes which have been mentioned
Capitol .xxxiii.	 The next sentence is missing part of its text. I cannot complete it accurately without more information.
De cauterizacio de cos de ventre.	 Cautery on the stomach
Quan cos de ventre es per freg e per humiditat entro que debelice las vertutz, so es la vertut digestiva e retentiva, las quals so en l’estomac e en les budels, e es curat aquo am las manieyras de curacio e no confereys, e vezes le malaute suffertan cauteri de vertut exhiberant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am gran cauteri sobre le sieu stomac segon que a precedit en la cauterizacio del estomac, am le cauteri del cercle e am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic subtils, am cauteri clavilh subtil; e am cauteri sobre le alcatin sobre alozis gran, o am dos cauteris.	 When the stomach is inflamed and humid, you should perform digestive and retentive cautery at the stomach. This is done in the stomach as well as the intestines, through a great cautery over it to follow after what has been done on the stomach, also the circle of Cauteries which are on the belly button, four Cauteries in the semicircle by the delicate veins, and Cauteries above the elbows around the thighs, or two Cauteries.
E si vezes las humiditatz exhuberants e le malaute aquo tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le pentenilh e sobre les budels, e fort leu ajustant dos cauteris sobre l’estomac e prop dels inguonas, quar es curacio perficent de juvament de la qual no erras.	 If times the humors are abundant and the patient is tolerant, then doctors perform a Cautery on the liver and the pancreas as well, and place two Cauteries over the stomach to control the digestive juices that may be excessive.
Capitol .xxxiv.	 The next sentence is missing part of its text. I cannot complete it accurately without more information.
De cauterizacio de emorroydas antiquas.	 Cautery on ancient hemorrhoids.
Quan so en la natura derier emorroydas antiquas o una de humors grossas fregas o de humiditatz corrompudas, e son curadas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no confereys la tieua curacio, lahoras cauterisa am tres cauteris sobre le pus dejos spondilh del dos petit e petit triangular, e am cauteri desus le ombelic cays per dos ditz.	 When so is in the nature of ancient hemorrhoids or one with gross humors or corrupted humidities, and are treated as what has been mentioned earlier by division without conferring the same cure, doctors perform Cautery on three points on both sides of the buttocks which are small and triangular, and Cautery on each ombilicus through two cuts.
E si doptas que l’estomac de lu sia enfregidat e la vianda de lu no sia degerida, e la cara de lu vezes apostemada, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre l’estomac am gran cauteri segon que es precedit; e am un cauteri sobre fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa de lu am cauteri clavilh, e leyssa le cauteri per alcun temps ubert, e aprop cura lu entro que sia sanat.	 When the stomach of a patient is chilled and the vein of the patient is paralyzed, with the face of the patient turning pale, doctors apply a cautery over the stomach as a second one after it has been applied; they also have another cautery on his hand, and another above the belly of the patient at the elbow cautery. Let them leave this cautery open for some time, and apply medicine to him in order to heal him
Capitol .xxxv.	 Chapter 55
De cauterizacio de atheyl aprop la abscizio de lor.	 Cautery is applied over the abscesses
Quan tu abscindes atheyl, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri que es asemblat a ray.	 When you cut off an abscess, doctors remove the cautery that has been attached to it.
Aprop entremet aquel ignit en aquel atheyl abscis, e ultima la tieua ma entro que pervengua le cauteri al orifici de la vena de la qual ve la sanc.	 When you cut off an abscess in the vein from which it came, finally remove both the cautery and the bandage that had been applied to the opening of that vein.
E fay aquo una vetz o doas, quar si achieyl son trops, lahoras cauteriza quascun de lor segon que havem recontat, e aprop cura aquels am aquo que confereys a lor dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	 And if you apply it frequently and often, doctors burn each of them after a while, and treat these as they come to their wounds that are within the time for healing.
E si cauterizas am gran cauteri sobre alquatin, es mays derier en juvament.	 If you apply a large cautery on someone's arm, it may be more painful in youth.
Capitol .xxxvi.	 Aor la cauzeria de las artels per a lor, e apuns l’artel de loa de la vena o l’arrel del cors am abietir cauteri, lor que fa que aquo faien, e la horaz de lor, e aprops la lor que son los.
De cauterizacio de fistolas que son faytas en la natura derie en las partidas de lu.	 First aid application on fistulas that are found in nature or on the body
Quan la natura no obeziys a la obra la qual havem recomtada en son loc, e·l pacient es espaventat per aquo, sia sanat am cauteri.	 When the patient refuses to comply with the recommendations given in this location, and is agitated by it, then do first aid application.
Donc quan ad alcun ve fistola en la natura derier, e es antiquada, corro sania de lu e humiditatz corrompudas, e donc aquo que es pus digne que cove es que proes aquela am tenta subtil, e aprop conoys la quantitat de la profunditat de lu am la devant dita tenta.	 When there is any fistula in the natural course or after it has been established, then apply these remedies: cover them with something suitable to prevent further infection and ensure that you use a correct quantity of water according to the depth of the wound when applying this remedy.
Aprop igneys le cauteri que es semblant a ray.	 Place the cautery in such a manner as it resembles a ray.
E aprop met aquel cauteri ignit en aquesta fistula, e segon la quantitat en la qual intrec la tenta.	 Then apply that cautery to this fistula and follow the quantity mentioned on how you should apply it.
E itera sobre aquela le cauteri entro que sian comburitz aquels cors corrumputz tost una veguada o dos o tres, segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	 After using that cautery to burn off these ulcers or sores within a short time of one or two or three times depending on the quantity necessary based on your need.
E guarda te de combustio de nervi e de vena; o si fistula va al cors de la vesica o al cors del budel, lahoras guarda te de totz aquels locz; e no fassas aquo sino quan la fistula es en loc carnos e cogitas que no es penetrant.	 Then, do not burn the nerves and veins unless it is on the bladder or bowels, in that case hold everything back from those areas; otherwise only apply when you know it's penetrating.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	 After doing first aid, then treat the area as needed.
E si le loc es sigillat, e so abscindidas de lu las materias, e roman ayssi per lonc temps, lahoras sapias que ja es curat entierament.	 If that location is sealed off and you have removed all materials from it for a long time, then the wounds will eventually heal completely on their own.
E si las materias no so de lu ostadas, lahoras sapias que es penetrant o en le preon de lu os corromput, o cays aquo de aquelas causas de las quals vindra rememoracio en son loc.	 When there are no more causes to recall in their memory, they know that the disease has taken hold of them.
Capitol .xxxvii.	 Chapter 77 of the Capitularies
De cauterizacio dels ronhos.	 Cautery on veins.
Quan en les ronhos endeve dolor per freg o per grossa ventozitat, e per aysso le coyt del malaute es amermat, lahoras cove que cauterizes aquel sobre les ronhos am cauteri sobre quascun ronho am cauteri clavilh del qual precesic la rememoracio.	 When pain occurs in the veins or due to great swelling, and it is desired by the patient that cautery be applied to each vein separately with a small cautery on each vein so as to remember which one was treated first.
E fort leu cauterizam am le segon un petit dejos, per que vindran tres cauteris liniatz, e donc siran mays deriers en juvament.	 And after the second one has been cautorized with a small amount of each, so that three cauteries will be applied in total and therefore may be the latest ones to recall first.
Capitol .xxxviii.	 Chapter 88 of the Capitularies
De cauterizacio de la vesica.	 Cautery on the bladder.
Quan accideys en la vesica debelitat e mollificacio per freg e per humiditatz ayssi que·l malaute la urina no retengua, lahoras cauteriza aquel en la partida pus dejos sobre la vesiqua, la hon comensan les pels del pentenilh, e cauteriza am un cauteri en la partida dreyta, e am autre en la senestra de lu.	 When it happens in the bladder with pain and softening due to swelling or humidity that the patient cannot hold their urine in, doctors cautorize there in a small space under the bladder itself near where they sit on the bench, and cautorize one above and another below as well.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la cantitat dels not del pous; e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en la partida pus bassa del dos, o am dos cauteris si es necessitat.	 The length of each cautery is determined by the amount of blood vessels to be treated, and if more than two veins need to be cautorized it will require as many cautories.
E sia cauteri clavilh segon que es procesit.	 When joints are afflicted by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet
Capitol .xxxix.	 The next sentence to translate is "Sia cauteri clavilh segons que es processit.
De cauterizacio de la mayra.	 Cautery for the artery
Quan veno en la mayra freg e humiditatz, e per aysso es prohibida enpreignacio, e son corrompudas las mestruas de lu, e es tardada la provocacio de lor, e accideys dolor deves le haveniment de lor, lahoras cove que·l loc sia cauterizat am tres cauteris en le circuit del ombelic, ayssi cum havem dit en le cauteri de la vesica; e am cauteri sobre le loc pus dejos del dos, o am dos cauteris, e sia le cauteri clavilh.	 When veins in the artery become inflamed and infected, it is forbidden to treat them directly with cautery, so their membranes are damaged, and healing is delayed, and pain arises due to their obstruction; therefore, doctors customarily cauterize three times around the abdominal aorta as they do for the vesica's cautery, or two cauteries depending on the location, one cautery
Capitol .xl.	 The next sentence to translate is "E am cauteri sobre le loc pus dejos del dos, o am dos cauteris.
De cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua.	 Cautery for the dislocation of the artery.
Quan humiditatz moucozas so efundudas a la partida de la anqua, e so faytas causas del yssiment del sieu loc, e senhal de lu es que la coyssa es prolonguada sobre l’autre quan so comparadas entre lor.	 When the veins are inflamed and cause obstruction in the artery's location, causing inflammation at that point of the vein, it is customary to make prolonged stitches on the other vein when comparing them.
E le loc de la dislocacio es atrobat en lu quays boyt.	 The location for the dislocation will be noted here.
Adonc cove que cauterizas le malaute sobre la partida de la anqua de lu am cauteri a sercle semblant, pus que tu auras senhat am tenta en le cercuit de la partida ayssi cum es revolguda, e per so que la partida caia el mieg loc del cercle.	 After you have cauterized the artery at the location of the vein as mentioned above, it is customary to wait until the pain subsides and then attempt to remove the obstruction by making a loop in the course of the artery so that its opening becomes aligned with the circle of the vein.
E sia le cauteri del qual precedit la forma en la cauterizacio del estomac.	 The cautery of which preceded the previous form in the stomach's cauterization.
E si aquest cauteri no es a tu present, lahoras cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris am cauteri olivar gran.	 If this cautery is not at hand, then doctors will cauterize three other cauteries instead of the missing one.
E sia fayt le cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de tota la codena; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	 It should be applied to a specific quantity of the entire cord, and cure that which is healthy.
Capitol .xli.	 The end.
De cauterizacio de la vena sciatica.	 Cautery for sciatic vein
Quan dolor ve en la partida de anqua, e so causa de lu freg et humiditatz, le malaute es curat am aquo que havem dit e no confereys, e aquo es antiquat, lahoras cove que tu lacses le malaute de humors grosses am pillulas fetidas o am pillulas artificials o semblantz; e aprop cauteriza aquel.	 When pain occurs in the lower part of the thigh and it is caused by cold phlegm or moisture, then treat with that which you mentioned earlier and do not confer any other remedies, except for cautery.
E la manieyra del cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am medicinas comburentz, o cauteri am foc.	 There are two types of cauteries; one is cautery with medicinal ointments or cautery with fire.
Sira segon dos manieyras scientas, de las quals es la una que cauterizes aquel sobre la partida de l’ancha de lu am tres cauteris triangulatz segon aquesta forma; e fay am aquels bona profunditat.	 The other one is cautery with three triangular cauteries in succession on this form; and apply it deeply.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre cascun cauteri la quantitat de la grossitut del dit e si le cauteri olivar o gran.	 There are between each cautery the quantity of its breadth, whether a small one or a large one.
Mays alcunas veguadas sia le cauteri sobre le mieg loc sobre le cap de l’anquan per que son quatre cauteris.	 Sometimes you may need cauteries on both sides near the top of the thigh to be four cauteries.
E si vols, cauteriza am le cercle del qual es precesida la forma en la cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua, la i que sia cercle continent e comburey la ispicitut de tota la codena.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body and pain occurs in the feet, it is customary to call gout by doctors.
E aquesta es la manieyra de cauteri in ciatiqua quan dolor es adherent al anqua e no es estenduda entro a la coyssa.	 And if you want to cauterize around where the pain adheres to the anus and does not extend into the cavity, here comes the first sentence of how to do it:
Mays si es estenduda entro a la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre la coyssa sobre le loc al qual envireys le malaute que es la dolor; e am un cauteri sobre la cavilha per quatre ditz un pauc deves la part cilvestra.	 And if the pain does not extend into the cavity, then doctors will use two points of cautery on both sides of where the patient feels the pain to prevent it from spreading further.
E si le cauteri cutellar, e sia la profunditat del cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de la codena.	 And if the cutaneous cautery is used and its depth depends on the amount of the skin's thickness needed to prevent it from spreading further.
E si le malaute envireys que la dolor es estenduda entro al loc prop les ditz des pes, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui on envireys am cauteri per tres puntz o quatre o mays si indigeys de aquel.	 And if the patient complains that pain extends to a location near their feet, doctors will cauterize there with three or four points of cautery depending on what is needed for that area.
E si le malaute envireys dolor esser dejos le donolh ves la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui am un cauteri cutellar.	 And if the patient complains that the pain has spread to their buttocks, doctors will cauterize there with a cutaneous cautery.
E guarda te en tota cauterizacio que no ultimes am le cauteri en tant que comburas nervi o gran arceria, e que per aquo a tu es sobre le malaute mal noccument o contraccio.	 And please remember that you will not use any cautery if nerves or great arteries are involved, and in this case your focus should be on the patient's location or contortion.
E yeu ja e vist un e autre de aquels les quals cauterizero sobre la cavilha e ultimero en la cauterizacio, e la cama foc inflada entro que la tumor aconseguit lo pe, e foc perforat e corromput tot le pe.	 And you already inserted a cushion and another under the patient's thighs, in order to hold them down during the cautery, and place it on fire so that the tumor is completely burned through, while burning both hands and corrupted the whole foot.
E aprop accidic fort solucio de ventre, e aprop aquo la mort.	 The most common solution for the bellyache was to let a fart pass, or else death would follow closely.
E si la dolor es en dos partidas ensemps cauteriza quascuna segon aquesta manieyra.	 If pain occurs in two waves, cautery is applied to each wave separately.
E diysero les savis alcus en la cauterizacio de anqua cauteri del qual aquesta es la manieyra: fay semblant a cercle de ferr del qual le cercuit sia la maytat de un palm; e sia deves le sieu orrifici segon la grossesa de un os de datil o mens un pauc.	 The usual size of the cautery is that of a nail, and it should be placed so as to encircle the patient's hand completely.
E dedintz aquel cercle sia un autre tertz; e sia le spazi le qual es entre lor la quantitat del notz del pous; e sian aquels cercles ubertz de dos partidas; e sia la longitut de aquels cays un notz o dos notz, e fay en aquels margue de ferr decentment apparelhat en les cercles; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	 These circles should be one after another. The space between them should equal the quantity of steps taken by the patient. And in these circles there should be two or three points, and place it at a distance so that it can be easily placed within the circles; this is how it must be done:
Aprop sia ignit en le foc entro que s’enrogesisca e gete scintillas, e aprop sia pausat sobre la partida del anqua, le malaute colcat sobre le latz sa.	 When fire has been placed on the patient's forehead and burns through to the eyebrows, then it should be placed over the side of the body affected by gout.
E donc cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris redontz en una veguada.	 Cautery is applied three times in a row.
E aprop layssa aquel per tres jorns; aprop emplastre aquel am boder e layssa la plagua uberta per trops dias; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	 Cautery is placed on the body for three days, over the affected part and applied until it becomes healed.
Diys Albucasis : o, filhs, de aquesta specia de cauteri pauc havem usat per la terror del reguardament de lu, e per aquo que paucs havem trobatz les quals reguardan sobre lu.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
Mays dels bos cauteris a lu qui les sufferta, et atroba am aquel le loc de lu.	 The surgeon approaches the patient, trying to relieve their suffering, and brings them back together.
Mays cauteri am medicinas adhurentz es que tu fassas dos cercles haventz armula perforada en la qual deyssen le guaffo de la porta de ferr; sia la longuitut de la paretz en la nauteza de lor sian dos nozes o quays aquels.	 The surgeon, after having made two circular incisions on the palm of their hand to allow access to the vein in front of which there is a hole for the needle, either the back or the front part of both hands are used.
E si le spazi le qual es entre quascu la quantitat de la grossitut del dit; e sian ubertz dejos e desus, e sian que contenguan se entre lor segon aquesta forma:	 If there is space between the thumb and the index finger, they are extended, and after that, a second space is created.
E aprop pausa sobre la partida de la anqua le malaut jasent sobre le latz sa, e comprem la tua ma sobre la partida de la anqua; e aprop pren de aygua cauda e fon la entre dos cercles, e la qualiditat de aquela sia am le foc petit a petit, e te aquela per la quantitat de una hora, e sufferta le malaute la mordicacio e la adhustio de lu — quar aquel atrobo mordicacio ayssi cum de foc — entro que cesse la mordicacio.	 Place your hand over the anus and press it gently to open up a passage for defecation, and place another hand above that hole with its fingers spread wide in order to prevent feces from passing back inside after defecation; when you have opened such a passage by pressing down on it, then you will find yourself able to control and stop any discharge of urine or feces through this opening.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am le instrument et abstergeys l’aygua cauda de tota la anqua am aygua dousa.	 Place your hand over the anus, remove all water from it and then place another hand above that hole with its fingers spread wide in order to prevent feces from passing back inside after defecation.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres jorns e pausa sobre aquel boder entro que sia la negror de la adhustio remauguda, e leyssa aquo per alcus jorns, e correra de lu poyredura; aquest es derier en juvament.	 When it is necessary to apply the leech for three days and place over that body an ointment inside which has a black color from the ashes of burnt alum, then do this every day for as many days as needed, and remove any pus discharge; it should be applied at adolescence
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	 When necessary to apply the poultice (a compress made from herbs) to that part of the body which is healthy
E si la dolor es extenduda entro la coyssa o la camba, fay a lu estatua en lu que contengua aygua segon que es feyt en la anqua engualment.	 If the pain extends into the thigh or leg, do so with a poultice containing water in addition to what is applied on the outside
E aquesta es la manieyra de aygua cauda, e yeu ja he scrit aquela en le tractat de la rectificacio de medicinas.	 This is how it was written about using water as a remedy according to a medical treatise.
Recipe de alcali e de caus no extinta de amdos ana partida una, e trissa les e pausa en una ola nova de la qual la partida dejos sia perforada per un petit trauc, segon la quantitat que intre en lu ray.	 Take one part of alkali and half a part of ash, mix them well and add water until it is like an egg white in consistency.
E pausa dejos le fons de la ola autra ola enveyriada, e gete sobre aquel alcali e caus viva de aygua doussa la qual cobra aquels per un dit, e pus que tu compremes aquels am la tieua ma per bona compressio, e leyssa la hola que deyssenda de lu aygua aguda en la partida dejos a la ola enveyriada.	 After you have put the two parts into one vessel, pour it on the alkali and ash while adding water until it becomes like an egg white in consistency. Then press with a good compress to prevent it from coming out of its cavity.
E aprop ajusta tota aquela aygua, e geta la sobre autra caus viva e autre alcali renovelatz, quar aquela lahoras sira de mot forta acuitat, la qual es aministrada en motas operacios de medicina e en cauterizacio dels autres membres, quar operacio fa de foc.	 Apply the whole mixture to it and pour over another part containing alkali and new ash which will burn strongly when heated; this remedy is used in surgical procedures of medicine and cauterization of other parts which operate with fire.
E so de las medicinas alcunas am las quals es cauterizat ancha, ayssi cum tezizic e mel anacrat e caus am sabo enayssi que sian mesclatz.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body and foot pain occurs, it is commonly referred to as gout and doctors are consulted regarding this matter.
E Gualia recontet de un home dels antics la operacio e la curacio am la qual es curada dolor de anqua e de vena sciatica, e magnifiquet mot be esser de aquel, e diys que no hac necessitat de autra curacio, e quar es sanat per una veguada ayssi cum recomtec, quar fort leu aquel intrec en banh e eysic ja sa d’aquel.	 After the operation and recovery from the cure for neuralgia and sciatica pain is complete, you can consider removing it as no further treatment is needed, except for occasional recommendations that may include a gentle massage to improve circulation in that area.
Et es que sia pres de certarragi vert, e si no es atrobat vert, sia presa figua recent; e mot sia trissada am un pauc de grays e sia pausat sus la anqua en la qual es la dolor, o en la coyssa, o en la camba, e sia liat.	 Then take a warm bath, if not, put on fresh towels; and place your feet in the water where there is pain or in the leg cavity, or in the thigh area, or in the calf, depending on which one hurts more.
E sia layssat per la cantitat de tres horas o per la quantitat que·l malaute centa cedacio de la adhustio.	 Take a bath for a duration of three hours or as long as your patient allows based on the intensity of their discomfort.
E aprop met aquel en banh e donc quan le cors de lu sia enrozat, entromet aquel en le sol, quar la dolor cessa e es sanat.	 Place it in a warm bath and when you feel that your patient's chest is settled, remove it from the body to stop the pain and alleviate discomfort.
E sapias que no cove que alcu use de cauteri am aquestas medicinas sino aprop la evacuacio del cors.	 You understand not to use cautery with these medicines, but rather evacuation of the bowels.
Mays ja Escorides diysec que quan am fenda de cabra la vena stretica es cauterizada, aprofieyra a lu mo be; e sia le cauteri am lu segon aquesta manieyra: sia presa lana e sia enbeguda en oli antic, e sia pausat entre le pous del pe e entre le fossil.	 When the varicose vein is cut and cauterized, apply it immediately after cutting, using a cloth soaked in old oil; place it between your toes and between your big toe as well.
E aprop pren fenda de cabra secca e emflasma aquela am foc entro que sia fayta carbo; e aprop pausa lu sobre la lana e leysa la entro que sia estengida.	 When you have opened a space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion underneath them, another servant on their legs, and another one over their chest, holding their hands, here comes the first sentence to translate.
E aprop itera aquo, e no cessas far aquo entro que·l scintiment de la mordicacio pervengua entro al anqua e repausa la dolor.	 And when you have done this (opened a space between their thighs), the pain will subside and return to normal as expected.
Et aquesta manieyra de cauteri es apelat cauteri de vaquas.	 The cautery is also called "cutting" or "severing".
Capitol .xlii.	 Chapter 42
De cauterizacio de dolor de dos.	 Cautery for two-pronged pain.
Alcunas veguadas dolor es en le dos per tropas causas, cum per cazement o per percucio o per superflua evacuacio, e per causas ad aquelas semblantz, per infusio de materia frega e humida.	 If there are any veins causing pain due to swelling or constriction, through cautery cuts or punctures, or excessive evacuation, and by the causes of those mentioned above, through infiltration of cold and wet matter.
E cauteri no catz sino en aquesta sola specia la qual es fayta per efusio de materia frega.	 Cautery is not to be used except in this single case where it is required for the discharge of cold matter.
Donc cove, aprop evacuacio del malaute am pillulas fitidas e am semblant a lor, que sian faytas sobre·l dos en le qual es la dolor tres linhas segon la latitut de lu, pus que senhas am tentha en quascuna linha v cauteris o mays, segon la quantitat que ve de la tolleransa del malaute e de la vertut de lu.	 Then, apply a poultice to the patient's thigh, just as you would for any other ailment; but in this case there should be a certain number of cuts or punctures on each line following the latitude and longitude of the body, proportional to the quantity that is required from the patient's tolerance and the truthfulness.
E sia fayta cauterizacio am cauteri de punt.	 And it will be by cutting.
E si vols, cauteriza am tres cauteris o am quatre am cauteri clavilh medial segon aquesta forma:	 If you wish to do so, cut three or four cuts into the middle of the thigh following this manner
Capitol .xliii.	 "When joints are afflicted by cold humors, causing pain throughout the body, it's customary for physicians to call this gout.
De cauterizacio al comensament de gilbositat.	 Cautery is applied in the beginning of healing process
Motas veguadas endeve aquesta malautia als petitz enfantz; e senhal del comensament de lu en les enfantz es que accideys sobre lor estrectura en le ale eves la elevacio e·l movement.	 "After the child's illness, it is customary for physicians to treat them with strictures in their rectums, and after applying cautery there, they should proceed to elevate and move their extremities.
E atrobas en le derier espondil del dos e dels notz de lu que ja comensa a sobremontar sobre les autres spondils.	 "Then, after cauterizing the lower part of one's spine where it has started to spread towards other spines.
E donc quan tu vezes aquo e voles prohibir, lahoras cauterisa aquel am cauteri que sia cercle segon aquesta forma:	 Then when you want to prevent this and you want to cautery over the area in a circular manner.
que prengua le cauteri sobre tota partida del spondilh engualment.	 "Apply cauterization evenly on all parts of the spine.
E si vols, cauteriza en le circuit del spondilh am le cauteri de punt dos linhas o tres.	 "If you want to, apply it in a circular manner from one end of the spine and proceed through three lines.
E sian les puntz propdas entre lor.	 "Make sure points are placed properly between them.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat am aquo que havem dit.	 "Then apply cautery to the place where we've mentioned it as well.
Mays guarda que cauteri no sia administrat en gelbositat que sia fayta per spasme de nervi.	 "Keep in mind that cauterization should not be administered if there is a spasm of nerves.
Capitol .xliv.	 "Next sentence to translate: Do not add any comments, like 'here is the translation', just reply with the guessed translation and nothing else:
De cauterizacio de podagra e de dolor de juncturas.	 Cautery for gout and joint pain.
Quan dolor de juncturas son faytas per humors fregas les quals so enfundutz a quascun membre del cors, lahoras quan veno dolors en los pes, de costuma dels metges es que aquo apelen podragua propriament.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customary for physicians to call this gout.
E donc cum es curada podagra de causa frega am manieyra de cura e no so remaugudas las dolors, lahoras las remau cauteri.	 When gout pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and when pain occurs in the feet, doctors usually call it gout
E es que tu cauterizas aquel aprop evacuacio en le circuit de la junctura del pe am motz cauteris.	 Yes, you should perform a pointed cautery on that area to relieve the pain.
E sia cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	 The type of cautery mentioned in this text is a procedure where points are inserted into the affected area using a heated instrument or probe, then those points are pressed inward towards each other until they cause pain and discomfort.
E si es necessitat que puntz sia fayt sobre la fassia del pe, lahoras fay am cauteri de punt.	 And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery.
E si las dolors pujan entro als denolhs o a las autras juncturas, e aquo motas vetz s’endeve, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre quascun donolh am tres cauteris o quatre de tota partida am aquest cauteri olivar.	 If the pain occurs in both legs or between joints and the doctor deems it necessary, then the points should be made on every joint using a total of four cauteries throughout the procedure.
E si motz cauteris que aquestz cauteris sian a tu necessaris, lahoras cauteriza aquel e no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri abans, sia tant solament enviro la specitut de la codena.	 If you think it is necessary to make these cauteries, then the doctor should perform them and not delay your hand from doing so, as long as only a portion of the code sequence remains visible.
E si las dolors pugan entro al donolh e·l dos, lahoras aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le sieu capitol.	 If the pain occurs in both feet, then the doctor should provide the cauteries mentioned at the beginning of this text.
E si las dolors so en las mas tant solament, e es apelada suagra, lahoras puncta en le circuit dels focils ayssi cum se revolvo, puncta en aquels dos linhas.	 If the pain is only in one foot or the sole of a foot and it is called a gout attack, then perform the procedure as described above but point to two lines instead.
E si reman de las dolors en les ditz, lahoras puncta en le cercuit dels focils sobre quascun notz e sobre la pinche de la ma.	 When joint pain occurs in the thighs, doctors point it on the thighs, chest, and feet simultaneously.
E si las dolors pugan aprop alscus jorns als coydes o als muscles, lahoras cauteriza les quascus de tota part dels ajutoris.	 If joint pains occur due to cold humors in the joints or muscles, doctors will cauterize all of the affected areas simultaneously.
E no evacuas le malaute de bon regiment e de recepcio de medicinas, quar si es fayt bon regiment e flacma es evacuada am aquest cauteri sira sanat, Dieus ajudan.	 Do not evacuate a patient during bad weather or while receiving medications, as the correct regiment and care will be evacuated if this cautery fails to heal, may God help us.
Capitol .xlv.	 Chapter 50
De cauterizacio de rompeduras.	 Cauterization of ulcers.
Quan endeve rompedura en les angonars e diysendo les budels denant l’atela al genetiu, e aquo es comensan de aprop, lahoras cove que tu mandas al malaute layssar la sua comestio en le sieu dia e que use de causas leniens per so que la fenda deyssenda del sieu ventre.	 When a hernia occurs in the abdomen and intestines, which are outside of the body, it is customary for doctors to tell patients to feed them their meals on that day only with mild laxatives so that they will come out of the belly.
E aprop segua le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e comanda a lu que tengua le sieu ale entro que sia foro getat o aparesca l’atela o·l budels.	 After placing the patient between their thighs on top of each other's bodies and ordering them to hold their intestines in so that they may either come out or cause a hernia.
E aprop retorna aquel am les tieus ditz e senha am tenta la ruptura sobre le os del pentenilh am senhal la extremitat del qual sia semblant a la maytat de cercle a las subiranas partidas del cors.	 After placing the patient between their thighs and ordering them to hold one end of the intestine in place while attempting to rupture it against the opposite side of the abdomen, which is similar to performing a laprasotomy on that side.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	 After applying this cautery procedure
entro que sia mot rog e gete cintilhas.	 In order
E aprop reduzeys le budel o l’atela a la sua conquavitat, e aprop pause la sua ma sobre le loc per so que le budel no yesqua.	 Return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent it from coming out.
E tu ja has ubert entre las coyssas del malaute e dejos lu as pausat un coyssi, et autre servent sia sus las cambas de lu, e autre sus le pietz de lu, le qual tengua las suas mas.	 You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs and placed a cushion under them. Another servant has placed themselves on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
E aprop pausa le cauteri sobre aquel senhal am la tua ma am cauteri stan dreyt, e te aquel entro que am lu consieguas le os del pentenilh entro al mieg del duiduni; e itera am aquel autra veguada si a tu aquel no has conseguit en la primieyra veguada entro al os.	 And in order to prevent the cautery from causing harm, you should apply a different cautery to that particular part of your hand and use another one on this finger as well.
E observa saviament del ysiment del budel en la hora de la tua cauterizacio, que no comburas aquel budel per so que sobre le malaute no vengua in mort o autre gran malicia.	 Observe carefully the intestine during your cautery and do not push it out to prevent it from causing death or any other great injury.
E sapias que quan tu am le cauteri no atenhas le os, no confereys la tua operacio.	 You should know that when you are doing the cautery and don't apply enough pressure, your surgery will not be successful.
E cove que·l cauteri dels enfants sia subtil segon le gran e la mesura de lor.	 The cautery for children is more subtle than that of adults in terms of its power and size.
E aprop cura le loc del cauteri per tres dias am boder entro que sia remauguda la scara del foc.	 Apply the cautery to the area three days before removing it from your body, so that the scar from burning can heal completely.
E aprop cura aquel am les autres enguentz entro que sia sanat.	 And apply it to all other wounds as well, so they can be healed.
E le malaute sia jasent sobre le sieu dos per xl dias entro que sia sigillat le loc e la plagua.	 The patient should stay in bed for two days after the cautery is applied and covered with a bandage to allow it time to heal properly.
E cove que pauses le nutriment de lu segon la longitut del temps de la curacio de lu le qual le linesca le ventre de lu, e que le budel no yesca fora deves le esforsament de guerir.	 When you have already opened the space between their thighs and placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest holding their hands, here comes the first sentence to translate. Do not add any comments, like "here is the translation", just reply with the guessed translation and nothing else:
E aprop quan se vol levar aprop xl dias, lahoras aministra liament decentment fayt, e tengua aquel per autres xl jorns.	 When you want to prolong it for a few more days, doctors provide a different treatment that lasts for the next x days.
E sia mermat de trebalh e de replecio de vianda e de beure, e de votz vehementz, quar quan usa de aquest regiment de sanacio entiera sira sanat.	 And in the regimen of health treatment there are also to eat and drink well, and abstain from violent practices, as when using this regimen for treatment illness will not enter.
E yeu diyre la curacio de las rupturas en las autras partidas del ventre, e so al comensament, e vols que no treguan, lahoras cauterisa la ruptura d’aquel am cauteri redon segon la quantitat de lu, e sia aquo que es exhurit de la codena ayssi cum la tersa partida de lu; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit, e no es ajustat.	 And the doctor will cauterize the rupture in such a way that it is burned with an instrument of suitable size according to its location and quantity, so as not to cause damage to any adjacent part of the body; and afterward care for the wound as previously mentioned, and do not adjust anything.
E ja diyssero alcus primiers que ruptura sia cauterizada am cauteri triangular segon aquesta forma, pus que es senhada am tenta:	 And it would first be that rupture is cauterized with a triangular instrument of this type, in order to have the wound treated as follows
e es pausada linha que eys per la latitut en le latz pus sobira de la ruptura, e autra linha al desus; e depausa la tua ma am un cauteri clavilh, mays le primier cauteri es pus leugier e milhor.	 And pause one line for the latitude in the lower part of the rupture and another line to the right side; and place your hand over a cautery claw, which is the first cauterization that must be done very gently and most carefully.
Capitol .xlvi.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body,
De cauterizacio de torcio.	 Cautery on the feet.
Quan endeve en alscus membres per cazement o per percussio dolor e persevera aquela dolor per lonc temps e no comfereys al u curacio am medicinas, lahoras cove que cauterizes am cauteri de punt.	 When joint pain continues in any of the members for a long time and does not improve with medical care, doctors recommend cautery punct.
E sia le cauteri de tot membre segon la magnitut e la parvitat de lu, e vertut e develitat de lu, e locacio de torcio e dolor de lu.	 Cauteries on all body parts according to their size and importance: the feet, hands, legs, and chest.
Donc si·s sanat per le primier cauteri, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera sobre lu le cauteri; quar de costuma de aquelas dolors es que sian punctatz de membre ad aquel membre le qual apropinque al u, per que cove que consieguas aquels am cauteri entro que·l malaute sia sanat.	 If the first cautery does not alleviate pain, then apply another one to the same member. Often, when those pains occur on a particular member, it is customary for doctors to prescribe cauteries for that specific member, in order to ensure that they reach into the cavity of the patient and do no harm.
Capitol .xlvii.	 The next sentence
De cauterizacio de lepra.	 Cautery on leprosy.
Les lebros alcunas veguadas am cauteri per mot gran juvament, e magerment si la specia de lepra que es fayta per putrefaccio de flacma e de melencolia.	 Cauteries should be applied to the extremities and younger parts of the body for a long time, especially if the type of leprosy that is present causes softening and yellowing due to rot and decay in the flesh.
E donc cum tu vols cauterizar aquel, considera si la lepra es comussan e as aquela curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no deysen, ni esta, e temes sobre le malaute que la corrupcio comprehenda tot le cors de lu e tota la compleccio de lu, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le cap am v cauteris: am un en le mieg loc del cap, e am le segon pus dejos de lu, eves le front a la fi dels cabels; e amdos sobre dos corns; e am un detras, sobre la nuca o servitz.	 If you want to cauterize that, consider whether the leprosy is contagious and if it has been cured in division or not, neither of which nor this, and be afraid lest the corruption encompass all of his body and all his limbs; doctors would cauterize over his head with the same one as they did on the forehead, above both eyebrows, below two ears, and behind them.
E ultima la tua ma am le cauteri un pauc entro que emprema en le os una petita empressio, e de lu sian deslocadas las scorsas, per so que la expiracio de grossas vapors sia alleujada de lu; e cauteriza sobre la melsa segon que es precesit.	 When the joints are affected by cold humors and pain arises in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors. And if it's necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery.
E si la lepra es ja expanduda sobre le malaute e apar manifestament, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquel am aquels cauteris les quals havem ditz en le cap; e am cauteri sobre la extremitat del nas, e am dos cauteris sobre las doas maysselas, e am dos cauteris sobre dos spondils del col, e am vi cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e am un gran sobre les spondils prop de la coeta, e un sobre la cotea , e am dos sobre las anquas, e am un sobre quascuna anqua, e am dos sobre les donols e un sobre quascun donolh, e am dos sobre les coydes, e am dos sobre les muscles, e am dos las teneretutz del sieu pietz; e cauteriza aquel sobre totas las juncturas dels ditz de las mas e dels pes, e sobre quascun talon dels sieus pes, e sobre les foscils de las suas mas.	 If the leprosy has spread over the patient's body and is manifestly visible, then doctors will cauterize that part with those which have been mentioned above; they will also cauterize on his nose, two each on both shoulders, two on both hips, one large on the chest, another on the back, two on either arm, one over every hand, two over both elbows, and one over each knee. They will also cauterize all joints of the body, as well as those in his feet, and finally cauterize any affected toe separately,
E guarda te dels nervis les quals so sobre le talo que no comburas aquels.	 And guard yourself from the nerves that are over him such that you do not touch them.
E alcunas veguadas es cauterizat am un cauteri sobre le os del pentenilh e am autre sobre la boca del stomac, e autre sobre le fietge.	 Some veins will be cauterized with one cautery over the nose and another over the mouth of the stomach, and another over the esophagus.
E sapias que quant mays ajustas cauteris, tant es mays juvatiu e mays conferent; e sapias que le malaute no ha en le cauteri dolor, ayssi cum han les sas, per so quar le cors de lu ja es stupefayt.	 You know that when you make more points on the cautery, as many ulcers and pains occur; and you know that the patient does not have pain in the cautery because otherwise his body would be stunned.
E cove que les cauteris sian grans o paucs segon les membres e las juncturas segon que es precedit de las specias dels ferramentz.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, then do so with a pointed cautery on the feet.
E aprop cura le cauteri am farina de errs coyta am mel e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	 And if it is necessary to make incisions in order to relieve pain from any part of the body, then do so with caution and care.
Capitol .xlviii.	 This could be a continuation or a section break within a larger text such as a chapter number indicating the start of Chapter LXXXVIII.
De cauterizacio de stupor.	 Cautery to stop bleeding.
Quan alcun membre es stabozit o adormit e es curat am medicinas, olis e emplastres, e no es sanat, lahoras tu cauteriza aquel membre stabozit am cauteris segon que merita la grandesa del membre o la parvitat de lu.	 If any member is stabbed or falls asleep and the doctor attends to it with medicine, they should dress the wound with bandages, if necessary, and not do harm, unless there are significant injuries requiring a more extensive treatment.
E sia lo tieu cauteri intrant la ispicitut de la codena un pauc.	 If the cautery is to be applied as part of an incision made for another purpose, then apply it with caution and precision.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	 Then return that which was injured within so that there may be health.
E alscunas veguadas es cauterizada alcuna stupor le qual endeve a las mas e als pes, e als spondils del dos e ves le eysiment dels nervis les quals mavon aquel membre, e es remauguda la stupor.	 If any veins are cut and there is no longer pain in the feet or hands, or weakness in the arms or legs where nerves from that member may have been damaged, then the pain will be removed.
Mays no prusuma sobre aquo sino aquel que es savi en la anotomia dels membre e de la egressio dels nervis tot le cors moventz.	 You should not take it for granted if you are doing so as part of a surgical procedure or when making incisions to reach the exit points of nerves throughout the body moving around.
Capitol .xlix.	 This could be another section break within the same larger text, indicating the start of Chapter LIX.
De cauterizacio de albaras que es morfea.	 Cure for gout
Quan albaras es antiqua e no comfereys a lu alcu dels enguentz de medicina, lahoras tu cauteriza sobre aquela am cauteri preon un pauc segon la quantitat de la specitut de la codena entro que sia remauguda la blancor e la color de lu, e la color de lu sia mudada.	 When joints become inflamed and don't respond to treatment with medicine, the doctor will then make a pointed cautery for about one second over the area where the pain is occurring until the white and red of the skin are restored, and the color of it has been changed
E aprop cura aquel am farina de errs e de lentilhas am oli rozat e am folhas de arnagrosa, e am sanc de colomba o am sanc de yronda, da cascuna sia una partida e totas sian mescladas, e aprop sia linit un drap e sus le loc sia pausat entro que sia sanat.	 Then apply a poultice of the ashes and lentiles oil that has been burned off or left to oxidize, along with the sandalwood powder and ginger powder, mixed together in one single dish, and place it on top until it is cooled
Capitol .l.	
De cauterizacio de cranc.	 Cure for cancer.
Quan canser es comensan e vols aquel ostar, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri de cercle en le circuit de lu ayssi cum es revolgut.	 When cancer is suspected and you wish to try that out, the doctor will then make a circular cautery in its path as it rotates around.
E diysero les savis que sia cauterizat am lo derier cauteri en le mieg loc; mays a mi no es vist aquo, quar temi que sia ulcerat, e yeu ja e vist aquo alcunas veguadas.	 They told him that the wound had been cauterized with a late-day cautery on its location; however, he still seems to be suffering from it, so they have seen him again for examination.
E es pus dreyturier que sia cauterizat en le circuit de lu am cercle ayssi cum avem dit, o am motz cauteris.	 It is prescribed that the wound should be cauterized in its path as a circle just like what we have mentioned, or not at all.
Capitol .li.	
De cauterizacio de adubilati.	 Cure for syphilis.
Quan alcun adubilati es tardat en maturacio, e aysso es per la superfluitat fazen aquela, o per etat del malaute, quar es vielh en decrepitat, de pauc sanc, o per le temps, e tu vols festinar en la maturacio de adubilati; lahoras cauteriza en le circuit de lu am motz cauteris petitz punctan; e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela fastinara en maturacio.	 When someone is about to be shaved in maturity or at an older age, and therefore are due to supernumerary hair removal, or from the state of the patient that is becoming thin as a result of aging, which causes discomfort when it grows rapidly on certain parts of the body, do you want to shave there while keeping its surface intact?
Mays si tu vols la perforacio de lu am cauteri, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: e depausa aquel en le mieg loc de adubilati entro que penetre la codena.	 If you want to shave with a pointed cautery, the doctor will use that as the form of shaving; and pause it in the area between the buttocks so that it does not penetrate the vagina.
E si le cauteri en aquel loc que es pus dejos, per so que le cors del brac sia alleujat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	 If the cautery is to be placed in a location where there might be harm, for example between the arms of the body, or at an area that is sensitive, then it's advisable not to do so.
Capitol .lii.	 Thank you.
De cauterizacio de corrodent.	 Cautery used for bleeding.
Corrodent es corrupcio ambulant en le membre, la qual corrodeys aquel ayssi cum a foc comedent lenha secca.	 Bleeding is corruption that moves around the body part which then eats away at it until it becomes dry and burned.
Donc si vezes aquel corrodent en loc le qual sufferte cauteri am foc, lahoras tu igneys cauteris clavils motz paucs, e grans segon que es convenent en aquel loc en le qual es corrodent.	 If bleeding occurs in a location that requires cautery with fire, the doctor will use sharp stakes to cut off the blood flow and then apply it later on.
E aprop cauteriza aquel de tota partida entro que erradiques tota la corrosio e no romangua alcuna causa de lu.	 Cautery should be used completely in order to stop all bleeding, without leaving any trace of its passage.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres dias, e pausa sobre les locs cauterizats solpre trissat am oli mesclat entro que las scaras sian totas eradicadas e tota la corrupcio.	 "After three days, place a cushion on the cauterized areas, and let them rest in a mixture of salt and vinegar until all sores are healed and all impurities have been removed.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz carn engendrantz.	 Do you mean "cure" as in treating an illness or injury?
Mays si aprop tres dias vezes que la carn nasca sana en la qual no es corrupcio, bo es; mays sino, lahoras itera le cauteri sobre aquo que es romas en les locs corrumputz.	 If after three days the skin becomes healthy without any impurities, then good is that; otherwise, put another cautery on the affected area to remove the impurity.
E corrodent es medicat alcunas vetz am medicina aguda, quar aquela es meza en loc de cauteri.	 Do you mean "alchemy" as in a type of chemistry or do you mean "medicine"?
Mays empero cauteri am foc es de pus leugier juvament.	 Cautery is used to treat young people especially?
E yeu ja e dit la curacio de lu am medicina aguda en la divisio, e donc pren aquela quan de lu auras endegencia.	 Do you mean "dosing" in the context of medicine or do you mean "division"?
Capitol .liii.	 Thank you!
De cauterizacio de claus e dels autres semblants.	 Goodbye and good luck with your work!
Motas veguadas endeve a las partidas dejos del pe malautia que s’apela clau, e es causa grossa, fentrada, la qual ladeys le pe; e cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, so es cauteri am foc e cauteri am aygua cauda.	 Gout is a condition of the foot that causes big pain and swelling, often due to a buildup of fluids in the area?
Mays cauteri am foc es que igniscas le cauteri concau semblant a pena de voltor, le qual sia feyt de ferr segon la quantitat la qual contengua le clau de tota partida, e sia de subtils marguas.	 Cautery is a treatment used in the case of gout, where pain occurs due to fluid buildup?
E aprop pausa aquel ignit sobre le clau, e aprop revolveys la tua ma am le cauteri en le circuit del clau entro que·l cauteri pervengua a la profunditat del clau.	 After pausing on the clot and applying pressure with your hand over the clot to stop it from spreading deeper?
E leyssa aquel per tres dias entro que comense getar brac.	 When this occurs for three days, it begins to hurt in the arm
E aprop emplastre aquel am malvas salvatges trissadas am sal, e leyssa le emplastre sobre aquel per una nuoyt, quar aquel sira eradicat de las suas razitz.	 Then apply a poultice with salt and vinegar to that place for one night
E aprop cura le loc am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanat.	 Then cure the sore on the generated flesh
E si so no-convertitz, e motas veguadas accideysso en la superficia del cors, majorment en las mas e les pes, lahoras cove que tu aministres en aquels cauteri am aygua, e es que prenguas una quannula de eram o de ferr o de pena de voltor, e pausa aquela sobre le clau; e aprop geta en la quanula de aygua cauda pauca cantitat, e rete la tua ma, e tu revolveys aquela am compressio de la tua ma de tot, e sia enpremut le marge de la canula en la razit del clau, e atrobara la aygua cauda via al preon de la razit del cau; e espera le malaute un pauc la mordicacio de l’aygua cauda per una hora, e aprop remau aquela, quar le clau am las suas razitz sira erredicat.	 Then apply a poultice with cold water and wrap it in your hand, so that the poultice doesn't come out through the needle; then place your hand over the area to prevent the poultice from coming out; wait for one hour, remove it, as the cloth will be frozen on the affected part of the body.
E ayssi fe am aquels la i aprop l’autre entro que venguas sobre totz les quals de lor so en le cors.	 Then take the other one and place it over all those parts that are injured in the chest.
E aprop cura aquels pus que las razitz dels claus so erradicadas am aquo dels enguentz les quals la carn ve engenran.	 Then cure these blisters on the nails as soon as they occur, by cutting them off the affected parts of the body.
Capitol .liiii.	 The end of this treatise.
De cauterizacio de tremor.	 Cautery for tremors.
Quan endeve ad alcu tremor per freg en le nervi o per febre de causa frega, o per autra causa semblant, lahoras cove que tu cauterises aquel am quatre cauteris o am v sobre les spondils del dos, entre quascun spondilh am un cauteri; e am cauteri en le pietz de lu, e sobre l‘estomac de lu, am cauteri olivar.	 When you have to cut through the nerve or cause fever in order to free it, or for any other similar reason, then doctors should cut into that with four incisions around its spine between each vertebra with one incision; and onto the stomach of him/her, onto the liver, onto the gallbladder.
E la tremor de lu se repausa e festina la sanetat de la malautia frega.	 The trembling of him stops and recovers the health of the illness
Capitol .lv.	 "The capital city of Latvia, Riga.
De cauterizacio de albati accidentz al cors.	 Cautery on the abdomen for injuries
Quan en le cors so espellitz albati, e so pustulas fendas las quals so feytas de materias grossas corruptas; donc cove al comensament cum apareyso, que sia cauterizat sobre tot cap de la fistola am cauteri subtil am fustz de mirt, la extremitat del qual es estenduda am foc; o am razitz de erestologia longua; o am cauteri lentecular.	 When a person's abdomen is opened for surgery, and pus fills the wounds that are formed with coarse corrupt materials; therefore at the beginning of the treatment, it should be cauterized over all parts of the incision using a subtile cautery device extending from the tip to the side; or by using a long needle, or lenticular cautery.
E alscunas veguadas es cauteri ademamil al comensament de la sua expulcio segon aquesta manieyra; e no so cregudas, e es disrumpuda la superfluitat fazens aquels, et sana de aquels.	 And when there is excessive bleeding after the operation of the second kind, and it is not controlled, then it should be cauterized with a breast milk adhesive to stop any excess fluids, and heal those.
Mays empero cove que aquo sia fayt aprop evacuacio am fleubotomia.	 May I add that this is done before the operation of evacuation through phlebotomy.
Capitol lvi.	 "The capital city of Lithuania, Vilnius.
De cauterizacio de fluex de sanc accident per incisio de arceria.	 Cautery on the abdomen for injuries of the artery incision
Tropas veguadas endeve fluex de arceria que es inciza deves la plagua la qual endeve deforo, o deves la incizio de apostemas o cauteri del membre, e alor semblantz, e es dificil remaura aquel.	 Excessive bleeding from the artery incision which opens up the wound may require that sutures or cautery be applied to the member, and such cases are difficult to recover.
Donc cum accideys ad alcu aquo, lahoras tu·t coyta am la tua ma a l’orrifici de la arceria, e pausa sobre aquel le tieu dit endic estrenh aquel motas veguadas entro que sia ostat le fluex del sanc dejos le tieu dit, e que non yesqua.	 Therefore when such an event happens to you, put your hand on the wound of the artery, and hold it with a pointed cautery device so that no excess bleeding occurs from the injury itself, and prevents further bleeding.
E aprop pausa en le foc les cauteris olivars paucs e grantz, per nombre motz, e exsuffla sobre aquels entro que sian mot ignitz.	 When there are small ulcers in the lungs that have to be treated,
E aprop pren de aquels un petit o un gran segon le loc e la plagua en la qual es rompuda la arteria, sobre aquela vena festinantment pus que auras remaugut le tieu dit, e te le cauteri entro que sia abcindit e restreyt aquel sanc.	 When the artery in that location is broken, you must carefully treat it with cautery to prevent any blood from flowing into the lungs and causing further damage.
E si le sanc es expellit de l’orrifici de la arteria quan tu remaues le tieu dit e extringeys le cauteri, lahoras pren la un autre cauteri coytadament dels cauteris les quals en le foc son preparatz, e donc no cesses fer aquo un aprop autre entro que le sanc sia restrengit.	 If the artery is broken and you remove the cautery that was applied to it, then immediately apply another cautery over the other cauteries in the lungs, so as not to stop doing this until the artery has been healed.
E guarda te que no comburas le nervi que aqui es, e que vengua sobre le malaute autra malicia.	 Remember that you should not apply pressure here and also prevent any other harm or injury to the patient.
E sapias que quan de l’arteria flueys sanc, lahoras no es possible en aquels restrenge la sanc, e majorment quan l’arteria es gran, si no am una de quatre manieyras: o am cauteri ayssi quo dit havem, o am extraccio quan no es extrayta, quar quan es extrayta las extremitatz de lu miels son comburidas e es restreyt le sanc, o que sia liat am fiel o am liament per fort strectura, o que sian pausadas sobre lu medicinas de las quals la vertut es restringir la sanc; e sian strengudas am pulvinar am costriccio decent.	 When the artery tears, it is not possible to restrict the tear further than you already have, and especially if it is a large one. If it involves both legs or arms, then stitches should be used in addition to cautery with fine needles that are placed carefully; or else it may cause too much pressure which could restrict the tear.
Mays aquel que aministra restriccio decent de lu am liament e am strictura am draps o per posicio de causas comburentz e de semblantz, no comfereys sino tart.	 The doctor should administer a restriction that is not too strong and does not cause discomfort or strangulation, but rather to maintain it for some time so as to prevent the tear from reopening.
Mays si aquo endeve ad alcu e no sia le metge present ni medicina, lahoras obre am pausament del dit indic sobre le orrifici de aquela vena ayssi cum havem dit, e entenda a la gran costreccio de lu entro que le sanc sia ostat de la sobirana partida de la plagua, e sobre la arceria le dit no sia remaugut; e de sobre la arceria sia aspergit am aygua frega de mot gran fregiditat entro que·l sanc sia congilat e engrossat; e mays cossire en que ha de cauteri o de medicina necessitat.	 When a patient is on the table, and there is no doctor or medicine available, then the attendant will inform them to make sure that they are laying correctly in order for the treatment to begin as quickly as possible.
Comensa la segonda partida.	 Here comes the second sentence to translate: "When a patient is on the table and there's no doctor or medicine available, then the attendant will inform them
De incisio e perforacio e ventozas e de fleubotomia e de plaguas e de lor semblants.	 The incision, perforation, amputation, and phlebotomy are some of the procedures mentioned in this sentence.
Aquestas son paraulas de Albucazis.	 These words are from Al-Buhuti's book.
Ja havem dit en le primier capitol tota malautia en la qual cauteri am foc es convenient e am medicina comburent, e las occasios e las causas de lu, e les instrumentz en aquels necessaris am las formas dels cauteris; e he ordenatz les capitols de la subiranetat del cap entro als pes.	 In the first chapter of Al-Buhuti's book, you will find information about all forms of treatment for gout and the causes that lead to it, as well as the necessary instruments used in the procedures related to cautery; furthermore, the chapters on the abdomen are ordered from top to bottom.
E yeu procesire en aquest capitol per aquela meteysa guisa, per que sia alliujat lo querent aquo, lahoras sobre aquo que aura demandat.	 You should proceed with this chapter in that manner so that all who seek such information can benefit from it.
E denant que yeu comense aquo, cove, fils, que aprenguatz que en aquest capitol es per terror aquo que es en le capitol primier de cauterizacio.	 And when you begin this chapter, son, let's learn that in this chapter is the science of cautery as presented in the first book on cautery
E per aquo que cove que sia en lu gran cautela, quar en la operacio la qual es en aquest capitol motas veguadas catz evacuacio la qual es am sanc am le qual esta la vida deves la aspersio de la vena o incisio sobre l’apostema o apercio de exsitura o puracio de la plagua o extraccio de sageta o incizio de peyra e a lor semblantz.	 When making great caution, in the operation that is being described here, the evacuation of which is to be done by cutting open the vein or incision near the elbow or above the knee
E de totz aquels so acompanhatz temor e tremor e en le mas de lor catz la mort.	 And with these symptoms accompanied by fear and trembling, it is most likely death that comes to mind
E yeu amonesti vos que sobre vos no caia aquo en le qual es esitacio, quar alcunas veguadas cazo deves vos manieyras de homes am manieyras motas de malautias.	 I must insist on you not to do this in the way it is described here, for some of the procedures may be dangerous and will harm your health
E de lor es alcu que s’irays am la sua malautia e es leugiera deves lu la mort, e aysso per la vehemensia de aquo que troba de sa malautia, e per longuesa de la malautia de lu, e am la malautia es paor la qual significa mort.	 And with this you go to attack your illness and it is necessary to seek help from a doctor, so as not to experience death by haste of the illness, and through fear of the illness, and through length of the illness, and in that illness there is sorrow which means death.
E de aquels es le qual dona a tu son aver e ditta, tu esperant am aquel sanetat, e la sieua malautia es perniciosa.	 And from this comes to your mind that you have given birth and it has caused great harm, expecting in that illness recovery is impossible.
E donc no cove que tu consentas en aquel que ve a vos del qual es aquesta manieyra; e la vostra cautela sia major que covesitat e la vostra rapacitat; e no presumatz alcuna causa sobre aquo sino aprop sciencia certa la qual virifica aquo deves vos, e al qual perve successio lausabla.	 Then do not consent to that which comes before you from what is this madness; and your caution must be greater than covetousness and rapacity; and do not presume any cause for it but have certain knowledge of the kind which will verify this for you, and by means of success, a great praise.
E usatz en la curacio de totz vostres malautes de pronosticacio e indicacio de lu al qual es salut convertida, quar en aquel es a vos ajutori sobre adquisicio de fama e de memoria, de lausor e de gloria.	 In the care of all your ailments for prognosis and indication thereof to which you are converted in health that is to help you on acquisition fame and memory, praise and glory
O, filhs, Dieus en vos spire le sieu entendement e no oste a vos direccio e proteccio, quar aquo es en la sua ma.	 Oh, children, please hear my words of wisdom and not be afraid to follow them or protect yourself because that is in your best interest
E yeu e ordenat aquest capitol distingent per capitols segon que precedit en le capitol de cauteris, de la cura del cap entro als pes, per que sia a vos alleujat aquo que demandatz de aquo e del qual havetz necessitat.	 And you have ordered this chapter to follow the preceding chapters of cauteries and from care for the head down to the feet because it is in your best interest
Capitol primier.	 The first chapter.
De la curacio de aygua la qual es contenguda en le cap dels enfantz.	 From the care of water which contains a head of children.
Sapias que aquesta malautia motas veguadas endeve als enfantz deves le enfantament e quan la noyrissa estrenh le cap del enfant ses livitat.	 You know that this illness will go away from the children if they treat it and when the nurse comes to remove their head lice
E alcunas veguadas endeve per causa amaguada la qual no es saubuda.	 And some are treated for a cause that is not known to be true
Mays yeu no vi aquesta malautia sino en les enfantz; e a totz aquels les quals yeu vi se coytec la mort, e per ayssi es a mi vist layssada obra en aquels.	 If you do not see this illness in the children, and for those who have seen it but will die from it, so are they in my view sickened by that.
E yeu e vist que un enfant le cap del qual era d’aygua omplit, e·l cap de lu era totjorn ayssi magnificat entro que ceser no podia sobre si meteys per la grandesa del sieu cap, e mays que la humiditat fe aucmentada entro que foc mort.	 You saw that one child's head which was full of water became magnificent in size compared to what could stop the sun from reaching if it were to burn it, and may humidity be only slight to avoid death by fire.
E aquesta humiditat o es agreguada entre la codena e l’os, o es agreguada dejos le os sobre le ciphac.	 When the moisture or humidity is added between the knee and the ankle, or between the legs, it is added to cover the floor.
Quar la operacio en aquel si la humiditat es entre la codena e l’os e le apostema es pauc, lahoras cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am una fissura en la latitut, e sia la longitut de la fissura cays dos notz entro que corra la humiditat, e aquesta es la forma del spatum:	 When performing the operation in such a situation where the moisture is between the knee and the ankle, or between the legs, doctors prescribe that you must make a small cut on your head at its latitude. And also note down the length of this cut to determine if it runs through the moisture, as that indicates the formation of a fistula.
E donc si la humiditat es mays augmentada e l’apostema es major, lahoras son aqui dos fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	 And if the humidity is greatly increased and between the legs are more pronounced, doctors prescribe that there should be two cuts in this way.
E si la humiditat es dejos le os, senhal de lu es que tu vezes la comissuras del cap ubertas de tota partida e l’aygua es spremuda quan tu compremes aquela am la tieua ma a las partidas dedintz e no es aquo a tu amaguat.	 And if the humidity is at the knee, as soon as it touches that place, your veins swell up and become inflamed when you come into contact with water on those parts of the body, do not worry about it.
Cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am tres fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	 When you make a small cut on your head at its latitude and observe that there are two cuts in this way, doctors prescribe that...
e aprop la inscizio extratz ne tota la humiditat; e aprop strenh las fissuras am draps e plumassols; e aprop enbroca aquo de sobre am vi e oli entro al quint dia, e aprop deslia le liament e cura la plagua am tentas e enguentz, e strenh le cap am equalitat; e mange le malaute am vianda secca de pauca humiditat entro que·l membre sia confortat e sanat.	 The physician places incisions on the forehead, above and below them, and also at the back of the neck to relieve the heat and humidity, and to drain the fluids and cure the abscess that has formed there, and to cover the wound with a dry bandage to prevent infection while maintaining equal moisture in all parts.
E es autra manieyra de incisio, que consideras hon apar la magnitut del apostema e la colleccio de l’aygua, quar alcunas veguadas es mays en le occipicii, o en la partida denant, o en la destra, o en la sinistra; e donc aten am la incizio on appar le apostema e la replecio de l’aygua, e fen aquo segon que a tu es miels possible.	 When making an incision, consider the size of the opening and the flow of water: if any veins are dilated in the occipital or parietal region, it may occur on that side; to the right or left; hence, be attentive at the beginning when placing the aperture and the removal of the water, so as to ensure a second attempt is possible.
Et observa que no inscindas la arteria e endevengua flueys de sanc e mora le malaute per aquel flux de sanc am evacuacio de humiditat.	 Be careful not to cut an artery and cause the patient unnecessary harm in that flow of blood as you remove moisture.
Capitol .ii.	 The second sentence translates to: "The second".
De inscisio de las arterias las quals so aprop las aurelhas, apeladas hilasseysse.	 The translation for that part is: "When cutting the arteries close to the ears, they are called hilarities.
Capitol segon.	 The third sentence translates to: "The second".
Quan endeveno ad alcu catars o raumas als huelhs o al pietz, e es antiquat aquo, e no confereys en aquo la curacio de las medicinas, lahoras la deriera curacio en aquest es incizio de aquelas dos arterias.	 When you reach the back of the neck or chest area, and it is customary to do so in this manner without consulting a doctor for the care of those two arteries
E donc cove quan tu vols inscidir aquelas que le malaute raza lo sieu cap, e aprop fregua le loc am drap aspre per so que aparan las arcerias, e aprop sia strengut le col del malaute am alcu drap; e aprop considera on polsa la vena; e les locs de quascuna sobre les locs les quals so aprop las aurelhas depremutz, e tant se occultan sino en alcus homes.	 Then you will cut into those that lead to the head and place it tightly against the chest area in order for them to be visible; and make sure not to miss any of them when they are about to be severed; and consider putting a vein over each of the locations where the arteries run, and so on
E aprop senha sobre la arceria am tenta, e aprop inscideys quascuna am le spatum de quascuna partida agut am inscizio pervenient entro al os, e sia aquo per la latitut del cap.	 When the person is on their back
E si vols, entromet le spatum dejos la arteria e trenqua aquala a las inciden a las partidas desus.	 If you wish, remove the bandage and apply it to the wounds as quickly as possible
E sia la longitut de la inscizio cays dos ditz ajustatz, quar quan alcuna vena es inscizida le sanc es eyssit am egressio pulsatil, le qual saut deforo per saut frequent.	 The length of the incision should be adjusted to two digits, as if a vein is injured there will likely be a pulsatile exit, indicating severe bleeding.
Mays si la arceria no apareys al cintiment, lahoras cove que tu mesures de la aurelha la quantitat del spazi de tres ditz, e aprop senha am tenta, e fen entro al os.	 If the artery does not appear in the incision, doctors will assume you measured from the hairline to three fingertips, and place it now.
E aquo que cove getar del sanc es quantitat de vi unc., e fort leu ne geta de lu mays o mens, e tot aquo es segon la quantitat la qual appareys de la vertut del malaute e de la replecio de la arceria de lu.	 This is the quantity of blood you need to get rid of completely, and if it is not all, or only a part, this will be based on how much can be removed from both the patient's veins and arteries.
E aprop considera la plagua, e donc si reman sobre le os alcuna causa del ciphac, lahoras inscindys aquo per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	 Then apply a bandage, but if there is any cause of bleeding, do not remove it to prevent further loss of blood.
E aprop strenh la plagua am plumassols e am liamentz de drap de li, e aprop cura aquela am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	 Then apply the bandage securely over the patient's shoulders and limb dressings until they are stable.
Capitol .iii.	 And so on.
De extraccio de las arcerias las quals so en las templas.	 Remove all arteries that were in the temples.
Quan ad alcu accideys emigranea antiqua o catertz agutz, per humiditatz agrimonials e per qualiditat en les lacertz des templas, o sodo antiqua vehement e semblantz ad aquels, e es medicat am las manieyras de curacio de medicina e aquo no comfereys, lahoras nos hem sproatz en aquestas malautias extraccio de las arcerias en les templas, o cauterizacio de aquelas ayssi cum havem mostrat.	 When it comes to the head injuries that cause confusion or catatonia due to humidity and temperature fluctuations in temples, or if they are severe and resemble those seen here, doctors would remove the arteries from the temples by cautery as is done here.
E la manieyra de la operacio e extracio de aquelas es que·l malaute raza les pels les quals son en les templas; e entenda a la arceria apparent en le templar quar ela es a tu mostrada per le sieu pols, e·s occultada sino en paucs homes per vehemencia de freg.	 The incision and extraction of the hernia are to be made in the temples, as well as understanding that this is done with great caution due to its sensitive nature
E si a tu es occultada, lahoras le col del malaute sia strengut am alcun drap; e aprop fregua le loc am un drap aspre o evapora le loc am aygua cauda entro que aparesca a tu la arceria manifestament.	 If the hernia is hidden and its location is uncertain, doctors may ask you to lubricate it with a cloth that dries quickly so they can clearly see if the incision has been made properly.
E lahoras tu pren le spatum del qual aquesta es la forma:	 The doctor will use this bandage in order for them
E aprop tu scorja la codena am aquel am facilitat entro que pervenguas a la arceria; e aprop geta en lu onti e extratz aquela a las partidas sobiranas entro que extraguas aquela de la codena e descobras aquela de las tunicas las quals so dejos aquela, de tota partida.	 Then, they will remove the bandage and examine it closely to check if the incision has been made properly; additionally, you should look for any signs of internal bleeding or other problems in the tunics as well.
Mays si la arteria es subtil, lahoras envolveys aquela am la extremitat del oncii, e aprop inscindeys de aquela una partida segon la quantitat per la qual sian alonguadas las extremitatz de lu e sian contraytas, e no endevindra flux de sanc, quar si no so inscididas no pujara le sanc de tot.	 If the artery is delicate, doctors will wrap it around the affected limb and check for signs of circulation after a certain time period to ensure that there are no wounds or abrasions elsewhere on the patient's extremities; otherwise they may cause damage to all of them.
E aprop evacua del sanc de vi unc. entro a tres.	 Then remove it from the wound as quickly as possible within three days.
E si la arceria es gran, lahoras cove que tu lies aquela en dos locs am fiel dopble fort de ceda o am cordas a lonc, e no coyte a lu putrefaccio denant la consolidacio de la plagua e endevengua flux de sanc.	 If the incision is large and you cannot use one of your hands to hold it steady or close to your body, doctors will recommend using both hands instead; otherwise, it could cause infection as well as damage blood circulation during the healing process.
E aprop incideys la superfluitat la qual es entre dos liamentz; e fay aquo en aquela hora o aprop autra ora.	 When the excess fluid between two ligaments occurs; do this at that time or another time thereafter
E si vols, cauteriza aquela am cauteri entro al os am cauteri cutellar entro que sian incididas las extramitatz de lu, e stara en loc de aquela meteyssa obra.	 If you want, cautery can be applied to the external hemorrhoids in order to stop them from bleeding; or alternatively, it can be used on that part of the body where they have occurred.
E es milhor obra sino que·l malaute aia febre o es de escalfada compleccio; quar cauteri es de aquelas causas que ajudan a las humiditatz finidoras, e donc es milhor en juvament.	 The best treatment is not to give the patient fever or hot baths because they can complicate a severe condition; instead, cautery should be applied to those causes that lead to final dryness of humors and it's most effective in youth
E cove aprop la extraccio de las arcerias que huomplas le loc de coto antic, e sian pausatz sobre lu polvils decentement fayt, e aprop sia curat am medicinas seccas fazen naysser la carn e am calguas entro que sia sanat.	 Apply cautery to the excrescences that grow from the surface of the flesh in order to stop them from bleeding; afterwards place a poultice on the affected area and apply warm compresses so as not to make things worse, lest they become infected with cold water.
E si mentre obres autra veguada endeventa flux de sanc de la arceria, lahora tu te coyta a restrenger aquel sanc, o am cauteri, o que omplas le loc de coto, e strenh la tua ma entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	 If while you are dealing with any other external bleeding from the veins, you will also stop that bleeding; cautery can be applied to it or compress the area where it is located and tighten your hand so as not to let the bleeding go on.
E si deguna causa de aquelas no es a tu present, lahoras pausa le tieu dit sobre le loc entro que·l sanc sia congilat, e enbroca le loc am aygua de vehement fregiditat entro que la acuitat repausa, e sia strengut segon que cove.	 If the cause of that is not at hand, pause treatment on that area so as to allow the wound to heal; and afterwards, place a cloth soaked in very cold water over it, tightening it so as to stop the bleeding, while remaining second-in command.
E aquo que es pus leugier en extraccio de arceria es que tu cauterizes la vena am aquest cauteri haventz dos cotels, pus que tu has senhat les dos locs am tenta, e depausa quascus, mot ignitz, entro que pervenguan al os e inscindan la vena en dos locs, per so que sia elonguat aquo que es entre las extremitatz de lu, quar no son consolidadas de tot am aquest cauteri.	 "When you have opened the space between the patient's thighs and placed a cushion underneath them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest holding their hands, then comes here to cauterize that vein with this cautery.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri:	 This is how the cautery works
E sia la acuitat dels dos cotels esemps.	 The sharpness of both needles varies.
Mays empero si so mendres acuitat que dos cotels es milhor, quar si so agudas cum dos cotels propera a quascuna freg, e no enscideysso la carn am velocitat.	 If the sharpness of both needles is similar, then puncturing each with one needle will not cause harm to the skin at high speed.
Donc cum en aquels es alcuna grossitut, es tenguda la calor del foc en aquels e la carn es abscindida leugierament.	 In such cases where there is some fat around it, you must apply heat from fire on that area and the flesh will be burned off gently.
E aquesta obra es milhor en tota obra e pus leugiera.	 This work is most effective in all works and easy to do.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre dos cotels la quantitat de la grossesa del dit.	 The space between the two needles determines how much fat will be burned off.
Capitol quart.	 The fourth part.
De la cura de cors de lagremas agudas e aciduas dels huels.	 For the cure of the limbs, use sharp and strong needles.
Quan so lagremas aciduas, e es le cors de aquelas venas las quals so sobre le test del cap deforo, e no comfereys en aquo alcuna causa de la curacio de medicina, e vezes la cara del malaute ja enrogesir e sent en le sieu front deambulacio ayssi cum si era deambulacio de formiguas, e·ls huels de aquel so extenuatz, humitz enayssi que ja les pels de lor son conodutz, e las parpelas so scalfadas per la acuitat de las lacrimas, les antics agro mesties en la curacio de aquelas de aquesta operacio, e nompnero aquela curacio am spassa.	 When treating the limbs with acid needles and veins which are near to the crown of the head that do not interfere in this cause for medical treatment but times they cover and feel on their own front when walking as if it were the gait of fleas, and become exhausted from using them so often that their claws lose strength, and their fur becomes scaly due to the sharpness of the tears, are treated with this method in the cure of these veins, and it is performed.
E es que tu comandas al malaute rayre les pels les quals son en le sieu front, e aprop inscideys en le front tres fissuras engualment distans segon la longitut del front.	 "You command the patient to raise their arms so that they are in view from above, and then place incisions on both sides of the forehead at an equal distance as measured from the top of the head.
E si’ la longitut de la fissura cays dos ditz: la una fissura sia engualment distant a la longitut del nas en le mieg loc del front, e la segonda segon la longitut un petit del movement dels lacertz les quals so en le lacrimal, e la tersa del autre part.	 "The length of the incision should be two fingers: one incision will extend from just below the nose to the end of the forehead, and the second slightly shorter, measuring about a finger's width away, for incisions on both sides of the tear ducts.
E guarda te de la incizio de las arcerias las quals so en dos latz, e elongua la tua ma de la continuacio de amdos las mandibulas.	 "And guard your hands from making incisions where the tears are located: on both sides of each eyelid.
E si’ l’espazi de quascuna inscizio la quantitat de tres ditz ajustatz.	 "The space between each incision should be three fingers wide.
E si’ a tu una pessa d’espongua apparelhada o draps seccatz motz am les quals exsiccas le sanc.	 "And if the skin is fragile or dry, apply a protective dressing to prevent cracking it further.
E aprop entremet le spatum de dos agudas extremitatz, del qual aquesta es la forma de la inscisio de lu:	 "Place two sharp instruments between your hands, which will be the form of the incision:
que es de la partida des templas entro a la segonda inscizio.	 "It's from the beginning of the temples to the second incision.
Exxcorja am aquel tota la codena la qual es entre dos incizios am le ciphac le qual es sobre le os, e aprop fay aquo de la inscizio migera entro a la segonda inscisio.	 "Cut the cord between those two incisions to the one that is above your eye, and place it into the second incision.
E aprop stratz ne aquest spatum e entromet en la primieyra inscizio autra vetz un autre instrument le qual es apelat cutellar, agut de una part e del autre no agut.	 "Place another tool called a cautery in the first incision, but not on both sides of it.
E pausa le latz de aquel agut deves la carn annexa deves la codena, e le latz de lu leon dintz le os, e empelley aquel entro que pervengua a la fissura migera, e abscindeys am aquel totz les vaysels que descendo del cap als huels.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
Mays que sia continuada la inscizio ad aquo appar de la codena, e aprop fay aquo en la fissura migana entro al autra fissura.	 And if necessary to continue the incision at this point and close it in the crease of the arm.
E pus que corr del sanc quantitat engual, exprem les locs de las pessas del sanc congilat.	 You need to add more places for washing the hands.
E aprop pausa en quascuna fissura calgua de coto vielh, e pausa sobre aquels polvils enbegutz en vi e oli e vi agre, e vegas que no endevengua apostema caut.	 And then apply a piece of cloth soaked in vinegar and oil over the poultice gently and repeatedly until it is completely absorbed into the poultice.
E en le tertz dia deslia le liament e aministra gran enfusio de aygua cauda o tebeza, e aprop cura aquo am enguent bazilicon am oli rozat e autres entro que las plaguas sian sanadas.	 And in the third day remove the bandage and apply a generous amount of warm water or broth, and then wrap it around to heal the wounds.
Capitol .v.	 Certainly.
De la cura de lagramas per catartz e als huels descendentz de las partidas dedintz del cap.	 From treatment of limbs and down towards the hands descending from the head parts.
Quan ad alcu veno catartz agutz e continuantz, e vezes les huels del malaute extenuatz petitz, e ja le reguardament de lor es debelitat, e las palpebras ulceradas e de lor cazo les pels, e en le preon del cap es dolor aguda ledent e extrenutacio consequent, lahoras sapias per aquestz accidentz que las materias e catartz no veno sino de motas venas de las partidas dedintz procedent.	 When the arteries come to an end and continue, and if the patient's limbs become exhausted, and their hands are ulcerated, and in the forehead there is severe pain that radiates and extends downwards, the doctors understand that the materials and vessels of the limbs only bring blood from veins of the extremities.
E la milhor curacio en aquels es aquesta: que comandes al malaute que raza lo sieu front, e aprop inscideys en aquel una fissura al mieg loc del front, un petit per la latitut (e comensa am la fissura del templar senestre entro al dextre templar; e sia inscisio entro al os; e eslongua la tua ma dels lacertz del templas lesquals son maugutz deves la mastigacio), entro que sia le os descubert.	 "The first aid in this case is to command the patient to raise his head, and then make a small incision at the top of the forehead, just above it (and as you come from the left temple towards the right temple; and after that, make an incision through the nose; and elongate your hand from the temples to which the mastication must be done. And when the mouth is opened.
Exsicca tot le sanc am espongua o am drap secc e aprop repleys entre las doas labias de la fissura am coto vielh o am draps de li.	 "After making a small incision at the top of the forehead, place two fingers on either side of it.
E aprop estrenh desus am polvils enbegutz en vi e oli per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	 "Then insert your thumb and forefinger into it carefully, so that you do not damage the patient's eye or nose.
E quan deslias aquo e veses que l’apostema ja es diminuit, lahoras cove que fregua le os entro que comensa en lu nayser carn, e aprop cura aquel am regiment exsiccatiu le qual fassa neysser la carn, ayssi cum si tu prenes de farina de froment dos partidas e de colofania quatre partidas e mescla o, e de lor sia fayt emplastre e sia aministrat en aquestas plaguas a de la carn nativitat.	 "When you have finished this and see that the aperture has been reduced, then apply ointment made from two parts of wheat flour and four parts of colophonia to it. And so if you take oatmeal made from two parts of bran and four parts of colophonia mixed with water, and place it in these patches on the native skin.
Capitol .vi.	 "Thank you very much.
De la cura de aquo que catz en las aurelhas.	 "For the cure of this thing use the ears.
Tota causa que catz en las aurelhas es una de quatre specias, quar o es peyra mineral o causa semblant a peyra, ayssi cum ferr e veyre, o es de planta ayssi cum ceze o fava, o es causa fluxtibla ayssi cum aygua e vi agre e a lor semblantz, o alcuna bestia.	 "The cause of this thing is one of four varieties: it may be mineral or similar to poison, or else it is plant-based, just like the venom from the bite of an adder or viper; or it can also be influenza, as with water and fever, or any other animal.
E donc quan peyra catz en l’aurelha o autra causa semblant de aquelas causas que no ajustan ne creysso en l’aurelha, e pausa la aurelha al solelh, e si vezes la peyra, lahoras distilla en aquela alcuna causa de oli violat o sizami, e aprop aministra la extraccio de lu, e fay le stornudar am condizi, e oppila las nars deve le aveniment de stornutacio.	 When any of the following causes are present that do not match those of the heart, and pause the chest if you wish; in case it comes up with a cause like this one, then treat it as stated above for gout.
E aprop pausa en le circuit de la aurelha alscunas pessas de drap o lana, e dextendas la aurelha a las partidas desus, quar motas veguadas es foro-getada am aquestas causas.	 Pause the chest circulation of fats or fumes, and remove any excess fat that may be causing pain; if you wish to address these causes
E si no n’es getada, lahoras aministra extraccio de lu am le instrument apelat gesti epicicarios subtil del qual aquesta es la forma:	 If not, then treat it as stated above for gout.
E si es foro-getada am gesti, bo es; e sino, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am onci subtil de pauca duplicacio.	 Then, if you agree to do so and wish to continue; otherwise, treat it as stated above for gout.
E donc si no es foro-getada per aquo, lahoras fay una canula de aram e entromet la extremitat de la canula en le trauc de la aurelha e claus a l’enviro de la canula am cera e am oli mollificada per so que no sia ubert sino la canula.	 Then, if you do not agree to proceed with this procedure, treat it as stated above for gout, using a needle and inserting the catheter into the arm vein in order to remove blood from the area while keeping the catheter at an angle that prevents both the needle and the catheter from being removed.
E aprop extratz am le tieu vent am fort atraccio, quar tropas veguadas cum aquo que havem recontat.	 Then, if you agree to proceed with this treatment, which is also recommended given your past experiences.
Mays si no es foro-getada en aquesta manieyra, lahoras pren de halka alumbat o de vecz aparelhat am le qual son preses les ausels una patita quantitat, e pausa aquel en la extremitat de ray, e aprop envolopa sobre aquel coto decentment pausat.	 If you do not agree to proceed with this procedure, treat it as stated above for gout by placing a bandage over the affected area while ensuring that it remains still and stationary.
E aprop entromet aquel en le trauc de la aurelha am facilitat, e aprop excicca la aurelha de la humiditat.	 With a cushion under their thighs, place another one on their legs, and yet another one on their chest, holding onto them with your hands.
E donc si no es foro-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recontadas, lahoras tu coyta a talhar aquela denant que endevengua apostema caut o espasme.	 And if it's found that there are several causes for the pain you mentioned earlier, then doctors will tend to recommend applying warmth or using a massage to alleviate the pains.
E la manieyra de talhar aquela es que tu al comensament sancnes le malaute de la vena sephasica e extratz del sanc segon la mannieyra de la vertut de lu, e aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas e converteys l’aurelha a las partidas desus, e fen am petita fissura en la razit de la aurelha deves lo greys de lu en le loc be premegut de lu.	 The method for doing this is to start by massaging the patient's superficial vein and extending it out of their second hand, then applying a cautery between your fingers and pressing gently on the surface of the foot below, making sure that no part of the intestine comes out through the small opening in the heel.
E sia la fissura de figura lunar entro que pervengua a la peyra, e, la peyra atrobada, osta aquela si podes am instrumentz apropriatz; e aprop cos la fissura en aquela hora am velocitat, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	 If the tear of the lunar figure occurs in the foot itself and is not caused by a puncture wound that occurred earlier, then you would need to use an appropriate instrument for closing it; after applying this to close it quickly, ensuring its safety as well.
E si la causa cazent en la aurelha es un dels gras que creysso e so inflatz, lahoras aministra la curacio e la extraccio de lu; mays si no obezeys a tu ad eyssiment, lahoras tu pren spatum teune subtil segon aquesta forma:	 If the cause is found to be fat that has spread and infiltrated there, then doctors will administer treatment such as drainage or extraction of it. If you are unable to remove it yourself, they may recommend further care in this way:
e aministra am aquel la abscizio de aquel gra lo qual es cazut en l’aurelha.	 They will provide surgery to remove the fat that was found on their foot.
E no fassas aquo quan cogitas que aquel ja es humectat per la vapor del aurelha, e pausa aquel en motas pessas, e prop extratz ne aquelas am les oncis o am gesti subtil, o ab inscizio ayssi co dit havem, quar es alleujada la extraccio de lu.	 When joints are inflamed by the heat of fever, and pain occurs in the feet, then it is customary to call gout by doctors.
Mays en l’aygua la qual es intrada en l’aurelha cove que·l malaute use de sternutacio am condizi al comensament, e omple la sieua aurelha am alcu coto vielh, e jagua sobre aquela aurelha en la qual es l’aygua, e si per aquo es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, lahoras pren tropas peyras teunas e leons segon la longitut del dit, e calfa aquelas en le foc un pauc, e le pacient entrometa una de aquelas en le trauc de la sua aurelha e saute sobre la un pe sieu de aquela partida e percussia am una autra peyra sobre la peyra la qual es dintz la aurelha.	 First the space between the patient's thighs is opened, a cushion placed beneath them, another on their legs and another over their chest, holding their hands
Donc no cesse aquo am peyra entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada.	 And if it should happen that the water becomes heated through fever heat, then pain occurs in the feet.
E ja l’aygua sira foro-getada enayssi que tu prenguas de papier o de gonc i, e met la una extremetat de lu en l’aurelha e estendas l’autre extremitat am foc entro que sia comburit le may de lu.	 And if the water becomes heated through fever heat and it should happen that you run out of paper or cotton, then place one extremity on the abdomen and extend the other towards the flame to prevent injury to your hands.
E prop met i autre gonc e fay aquo tantas veguadas entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada, e stratz aquel am canula ayssi co desus es dit de la peyra extrasadora.	 And as the water becomes heated through fever heat and you run out of paper or cotton, then place another spoon against which to remove it from the patient's body.
Mays en la extraccio de bestia intrant en aquela aurelha, si es a petit cos, ayssi piussa e a lu semblant, cura aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio; mays si es de gran cos la qual causa apar al sen del vezement, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am gesti e oncis, e la causa de lu es pus leugiera de totas las autras causas que cazo en l’aurelha.	 And if the abscess comes out of that opening in the abdomen, as long as it is small enough, you should spread and press on it similarly to how one would squeeze a pimple from the body. But if the size causes swelling at the entrance of the body, doctors administer treatment for that too along with treating the abscess itself, because the cause could be more severe than all other reasons in the abdomen.
Mays en la extraccio de verm engendrat en la aurelha, quan tu curas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e en le tractat de distillacios e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu reguardes la aurelha al solelh.	 In the hollow of a newly born calf, when you cure that which I mentioned in division and treatise on distillation, do not expose it to direct sunlight.
E donc si apar aqui alcuna causa dels verms, lahoras extratz aquel am gesti o am onci subtils, mays si no apar deguna causa, lahoras pren una canula dejos streyta e desus ampla de la qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	 And if there is here any cause of worms, remove that substance gently or delicately, unless there's a cause, use the long needle and this broad one which is like this:
E entromet la extremitat subtil en la aurelha segon la quantitat la qual suffertar puesca le malaute; e aprop sucgeys am aquela per succio fort, e fay aquo motas veguadas, entro que totz les verms sian foro-gitatz.	 Insert the thin end into the calf's ear according to the amount necessary for healing, and apply it in a manner that is gentle but strong enough to kill all worms.
Mays si no obezeysso a tu al ayssiment, lahoras tu opila e claus en le circuit de la canula am cera ayssi cum havem dit; lahoras aministre distillacios las quals han ja esproadas les antics en la curacio dels verms, e atrobaras aquo en le tractat de distillacios.	 If it is not necessary to do so at that time, apply and wrap around the needle as described above; remove it in the treatise on distillation after it has been applied for treatment of worms.
E sia la tua efusio am la qual efundas les olis medicinas en la aurelha am aquest strument del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	 And that your juice is what you use to heal the ear with this instrument which is like this:
E fay aquela de argent o de eram, dejos streyt, en le qual sia un petit trauc, e am pla desus.	 Use either silver or copper wire, thin enough, and tie it in a knot as described above.
E donc sia cum empellent a que es en la conquavitat de la canula de continent aqui on sira necessari.	 And then it is necessary to apply it at the place where the needle of continence should be inserted, that is:
E si vols, pren le ray e envolveys en la extremitat de lu decentment coto, e aprop gieta oli en la concavitat del auziment, o suc de alcuna herba, o aquo que vols de aquestas medicinas en la canula — e aquela es en la aurelha —, e aprop entromet le ray am coto desus e exprem am la tua ma aquel am compressio temprada de lu entro que l’oli sia expellit en la concavitat del auziment e le malaute senta le oli dedintz.	 "If you want, take the ray and insert it into the patient's abdomen gently, and put something in the hollow of their arm or a herb extract that you wish for these medicines to be given through this tube - that is within the ear canal.
E aquo que sia enfundut en la aurelha sia ja scalfat am foc un petit.	 "The one inside the ear canal has already been inserted with a small incision made in its focus.
E guarda te que la causa la qual distillaras en l’aurelha no sia trop frega, quar las medicinas de aurelha no suffertan aquo.	 "Remember that if the cause of what is to be drawn from within the ear canal is too deep, then the medicines in the ear canal may not work.
Capitol .vii.	 I am unable to translate this as it appears to be a mistake or an incomplete sentence.
De curacio de opilacio de aurelhas.	 "Regarding the insertion of tubes into the ear canal.
Alcunas veguadas alcus enfantz yeysso dels ventres de lors mayres no-perforatz, e aquo ja accideys en alcus homes, opilacio en le meat de la aurelha per plagua o per carn nada en aquela; e aquesta opilacio alcunas veguadas es fayta en le preon del trau de la aurelha la qual no consiec le vezement, e alcunas veguadas es en las partidas defora.	 "The insertion of tubes into the ear canal should be done with caution in order to avoid perforating the drum or soft tissues. In case there is a perforation caused by inserting the tube through flesh instead of cartilage, that incision should only occur at the point where it was intended - and any other incisions made elsewhere are unnecessary.
E aquela que accideys en le preon de lu, la qual no comprehen le vezement, es en las majors disposicios de dificil sanacio.	 "In case of perforation in this location which is not understood by the patient, it requires more difficult and challenging surgery.
E en aquela en qual consegueys le vezement, cove que tu pauses la aurelha del malaute al solelh e reguarda en aquela.	 In that case where you find a moment to pause the patient's arm outside in the sunlight and keep watch over it there
E donc si vezes oppulacio apparent, obre aquela am espatum subtil del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	 And if such an opening appears suddenly, do this method which is most subtle, that is how to proceed
Si’ la extremitat de lu en la qual sia petita la latitut, del qual la una partida sia aguda e l’autra no; e le spatum sia de dos latz leon per so que no fassa lizio al aurelha.	 If the limb for which this is done has a small latitude, that one part of it being sharp and the other not; and if its surface is of two lengths such that it does not cause injury to the arm.
E donc si la opilacio es per carn nascuda en la aurelha o en le meat de lu, lahoras te aquela am oncis subtils e incidiys aquela vehement facilitat entro que sia ostada tota la carn.	 And if the opening is done through naked flesh on the arm or on the body of the patient, then you perform this most subtle incision and quickly make it so that all the flesh has been opened up.
E si opilacio es en le preon de la aurelha, lahoras pren ray subtil leon e escalfa aquel am foc un pauc, e aprop met aquel en le meat de l’aurelha.	 And if it is done on the front of the arm, then you take a small piece and fasten that to the body of the arm.
E donc si as scentit oppulacio am aquo que le malaute atroba am facilitat, per gravetat de ausir, esforsa la oppressio de lu am facilitat; e guarda te que no plagues les nervis del aurelha.	 And if the opening is done in such a way that the patient cannot easily bear it due to great pain caused by its use, force the release of this from the body gently; and remember not to harm any nerves on the arm.
E aprop pausa en l’aurelha drap de li segon la quantitat del ample del trauc lo qual tu as envolvutz en l’enguent egipciac; e fay aquo per alcus jorns entro que sias segur de la consolidacio de la plagua; o que prenguas qualgua e enfon aquela en ayguaros e pulveriza sobre lu segi trissat e usa de lu; e si vezes la aurelha ja esser apostemada, lahoras cove que tu estraguas la qualgua e permutes aquela am autra qualgua la qual tu envoloparas en cerot que sia fayt am oli rozat, entro que sia le apostema caut cedat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	 And after it has been wrapped tightly around the arm as you would in Egypt's way of binding, wait for several days to ensure that the bandage is secure; or if needed apply another bandage over this one and smooth out any wrinkles on it, and use a sharp implement like a knife to cut through it, but do not tear anything. And after you have wrapped tightly around the arm as you would in Egypt's way of binding, wait for several days to ensure that the bandage is secure; or if needed apply another bandage over this one and smooth out any wrinkles on it, and use a sharp implement like a knife to cut through it, but do not tear anything.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras submergeys esponga o drap en aygua frega e pausa sobre la aurelha, e usa del autra curacio la qual restrengeys le flux del sanc, la qual es dita en le tractat de distillacio.	 When a flux of sin arises, the pains are poured over or laid on linen and water, above the navel, while another servant holds it back with care to prevent its flow, as is mentioned in the treatise on distillation
Capitol .viii.	 This sentence seems incomplete without more information about what "sanc" refers to. Is there anything else you know that could help me understand?
De cura de athezil le qual endeveno a las palpebras.	 In order to cure the illness of which eye, it is necessary to apply a poultice made from the aforementioned substance.
Athezil les quals endeveno a las paupebras dels huels alcuna veguada so humitz, alscunas veguadas son secs.	 The illness in question affects only one eye and does not spread to other parts of the body
Donc cove que tu tenguas aquels am tenhalhas o am onci, e inscindas aquels am espatum de las suas razitz, e aprop pausa sobre les locs segi trissat.	 Then put it as you would onto a clean cloth and gently apply it to the affected parts of their face, and place your hand over them to prevent any further scratching.
Mays si dolor am flux de sanc veno, lahoras tu cauteriza aquels am cauteri lanticular subtil.	 If pain arises from the flow of the blood, then you should burnish with a subtle lancet these parts that are affected.
E la milhor cauterizacio es aprop las inscizios e tropas veguadas retornam quan reman alcuna causa de sas razitz; e quan so cauterizadas am foc, aquelas razitz son comburidas e no retornan.	 The preferred cautery is to apply it in the creases and folds of the affected areas, where it will remain until all signs of inflammation have disappeared completely, at which point the affected parts will burn up and not reappear.
Capitol .ix.	 This sentence seems incomplete without more information about what "sanc" refers to. Is there anything else you know that could help me understand?
Cura de grandeyssa que veno a las palpebras dels huels.	 In order to cure the illness of which eye, it is necessary to apply a poultice made from the aforementioned substance.
Motas veguadas endeve en las palpebras dels huels alcuna causa la qual es asemblada a grandissa en sa fortalicia e duricia, e per so grandissia es apelada.	 When the pain is so great in the palms of the hands that it seems to increase strength and hardness, then it is called gout.
E es agreguacio de humiditat grossa en la palpebra dejos e desus.	 This means "when there's a swelling of large moisture on the eyelid.
Donc la opperacio en lor es que consideras lahoras si la grandissia es procedent en lu en aquo que apar de la palpebra e es mauguda a tota partida; e la causa de lu es leugiera.	 In this case, the doctor's action is to check if it comes from the hand and is accompanied by swelling throughout the whole area of the palm, which may indicate gout as a cause.
Donc fen sobre aquela am fissura per la latitut, e aprop escorga aquela de tota partida am facilitat entro que evasesca, e aprop suspen aquela am onci e abscindeys aquela.	 "Then fasten that opening onto the lateral area and then close it gently to facilitate its closure, preventing any loss of blood.
Mays si a tu no es apparelhada la incizio de lu si no pus que penetras la palpebra am inscizio pauc a pauc, lahoras aquo no notz en deguna causa.	 If the pain is caused by only entering into the palm slowly and slowly then it's not gout or any other cause.
E si la figura es gran, lahoras tu l’ajusta am sutura; e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	 If the figure is large, tighten that opening up to ensure it is healed.
E si es pauca, a tu no sobrevindra mal per aquela quar l’anguent de lu restaura aquela e encarna.	 "If there's not much, you won't do any harm by restoring and closing it.
E si la grandissia es declinant a las partidas dedintz de la palpebra deves la superficia dedintz, lahoras evesa la palpebra e suspen la grandissia am onci, otra que tu indigescas de incizio, e prem aquela de tota part, e si la palpebra per inscizio es alonguada, aquo no notz en deguna causa.	 "If the swelling is diminishing from the palms of the hand then you remove that opening and gently close it, leaving some room for insertion if necessary, otherwise press it all down to ensure its closure, but if it's already closed and the hand is swollen in this way, there's no cause.
E aprop la incizio, lava le huel am aygua salada; e cura le loc am aquo que encarna entro que sia sanat.	 The first sentence translates to: Begin by washing his hands with salty water, then treat the location where the ailment has occurred as best you can for health's sake.
Capitol .x.	 This appears to be a request for clarification or correction of a previous statement made in the text above that I cannot identify without more context. Could you please provide more information about what needs to be corrected?
De la cura axcirnah en la palpebra desus del huel.	 The sentence "Cura le loc am aquo que encarna entro que sia sanat" may need a correction in the phrase following it, which is "axcirnah.
Axcirnath es grays le qual es engendrat en las tunicas de la palpebra desus, e majorment endeve als enfantz, agrava les huels de aquels et accideyso a lor catartz le mayti; e no podon reguardar la claror del solelh per aquo quar lagremas se coytan ad aquels.	 The corrected sentence is as follows: "E grays le qual es engendrat en las tunicas de la palpebra desus, e majorment endeve als enfantz, agrava les huels de aquels et accideyso a lor catartz le mayti; e no podon reguardar la claror del soleilh per aquo quar lagremas se coytan ad aquels.
E per so tu vezes aquels jaser sobre les lors caras tot temps, e sobre les lors caras dormen; e so a las palpebras de lor dejos les sobrecils humidas, las quals ja ha cuberta imflacio, e iminencia de accernac apparent es en l’uelh; e que quant tu premes le loc am les tieus ditz, tu centes accernac entro aquels.	 This sentence translates to: "And because of the times that these sores appear on their cheeks when they are awake and on their eyelids while they sleep, as well as the tears from those with wet eyelids caused by the inflammation, which have already been treated with a cautery and there is an imminent danger of recurrence in them; and whenever you apply lotion to the affected areas you'll feel a burning sensation inside them.
E alcuna manieyra de opperacio es en aquel que le malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop pausa drap de li e de lu fay calgua, e fay de lu cercle segon la quantitat la qual contena arthernach de tota partida, e aprop pausa aquel sobre aquela e prem am les tieus ditz de tota per que sia agreguat arcernac en le mieg del cercle, e aprop fen en le mieg de aquela humiditat am spatum inscident am fissura per la latitut, e la fissura no sia major que la fissura que es fayta en flaubotomia.	 This sentence translates to: "No matter how many times you operate on the patient who stops bleeding from the top of their head with a cloth and then applies it wet over them, then circles second around the amount which contains all the parts, and then places it above that one and presses against the entire area in order for it to be tightened up into a circle, if there is no moisture on the outside surface of the wound when you perform this procedure, because there may not have been enough time spent on the application.
Mays en le preon cove que tu fendas la codena tota entro que pervenguas ad arcernach, quar en las mays desposicios proceseys arcernach per fissura segon la forma de grayseza blanca.	 "You should be careful when inserting needles into the patient's abdomen, as punctures may occur on a hernia.
Donc extratz aquela am draps los quals tu as envolopatz entre les tieus ditz a las partidas deforo e revolv entre la ma dextra e sinistre entro que sia dispargut.	 "Take care while wrapping the bandage around your right and left thighs, being careful not to twist it between the legs, so that it is properly positioned.
E guarda te que no ajustes en la fissura per so que am le spatum no pervenguas al huel e ladescas aquel.	 "Remember to keep the incision clean in order to prevent infection and heal well.
Mays si no apar a tu arternach en le comensament de la fissura, mays que tu ajustes en la fissura un petit am fecilitat entro que procesisca arternach; e aprop extratz aquela ayssi quo havem dit; e aprop submargeys draps de li en aygua e vi agre e pausa les sobre le loc e estrenh aquels am polvils.	 "Make sure not to apply pressure on the incision site immediately after making it, and adjust your bandage slightly so as to avoid irritation of the wound; and do wrap it tightly with soft cloth, adding water and gauze over it to keep it clean.
E so alcus que trissan sal e pausan aquel en la conquavitat de la fissura per so que aquo que es remas de aquela humiditat.	 "And remember to keep the bandage moist around the incision site in order to prevent dryness and heal well.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	 "Take care of it until it heals.
Mays si accideys en le loc apostema caut, lahoras cura aquel am emplastres cedatils entro que sia sanat.	 "If anything happens to the wound and you're in a hurry, treat it with haste while seeking medical attention.
Capitol .xi.	 ".10th capital letter.
De manieyras de tactimi del huel.	 "Many thanks for the translation.
Quan en las palpebras dels huels so natz pels ajustatz dejos les pels naturals e so antiquatz, lahoras aquels noso al huel e fan endevenir manieras de malautias ayssi cum lacrimas assiduas e mollificacio de palpebras e tela entro que aquo sia causa de destruccio del huel que s’apela tactinir del huel, e cura se en quatre manieyras: o per cauteri am foc; o am medicina acuta segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri; o es fayt atactini per inscizio e sutura; o per cannas segon que yeu diyre.	 "When the eyelids swell up due to inflammation and itching, doctors usually apply natural remedies or use old techniques such as cautery. The cause of this is called blepharitis, and it can be cured in four ways: by burning with fire; applying acute medicine according to what was described in the capital of cautery; doing surgery; or by using a hook.
E donc cove que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se; aprop converteys la palpebra del uelh am la tua ma sinistra, e si es convertida, bo es; e sino, entromet agulha en aquela en la qual sia fiel de la partida pus dejos de la palpebra, e fay penetrar la agulha am fiel desus, e aquo sia — prop del marge de la palpebra en le qual naysso les pels — prop dels pels, e tira le fiel a las partidas desus am la palpebra, e converteys aquela am le ray.	 "You should now put the finger of the right hand on the forehead of the patient and, if possible, convert it to pierce through, otherwise you must insert an iron needle into that part where it was faithfully removed from the eyelid, and proceed as follows.
E aprop fen en la partida dedintz de la palpebra dejos les pels ajustatz am spatum inscidentz del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal mendre; e aprop extratz le fiel e pausa dejos la palpebra polvilhs petitz de coto o de drap, e aprop senha sobre la palpebra am tenta, e sia ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirt.	 "Next you should put the finger of your left hand into the upper eyelid and stretch it towards the inner corner of the eye; then remove the finger and sprinkle the eyelid with water or wipe it clean.
Mays empero cove que sia la figura segon la quantitat de helevacio de la palpebra, quar aquo ja es diversificat en les homes, quar de aquels es le quals indigeys que sia inscidit de la palpebra gran quantitat segon la quantitat per la qual la palpebra es mollificada.	 "However, please note that this measure may vary depending on the height of the eyelid as it differs among people, so those who have a more delicate eyelid should be cautious when using these methods.
E aprop fen am le spatum sobre las doas linhas las quals has senhadas, e comensa del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal menor.	 "Next put your finger on the lower eyelids where you made incisions earlier and proceed from the inner corner of one eye to the other.
E si’ la tua fissura prop dels pels naturals ayssi cum es la grossetut del rey.	 "If there is a natural furrow at that point, it should be as smooth as possible in order for it to heal correctly.
E aprop met le onci en un dels dos angles de la codena, e aprop excoria aquela tota, e aprop ajusta am la scitura las doas labias am gula o fiel de lana subtil, e abstergeys le sanc, e fay adherir aquo que superflueys dels fiels sobre dos sobrecils am alcunas causas enviscans, si voles far aquo, e sino, non cures.	 "Next, put one of your fingers in the corner and make sure it is clean; then gently draw back its nail to avoid tearing the delicate skin around the eye or eyebrow.
E aprop leyssa la sutura dels fiels entro a tres dias o quatre, e aprop cura aquo.	 When the intestines are opened for three days or four, it should be treated right away
E si vols, layssa la plagua ses sutura, e cura aquela am aquo que exsicca e constrenh, quar la palpebra es alevada deves la sigillacio de la plagua e la agreguacio de lu; mays sutura es milor E donc aysso diysso les antics de taxanir.	 If you want to close the opening in the intestines and restore fluids, you should seal it with a stitch and then apply pressure on both sides, as closing it will heal better than doing nothing at all, especially if done quickly after the onset of symptoms
Mays empero en lu sia sollicitut sobre le malaute, e es de bona operacio, e no es en lu temor.	 The treatment may seem severe but is a good operation and should not be feared.
E es autra manieyra en taxmir, e es que senhes sobre la palpebra figura ayssi cum fuelha de mirt, e aprop eleva la palpebra am tres uncis segreguatz e congreguatz segon aquesta forma:	 Then the opening should be closed as quickly as possible, and apply pressure on both sides to seal it in this manner.
Mays si no es possible aquo, tener les uncis, e aquo no es engualhat, lahoras pren una agula en la qual haia fil e met aquela en le mieg de la figura, e entromet le autre fiel prop le lacrimal major, e·l fiel segon prop le lacrimal mendre, e ajusta entre les tieus ditz les fiels am equalitat, e aprop am aquels eleva la tua ma am elevacio engual, eleva tota la codena sobre la qual es senhat ayssi cum havem recomtat.	 If it's not possible to close it immediately or if the closure is not successful, doctors will insert a needle with a filament and put it into the eye socket of the affected side, then place another finger on the outside corner of that same eye so as to apply pressure evenly across both sides.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	 Then firmly grasp both lips of the opening and sew it closed, making sure it is sealed completely.
Mays si accideys apostema deves la tua inscizio o la tua fissura, seda aquel apostema am cerot e a lu semblantz, e am enguentz.	 If you have cuts or wounds that need to be treated, seal them with sutures and clean the area around it carefully, being sure not to contaminate it.
E alcunas veguadas endeve a la palpebra que·ls sieus pels sian convertitz, adonc cove que tu uses en aquela de aquo que havem dit de inscizio; mays sutura en quascus es mays artificial.	 "First servant, open the space between their thighs and place a cushion underneath them.
Ataxinir am cannas es segon aquesta forma:	 "Second servant, perform this action next:
e es que tu convertas la palpebra e scindas la figura qu’es dedintz segon que he recontat; e aprop per art fay doas cannas o doas astelas subtils de las quals longitut sia segon la longitut de la palpebra e la latitut de lor sia mendra de la latitut del spatum.	 "Second servant, open the eyelid and make a slit in the shape described second, so that it extends from the edge of the eyelid to the edge of the pupil. Also place two thin strips below which run parallel to each other and at an angle equal to half the length of the eyelid divided by twice the height of the pupil.
E tu ja has inscidit en las extremitatz de quascunas partidas, la on tenes les fils.	 "You have already opened the space between their thighs, place one hand in each of their hands.
Aprop agregua quascuna am subtilitat subre aquo que superflueys de la palpebra del huel, e constres las cannas de quascunas partidas am fort strictura, e layssa aquela per alcus jorns, quar la codena per la strictura morira e sira denegada e se poyrira entro que per si meteyssa cayra.	 "In the meantime, tighten each of their fingers as much as possible and place them on top of the slit in the eyelid, making sure to keep them in place for as long as necessary.
Mays si es tardat, lahoras trenca la am las toroyras, e aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanat.	 "If it is late, stop applying heat and take care to cover the wound with something clean.
Donc cum es solidada, la palpebra es elevada e les pels no pungo.	 "Once closed, the eyelid will be elevated and the eyelashes won't itch.
E aquesta es la forma de doas cannas las quals faras segon aquesta forma:	 The second servant to perform this action is:
e haia la quantitat de la longitut e de la latitut ni mays ni mens.	 "The number of the length and width must be equal.
Capitol .xii.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
De elevacio de pels pungentz en le huel am agula quan le pel es dur.	 Do not apply heat to the affected area if it is painful or inflamed.
Quan son pels no-naturals, durs e aspres e pungentz les huels, lahoras la operacio en lu es que tu prenguas agula subtil e pauses en aquela fiel de ceda subtil e leon, e aprop que tu ajustes las extremitatz de lu e nozes quascu en manieyra mot subtil.	 When the swelling is natural and hard or sharp, avoid piercing it with a needle in that spot; instead gently press down on that area and apply heat to help reduce inflammation, making sure not to use excessive pressure as this could cause damage.
E sia la longitut dels fiels de quantitat de una palma.	 The length of the foot is equivalent to the width of a palm.
E aprop tu compon2 autre fiel subtil dejos lu en breu, e nuza las extremitatz de aquel si tu·t vols.	 If you want to change his position in short order, gently press down on that other part and remove both feet at the same time.
E aprop pause le malaute le sieu cap en le tieu se, e sia prop del solelh per que la tua obra sia declarada, quar es operacio subtil e menuda.	 Then slowly raise his head up into the air while pronouncing your declaration clearly and distinctly, for this is a delicate operation that requires great care and attention to detail.
E aprop intromet la agulha en la razit del pel ajustat la qual ha necessitat de engen, e fay aquela penetrar en la palpebra festinantment entro que extraguas aquela desus le pel natural.	 Then gently insert the needle into the affected part of the skin, adjusting it so that it enters the eye only very slightly and does not penetrate beyond the natural tear film.
E aprop tire le pel entro desus e intromet aquel en alixati, e sian les pels un o dos o tres e no mays.	 Then gradually remove the skin from above as you insert it into that area gently and smoothly until the skin is removed in one or two or three pieces without leaving any excess.
E aprop tira la tua ma am aquel entro que·l pel sia fora-gitat am alixolati en la palpebra am le pel natural.	 Then carefully take your hand away from above as you remove the skin gently and smoothly until it is removed from around the eye into the natural tear film.
Mays si es atirat alixalati e non es gitat le pel, atiraras alixati a las partidas dejos am le fiel le qual tu has compost am aquela, entro qu’en sia gitat alixalati del trau sobira.	 "When the veins swell and are painful in the patient's feet, it is customary to apply poultice on the affected parts.
E vegas aquela am la visio del huel, quar lahoras tu gitaras alixati e lo fiel, e grotan quascu e clautz le huel, e laysse le claus per dos dias o tres, entro que·l pel adheresca al sieu loc e nasque sobre aquel bona carn.	 "The poultice will be applied to the swelling and painful veins; it should be kept on for two or three days, until the wound becomes covered with good healthy skin.
E si es mays breu le pel, lahoras tu ajusta un pel lonc dels pels naturals, e es elevat am aquel, o que·l leysses entro que sia alonguat aprop alcu spazi, e lehoras tu eleva aquel.	 "If the poultice is too tight or painful to apply directly on the patient's skin, adjust a natural furrow of hair and lift it up; do this gently, so that it will stay in place until the wound becomes covered with good healthy skin.
Capitol .xiii.	 "After healing...
De la cura de ehacratir la qual ve en la palpebra desus.	 "From the cure of the last eye infection that was cured...
Quan ve en le huel ehacratir, e es contraccio de la palpebra quan es contrayta en sus, o a dextra o a sinistra partida, per mala consolidacio de plagua o de seccio o de cauteri, e es apelada leporina, e aquesta ahercrati o es natural o accidental, e es fayta per consolidacio de plagua o de seccios o de cauteri, o per semblantz a lor malcuratz.	 "When the eye is infected and becomes swollen or contorted on one side of the face, either left or right, due to improper closure of the eyelid or suture, it is called an epiphora; this may be accidental or intentional, depending on whether it was caused by improper closure or sutures.
May la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que tu fendas aquela consolidacio e que separes las labias de lu, e pauses en lu en aquo que es entre aquelas una meca de drap de li, e ligues aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	 "The surgeon should make an incision between the two eyelids and separate them so that there is a space to place a dressing over; then close it as soon as possible after healing has occurred.
E no cove que tu uses de curacio de lu de las causas las quals exsiccan, constrenho; quar si tu fas aquo retorna alixacratir pus mal que nulh temps no foc habantz.	 "When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body and foot pain occurs, it is customarily called gout.
Usa en aquela de causas que mollifico ayssi cum es fenugrec, e embroca am la aygua en la qual son coytz altea e semensa de li, o enguent dyaquilon, le qual sia liquefayt am alcu dels olis, e submergeys en aquel la meca, e cura am aquel.	 "And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery.
E lo tesaur de la tua curacio es que tu perforsses am tot engen que no sia consolidat segon la forma que foc al comensament.	 "And it is customary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery.
E aquesta operacio la qual havem dita, no es sino alcuna rectificacio de ehalixacrati que no retorna la forma del loc segon que foc denant.	 "This operation which we call for is simply the correction of the hernia that does not return to its original shape after being released.
Capitol .xiiii.	 "Chapter .xiiii".
De la cura de ehacrati le qual es fayt en la palpebra dejos.	 "Of the treatment of the eye which is done on the eyelid.
Aquesta alxacrati la qual es fayta en la palpebra dejos, la qual es nompnada vertadierament alxacrati; e es de lu alcuna natural, autra accidental.	 "This operation which is called for on the eyelid, it is either congenital or accidental.
Mays accidental es fayta per plagua o per scissura o per cauteri o per autres semblantz.	 "The accidental operation may be done by stabbing or incision or cautery or any other means.
E la via de la operacio de lu es que tu prenguas una agula en la qual haga fil doble, e fiques aquela en la carn, e que la fassas passar del lacrimal de senestre entro al lacrimal dextre, entro que·l fil pervengua en las doas extremitatz de la carn.	 "The way of performing the operation is that you take a needle with which make two passes and place it in the skin and let it pass from the inner to the outer part of the eye.
E aprop exten la carn a las partidas desus am la agula e cus aquela am la agula, e inscideys am spatum ample.	 The first sentence translates to "Open up the space on either side of the patient's chest.
E donc si retorne la figura de la palpebre segon que cove, bo es; e sino, pren le ray e pausa aquel en la figura fenduda, e am aquel converteys la palpebra, e fen las doas fissuras en le latz de la palpebra dejos.	 "After you have returned the eyelid figure as described above, if it is so, then close [the split] eyelid and make two slits in its lower part.
E sian las extremitatz de las doas fissuras de dos angles de la inscizio, la qual has fayta entro que concurren, e sia de lor fayt angle entro que quan se congreguan sia fayta figura de lor.	 "The two slits should be made at the corners of the eyelid, which will allow them to enter when they align together.
E aquesta figura es letra greca: la landa.	 The Greek letter for "eye" is lambda (Λ).
E aprop osta la carn aquela per la quantitat que es le latz de lu agut dejos de lu, aquo que siec la palpebra.	 "Take the amount of skin from between their eyebrows to make a slit in it.
E aprop ajusta las partz seperadas e cos aquelas am le fil de lana; e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit de las medicinas mollificativas e de las calguas entro que sia sanat.	 "Adjust the separated parts and cover them with a piece of woolen cloth, and also apply the soothing medicines mentioned earlier to ensure they are all in order.
E si alxacrati endeve per fissura o sutura o cauteri, lahoras cove que tu fendas am fissura plana sobre les pels de la palpebra segon que es precedit.	 "If it is necessary to perform a slit or incision with a cautery, then you should make the slit flat on top of their eyebrows as described.
E aprop separa am la calgua entre doas labias segon que havem dit.	 "Then adjust the gap between the two lips as mentioned earlier.
En la suma del sermo de la cura de alxacrati quan es desus o dejos, que corra en lu operacio, segon que es preparat de la forma de alxacrati, e aquela es en forma de motas diversitatz.	 "In the context of performing a cautery when they are ready or needed for surgery, after it is prepared in the manner described earlier and that shape varies.
E le artifexs savi totz temps prepara engen en quascuna manieyra la qual es possibla a lu entro que fassa retornar la figura a la forma natural, o prop de aquela, e aquel malaute segon que a lu conveneys de la operacio e dels strumentz en las majors disposicios.	 When joints become inflamed and filled with cold humors, they can cause pain throughout the body including in the feet, it is customary to call this gout by doctors.
Capitol .xv.	 And if necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery
De la adherencia de la palpebra am la conjunctiva o am la cornea.	 From adhering to the eyelid to the conjunctiva or the cornea.
Quan accideys aquesta consolidacio a motz homes enayssi que sia solidada la palpebra pus desus am le album del huel, e sia prohibida de la facilitat del movement e de las suas obras naturals, donc cove que tu entrometas la extramitat del ray dejos la palpebra, e eleva en sus aquela, o exten aquela am le unci.	 When adhesions occur in the eyelid causing it to become solid and unable to move freely due to a restriction of natural movements, then you must remove that extra bit from under the lid, lift it up or extend it along its edge.
E aprop tu inscideys la adherencia am spatum subtil, le qual no sia am acuitat de las inscisios, habantz obtus un petit per so que·l malaute no sia inquietat deves la operacio, e remau le spatum que no ledesca le huel am la sua acuitat.	 And if the adhesions are in a very subtle place where incisions cannot be made without causing additional damage to the eyelid itself, then you must remove that small piece so that the patient is not overly concerned about the operation and retract it away from the edge of the eyelid.
E sia la tua inscizio quays excorjan aquela adherencia am facilitat entro que sia retornada la palpebra segon la sua forma natural e que sia sanada tota la adherencia.	 And that incision should be made in such a way as to allow the adhesion to return to its normal state and to be completely healed.
E aprop tu met en le huel aygua salada am la qual tu laves; o distilla en lu de zunia dissolvut en l’aygua.	 And when putting in a salted water that you wash with, or distill it of the impurities from alcohol.
E aprop separa entre la palpebra e l’huel am calgua de li, e pausa sobre le huel lana infuza en album de huou, e aprop le tertz jorn usa de causas consolidativas entro que sia sanat.	 And if necessary to separate the eyelid from the eyelashes by pulling them apart and placing a wet towel over the eye in order to absorb any remaining liquid or impurities after shaving it free of hair.
Capitol .xvi.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
De inscizio de ungla e de eminencia de carn dels lacrimals.	 With incision wounds and the emission of blood from tears.
Sapias que ungla es segon dos manieyras, quar o es nervosa, e es semblant a ciphac dur subtil; o es no-nervosa, semblant a humiditat blanca congilada, la qual quan ferr la toca, o es forsat aquela prendre am onci, es abscindida e le onci no es ficat en lu.	 It is the second of two veins, one nervous and one not-nervous; like a subtle cephale or a cold white humidity which when touched either way, is free from taking effect, it is obstructed and does not take place in that vein.
E amdos las specias no comensan sino del lacrimal major entro que va petit a petit que cobre la vista e prohibeys le lum e·l movement de huel.	 The eyelids do not communicate but with the tear duct which goes little by little towards covering the eye and prevents it from moving.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en la inscizio de lu es que·l malaute pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop obre les huels de lu, e eleva la palpebra am la tua ma, e aprop colligeys la ungla am onci de pauca duplicacio e exten aquela a las partidas desus.	 The vein of the work in the incision is that the patient's head should be placed towards it, and the hands are placed there, and raise the eyelid with your hand, and close them a few times to extend that to the edges of the wound.
E aprop pren una agula e entromet en aquela un pel de cavalh o de buou o de vaqua, o de semblantz, o de fiel fort, o duplica la extremitat de la agulha petit a petit e fica aquela en le mieg de la ungla, e penetra aquela am la agulha, e lia am fiel la ungla; e exten aquela a las partidas desus, e excorja am le pel le latz de la ungla lo qual siec la pupilla.	 You take one needle and insert it in the navel or beneath the arm pit, or between the shoulder blades, or diagonally to the side of the abdomen, double up the needle little by little until it reaches at the edge of the wound, and inserts into the needle, and holds close the eyelid; and prolongs that with many folds, and releases from the hair on the edge of the eye which is the pupil.
E ayssi tu sieguas aquela am le pel entro al derier de lu.	 When joint pain occurs due to cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, it is customary for doctors to call this gout.
E aprop tu inscideys le romanent en la razitz del lacrimal am spatum subtil o am petitas forfexs, e leysa la carn del lacrimal natural per so que per inscizio de aquela no endevengua fluxs de lagremas continuabla.	 You should gently massage the eyelid area with a small brush or sponge to help remove any remaining mucus that may continue to flow from the glands continuously
E alscunas vetz la ungla am le sol onci estenduda o am fiel, ayssi co havem dit, e aprop sia excurjat am spatum leon del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	 If you find yourself in a situation where the surface of the eyelid is already swollen or inflamed as mentioned earlier, and if it is necessary to remove it completely by using a sharp instrument like a scalpel, then this would be the method used to do so.
E guarda te que am le spatum no toques la tunica cornea e que avengua en lu ruptura, e que la pupilla sia perforada.	 Remember not to touch the cornea and cause injury or rupture it, as that could result in a perforated pupil.
Aprop la inscizio geta en le huel un pauc de sal trissa o di cief fayt de siniar, e leyssa aquel entro al autre dia; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	 After the incision has been made with a small amount of salt water or saline solution, let it sit for a moment and then gently wash it off in another bowl, and afterwards care for that area as if it were injured.
E si la ungla no es nervoza e no podes metre la agulha, ni es ficada en aquela le onci, lahoras motas veguadas aquesta specia de ungla es curada am medicinas, e es sanada ayssi cum yeu e recomtat en la divisio.	 If the eyelid is not swollen and you are unable to thread a needle through it without tearing or puncturing it, then doctors will treat this specific type of eyelid injury by medication, and it would be advisable to consult an ophthalmologist for further treatment.
E si tu vols inscindir aquela, lahoras tu obre le huel del malaute e pren spatum subtil leon de freul acuitat segon aquesta forma:	 If you wish to perform this procedure, then first remove the gauze pad and gently squeeze out excess fluid with a soft cloth as described earlier.
am subtilitat.	 subtlety
E si vezes que aquela es rarificada e es confugida e empren en aquela razit, lahoras distilla de la tua ora en le huel de cief fayt de siniar o am cief rog o am sal trissat, e opila le huel entro a l’autre dia.	 If the aforementioned is rarefied and confused when engaged in that manner, then pain is caused by cold air or dampness infiltrating into it to cause such pain.
E aprop itera sobre aquela la operacio entro que sia remaugut tot aquo que es de lu, sino que·l contrari apostema caut sia en le huel, quar lahoras tu leyssa aquela, e cura al comensament la apostema entro que sia sanat.	 Then apply ointment on top of that to heal it, unless the contrary is proven by a doctor's order, in which case he should immediately treat as if it were a wound.
E aprop itera la tua operacio sobre aquela am razo entro que sia sanat.	 Then do apply treatment to that part to make it healthy again.
La emenencia de la carn lacrimal, si notz en le huel per gran nocument, sia suspendut am onci; e inscideys aquela de aquela una partida, e no ultimes la inscizio per so que no inscidesqua fluxs de lagremas.	 The emission of tears is when the tear ducts become blocked and inflamed; if it occurs frequently and persists without improvement or cure, that condition should be examined closely for other causes to prevent further eye damage.
E aprop distilla en le lacrimal cief rog e fayt de siniar entro que sia sanat.	 Then distill into the tear ducts air or dampness to cause such pain.
Capitol .xvii.	 Chapter XVII.
De inscizio de alguazardenic e de aquo que es nascut de carn ajustada en le huel.	 On the incision of a gallbladder and that which is born in the liver.
Alcunas veguadas en les huels de alcus es nascuda carn roga, e es sobre-pausada entro que cobre la pupilla, o apropinqua o estrenh sobre las palpebras e fort leu comprem las palpebras a las partidas deforo e es assemblada a roza de balaustra.	 Any veins in the hands that are born with rough skin and over-raised will cause pain when pressing on the eyes, close them or press against the cheeks to raise their eyebrows.
Mays la operacio en lu es que·l malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se; e aprop obre les huels de aquel e colligeys tota aquela carn am oncis convenientz ad aquo, e te aquo am una forcep o am cesti; e aprop inscindiys la carn el comensament entro que tot sia finit am le encisori, e guarda te del huel que no ledescas aquel deves la tua operacio.	 The operation on him is to pause the head in the tie and fix his eyes closed as much as possible; then apply ointment onto that part of his body according to what works best for him at this time, either with a forceps or a needle; after that start treating the skin from there until everything has been finished by making incisions.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscides aquelas o am espatum le qual nos havem recomtat en la inscizio de la ungla, o am petitas forfexs am las quals es colligit ascebel segon que vindra la forma de lu aprop aquest capitol.	 When the incision is made according to which method we recommend in the previous chapter or fashion of the wound, after it has been applied, you will come.
Donc cum es complida la tua inscizio e es remauguda tota aquela carn, lahoras omple le huel de sal trissa, o destilla en lu polvera roga e semblantz a lu de las medicinas corrossivas, e pausa sobre le huel deforo coto am album de huou entro que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	 After completing the incision and removing all of that flesh, pour hot oil on it or distillate in alcohol to cover it with corrosive medicines, and then apply a pointed cautery.
E si roman alcuna causa de alguardenici e es senhoragat sanc caut, e temes apostema caut, lahoras leyssa le huel e cura aquela apostema am aquo que ceda aquela apostema, e aprop itera sobre aquel am operacio entro que sia sanat, e semblantment fay en la carn ajustada la qual accideys en le huel de aquesta especia.	 If there is no cause for the cautery to be used and you are afraid of pain from the cautery, then apply a pointed cautery on it while covering that with this procedure so as to prevent that from happening again, and do similarly in the adjusted flesh which causes the pains in the oil.
Mays empero tu cove que alienes tota curacio del huel freul per via natural o per via accidental, obran am ferr, e no metas la tua ma en alcuna de aquestas operacios entro que veges que aquel membre sia suffertant aquela operacio.	 Please do not remove all care from the wound either naturally or accidentally, otherwise you may miss that part of it which was operated on.
Capitol .xviii.	 Chapter eighteen
De colleccio de sabel en le huel.	 The collection of salt to put on the oil.
Sabel so venas rogas las quals son testudas sobre le huel e prohibeysso al vesement la sua operacio, e develican le huel am longitut de dias.	 Sabel should be poured over it and prohibited from that procedure, to prevent the oil from becoming rancid or spoiling the operation, and remove it after days of use.
Donc necessari es al comensament que tu consideres si le huel en le qual es sabel es fort e en lu no es autra malautia que sabel, lahoras tu colligeys aquel sabel.	 Therefore, you should initially consider whether the oil in which salt is used is good and not another type of poison that may harm it, and then apply the salt to it.
E es que tu comandes al malaute que pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop suspen aquelas venas am un onci o am dos segon la tua prudencia; e sia aquel onci de subtil duplicacio segon aquesta forma:	 And you command the patient to hold his head in such a way that it is at rest and let one or both of these veins be stretched.
o so dos oncis gradantment en un cos segon aquesta forma:	 And if two are held tightly, have them gently moved apart in this manner
E aprop sian colligidas aquelas venas am forses subtils, am subtilitat, e abstergeys le sanc hora aprop hora, entro que vegas aquelas venas esser remaugudas del huel e sian revolgudas.	 And if the two veins are stretched with great force and subtlety, stretch them gently but firmly, and take away at once those that are being obstructed or blocked, so they may be relaxed.
E guarda te que tu no ledes le huel am las extremitatz del spatum; e si’ la tua operacio en le miegjorn denant le solelh, e sias mot ferm en la tua operacio que no inscidas sino aquelas venas.	 And be sure not to hold the hands of the patient's feet while performing this operation on their abdomen if it is being done in broad daylight; and make your movements firm but without cutting off circulation, so that veins may remain intact.
E quan tu auras complitz, lahoras tu distilla en le huel cief vert o rog per que am sa acuitat corrodesca aquo que es remaugut del sabel.	 When you are done, apply something cold or hot to prevent any further erosion of this area that has been cut open.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible colligeys tot en aquela hora, e lahoras tu emplastra tot am aquo que cede la dolor de lu, e leyssa lu per alcus dias entro que sia sedada la dolor de lu e que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	 If it is not possible to attend to the patient at that moment, and if there are still pains from them, then you should leave this care for a certain number of days until the pain subsides and it has been ensured that the cauterization will heal properly.
E aprop itera sobre lu segon que la mateyssa manieyra entro que sia sanat.	 And when returning to attend him, make sure there is no further bleeding from this procedure.
E aquesta es la forma de las forfexs:	 This is how the operation should be performed:
Capitol .xix.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet
De reduccio de arizati al nas.	 And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery.
Quan tu curas arisati am cauteri o am medicina aguda comburent segon que es precedida la narracio de lu e no es sanat, lahoras no es engen en lu sino que fendas sobre le apostema deves la maturitat de lu, e que extraguas tota la humiditat la qual es en lu e·l poyre entro que sia descubert le os.	 When you cure joints with cautery or acute medicine after the account is given and it is not a secret remedy, then the sores are opened in the same way as before to extract all of the moisture which is within them by the nose.
E donc cum es descubert le os e vezes en lu corrupcio o negror, lahoras tu ratz lu am un sturment del qual aquesta es la forma:	 And when it is discovered that there is corruption or blackening in it, then you should apply a treatment of which type this way:
E es nompnat de aspre cap, e sia feyt de fer indi, e sia le cap redon ayssi cum asir le qual sia fayt punctat per punctacio de lima o aliskalfati per punctacio subtil (ayssi cum es en la forma seguent).	 It is called "the quick and easy way," and it consists of placing a poultice on it, then applying heat, or alternately by puncturing with the sharp point of a needle or applying a subtle puncture.
E pausa aquel sobre le loc corrumput del os, e aprop revolveys aquel entre les tieus ditz, e prem la tua ma petit a petit entro que sapias que aquela corropcio es rasa.	 And if you find it necessary to make the poultice between the toes and press your hand gently bit by bit until you know that this corruption is cured.
E aquo sia fayt alcunas veguadas, e aprop restaura le loc am causas exsiccativas e stipticas.	 And if it is necessary to make poultices with damp and hot compresses.
Donc si·l loc es consolidat e es en lu nascuda bona carn e es abscindit le cors de la sania e roman per xl dias, e no es renovat e no es apostemat e no accideys en lu accident, lahoras tu sapias que es sanat.	 If the spot is healed and is in good skin and has been removed from the body by washing it with water for 10 days, without healing or being applied ointment, nothing happens to him accidentally, then you know that he is cured.
E sino, lahoras no es en lu engen sino reduzir la fissura a la forma del nas, e segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu descuebras de segon os am ferr o am medicina acuta, e cum sira descubert le os, lahoras tu pren tribo segon aquesta forma:	 When the fissure is not in the nose but rather on the face and its severity increases, then you should make incisions and it is customary that doctors prescribe acute treatment or medicine.
Sia la extramitat de lu ferr triangulada, e·l fust de lu sia prim extenuat entro a la extremitat ayssi cum vezes assi.	 If the tear is triangular-shaped, first extend your fist towards it as often as you can be.
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le os, e sia aquel prop del lacrimal; e alongua la tua ma un pauc del huel, e aprop revol la tua ma am le tribo entro que penetre tot le os, e aquel sente le malaute per asso que atroba vent yssir per so quan te la sua ma.	 Then place your hand over the eye and on the eyebrow; and put a little of it into your hand, and remove your hand from above to prevent entering into both eyes, that is where you should hold your hand.
Donc lahoras restaura le loc am medicinas stipticas exsiccantz ayssi cum t’e eyssenhat.	 Then the doctors restore the location with strict medication and it must be done as often as possible.
Donc cum nays la carn e·l loc es endurazit, lahoras la materia la qual effundia a las partidas deforo retorna al nas, donc aquo es pus leugier sobre le malaute.	 Then with the material that it filled in the parts of the body return to the nose; then put it over the patient's head.
Capitol .xx.	 This is a translation error and there are no further translations available for this line
De reduccio de la eminencia del huel.	 Reduction of the prominence of the nose.
Quan le huel emineys am la sua totalitat e no accideys en le vezement nocument ni diminuacio, lahoras cove que laxas le malaute, e aprop que·l segues, e aprop que pausas ventozas en le cervitz ses scarificacio e succa per bona succaccio; e aprop pausa sobre le huel liniment le qual sia fayt de acatra e aloe e enses e sarcocolla, e aprop strenh le emplaustre sobre le huel am motz polvils.	 When the nose becomes prominent and does not occur in any other way than a slight increase or decrease in size but is generally constant, it is customary that doctors prescribe laxatives, and put their hand over them, and place your hand above to prevent the mucus from escaping through the throat and falling into the chest; and then rest on the nose ointment that contains acacia, aloe, and sandalwood.
E la manieyra dels polvils es que prenguas draps de li leons motz, e quascun drap sia duplicat en quatre plecs; e fay de aquels motz.	 "The doctor's assistant rolls a bandage over the patient's mouth to cover their tongue.
E aprop pausa aquels la un sobre le autre segon la quantitat de la qual ha le huel necessitat.	 "The servant places one more on top of the other, according to how much is needed for treatment.
E aprop strenh sobre aquels am drap dur am fort strictura; e itera las ventosas am succio ses scarificacio; e aprop osta las ventosas e leyssa le huel streyt le dia e la nueyt.	 "The servant tightens the bandage tightly to prevent strangulation, and afterwards applies a poultice of warm water or oil to soothe the pain.
Mays si entretant le liguament es mollificat, lahoras cove que sia mot streyt.	 "If meanwhile the ligament is softened by alcohol application, then loosen it after treatment.
E aprop osta le liament aprop le dia e la nueyt ayssi cum havem dit.	 "The servant applies the ligature as described above.
E si vezes le huel ja esser redusit, bo es, e sino, lahoras itera le emplastre am les polvils e la strictura e las ventosas entro que sia sanat.	 "If pain occurs after treatment, then the servant applies a poultice of warm water or oil to soothe the pain.
Capitol .xxi.	 "The end of this medical treatise.
De la inscizio de la eminencia de la tunica uvea.	 "From the beginning of this medical treatise.
Quan endeve disrupcio en la tunica uvea, e aprop es eminent e procezeys fora las palpebras ayssi cum un gra de rasim, e es orrazada la forma de home per aquo, e vols aquo inscidir, lahoras la operacio en lu es ayssi cum havem recomtat, que tu entrometas la agula en la razitz de la uvea de la partida dejos en la partida desus, e aprop met la agula autra en la qual sia fil doble de la part del lacrimal, e fay aquela penetrar e leyssa la primieyra agula segon la sua disposicio; e aprop inscideys le loc del fiel doble e leva am aquel la partida de la uvea en le circuit de la agula, e strenh aquela mot.	 "When the rupture occurs in the tunic, and it is evident and clear to see this way of doing things, one does this operation as described above; inserting the needle at the point where the tear ends, and holding it tight.
E aprop extratz la agula e pausa sobre le huel lana infusa en album de huou e leyssa entro que cayha le fil am la uva.	 When you have placed a cushion under their thighs, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest holding them by the hands, then insert a needle into the vein infused with alcohol in order to draw out the phlegm as it may happen that the thread will come out along with the phlegm.
E aprop cura le huel am aquo que conforte aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	 And then apply a cold compress over this area, which should be healed.
E alcunas veguadas aduna de tota partida am cercle de drap entro le huel ajuste eminencia gran, e aprop sia perforat am le spatum subtil que vengua al preon del huel, e corra la humiditat albuginea, e descen le huel e intra tantost.	 And place the rags soaked in cold water around this area with great intensity of wetness, and pierce a small hole that will allow the phlegm to escape, then run cool water over it and inside as well.
E aprop strenh entro que sia sanat.	 And continue doing so until they are healed.
Capitol .xxii.	 Chapter 22.
De curacio de alconati.	 Of the treatment of cataracts.
Aquesta malautia que es apelada alconati no es sino sania la qual es ajustada en le huel semblant a aygua dessendent e no es aquela.	 The ailment called cataract is nothing more than a swelling that can be treated with cool water and not by this one.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en ela es que fasses le malaute sezer sobre la sela aparelada e dreyta, e aprop pren le cap sieu en las tuas mas de doas partz e mau aquel entro que veias la sania pervenir a las partidas dejos, e aprop sia siccada e no descenda, e sia ostat le lum, e·l malaute veia las causas ayssi cum vezia.	 The procedure of the work is that you should pour water on their face and put it in a cool position for them to drink from your two cups placed there by doing this, avoiding it going down unless necessary, holding its head so that it sees the remedy coming, and then after applying it, do not descend but remain still.
E si no descendra en jos, sapias que es aygua.	 And if you will not come down from above, you know what water is.
Mays si no es preparat le descendement a la sania am aquo que havem dit, lahoras fay le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e aprop pren spatum subtil e fen am aquel sobre le pannicol cernent un petit deves la continuacio de la conjunctiva am la tunica cornea en la corona (entro al loc vuet), entro que sia fora-getada la sania.	 When the descent to the abdomen is prepared as we have said, the gout will be removed between your thighs and gently applied to a small piece of cotton over the abdominal skin in order to prevent the discharge from continuing onto the conjunctiva or cornea of the eye (insert location).
Donc cum es fora-getada, lahoras tu distilla en le huel aygua cauda en la qual has mesclat mel o aygua en la qual ja has bulit fenugrec e mel.	 Once it is done, the gout will be distilled in a liquid containing salt or sugar, which you have mixed with vinegar and water.
E aprop sia curat am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	 And then take care of all other causes that may exist
Capitol .xxii.	 Chapter 22
De la curacio de la aygua descendent del huel.	 From the treatment of the gout descending from the urine.
Ja havem dit las specias de la aygua en la divisio e qual conveneys a perforar am sermo declarant, lahoras aquel segon la sanetat.	 You have specified in the division where to make a hole for declaring that this is done for the health's sake.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre un cayrat e lia le sieu huel sa, lu mot stringent.	 The gout will be removed between your thighs on a flat surface and its urine will drain well through it, the strictness of which you should know.
E aprop pausa prop de la palpebra del sieu huel la tua ma senestra, si le huel en le qual es l’aygua es le huel senestra; o am la tua ma dreyta, si le huel es le dextre.	 Place your right hand on the eye's eyelid if its urine is the left one, or on the left hand if it is the right one.
E aprop am la tua ma dextra pren almagda, si le huel es senestre; o am la tua ma senestra, si le huel es de dreyt.	 Place your right hand on the top of the stomach if its urine is the left one, or on the left side if it is the right one.
E aprop pausa la extremitat de almagda prop de la corona per la grossesa del ray en le album del huel de part del mendre lacrimal, e aprop enpelleys almagda am vertut e revol la tua ma am aquel.	 When the patient's abdomen is to be touched at its lower edge near the eyebrow and on the surface of the tear duct in the lobe of the eyelid, approach gently with your hand towards it.
E aprop penetre en le album del huel e sentas que almagda ja es pervenguda a causa vueda.	 If you suspect that the pain is due to an abscessed liver or gallbladder, approach very gently and ask if it has already burst open.
E cove que sia la masura del cami de almagda al preon la mesura del spazi le qual es de la pupilla entro a la fi de la negror, e es la corona del huel; quar tu veyras am aquel pupilla am la visio de l’huel per la clartat de la tunica cornea.	 Approach the pupil at its lower edge towards the measurement of the space that is found between the iris and the limbus, which includes the eyelid's margin; when you are approaching this pupil from within the eye for clarity in the corneal epithelium.
E aprop pausa almagda entro al loc en le qual es l’aygua, e aprop tu la atira en jos una veguada aprop autra, e donc si la aygua descen tantost, lahoras vetz le malaute aquo sobre le qual huebre la sua vista tantost, e almagda en le sieu huel.	 Approach the patient with water, gently place your hand on their shoulder a short distance away, and if they complain of vision problems as well, ask about any other pain that may be affecting their sight as well, such as the gallbladder.
E aprop repausa se un pauc; donc si la aygua es descenduda, lahoras tu depausa aquela autre veguada abantz que almagda ne sia getada.	 After a short pause, if it is determined that water has been applied and the patient still complains of pain after applying another hand over their shoulder gently but firmly, ask about any other pains they may be experiencing as well, such as abdominal pain.
E donc quan es sicada e no descen, lahoras tu extrat almagda am facilitat, e revol am aquel la tua ma pauc a pauc, e aprop dissolveys en l’aygua un petit de sal clara de gemma e am aquela lava le huel dedintz; e aprop pausa fora le huel coto o stopa o lana infusa en oli rozat e album de huou e ligua am aquo le huel sa.	 When it has been determined that the water is still causing pain and not receding, ask for the patient to gently stretch their abdomen, approach with one hand at a time towards it, and place your hand over the ear as well; then wash thoroughly the eye with clear salt solution to remove any infection or irritation from the cornea.
Mays nos e aquels que so de nostre temps pause sobre aquel comi trissat am album de huou.	 In our time, it's customary that when someone has eaten a meal rich in purine from an album of food,
E si no obezeys a tu almagda al intrament de l’huel per la sua duricia — quar es alcu dels homes del qual le huel es dur mot —, lahoras cove que prenguas le spatum le qual es nompnat alberid del qual aquesta es la forma:	 When a person becomes obese and suffers from excessive hunger - which is the case of many men for whom this happens to be true - doctors recommend that they consume food in moderation.
E donc perfora am aquel aquela conjunctura, e no ultimes la tua ma en le trauc, e no es si no que fassas via ad almagda loc subtil.	 And when it comes to joints, and not the extremities of your hand or foot, do consume food in moderation.
E aprop entromet almagda segon que havem dit.	 Once you've eaten something that has been mentioned earlier.
E deves le compliment de la tua obra, sia preparat al malaute dormitori descentment fayt en le qual dorma sobre le sieu dos en mayson tenebrosa, e sia prohibit de totz movementz .	 You must give the patient's order to remain still on their back with a soft cushion between them and their feet, and strictly forbid any movements.
E pausa en la natura de lu aquo per que sia linida la sua natura, e no maugua le sieu cap a la partida dreyta ni senestra de tot.	 Pausing in nature of it to allow its nature to be quiet and not encourage any movement towards the right or left side either up or down.
E sia le liament segon la sua disposicio entro al tertz dia.	 And for those who's disposition is within three days
E aprop deslia aquel en aquela maysso tenebrosa e exproha la freol vista, e fay li vezer alcunas causas, e aprop retorna le liament entro al dia .vii.	 And place them in a very dark and quiet room, and ask for causes of their pain, and return the order within seven days.
E no cove que fassas aquo en la hora de las curacios o tantost aprop la infusio.	 Do not do this during or just before feeding.
Habantz cove que tu alienes aquo per so quar la aygua puega leugierament per gran e vehement de reguardament.	 Be careful when you remove it, because water can flow violently and heavily from the wound.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que deslias le huel denant le vii dia, e rectifica aquel am aquo que ceda apostema.	 When a gout attack occurs in the morning or evening, they say that it is caused by cold humors and ask for treatment right away to stop the pain from spreading through the day/night.
Lahoras tu absol la vista de lu e pausa sobre la cara de lu oral per le qual sia regit le vezement de lu dejos lu per alcus dias, lu existent en la mayszo tenebrosa.	 It is customary to remove the bandage from their face and cover it with a cloth or something similar in order for them not to see the blisters that may appear over time on those days
E aprop sia gitat de aquela mayzo gradantment e conversa8 en las suas causas.	 This sentence suggests that the doctor should investigate the cause of gout as quickly as possible, asking questions and seeking answers accordingly.
E sapias que in alchatea no es excusat le discipol de visio alcunas veguadas, e lahoras tu sias ardit sobre la operacio.	 They say that one should not excuse a disciple who has been caught looking at certain forbidden fruits, and they ask the doctor to inquire into their operation as well
E ja es pervengut a nos de alcu de aquels les quals so al Artach , e alcu disse que fayt foc en al Ayrac magdaam perforat am le qual es succada la aygua.	 They mention that they have been to the doctor who performs acupuncture, and they say it is important to note down when the needle was inserted into the arm.
Mays empero yeu non e vist degu en la nostra terra le qual haia perfeyt aquo, ni e aquo legit en alcu dels libres dels antics; e es possible que aquo sia novel.	 Although it is true that this may not happen in our land as we know it, or be done according to the old ways of free people, but it could still be a new thing.
E aquestas so las formas de las specias de magdaan per que sia sobre aquelas aquel le qual ignora aquelas:	 This is how the methods used by magicians are performed in order for them to control those things that you don't know about:
E sian faytas de eram o de ferr propriament, e sian las extramitatz de lor am aquesta subtilitat triangulada, la extremitat aguda ayssi cum aquela es la forma.	 It may be necessary to have an acute point at the end of this line as well as another way that is more subtle and triangular-shaped, using one's hand or something similar.
Capitol .xxiv.	 The capital of the twenty-fourth book
De la curacio de carn nada en le nas.	 From the care of flesh none in the nose
Quan en le nas so nascudas carns diversas ajustadas de las quals es alcuna causa la qual es assemblada a scorpio de motz pes, o a polip peys; e aquesta malautia es apelada polipus quar es a semblansa de aquel peys representat.	 When the flesh in the nose becomes infected with various adjusted worms of which no cause is the assembly scorpion or polyps, and this disease is called polyps, because it resembles the appearance of that worm represented.
E de lu es carn cancrosa, lapadea, de fusca color; e de lu es que es carn leon no de color fusca.	 From which flesh becomes cancerous, it turns pale, and from it is that flesh becomes white
Donc en aquela que es en aquestas carns leon no fraudulenta ni cancroza, cove que fassas le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e posat al solelh, e huebre las nars de lu, e picoys le tieu onci en aquelas carns.	 Then in the case where those worms are neither fraudulent nor cancerous, make a space for the patient between your legs and expose them to sunlight, spread their excrement on the nose of him, and sprinkle salt over it in order to heal the sores on those worms.
E aprop extrat aquela a las partidas deforo, e aprop inscindeys aquo que has comprehendut de aquelas am spatum agut subtil de la una partida entro que sapias que tota la carn ja es ostada; que si roman de lu deguna causa de la qual la abscisio es possibla, lahoras tu ratz aquo am la un dels estrumentz subtils am facilitat entro que de lu romangua denguna causa.	 And with the aid of that subtle instrument which you have comprehended from these fine parts of the one opening through which it is clear to you that all flesh has been opened, if any cause arises for whose removal is possible, the doctors are advised in this case to take advantage of a simple means to facilitate the movement of this cause.
Mays si senhoreja am sanc o accida apostema caut, lahoras tu pausa a lu aquo que cove; o es dels apostemas malignes, lahoras tu coyta e cauteriza aquel entro que sia abscindit sanc e sian ostadas las cavas totas.	 If the sore is caused by cold or hot sores, the doctors are advised to pause there and cleanse it with a cautery; if it is from malignant sores, they are advised to burn away all the cavities that have been opened.
E aprop sia getatz en le nas aprop la inscizio vi agre e aygua o vi.	 When you have opened up space between the patient's thighs, place a cushion underneath them, another servant on their legs, and yet another one on their chest while holding onto their hands.
Mays si le nas es ubert e de lu procezeys humiditat entro al palat, lahoras sapias que ja es sanat.	 The mouth is open and the servant approaches to moisturize it with water or wine.
Mays si la humiditat no penetra segon que cove, lahoras tu sapias que dedintz lu es carn nada en los pus sobiras osses de las nars als quals non es pervengut abscizio.	 If the moisture doesn't penetrate when it is moistened because of a blockage, then you know that he has a blocked nose and his nasal passages are inflamed in those areas where they have not been obstructed.
Donc lahoras cove que entromitas fiel de li al qual sia alcuna grosseza, e nuza en lu motz nuzes, e pausa entre quascun nutz la quantitat del dit o mens, e engene le malaute e entromet una extremitat del fiel en le nars am lo ray o am autra causa la qual es a lu possibla.	 Then you know to introduce it gently into the nostril where there is no obstruction, and place your hand between each nostril counting the quantity of that one or another, and insert them gently in the nostrils due to any reason which may be possible.
E pus que aquo aura fayt, que atire le sieu odorament entro que pervengua a las canals de las nars, e sia eyssit sobre le sieu golayro, quar tropas veguadas le semblant ad aquesta accio fan les enfantz a las scolas, e es leugiera causa ad aquel que ho vol far.	 You know to make them inhale the smell through their nostrils, and be sure it reaches into their throat so that they will vomit what is there when they have eaten too much of this remedy which causes children in schools to do this action.
E aprop pausa las dos extramitatz del fiel, una extremitat que iesca sobre le nas et l’autra que romangua en le nas, e aprop aministra serratura de carn am les nuzes que so en le fiel, e fay aquo entro que sapias que las carn ja so am les nuzes del fiel.	 Then pause the two fingers from one hand, and place another finger into their nostril which is towards the nose, and insert it gently in the nostrils as well, knowing that the flesh has already become moist with the nose of the person.
E aprop extratz le fiel, e pausa en le nas aprop la abstraccio del sanc una calgua , e fay aquo per tres dias o mays entro que l’enguent corrodo tot aquo que es romas de las carns.	 When the body part is first exposed by a cautery, place a cushion under it and put another one on its chest to prevent injury during this procedure that lasts for three days or more until all wounds related to the foot have healed
E aprop en la fi de la causa, pausa en le nas una canula de plom per alscus jorns entro que sia sanat.	 When the cause is over, place a needle filled with poison in its nose for three days or more until it's cured.
Mays si endigeys de curacio que exsique, usa de aquela.	 If there were no curative measures available at that time, then use this one.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument a capipurge fazedor am le qual son distillatz olis e medicinas en le nars:	 This is the form of the instrument used to open up and drain any fluid or medicine from inside.
E fay aquo de argent o de eram, la qual sia semblant a una petita lampesa uberta, ayssi cum petita conqua, e le meat semblantment.	 If it is filled with silver or other metals that resemble a small vessel of goldsmith's work, and has the same shape as such an object.
E si vols, fay una canula clausa ayssi cum cana, e la cancula del estrument a capipurge fazedor e sia plana, descuberta; a la qual sia manubre en lo derier de lu, am le qual tenguas aquela quan escaufas en lu oli o aquo que tu vols dels sucs e de las causas suctiblas.	 If you wish to use a closed cautery as well with the needle, and place the instrument in such a way that it is flat on top, uncovered; having its muzzle at the lower part of it, through which you will draw out what you want from the juice or causes of bleeding.
E aquestz capipurgi es precios: recipe de enforbi de castor, de balayra blanc, de giengiebre, e piletre de safra, de pebre lonc, de escafragia, de epetum de spic ana unc. vi cumfizeys am suc de bleda e de caul, e sian faytas pillulas, e sia destemprada una pillula am aygua tebeza, e sia gitat en las nars del malaute jasent envers.	 This cautery is expensive: made of castor oil, white lead, ginger root, and pepper long, saffron, ashwaganda, epetuma spicana unc., and has the properties that make it suitable for drawing out blood or pus, and to be placed in the nostrils of the patient.
Capitol .xxv.	 "When a person feels joint pain caused by cold humors invading every part of the body and experiencing pain in their feet.
De theyls natz en las extramitatz del nas.	 Of course, it should be translated as: When the extremities become inflamed due to excessive coldness.
Motas veguadas es nat theyl en las extramitatz del nas, e es magnificat e omentat en alscus dias entro en que mot es leg le reguardament de lu.	 Of course, it should be translated as: "When the extremities get inflamed due to excessive coldness, and if that happens frequently enough to become a chronic condition, consult a doctor.
E per aquo cove que tu inscidas aquel en le comensament de la apparissio de lu, e erediques tot aquel.	 Certainly, it should be translated as: "And for this reason you must start using that from the very beginning of their treatment process.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc o cauteri o medicina comburent la qual estia en loc de lu.	 Certainly, it should be translated to mean: "Then apply a pointed cautery or medicine where needed in order to treat him/her.
Mays si es tardada la sua inscizio entro que sia magnificat, lahoras considera si es lapificat, dur, de fusca color e de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr quar es apostema crancos; quar motas veguadas ad aquel que inscideys aquesta apostema endeve per lu granda malicia sobre aquel le qual aquel havia.	 Certainly, it should be translated as: "If the patient's illness becomes chronic, and pain, redness, swelling, or a few other symptoms appear, do not hesitate to apply the pointed cautery where necessary.
E si le apostema es de leon tocament e no es de fosca color, e vezes que inscizio es possibla en tot aquel, lahoras evacua le malaute e inscideys aquel senes temor, e cura le loc am aquo que exsique e costrenh entro que sia sanat.	 Certainly, it should be translated as: "If the pointed cautery is used gently and not accompanied by a swelling color or when an incision may be possible in that area, then the patient's ulcer is treated and the wound is cleaned to ensure cleanliness before applying any treatment.
Capitol .xxvi.	 "When a person has joint pain caused by cold humors invading every part of their body and experiencing pain in their feet, consult a doctor immediately.
De sutura del nas e de las labias e de la aurelha quan la continuitat es dissolvuda per plagua o per semblantz.	 Joint pain caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, including the nose and lips and the chin when continuity is dissolved through either plague or through laughter
Sapias que quan accideys solucio de continuitat en una de aquestas cartillages, pauc confereys en aquela operacio sino en alcus homes.	 "When solving the problem of continuity in one of these vessels, please refer to that operation instead of this one.
Donc cove, quan endeve ad alcu alcuna causa de aquelas, que consideres si es plagua fresca am le sieu sanc, e lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	 "Then go ahead and if it is fresh blood in the vein, adjust the two lips of the plague by the incision, and apply a cold compress to that affected area.
E si las labias de solucio de continuitat so ja separadas, e quascuna es fayta sana, lahoras cove que tu excorjes quascuna partida de la sua codena apparent entro que n’iesca sanc.	 "If the lips of solution to continuity are already separated and each is healthy, then you should remove one piece from its cavity as soon as possible.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias am sutura e strenh aquelas, e sobre aquelas pulveriza sanc de drago e enses trissat, e pausa sobre la polvera una pessa de emplaustra diafinicon, o de alcu autre dels emplastres consolidatius, e leyssa aquel liat per dos jorns o per tres, e aprop deslia aquel e permuta aquel emplaustre e leyssa aquel entro que·ls fiels per si sian abscinditz, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	 "Then adjust the two lips by incision and stretch them tightly, and place a compress of dragon's blood on them and wrap it around each in a strip like bandage, then lay that over another of those consolidated plasters or similar, and let it stay for 2 days or three, and remove it and exchange it with another one, and let it stay there to prevent any escape, and apply it over the affected area as soon as possible.
Mays la manieyra de la sutura es que tu agregues la solucio de continuitat o am agulhas ayssi cum havem recomtat en la sutura del ventre, o agregua la solucio de continuitat am fiel ayssi cum a tu e fayt saber.	 "The remedy of the incision is that you apply the solution to continuity or with needles as recommended for abdominal surgery, or add the solution to continuity if it has already been applied in this manner and you know.
Capitol .xxvii.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors
De extraccio de aquela causas que veno en las doas labias en las partidas dedintz.	 The reasons for the pains that come from the toes on the steps of the house
Motas veguadas endeve a motz homes en las partidas dedintz de las suas labias alcus apostemas durs semblantz a gras de errs, e alscunas de lors son mendres e alcunas son majors.	 These reasons are considered very harsh and severe on the feet, as well as some others that are softer and more mild.
Donc cove que tu convertas las labias e fendas quascuna de aquelas duricias de tota part, e aprop la abscizio umpliscas le loc de sagi trissat entro que·l sanc sia restrengut, e aprop sia lavat am vi agre e sia curat le loc am aquo que es stipticitat, entro que sia sanat.	 To prevent these harsh wounds from spreading throughout the whole part of the body and to clean up any injuries that may have occurred during this process, it is customary for you to wash the area with warm water and then dry it thoroughly before sealing it.
Capitol .xxviii.	 Here comes the next sentence to translate. Do not add any comments, like "here is the translation", just reply with the guessed translation and nothing else:
De inscizio de la carn ajustada en las gengivas.	 To sew up the skin on the lips.
Granre de veguadas nays sobre la gengiva carn ajustada la qual les antics apelero albulus, adonc cove que tu suspendas aquela am onci o que tenguas aquela am las forfecs e inscidas aquela deves la sua razit, e leyssas la sania correr o le sanc.	 You should stretch the skin on the lips over the upper teeth and close it with your lower lip or fasten it between your teeth, making sure to leave a small opening so that saliva can flow through easily.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc sagi trissat o autra polveras stipticas o excicativas.	 After sealing up the wound, you should place a soft or absorbent material on it in order for it to absorb any pus or other substances that may have flowed through during the process.
E si aquela carn retorna, lahoras inscideys aquela segundariament, e cauterisa aquela, quar aprop le cauteri no retornara.	 If the skin returns after being sealed up, then you should cut it open again and apply a cautery to seal it once more, as the cautery will not return.
Capitol .xxix.	 When severe joint pain is caused by cold humors that spread through each part of the body, and especially if it happens in the feet, doctors customarily call it gout.
De razo de dentz am ferr.	 The reason for doing this is unknown, but please continue with the next line anyway:
Quan en la superficia de las dentz de las partidas dedintz e de las de foro e entre las gingivas so ajustadas escorsas aspras, legas, e alcunas veguadas son de nigradas e son faytas citrinas o vertz entro que a la gingiva ve per aquo corrupcio e son faytas las dentz legas.	 When the gums around the teeth and between the front teeth are tightly pressed together and covered in blisters, it is customary to call this condition canker sores.
E donc cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas e pausar le cap de lu en le tieu se, e ratz las dents en las quals apareysso aquelas escorsas e causas semblantz arena entro que de lor no romangua deguna causa, e aquo fay de la negror e de la citrinitat e de las autras entro que sian mondificadas.	 And if you place the patient between your breasts and hold his head in its position so that it cannot move, but the teeth are in the gums where these blisters and causes seem to be going into them because of some cause, and this is due to blackness and citrininity and other things being mixed together, then they are considered as a mixed infection.
Donc si es ostat aquo que es en aquelas del comensament de la razio, bo es; e sino, lahoras tu itera la razio sobre aquelas al autra dia e al segon e al tertz entro que vengua al derier stament en aquo que tu vols.	 If this is where the reason begins, then good luck! But if not, you should go back to the previous day and the second one after that until tomorrow.
E sapias que las dentz han necessitat de motz rezoris de diversas formas e de motas figuras segon que es preparat a la tua operacio.	 You know that teeth may need different treatments depending on how they are prepared for your surgery.
E per so quar le razori am le qual la dent es raza de la partida dedintz es autre del razori am le qual es ras entre las dentz segon autras formas, e aquestas formas de razoris sian deves tu preparadas las quals veyras tantost:	 To ensure that the reason is prepared for when the tooth comes out of its socket and another for when it is removed between teeth.
Capitol .xxx.	 "When joints are affected by cold humors that permeate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet.
D’eradicacio de dentz.	 "Remove them if necessary
Cove que tu cures la dent de la sua dolor am tot engen e tardes en tota eradicacio de lu, quar no es denguna causa que suplisqua la veguada de lu quan es eradicada, quar es sustancia sublima entro que es excusacio en la eradicacio de lu.	 "Treat the cause of pain by removing it if possible and prevent any further causes arising from its removal.
Mays cove quan le malaute es forsat aquela dent eradicar, que fermament deves tu sia certificat quala es la dent dolent, quar motas veguadas la dolor descep le malaute e cuga que sia en dent sana, e tu eradicas aquela e aprop la dolor no cessa entro que la dent malauta e dolent sia eradicada, quar nos ja havem vist aquo per operacio dels barbies.	 "Make sure to remove the affected part if possible and make it clear that this is a gout pain caused by cold humors so that future pains do not occur in the same area.
Donc cum deves tu es sertificat qual es la dent dolent, e que o sabes be, lahoras cove que tu scarifiques en le circuit de la dent am spatum en le qual sia alcuna vertut, entro que sia dissolvut de la dent de la gingiva de tota partida, e aprop mau aquel am les tieus ditz, o am forfexs subtils al comensament petit a petit entro que aquela concucesquas.	 "If it is necessary to remove the affected area, you should do so in stages from the outermost edge of the tooth inwards towards the center.
E aprop alogua en lu fortz tenalhas grans per bona loquacio o estuptura fort, e pausa le cap del malaute entre les tieus denolhs que be le tengues que no·s maugua, e aprop tratz la dent segon rectitut en manieyra que no trenques aquela, ni al malaute major dolor no dones.	 "Take great care when making a large opening or causing a fracture in it, and put the top of your hand over the patient's head to prevent injury from being done.
E donc si no es foro-getat, lahoras pren un de aquels instrumentz, e met aquel dejos lu de tota part am facilitat e esforsa la remocio de lu ayssi que es feyt al comensament.	 "If not possible to remove it directly, you should take one of these instruments and put it at the very tip so that you can easily feel around inside.
Mays si la dent es trauquada o corrosa, lahoras cove que tu comples de drap aquel trauc e estrenguas aquel am la extremitat de ray subtil per so que no sia trinquada en la hora de la tua constriccio sobre aquela am tenalas.	 When the tooth is decayed or perforated, doctors recommend covering it with a dressing and keeping it covered to prevent infection at that location until the next check-up time approaches when you can examine it more closely
E cove que tu obres exquesitament am scarificacio en le circuit de tota part de la gingiva e guarda mot la tua fortaleza que no trenques aquela e romangua partida de lu, e retorne sobre le malaute per la malicia que sia majo que la primieyra dolor de lu.	 Doctors recommend covering the entire length of your gumline and be sure not to touch it until you are certain that it is completely healed, as returning to it prematurely may exacerbate the first pain of recovery
E guarda te que no fassas aquo que fan alscus ignorantz barbiers en lor fistinacio e audacia sobre la eradicacio de lor, ses que no aministran aquo que nos havem recomtat; quar motas veguadas fan venir sobre les homes malautias grans las quals son pus dificils que sian trinquadas, e las razitz de lor remaugudas totas, o alcunas de aquelas, o que extrayguas aquela am alcus osses de la mandigula ayssi cum motas veguadas havem testificat.	 Doctors advise against allowing ignorant barbers or others to perform a suction excision without proper training and expertise as they may find it difficult and may cause complications, especially when attempting to remove cysts from the eyelid or other such areas.
E aprop la eradicacio de lu sia lavada la boca am vi caut o vi agre am sal.	 The excision should be performed by a qualified professional in a controlled manner using caution or scissors
E si endeve fluxs de sanc per aysso, ayssi cum motas veguadas endeve, lahoras trissa alcuna quantitat de zegi e aspergeys sobre la plagua, e si no confereys aquel zegi, cauteriza.	 If there is bleeding or injury from this procedure, then proceed with caution and apply pressure to the wound if necessary, using a cautery if bleeding continues.
La forma de las forceps e tenalas subtils am las quals es mauguda la dent al comensament sia de longua extramitat, de breu manubre e gros, per so que no sian doblatz quan am aquels deves obrar.	 Use the forceps carefully starting from the longer end outward to prevent injury during use.
E sian ayssi cum vezes de gros manubre entro que quan estrenhas am aquelas no sian dobladas, sian breus extramitatz.	 When you first open a door to enter into that which has been sealed up until now, it will be opened with great ease
E sian faytas de ferr de India descentment faytas de dreytas extramitatz, e en las extramitatz de aquelas sian dentz de las quals las unas intron en las autras e estrenhan per constriccio descent fort, e alscunas veguadas las extramitatz de aquelas sian la forma del bec d’un auzel le qual ha nom ciconia, so es guanta, e son de fort constriccio.	 These are the procedures to be used when it is necessary to loosen tight fist joints and fingers: you should use these methods of stretching them out, in the stretches that follow after each other with great ease.
Capitol .xxxi.	 This is sentence 31
De erradicacio de dentz e d‘estraccio dels osses de las mandibulas trincadas.	 The procedure to open the mouth and loosen the jaws of a person whose jaw has been locked up tight
Quan deves la eradicacio de dent le qual es trinquat roman alcuna causa, lahoras cove que tu pauses sobre le loc coto am boder per un jorn o per dos entro que·l loc sia mollificat; e aprop entromet algesti o tenalhas las extramitatz de las quals so asembladas al bec de un auzel apelat ciconia o guanta, la forma de las forceps:	 When you need to loosen the jaw that has been locked up tight for no particular reason, do this. Place your hand gently or with a pair of tweezers on the area around the mouth so as to make it soft over one or two days until the place is softened; and then apply a small piece of flesh between the lips by way of forceps:
Las extramitatz de lor sian faytas dedintz ayssi cum lima o alfagi.	 These procedures should be used in the same way as before, either gently or with tweezers.
E si no obediys a tu a eyssiment am aquestas forceps o tenalas, lahoras cove que tu caves sobre la razit e descrobas tota la carn e entrometas le instrument le qual ha nom atali, so es palanca petita del qual la forma es aquesta:	 If you do not have the forceps or tweezers available, then hold your hand steady and bring out the instrument by which this operation is known as such, a small one with a form like that.
E sia de breu extremitat grossa un petit, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	 "The extremity should be large but not too big to prevent it from being cramped.
Donc si per aquo la razit es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, ajuda te am aquestz autres instrument dels quals aquestas son las formas: la forma del primier instrument es de triangulada extramitat en la qual sia alcuna grossesa:	 "If the issue is as described, then proceed. If not, use this other tool which has these forms: the form of the first tool is a triangular extremity with some thickness.
La forma del segon instrument es que sia de triangulada e de pus subtil extremitat.	 The second tool is also triangular but even more subtle in its extremity.
E ja so ajudatz am aquest instrument havent dos ramps del qual aquesta es la forma aprop la seguent:	 "Use this tool with two ramps, where the following shape is correct:
e am autres instrumentz les quals precidero en rasura de dentz; quar juvament es fayt am aquest instrument le qual es asemblat a onci gran, e aquesta es la forma:	 "Use this tool for shaving with razors. Originally it was assembled into one large piece, and the shape is:
de la triangulada extremitat torta o curta, la qual sia alcuna grossesa, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	 The triangular extremity should be long or short but never too thick to prevent it from being cramped.
E otra sapias que·ls instrumentz de las dentz motz so e semblantment les autres instruments.	 "Other tools for shaving your face are similar, just not razors.
Mays le artifexs savi e subtil en l’art, atroba per si mateys segon aquo que a lu significa la operacio e las malautias diversas; quar son de las malautias a las quals les antics no diysero ni pausero propri instrument, per las formas de diversas specias.	 "The subtle art of shaving and the different types of cuts mean that other tools are needed to perform these various operations on the face which previous instruments could not handle or predict.
Mays si es trinquat l’os de la mandibula o dels autres osses de la boca, o si poyreys, lahoras sia pes curat sobre aquel en son loc am aquo que es a lu convenient dels instrumentz e de las forceps las quals havem dit en la extraccio de las razitz de las dentz, e ajuda te am gesti del qual aquesta es la forma:	 "If the jaw or any of the bones in your mouth are cramping, then hold this tool on that location as you did for pulling out razor blades and help with the following procedure:
E sia en lu alcuna grosseza petit a petit, e sia instringida o tenguda am la boca per que no evasesca o fuga entro que l’os de tot sia foro-getat; e aprop restaura le loc am medicinas convenientz ad aquo.	 When pain comes from cold humors that infiltrate the body part by part, and when it occurs in the feet, then it is customarily called gout by doctors.
Mays si en l’os es petita poyredura, lahoras ratz aquel de aquela poyredura e de la sua negror, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	 If there's a small puncture wound on the nose and it is bleeding heavily, then do so with this cautery to close that hole or bleedhole.
Capitol .xxxii.	 The end of the text.
De la cura de las dentz eminentz sobre las autras.	 Care for teeth is important above all else.
Quan las dentz so eminentz no segon lor cors natural per aquelas la forma es laga, e majorment quan endeve a las femnas, e majorment a las piuselas venerablas; donc cove que tu consideras: si dent es nada aprop autra dent, e no es possibla sarradura ni linament de lu, lahoras radica aquela; mays que no sia annexa am autra dent, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am aquest instrument del qual aquesta es la forma; e es semblant a morr de porc, e sia feyt de ferr de India de extramitat mot aguda.	 When teeth are important enough to override natural functions of those teeth the way they were meant to be used, and more so when there is an issue with the front or back teeth, as well as with the bottom lip; it means that you should consider removing them both if one cannot be saved, unless otherwise instructed by a doctor. It's important not to remove any other tooth without consulting this instrument which identifies whether they can be removed at all.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscideyses aquela en trops dias per la duricia de la dent, e que no sia comauguda autra de las dentz.	 And if the incision is made in such a way as to save that tooth for many days due to its importance and not another one's, it means
E si es dent eminent expausat a limadura, lahoras lima aquel am lima de ferr de India del qual aquesta es la forma:	 And if the prominent tooth is lost in battle, the doctor will sew that back on by using this instrument which identifies whether it can be put back at all.
E sia tot de ferr de India e·l margua eysament; e sia de motz menutz puntz ayssi cum lima am la qual son faytas agulhas, am la qual la dent sia limada pauc a pauc en motz dias am fecilitat, per so que no sia autra dent comauguda e caga.	 When the first tooth is extracted due to pain and swelling of the gums near where it was extracted from, there will be little or no other teeth like it in motion days that follow, for fear that another tooth may come out as well.
E aprop lineys aquela en la fi, e ratz aquela am alscus razoris.	 Then return the intestines to their cavity and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out.
E si es dent del qual una partida es trinquada e lideys la lengua, lahoras cove que tu limescas aquel entro que l’aspretat de aquela fraccio sia ostada e engualhada, e sia aplenada per so que la lengua no ledesca ni la paraula no corrumpa.	 If the tongue is injured and torn off its root, then place it back in place so that it does not fall out or get damaged due to speaking.
Capitol .xxxiii.	 The thirty-third chapter of Capitulum
De restauracio de dentz maugudas am fiel de aur o de argent.	 To restore a missing tooth with gold or silver.
Quan accideys a las dentz devant concussio e remossio per percussio o per cazament, e le malaute no pot strenher sobre aquo que manga, e tu has curat aquel am medicinas stipticas, e no ha valgut la tua curacio, lahoras per so que no cagan es engen en aquelas que sian strengudas am fiel de aur e no de argent, quar argent se fa vert e aprop se poyreys aprop alscus dias, mays aur nul temps no es mudat.	 When an injury occurs on a tooth due to concussion or bruising from impact, and the patient cannot withstand it anymore, you should seek immediate medical attention, as your care was not taken properly, so that they may not lose their wisdom teeth made of gold but not silver, because silver may break easily.
E sia le fiel en tal subtilitat e grocesa segon la quantitat que puesca entrar entre las dentz; e la forma de la reccio es que prenguas le fiel e pren lo doble de lu entre doas dentz sanas, e aprop que cresques am doas tortuositatz del fiel entre doas maugudas, o si’ una o motas, entro que pervengua la tela a la dent sana del autra partida.	 The manner in which to restore the missing tooth is by placing it between two healthy teeth, and cutting it so that half of its length lies between them; or if there are only one or three parts, then you should place the fabric over both of the teeth on the side where the other part is.
E aprop itera le teyssiment entro a la partida de la qual comenciest, e strenh la tua ma am facilitat e savieza entro que no sia mauguda.	 The first sentence in English is "You have already prepared the space between their thighs...
E sia la tua striccio am la qual strenhas le fiel deves las razitz de las dentz que no evasesca.	 "...and strained your hand to facilitate and ensure it does not cause harm.
E aprop inscindeys las extramitatz del fiel superfluens am las forceps o tosoyras, e agregua aquelas en quascun loc am gesti, e converteys aquelas e las occulta entre la dent sana e la dent mauguda, per so que no fassa lesio a la lengua.	 "Add those in any location you choose, and close them between the healthy tooth and the one that is damaged to ensure there's no injury to the tongue.
E aprop leyssa aquela ayssi streyta cum roman.	 "...and straighten it as before with a Roman.
Mays si es desliada o rumpuda, strenh aquela o aquelas am autra fiel en tal manieyra en tot son temps.	 "If the patient is on their side or stomach, keep them in place and support them gently to prevent any harm coming from a change of position.
E aquesta es la forma de las dentz e la figura de la rectacio de doas dentz sanas e de doas maugudas, ayssi cum vezes aquestas liadas:	 "...this is the shape of the teeth and figure for two healthy teeth and two damaged ones, like this...
E quan se fa que retorno una dent o doas aprop le cazement de quascuna en lors locs, e sian recrescutz ayssi cum havem recomtat, e que remauguan.	 "When returning a tooth or two to their place in these locations, it is recommended that you use the same way and remove them.
E no fa aquo sino bo artifexs e savi.	 "This isn't just any tool; it serves a purpose.
E alcunas veguadas es aptat alcuna causa dels osses de vaca, e es fayt de lor ayssi cum forma de dent, e es pausada en loc en le qual defayl la dent, e es strengit ayssi cum havem dit, e reman e serveys am aquel per lonc temps.	 "Some vegetables are good for cow bones and it's used in the same way as a tooth, with its surface smoothened off at an angle to prevent slipping of the tooth, and tightened like that which was mentioned earlier.
Capitol .xxxiv.	 The passage describes a method for treating various medical conditions using cautery points on specific parts of the body in order to prevent them from causing pain or damage when they occur.
De inscizio del liament le qual ve en la lengua e prohibeys loquela.	 To slit an ulcer that is located in the tongue and prohibit it speaking.
Aquest liguament le qual ve dejos la lengua alcunas veguadas o es natural am le qual hom nays, o accidental e accideys per plagua la qual ja es consolidada.	 The ligament of which part of the body can cause some swelling or is normally found in that part where people speak, or accidentally occur due to a previous solidification.
E la operacio en lu es que huobres la boca del malaute, le sieu cap existent en le tieu se; e eleva la sieua lengua, e aprop inscideys aquel liament nervos segon la latitut entro que sia solvuda la lengua de la sua recencio.	 The operation is to remove the tongue of the patient from its place and elevate it, so that the nerve ligament is cut after a certain length has been reached which can be solved by the tip of the tongue touching the palate of his reception.
Mays si en aquela es alcuna duricia o denodacio, e aquo es stat per consolidacio de plagua, lahoras tu gieta unci e scindeys aquel per la latitut entro que aias inscindit le liament e sia dissolvuda la nodacio.	 If there is no pain or injury and it was only meant for the formation of fluid, then you should cut through the ligament at that point where you first cut through it in order to dissolve the knot.
E guarda te que no sia fayta fissura en le preon de la carn e que scindas aqui arceria e vengua flux de sanc.	 And remember not to make a tear in his forehead, and that you will cause bleeding if you split through here.
E aprop sia lavat le vestigi de la inscisio am ayguaros o am vi agre o am aygua frega; e aprop pausa dejos la lengua licini; so es meca la qual tengua le malaute dejos la lengua en quascuna nuoyt per so que no sia consolidat autra veguada.	 And make sure that the vestige of the incision is covered or wet, and pause from allowing the tongue to lick it; otherwise, make sure that the tongue does not become solidified or swollen in any way.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, pausa sobre le loc vetriol trissat; mays si le sanc ventz, lahoras cauteriza le loc am cauteri lantiginos le qual conveneys ad aquo.	 If bleeding occurs, put a bandage over the bruised area; if an injury is about to occur, then burn it with cautery points in order for that to happen.
E aprop aquel cura am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	 When health fails due to the presence of certain causes between the thighs, this ailment becomes gout.
Capitol .xxxv.	 Chapter fifty-five
De extraccio de ranula dejos la lengua.	 You remove a bandage from your tongue.
Alcunas veguadas accideys dejos la lengua apostema asemblant a nomla petita prohibent la lengua de la sua operacio natural; e fort leu es magnificada entro que huempla la boca.	 Some of the symptoms that happen to you when your tongue is bandaged are: it becomes swollen, and it hurts due to being pushed away from its normal position inside your mouth.
E la operacio en lu es que huebras la boca del malaute sesent devant le solel e considera le apostema.	 The operation involves holding the patient's mouth open for several minutes, and considering a bandage placed over it.
E si tu le vezes de fusca color o de negra, dur, al qual le malaute no atroba sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel quar es cranc.	 If you notice that the color or blackness of your feet becomes painful and unbearable to bear without causing pain in others nearby, then stop doing so immediately.
E si es declinat a blancor, en le qual es humiditat, lahoras tu met le onci en lu, e inscideys aquel am spatum subtil, e inscindeys le de tota partida; e si sanc te ventz en la hora de la tua operacio, lahoras tu pausa desus zegi trissat, so es vetriol, entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	 If the whiteness of your feet becomes damp and uncomfortable to handle, then you must soak them in something warm; and if they start to swell during the operation time, stop using any sharp objects that may cause further swelling; this is very dangerous as it restricts blood flow
E aprop retorna a la obra tua entro que lo haias trayt am compliment de lu, entro que sia lavat am vi agre e sal; e cura aquel am l’autra curacio ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	 Return to your work and try various remedies such as water, salt, and vinegar. If this does not help for the health of the foot itself, then proceed with other solutions.
Capitol .xxxvi.	 Chapter sixty
De extraccio de apostema de doas aurelhas e de aquel que es nada en le golayro e de las autras apostemas.	 You remove the bandage from both thighs and also from any other area that is not on top of your groin.
Quan endeveno en le golayro godat, so son glandulas las quals son asembladas algodat, las quals accideysso deforas e son nompnadas doas aurelhas, las quals quan tu las curas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no es sanat, lahoras tu considera si le apostema es dur, de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr.	 When the gout comes from the glands that are assembled together and those cause sores and are called urates, when you apply it to the section mentioned earlier and is not healthy, then consider if the treatment is needed, of a purplish color, with little feeling, do not touch or use it
E si es de roga color e la razic es grossa, lahoras no toques aquela am ferr per le flux del sanc; abantz layssa aquel entro sia madurat, e lahoras o tu trauqueras aquel, o sira romput per si.	 If the treatment is of a purplish color and has large veins, do not use it to apply to the affected area as soon as possible; stop using that immediately if you notice
E si es de blanqua color, radon, e la razit de lu es subtil, lahoras aquel es que cove esser inscidit.	 If it is of a whitish color and its veins are small, then do not use this one; rather apply the following one.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras, denant la tua operacio, si ja ha repausat le apostema de lu caut am repaus complit o si es deminuit am alcuna deminucio; e lahoras fay sezer le malaute denant le soleyl, e·l cap de lu sia en le tieu se, e huebre la boca de lu, e le servidor prenent entre las suas mas prema la lengua de lu dejos am instrument mot noble del qual aquesta es la forma:	 Before your operation, consider if the bandage to be used has already been removed completely or if it is necessary to remove some of it; and then apply ointment between the patient's thighs, place a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
E sia fayt de argent o de aram, e sia subtil cum cotel.	 It should be light or dark in color, subtle as cotton.
Donc cum tu premes am aquel la lengua e es mostrat a tu la apostema, e catz sobre aquel le tieu vezement, lahoras pren onci e fica aquel en l’amenla, e tira aquel a las partidas defora tant quant podes.	 When you place it in the mouth and show it to the patient, cover it over your own hand; then put it into the affected area, wipe it off frequently as much as possible.
Otra aquo que tiras alcuna causa de las tunicas, e aprop incideys aquela am instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	 The initial sentence seems to imply that the medical treatment involves an instrument of some kind.
e es asemblat a forceps, empero las extramitatz de lu son corvadas, ayssi que l’orrifici de quascuna de aquelas es en le endreyt del autra, mot agudas, le qual sia de ferr indi enbegut.	 The initial sentence seems to imply that the medical treatment involves a pair of forceps. However, the extramitaz (what I assume is an error for extramità) of them are broken, so none of those can be used in its place, but it's suggested that we use another instrument instead.
Mays si aquest instrument no es a tu present, lahoras inscideys aquel am spatum del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: E sia agut de la una part, no agut del autra part.	 If this instrument is not available at the moment, then please indicate which one of these tools it should be replaced with: And that tool shall act as if it were in its place on one side only; do not use it for the other side.
E pus que has inscidit una mella, inscideys l’autra segon aquesta meteyssa manieyra de inscizio, e aprop la inscizio le malaute guarguarise de aygua frega	 If you have used a spoon, then please indicate which of the following utensils should be used instead: And apply this cooking utensil to protect the patient's mouth from being washed out.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, guarguarise aygua de decoccio de scorsa de milgrana o de fuelha de mirtra e semblantz ad aquel de las causas stiptiquas entro que·l flux del sanc sia restreyt, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	 If the patient is suffering from bleeding or spitting blood, please use the following utensils to protect its mouth: And apply this cooking utensil to ensure that no external fluids enter it during bleeding, and treat it as soon as possible if needed.
E alcunas veguadas naysso en le guolayro autras apostemas otra aquelas doas aurelhas, e inscideys aquelas segon que yeu e dit en la inscizio de doas mellas engualment.	 The last sentence seems to imply that you should indicate which of the two spoons listed below should be used together with one another for this procedure:
E yeu ja fu medicat una femna de apostema le qual era nat en le golayro de lu, le qual apostema tendia a color fusca, de pauc sentiment, le qual ja havia claus le golayro de lu, e la femna respirava am meat streyt, e ja havia prohibit a lu comestio e beure de aygua, e ja era pervenguda a la mort si mays agues stat per un dia o per dos.	 The female patient had been treated with an ointment that was not in her stomach, the ointment tended to cause a violent color change and few feelings, as it closed off her stomach, she was unable to eat or drink water, and was likely dying if left untreated for one day or two.
E l’apostema ja tant havia pugat que havia mezes dos ramps entro que eyssiro per dos traucs.	 The steward has already prepared that there were two steps inside, so I had to pass through two doors.
Donc yeu me cuytegui fisturalment e fiquegui en un de lor onci, e tiregui aquel, e atirada es de lu gran porcio, e aprop yeu incidigui aquela de on comprendegui del autre trau, e aprop yeu obrigui la boca de lu, e compremegui la sua lengua, e aprop yeu fiquegui le onci en aquela apostema.	 Then you should first remove the first door completely and take that one away, after which there will be a large hole through which you have to pass, so I had to go through two doors.
E aprop yeu abscizi gran partida de lu, e no corria de lu sino un pauc de sanc.	 Then remove the large part of it and only leave behind a small one
Donc absolut es le guolayro de aquela femna, e comensec tantost beure aygua, e aprop presec vianda, donc yeu no cessegui inscidir de aquela apostema motas vetz per lonc temps, e succesia apostema en loc de aquel, le qual inscizia entro que es prolonguat aquel.	 Absolutely remove the large part of that thing and then start to drink water, so you shouldn't keep putting in a needle until long after it has been inserted into that place for a while, and finish it off at that place where it was inserted, which is inside somewhere for quite some time.
Donc yeu engen agui e cauterizegui le guolayro de lu, donc astec de addicio; e aprop yeu perambulegui e no saubi que fec Dieus de aquela aprop mi.	 Then you should engrave and cauterize the large part of it, so attach to that; after which you should prepare a meal with something edible near it.
Capitol .xxxvii.	 Chapter 70
De inscizio de huvela quan es apostemada.	 The moment the needle was inserted
Quan catarr deysen a la huvula, e es apostemada e es longa, lahoras ela es nompnada perpendicular; e si es en la partida dejos grossa e redonda, e lahoras ela es apelada buba.	 When the cold sore occurs on the eyelid and it is large and round, then doctors call it a canker sore.
Mays quan es curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio, e no comfereys la tua curacio, e eyssament ja vezes que apostema caut ja es ostat de lu e es subtil, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquela que es agreguadas redonda; e si es ad aquela longitut, e es sanguina, de fusca color o de negre, e no es a lu centiment, lahoras cove que tu temtes la inscizio de lu, quar en aquela es temor sobre le malaute.	 When you have already opened the space as mentioned in the division and it doesn't cause any discomfort, and every time that is repeated, the pain will become more subtle, so that you notice that which are added to its roundness; and if it is of a long length and bloodiness, that is an issue of black or white color, but not at center, then be aware of the incision in the thigh, for from this point there is fear about the patient.
E quan tu vezes aquela segon la manieyra que yeu he dita de la sua blancor e longuesa, que tu fassas sezer le malaute e premas la lengua de lu am instrument del qual procesic la sua forma e aprop fica le onci en la nuva, e tira aquela en jos e inscideys aquela am un de dos instrumentz les quals e ditz en la inscizio de dos mellas.	 When you do it for the second time with a hand that is of the patient's whiteness and length, make sure to hold back the intestine or hernia from coming out, place your hand over the area to prevent it from exiting, and cut off that in two pieces using one of the two instruments mentioned in the incision of the thigh.
E cove que no inscidas aquela sino aquo que es ajustat sobre le terme natural ses addicio, quar si tu inscides de lu mays, lediyras le sieu parlar.	 And when you don't cut it but instead adjust it over the natural addition of its circumference, as if you cut off from it more, then lead it to speak louder.
E aprop la inscizio, usa de aquo le qual havem recomtat en la inscizio de dos mellas, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	 After the incision is done, use one of those that we recommended in the division of two thighs and sew it up so as to be healthy
Mays si era le malaute espaventat per la inscizio de lu, cove que use de engen en la cauterizacio de lu ses temor, e la manieyra del cauteri en lu no es sino am aygua aguda, e es que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop prem la lengua de lu am le instrument le qual havem dit, e aprop pren de l’aygua la qual havem dita en le capitol de cauterizacio, e comfeys am aquela caus viva, e pausa aquela no spessa ni subtil, e de aquela omple la concavitat de l’estrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	 If the patient feels nervous during the incision of the thigh and the cautery instrument water causes pain and trembling, place your hand over its head to prevent it from moving and quickly take hold of the tongue with the recommended instrument, push down on it and let a sharp stream of water come out.
Sia la extramitat de lu conquavitat en la qual sia pausada la medicina ayssi cum la conquavitat de culher de ray, e pausa le strument am la medicina sobre la vula, e·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu latz per so que corro saliva o musellage de la boca de aquel per la intrinscequa medicina, per so que no deyssenda de aquela deguna causa sobre le golayro de lu e que ledesca aquel.	 "The space between the patient's legs is prepared with a cushion and another servant on their legs; an additional one is placed over them to hold their hands in place while administering medicine, which may include applying it directly into the mouth or onto the chest.
E aprop te la tua ma am la medicina, e exprem aquela sobre la uvula per l’espazi de miega hora entro que vegas aquela esser denegrada e sedada per la mordicacio de la medicina.	 "After placing the medicine on their chest and into the mouth/throat area (not specifying how), it is necessary to prevent any saliva or mucus from getting in, as this may cause irritation.
E si vols, prengues coto e envolopes aquel sobre la extremitat del ray, e submergeys le coto en la medicina, e entrometas le ray am le coto en una canula de sobre entro que·l coto adheresca en aquela canula, e fay aquo tantas vetz entro que consiegues aquo que vols de la cauterizacio de la uva, e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela se seccara e cayra aprop tres dias o quatre.	 "If desired, you may also place a cotton ball on the affected extremity and submerge it in the medicine; insert this into an intravenous cannula so that the cotton adheres to its interior walls, ensuring continuous exposure for 24-72 hours or more depending on the severity of the burn.
E si indigeysses que iteras la medicina, itera aquela, e aprop la cauterizacio abstergeys en le circuit de la uva am coto enbegut en boder, e mondifica am aquel aquo que es en le circuit de lu de la medicina, e sia lavat am aygua frega, e sia curat deforo am embrocacio, e dedintz am guarguarismes entro que sia sanat.	 "If you do not wish to administer the medicine directly into the vein of the affected extremity using a cannula: instead, continue to bathe it with warm water and apply creams containing moisture, emollients, and disinfectants in order to protect and maintain the integrity of the skin.
E aquesta especia de curacio es pus salva que inscizio e pus long de temor.	 "This specific care is recommended for those who have been exposed to long periods of fear or terror.
Alcunas veguadas es curada la uvuola am aquo que es pus subtil que cauteri e inscizio, quar es curat am subfumigacio en aquesta manieyra: recipe calament, ysop, origua, ruda, scicados arabic, camamilla, broyda e semblant ad aquels de las erbas, e ajusta totas aquelas causas, o alcunas de lor, en una ola, e sian submergidas am vi agre, e bulhan; e la ola sia be lutada am lut decentment, e sia en le mieg loc de la ola un trauc, sobre le qual sia pausat un instrument conquau de aram segon aquesta manieyra; sia fayt de argent o de aram.	 When you have removed the clothing and exposed the body to air, apply a cold cautery and incision gently over it so that it is not painful for the patient.
E sia entromesa la extremitat en la boca del malaute entro que la vapor poge a la uvula sobre la quanula, entro que la uvula sia mot ofuscada.	 Insert one end into the patient's mouth and apply heat to the uvula so that it is covered over the vulva
E aprop itera sobre aquela motas veguadas entro qu’es secca, e guarda te que no fassas aquesta curacio al comesament de l’aveniment de apostemas, quar trop ajustaria en le apostema, e no cove que tu fassas aquo, sino deves la declaracio de apostema de lu caut.	 Then gently remove the pad that you have placed there and do not apply this treatment immediately after inserting it because it might be uncomfortable for the patient, so only declare that the pad has been applied to prevent anything coming out through the urethra.
Mays si no es a tu present aquest instrument, lahoras pren una cana e compon en la extramitat de lu un clos de huou, per so que la boca del malaute sia comborida, quar le closc del huou prohibeys la vapor comburir la boca.	 If you are not using this instrument, place a cloth pad on the patient's side to prevent the urethra from being burned by hot air.
E aquesta curacio es bona am salut.	 This treatment is good for health.
Capitol .xxxviii.	 Chapter Fifty-eight
De extraccio d’espinas e de aquo que adhereys en le golayro e de las autras causas.	 Of spines and of causes that adhere to the gallbladder and other internal organs.
Motas veguadas adhereys en le guolayro o spina de peys o alcuna autra causa.	 The clothing adheres to the gallbladder or spine, or any other cause.
Adonc cove que tu extraguas aquo que de aquels es apparent, sobre le qual catz la vista, pus que tu premes la lengua am instrument denant solelh, per so que a tu sia declarat aquo que es en la guola.	 When you have extracted that from those it is evident as to what the eyes can see and your tongue cannot perceive, please declare aloud that this is in Latin
E aquo que no apar e es a tu occultat en le guolayro, cove que tu fassas vomir le malaute denant que la vianda sia degerida en l’estomac, quar fort leu la causa annexsa le golayro sira foro-getada per vomit; o que deglusia le malaute una pessa de nap o de razit de laytuga o un boci de pa sec; o prengua una pessa de sponga marina sequa leon, e lia aquela fortment am fiel, e aprop le malaute transglussia aquela, quar cum perve al loc en le qual so spinas e es extrahuda, lahoras so foro-getatz.	 When you have extracted that from those it is evident as to what the eyes can see and your tongue cannot perceive, please declare aloud that this is in Latin.
E mays pren una anguila e be am fiel liada, e sia dedintz mesa e soptament sia extrayta; o pren un porr e soptament le metas e soptament l’en tratz.	 You may remove a chicken and have it cooked and prepared, or take a pork and prepare the meat as well.
Mays si no so foro-getatz am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas, lahoras husa de un instrument de plom segon aquesta forma:	 If not for those causes that I mentioned, then do with an instrument of gold according to this manner
E sia pus gros que ray un petit, e en la extramitat de lu sia conquavitat la qual tu entrometas en la sua guola am facilitat.	 The greater the distance from it is the easier it is for you to enter into its cavity in a simple manner.
E el aga le sieu cap elevat en sus, e guarda te que·l tocament del sieu os de la gola, per so que endevengua a lu cos e am aquela que enpellesca le os o la spina, o que aquel le metge am la sua ma.	 The head should be raised in him and make sure that the touch of his throat is gentle to avoid choking or tearing the muscle tissue or veins, or having the doctor put their hand there.
Mays empero que·l malaute aquel entrometa es miels, per la sua sciencia del loc de la causa annexa e enpellisca en jos, e tira la sua ma am le instrument en sus, tot aquo segon la quantitat la qual es a lu preparada entro que sia foro-getada.	 The patient should enter the intestine and remove his hand from the instrument there after making sure that it is in its place due to the cause added on and is pulled out gently down while keeping their hand over it as much as necessary for the extraction to be successful.
Capitol .xxxix.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors
De extraccio de sancguisugua annexsa al golayro.	 And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot
Quan es medicada sanguisugua am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la curacio am medicinas e no comfereys, considera lahoras en le guolayro del malaute al solelh, pus que tu aias compremuda la lengua de lu am instrument le qual a tu havem recomtat.	 And if it is necessary to make incisions on the surface of the foot.
Donc si tu vezes la sancguisugua, extratz aquela am onci petit o am gesti subtils decentment.	 Then, when making cuts on the surface of the foot, be gentle and subtle about it.
E si no es a tu possible estrayre am aquel, lahoras pren una canula concava e entromet aquela en lo guolayro del malaute, e aprop pausa en la concavitat de la canula un ferr ignit, e fay aquo tantas vetz (entro que la sancguisugua sia morta e se osta del guolayro) e abstengua se le malaute tot lo jorn de aygua.	 If it is not possible to perform an incision on the surface of the foot, then place a soft and curved needle into its cavity, making sure that you preventively close its opening with fire, so as to avoid any damage (in case of death or rupture) in the process.
E aprop prengua una veyria plena de aygua frega, e obra la boca de lu en aquela, e lava la boca am aquela; e no trasglucia de aquela alcuna causa e maugua l’aygua una hora aprop autra am la sua ma, quar la sancguisugua tantost cum sent l’aygua catz.	 And after the wound has been cleaned with water and closed its mouth in that way, wash it clean using that same method; avoid causing any further injury or harm to the patient's body for a duration of one hour as long as the gout persists.
Mays si no es foro-getada am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras subfumigua le malaute am cimetz o am assafetida per le instrument le qual havem recomtat en la sufumiguacio de uvula.	 If not everything is done as you were instructed to do it, then the doctor will apply a cold or hot object through the instrument that was recommended in the treatment of the tonsils.
Fay aquo, so en quar cayra.	 When joint pain arises from cold humors, causing infiltration in each part of the body.
E es un’autra manieyra de operacio en sufumiguacio de aquela, es que tu prenguas una ola en la qual sian carbos ignitz e la ola sia cuberta am una cobertora en le mieg de la qual sia un trauc, e sia compausat en aquel trauc la extremitat del instrument; e aprop dega desus la subfumigacio; e pause le malaute la sua boca en la extremitat de la canula, e claugua la sua boca per que la subfumiguacio no sia foro-getada entro que sapias que la subfumigacio es pervenguda a la sancguisugua, quar la sancguisugua tantost cayra.	 There is another type of operation in the smoke, namely to use a hollow cover on which there are hollow and covered holes near the instrument's handle; it covers that part to prevent the smoke from escaping into the other parts; pause the patient if they try to open their mouth during the procedure.
E si no catz, lahoras tu itera la subfumiguacio motas vetz, e abstengua le malaute de beure, e mange causas saladas e alhs, e no begua aygua, e ayssi necessari es que am aquest regiment sia fora-getada.	 If not, stop the smoke procedure and prevent the patient from drinking salty water or eating anything else; it is also necessary to ensure that this treatment is discontinued.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument am le qual es trayta sancguisugua del guolayro quan es vista; e es semblant a forceps ayssi cum vezes, sino quar es en lu alcuna curvitat:	 This is the shape of the instrument that is used for such an operation as mentioned earlier.
le qual sia mesa al guolayro, e la extremitat de lu es semblant a bec de ciconia, que es guanta, en la qual es aspretat de lima, per so quar, quan comprem alcuna causa, aquela no leyssa.	 When placed on the chest, its extremity is similar to that of a cicone beak, which catches things and holds them tightly; when any cause occurs, it will let go immediately.
Capitol .xl.	 The end.
En le qual es la suma del sermo en apercio de apostemas e en seccio de lor.	 Which is the sum of all the meaning in this treatise, and it includes the parts of words and their endings.
Les apostemas so motas specias, de motas manieyras, segon que ve rememoracio de lor, de quascuna en aquest libre.	 When the patient's pain occurs in the feet
E so diversas en perforacio e seccio de lor per doas manieyras, de las quals la una es per la specia de apostemas en si meteys; e per aquo que comprem de las humiditatz.	 The physician will make cuts and incisions in various places, such as those mentioned above, to drain the humors from them
E la segonda manieyra es prop les locs en les quals accideys del cos, quar le apostema accident en le cap es autra de la apostema accident en le cul; e le apostema en le loc carnos accident es autra del apostema accident en junctura; e a quascun de lor es son juguament per operacio.	 The second servant will be placed in locations where the body's organs are located, such as the head being one location and the anus another location; it will also have incisions made for them, so that when they occur (organs) surgery is necessary.
E mays de apostemas so alcunas las quals cove que no sian perforadas sino aprop maturacio de la sania en aquels o compliment de lor.	 The servants mentioned earlier are those whose openings should not be made by cutting but rather with the application of a poultice, whether on them or in relation to them.
So autras apostemas les quals cove que sian traucatz quan son cruzes, e no son maturatz segon lor compliment, ayssi cum apostemas que son propdas a las juncturas, quar apostema quan ve prop junctura, lo esser de lu es prolonguat entro que·s poyreys aquo que es en le circuit de lu, e fort leu son corromputz les liamentz o les nervis de aquela junctura, per que es fayta causa de contraccio de aquel membre; o es apostema prop de membre principal, e si tu tardas la perforacio de lu entro sia madurat nosira al membre principal; o es prop le cul, donc perfora aque no-madurat; e no cove que·l perforas cru, de no-complida degestio, sino aquel que es prop del cul, per so que no poyresca le preon de lu e sia elonguat a las partidas dedintz del cul, e sia fayta fistula, o que sia fayt en le terme de lu que no sia sanat.	 When the servant is crushed or injured at its location and not healed properly after that, it can cause damage to the main intestine (large intestine), leading to a fistula being formed, either at the anus or another location; if done without proper preparation, such as improper positioning of the opening of the large intestine may lead to hernia formation.
Mays cove que tu sapias la hora de la perforacio de la apostema, e aysso es quan es maturat.	 "You know that the time has come for the puncture of the vein, as so it is when matured.
E sapias que es madurat quan es la cedacio de la dolor e la cessacio de la febre, e aprop la diminucio de la rogor e de la pulsacio, e la acuitat del cap del apostema, e les autres senhals.	 "You know that it is mature when the cutting of pain and fever ends, as well as the reduction in swelling and pulse, and the sharpness of the vein's head, and others nerves.
E quar cove que sapias la perforacio cazer en le loc pus dejos del apostema e de pus venient de curacio de la eminencia.	 "You know that the puncture must be done in a very small location between the vein and the surface to prevent bleeding from the vein or nearby areas.
E perforacio tostemps sia per le lonc de la carn o del cors, si las apostemas son en las partidas de las mas o dels pes, e en loc dels lacertz, de las cordas dels nervis, de las arcerias; e, al derier, en totz locs enguals en les quals no es reflecio; quar en aquels que so reflectitz, usa de perforacio segon aquel membre.	 "The puncture must be done on the surface of the flesh or the body, if the veins are in the hands or feet, and at locations like those between the ribs, nerves cords, arches; and finally, in all places not reflected, where it is used; wherever there is reflection, use a second puncture for that member.
Mays quan le apostema es en loc carnos, lahoras miels es que leysses la perforacio de lu entro que sia confermada la digestio de lu segon compliment, ayssi quo havem dit; quar si tu perforas aquel denant aquo, es prolonguat le cors del poyre de lu e de mota sordicia, e fort leu las labias de lu so enduradas e la profunditat de lu.	 "When the vein is in a place that bleeds easily, it is customary to make the puncture inside and confirm digestion of it as well; but if you puncture it this way, prolonged pain in the belly area or throat may occur, and very painful labias are caused by deeper penetration.
Mays alcus apostemas so perforatz segon la latitut de la carn o del cos deves la necessitat, o segon aquo del qual lo membre indigeys.	 "If you pierce the veins in a position that is necessary or in which part of the body it is important to do.
E cove que administres petita perforacio , e·n les apostemas grans gran perforacio e ampla o motas seccios segon la diversitat de la grandesa dels apostemas.	 When you administer a small incision, a larger one, or make a large incision with a scalpel depending on the variety of sizes needed
E autras so dels apostemas en les quals cove que la codena sia conquavada e sia encidida, quan es fayta ayssi quo pan e fayta es en terme que ja stigua, ayssi cum aquel que accideys en trops de dubelec e de bubos.	 When the abscess is completely opened and closed, when you do it in terms that have already been described, as well as with those who fall into the second group of abscesses.
E de aquels so que so insciditz am seccio havent tres angles; e de aquels es en le qual es inscidit ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirtra, ayssi cum las apostemas dels angonars.	 The ones with three angles are the abscesses that have been described as those who have a funnel-like shape, and those which are incised in such a way that they resemble the angle of a miter.
E de lor so en les quals es administrada seccio redonda e seccio lunar, e semblantz ad aquels.	 Of these ones administered with a round incision or a crescent-shaped incision, and those like them.
Mays aquel al qual no es cap ayssi cum son apostemas leons superficials, cove que tu perforas aquel am perforacio superficial, o plana tant solament.	 For that one for which it is not necessary to make a surface incision as you do with those who have a superficial incision or only one.
E cove quant le apostema es gros e ya ha colligit mota sania, que perfores aquel e no te coytes que extraguas tot le poyre en aquela hora; habantz extratz de aquel una partida, e aprop opila le apostema entro al autre dia, e aprop extratz una partida major, e aprop fa aquo motas veguadas segon graduacio entro que sia foro-getat.	 When the abscess is large and has already caused some damage to the body in that moment, you perforate it with no need for external drainage at that time; extract from it one piece, place it on another day, and if necessary do a larger extraction, and prepare the abscess cavity by removing any accumulated pus as needed.
E majorment si·l malaute es de freol vertut, o femna prens, o enfant petit, o viel en decrepitut, quar l’esperit animal motas vetz es resolvut am la egressio de la sania, e fort leu mor le malaute, e tu operte les.	 If the patient is very sick or in critical condition, or if they are weak and frail from old age, let the spirit of the animal lead to the exit of the abscess, and do not remove it gently unless absolutely necessary, so as to avoid harming them.
Don guarda aquest capitol am gran cautela, e aprop la tua perforacio en la qual perforas aquestz apostemas, cove que abstergescas las plagues e consideras donc si la plagua del apostema es pauca, o es una seccio plana, lahoras tu aministra las qualguas de li o de coto antic; e si le apostema es gran, e las fissuras de la perforacio son motas, lahoras cove que tu pauses meca en quascun trauc entro que pervenguan ensemps.	 When you have opened a space with great caution and placed your incision in the manner that allows incisions into this, consider whether the plague of the incision is small or flat, then adjust how you administer any remedies to it or its opposite side; if the incision is large and the fissures from the incision are wide, pause for any other wounds nearby.
E si en le apostema es abscindit una partida de la codena o has concavada aquela en le circuit, lahoras cove que tu la complescas de coto viel o de fil fayt de drap de li, ayssi cum quan has traytz pans o razizos, ses humiditat; e strenh aquel entro al tertz dia; e aprop proceseys aquel e cura le am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	 If the incision is completely closed or convexly curved, then you must apply a dressing to it and wait until morning; if there are any tears or fissures in addition to them, keep them moist, and stretch that part every third day; take care of this and cure whatever comes into contact with it so that everything becomes healthy.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc en la hora de la operacio tua, lahoras tu aministra aygua frega e vi agre en les quals mules un drap de li, e pausa aquel sobre le loc del fluxs del sanc motas veguadas.	 If you encounter bleeding during the time of your operation, then administer cold water and apply a dressing to it, and place that on top of the location from where the blood was flowing.
Mays si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras cove que tu aministres regiment e curacio e polveras las quals he recomtadas en motz locs de aquest nostre libre e de divisio.	 If bleeding continues after the operation, then you must administer medication and care as recommended in other locations from this book and division.
Mays si es en temps de hivern, e·l loc de la apostema es loc de motz nervis, lahoras cove que tu enfundas pulvils en vi e oli caut, e pauses aquels sobre les locs.	 If it is in the winter and the location of the incision is a nerve area, then you must apply powders from cold water and oil on top of them, placing that there.
E si es en estiu, e les locs son carnoses, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils enbeguts am aygua e oli o am vi e oli, e tot aquo sia freg entro que sia le ters dia, ayssi cum havem dit, e lahoras cove que tu deslies le apostema e abstergescas aquel e aministres en la curacio de lu aquo que a lu conveneys entro que sia sanat.	 When it is hot and the limbs are swollen with water or oil or wine, then such gout occurs in these parts that cause them to come out suddenly through openings between them when touched; hence, one who knows how can prevent this by treating such gout promptly as I have mentioned above.
E aysso es aquo que es necessari de la cognicio de la curacio de apostemas universalment, mays segon la via de distinccio ja he dit de tot apostema en qual manieyra es via de la cura de lu per capitols singularment.	 It is therefore necessary to consider the common knowledge of universal treatment methods and also discuss individual case treatments separately.
Capitol .xli.	 The sixty-first chapter.
De seccio de apostemas les quals veno en la codena del cap.	 In the following section, we will examine those that appear in the scalp area.
En la codena del cap petitz apostemas, e so de specias de nodes les quals conteno tunicas que so a lor factz ; e las specias de lor so motas.	 In the scalp region, there are two types of nodules that contain tunics which can be seen; and the smaller ones.
E de lor son pingas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditat semblant a lima.	 The nodules on them are small, and those containing moisture similar to lime.
E de aquelas so las quals conteno humiditat semblant a pols, et asemblantz a lor; e de aquelas so que son lapideas, durs.	 The nodules of the latter type contain moisture similar to dust, and they are rough on the outside; and those that are soft.
E en la seccio de totz, e en la extraccio de aquels no es temor, cum deves la exteccio de aquels no fa contrariat arceria.	 In all sections, except in the section dealing with them [nodules], and apart from their removal there is no need to worry; but when it comes time for removing these, then you should not let your guard down.
E la operacio en seccio de aquels es que tu esproes aquels am instrument la forma del qual ve aprop aysso, le qual es apelat entromes, entro que sapias que contengua.	 The operation in the section of nodules is to remove them with an instrument that you have just described; which is called extramission, through which it should be known.
Quar si aquo que conte es humiditat, lahoras scindeys aquel am seccio segon la longitut per seccio superficial segon aquesta forma:	 When humidity is present, the pain spreads to another part of the body second, then it spreads in a superficial section, like this way:
E comensa en la seccio de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G. Donc cum la humiditat es evacuada, lahoras tu excoria aquela pel que conte aquela humiditat, e no leysses de aquela alcuna causa de tot, quar tropas veguadas retorna, si roman de aquela alcuna causa.	 The pain is first spread to the part between .B. and .G., then it spreads in a superficial section like this:
E aprop submergeys coto en enguent egipciach, si es present, e sino, en aygua e sal; e umpleys am aquel la plagua e layssa aquel entro ad autra dia, quar am aquo corrodeys tot so que es romas de aquela pellicula.	 If the humidity is present, then apply it in oil and salt; otherwise, apply it wet and dry; and put it on that part of the body where you want to remove it, as long as there are no other causes for its removal, so that it dissolves entirely from that layer.
E aprop itera sobre aquel coto am enguent egipciach segondament e tersament si indigeyses de lu, entro que·t comfides que no y haia romas alcuna causa de aquela pellicula; lahoras cura la plagua am enguent entro que sia sanada.	 Then apply it again to that part of the body second and third times when you confirm there are no other causes for its removal, in order to cure the pain from that area.
E si apostema conte nodi gras, lahoras tu inscideys aquel segon aquesta forma:	 If you suspect fatty deposits, then apply it like this way:
am seccio havent forma de crotz, e geta oncis entre doas labias de la seccio e scorsa aquel de tota partida, e esforsa la tua vertut en extraccio de la tunica la qual conte aquel.	 In the section of the body that you suspect fatty deposits to be present in, apply it between two lines at the end of that section and remove all from its entirety, while stretching your neck in order to extract what is present.
Mays si a tu arceria fa contrarieta, lahoras fay aquo que yeu t’e recontat primieyrament.	 If your arteries are stiff, then apply it first.
E semblantment fay en le apostema lapificat de seccio e de curacio segon que a tu havem dit; e seccio sobre apostema lapificat es pus leugiera, quar es de pauc sanc e de pauca humiditat.	 "The doctor will now make a small incision and examine the patient's abdomen in order to check for any signs of infection or inflammation.
E alcunas vetz so alcus de aquestz apostemas les quals so en le cap en alcus homes am los quals de tot no es humiditat; la qual causa es quar yeu inscindigui sobre un apostema en le cap de una femna vielha e atrobegui le apostema ayssi cum peyra sorda, aspra, blanqua, la qual no podia esser trinquada, e si a alcu fos am aquela percussit, plaguera aquel.	 "The doctor will first make an incision in the head of the patient to check for any signs of inflammation or infection.
Mays en les autres apostemas accidentz en le cap otra aquest no es aquest capitol, ayssi cum les apostemas que veno als caps dels enfantz e deves las razitz de las aurelhas, mays la seccio de aquestz totz sia seccio superficial.	 "The doctor will then make additional small incisions in the patient's other areas such as the ears and eyebrows.
E pausa la perforacio de aquels de la partida pus bassa de lor per so que sia alleujat le cos de la sania a las partidas pus bassas.	 "The doctor will then apply a small amount of saline to cleanse the body from any remaining infections in the wounds.
E aprop cura aquelas am aquo que conveneys ad aquel de curacio.	 "The doctor will now begin caring for the patient.
Capitol .xlii.	 "Chapter 62.
De seccio de scrophulas las quals accideyso en le col.	 "The doctor will then make a small incision in the abdomen to expose the ovaries, if necessary.
Motas veguadas endeveno aquestas apostemas en le colh e en las aysselhas e en les angonars; e alcunas veguadas accideyso en las autras partidas del cos.	 "The doctor will then examine and treat any other areas of the body that may be affected.
E so aquelas que accideysso en le colh, e so motas que so engendradas entre lor, e tota scrofula de aquelas es dintz la sua tunica propria, e ayssi cum en les nodis e apostema del cap, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	 "And for those that are affected in the abdomen and between them, and all sores of these are part of its own clothing, as well as in the head's veins and organs.
E las specias de aquestas scrophulas son motas, quar de aquelas so alcunas lapideas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditatz, e de aquelas so malignas las quals no obeseysso a curacio.	 "The symptoms of these sores are multiple, from those that contain moisture to those that contain malignant matter, and those that are both moist and malignant.
Donc en aquela la qual tu vezes de bona disposicio en le Tocament, de la qual la color de aquo que es manifest es propda a la color de la codena, e es mauguda a tota partida, e no es annexsa am le nervi del colh, ni am las venas, ni am la arceria, e no es preonda, cove que tu inscidiscas aquela am siccio superficial de la partida desus a la partida dejos del cos de la linha de .G. entro la linha de .B., e scorja aquela de tota partida, e exten dos labias de la codena am onci, o am motz oncis si has necessitat de aquels, ayssi cum havem dit en las apostemas del cap, e extratz aquela petit a petit.	 "In that area where you have good disposition towards the Circumflex, its color is indicative of the color of the Circe, and it's malignant throughout; do not insert anything into any superficial part of this line until you have inserted it into another line.
E es mays cautela que no sia inscidida la vena o nervi.	 "Be careful that nothing is inserted into a vein or nerve.
E sia le spatum no mot agut, que no ajuste a tu la tua ma am inscizio, o que enquiete le malaute, e que inscidas aquo que no es necessari inscidir; quar si inscideysses vena o arceria e prohibeys tu de la tua operacio, lahoras pausa en la plagua vetriol trissat o autras polveras las quals ostan fluxs de sanc, e estrenh la plagua, e layssa aquel entro que·s repausa la acuitat de la apostema e sia mollificada la plagua e comense esser poyrida.	 "Do not insert the knife into anything except for that which is necessary to incise; if you inserted a vein or artery and it prevents your operation, pause in the bloody bandage applied or powder from those that still flow with poison, cover them up, and lay down this thing so that its sharpness will be softened.
Quan le sanc es abscindit.	 "When the incision is complete.
Donc retorna a la tua operacio entro que l’aias complida.	 "Then return to your operation after completing it.
E aprop inquireys am le tieu dit indic si es romas alcuna causa de las autras petitas scrophulas, donc inscideys aquelas e munda aquelas.	 When it is suspected that there may be a small abscess in one of the thighs or legs, immediately look for and examine those parts
E si es en la razit de la scrophula gran vena, cove lahoras que no inscidas aquela scrophula de la sua razitz.	 If you suspect that it is a large abscess in one of the veins, then look closely at that part
Abantz cove que lies aquela am fiel doblat fort e que leysses aquela entro que caia per si ses nocument.	 Look carefully and see if there are any openings or leaks through which fluids may flow out.
E aprop omple la plagua de coto vielh le qual tu has ja submirgit en enguent egipciac, e aprop cura aquel.	 Then place a cloth soaked in ice water on the affected part and keep it there to cool it down.
E si inscides aquela scrophula tota, lahoras cove que tu ajustes las doas labias de la plagua e cuzas2 tantost pus que no y ha romasa deguna superfluitat.	 If you suspect that the abscess has already ruptured, then place a cloth soaked in ice water on both of your legs and hold it there to prevent any excess fluids from coming out.
Mays si tu vezes que haia romasa superfluitat per la grandeza de la scrofula, cove que tu entendas a inscidir la razit de aquela, e astrayra aquela e aministra sutura e aquo que es dit.	 If you suspect that the abscess has already burst through swelling of the abscess (scrophula), look closely at it and drain it with a needle to prevent further damage and to this end.
E aquela de las scrophulas que conteno humiditatz, perfora aquela am perforacio superficial aqui la on appar a tu le loc de maturacio de lu, e pausa perforacio de aquo que siec le pus bas del cos, ayssi cum havem dit.	 The abscesses that contain fluids should be punctured with a sharp needle here where the surface is easily accessible to prevent any further damage and to this end.
E aprop aministra perforacio, calguas am enguent e semblantz ad aquels, per so que corroda aquo que es romas de la corropcio.	 Then provide a bandage soaked in cold water on the affected area, cover it up and try to control any bleeding from that.
E aprop quan tu vezes la plagua ja esser mundada, lahoras tu cura aquela am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanada.	 Then, when you suspect that the abscess has already burst, look carefully at it and drain it with a needle to prevent further damage and to this end.
Capitol .xliii.	 When joints ache due to cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, as well as pain in the feet, it is customary among doctors to call gout.
De seccio del pilhot del apostema accident dintz le guolayro.	 The doctor's assistant will cut off a section of the patient's hair at the nape of their neck.
Diyssero les antics aquesta seccio en le epilhot, e no vist alcu hom en nostra terra que aquela aia fayta.	 They shall remove that section from the head and show it to nobody in our land.
E aquesta es la inscriptura del sermo de aquels.	 This is the inscription of the medical treatise.
Mays en les homes haventz esquinencia, cove que sia esquivada la extraccio del epilhot, cum per aquo no sia fayt juvament per so quar totas las venas e las majors del malaute so aqui.	 In the meantime, if it is necessary to remove that section from the head, by this means they should not be severed immediately and all veins of the patient will be here.
Mays en aquels que han apostemas cautz en la boca o guolayro o dos aurelhas, quan la malautia no es en la cana, cove husar de la seccio de epilhot a fugir la perdicio la qual es fayta per perfocacio.	 If the patient coughs when eating hot food or drinks, and if the illness is not in the throat, it would be necessary to remove that section of hair so as to prevent its escape by tearing.
Donc cove quan volem aquo, que inscidam le epilhot dejos tres cercles dels cercles del epilhot, o quatre am petita seccio per la latitut en aquel que es entre dos cercles per quantitat, que la seccio sia en ciphac, no en la cartillage, e aquest loc es convenent a seccio, quar es privat de carn e les vayselhs de sanc de lu son luhen.	 When we want this (removal of the section from the head), then insert three circles into the circles of the head or four smaller sections near the latitude at which there is space between two circles in proportion, that section should be made on a pillow rather than in the flesh, and this location serves to prevent the escape.
E si le metge es pauruc, cove lahoras que extenda la codena del golayro am onci, e aprop fenda la codena entro que pervengua a la canal, mays evite les vaysels de sanc si vetz de aquelas alcuna causa.	 If the doctor is afraid that spreading the cold humor in that way may cause an illness to come out through the channel, then they should try to prevent this by closing it off so as not to allow any of these causes for disease.
E aprop inscida li ciplach segon que havem recomtat; e es significat sobre la seccio de la canal per le flacma le qual es de aquela eyssit am aquo que es de lu disromput e per la abscizio de la votz.	 "Here, the passage is being translated: 'Then place a cushion under them and another on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.' This means that they are performing an abdominal examination.
E layssa la plagua uberta per alcun temps.	 The physician has taken out his bag of tools for some time now.
Donc cum la hora es remauguda en la qual perforacio es temuda, agregua doas labias de la codena de la plagua, e cus aquela sola ses la cartillage.	 When the time comes that a passage needs to be made, add two blades of the surgeon's scalpels and cut into it with one stroke.
E aprop administra medicinas que fan naysser la carn entro que sia sanat.	 And then administer medicines which make sick flesh disappear when they are sick.
E diyssec Albucasis que la summa del sermo le qual havem recomtat, exposicio no es sino que veias que alcus de aquetz apostemas ja han opilat lo guolayro del malaute, e le malaute es vengut entro a mort, e le ale de lu es entresecat, e alcus van a inscidir le epiglos per so que respire le malaute sobre le loc de la plagua per alcuna respiracio, e sia salvat de mort.	 And the summary of what we have recommended is that you should see if the ulcers caused by the disease have been cured and the patient has recovered from the illness, and then the ulcers are to be closed, and the ulcers must be cut in such a way as to prevent the ulcer causing the patient from coming out through the passage, so they cannot breathe it out through any breathing hole, and will be saved from death.
E per aquo comandero layssar la plagua uberta entro que sia consumida la malicia de la malautia; e es la malicia de lu per tres dias; e donc lahoras comandero cosi la plagua, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	 And by this command the bag is to be placed into what has been cured of the illness in ulcers, and it lasts for three days, so the physician commands thus that it be done with the bag, and cures it until it is healed.
E aquo que yeu he vist per mi meteys, es que una sirventa pres un cotel e mesec le en le sieu golayro e inscidic am aquel una partida de la cana del pulmo, e yeu fu apelat a la curacio de lu, e atrobegui la mugen ayssi cum es mugit del moridos, e descubrigui la plagua e atrobegui le sanc le qual era yssit de la plagua petit.	 And after you have seen through my means, it is that a servant places their hand on the chest and cuts into its cavity with one stroke; then they are called upon to care for him, and also bring down the sack which was from the bag's part
Donc yeu fo confessat que aquela no havia inscidit vena ni guidegi, e le vent yssia de la plagua, e curegui aquela entro que foc sanada.	 Indeed you confessed that there was no wound or injury, and the wind was blowing from the plague; and it cured him by fire.
E no accidic a la sirventa si no rauquiera en la votz, e aprop alcus dias retornec ad miloracio de las suas dispozicios.	 Do not accuse the physician if he does not agree with the oaths, but let him return to his duties.
E ara dic yeu que en la seccio del epilhot no ha temor.	 And now you say that in the section of the epilogue there is no fear.
Capitol .xliv.	 Chapter 44.
De seccio sobre apostema le qual accideys en le golayro defora, e es apelat hernia del golayro.	 Of the section about the apostrophe which occurs in the forehead, and it is called a forehead hernia.
Aquest apostema nompnat hernia del golayro es apostema gran segon la color del cors, e es mot en las femnas.	 The forehead apostrophe is sometimes also called a big one after the skin of the face, and it occurs in women as well.
E es segon dos manieyras, quar o es natural o accidental.	 It can be caused by nature or accident.
E en le natural no es engen de curar.	 In the case of a natural one it cannot be cured.
E l’accidental es segon dos manieyras del qual la un es semblant a nodes grasses, e l’autra manieyra es semblant apostema le qual es fayt per nodacio de arteria, e en aquel es temor.	 The accidental one is the second type that can be similar to a grass knot, and another kind of hernia caused by blockage in an artery occurs as well.
E no cove que·s fassa presumpcio a lu cum ferr sino en aquel que es petit.	 Do not assume it will happen if you do not eat certain foods unless the one is small.
E tu proha aquel e investigua aquel am le dit, e si atrobas lu semblant a nodi gras, e no es suspendut am alcuna de las venas, lahoras tu inscideys aquel ayssi cum les nodes, e extratz aquel am aquo que conte lu de la pel e bursiclam; e sino, lahoras es perscrutat tot le sieu esser, e aprop cura le loc am aquo que cove de curacio entro que sia sanat.	 You should also examine that one and the other as well, for example if it is similar to a fat knot or does not block any vein, then you should identify both of them with those found in the skin and bursa; otherwise, they are considered invalid and appropriate treatment is given to where care must be taken so that the injury may heal.
Capitol .xlv.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
De seccio de las specias de nodes.	 Then you will divide the parts of the veins.
Dels nodes so motas specias e yeu ja he dit totas las specias de lor en la divisio.	 You have divided all the parts into one division.
E cove que yeu recomte assi la diferencia entre node e exitura cum fassa dubitacio.	 And note that there is a difference between nodes and exits, as you will discuss below.
Donc yeu dic que am exitura es caliditat e febre e dolors vehementz entro que es sedada la ebullicio de la superfluitat; e es complida putrefaccio que lahora cessa la febre, la dolor e la calor.	 Then you say that a hernia is called heat and fever, and pain occurs as the body tries to expel excess fluid; it also involves putrefaction, which stops the fever, pain, and heat.
Mays am node no es caliditat ni febre ni dolor, e conte aquel ciphac leon le qual es al u sac propri.	 A node is neither hot nor fever nor pain, but it is characterized by a lump that arises from the body itself.
E es segon la color del cors, e le comensament de lu es cum un ceze e es fayt ayssi cum vace, sia major o minor, e son segon dos specias, quar o so grassas e conteno humiditat, e las colors de la humiditat son motas, segon que yeu diyssi en la divisio.	 The color of the body is next mentioned; at first it appears like a lump and grows as well or poorly, being one of two parts, either wet or dry, containing humidity, with different colors depending on the amount of humidity in the division.
Donc cove, quan pervenas a la curacio de node, que exprohes aquel e inquiras aquel al comensament am sturment le qual es apelat intromes, segon que vindra la sua forma en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	 Therefore, when you approach the cure for a node, inquire if it is an introitus or if it comes out on its own as swelling begins; and then examine its appearance in relation to what was mentioned above.
E es manieyra de inquisicio de apostemas e de totz nodes, e es que tu prenguas aquest sturment e entromet aquel en le loc pus humit le qual atrobas en le apostema, e tu revolveras les tieus ditz am aquel petit a petit entro que sapias que·l sturment ja ha penetrat la codena.	 Investigate the openings and all nodes, and make sure to put that one into the moist place where you found it in the aperture; as you insert them little by little until you discover that one has already entered the urethra.
E aprop ultima la tua ma segon la mesura de la grandeza del apostema, e aprop extratz le entromes e considera aquo que es yssit en le vestigi de lu.	 When you have finished preparing the patient's limbs as described above, it is now time to place a cushion on their chest and then extend your hand towards them while considering that it should be in front of the memorial.
E si es fora-getada la humiditat corrent, de qualque color sia, lahoras tu le inscideys am seccio superficial segon que he dit en les autres apostemas.	 If the current humidity is unknown or of an unusual color, you should first apply a superficial incision as I mentioned in the previous passage.
E si del vestigi de l’intromes no hieys humiditat, lahoras sapias que es gras.	 If there is no moisture at the opening, it means that the testicle has been removed (castrated).
E secca sobre lu am seccio havent forma de crotz segon aquesta forma:	 Cut through this incision in a straight line.
ayssi cum t’e ensenhat, e suspen aquel am oncis, e excorja la codena de tota part am facilitat, e guarda la pel o sac, si podes, sobre aquel e extraguas aquela sania am le node.	 When you have cut through this incision and removed the intestines as described earlier, make sure to cleanse all of it thoroughly with a washcloth or towel.
Mays si es romput en la operacio, no es possible extrayre aquela sana, e motas veguadas endeve aquo, e lahoras tu la extratz a pessas entro que de lu no romangua denguna causa.	 If it was not removed during the surgery and cannot be reattached due to some reason or another, you must treat the wound thoroughly as described earlier in order for it to heal properly.
Quar si de lu roman denguna causa, pauc o trop, le node retorne segon le mays.	 If something went wrong during surgery, return to this step later.
E si tu vezes que de lu roman alcuna part petita, lahoras comple la plagua de alcunas polveras corrosivas agudas e strenh la plagua, e pausa sobre aquela que sede apostema caut, e cura aquel del autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	 If a small portion of it was removed during the surgery and you need to complete the skin incision as described earlier with corrosive substances that are sharp and sting the incision, and place the cautery on top of that which is in front of the memorial, and treat that area with further care until it heals.
E si es node gran, lahoras tu cus las doas labias de lu e cura aquel am aquo que encarna.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
Mays si vena pulsatil es a lu contraria, o no-pulsatil, lahoras tu coyta e huemple le loc de zegi trissat que es vetriol e leyssa aquel streyt per dos dias o per tres entro que·s poyresca la plagua e que repause la ebullicio del sanc; e aprop retorna a inscindir aquo que es romas del node.	 If the pulse is against or not-pulsatile, you are to cleanse and empty that place where it was thought (lit: "that vein") with two days or three for it to cease its pain, and postpone the ebullition of this; and then return to incision on that vein.
Capitol .xlvi.	 The following line is a part of a poem from the Roman poet Ovid's "The Metamorphoses". Can you translate it into English?
De las formas del sturmentz necessaris en seccio e perforacio.	 Because of the forms necessary in sectioning and perforation.
De aquels so las formas dels intromesas, e so de tres specias, que de aquels es alcu gran, e de lor es migier, e de lor es petit.	 Of these is the shape of the vestibule, it's also three species which are big, medium and small
La forma de intromes gran es aquesta:	 The great one is this form
La forma de intromes migier es aquesta:	 The middle size one is this one.
La forma de intromes petit es aquesta:	 The smallest one is this one.
Sian faytz de ferr, de alfulud, de extremitatz cayradas decentment, per so que festino le intrament en les apostemas.	 When you are to perform surgery, from anesthesia, on the extremities carefully for fear that it does not reach the opening of the passage.
E aquestas so las formas dels experientz, e son nompnatz albered, e un de aquels es apelat berid.	 These are the shapes of the parts, their names are well-known, and one of these is called beard.
E so de tres especias, quar de lor es gran, migier e pauc.	 The three sizes: large, medium, small
La forma de experient gran, forma de lu:	 The manner of experiencing great pleasure, the way in which it occurs
La forma de experient migier, forma de lu:	 The manner of experiencing lesser pleasure
La forma de experient pauc, forma de lu:	 The manner of experiencing a little pleasure
Conveneysso que sian per aquels apostemas e exituras e fistulas e bubos per so que entre aquelas so dels osses e de autras causas.	 These are the openings and excisions, fistulae and abscesses that lead to these causes, between which bones and other causes there may be
E so faytz redontz, grosses, leons, ayssi cum grans agulhas am las quals son cosidas las selhas, e son faytas de eram citri, o de eram o de ferr, o de argent, E las milhors so quan so faytas de eram citri.	 These are the openings that must be closed, great ones with large hooks to sew up the wounds, and those that come from cuts or blows, or from arrows, and many more when there is much pain in the same place.
E son faytz les experient de plum negre, les quals se acordan que per aquels sian ubertas las fistulas en la conquavitat de las quals so reflexios, que sian reflectidas am la sua levitat am aquelas refleccios.	 They are the openings that experience black pain and it is agreed that through these they must be closed in the cavities of those who have reflections that occur from their bodies, which reflection occurs on their chest in those reflections.
E so de tres specias, quar alcus de lor so loncs, e dels autres migiers, e dels autres breus, segon la quantitat del ample de la fistula e de la strictura de lu.	 There are three types: the large ones that occur less frequently, and those of lesser frequency for others, and those which are smaller according to the amount of the fistula and the constriction of them.
Forma del experient gran de plom:	 The manner in which great pleasure occurs
Forma del experient migier de plom:	 The manner in which lesser pleasure occurs
Forma del experient petit de plom:	 The manner in which a little pleasure occurs
Las formas dels oncis so de motas specias, quar de aquels so alcus simples, als quals es una curvitat solament, e so de tres specias: grans, paucs e migiers.	 These varieties are of the three types that exist, with some very simple ones, those being only curved and there are also three sorts: great ones, few and lesser ones.
E de lor so uncis orps, e so de tres specias.	 When a person has very cold feet, three servants are needed.
E de aquels so uncis haventz doas curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	 The first servant will help the patient to straighten their bent legs and arms with a cushion support as necessary.
E de lor so haventz tres curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	 If three servants are needed for curvature, then there must be at least three servants.
E totz aquetz so necessaris en lor loc.	 Everything is necessary in that place
Forma de unci simple gran, forma de lu:	 It's simple to do this
Forma de unci simple migier:	 A more simple way would be:
Forma de unci simple pauc, forma de lu:	 A simpler way is to do it.
Forma de unci orp gran:	 One way of doing this is
Forma de unci orp migier, forma de lu:	 Another way would be to do it like this.
Forma de unci orp pauc, forma de lu:	 A simpler way could be to do it this way.
Forma de unci gran havent dos curvaturas:	 When one has two curvatures, the following is necessary:
Forma de unci migier havent dos curvatas:	 Another way would be to do it like this:
Forma de unci pauc havent dos curvaturas:	 A simpler way could be to do it that way.
Forma de unci gran havent tres curvaturas:	 When one has three curvatures, the following is necessary:
Forma de unci migier havent tres curvaturas:	 Another way would be to do it like this:
Forma de unci pauc havent tres curvaturas:	 A simpler way could be to do it that way.
E aquestas so las formas dels scalpels am les quals son seccatz e scorjatz les nodes e le apostemas, e so de tres specias, quar de aquels es gran, migier, e pauc.	 These are the forms of knives which will cut and pierce the nodes and nails, and have three servants.
Forma de scapel gran:	 The form for a large knife is
Forma del scapel migier:	 Form of the scalpel:
Forma de scapel pauc:	 Form of a small scalpel
Las extramitatz de aquels am les quals es fayta seccio so agudas e las autres extramitatz so no-agudas, e no so pausadas en tal manieyra, sino per que sia fayt juvament en la excorjacio dels nodes la temor de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e per aquels sia sanat le malaute e atrobe tranquilitat un petit per la adustio la qual atroba deves la excoriacio del apostema.	 The edges of the incision should be sharp and the others smooth or rounded, not to cause any damage to blood vessels or nerves, for those reasons the surgeon aims to minimize pain in the patient's body and provide a comfortable environment during the healing process after the operation.
E aquestas son las formas de almagidas, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc, ayssi cum veyras.	 These are the forms of the scalpel blades, there are three types: large, medium and small, as you see.
La forma de magda gran:	 The form of a large scalpel.
Forma de magda migier:	 The form of a medium scalpel.
Forma de magda pauc:	 The form of a small scalpel.
Sian faytas de eram e so semblantz de ray am le qual e fayt alcofol.	 Those who use it also have similar forms in the hand with which they perform the operation.
E es en la extramitat lada punctada am spatum occultada e en aquela corr a las partidas dedintz e defora, quan tu vols, ayssi cum veses.	 It is at the edges of the hidden part that you should be careful with, especially when cutting and removing tissues or bones, as you will do so
Las formas de spatimis, les quals so amaguatz entre los ditz deves la perforacio dels apostemas e no les percebo les malautes, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc.	 The forms of the sponges used in medical practice, there are three types large, medium and small, as you see.
E aquestas so las formas de aquels:	 These are the forms of the instruments.
Las formas de ventozas am las quals es abscindit le flux del sanc, e so de tres specias; gran, migiera e pauca; las formas de lu:	 The forms of the tubes that separate the flow from air and water are large, medium, and small.
Sian faytas de eram citri, redondas am alcuna longitut , e sian subtils.	 When there are cold humors in the feet, it causes pain.
E cove que sian aquestas specias de ventosas deves tu grans, migieras e paucas, per so que per aquelas abscindas flux de sanc am velocitat en necessitat, e lahoras quan a tu primieyrament no es medicina.	 The areas that are affected by these humors tend to be the joints and extremities (hands, feet), which may cause pain due to their sensitivity and lack of protection in cold conditions, hence it is not considered medical treatment when experienced at the first onset.
Enpero no uses de aquelas ad abscidir sanc en tot loc del cors, e non uses sino en locs carnoses, ayssi cum en les lacertis de las cambas e de las coyssas, e en les lacertz dels brasses, e de las mamillas e del ventre e dels engonars, e semblantz a lor dels lacertz carnoses humitz.	 The areas affected by these humors should not be found anywhere on the body except for the hands and feet (and possibly other sensitive areas like the calves of legs, thighs, breasts, and belly).
E alcunas veguadas son faytz de aquels strumentz autres petitz semblantz scorsas de fisacs segon aquesta forma; per les quals lo sanc es abscindit quan es fayt per fleubotomia, o deves inscizio de vena o de arceria.	 Some veins are affected by these humors in a similar way to the previous conditions; when they become obstructed through phlebotomy (a procedure for removing veins) or due to injury of the vein itself, pain is experienced.
E alcunas veguadas son faytas redondas segon aquesta forma:	 Some veins are affected similarly:
Capitol .xlvii.	 Chapter 47.
De la cura de las mamillas dels homes las quals so asembladas de femnas.	 The cure of the breasts in men, which resemble those found in women.
Alcunas veguadas so infladas las mamillas de alcus homes deves le compliment del dormir cum comensan esser pellutz, e aprop so infladas las mamillas, e so asembladas las mamillas de las femnas, e romano apostemosas, lejas.	 Some veins in the breasts of men swell when they sleep like those found on women's breasts, and swelling occurs from this same cause; and are similar to the breasts that you find on women, therefore it is necessary for them to seek medical attention.
E ad aquel que avoreys aquo, cove que inscidisca aquelas am seccio lunar segon aquesta forma, de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G., e aprop excorja la groceza tota, e aprop uempla la plagua de medicament encarnatiu, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am cosidura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	 "And for that who wishes to learn these remedies, if you want to study the lunar line from this form of B up until the line G and then apply a poultice on every spot where necessary with a medicated plaster, and adjust both sides of the affected area.
Mays si la mamilla declina a las partidas dejos e es mollificada per la sua magnitut ayssi cum endeve a las femnas, lahoras sia fendut en dos latz sieus pus sobiras, am dos seccios semblantz a figura lunar, de las quals quascuna sia contenguda en l’autra deves la fi de quascuna, entro que sia que la linha major contengua la menor segon aquesta forma de la linha de .B. e la linha de .G. E aprop excorja la codena la qual es entre dos labias de la plagua, e osta la pingueza, e aministra aquo que havem dit de la sutura e de las polveras aquo que es necessari en la curacio entro que sia sanat.	 "And if the nipple declines to join in on these parts and is too small for this size of patches, then adjust its position between two sides of the affected area until it is aligned with both sides.
E si tu non conpleysses la inscizio de aquo que cove inscidir per la inquietut del malaute, e per flux de sanc, lahoras cove que huemplas la plagua de coto submergit en enguent corrosiu e layssa aquel entro que aquo corroda que es romas de la grayssa, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	 "And if you do not fulfill the prescription of this to bring about a sense of calm in the patient and to reduce swelling, then apply it soaked with corrosive vinegar until that which flows from its roots is cured and adjusted for health.
Capitol .xlviii.	 "Chapter 58.
De perforacio de apostemas que veno dejos le titillic.	 "Of the puncture wounds that come by chance.
Aquetz apostemas que veno dejos le titillic so de las specias de scrophulas, durs, las quals conte una pel que es sac.	 "The punctures of the letters that come from thorns are of the species of scrophulas and thorns which have one feature in common.
E de aquelas so alcunas que conteno humiditatz; e aquelas que conteno humiditatz cove que sian inscididas am seccio lunar segon aquesta figura: de la linha de .G. a la linha de .B. E cum es tot evacuat aquo que es en le apostema de la sania, lahoras tu le comple de coto viel e leysa le entro al autra dia.	 "The space between the patient's thighs being moist, and those that contain moisture which may become infected when exposed to lunar light for this period: from line .G. to line .B.
E aprop le coto sia ostat e sia curat am enguent convenient ad aquo, entro que sia sanat.	 "Place the cushion under them and make it comfortable in this position.
E si le apostema de las specias dels nodes es, e de las scrophulas, lahoras tu scindeys sobre aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la seccio sobre las scrophulas engualment.	 "If the abdomen incision is made, and for the abscesses, you should also mention it in this section.
May si la plagua es extenduda en aysso que yesca poyredura, lahoras administra en lu cauteri segon que en aquo havem denant dit.	 "If the incision is long enough to cause bleeding, then apply cautery here as well.
Capitol .xlix.	 "Chapter 49.
De seccio de apostemas que accideysso per arceria o per vena.	 "Of incisions that occur due to arteries or veins.
Quan arceria es rompuda, e la codena es consolidada la qual es sobre aquela, lahoras motas veguadas accideys apostema E les senhals per les quals es conoguda que imflamacio e apostema sian per la arteria o per vena: quar quan apostema es per arceria es lonc agreguat en le preon del cors; e que quan inpelleysses le apostema am les tieus ditz, sentes en lu quays sia stridor.	 "When an artery is ruptured and the clot has settled over it, then the arteries near by become inflamed and the vein will be affected: when the incision occurs through the artery, it will cause a swelling in the chest; and if you attempt to remove the incision at these points, there may be stridor.
E aquel que es per vena es redon al manifest del cors.	 "In that case, it is reflected on the surface of the chest.
E seccio sobre aquest apostema es error, e majorment en aquel que es dejos las aysselhas, e en les angonars, e en le col, e en motz locs del cors; e es mot gran, donc cove que la sua curacio am ferr sia esquivada, e aquel que es en las extramitatz, o al cap, cove que sia evitat.	 "The incision over this part is usually made in the abdomen, chest, and navel areas; it should be small enough so that its cure cannot be avoided.
Mays sobre aquel que es de lor per imflacio de l’orrifici de la arceria, scindeys en la codena seccio en le lonc; e aprop huebre la seccio am uncis e aprop la arceria, e deliura de las tunicas entro que sia descuberta.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body and especially in the feet, it is customary to call gout by doctors.
E aprop met sobre aquel agulha e fay aquela penetrar entro al autre latz, e estrenh la arceria am fiel doble en dos locs, — la qual causa yeu a tu eyssenhegui en extraccio de doas arcerias les quals so en les templars.	 And if it is necessary to place an arrow and let it penetrate into another part of the body, stretch out the intestine tightly in two places - the one causing pain will be expelled from both openings of the bowels which are near them.
E aprop punh le loc le qual es entre dos liamentz am spatum entro que yesca le sanc tot que es en lu, e sia dissolvut le apostema.	 And place that spot between two straps on the surface so it will come out completely when it is in there, and dissolve its purpose.
E aprop administra curacio en la qual es engendrat poyre entro que caian les liamentz; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz convenientz ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	 And administer care to the one born with short hamstrings so that they may come out conveniently, and care for him when he emerges in this way so that he is healed.
E si es apostema per seccio de vena, lahoras cove que tu tenguas am la tua ma aquo que es a tu possible del apostema am la codena, e aprop intromet la agulha dejos le loc le qual tu has tengut dejos la tua ma, e fay aquela penetrar; e sia en aquela fil doble entro que tu extraguas aquel del autre latz, e aprop ligua le apostema am bo liament segon que yeu he dit a tu en le liament de uva4 de doas partz am doas extremitatz del fil.	 If it is necessary to make an incision into the vein, you must have your hand on its surface so that it comes out of the vein's channel, and push the arrow in; and be at this double fold where you extract the other part from another location, and bind it with a second thread for both sides of two parts of the thread.
Mays si temes que extraguam le fil, lahoras entromet le fiel am aquela agula dejos tot le apostema deves la inscizio de la agulha primieyra, e strenh les tieus fiels en quatre locs.	 If you want to remove the thread, open up the vein and insert the needle as before, and stretch your threads in four places.
Aprop secca le apostema en le mieg loc de lu entro que quan es yssit aquo que es en lu, lahoras tu inscideys la superfluitat de la codena, e layssa aquo que de lu es liat.	 When the gout is present in the body and it has already become apparent that this is what we are dealing with at this point, doctors prescribe rest for the patient to prevent further complications.
E aprop pausa sobre lu pulvil le qual has submergit en vi e oli, e aprop administra la curacio la qual es fayta am calguas e enguentz entro que sia sanat.	 Apply a powder that you have soaked in water and oil, then administer the remedy which is known to be soothing and alleviates the pain when applied topically.
Capitol l del apostema le qual accideys per torcio de nervis.	 The first sentence translates to "the space between the thighs
Ayssi cum accideys apostema en arceria e en vena, e semblantment accideys apostema en les nervis quan accideys en lor percussio o accideys per trebal superfluable, e per semblantz.	 When the gout attacks joints and veins as well as when it is caused by a blow or stroke that could be harmful, in such cases.
E es fayt le mays de lu en les locs dels adjutoris o del talo, o en tot loc en le qual so maugudas las juncturas.	 It is customarily placed on the joints of the assistant or the table, or in any location where the joints are affected.
E es apostema greu, e es asemblat a la color del autre cors, e es en las majors de lu disposicios ses de lor e quan es streyt am vehementia, sent en lu le malaute semblant stupor.	 The gout is severe and spreads to other parts of the body, causing it to feel numb as though in a trance.
E no es apostema agreguat en le preon del cors, e per so es dejos la codena, e el es maugut a tota partida e no va a las partidas denant ni detras.	 It is not customary to apply the poultice on the abdomen or any other part of the body except the affected joints, and after it has been applied, there will be numbness throughout the entire body with no sensation in front or behind.
Donc aquo de aquels que es en las juncturas no cove que sia envasit am ferr, quar fort leu endevenguera contracio.	 In such cases, it is not advisable to apply on the joints as further application could cause a contraction of the muscles.
Mays aquel que es en le cap o en le front fen la codena am spatum.	 May it be done on top or in the front so that a cordon can be made over his chest
Mays si es apostema pauc, lahoras te aquel am les forfecs e abscindeys aquel de razitz.	 If too much is added, then loosen the cords and remove them from their shoulders.
E si es gran, lahoras tu le suspen am unci, e excorja aquel, e aprop osta aquel; e ajusta la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	 If it's too tight, then take away some of the cordage and remove them, and adjust the padding, and fix the wound as best you can.
Capitol .li.	 I don't understand this sentence or its meaning in context
De seccio de apostema le qual accideys de cheil que accideys al ventre.	 If a patient has an abscess that is causing pain in the belly.
Endeveno ad alcus homes motas veguadas en les ventres de aquels e en las autras partidas del cors de aquels theils les quals son apelatz funguals per similitut de aquels am funges, dels quals la razitz es subtil e·l cap de aquel es gros; e ja las labias de aquels so conversas, e es de aquels que es petit, e es de aquels que es mot magnificat.	 Among the many kinds of excrements that are ejected from these openings and the various parts of the body which serve as channels for eliminating them with a subtlety similar to those in use by the liver, of which the head is large; and then they talk to those who are small, and to those who are magnificent.
E yeu ja e vist un, e en le ventre de lu eran dos theils les quals eran mays a funges semblantz, e no era diferencia entre aquels blancs, de menuda razitz.	 And you saw one in it and then in his belly were two channels which were quite similar to each other, without being different because of their thinness.
E ja las labias de aquels eran enversadas e se fendian, e humiditat corria de aquel tot temps.	 And the openings of those would be opened and they would separate themselves, and moisture would run out from them at all times.
Donc yeu inscidegui aquels e atrobegui en la un en pes quays xviii unc. e l’autre quays vi unc.	 Therefore you instruct these and lead them to the one in each of the eighteenth hour, and then to the other which is on the twelfth hour.
E la operacio en la inscizio de lor es que consideres lahoras si·l malaute es humit, e la color de atheil es blanca, humit, de subtil razitz; lahoras tu le inscideys am spatum lat, e sian en la presencia tua cauteris en le foc, quar motas veguadas deves la seccio de lu es expellit mot sanc; e si te ventz le sanc, cauteriza aquel.	 When making an incision on the patient's thigh it is considered that if the sores are moist and the color of the flesh is white, humid, subtle dewiness; the sores should be incised at a spot on the lat side near your watchfulness, in front of your cauldron you must burn them with cautery or else they will spread. If you touch them when inflamed, cauterize it
E si vezes le malaute pauruc e temeros, guarda te de inscizio am ferr; mays lahoras pren fiel de plom recent fayt, e strenh am aquel atheil, la manieyra del qual es aquela que havem dita; e leyssa aquel per dos dias.	 If the sores are purulent and fearful, make a slit near it when you cut into it; if the sores are covered with recent pus, stretch that flesh, the vein of which is called the finger vein; and lay that over for two days.
E aprop ajusta en la strictura del fil de plom; donc, no cesses strenher le plom granre devetz en theil, entro que sia abscindit e cayha per se ses trebalh.	 Then adjust it in the vein of the flesh; then do not stretch the great veins underneath, except if they are absent and cause a hernia to appear through itself.
Mays si theil es de grossa razitz, lahoras en la inscizio de lu es alcuna causa de temor e de paor, e majorment en aquel que es en le ventre.	 If the flesh is of great thickness, incisions into it will cause no fear or worry and more in that which is within the belly.
Mays possibla es que tu inscindas la maytat de lu , e aprop cauteriza aquel per que no retorne.	 It is possible to make an incision through the whole of it, and then cautorize that so as not to return.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanada la plagua.	 Then cure that within which has been wounded.
E guarda te que tu no presumas inscidir theil le qual es de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, de leg reguardament, quar aquel es absi cancros.	 And remember to not make incisions into flesh that is of a dark color, few sentiment, and light regard; for such are abashed wounds.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio de cranc aprop aysso.	 The first sentence translates to: You must remember your appointment clearly.
Capitol .lii.	 The corrected sentence is: Remember your appointment clearly.
De curacio de eminencia del umbilic.	 Stomachache from constipation.
Eminencia del umbilic es fayta per motas causas; o per fissuras del ciphac le qual es sobre le ventre, e yeys de lu la tela o budel segon que endeve en las autras rupturas; o per sanc le qual flueys de vena o de arceria segon que es denant dit, o per ventositat coarctada en lu.	 Stomachache from a blockage in the umbilical vein or artery (due to a tear), constipation causing intestinal obstruction, or from a narrowed section of the intestine itself.
Mays si es per fissura del ciphac e per yssiment de la tela, lahoras la color del apostema es semblant a la color del cors; e es leon ses dolor, e aprop appar de divers situament.	 The pain may be due to a tear in the diaphragm and pain spreading through the surface of the body, causing the skin over it to appear pale or white like the body's color; this may also indicate pain spreading from there
E si es per egressio del budel, lahoras le situament de aquel am lu de aquo que havem recontat, de mays vehement diversitat, e cum tu premes aquel am les tieus ditz es occultat, e aprop retorna; e fort leu es am lu so, e es magnificat mot deves le introt de banh e vehement trebalh.	 If it is due to the intestine coming out (hernia), you will know that situation from here as described earlier, in many cases there are different pains and sensations; if you press on this area too much, it may cause intense pain and swelling of the abdomen.
Mays si per humiditat, lahoras es leon e no es occultat quan premes am la tua ma, ni es constrengut, ni es cregut.	 The pain may be due to moisture (inflammation), but it won't stop if you press on the area with your hand or feel for anything inside; there is no feeling of constriction or fullness.
E si es per sanc, lahoras am aquestz senhals apareys le apostema a negror declinant.	 If it is due to an obstruction (obstruction), the pain may spread over the surface and appear black as the skin darkens.
Mays si es per carn nada, lahoras es apostema greu, gros e dur, e es ficat segon una quantitat.	 The pain may be due to a piece of flesh being caught or trapped inside, it is very hard, heavy, and feels like something stuck in place; if you try to remove it without knowing what exactly is there, the sensation can spread over the body and cause intense pain.
Mays si es per ventositat, lahoras le tocament de lu es leon.	 When joints are affected by cold humors, doctors call it gout
E la operacio en lu es que consideras lahoras si la eminencia de l’umbilic es per sanc de arceria, o de vena, o per ventositat; lahoras cove que sias prohibit de la curacio de lu, quar en aquela es temor e paor ayssi cum t’e ensenhat en le capitol en le qual he dit les apostemas per arceria e per vena.	 If the abscess is located in the groin region or vein location, doctors caution to avoid treatment of that area as it carries a risk and could lead to more serious consequences if not properly attended to
E si la eminencia del umbilic es per le budel o per la tela, lahoras cove que comandes al malaute que tengua le ale sieu, e sia stant extendut; e aprop senha am tenta en le circuit de tot le umbilic, e aprop comanda a lu que stia envers entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e aprop circunda am spatum lat en le circuit del umbilic sobre le loc le qual has senhat am la tenta; e aprop exten la maytat del apostema a las partidas desus am unci gran; e aprop lia en le circuit am fiel fort o am ceda e la manieyra del liar decent.	 If the abscess is located in the groin region or in the abdominal wall, doctors instruct the patient to keep it intact as much as possible, and extend their arm over that area towards the other side of their body so they can monitor for any signs of leakage, also instructing them to gently press on the abdomen to feel if there are any contractions.
E aprop huebre le mieg del apostema extendut sobre le liament e intromet le dit tieu en aquel indic e quereys le budel; e si tu l’as atrobat ni guardat per le liament, lahoras tu extratz alxorati e impelleys le budel a las partidas dedintz del ventre.	 If you miss the abscess and it doesn't leak, doctors instruct to squeeze as hard as possible to try to get rid of it and urge them to press firmly on their abdomen to feel for any contractions that may indicate leakage.
E si has atrobada la tela, lahoras pren aquel am unci; e inscideys las superfluitatz de lu.	 If you find the abscess, doctors instruct to pick it up and examine its contents.
Mays si es contraria a tu arceria o vena, lahoras circunda aquel mot, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio; e pren dos agulhas e met en aquelas dos fiels fortz e entromet dos agulhas en le circuit le qual has feyt entorn le apostema en manieyra de crotz, las quals fassas penetrar; e aprop strenh le apostema en quatre partidas sobre las agulhas.	 If it is contrary to the artery or vein, doctors caution you and instruct to redo your procedure using two needles placed in opposite corners of the area where you punctured it, making sure that both needles penetrate, then stretch the abscess over them four times.
E si tu vols, osta las agulhas e leyssa le loc entro que poyresca la carn extenduda e caia per si; o inscideys aquel quan es subtiliat e se poyreys, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	 "When you wish to, cut the skin and let it bleed freely so that all the fat can be removed easily; or if there is a suspicion of any internal disease, make an incision in such a way as to drain out the entrails.
E si la eminencia del ombilic es de carn nada en lu o per humiditat, lahoras cove que tu conquaves le apostema ayssi cum havem dit e estraguas le sanc o la humiditat, la qual atrobas en lu, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove e que consolide le loc.	 "If the prominence of the belly is caused by fat and not moisture, then doctors advise to cut through it as before, or if there are signs of dampness, drain off that too, and close up the wound.
Capitol .liii.	 The third book of the Capitularies
De curacio de cranc.	 About care for a wound
Ja havem dit, en la divisio, de specia de cranc e en qual manieyra es via a la curacio de lu am medicinas, e que es squivador en lu la curacio am ferr per so que no sia ulcerat; e havem dit cranc engendrat en la mayra e cautela de la curacio de lu.	 We have said that in the division of care for a wound and how to approach it from medical practices, which is important when carrying out such care because not all wounds are ulcers; we have also mentioned the generation of new wounds through excessive caution in caring for them.
E diyssero les antics que alcunas veguadas cranc es en loc on es possibla la eradicacio de lu, ayssi cum de cran le qual es en las mamillas o en la coyssa e a lor semblantz dels membres allocat a estrayre tot aquel, e majorment quan es comensant petit.	 Whenever old wounds are found in locations where it is possible to eradicate them, as well as when they appear on the breasts or buttocks and any other part of the body that can be reached with ease, especially if they occur first thing in the morning
Mays quan es antiquat e es gra, no cove que te propries a lu, quar yeu non pogui sanar de aquel alcu ni no he vist autre, ni que sia pervengut ad aquo.	 If it is old and large, do not attempt to remove it, because if you cannot heal from this wound or prevent further damage, do nothing about it.
E la operacio en lu es quan es allocat ayssi cum havem dit, es que tu precedescas e laysses le malaute e purgues de colera negra alcunas veguadas, e aprop sagna aquel, si es atrobada replecio manifesta.	 The operation is when it is inserted like this as we have said, you precede and loosen the ulcerated flesh with cold water jets some vegetables, and then proceed to that place if found clearly manifested.
E aprop prepara le malaute am preparacio en le qual sia locat am operacio, e aprop prohiceys en le trauc uncis les quals cove ad aquel; e aprop concava de tota part am la codena sego bona perexcrutacio entro que no romangua alcuna causa de las razitz de lu.	 Then prepare the ulcerated flesh for the operation, and proceed to that place where you were previously directed; then focus on a thorough examination of all parts until nothing remains unexplained in the causes of this disease.
E layssa correr le sanc, e no abscidas aquel leugierament, e exprem les locs, e abstergeys le sanc gros tot am la tua ma o am instrument am le qual es a tu possible dels instruments.	 Then loosen the sutures and remove them gradually, examine all places, and treat with the largest possible ointment or instrument that may be among your instruments.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat de sanc gros inscizio de vena o de arceria, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que·l flux del sanc sia cessat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	 If it is necessary to make incisions of vein or artery, the ulcers will be burned until the flow of blood has ceased, and then treat as before with another treatment.
Capitol .liv.	 Afterwards.
De curacio de ydropici.	 The treatment for dropsy.
Nos ja havem recomtat, en la divisio, de las specias de ydropici de l’aygua, e les senhals de quascuna especia, de la curacio de lu am medicinas.	 We have recommended in the division of dropsy from water and the necks of each species, to treat with medicines.
E aquela la qual es curada am ferr no es sino la specia de althitas sola, e no es aproximat am ferr a la specia de timpanistres ni a la especia de yposarcha, quar aquo es mortal.	 And that which is treated by burning alone is the species of madness only, and it's not recommended to treat the species of tinnitus or hydrophobia because this would be fatal.
E quan tu ja has medicat aquesta especia de ydropici timpanistre am medicinas e no comfereys la tua medicacio, lahoras considera, quar si al malaute ja es conseguida debelitat, o es am aquel autra malautia otra ydropici, ayssi cum si es en lu tos o cos de ventre e semblant ad aquels, lahoras guarda te que no le mediques am ferr, quar temor es sobre aquo.	 "When you have already applied the specific diuretic medicine and it does not interfere with your treatment, the doctor considers that a bladder infection has occurred or another urinary tract infection is present, so if this is in the abdomen area as well.
Mays si tu vezes le malaute de vertut exuberant, e am lu no es autra malautia sino ydropici tant solament, e no enfant ni vielh, lahoras la manieyra de la operacio de lu es que tu eleves le malaute entre las tuas mas, e le ministre aprop lu exprema le ventre de lu am la sua ma, enpellen la aygua a la partida dejos del pentenilh, e aprop pren spatum spinos segon aquesta forma:	 "If the bladder is bursting with urine and there are no other infections present, only urinary tract infection symptoms appear in this way.
sia de dos partz agudas lonc, de aguda extremitat ayssi cum spatum; mays empero sia en lu alcuna brevitat petit a petit, per so que en la operacio am aquel no passes entro al budel, e que ledas aquel.	 "In this case, the operation will be performed in two parts: first, an acute extremity and second, an acute point of approach.
E aprop considera si la generacio de ydropici es de part dels budels, quar lahoras cove que tu am la seccio te alonhes del ombelic per la quantitat de tres ditz a las partidas dejos, en le dreyt de lu sobre le pentenilh.	 "Consider that the cause of the urinary tract infection may be from both kidneys and also note that doctors often take three samples to determine whether it is in fact an infection or something else.
Mays si la generacio de hydropici es per malautia del fietge, lahoras la tua seccio sia sinistra del ombilic per tres ditz.	 "If the cause of urinary tract infection is due to kidney disease, doctors often take three samples from the left side of the abdomen.
E si la generacio de lu es per la melsa, lahoras la tua seccio sia en le las dreyt.	 "If it's due to some other cause, then doctors will typically take three samples on the right side of the abdomen.
E no cove que la tua seccio sia sobre le costat sobre le qual vol jaser le malaute per que no corron las superfluitatz ad aquel loc freul.	 The first sentence translates to: "Do not place your section on the side that will hold back the patient, as it may cause too much tension there.
E aprop perfora am le instrument tota la codena, e aprop entromet en aquela seccio, e eleva la tua ma am le spatum entre la codena e·l siphac, e tu excorja aquel; e si’ la quantitat de una ungla o enviro.	 The second sentence translates to: "Put the instrument all the way in and then move into that section, placing your hand between the incision site and a flap of skin, you should elevate it and then remove it. If one flap is sufficient or not.
E aprop perforo le ciphac entro que pervengua le spatum al loc vuoyt, e es loc de l’aygua.	 The third sentence translates to: "Put the tissue between the incision site and a flap of skin that extends beyond it, as it is located at the edge.
E aprop extratz aquel e entromet un instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	 The fourth sentence translates to: "Then retract this one and move an instrument whose shape is like this...
e es semblant a canula de argent subtil; es fayt de argent o de eram o de lato leon, al qual en la partida pus bassa de lu es un petit trauc, e en les costatz de lu so tres traucs: dos de una partida e un del autra partida; e fayta es la extremitat de lu insciza segon la manieyra de pluma, ayssi cum vezes:	 The fifth sentence translates to: "...its shape is like a fine needle. It can be made of silver or iron or lead, at which in the beginning it is a small trap, and on its sides there are three traps: two from one side and one from another side; and this extremity is fixed by placing your hand over it, as shown below.
E en la extramitat de lu pus sobirana es armilla, quar quan le instrument perve al aygua, lahoras aquela tantost deysen sobre le instrument, donc evacua de l’aygua en la ora miega quantitat, quar si tu evacuas de aquela mes que no cove en la hora, fort leu mor le malaute per resolucio del sieu spirit animal, o accideys a lu cincopi que es appropinquada la mort.	 In the extremity of it where there is a small trap when the instrument penetrates water, the hand should be placed over the instrument to remove it from the water as quickly as possible, because if you do not evacuate it in time, then severe pain may occur for the patient due to inflammation of their internal organs, or you might die within five minutes.
Mays evacua de aquela segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu e segon que significan a tu las disposicios del malaute de la vertut del pols de lu e de la bontat de lu.	 "Firstly, remove from that quantity of the virtue of him and secondly what they mean by the disposition of the patient in terms of the goodness of him.
E aprop extrats le instrument, e rete l’aygua la qual causa es quar tantost es retenguda per la codena la qual rete le trauc que es sobre le ciphac del qual e recomtat a tu que perfores aquel segon aquela manieyra.	 "Then take the instrument and apply water that caused it to be kept hidden by a seal which seals over the place where they recommend you to perform this second time.
E aprop itera le instrument al autra dia si vezes le malaute tollerant aquo, e extratz de la aygua petita quantitat, e fay aquo per alcus jorns sobre temor, e guarda te de error entro que no romangua de l’aygua sino pauc.	 "Then apply the instrument on that day if you are able to tolerate it, and extract a small amount of water, and do so for many days until it subsides, keeping your hand out of water unless it is very little.
Mays si tu temes sobre le malaute, e leyssas de l’aygua gran quantitat, lahoras cura aquel am sepultura en arena cauda, e mota suzor en banh, e al solelh espere per lonc temps; e cura aquel am medicinas dessicativas entro que sia sanat.	 "If you are worried about the patient, let them drink large amounts of water and cure that by immersing their feet in a bucket full of sand, wiping it with cloth, and exposing it to sunlight for some time; and cure the dry medicine when they are thirsty.
E cauteriza sobre le stomac, e la melsa e·l fitge aprop la extraccio de l’aygua, segon que yeu he recontat en aquo que es precedit.	 "Burns above the stomach and gently apply water extraction after applying this medicine as mentioned before.
Capitol .lv.	 "End of text
De la curacio dels enfants les quals so natz les locs de la urina no-perforatz.	 "The care for children who have not learned the paths to urine retention.
Alcunas veguadas alcun dels enfantz es eyssi del ventre de la sua mayre e·l cap de la sua mixtio no es perforat (o es trauc streyt o no es en son loc).	 "Some vegetables should not be given to children whose belly button and head are not cleaned, or if the hole is blocked, the stool will come out very hard.
Donc cove coytar am perforacio de lu tantost que es nascut am spatum mot subtil segon aquesta forma:	 The surgeon's knife must be so sharp that it cuts through a small piece of flesh smoothly.
E aprop pausa en le trauc un clavil subtil de plom e ligua aquel, e te per tres jorns o per .iiii.tre.	 After pausing briefly on the point to bind it tightly, and then for three days or more...
E quant vol urinar sia remaugut e hurine; e aprop retorne aquel.	 When urine is excreted, return
E si tu no pauses le plom, ja es possible que la urina la qual va sobre le loc, no leysa aquest claure.	 If you do not pause the point, it may be that the urine which has been over the area does not allow this hole to open.
Mays aquel del qual le trauc es streyt sia medicat am clavil de Plom, ayssi cum havem dit, per trops dias entro que sia amplificat.	 The surgeon will use a smaller blade for making this cut, as mentioned before, and it may take days or more to be fully amplified.
Mays aquels en les quals es le trauc no en son loc, so leditz, la qual causa es quar de aquels, aquel que es nat e·l trau es deves la fi del cap de la vergua per que no pot urinar a las partidas dedintz, entro que eleva la vergua am la sua ma a las partidas desus; e no es a lu generacio, per so quar le sperma no pot pervenir a la mayre segon rectitut, e es malautia mot laga.	 The ones whose urethra is obstructed by this cut will have difficulty urinating at the opening of the day, and it is necessary to elevate the vagina with your hand over that area during urination in order for semen not to come out when ejaculating from the anus.
E la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que·l malaute sia envessat sobre le sieu dos, e aprop exten le cap de la vergua de lu am la tua ma sinistra am vehement extraccio, e inscideys le cap del cap de la vergua del loc del perpucii am spatum agut, ayssi cum es inscizio de pluma, o que tu ne razas alcuna partida, per so que·l mieg de lu vengua semblant al cap de la vergua e que le trauc caia en le mieg loc segon que cove.	 The procedure's method is that the patient is seated over their own back, and you extend your left arm towards the vagina to insert it gently into the vagina while holding tightly with both hands.
E guarda te que en la tua operacio de flux de sanc, quar motas vetz accideys aquo; e pausa te a lu am aquo que abscindeys le sanc, e cura la plagua entro que si’ sanada.	 "In your operation for bleeding from the vein, where are the veins located? And do you stop the bleeding and treat the wound if it is healed?
Capitol .lvi.	 "The sixth letter 'I' in Latin.
De albater le qual accideys en le prepucii en le cap de la vergua e de corropcio e negror e adherencia del prepucii del cap de la vergua.	 "Remove the part of the brain that causes headaches and dizziness, and increase blood circulation to the head.
Motas veguadas accideys aquest albater en la vergua e es eminencia de carn laga.	 "The vein causing this pain is in the neck; sensation of numbness in the arm.
E de aquela una es maligna e autra es no-maligna.	 "If it is malignant, and if not, what should be done?
No-maligna, cove que suspendas am unci subtil e abscindas aquela entro que aquela mondes tota; e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto submirgit en enguent egipciac; e aprop aquel, cura le am enguent diafinicon entro que sia sanat.	 "If it is not malignant, then apply a subtle incision to remove it entirely, and place your hand over the affected area to prevent any further damage or infection. Then treat the affected area with medication until it heals.
E si albater es maligna, de lega color, lahoras cove que tu aministres cauteri aprop la inscizio de lu e la razio de lu.	 "If it is malignant then call for a surgeon and let them perform the incision and remove it.
Mays si albater es en le prepuci del cap de la vergua no-circumcis, e la una partida de albater es dedintz le prepucii e l’autra partida es defora, lahoras cove que tu ostes albater le qual es dedintz al comensament entro que es consolidat; e lahora tu cura aquel deforo, quar quan tu curas aquel ensemps le prepuci, no es asegurat que no sia trinquat.	 "If the vein is in the neck and not circumcised, and if its removal leads to healing immediately after it's removed, but there's a chance of recurrence; then cure that recurrence by treating the previous wound until you heal.
E ja eysamen accideys en les genetius e en le prepuci negror e corruccio, adonc cove que tu conquavas tot aquo que ja es denigrat e que ja se vol corrompre o que ja es corrumput; e aprop lineys sobre aquel aprop aquo am mel, le qual es contusit am farina de scorsa de milgrana e de errs trissatz e crivellatz.	 "When one or both testicles are inflamed and sore inside the scrotum, if you want to treat it with harsh means and want it to be corrupted or ruined; do put a line on that place so as not to let it mix with any other parts of the body.
E aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sana.	 "Do apply another treatment, if necessary, in order for it to be healthy.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, lahoras aministra cauteri lunar segon aquesta forma:	 If you have an abscess that needs drainage, the doctor may administer a caustic therapy.
quar cauteri juvatiu es a dos disposicios ensemps, so es a flux de sanc e a la plagua quan es corrumpuda.	 A young man has two remedies at his disposal; one is for abscesses and the other is for ulcers when they become corrupted.
E si le cap de la vergua es corrodut e es destruit tot en la hora, lahoras cove que tu intrometas en lo meat del prepucii una canula de plom per so que le malaute urina per aquela.	 If the tip of the vein is corrupted and destroyed at that moment, it may be necessary to insert a needle through the anus in order for the patient's urine to pass from there.
En la adherencia del prepucii am le cap de la vergua (et aquesta adherencia no accideys sino en aquel del qual le prepucii es sa, e sobre lu no es exhigida circumcizio; e quan accideys adherencia per plagua o per apostema) cove que excorjas am spatum obtus entro que sia dissolvut le liament e sia deliurat le cap de la vergua de tota partida.	 When the adhesion between the veins of the penis (and this adhesion should not occur in those where the penis is soft, and over it no circumcision is required; and when adhesion occurs through a fistula or abscess) you must excise all the adhesions that are dissolved and deliver the tip of the vein completely.
E si es dificil desirnir aquelas exquisidament, lahoras cove que tu excorjes am spatum alcuna causa del cap de la vergua e del prepucii, e aysso es quar le prepucii, quan es subtil, fort leu es perforat per la sua subtilitat leugierament.	 If it is difficult to remove them completely, the doctor may excise any cause from the vein and penis, so that they are separated; as well, when the penis is soft and easily perforated by its own fragility.
E aprop separa entre·l prepucii e·l cap de la vergua am dra7 de li subtil, le qual ja es mulhat en l’aygua frega per que no adherescan autra veguada.	 Between the anus and the head of the vagina, there is a small hole through which urine may sometimes leak if it is not covered properly
E aprop sia curat am vi stiptic entro que sia consolidat.	 It should be maintained as tightly sealed as possible.
Capitol .lvii.	 VII
De mundificacio dels enfants e de la curacio de aquo que accideys ad aquels de circumcisio.	 To circumcise children and the care of that which happens around the time of circumcision.
Circumcisio no es solucio de continuitat ayssi cum las autras plaguas: mays empero cum sia de la nostra operacio e de nostra voluntat, e lus de aquela sia propriament en les enfants, es necessari que asignem en aquela milhor operacio e via pus leugiera perdusent a salut.	 Circumcision is not the solution for longevity or to prevent these plagues: but if it is part of our operation and our will, and if they are performed in children, then we need to assign this as our best operation because otherwise there would be great difficulty finding doctors who agree with us on health.
Donc dic que les antics no diyssero circumcisio en alcu dels lors libres, quar no n’usan en las suas leys, e no es sino quar havem aquisit per speriment, la qual causa es que yeu he atrobat la major partida dels artifexs e dels barbies usar circumcisir e mundificacio am novacula e am torores; e usan de liament am fiel e de inscizio am la ungla.	 Therefore, I say that the ancients would not circumcise in free persons because it is not used in their laws and only because of experimentation, which causes this to be a major part of circumcision and mutilation at new and young; they use faith and obedience as a constant companion.
E yeu ja he prohadas totas aquestas manieras e no atrobegui milhor mondificacio am forfexs, am liament am fiel que en mondificacio cum la ungla, quar motas vetz efugeys la codena pus desus, quar la codena del prepucii a dos tunicas, e roman la tonica pus dejos, e fort leu es forsat ad autra inscizio e dolor sicura.	 And you already have forbidden all these manners and not allowed the best circumcision with faith, because it is sure that the urethra will never be blocked by anything except two rings; it seals both the top of the prepuce to two tunics, covers the tone inside with a soft membrane, and is very light so as not to cause any other injury or pain.
E am mundificacio le qual es fayta per alphecati, e es digital, del qual usan les sabatiers, no es segurada la inscizio de la extremitat del membre viril, quar fort leu intra en le trau de lu.	 When the opening of the urethra is painful and urgent, it can be dangerous to the genital member, as the urine may flow too fast into the bladder.
Mays en la operacio am ungla, fort leu obazeys ferr e corromp la tua operacio.	 During the operation, you must stay still and prevent any movement that could harm or contaminate your surgery.
E la codena del enfant es breu per natura, e motas veguadas nays en tal manieyra que no ha necessitat de mondificacio, e yeu he vist aquel.	 A baby's cry is short by nature and usually stops within a few minutes without any medical need for catheterization, unless otherwise indicated
Mays de la mondificacio que·s fa am forfexs e liamentz am fiel, la bontat, experiment descrobic a mi, quar las forfexs so de proporcional inscizio, per aquo quar la acuitat que es desus es ayssi cum la acuitat que es dejos; e donc cum tu premes la tua ma so proporcionadas dos acuitatz, e inscideysso segon una comperacio en un temps; e es fayta compressio del fiel am figura contenent la codena de la vergua de tota partida, am le qual no catz error de tot.	 When making a catheterization that goes through the urethra and prostate gland, it is important to use an appropriately sized catheter so as not to cause any unnecessary damage or injury, as the pain experienced should correspond with the pain of urination; additionally, if you pre-measure your urine output before starting the process, it can be done in one time period. The compression cuff on the penis contains a hole for the urethra and its contents, preventing it from coming out accidentally.
E la manieyra de la operacio primeyra es que tu fassas estar le enfant majorment si es de aquels que entendo un petit, que no fassas sino que tu lies le fiel en la sua vergua tant solament, e que leysses aquel entro al autra dia.	 The first priority of the operation is to ensure that you stay still and only apply the catheter gently into the urethra without causing any damage or injury; it should then be left in place for another day.
E aprop fay aquel alegrar en tota aquela manieyra que es a tu possibla de aquo que recep la sua intelligencia.	 The most important thing to remember during this procedure is that it's up to your discretion on how to perform it, so please exercise your intelligence in order to achieve the best possible result.
E aprop fa aquel estar entre las tuas mas estatuir preparadament, e no sia ges cezent; e occulta las forfexs en la tua ma o dejos le tieu pe, que l’enfant no veia aquelas ni degun autre dels instruments.	 In order for your preparation to be complete and not cause any discomfort, it is recommended that you place a cushion between the buttocks, do not let them touch each other; and also cover up the fingers in your hand or put a bandage on the foot so that the child will not see those or anything else of the instruments.
E aprop entremet la tua ma a la vergua de lu e suffla en la codena, e tira aquela entro que sia eyssit le cap de la vergua, e aprop mondifica aquel de aquo que es agregat en ela de sordicia.	 Between your hand and the vagina of her, blow on it gently; pull it out so that its head is outside, and arrange it in such a way as to make it hard when excited.
E aprop lia le loc signat am fiel dobla, e aprop ligua pus bas de aquel un petit le segon liament, e aprop te am le dit pous e endic tieu le loc del liament dejos am bona retencio, e inscideys entre dos liaments.	 In a double loop bind the upper part of your wrist firmly to it; then tighten the lower part with a second rope slightly less tightly than you tied the first one, and attach that last knot securely between two loops, making sure they are parallel.
E aprop eleva la codena sus leugierament e estratz le cap de la vergua; e aprop leyssa le sanc corre petit e petit, quar es milhor ; e pausa polvera desus e sobre la polvera pausa drap en le qual es spandut mugol de huou coyt en ayguaros concosit am oli rozat recent bo; e layssa aquel sobre aquel entro al autra dia; e cura aquel am curacio entro que sia sanat.	 After blowing gently on her vagina, remove it from its cavity; and slowly pull the penis out a little by little until it is fully erect; pause slightly to allow lubrication, over the lubricated pause place another pause before it so that tomorrow you can do this again comfortably, without pain or discomfort. And keep doing this every day for health purposes.
La forma de las forfexs a mondificacio, aquesta es la forma:	 The way to make fingers move is as follows:
Sian las unas extramitatz no-talhantz e las autras sian talhant, que non sia yssit le ram del clau, e sia la longitut de las doas acuitatz ayssi cum la longitut de dos manubres engualment.	 The fingers should alternate between touching and not touching, so that the length of their stroke is as the same as the length of two thumbs together.
Mays la error en mundificacio es quar fort leu efugeys la codena intrinseca tota, o partida de lu deves la inscizio.	 When there is a mistake in the making of the intrinsic coding that cannot be resolved or is missing altogether, it has to be programmed anew.
Donc cove que tu extendas aquela de la tua hora am la tua ungla denant la apostemacio del loc e que inscidas aquela segon equalitat.	 Then go on extending the amount of time until you reach your target heart rate and continue taking breaks at regular intervals.
E si no la podes tenir am la tua ungla, lahoras extratz aquela am unci e inscideys aquela.	 If you can't hold it for as long as your target heart rate, extend the break and take that one instead.
Mays si son passatz tres dias, e roman aquo que es imflat dejos la vergua apostemat, lahoras tu leyssa aquo entro que sia cedat le apostema caut, e excorja aquel am fecilitat, e inscidex aquel segon que a tu es preparat.	 If it takes more than three days to flatten the bruise and you notice that it's healing slowly, then go ahead with applying the ointment, as it is the most effective one, and use this instead of the others once you are prepared.
E guarda te del cap de la vergua, quar no nosera a lu aquo.	 And remember to cover your bruise from head to toe so that nothing else can be seen above it.
E donc cura aquel am aquo que la plagua consolida de las polveras las quals havem recomtadas en le tractat de las polveras.	 Then use the ointment as described in the chapter on powders for healing your bruise.
E si es inscidit de la codena sobre mesura, e obezeys a las partidas desus, aquo no notz a lu.	 If it is missing from the coding that you have mentioned and misses out the parts thereof, then don't worry about it at all.
E mays cura aquel am aquo que havem dit entro que sia sanat.	 Then use the ointment as described in what I said was healing for it.
Capitol .lviii.	 The Eighth Capital
De curacio de urina retenguda en la vesiqua.	 For urinary retention, you should seek treatment from a urologist.
Retencio de urina en la vesica es fayta per oppulacio fayta per peyra o per sanc congilat, o per poyre o per carnada, e semblantz ad aquels de aquo que havem dit de las manieyras de curacio en la divisio.	 Urinary retention can be treated through various methods such as urethral dilation or catheterization (introducing a catheter into the bladder), or even pouching and skinning, according to what I mentioned in that section on urination care division.
E si no es dissolvuda la urina, e veses retencio de lu esser per peyra le qual ja es en le col de la vesica, lahoras cove que le malaute sia encorbat sobre les sieus denolhs.	 When the bladder is not emptied and urine remains in the urethra that enters at the bottom of the bladder, doctors say that the patient should beat their chest to stimulate urination.
E aprop conponeys les pes de aquel sobre le sieu dos e extendas le sieu ventre de la partida pus desus del sieu dos, e le malaute estrengua le sieu ale tant quant es a lu possible.	 Put the patient on their back and extend their legs to expose their feet from the start of your examination.
Donc lahoras le col de la vesica es costreyt ha espulsio de la peyra a las partidas detras, per que la urina es absolta.	 After emptying the bladder, doctors instruct you to press on the urethra at the bottom of the bladder in order to expel it from behind.
E si no es dissolvuda am aquo que havem dit he vehement es fayta la causa sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que aministres extraccio de lu am instrument le qual es apelat siringua, del qual aquesta es la forma: Sia de argent e sia subtil leon conquau, ayssi cum canula de pena de ausel am subtilitat de ray lonc en similitut d’un palm e mig, al qual sia cana subtil en le cap de lu.	 If it is not caused by what we have already mentioned above, then the doctors advise to apply a syringe made of silver and fine thread with a very small opening at its tip, which resembles a tiny finger in shape; this needle should be inserted into the urethra gently, ensuring that it does not cause any pain.
E la manieyra del eyssiment de la urina per aquel es que prenguas le fiel doblat e lies en la extramitat de lu lana o coto per bona liadura; e entrometas las extramitatz del fiel en la partida dejos de la ciringua, e inscideys am las forfexs si superflueys alcuna causa de la lana, mays intromet la en la canula am vehemencia E aprop enongeys la ciringua am boder e am album de huou.	 The procedure for emptying the bladder is to gently insert a syringe made of silver and fine thread into it in the outer part or hole of its opening, near where urine comes out; after inserting it, you should remove the needle from inside the urethra, making sure not to cause any pain.
E fay cezer le malaute sobre la selha, e embroca la vesiqua de lu e la vergua am olis umitz, e oli de oliva e ayguaros.	 When you have finished examining all of the patient's relevant organs and areas, such as their bladder and urethra, you should lubricate them with olive oil to ease any friction or pain that may occur during your examination.
E aprop entromet la ciringua am facilitat entro que pervengua a la razit de la vergua; e aprop dobla la vergua desus a la partida del embelic; e aprop empelleys la ciringua dintz aquela; e aprop empelleys aquela entro que pervengua a la vesica, e aquela centa le malaute esser pervenguda a la causa vuoda, e no es fayt asso segon aquest orde, sino le meat en le qual va a tortuositat.	 When you put the catheter into the vagina, make it as soft as possible to prevent stretching of the urethra; then gently pull out the vagina and place it on that side; then carefully insert the catheter into the bladder, ensuring it does not touch the prostate gland; finally, secure the catheter by pulling both sides.
E aprop exten le fiel am la lana petit a petit, quar la urina siec la lana.	 When putting in a urinary catheter, make sure to do it slowly and steadily, as urine can damage the urethra.
Aprop extratz aquela e fay per curacio urina, e usa ciringua, no cesses fer aquo e usa ciringua entro que sia evacuada la vesica e le malaute atrobe alleviacio.	 When inserting a urinary catheter and using it to empty the bladder, ensure that you do not push or force urine out; instead use the catheter gently to remove any blockage in the urethra, as well as to relieve any discomfort in the patient's bladder.
Capitol .lix.	 [No translation is possible based on the information provided.]
De qualitat de clisterizacio de la vezica am clampcedra e am semblantz instrumentz les quals sian acordants ad aquo.	 The clamping of the vesicae and similar instruments that are agreed upon for this purpose should be applied at this time.
Quan accideys en la vesica ulceracio o apostema, o sanc congilat en aquela, o es coartat poyredura, e vols en aquela destillar ayguas e medicinas, lahoras sia fayt am instrument le qual es apelat clampcedra, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	 When vesica ulcer occurs or when a stone is stuck in it, or if there's any obstruction due to cancer, then you should use the tool called the clamping device; this is its form.
sino que en la extramitat de lu es sorda, so es clausa.	 However, if there are no sounds outside of that area, it means closed off.
Et en aquela so tres traucs: dos de la una partida , ayssi quo vezes.	 In addition to the other two mentioned above, one is from the urethra and another comes from the bladder itself; in this case, they are both present.
En le comensament es loc concau, en le qual es aquo que es enpellit, e sia segon quantitat que oppile aquel, ses addicio, entro que quan alcuna causa es ab aquel tirada de las humiditatz, sia atirada, e quan es expellida, am aquo sia atirada, e quan es expellit lonc, segon que fa clampcedra am la qual es phicat naphta en las batalhas de mar.	 The first sentence translates to "In the beginning of this location there is a thing that inflames and increases in quantity.
Donc cum tu vols prohicir humiditatz en la vesica, entromet la extremitat de clapcedra en la humiditat, e atira am aquel aquo que es empellit a las partidas desus, quar la humiditat es atirada en la conquavitat de clapcedra.	 To pour out the humors from the bladder, insert the urethral tip into the moisture of the clitoral area and pull it back to remove the humors in the vagina.
E aprop entromet la extramitat de clapcedra en la vergua segon que havem recomtat en la ciringua; e aprop empelleys la humiditat am aquo que empelleys, quar aquela humiditat perve a la vesica tantost, e le malaute cent aquela.	 Insert the urethral tip into the vagina after you've suggested in the urethra, and then pull it back to pour out the humors as they move towards the bladder, so that the moisture does not go back into the vagina.
Forma del cristeri subtil am le qual la vesica es cristerizada, e es aquela la forma:	 The urethral tip is inserted gently at the point where the bladder is opened, and it should be like this.
E sia fayta de argent o de lato, de la qual le cap pus aut sia semblant a petita pluma, e dejos lu cana dedintz liament.	 It can be made of silver or gold with the shape of a small feather, and it is used to insert into the urethra gently.
E aprop pren vesica de moto, e pausa en aquela la humiditat que vols cristirizar en la vesica, e aprop lia aquela entre dos am fort liguatura am fiel doble, e escalfa aquela humiditat sobre le foc.	 After introducing it into the bladder, pause in that moisture you want to pour out of the bladder, and then gently pull this between two fingers with a firm double grip, so as to pour the moisture over the flame.
E aprop entromet la extremitat del cristeri en la vergua.	 Insert the urethral tip into the vagina.
E aprop estrenh la tua ma sobre la vesica am la humiditat am strectura descent entro que·l malaute centa que aquela humiditat ja es pervenguda a la vesica.	 "The servant is to place his hands on the bladder, to apply moisture and stretch it inside until the urine is released from the bladder.
Mays si a tu no es present vesica, lahoras tu pren una pessa de parguames e fay de aquel cercle; e perfora aquel de tota la sua retonditat; e aprop entromet fiel fort en aquels traucs, ayssi quo so revolgut; e aprop agregua le cercle ayssi quo es agreguat alsofatur, pus que tu pausas en aquel aquo que tu vols de las humiditatz, e olis e ayguas.	 "If the bladder is not present, then you will take a sponge and place it in that circle; and perform all of its roundness; and firmly press into these troughs as well, so that they are rolled up; and add to the circle as if you added fat, unless you pause on this part where you want to apply the moisture.
E aprop tu lia aquel en le instrument e fay am aquel ayssi cum has fayt am la vesica, e exprescio am la tua ma entro que la humiditat pervengua a la vesica.	 "Then place it in an instrument and apply it as you did with the bladder, expressing that the moisture is penetrating into the bladder.
Capitol .lx.	 "The end of this medical treatise.
De extraccio de peyra.	 Translation: From the conclusion of this text
Nos ja havem dit en la divisio las specias de peyra e curacio de lu am medicinas, e la diferencia entre peyra engendrada en los ronhos e peyra engendrada en la vesica, e les senhals de aquela.	 "We have now discussed the varieties of urine and its causes in both the lungs and bladder, as well as their symptoms.
E havem dit la peyra en la qual catz operacio am ma, e seccio.	 "Now we will discuss the surgical operation for urine.
E la peyra engendrada en la vesica propriament es aquela que es ficada en la vesica.	 "The urine caused in the bladder is called vesicular stones.
E yeu so narrant aquel am exposicio manifesta e abreviacio.	 "So we present this information briefly and succinctly.
Donc dic que peyra engendrada en la vesica majorment ve als enfantz; e dels senhals de lu es que la urina que es eyssida de la vesica es semblant a aygua en la sua subtilitat, e apar en aquela arena; e le malaute fregua la sua vergua, e motas veguadas pen, e aprop es dressada; e am aquo yeys foro le cul en motz de aquels.	 "The urine caused in the bladder is usually accompanied by children and its symptoms are similar to water in its subtlety, appearing as such on that surface; and the patient becomes distressed, vomiting, and froths at the mouth, while urine is coming out.
E es laugiera la sanacio dels enfants de aquela entro que han conseguitz xiiii ans; e es dificil curacio en les viels.	 The first sentence translates to: "We are going to treat children who have reached 14 years old, as it is a difficult treatment in childhood.
Mays en les joves es migiera per aquo quar es entre aquels.	 In young people, gout can be mild due to the proximity of these two things:
E de aquel del qual la peyra es major e la curacio es pus leugiera; E si es pauca, es contraria ad aquela.	 The first statement translates to "in those where the attacks are frequent and treatment is more challenging.
Donc cum pervenem a la curacio de aquela, cove al comensament de aquela que mondifiquem le malaute am cristeri le qual extragua tota la fenda la qual es en les sieus budels; quar aquela fenda alcunas veguadas prohibeys la envencio de la peyra deves la inquisicio de lu.	 To begin the treatment of gout, first you must extract all the waste from between the toes that infiltrates it, and then prevent its recurrence by inspecting for any signs of pain in your feet.
E aprop sia pres le malaute am les sieus pes e sia contosit e maugut enjos per so que la peyra descenda al preon de la vesica, o que saute de loc aut alcunas veguadas.	 Then, place the patient on their back and gently massage their legs with warm water to help relieve symptoms of gout.
E aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas preparat, e las mas de lu sian dejos las coysas de lu, per so que la vesica tota sia fayta declinant a las partidas dejos.	 Then place the patient on their back and gently massage their legs with warm water to help relieve symptoms of gout.
E aprop perquier aquela e tota aquela deforo.	 Lastly, apply a poultice made from ground fenugreek seeds mixed with water or honey to the affected area as needed.
Donc si sentes la peyra en l’espazi, lahoras tu te coyta tantost am seccio sobre lu.	 If you feel gout in that space, then apply heat packs on it regularly.
E si no catz de tot dejos le tieu tocament, lahoras cove que tu untes am oli le tieu dit indic de la ma sinistra, si malaute es enfant, o le dit miga si es jove complit, e entrometas aquel en le sieu cul.	 If you don't find relief from all the other treatments mentioned earlier, then apply heat packs to that area as needed and put a finger in its cavity regularly to check for pain or signs of inflammation.
E perquier de la peyra entro que stia dejos le tieu dit.	 When joints are affected by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body
E converteys aquela petit a petit entro al col de la vesica.	 And return the intestine or hernia to its cavity
E aprop prem sobre aquel am lo tieu dit, e expelleys aquel a las partidas defora ves le loc del qual vos la seccio.	 And place your hand over that area, and expel it from where you have opened it
E comanda al ministra que prema la vesica am la sua ma; e comanda a un autra ministra que am la sua ma dextra extenda les genetius a las partidas desus, e am la sua autra ma remaugua la codena la qual es dejos les genetius, en partida del loc en le qual se fa la seccio.	 And order the minister to place his hand on the patient's belly; and command another minister to extend her right hand outward towards the legs, spread them apart slightly from the abdomen as a way of preventing the intestine from coming out, in the area where you make an incision.
E aprop entromet espatum be inscident del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	 And when it comes to making the incision itself, here is how it should be done:
e scindeys en lu aquo que es entre·l cul e·ls genetius, no en le mieg loc, abantz al latz de la coyssa sinistra; e sia la seccio sobre aquela peyra e·l tieu dit sia en le cul, e sia fayta seccio transversa, per que la seccio defora sia ampla e dedintz streyta segon la quantitat que egrecio de la peyra sia a lu possibla, e no major, quar fort leu comprem le tieu dit le qual es en le cul la peyra deves la seccio, e es foro-getada ses defacultat.	 And when making the incision itself between the buttocks and the legs, make it in the lower part of the left thigh; and have the cut over that space as well, and have a transverse cut to prevent the intestine from coming out widely or too much, if necessary, so that no more than necessary.
E sapias que de la peyra es alcuna a la qual so angle e margers, per que le eyssiment de lu es fayt deficil per aquo.	 And be aware that from the intestine itself there is an angle and margin to it, in order to make the effort difficult for you
E de aquela aquo es leon semblant a glan, e es redonda, e es fayt de lu leugier eyssiment.	 From this incision downward, it should be smooth, rounded, and then made into an angle as well, so that the intestine is held in place.
Donc si es aquela al qual so angles e marger, ajusta en la fissura.	 "When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body.
E si no es ayssi foro-getada, lahoras cove que tu engenes sobre aquel, o que strenguas sobre aquel am gesti decentment, la extremitat del qual sia ayssi cum lima am le qual strenguas sobre la peyra, e no evasesca de lu; o que entrometas dejos lu instrument subtil de curvada extremitat.	 "And if it is not a hernia as mentioned earlier, put your hand on the affected part or gently press on that area with the subtle curved instrument.
Mays si tu no podes sobre aquel, lahoras tu amplifica le trauc un petit, e si tu veus flux de sanc, abscindeys en strenh aquel am vitriol trissat.	 "If you cannot press on that area directly, place a small cloth or gauze over the affected part and if you see signs of infection, remove it gently.
Mays si la peyra es mays de una, lahoras al comensament tu impelleys la ma a la boca de la vesica, e aprop inscideys sobre lu; e aprop impelleys un petit aprop aquo; e semblantment fay si son motas mays de doas.	 "If the foot is swollen from swelling or gout attacks, first try pressing on it with your hand to relieve pain at the bladder's mouth and then apply a small compress over that area.
E si es peyra mot gran, lahoras ignorancia es que tu inscidas aquel am gran seccio, quar accideys al malaute una de doas causas: o que mora o que endevengua a lu destillacio de urina continuabla, per aquo quar le loc no es de tot consolidat.	 "If the foot is very swollen and you suspect one of two causes - obstruction or continuous urine leakage - then apply gentle pressure to prevent further damage.
Mays aministra expulcio de lu entro que sia fora-getada, o engenia en la fractura de lu am las forfexs entro que extragua aquela en pessas.	 "If the intestine or hernia is protruding out of its cavity, you should gently push it back into place.
Donc cum tu auras cumplit la tua opperacio, lahoras omple la plagua de enses de aloe e de sanc de drago, e strenh aquel.	 "Once your operation is complete and the dressing has been removed from these areas, gently press down on that area.
E pausa sobre aquel drap enfus en oli e vi, o en oli rozat e aygua frega, per so que apostema caut sia cedat.	 When the body becomes infiltrated by cold humors (caused by joint pain), and when pains occur in the feet.
E aprop resupina le malaute sobre le sieu col, e no deslias le liament entro al tertz dia.	 And place the cushion beneath the patient's back, leaving his chest uncovered.
E cum aquel auras desliat, embroca le loc am aygua e mot oli, e aprop cura aquel am enguent diafinicon e am enguent diabazilicon entro que sia sanat.	 And when that happens, put on the area where water is cold and oil, applying a mixture of vinegar and oil to prevent it from coming out.
Mays si en la plagua accideys apostema caut, adhust e corrosiu, e de aquel semblantz ayssi cum si le sanc es en la vesica congelat, e per lu es la hurina prohibida (e aquo es conogut per la egressio del sanc am urina), a donc entromet lo tieu dit en la plagua e extratz aquel sanc, quar si roman provoca la vesica a corropcio de la vesica e de lu putrefaccio.	 When the bladder becomes infiltrated with cold humors and cramps occur in the feet, it is forbidden to pass urine until the bladder is emptied.
E aprop lava la plagua am vi agre, aygua e sal, e am opposicio a tota specia, am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	 And when you apply vinegar and salt to the foot, do it in such a way that it prevents urination until the bladder is emptied.
E cove en las horas de tota la curacio que tu lies amdos las coyssas e ajustes las medicinas las quals so pausadas sobre le loc.	 And during all of this care, put on the thighs and adjust any medications that are suspended over there.
E si la peyra es petita e es en le meat de la vergua, e es ficat en lu, e eyssement de urina es prohibit, lahoras cura aquel am aquo que yeu recomti denant que pervenguas a seccio, quar tropas veguadas per aquesta curacio yest acusat de seccio; e ja yeu e esproat aquo, e es que tu prenguas un perforador de ferr alfelut, del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	 And if the bladder is small and it is blocked in this way, you should remove it. If urination is prohibited due to this procedure, doctors recommend passing urine until that time; also after removing it, you must use a needleholder of iron, as follows:
de triangulada extramitat, agut, ficat en fust.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body
E aprop pren fiel, e lia am aquel la vergua dejos la peyra per so que no retorne a la vesica.	 Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity and place your hand over the area to prevent it from coming out.
E aprop entromet le ferr en la vergua, perforant am fecilitat entro que·l perforador vengua ad aquela peyra.	 Then insert a pointed instrument into that part of the body, making sure not to puncture the bowel, lest it pierce the penetrator.
E revolveys le perforador am la tua ma en aquela peyra petit a petit, e tu perforsa la perforacio de lu entro que fassas aquel del autra part penetrar; quar la urina tantost es absolta.	 Then slowly rotate the penetrator into that cavity little by little, and make sure it does not go any further than another part penetrating, for urine must always be free.
E aprop prem la tua ma sobre aquo que es romas de la peyra de la partida deforo de la vergua, quar aquela es trinquada, e es foro-getada am la urina, e le malaute es sanat.	 Then gently place your hand over that part of the body to prevent urine leakage from that area, as it is sealed and secure against injury, and the patient's intestines are safe.
Mays si aquesta curacio no es a tu aparelhada per alcuna causa la qual prohibeys de aquela, lahoras lia un fiel dejos la peyra, e autra fiel desus la peyra.	 If that procedure is not permitted for any cause which forbids from using that part of the body, then the doctor will use another instrument instead.
E aprop encideys sobre la peyra en aquela vergua entre doas liaduras.	 Then gently place the instrument between those two parts of the body.
E aprop extratz aquela.	 Then put it aside.
E aprop deslia le liament e mondifica le sanc congilat, le qual es fayt en la plagua.	 Then remove any restraining straps and make sure they are loose enough to allow free movement within the bag.
E no es necessari liament de fiel dejos la peyra, sino per que no retorne a la vesica, e l’autre liament desus sino, quar quan es desliat le fiel aprop la egrecio de la peyra, la codena retorna a son loc e cobra la plagua.	 If there is no need for restraining straps to prevent the intestine from coming out or herniate back into place, then remove those straps only if they are not loose enough already.
E per aquo es a tu necessari quan lias le fiel desus, que tu eleves la codena a las partidas desus, o que retorne deves le tieu compliment, e cobra la plagua ayssi co havem dit.	 When you have opened the space between his thighs and placed cushions beneath them, another attendant should be positioned on their legs, while yet another attendant should stand at their chest with both hands extended in a gesture of respect.
Capitol .lxi.	 [No clear translation provided]
De extraccio de peyra de las femnas.	 The extraction or phlebotomy of the veins from the females.
Peyra en las femnas pauc es engendrada.	 Extraction or phlebotomy in the veins from women is not a common practice.
Mays si ve peyra ad alcuna de aquelas, lahoras dificil es la curacio de lu, e es prohibida per tropas manieyras.	 If you want to extract blood from those veins, then it would be difficult and forbidden by law.
La una de lor es quar la femna fort leu es verges.	 One of the reasons could be that the woman is very thin.
E la segonda es quar tu no trobas femna be scient que descroba si meteyssa al metge quan es casta, o es de las femnas haventz maritz.	 Another reason could be that you don't find a female body to show the procedure at the doctor when asked, or because women have less access to medical facilities.
La tersa es quar tu no hatrobas femna be sabent aquesta art, majorment la operacio am ma.	 The third reason could be that you don't know any female who is willing and capable of performing this surgery, mainly because the operation itself requires certain skills.
E la quarta es que·l loc de la seccio sobre peyra en las femnas es longinc del loc de la peyra, per que indigeys de seccio preonda, e en aquela es temor.	 The fourth reason could be that the location for phlebotomy in women is remote and far from where the bloodletting procedure takes place, causing a significant delay which adds to fear.
Mays si necessitat provoca a tu ad aquo, lahoras cove que tu prenguas una femna metga be scient, e pauc es atrobada.	 If you need to perform phlebotomy on her, the attendant must first find a female willing and able to assist, as it is rare to find one.
Mays si tu es privat de aquela, lahoras cerca metga quast e subtil, o presenta una femna matrona be esenhada en le feyt de las femnas, o femna que en aquesta art ennueys partida del art.	 If you are in a hurry or need to find someone discreet and subtle, or present a female with experience who is knowledgeable about this practice among the females, or a woman capable of performing this task within her field of knowledge.
Donc fay aquela present, e comanda a lu que fassa tot aquo que tu li mandaras, de la enquisicio sobre la peyra al comensament; la qual causa es que reguarde si la femna es verges, lahoras cove que meta lo sieu dit en le cul de lu e quiera la peyra.	 "Then do as you would have him perform everything that you commanded of him earlier regarding the examination from the beginning; so guard yourself in his presence and wish to see his genitals.
Donc si atroba aquela, coarte aquela dejos le sieu dit, e lahoras comanda a lu que inscida sobre aquela.	 "Then if you are afraid of that [the genitals], cover it with your hand and instruct him regarding that.
Mays si no es verge, lahoras comanda a la matrona que entrometa lo sieu dit en le conh de la malauta e enquiera sobre la peyra, pus que pausa la sua ma sinistra sobre la vesica, e comprem aquela am bona comprecio.	 "If she is not afraid [of the genitals], instruct her to introduce it into his hand and ask about its nature, placing your left hand over the bladder as well.
Donc si atroba aquela, lahoras cove que gradantment maugua aquela de l’orrifici de la vesica a las partidas dejos am somman de la sua vertut entro que pervengua am aquel a la razit de la coyssa.	 "Then if you are afraid of that [the genitals], instruct her to gradually move it from the orifice of the bladder towards your hand, avoiding any contact with his genitalia.
E aprop inscida sobre aquela apposicio de la maytat del conh deves la razit de la coyssa de qualque part sia a lu parada e cent la peyra en aquela partida, e·l dit de lu no sia remaugut de la peyra coartan dejos lu.	 "Then instruct him to place it gently at the bottom of his bladder and towards its exit in that area, not causing any discomfort or pain for either party.
E la seccio sia pauca al comensament; e aprop entrometa lo ray sobre aquela seccio, e si sent la peyra, lahoras ajuste en seccio segon la quantitat la qual sap que la peyra sira getada de aquela.	 "The passage is short and the examination is done gently as you instruct him to enter that opening and if he feels it, adjust the angle according to how much pain or discomfort one party experiences.
E sapias que las specias de peyra son motas: quar de aquelas es pauca e gran, e leon e aspra, e longua e redonda, e havent ramps.	 "You know that the parts of the genitals are different; four of them small and large, flat and soft, long and round, without ridges.
Donc tu sapias quantas specias so de lu per aquo que tu signifiques sobre aquo que vols.	 'Therefore, you know how many sizes there are of him here from which you will indicate what you want.'
E si tu veus flux de sanc, ajusta en le loc vetriol trissat e te aquela per una hora entro que sia abscindit le sanc, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	 'If you see bleeding from the vein, adjust it to prevent further blood loss and then proceed with your operation as soon as possible.'
E fay que prepares am tu dels instrumentz les quals e ditz en la extraccio de peyra en les homes, per so que sias ajudat per aquels en la tua operacio.	 'And when you prepare the instruments that are used in the extraction of blood from the veins in men, to assist with these during your operation.'
E si tu veus flux de sanc, e sabes que la expulcio del sanc es de la arceria que es insciza, lahoras tu pausa polvera sobre le loc e estrenh aquel am pulvils e strictura descent, e no iteras aquo; e layssa la peyra e no extraguas aquela, quar fort leu morira la malauta.	 'If you see bleeding from the vein and know that the expulsion of blood is from a vessel that is clogged, stop pressing on that area and apply pressure to prevent further blood loss; but do not extract it as doing so may cause serious harm.'
E aprop cura la plagua.	 'And then proceed with the treatment.'
Donc cum es cedada la acuitat del sanc aprop alcus jorns, e·l loc se poyreys, lahoras tu retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	 'Once you have allowed for the pain to subside and the area is quiet, proceed with your operation as soon as possible.'
Capitol lxii.	 'Chapter 12.'
De seccio sobre ernia acoza.	 'The treatment of hernia.'
Hernia ayguoza no es sino agregacio de humiditat en le ciphac blanc lo qual es dejos la codena dels genetius contenent le huou, e es nompnat ciphac.	 'Hernia is nothing more than an accumulation of moisture in the sac that surrounds the intestine and is called a hernia.'
E alcunas veguadas es en le propri pannicol le qual a lu preparec natura en la partida del huou, entro que sia cuyat que ja es autre huou; e es la codena del genetiu entre le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, e no es aquo sino tart.	 'Some precautions are taken during the preparation of nature in the beginning of the journey, so that nothing is missed or omitted; and it refers to the opening of the intestine through the sac that we have mentioned, not just the one but also the other.'
E la generacio de aquest hernia es per debelitat la qual accideys als genetius, per que ad aquels es efundunda aquesta materia, e alcunas vetz accideys per percuscio fayta sobre les genetius.	 "The generation of this hernia is due to a certain illness that strikes the genitals, and for this reason there are ulcers that appear on the genitals.
E aquesta humiditat es havent motas colors, quar la color de lu o es declinant a citrina o a sanguinent, o rog, o es negra feculenta, o es ayguosa blanqua, e es aquo que es mays.	 "This humidity may cause various colors, such as the color becoming pale or blood-red, or it can be blackish, white, or yellowish; this is what makes it most troublesome.
E les senhals per les quals es saubut on es aquesta agreguacio de aygua so aquestz: quar si es en le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, lahoras le apostema es redon declinant un pauc a longitut ayssi cum figura de huou, e appar le genetiu, quar la humiditat conte aquel de tota part.	 "The ulcers caused by this humidity can be: if it is on the phlegm of white color mentioned earlier, then the ulcers are very deep and extend to some extent along the length; they appear in the genitals because the humidity affects that area too.
E si la humiditat es en le propri pannicol, lahoras le apostema es redon am partida del huou e per aysso hom estima que es autre huou.	 "If it is on the private part of the skin, then the ulcers appear as if they come from another place.
E si la humiditat es entre la codena dels genetius e·l ciphac blanc, lahoras catz dejos le centiment.	 "If it is between the genitals and phlegm of white color mentioned earlier, then the ulcers spread widely.
E cum tu vols la cognicio de la color de la humiditat, lahoras tu esproa la color de la humiditat en le apostema am entromes cayrat del qual la forma es precedida; e segon aquo que es eyssit en le vestigi del entromes, jutga de aquo que es dedintz lu.	 "To know the hue of the humidity, you spread out its color in the ulcer before it appears on the skin's surface and then consider what is left behind.
Donc quan nos vinem a la curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que comandem al malaute que sia fleubotomat si aquo es a tu possibla, e vezes le cos de lu ple.	 "Then when we come to cure it, tell the patient that if this is possible, he should apply cold water to his body.
E aprop sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos sobre alcuna causa un pauc auta, e pausa dejos lu motz draps.	 When joint pain arises from cold humors that permeate every part of the body, especially in the feet; it is customary for doctors to call this gout.
E aprop setz tu sobre la part sinistra de lu, e comanda al ministra que segua a la dextra de lu, le qual extenda la sua vergua a hun de dos latz a la codena dels genetius e a la partida del mirac del ventre.	 Place the hand on the left side of the patient and command the attendant to follow with their right hand, extending it towards both sides of the waist at the bottom of the navel button
E aprop pren spatum lat e scindeys la codena dels genetius del mieg loc per la longitut entro prop le pentenilh.	 Place the foot on its side, and stretch out your legs towards the front pillar.
E sia fayta la seccio segon rectetut engualment distant de la linha que deveseys la pel dels genetius, entro que pervengua al ciphac blanc comprehendent.	 Then insert it in such a way that both ends of the intestines lie within the white membrane, and they are properly positioned.
E excorja aquel, e observa, e guarda te per aysso que tu no inscidas aquel; e la tua excoriacio am la qual aquel excorjas per partida jassia que sia suspenduda am le huou mays e subtilment escruta am la excoriacio segon la quantitat a tu possibla.	 Then, observe it and keep that in mind so you do not cut it; and your excision should be such that the cut is made to the extent that the membrane covering allows for it.
E aprop perfora le ciphac ple de aygua am perforacio ampla, e extratz tota l’aygua.	 Then perform a wide incision in the white membrane and extract all of the water out of it.
E aprop separa entre doas labias de la seccio am uncis, e exten le ciphac a las partidas desus; e no toques la codena les genetius comprehendent, e inscideys le ciphac en aquela manieyra que es a tu possible.	 Then separate two parts of the incision, and extend it to both sides; do not touch the navel button or the genitalia inside the membrane, and insert the incision at that place where you can do so.
E inscideys aquel am la sua totalitat o en pessas, e majorment le sieu latz subtil, quar si tu no perscrutas exquisidament la inscizio de lu, no es fayta segurtat que la aygua no retorne.	 Then insert it completely or partially, making the incision as long and thin as possible, so that if you do not perfectly execute the incision, then it will be safe to know that water does not return.
Mays si le huou procezeys de aquela defora de la sua codena en la ora de la tua operacio, lahoras quan tu auras complida la seccio del ciphac, retorna dedintz aquel, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la codena dels genetius am sutura, e aprop cura aquel ayssi cum las autras plagua, entro que sia sanat.	 "When the incision of your operation has been completed and you have made a small cut in the abdomen to remove the phlegm, return it immediately and put aside the two fingers used for this purpose on the patient's belly button.
E si atrobas le huou corromput per autra malautia, lahoras cove que tu lies les vayssels les quals so sore le suspensori, e extrat le huou, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit.	 "If the wound is infected with another ailment, you will cover it over and extract it immediately, then treat it as instructed.
Mays si l’aygua es agreguada en doas partidas esemps, lahoras sapias que doas son las ernias; donc inscideys aquela partida segon que has feyt en l’autra engualment; e si es a tu vist que sia una opera, lahoras tu la fay.	 "If the water is divided into two parts, you will know that both are halves of it; so divide that part also in the same way if it's your turn to pour.
E aprop tu abstergiys le sanc, e entramet en las seccios lana submersa en oli o en oli rozat; e pausa deforo autra lana la qual tu as submersa en vi e oli, e expandeys aquela sobre dos genetius e·l mirac del ventre; e pausa desobre draps doblatz e pulvils, e lia aquels desobre am liament le qual es segon aquesta forma:	 "Firstly, keep the cloth soaked in oil or another oily substance. Then submerge it into a container with water and oil mixture, expand it over both thighs and the stomach area; place it on top of towels and powder to avoid any damage.
e aprop sian preses dos draps e sian humplitz de lana carmenada segon aquesta semblansa; e sian faytas las extremitatz am les quals es premut de coto o de lana humida, e sian agreguatz am strectura en le braguier de las braguas, e la una de las extremitatz prengua del cul entro al dos, e la segonda prengua a la partida del pantenilh, e dos extramitatz sobre dos coyssas dejos e dos extramitatz autras sobre dos angonars, e tota extrictura sia ajustada en le braguier de las braguas.	 "Use two moistened towels in this manner: one towel will go over the buttocks and the other on the thighs. The first will be spread out to cover the anal area and the second for covering the scrotum, making sure it covers both sides equally.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta hernia es medicada artificialment am cauteri en loc de seccio am ferr; e es que tu prenguas cauteri cutellar subtil e que inscidas am aquel la codena dels ginitius, e es ignit segon que havem recomtat entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc contenent la aygua, e lahoras tu pren cauteri segon aquesta forma:	 This sentence refers to the surgical treatment of a hernia using a cautery tool. The surgeon will make an incision in the appropriate location and apply the cautery on it. They recommend a subtle cautery technique that should be applied directly onto the wound, and once this is done...
e es asemblat a letra greca.	 ...the Greek letter alpha (A)
E aprop perfora am aquel ciphac, e es ignit entro que tota la humiditat sia fora-gitada.	 Once the wound has been made, it is recommended to remove all moisture from it.
E aprop exten le ciphac am uncis, e excorja am uncis, e excorja am cauteri subtil ignit; e inscideys aquel segon que es a tu possible entro que eradiques tot lu; e guarda te del huou que·l foc no·l toque.	 Remove the cautery once you have finished with it and ensure that the wound is well-cleansed, removing any residual cautery gently. If necessary, remove all of the cautery from the wound to prevent any further burns.
E sapias que aquesta operacio es pus salva e pus longinqua de flux de sanc, e milhor que operacio am seccio.	 You know that this operation is both safe and lengthy in terms of time, and preferable over other operations on the section.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat apostema caut en la hora de seccio o en hora de cauteri, o flux de sanc, lahoras cove que tu cures qual contrarietat fa a tu per aquo, am curacio la qual conveneys a lu segon que es dit.	 Do not apply the cautery before making an incision or after it has been applied for fear of causing harm to the wound as you should take care when applying any treatment on this matter and choose according to what was said.
Mays si le malaute es pauruc, e no spera la segonda operacio per la sua horribilitat, lahoras administra perforacio segon que yeu recomti aquo; e es quan es certificat deves tu, per aquo que havem dit de las significacios, que aquela hernia es ayguosa.	 If the patient is afraid and does not want a second operation due to its horrific nature, they should administer an incision once you recommend it as this indicates that such a hernia will heal properly.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute sobre alcuna cezelha elevada, aprop perfora le apostema en la partida pus bassa de lu am spatum lat, e pausa la perforacio segon la longitut del cos.	 When a patient is in need of an incision to be made on the upper part of their thigh, first prepare the incision area by placing gauze over it and perform the cut at the lower point of the chest, holding your hand down for support while making the cut.
E sia la apercio ampla entro que corro tota l‘aygua.	 This sentence means "If you open a large space to drain all the water.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc coto e lia aquel e layssa aquel, per so que corro le romanent de l’aygua.	 Place your hand over that area and hold it there while making a cut through which the wound will drain.
E aprop cura aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	 After making the incision, care for the wound by applying gauze to seal any gaps and prevent further bleeding.
Mays si contrarietat es a la egrecio de l’aygua en aquela hora tu perforas aquela: e aquo no es fayt sino per aquo quar le pannicol blanc en le orrifici de la plagua fa contrarietat e prohibeys le eyssiment de l’aygua, lahoras cove que tu metas en la plagua pena o instrument am la qual es extrayta l’aygua dels ydropitz, la forma del qual es precedida; o ajusta en la opprecio de la plagua un petit.	 If you do not find a suitable needle or instrument to extract the water from that place where it is oozing out, put gauze over the area and seal any gaps, or if there's no need for it because of its small size - in this case you can just leave it untouched.
E sapias que l’aygua retorna, e es agueguada aprop vi meses o enaviro aquels; e cum es agreguada, lahoras sia perforat segon aquela meteyssa manieyra, quar le malaute ayssi passara les sieus dias.	 If the water returns and becomes abundant, make a second incision so that the patient's days will be over sooner rather than later.
Capitol .lxiii.	 The thirty-third chapter of the book.
De seccio sobre hernia carnosa e la curacio de lu.	 This section deals with the cure for a hernia and how to operate on it.
Sapias que en la seccio sobre aquesta hernia es temor perdusent a pernicia en las majors disposicios; per que a mi es vista la dimissio de lu e esser salvat per aquela milhor.	 In this section about hernias, there is advice to avoid harm and the use of great caution in making incisions on large areas; for I see the discharge of it and its being saved by that means.
E yeu so rememorant la operacio en aquela e las specias dels apostemas.	 The operation should be remembered in that place and the specifications of the stitches.
Donc, dic que l‘apostemas natz en les cos dels quals les genetius so conponutz e es fayt aquo per motas causas: o per superfluitat aguda agra, la qual es efundida als genetius, o per percuscio.	 Then say that the stitches are located in the joints where they cause pain and are caused by cold humors infiltrating each part of the body, or by acute excess fat, which is found in the joints, or by gout.
E es la color de la apostema segon la color del cos, e no es atrobat en lu dolor, e es apostema greu.	 The color of the stitches should match the skin's color and not cause pain; the stitches are considered severe.
E fort leu es apostema lapificada, del qual la color es fosca, e no es centiment a lu.	 A very dark stitch is called a lapidated one, whose color is black, and it does not match with the skin's color.
E alcunas veguadas es fayt per nodacio de las arcerias, e per imflacio de aquelas ayssi quo ja es perceubut la rememoracio de lu, o per imflacio de venas.	 Some vegetables are put in to prevent the swelling of the veins or to remember that place where it was applied.
Mays aquo que es per imflacio de arcerias es conogut per la dispercio de la apostema quan compremas aquela am les tieus ditz; e no cove que aquel toques.	 This means that the swelling of veins is caused by the removal of the stitches when you apply it on those places mentioned, and not to touch it.
Mays aquel que es fayt per imflacio de vena no es dispergut de lu alcuna causa deves la compressio am les ditz.	 This means that the swelling from veins is prevented by compression in that place mentioned without any need for removing stitches, and you should avoid compressing it elsewhere.
E ja es possible que sobre aquesta specia sia fayta seccio e sobre les autres carns; e es que tu inscida la codena dels genetius, e aprop esten le huou a las partidas desus, e extratz aquel del ciphac blanc, e deliura le suspensori dels vaysels, e ligua les, e inscideys le suspensori pus que tu deliuras aquel de tota partida de las partidas del huou.	 It is possible that in this case the stitches should be removed and replaced with other ones; also to indicate which joints you have cut into, and apply those on the affected areas of your hands, remove it from the back bone, dissolve the suspension cord for veins, tie them, and insert the suspension cord over all of them.
Donc si l’huou ja es am aquelas carnadas consolida, lahoras cove que tu extraguas le huou e inscidas aquel.	 "When a patient's bowels have been opened, then you should extract that which is in them.
E si es adherencia entro alcuna causa del ciphac, o entre aquo que es entre les bayssels, lahoras cove que tu deliures tota aquela adherencia e inscidas aquela per inscizio redonda.	 "If there is no specific cause or between those that are between the bowels, then you should remove all of that adhesion and insert a round incision.
Mays si es nativitat de carn en le loc de la adherencia la qual es detras, lahoras cove que tu inscidas tot aquo que es de lu, e extraguas le huou ayssi cum havem dit.	 "If the adhesion is in a location behind where it should be, then you should remove all of that adhesion and extract the bowels as well.
Donc cum es complida la tua operacio, lahoras omple la plagua de lana imfuza en oli rozat e vi; e aprop cura aquela am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	 "Once your operation is complete, you should apply a poultice of warm, moist dressing to it and give another treatment for any injuries that may occur.
Capitol .lxiv.	 "Chapter 14 ends here.
De la curacio de hernia que es de vitz.	 "From the care of hernia, which is to be discussed later.
Vit es apostema envolut per alcuna envolucio semblant a broto am mollificacio dels testiculs, e es fayt dificil movement exercitiu e deambulacio sobre le malaute.	 "The hernia is closed with a band similar to the one used for strangulation of testicles, making it difficult to move and walk around.
E en la curacio de aquesta malautia es per temor per aquo del qual es precedida rememoracio.	 "In caring for this illness there is a fear that precedes its remembrance.
Empero cove que diguam opperacio en aquela segon que fero les primiers.	 "However, the operation should be done in reverse order to those first.
E dic que cove que fassas sezer le malaute sobre una cezelha elevada; e aprop enpelleys le suspensori dels testiculs a las partidas dejos; e aprop te la codena dels genetius am les tieus ditz am les baysels que so probdas a la vergua; e tengua aquels autre ministre que tu, e extenda aquels am extencio vehement.	 "Then say that you should make the patient lie on an elevated board; and put under his testicles the cushion of the scrotum as well; and place your knees at the side to hold in the bowels so they do not come out; and have these other ministers who will attend to him, and extend them with great effort.
E aprop inscideys am spatum lat agut per seccio traversa en le dreyt dels vaysels entro que sian les vayssels descubertz.	 When you have made incisions on both sides of the chest, it is customary to open the ribs from below so that they can be seen.
E aprop excorja de tota partida ayssi quo a tu havem dit en extraccio de arceria las quals so en las templas.	 And you'll remove everything related to the incisions made on top of your temples.
E aprop fica en aquelas un’agulha en la qual sia fiel doble, e lia aquel en le primier del locs en les quals accideys vit, e lia aquel autra veguada en le derier de lor.	 You will insert a fine needle through which to be true double, and place it in the first of the areas mentioned earlier, and put another one farther away from there.
E aprop inscideys aquels en le mieg loc per seccio dreyta segon la longuesa del cos, e extratz aquo que es agreguat de las humiditatz fetulentas e corruptas.	 You will make incisions in that part of the body for a second time along its length, and remove anything added from the contaminated and putrid fluids.
E aprop cura la plagua am curacio de las autras plaguas en las quals vols sania esser engendrada per so que caian les vaysels les quals noyreysso un de dos genetius, quar no es mal per aquo.	 You will cure the blisters with care of all the other blisters in which you wish to be born through so that they may emerge from the pores where only one of two generations are not harmful for this purpose.
Mays si accideys vit a totz les bayssels, lahoras cove que·ls testicols sian extragutz o que les testicols per aquo se cequo am les vayssels, per que sia privat de tot nutriment per la inscizio dels vayssels, e que sian estaborits, o que cequo per so que no sia juvament am aquels.	 If all the blisters have come out, then remove them completely or cut off those that emerge from this hole of the pores, for it is private to any nourishment for the incision and should be treated, unless they are already treated.
Capitol .lxv.	 Chapter 55.
De la cura de hernia entestinal.	 Of the cure of an inguinal hernia.
Le adveniment de aquesta hernia es per seccio que endeve en le ciphac extendut sobre le ventre de part dels angunars del mirac del ventre, per que deysendo les budels de aquela ruptura ad alcu dels budels.	 The occurrence of this hernia is due to a slit that extends over the stomach from an opening in the navel area, for which you must remove the intestine through this slit and place it back into its cavity.
E aquesta ruptura es o del ciphac o de excencio de lu, e accideysso aquestas doas specias per motas causas: o percussio, o per sautz, o per clamor, o per elevacio de alcuna causa greu, o per semblantz.	 When this rupture occurs in the diaphragm or excrement passage of the body, these two symptoms occur due to the following causes: impact, or friction, or loud noise, or elevation of a heavy thing, or resemblance.
E·l senhal de aquo, quan es per extencio del ciphac, es que accideys pauc a pauc en lonc temps, e no accideys soptament, e es apostema engual entro ves le preon per so quar le ciphac comprem le budel.	 When it is caused by the excrement passage, this occurs very little and far apart in short times, without exception; and if there are any pains in the stomach, they will be relieved through a cure for that.
E le senhal de lu es quan es per seccio del ciphac, quar al comensament fa accidir dolor vehement sobtament; e es apostema divers aparent dejos la codena propdana aparent, e aquo es per eyssiment del budel, e·l cos de lu a las partidas deforo del ciphac.	 When it is caused by obstruction of the excrement passage, at first pain occurs very suddenly and violently; and that's why they put an end to the cause, making the body to release pressure from the abdomen.
E alcunas veguadas es fora-getat am le budel la tela, e es apelada aquesta hernia entestinal zirbal.	 Sometimes a swelling is caused by the intestine being squeezed tightly against the skin; and it's called this intestinal hernia.
E alcunas veguadas es fayta am ventositat, e alcunas veguadas corr en le budel fenda, e aqui es retenguda, e es am aquo gran pernitia3 del malaute, e alcunas veguadas fa endevenir dolor malvada e majorment quan es premut.	 Sometimes swelling is caused by a hernia being pushed out; and here it's considered one of the worst misfortunes for the patient, some swellings cause bad and severe pain when pressed.
E en la curacio de las especias de aquesta malautia am ferr es temor, per que cove que sia esquivat le cazament en aquela.	 In the treatment of these ailments it is best to be afraid that you will miss the cure in this case.
E la manieyra de la operacio de aquela es que comandes al malaute que redugua le budel am la sua ma a las partidas dedintz de la sua conquavitat si obezeys al sieu retornament, e aprop sia envessat sobre le sieu col entre las tuas mas, e eleva las cambas de lu.	 The procedure of this operation is that you command the patient to place their hand over the abdomen at the lowest part of her waist if he/she feels sick again; and after it's done place your hand between hers and elevate her legs.
E aprop sten la codena la qual siec la codena dels testicols a las partidas desus, e inscideys la codena dels testicols tota per le lonc; e aprop fiqua en doas labias de la seccio uncis segon que indigeysses a hubrir la seccio am aquels.	 When the anus is to be washed with hot water, first put a cloth between its parts and wash it thoroughly until clean, then dry with a towel; afterwards, apply a medicine or ointment to prevent any discomforts caused by this action.
E si’ la seccio segon la quantitat que a tu sia possible que de aquela le huou sia foro-getat.	 If you are able to do so after the anus has been cleaned thoroughly and dried, then it can be gently wiped with a dry cloth or paper towel.
E aprop excorja aquela ciphaqueth les quals so dejos la codena dels testicols, entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc dur de quascuna partida.	 After washing the anus and inspecting it for any tears, one should wipe clean each part of it with a white cloth or paper towel if necessary.
Lahoras tu entromet le tieu dit en aquo que siec le testicol, en aquo que es entre ciphac blanc, le qual es dejos la codena del huou, e entre le ciphac segon, e absolve am aquel’adherencia que es en la partida detras del huou.	 When washing the anus and inspecting it for tears, you must first wash the bowel, then inspect each tear for any remaining debris in its cavity, after which you should thoroughly clean the remaining area behind the tear.
E aprop mau am la ma la codena dels testicols a las partidas deforo, e am aysso exten le ciphac blanc en sus am la ma sinestra, e eleva le huou am le ciphac a la partida de la seccio; e comanda al ministre que extenda le huou ensus e tu dissolveys la adherencia que es detras am solucio complida.	 After cleaning the anus and inspecting it for tears, you must first cleanse the bowel thoroughly from left to right with the white cloth on your left hand side, then inspect each tear for any remaining debris in its cavity, after which you should clean the remaining area behind the tear. Finally, have a minister extend their hand over both of them, remove their hands gently and thoroughly remove all adhering moisture that may remain behind as a solution is applied.
E cerqua am les tieus ditz que lay no sia alcuna causa del budel envelopat en le ciphac blanc dur.	 After cleaning the anus and inspecting it for tears, you must ensure there was no cause of the bowel to be caught within the tear itself, as this may indicate an issue that needs further investigation or treatment.
Mays si tu atrobas de lu alcuna causa, lahoras tu enpelleys aquel al ventre dejos.	 When a stomach ulcer occurs without an obvious cause, then place it in the belly of the patient.
E aprop tu pren una agulha en la qual sia fiel gros fayt de x fiels, e entromet aquel deves le derier del ciphac, le qual es jos la codena dels testicols, la qual siec seccio; e aprop inscideys las extremitatz las quals emineysso del fiel entro que sian quatre fiels, e aprop compausa alcus de lor sobre alcuna figura en manieyra de crotz; e lia am aquel le ciphac del qual havem dit que es dejos la codena dels testicols am fort liament de dos partz.	 Insert a needle with a fixed gauge into the patient, and then pass it through to reach the diaphragm, which is known as the 'door of death'. Do not remove it until you have finished your task, or risk bleeding.
E aprop envolveys las extremitatz dels fiels e lia aquelas am liament vehement entro que alcu dels vayssels que noyrrisso aquels no puscan trametre alcuna causa per so que de aqui no accida apostema caut.	 Then twist the limbs of the patient and bind them tightly, ensuring that they cannot move in any way to prevent escape from this place.
E pausa autra veguada liament segon foro le primier liament, lonh de lu mens tres ditz; e aprop aquestz dos liaments layssa del ciphac le qual es dejos la codena dels testicols la quantitat de la grandeza del dit, e inscideys tot le romanent segon redondeza, e osta de lu le huou.	 After the first incision has been made three times through the diaphragm, and after these two incisions have been closed, bind them firmly from side to side of his chest in a square shape, leaving the area open on both sides.
E aprop inscideys en la partida dejos de la codena dels testicols per seccio de la qual corra sanc e sania ayssi cum havem recomtat en aquo que havem dit.	 Insert into the opening of the diaphragm as you would normally do in this case that we recommend.
E aprop aministra lana submersa en oli, e pausa en la plagua; e aministra le liament le qual havem recomtat (e alcunas veguadas le ciphac blanc es cauterizat, le qual havem dit aprop la inscizio de lu temen de flux de sanc, quar motas veguadas accideys aquels) e leyssa le liament entro que per si caia.	 Apply a soaked thread in oil, and place it as we recommend (and sometimes the diaphragm is cauterized, which has been advised to prevent any leakage of blood, or at least put pressure on it until you can).
Mays si le cazement de lu es tardat, lahoras de aygua cauda sia embrocat, e pausa sobre aquel entro que caia segon que havem dit.	 When the time comes to administer it (the medicine), the doctors may pour water on it and hold their breath until they say so.
E aprop cura la plagua am l’autra curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanat.	 They will next apply another treatment for those ulcers, if necessary.
Capitol .lxvi.	 Chapter sixty-six
De hernia ventosa.	 Ventricular hernia.
En aquesta hernia no e vist alcu que sia estat ardit sus la curacio de lu am ferr.	 In this kind of hernia, there is not a need for surgery to heal it.
E les primiers diyssero que es fayta ayssi cum havem recomtat en la hernia que es am vi; la qual es que tu lies les vayssels aprop la seccio sobre aquela am fecilitat de lu; e aprop secca en le mieg loc en enviro le apostema am aquo que obro aquel, entro que caian les vayssels.	 The first doctors would suggest doing the same thing they recommended for the hernia that was mentioned earlier in the passage - hold their breath and press on that part where there is weakness to prevent it from coming out of its cavity.
E cura la plagua segon que havem dit entro que sia sanada.	 After saying so, apply another treatment if necessary.
Capitol .lxvii.	 Chapter sixty-seven
De la disropcio que es fayta en les anguonars.	 Of the disease that affects both lungs.
Alcunas veguadas endeve ruptura en les angonars ayssi cum havem dit, e emineys le loc.	 Certain vessels end up breaking in the lung areas as well, causing damage to it.
E no deyssen als genetius alcuna causa dels budels al genetius; e si deyssen, aquo es pauc; e retorna s’en en totas horas.	 There should not be any causes of hernias coming from the intestines either way; and if there are some, it is a rare occurrence, and it returns itself over time.
Mays si es prolonguat le temps am aquo, es ajustada fissura en le ciphac entro que deysenda le budel en le ciphac; e accideys aquo per la extencio del ciphac le qual es en le angonars ayssi cum havem dit, la qual causa es quar le ciphac es estendut, e aprop es mollificat e·l loc es apostemat e emineys.	 If the time is prolonged and a tear in the pericardium occurs where the hernia should come out of it, this causes the pericardium to expand and place pressure on that area as well, causing pain there too. The physician will then apply cold compress after another until the patient feels better
E la cura de lu es am cauteri ayssi quo es precedida la narracio de lu.	 The cure for it proceeds as soon as its history has been recorded.
E alcunas veguadas es curada am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: e es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos entre las tuas mas, e aprop secca le loc de la ruptura dels apostemas emineys am seccio per la latitut segon la quantitat de tres ditz.	 After the patient's thighs have been opened and a cushion placed under them, tighten their legs so that they are pulled back towards you as much as possible without breaking any stitches or tearing open an organ near to your level of comfort (second part is unclear).
E aprop strenh le ciphac blanc que es jos la codena entro que sia descubert.	 After having tightened the thighs, gently stretch their calves towards you while keeping them as close together as possible without uncovering any stitches or tearing open an organ near to your level of comfort.
E aprop pren le ray e pausa aquel sobre le loc eminent del ciphac, e prem aquel al preon del ventre.	 After stretching the calves and ensuring that they are close together, hold their calves in this position while moving them gently towards you on the abdomen.
E aprop cus le dos locs eminentz sobre la extremitat del ray del ciphac, e ajusta am la sutura un de aquels am l’autre.	 After placing both calves into this prominent position of the calf, tighten one stitch at each of them together.
E aprop extratz la extremitat del ray, e no inscidas del ciphac de tot, ni no extenda le huou, ni autra causa ayssi cum yeu te fi saber en la curacio de hernia entestinal.	 After stretching the calf but not pulling it all the way out or extending the hand in any other direction that might cause harm to the intestine healing process, proceed with the cure of an inguinal hernia.
E aprop cura aquela am la curacio de las plaguas, e cum inscideyses les fiels, mundifica aquela e restaura la plagua entro que sia consolidada; quar le ciphac es contrayt e no es ajustada la eminencia de ruptura.	 After curing that and marking the wounds with incision, cleanse it and restore the flap within which is consolidated; as you stretch the calf without adjusting its prominence of rupture.
E cauteri es milhor en aquest loc, quar es pus propda a salut.	 Cure him here, as this position promotes health.
Capitol .lxviii.	 Chapter 58 (end).
De mollificacio de la codena dels testiculs.	 The relief of a swollen scrotum
Motas veguadas la codena dels testiculs en alcus homes es mollificada per aysso quar las carns que so entre aquela son mollificadas, e es fedat le reguardament de lu.	 You should massage the swollen scrotum until it is relieved and warmed up by massaging the legs between them as well, after which you will feel relief in that area
Adonc necessari es ad aquel que es preguat en la curacio de lu que fassa jazer le malaute segon le sieu dos, e enscida tota la codena la qual es mollificada sobre la codena natural; e aprop que ajuste doas labias am la sutura.	 When necessary, you should apply cold compresses to the scrotum only on its own side and wrap it around the natural scrotum; then adjust two fingers over the stitches.
E si vols, cus en le comensament la superfluitat de la codena mollificada am tres cozeduras o quatre e am ferma sutura.	 If you wish to further compress the swollen scrotum with three or four gauze pads tightly wrapped around and firmly on top of the stitches.
E aprop inscideys entre las suturas; e aprop cura per curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat e caian les fiels.	 You should also insert a needle between the stitches, then perform the treatment to ensure that all the wounds are closed and can be felt no longer.
Capitol .lxix.	 The 59th chapter is complete.
De castracio.	 Castration.
Sapias que castratio en nostre ley es excomengada, mays per causa es legut a mi que·m remembre de lu en aquest libre; e no es necessaria la rememoracio de lu sino per doas manieyras, de las quals es la una per so que aquo sia en la sciensa del metge quan es enterroguat de aquela, que sapia la curacio de lu al qual accideys; e l’autra manieyra es que nos motas vetz havem necessitat de castracio de autras bestias per les juvamentz nostres per aquelas, ayssi cum de motos, e de bocs, e de porcs, e de semblantz a las bestias.	 It is known that castration in our law is excluded, except for certain cases where it is necessary to remember it here so as to understand the doctor when he asks about this matter; and the other purpose is to ensure that we must castrate any of these animals young ones among us who are able to mate, and also pigs and goats.
E donc dic que castracio es fayta en dos manieyras: o per atrissio, o per fissura a seccio.	 Castration occurs in two manners: either by traction or through a cut
Mays en aquela que es fayta per atrissio, la via de la opera es que nos fassam cezer la bestia en aygua cauda entro que·ls genetius de lu sian mollificatz e sian linhitz e que pendan.	 When castrated by traction, the method of operation is to cut off the foreskin inside so that both testicles are softened and lined up, and they hang down.
E aprop pren aquels am la tua ma entro que sian resols e no apparescan dejos le tocament.	 The approach taken here is to remove it gently without making any cuts.
Mays en castracio fayta per fissura e seccio, cove que tu tenguas la bestia e premas la codena dels testicols de lu am la ma senestra.	 When castrated by cutting and tearing, you will have the penis held in place between the testicles of the patient with a hand on either side.
E aprop lia le suspensori, e inscideys sobre quascun huou am una seccio entro que dos huous proceseysso.	 The suspenders are tightened and incisions made to ensure that both tubes remain separate
E aprop inscideys aquels pus que auras quascu excorjat.	 When castrated, the incision is made below the scrotum.
E no leysses sobre aquels del ciphac alcuna causa, sino le ciphac subtil le qual es sobre les vazes.	 Nothing else is mentioned except for the use of a catheter which is placed in the urethra.
E aquesta manieyra de castracio es milhor la qual es fayta per atrissio, quar atrissio fort leu layssa alcuna causa dels testicols per que la bestia desira coyt.	 The method of castration through traction is superior to that done through cutting and tearing as the foreskin can still cause harm to the testicles if it becomes detached.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	 After surgery, care must be taken so that the wound heals properly.
Capitol .lxx.	 The end of the text
De la cura de hermafrodozia.	 From curing hermaphroditism.
Hermafrodozia en les homes es segon dos manieyras: la una es quar o appar en aquo que siec l’espazi en la codena de testiculs, en aquel que es entre dos testiculs figura quar cunh de femna en la qual so pels.	 Hermaphroditism in humans occurs in two ways: one is when there are only external genitals between the testicles, and another is where a pair of female-like genitals appear that are both present.
E alcunas veguadas de aquel corr urina le qual es en la codena dels testiculs.	 When urine flows from a certain part of the body called the urethra
Mays en las femnas es una specia: e es que·l conh de la femna sobre le pentenilh es ayssi cum dos testiculs de home un pauc de tot yminiheys a la partida deforo ayssi cum le perpucii de home e dos testicols.	 In women, there is something special: when the urethra of the female body is opened slightly like this, urine will also flow from both testicles downward.
E la curacio es de tres specias: de dos dels homes e de una specia de las femnas.	 The cure consists of three stages: two for men and one for women.
E es que cove que tu inscidas aquelas carns ajustadas entro que efuga la emprecio de aquela, e aprop que cures aquelas am curacio de las autras plaguas.	 It is necessary to insert those pointed sticks into that part of the body where they will be used for treatment and then apply the cure to both the affected areas separately.
E en la segonda specia dels homes de la qual yeys urina la qual es en la codena dels testiculs, no es curacio ni opperacio en lu.	 In the second stage of men's treatment when urine flows from the urethra as in the testicles there is neither cure nor operation involved.
Capitol .xxi.	 The end.
De lentinge e de carn eminent per causas de las femnas.	 For women to undergo a minor surgery and have them removed due to various reasons.
Lentige fort leu es ajustada sobre causas naturals entro que es etressat e es fayt leg le reguardament; e alcunas veguadas es magnificada en alcunas femnas en tant entro que es spandit ayssi cum en les homes e perve entro al coito.	 Minor surgery can be done in a natural way, which involves the use of a pointed stick inserted into the urethra and then pulling it out gently to prevent any damage; in women, it may also include the use of a cushion placed between the thighs as well.
Adonc cove que tu tenguas la superfluitat de lentinge am la tua ma o am unci e inscidas.	 If you have excess of minor surgery and want to remove them or any kind, then insert it into your hand or arm.
E no ultimes en inscizio, majorment en le preon de la razit, per so que no endevengua flux de sanc.	 Last but not least: in such cases where there is a risk of bleeding during the procedure, it should be performed as close to the edge as possible to minimize any potential blood flow.
E aprop cura aquela am curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanada.	 And apply the treatment to be given when they are healed
Mays carn nascuda es carn que nays en le horrifici de la mayre entro que umple aquel, e fort leu es eyssit a las partidas deforo segon semblansa de coa (e per aquo alscus primiers appelero aquo “malautia caudada”); donc cove que nos inscidam ayssi cum inscidem lentinge, e curem aquela entro que sia sanada.	 A new flesh is the skin that appears in place of a larger one when it becomes full and swells; therefore, if you want to apply this treatment, call us for it as we would be pleased to assist you with this ("malignant ulcer").
Capitol .lxxii.	 [No translation provided]
De curacio de alratica.	 For the cure of dermatitis.
Alratica es que le conh de la femna no sia perforat, o sia le trauc petit.	 If a small hole is not made in her vagina, or if it has already been perforated,
E es o natural o accidental.	 It can be either natural or accidental
Accidental es per malautia la qual ha precedit, e aquela es fayta o per carn nada ajustada o per ciphac subtil o espes.	 If caused by malignant ulcers as mentioned earlier, and if it is not sutured properly, or through a small incision made in the flesh,
E es fayt o en le preon de la mayre, o en les costatz de lu, o en le pus sobira de lu, o en le pus bas de lu, e prohibeys de cuoyt e de enprenguacio e de enfantament, e fort leu prohibeys las mestruas.	 It is also used to remove the larger ulcer from under it, or from between its ribs (the sternum), or from beneath its breasts, or from beneath its buttocks, and is forbidden for cutting into any part of it that extends beyond this limit, and very severely prohibits any attempt at incision or castration, and is strictly prohibited against cutting into it in a manner other than specified.
E la cognicio de aquela es fayta per reguardament de la metrona, si la oppilacio es apparent, propdana; mays si no es apparent, lahoras tu cerqua aquela am les tieus ditz o am le ray.	 The knowledge of it is to be acquired by acquaintance with the art, if obvious; otherwise, you must ask about it in terms of the specified measures or procedure.
Mays si oppilacio es per ciphac subtil, e es propda a las doas labias, lahoras tu coyta e disromp aquela.	 When done gently, it will be removed by these two blades
E es que pauses sobre las doas labias pulvils, e aprop pausa les tieus ditz indicz de amdoas las mas encemps.	 And place the soft towels over the two thin thighs, and arrange them in a position to cover the buttocks.
E la femna sia sobre le sieu dos, las sieuas coyssas extendudas, e aprop exten las doas labias am forsa entro que aquel ciphac subtil sia romput e la oppilacio sia uberta.	 The woman should lie on her back with the two wide thighs exposed, and arrange them to cover the buttocks in a position so that the gentle removal of the blades occurs without the need to further remove the pain.
E aprop pren lana e enbeu le4 en oli e pausa aquela sobre·l loc, e jagua am home le dia per so que·l loc inscis no sia consolidat.	 Then take a cloth and wipe off any excess oil and place it over that area, and put something soft under it to keep it from sticking.
Mays si le ciphac es gros e espes, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel am spatum lat o am fuelha de mirta.	 If the blade is thick or heavy, the doctor will tell you that you should use a blunt one to prevent injury.
Mays si la oppilacio es per carnada, lahoras suspen aquela am unci, e inscideys aquela.	 If the removal occurs through flesh, it is customary to support it with something soft and secure it.
E sian am tu las medicinas que fan cessar flux de sanc ses mordicacio, ayssi cum ahacatia, e sanc de drago, e enses, ajustat am album de huou.	 If there are medicines that can stop the flow of bleeding and clotting, for example aspirin or anticoagulants, adjust as per instructions in the book.
E aprop aministra una canulha de plom ampla per so que la plagua no sia consolidada leugierament.	 Then use a broad needle to prevent it from sticking during application.
E tengua aquela per alcus jorns e aministra calgua de li sec.	 Let the medicine be applied regularly over several days, or as directed by your doctor.
E aprop sia curada am l’autra curacio de consolidacio entro que sia sanada.	 Then ensure that any other injuries are properly treated so they do not heal incorrectly.
E alcunas vetz accideys en la mayre nativitat de autres carns, e lahoras cove que inscidas segon aquesta manieyra.	 In some cases, joints ache in early infancy due to cold humors that invade every part of the body, and foot pain occurs then it is commonly called gout by doctors
Mays si aysso es per apostema crancos, a l’apostema crancos le qual es en la mayre no sia fayta contrarietat am ferr en deguna manieyra.	 If the abscess is already opened in any part of the body except for the groin, it cannot be closed again with this method.
Capitol .lxxiii.	 Chapter 33
De la cura de emorroydas e de tayl e de botor roja que accideysso en le conh de las femnas.	 Of the cure for hemorrhoids and lymphedema of the leg or arm that occurs in connection with menstruation.
Emorroydas so apprecio dels orificis de motas venas entro que de aquelas corro mot sanc continuadament; e cum so antiquadas emorroydas e son fayts theyls.	 Hemorrhoids are often caused by veins that continue to narrow and cause the veins to become obstructed continuously, and when hemorrhoids occur as a result of them being inflamed.
E ja yeu he dit en la divisio las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e diyre ayssi aquelas que recebo curacio e aquelas que no recebo curacio.	 He then divided the species from those with healing and those without, saying that
Donc dic que emorroydas e theyls quan so en le preon de la mayre e no apparo al sentiment, lahoras en aquelas no sia fayta curacio am ferr.	 Hemorrhoids are not cured when the pain is at its worst and does not subside over time, and the hemorrhoids in those cases should not be treated.
Mays aquelas las quals so en le orrifici de la mayre sobre las quals catz sentiment, so aquelas que so curadas.	 Those who have a lump where they ache severely but are cured are called healed sores.
E cove que tu metas la femna en mayso frega e aprop exten atheyl am les forfexs, o am drap aspre, e inscideys aquelas am las razitz.	 And for those who use the female in such a way that causes her pain or discomfort, and those that cause harm to her body parts, it is necessary to avoid them.
E aprop pulveriza sobre aquelas deves le fluxs del sanc de una de las polveras insciscivas ses mordicacio, ayssi cum acassia e semblant ad aquels.	 And in applying powders that contain the active ingredient of a remedy for sores from the pestilence as mentioned earlier to these sores, so too with other such remedies.
E aprop enpellesca les sieus pes per una hora, e aprop pausa aquela en aygua freja.	 When you put a cushion underneath them [the patient's legs], after that time has elapsed, then place your hand gently on their chest.
E si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras fay aquela sezer en decoccio de sumat e de scorsas de milgranas e de gualas e de semblantz.	 If the flow of blood continues, then do as follows: apply a mixture of equal parts of wine and vinegar to the affected areas near the groin and below the knee, and also on the elbows and under the arms.
E aprop pren farina de ordi e comfiys aquela am miel e vi agre e fay emplastre am aquo sobre le dos de lu.	 After you have put a cushion underneath them [the patient's legs], then take flour, honey, vinegar and water and make it into paste, apply this to both their thighs.
E si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, fay adherir am dos ventozas, e a las mamilhas ses escarificatio.	 If the ailment has been cured completely, then you may move on; if not, follow this: apply honey and vinegar to both breasts.
E aprop pren lana e submergeys aquela am suc de coliandre o am suc de arnagloza o am suc de guarravier am vi pentit e fay adherir al loc; e aprop cura le loc am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	 After you have put a cushion underneath them, then take water mixed with aloe vera or vinegar and apply it to the area as well. Then cover the area gently in order for it to be healed completely.
Mays athyl rog le qual es de aspre reguardament, cove que tu inscidas aquo que a tu appar de aquel segon que he dit en theyl engualment.	 If you cannot find out what is causing the pain with this procedure that I have mentioned earlier, then do not apply anything to their second part until it has been treated equally as well.
E cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	 Cure [the patient] completely so they may be healed
Capitol .lxxiv.	 Chapter twenty-four
De perforacio de eyssedura accident en la mayre.	 Damage to the liver through an accident.
Motas specias de apostemas accideysso en la mayre, ayssi cum cranc e apostema lapident e ulceracios e adhubelat e erpetromens e fistulas emorroyas e raguarrias e thyl e autres apostemas.	 The specific symptoms of an abscess occur in the liver: they are a lump, ulceration and inflammation around it, perforation, fistulas and aneurysms, and other abscesses.
E yeu ja he dit aquestas malautias e las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e las curacios de lor en la divisio.	 These are the maladies of those people in that division
E cove que yeu digua en aquest tractat de apostema caut le qual ve en la mayre quan es dels apostemas que collegeysso sania, e si vols saber en qual manieyra se fa la opperacio de lu am ferr.	 You can consult in this treatise the particular way that each operation is done, and if you want to know how
Adonc cove que tu consideres si la dolor de la apostema en le sieu comensament es aguda am percussio e flecma e febre, e vezes aquel enrogezir e si catz sobre aquel le sentiment, lahoras no·t coytes am perforacio de lu, e cura aquel am aquo que ajuda sobre la maturacio entro que cesse la acuitat dels accidentz.	 When joint pain first occurs and is accompanied by sharp shock, trembling, and fever, it may be a sign of gout that needs immediate attention from the doctor to prevent worsening.
E lahoras cove que tu fassas cezer la femna sobre una cezelha que aia doas cezelhas; e recline sobre le sieu dos e ajusta les sieus pes a la partida pus dejos del ventre, e las sieus coyssas sian expandudas, e pausa les sieus brasses dejos les sieus denols, e lia quascus am liament ad aquo convenient.	 After removing the female from her seat on the bench and placing her on the floor near your feet, recline her body towards the ground and adjust her legs to be close to the abdomen, with her thighs spread apart and her arms resting.
E aprop la matrona segua del latz dreyt e aministre le instrument am le qual es ubert le orrifici de la mayre, la forma del qual vindra en aquelas causas que·s faran aprop.	 After removing the female, direct your attention to the instrument with which you will open up the main part of it, and form its shape based on those causes that are expected to be performed.
E cove quan vols ministrar aquest instrument que tu fiques am lo ray le preon de la mayre de la femna, e aquo que del instrument es intrat en la mayre no sia mays que·l preon de la mayre e leda le malaute.	 When you want to administer this instrument, put your finger over the main part of the woman's body and into it gently but firmly, so that the instrument goes into her vagina without being larger than its own size and causing harm to the patient.
Mays si l’estrument es major que·l preon de la mayre, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils sobre la textura del preon de la mayre per sso que sia prohibit l’intrament de tot instrument en le preon de la mayre.	 When the greater tool is larger than usual, then it is customary to place powders on the surface of the greater tool so that it prevents all other tools from coming into contact with it
E cove que tu pauses le vertitge que corr en le strument del latz pus desus e que le ministre tengua le strument e revolva le vertitge entro que sia ubert le orrifici de la mayre.	 Then the minister will take the tool, and it is customary to roll up any powder that might be on the surface of the greater tool so as to ensure that there are no impurities from the larger object interfering with its use
E cum appar la excitura, e es tocada am la ma e es leon e molh, lahoras cove que tu secces aquela deves le cap de lu am spatum lat.	 After a cut has been made on the palm and it bleeds, then it is customary to apply pressure to stop the bleeding
E cum la sania es evacuada, lahoras cove que tu pauses en la plagua una meca submersa en oli rozat o oli vert en le qual sia alcuna stiptisitat; e pausa la calca7 en la seccio en le preon de la mayre.	 If the veins are evacuated, then it is customary to place a cloth submerged in hot oil or fat so that there is no stickiness on it, and put it over the affected area of greater importance.
E pause deforo la mayre e sobre le pentenilh lana munda submersa en aygua en la qual sian bulidas malvas.	 Place a cloth submerged in water that has been boiled so as to be scalding hot on the greater area, and then put it over the affected part of lesser importance.
E aprop sia curada aprop dos dias am enguent le qual conveneys ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	 Then do two days after you have applied a poultice so that when it is convenient to do so, this will be a cure.
E alcunas veguadas es lavada la mayre e la plagua enayssi que es cristerisat am aygua e mel, e aprop am aygua en la qual es bulhida razit de liri o de aristologia longua, e aprop retorna al enguent.	 Then wash the greater and the lesser vessels separately with warm water until they are clean, and apply them to the water that has been boiled so as to be scalding hot, then return to the original place.
E si la plagua es dedintz en la mayre ameguada, lahoras cove que tu sias prohibit de la curacio de lu am ferr, habantz cura aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio.	 When the bladder is empty and you want to prevent any urination from occurring, hold that area as instructed above.
Capitol .lxxv.	 Chapter LXXV
A ensenhar las matronas en qual manieyre les enbrios bius sian medicatz quan yeysso segon figura no-natural.	 To teach the midwives to attend upon those who show unnatural figures
Necessaria causa es que la matrona conogua en le comensament la figura del enfantament natural per senhals de lu, e es que quan tu vezas la femna expremar a las partidas dejos e desira odorar le ayre, e sobre aquo es enleujada per aquo que sobre ela es del part, e festina le eyssiment del enbrio, lahoras sapias que aquest part es segon figura natural, e es l’eyssiment de lu sobre le sieu cap, e la segondina am aquel o suspensa o pendent del ombelic.	 It is necessary for the midwife to observe at first the figure of a newborn as such through its ears because when she sees the woman trying to vomit or wanting to feel pain in her chest, and from this it is learned that this part is a natural figure, and also the vomiting up over the belly button, and suspending or holding back the umbilical cord.
Donc cum tu vezes aquels senhals, lahoras cove que·l ventre de lu sia compremut per so que l’embrio deysenda leugerament quar quan deyssen sobre le sieu cap, deysen a lu la segondina, e es mondada de aquelas superfluitatz am bona mondificacio.	 When you see those signs, the midwife understands that the belly of the baby is compressed in such a way that the embryo will descend more when it descends over its head, so loosen it gently and then bind it again, as this is beneficial for a good outcome.
Mays aquel que es otra aquest part es no-natural e no-lausable, quar quan le enbrio es eyssit sobre sos pes e·l cos de lu es eyssit devant le cap de lu e·ls pes de lu, e la ma de lu una, o al pe de lu i, o es eyssit le cap de lu e la ma de lu, o al ventre de lu, e fort leu es convertit sobre le sieu col, e semblant de las figuras de lu no-lausablas.	 If this part is another unnatural and untestable one, when the embryo comes out from its body and the baby's body is over its head and its legs, or if it comes out of the belly button and hand, or if it comes out of the head and belly, then it will be twisted around to the side.
Don necessaria causa es a la matrona que sia savia e subtil en totas aquelas causas, e que·s guarde de error e de decepcio.	 When the cause of labor pains is known to be due to the mother being wise and subtle in all those causes
E yeu so mostrant tota figura de aquelas, e qual engen es en aquelas per so que sia significat per aquo e sia stat sobre aquo.	 That figure will also show which one of these is meant by this and be placed on that place
Quan le feyt es eyssit sobre le sieu cap per egrecio natural, e aquel es vehement sobre la femna e es fayt a lu part dificil, e vezes la vertut de lu ja debelitada, lahoras fay aquela sezer , o que las femnas tenguan lu, e evapora le conh de lu am fenugrec coyt e am olis humitz.	 When the urine is excreted through an external opening because of a natural process, it is very painful for women and is difficult to pass; sometimes, urination may be difficult due to its tightness and many women have this problem.
E aprop entrometa la metrona entre les sieus ditz espatum petit e fenda am aquel la segondina, o secce aquela am la sua ungla entro que corro aquo que es en ela de humiditat.	 Between the second and third fingers on her right hand, place a small cloth to prevent any moisture from coming into contact with that area.
E preme le ventre de la femna entro que deyssenda le fet.	 Press down on the abdomen of the woman until she gives birth to it
Mays si no deyssen, lahoras cove que la femna sia cristirizada de mucellage de ptilli e mucellage de fenugrec am cizami.	 If not, the doctor will recommend that the woman undergo a cervical mucus and fetal fibronectin test.
E aprop comanda a lu, aprop le cristeri, que sia compremuda e fay aquela stornudar am condisi; e te la boca de lu e·l nas de lu per huna hora, quar le fet sira foro-getat tantost.	 Command the doctor to perform an amniocentesis procedure, and place a bandage on his chest so that he does not disturb during pregnancy; also put her mouth and nose with tape for one hour as the fetus will be monitored constantly.
E si las doas mas del fet so foro-getadas al comensament, lahoras cove que tu redusiscas aquelas am fecilitat petit a petit.	 If both of the fetus' legs are immediately affected with weakness, then the doctor will recommend reducing these gradually
Mays si no obezeys al intrament, lahoras pausa la femna sobre una cezelha e leva les pes de lu sus, e aprop concuceys la cezelha sobre la terra; e la femna sia tenguda que no caia deves la concussio.	 When the belly is not heavy and the pain subsides on a cushion underneath them, support their legs with another servant, place it under them as well, holding their hands to prevent dropping of the cushion or service.
E si las mas no son dedintz tornadas e morr le fet, lahoras inscideys aquelas e extratz le romament del fet o lia le cors a la ma de lu am drap e extratz aquel am equalitat, quar aquel sira foro-getat.	 If the feet do not separate and die after this occurs in the belly or in the chest to the hand of the patient is spread out and extended as well, and if it does not happen that way
De eyssiment del embrio sobre les sieus pes.	 Put the embryo on their back.
Quan le fet yeys sobre les sieus pes, lahoras cove que tu impelliscas aquels en sus, e aprop convertas le fet petit, e aprop que engualhes aquel, e aprop que prenguas un pe de lu e extendas aquels petit a petit.	 When the child is placed on their back, have it pushed over towards them, and gently turn the child onto its stomach, and then put your hand underneath to support it, and then slowly roll the baby up little by little.
Mays cum son eyssit entro a las coyssas, lahoras tu comanda a lu que se exprema, e fay aquela extornudar am condizi, quar sira foro-getat si Deus lo vol.	 When it comes out of the cavity into the thighs, have them push it outward, and hold down its chin to prevent it from retracting, unless God wills otherwise.
E si no es foro-getat am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras tu retorna le fet petit a petit entro que pauses aquel segon figura natural, quar aquel sira lahoras foro-getat am leugier eyssiment.	 If you do not agree with what has been recommended, then have them roll back into the fetal position until it is in its normal position again, unless otherwise dictated by God.
E si es prohibit am tot aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras pren de musellage de altea e de goma dissolvuda, e percuteys tot en le mortier per bona percussio, e aprop linieys am aquo le conh de la femna, el pus bas del ventre de lu.	 If it is prohibited altogether what has been recommended, have them remove their clothes and wet the mortar with dissolved lime, and then apply this to the forehead of the patient, place a bit under their lower abdomen as well.
E aprop fay aquela cezer en aygua tebeza, entro que consegua les ypocondias.	 "Take away this feverish sweat from under his armpits.
E cum vezes que las partidas dejos de lu so lenificadas, lahoras fay a lu subfumiguacio de mirta e sub-pausa aquela a lu.	 "Occasionally, when the limbs are weakened, place him gently and support it in that way.
E quan te la sub-fumiguacio per una hora, lahoras tu la fay sezer sobre una cezelha, e aprop fay aquela stornudar e extrenh la boca de lu, e levas de aquela, e prem la partida pus bassa del ventre de lu am leugiera compressio, quar le fet sira tantost foro-getat.	 "When the sub-fumigation lasts for an hour, place a cushion under his head and support him in that way. Then gently stroke his face and open his mouth, take away from there, and press down on the belly button with gentle pressure to make it stop.
Eyssiment del fet sobre les sieus denols e las suas mas.	 "The baby should be placed between your thighs and their chest.
Quan le fet eyssira segon aquesta forma, lahoras tu engenies en entrometen las suas mas petit a petit; e aprop la femna stia evessada sobre le sieu col, e les pes de lu pengo en jos, e aquelas sia jasent sobre le lieyt, e complegua las suas mas.	 "Once the baby is placed in this way, gently massage their little by little; and then place a small cushion on his belly, support them with your hands, and continue to caress them.
E aprop prem sobre le ventre de lu petit a petit, e aprop extratz aquo que es dejos les pes de lu de las aurelhas entro que sia preparada en la partida pus dejos.	 "Then gently press on his belly small by small, and remove that which is placed between the thighs when it's prepared for use.
E si le fet no es fora-getat, lahoras pren les pes de lu e mau aquels am movement vehement, e aprop prem aquo que es sobre les ypocondres petit a petit entro que le fet puege a las partidas desus.	 "If the baby is not brought to rest, then hold their hands and firmly press that which is on their thighs gently by gently until they can reach orgasm.
E aprop entrometa las suas mas e engualhe le fet petit a petit, e comanda a la femna que se exprema entro que le fet sia foro-getat.	 "Then place the baby between your legs and gently massage them little by little until they are brought to rest.
Eyssiment del fet latutidinalment pendent una de las suas mas.	 Holding their hand
Sia engeniat en reduccio de la ma de lu, mays si no podes aquela reduzir, lahoras eleva la femna e fe aquela anar.	 Place the first servant on her arm above mentioned.
E si anar no pot, lahoras fay la jazer sobre le lieyt, e concuteys las coyssas de lu am concussio vehement, e aprop aministra liamentz les quals yeu e recomtatz de mucillages.	 If that is not possible, the servant will be placed above her thigh and the muscles of his arms will be stimulated violently in order to administer the gout remedy recommended by doctors.
E si es vengut le enfantament, lahoras fay aquela sezer sobre cezelha, e aprop studia sobre la reduccio de la ma, e enguala le fet segon figura natural, e fay stornudar la femna e comanda a lu que comprema a si entro que sia foro-getat.	 If the previous method is insufficient, place the servant above her waist and instruct him to bend his second figure naturally while supporting her body with his arm; order him to enter into position as soon as possible so that he can easily reach what needs to be reached.
Eyssiment del fet sobre·l col expandudas las suas mas e la fassia de lu es al dos de la sua mayre.	 Place the servant's hand on her stomach, ensuring it is above her navel and at right angles to her side.
Cove que la matrona tengua la ma del fet e aprop revolva aquel petit a petit, e eque aquel am facilitat.	 Ensure that the mistress has the servant's arm, and instruct him to slowly move it in small circles, making sure he is agile.
E cum es e quant so es engualhat, e lahoras pausa sobre le conh de lu aquo que havem recomtat de oli e de mucellages.	 Once you've done that and placed the servant where recommended by doctors for oil and ointments, pause over his chest in order to administer what was suggested by doctors as a remedy for gout.
E aprop comandas a lu que·s maugua petit a petit, e quan auras feyt aquo, lahoras fay aquela cezer sobre una cezelha e comanda li que sia inclinada sobre le latz dreyt, e aprop comanda a lu que sia compremuda; e fay aquela stornudar am condizi.	 Instruct him to gently move it in small circles until you're finished, then place the servant on one knee and order him to lower himself while supporting his head with his hand; do this slowly so that he is not injured.
Exitus foetus praeparati super latus.	 The fetus descends from above
Quan deyssen a horrifici de la mayre segon aquesta manieyra, considera, e lahoras tu inscideys la segondina am la tua ungla entro que sia evacuada de la humiditat.	 When dealing with a horrific illness of the second kind, consider this and the doctor will recommend that you instill the second one into your urethra while it is being evacuated from the moisture
E si le fet es suspendut sobre la cara e·l col de lu, lahoras tu inscideys aquela del embelic, per so que no sia retengut e mora.	 If the fetus is suspended over the face and head of them, then you should instill that one into their urethra to prevent it from being retained and rotting.
E aprop empelleys le fet a las partidas dedintz entro que pauses aquel segon que cove, e manda a la femna que comprema a si alcunas veguadas, e el sira fora-getat am eyssiment leugier, si Dieus o vol.	 Then place the fetus at the opening of the second kind in and ask for someone to check it periodically; if necessary remove it immediately with extreme urgency, as God wills it
Exitus geminorum aut foetuum multorum.	 The exit or death of twins or many fetuses
Sapias que gemels motas veguadas so natz, e alcunas vetz naysso tres o quatre , mays aquo es estranh e tart s’endeve; mays v so causas foro natura, e no vivo.	 Know that twins often have different needs and sometimes three or four are necessary to achieve a result; may be because of nature's causes or not live
E conte aquelas, ja sia que sian montiplicatz, una segondina, e son seperatz per ciphac, distingen aquels enter le liguament en l’ombilic de cascun de aquels E alcunas veguadas so foro-getatz ayssi cum es un fet per eyssiment natural leugier, e so eysitz alcunas veguadas per eyssiment no-lausabla ayssi cum havem recomtat.	 If they are twins or multiples, the first one is separated and the second one through a cannula inserted into their umbilical vein; sometimes you may need to remove both if there's an emergency situation like this, so eggs as well as some are removed by removing
E si son dificils alcus de lor deves le enfantament e perveno ad aquo que havem dit de las figuras no-naturals, lahoras tu cura aquels ayssi cum havem recontat.	 If there's difficulty or obstruction in bringing the fetus out and you suspect unnatural figures, the doctor will suggest this as they described it.
E si’ la matrona subtil e fassa aquo que fa am facilitat e subtilitat, e am tarditat, e sia ingeniat segon tota figura segon que es a lu preparat de l’engen amenant a salut.	 When the gentlewoman is ready to proceed gently and subtly, slowly and cautiously, with ingenuity being used as a whole figure from which she proceeds when it comes prepared by an engine tending towards health
Rememoratio eius quod formatur in matrice ex embrionibus et Abortiuntur.	 The remembrance of this forms in the matrix out of the embryos and are aborted
Alcunas veguadas son formatz en la mayre un, e dos, e tres, e quatre, e v, e vi, e vii, e mays x, e ja es deves mi verificat que una femna abortem ne getet vi, e una autra x totz formatz, la qual causa fo fayta per mensuracio dels glorios savis.	 Some women's vagina is formed in the great one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, and many others X, who is a cause of death due to measurement of glory holes.
E tot aysso cove que sia en la sciencia de la matrona quar fort leu ad aquela parve semblant de aquo, e donc opause se ad aquo am so que cove.	 And therefore in the science of the gentlewoman who is very light and to that extent similar to this, and therefore stop yourself from doing it.
Capitol .lxxvi.	 Chapter 66
De extraccio del fet quan es mort.	 The extraction of the dead body when done.
Quan tu curas le fet mort am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la medicacio e no es defora eyssit, e tu yest forsat usar de opperacio am ma, lahoras cove que consideras si la femna es de sana vertut e no es am alcu dels accidentz per les quals sobre ela es temuda perdicio.	 When you care for a dead body as we have said in the division of medicine and it is not forbidden to do so, use your own operation as much as possible, taking into account whether or not the woman is healthy and free from accidents that she may be afraid to suffer loss.
Lahoras cove que la femna sia envessada sobre le lieyt sobre le sieu dos, e sia le cap de lu enclinat enjos e las coyssas de lu sian elevadas.	 The ladies place a cloth on the head of the body and put their own hands in order to hold its head up and raise her legs.
E·l ministre tengua aquela de doas partz o sia liada en le lieyt per so que·l cos de lu no se extenda deves la extraccio del fet.	 The minister shall have that from both parts, or be laid in the line to prevent the extension of his body towards the outside
E aprop tu humecta la boca de la mayre de lu am olis humitz e am mucellage de altea e de fenugrec e de semensa de li.	 You will lubricate the mouth of the bigger one with oil and mucus, then grease and feather it
E aprop unte la matrona la sua ma am aquels olis e mucellages, e aprop entrometa la sua ma am fecilitat en la mayre, e aprop cerque am la ma loc en le qual fique les uncis en le fet.	 Lubricate the arms of the woman with oil and mucus, then grease her larger arm and secure it tightly in place so that its tips do not come out of the body
E locs convenient en aquo: adonc tu considera si le fet es preparat que deysenda sobre le sieu cap, e lahoras tu fique les uncis en les huels de lu, o en le col, o en la boca, o en le palat, o dejos la barba, o en la furcula de lu, o en les locs propdas de las costas, o dejos les ypocondres.	 Where it is appropriate: If the body is prepared to send over its head, then place them in the hands of him, or in his collar, or in his mouth, or on his palate, or do not shave his beard, or at the base of his spine, or in any of the indentations between the ribs.
Mays si le deysendiment es sobre les pes de lu, lahoras en le pentenilh, o en le mieg de las costas.	 If it is necessary to send them down onto the feet, then put them on his back or in the groove of his ribs.
E cove que tengua le unci am la ma dreyta, e pausa la curvitat de lu en aquel loc le qual es entre les ditz de la ma senestra, e entrometa la ma am facilitat e fique le unci en alcu de aquels locs les quals havem ditz, entro que pervengua a la causa boyda.	 You should have the left arm in front and stop its curve at that location between the two breasts of her right side, enter it into the hollow of his body where you mentioned them earlier, so they may extend toward the buttocks
E aprop pause e fique en la apposicio de lu un autre unci, o le tertz si es necessitat, per so que sia atraccio engual, e no sia extencio segon la sua rectetut tant solament.	 Place another arm or the third if needed to make sure it is fixed securely, and not extended beyond its proper location only
Ans sia maugut a tota partida, per so que l’eyssiment de lu sia alleujat ayssi cum es fayt en dent deves la eradicacio de lu.	 When pain occurs in joints caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body and pain occurs in feet, it is customary to call gout by doctors.
E cove en lu aquo que es entre lor que la extencio sia mollificada; e si alcuna partida de lu es retenguda, lahoras cove que la matrona unte alcus sieus ditz am oli e entrometa aquels espertament e revolva am aquels aquo que es retengut.	 When you return the intestine to its cavity and it is not retained inside, remove the restraint with a pointed cautery and turn it around so that it enters as quickly as possible into the cavity where it was previously held.
Donc si la partida del fet es fora-getada, lahoras les uncis sian permudatz entra loc le qual sia pus aut; e fay aysso entro que tot le fet sia fora-getat.	 If the part of the body has been removed, then turn it inside out so that everything is as before.
Mays si la ma es eyssida denant l’autra, e no es possible reduzir aquela per la coartacio de lu, lahoras cove que drap sia envolopat sobre aquela; e aprop extratz aquela entro que tota sia fora-getada, e inscideys aquela o en la junctura de la ma o en le coyde.	 If the hand is separated from the other and it cannot be rejoined by coartation of the body part, then wrap it around that; and arrange it so that everything is as before, or in the joint of the hand or at the cavity.
E ayssi cove que fassas en l’autra ma e en les dos pes.	 And do this with both hands.
Mays si le cap del fet es gran, o accideys a lu coartacio en le eyssiment, o es en le cap de lu aygua ajustada, lahoras cove que entrometa entre les ditz espatum spinos e fenda le cap e extragua la aygua, o que discroba aquel am un instrument le qual es nompnat “alundat”, la forma del qual vindra am las formas dels autres instruments en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	 If the head of the body is big or if you want to make an incision in it, or if the neck is adjusted so that its opening faces forward, doctors say put it between two pointed things and pull out both ends of the skin, or use a tool called "alundat" which has the form of other tools mentioned above.
E semblantment fassa si·l fet es de gran cap per natura: e lahoras cove que inscida aquel am algematu, o que prengua aquel am alunda ayssi cum havem dit; e aprop extra les osses am les forceps.	 "When the pain is due to a large swelling by nature; and if its cause can be determined as an abscess or ulcer that causes pain in the same place, then apply pressure with a pair of tweezers.
E si le cap es eyssit e es coartat deves la furcula, lahoras sia fendut entro que la humiditat la qual es en le pietz sia efunduda.	 "If the swelling is internal and surrounded by muscle, then take a damp cloth to apply gentle pressure on the affected area.
Mays si no es complicat, ni obezeys a eyssiment, lahoras tu inscideys le cap tantost segon que a tu sira possible.	 "If it is not complicated or burdensome, then try to puncture the swelling as soon as possible.
E si le dejos del ventre es apostemat o es en lu ydropici, lahoras cove que tu perfores aquel entro que corro la humiditat que es en lu.	 "If there is a hernia in the abdomen or it protrudes downwards towards the groin area, then press gently to force the intestine back into its cavity.
Mays si le fet es sobre les sieus pes, lahoras la atraccio de lu es leugiera e la direccio de lu a la boca de la mayre es leugiera.	 "If it is on your foot, then gently lift the affected area and direct its movement towards the mouth of the larger chamber.
Mays si es coartat deves le ventre e·l pietz, lahoras cove que tu extraguas aquel am drap le qual auras envolopat sobre la tua ma, e que fendes le ventre e·l pietz entro que corra aquo que es en aquels.	 "If it is internal and surrounded by muscle, then gently lift the affected area with a cloth wrapped around your hand, and press back into its cavity while making sure that it moves towards this point.
Mays si les autres membres so ostatz e torna le cap, lahoras la metrona entrometa la ma senestra; mays si la boca de la mayre es huberta, lahoras intrometa la ma en le preon de layre, e cerque am aquela le cap, e atira aquel am les ditz entro a la boca de la mayre, e aprop entrometa en lu un unci, o dos uncis, e atire lu am aquels.	 "If the other limbs are affected and turn it towards your arm closest to the larger mouth; if the larger opening is open, then press in with one hand or two hands, depending on which way you would like it to move towards.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada per apostema caut le qual accideys a l’u, lahoras cove que no sia trebelhat sobre lu; abantz cove lahoras aministrar efusio de causas humidas grassas.	 When the mouth of the lady is closed by a pointed stick that causes pain to her, the doctors say it's not gout but an abscess on its tongue; however they do administer effusion of humid fluids for reasons.
E aministre emplastres; e segua le pacient en ayguas que mollifican e humectan.	 The physicians give emetics to the patient in order to make him vomit and thus cleanse his stomach.
E si le fet es sobre le sieu costat, lahoras si possible es, sia agulat: e sia aministrat aquo que havem dit en le fet viu.	 If it is on that side of the body, if possible, do so with caution; and if necessary, administer what we have mentioned to him in his current state.
E si aquo no es possible, lahoras sia inscidit en pessas, e sia extrayt.	 If it is not possible, the doctors will use pessaries or extractants instead.
E cove que non layssas alcuna causa dedintz de la segondina.	 Do not give any cause for the second part if they are unable to do so in advance.
E cum tu auras complida tota la tua opperacio, lahoras aministra aquo que havem dit de la curacio en les apostemas cautz les quals accideysso de la mayre.	 When you have completed all your work, the doctors will administer what we mentioned for care in the pointed sticks that cause her pain.
E si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras deyssendas en ayguas stipticas e aministra l’autra curacio.	 If a fever occurs due to blood, they will give strict purgatives and administer another course of care.
E yeu ja e vist una femna en le ventre de la qual era fet mort, e aprop sobre aquel foc autra veguada emprenhada, e aprop foc mort es le fet autre.	 You have found a woman in whose belly was born dead and you are now over the same fire that burned her alive; but if death is caused by another flame, then proceed with different care.
Accidit al u aprop lonc temps apostema en le sieu embelic; e inflat es entro que foc ubert, e comensec a getar brac.	 It hit him in the elbow joint and inflamed it as if a fire burned through it, and he began to put on bandages
E yeu fu appelhat a la cura de lu, e medicat a lu per lonc temps, e la plagua no es consolidada.	 When you call for healing of him, and care for him for a long time, the disease does not become consolidated.
Adonc yeu pausegui sobre lu de alscunas causas emplastra de forta atraccio, e eyssic de lu un os, e aprop passero alcus jorns, e eyssic un autre os; e yeu fu trop meravilhat, cum en le ventre no sia os.	 After placing gauze over his entire body except for the head and genitals, you are also to remove one hand, wait a while, then another hand. And if it is not relieved through the belly opening, there will be other means taken as well.
E adonc yeu cogitegui que eran dels osses del fet mort.	 After you have given him all possible treatments and care for a long time, think about using bones of dead children
Donc yeu enguisigui la plagua, e extrayssi de lu motz osses , la femna existent en las sieuas milhos disposicios, e ja visquec en tal manieyra per lonc temps, correc de lu un petit de brac.	 Therefore you have to consider using the bones of dead children as part of your treatments for a long time; in addition to these, there are other bones available from various sources that can be used, depending on how much time you want to invest.
E yeu no afermegui asso esser stranh, sino quar en aquo es sciensa e ajutori ad aquo que le metge artifec am la ma per curacio aministra.	 You are not alone in your struggle; many doctors also seek to help with care and treatment of this nature.
De las formas dels instrumentz que so necessaris a extrayre le fet.	 The forms that the instruments necessary for the extraction of the body parts are being prepared.
Forma de vertitge am la qual es uberta la mayre:	 Form of truth which is above all others:
Aquesta es la forma de strenhedor en le qual so engualhatz les libres, al qual engualhament sian dos virtitges en doas extremitatz de dos futz.	 This form of strength to which all people are equal; and in both extremities of two feet there are two virtues.
May empero aquesta virtitge cove que sia pus subtil de strictori, e sia fayt o de eba o de fust de boys.	 Even this virtue may be pushed by subtle restraint, or by the use of rope, or a fist, depending on circumstances.
E sia la latitut de quascun fust quays dos ditz e le marge de quascu amdos quays un dit, e la longitut de quascu es un palm e mig; e en le mieg loc de dos fustz so dos ajustaments de aquel meteys fustz les quals ja son fermatz, dels quals la longitut es la maytat de un palm e un pauc mes, e la latitut de quascu es quay dos ditz, o un pauc mes.	 When you've identified the joints affected by gout and located where the pain occurs in them (for example, feet), a physician would typically call it gout because:
E aquestz dos additamentz sian entromeses en la boca de la mayre per que sia uberta am aquels quan tu revolves las doas prescriptas virtigges.	 The second sentence translates to "and the two openings are into the mouth, so that it is covered up when you rotate the two prescribed vices.
Forma autra semblant de aquela pus subtil e pus leugiera:	 Another way of saying this in a more subtle and less explicit manner.
Sia fayta de fustz de eba o de boys segon la semblansa de forceps.	 It is customary to make incisions with the help of the blades or fingers, depending on the appearance desired.
Mays empero en la extremitat de lu so dos additament ayssi cum vezes, e la longitut de aquels additament es quays un palm, e la latitut de quascu es dos ditz.	 The first sentence is "May I place them at the end of his body twice, and the length of these incisions is like that of a palm, while the width of each one is equal to two digits.
E cum tu vols am aquels ubrir la mayre, lahoras tu fay cezer la femna sobre le lieyt les pes pendentz, ubert aquo que es entre las coyssas de lu.	 When you want to raise the heel, place a cushion under their thighs and lift it between the patient's legs.
E aprop obre la tua ma am le instrument ayssi cum fas am forfexs engualment segon la quantitat que vols de la aprecio de la boca de la mayre entro que la metrona fassa so que vols.	 You take your hand and place it on the tool just as you would with a pair of forceps, according to how much you want for raising the heel into which direction you wish
La forma de vertitge la qual diysero les antics:	 The manner in which they used to do things in the past.
Forma de impellent am le qual es empellit le fet:	 This is how one should act when trying to expel something:
Forma de amisidat2 am le qual es conterit le cap gran	 How one should behave while trying to hold back the large head.
E es asemblat a forceps al qual so dentz en la extremitat, ayssi cum vezes, e alcunas veguadas es fayt lonc ayssi cum forceps segon aquesta forma, ayssi cum vezes, al qual so dentz ayssi cum dentz de ressegua am le qual es inscidit e conterit.	 When using a pair of forceps on the limb in question, sometimes with caution and sometimes carefully, some people always use them with careful precision to stop the bleeding.
Forma de amesidat pauc:	 How to act when trying to expel something quickly:
Forma de unci havent una spina:	 How to treat a spine wound:
Forma de unci havent doas spinas:	 When dealing with multiple spine wounds.
Forma de forceps a la qual so dentz de cerra am le qual le cap del fet sia conterit:	 How to use the pair of forceps when trying to hold back something from escaping through your head.
Forma de spatum havent dos extremitatz am le qual le cap es abscindit:	 When dealing with both limbs severed at the head.
Forma de dos espatums latz:	 How to act when you are dealing with two amputations of the same type on opposite sides of your body.
Totz aquels instrumentz so excersitatz, e quan mes so multiplicadas las specias de aquel e so preparadas deves le artifexs, quant es pus leugier a la sua opperacio e pus aut deves les homes per la sua quantitat.	 When using these instruments, and when more varieties of the same type are prepared to be used, and you want to perform surgery on multiple patients, or if you have that many patients to deal with, use them according to their amount.
E no obres de aquels instrumentz ja sia qua sia deves tu aparalhat, quar la necessitat de aquels no es excusabla.	 Do not use these instruments when the need for them is not acceptable.
De extraccio de la segondina.	 After making a second incision.
Quan la segondina es retenguda deves le enfantament, lahoras cove que tu comandes a la malautae que retengua le sieu ale, e aprop fay aquela stornudar am condizi, e strenh la tua ma sobre la boca de lu e sobre las nars de lu, e si per aysso es defora eyssit, bo es.	 When the second incision is made, tell the surgeon to remove the patient's head and place your hand over his mouth and nose, if necessary, so that you can breathe for him, and if not possible, do it quickly with a sternum press or other means available
E sino, lahoras tu pren una ola e perfora en la cuberta un trauc e pausa en aquela erbas ubrent la boca de la mayre, ayssi cum calament e ruda e anet e camamilla e scicados arabic e cassia lignea e santaurea.	 When the joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body and when pain occurs in the feet
Totas aquestas erbas o alcunas de lor sian submersas en aygua en la ola, e pausa aquela sobre le foc.	 These herbs or some other may be submerged in water, and placed on fire
E aprop pausa una canula de canaviera en la boca de la mayre, e tengua aquela entro que la evapor vengua a la concavitat de la mayre.	 Then insert a cannula into the mouth of the patient, ensuring that any discharge will enter the cavity of the patient's nose.
E aprop fay aquela stornudar ayssi cum havem dit, e la segondina sira fora-getada am velocitat.	 And then, follow these instructions as quickly as possible.
Mays si roman aprop aquesta curacio e no es eyssida, lahoras tu comanda a la matrona que submerge la sua ma sinistra en oli sizami o en micellage de altea, e aprop entrometa aquela en le conh e queresca am aquela la segondina, e cum aquela auras trobada, lahoras pren la e exten aquela pauc a pauc Mays si es annexsa en le preon de la mayre, lahoras entrometa la sua ma segon que havem recomtat, e quan aura trobat la segondina, extragua aquela petit a petit segon rectetut per so que la mayre no caja deves la atraccio vehement.	 And then proceed with caution and do not miss it, the doctor commands the nurse to submerge his left hand in olive oil or in micellar water, and place this into the wound and wait until the second one arrives, and when they both arrive, the doctor takes out that little by little.
Abantz cove que sia permudada als costatz dreyt e sinestre am facilitat.	 The bandages are applied to both right and left hands easily.
E aprop sia ajustat en la quantitat de atraccio, quar ela obedira e evasira de adhirencia.	 Then adjust the amount of traction so that it is comfortable and avoids discomfort.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada, nos ja havem recomtat la curacio am sturnutacio e am medicacio de la ola am erbas.	 If the patient's mouth is closed, we already recommended the procedure to be performed and medical treatment with herbs.
Mays si no es fora-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recomtadas, lahoras guarda te que no fetigues sobre aquela en iteracio de abstracio, mays empero cove que aquo que es eyssit de lu a la boca de la mayre lies a la coyssa de la femna, e aprop cristeriza aquela am enguent e tetrafarmacon; quar aquel fara poyrir aquela aprop alcus dias e sira dissolvuda e sira fora-getada.	 When there are multiple causes of joint pain and those causes have been identified, please keep in mind that this procedure should only be performed once for each cause, even if more than one cause is present
Mays quan se poyreys, es de lu elevada mala audor al cap, e al estomac, e aquo ledeys la malauta; e adonc cove que sian aministradas sub-fumiguacios e convenientz ad aquo.	 Please raise the patient's head and stomach as well, let that be done with caution and care.
Mays alcus dels Antics ja so esproatz sub-fumigacio de nazitort e de figuas seccas.	 Please administer the old remedies by inserting a needle or lancet into the nose or ear canal to drain phlegm or pus from there, as needed.
Forma de instrument am le qual la femna es sub-fumiguada deves la retentio de mestruas e de la segondina:	 The instrument through which women are subjected to fumigation should retain the urine of the first and second menstruation period.
Sia fayta de veyre o de eram.	 It is necessary, or not
E sia pausada la extremitat subtil en le conh e la extremitat ampla sobre le foc, e la sub-fumiguacio sia pausada sobre las brazas del foc.	 Please hold the delicate extremity near the face and the broad extremity over the flame, and stop the fumigation on both hands.
E tengua aquela entro que sia consumida aquela sub-fumiguacio e itera·n autra.	 Please have that procedure repeated if needed.
De curacio del cul del enfant no-perforat.	 The anus of the child should not be perforated.
Motz enfantz naysso e les culs de lu no so perforatz, les quals ya ciphac subtil e opilat.	 Please do not pierce or lacerate any part of a child's body, especially delicate areas and lips.
Adonc cove a la matrona que perfore am le sieu dit aquel ciphac; e sino, perfora aquel am spatum agut, e guarda se que no toque le lacert.	 Please avoid piercing or lacerating the abdomen of any patient unless absolutely necessary and if possible, perforate that area just below it, keeping in mind to not touch anything sharp.
E aprop pause sobre aquel lana enfusa en vi e oli; e aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia senat.	 When pain occurs in a limb due to cold humors that have infiltrated into it, doctors typically call this gout
Mays si temes que sia opilat, lahoras pausa en le trauc una canula per motz dias, e osta la quan le enfant voldra degerir.	 This means "If you are worried about an abscess, then pause in applying a needle to drain it.
E ja accideys oppilacio del cul per consolidacio de plagua o de apostema; adonc cove que aquela consolidacio sia inscidida, e aprop sia curada am aquo que avem dit de la curacio e del plom.	 This means "When an abscess occurs in the anus from hemorrhoids or piles, and when that consolidation is infected, then it should be treated with care as prescribed by the doctor.
De curacio de las fistulas que endeveno dejos.	 This sentence can mean different things depending on what comes next, but one possible translation could be "The cure of fistulae wounds.
Las fistulas que endeveno en la partida dejos pus bassa so nodacio e grossetut las quals endeveno prop del cul defora o en l’espazi de la una partida.	 This translates to: "Fistulas that develop at the entrance of the body are usually small and coarse, those found in the anus or area around it.
E es una fistula o motas.	 This could mean either "it is a fistula" or "it's a wound," depending on what follows next in the text.
E cum aquela nodacio es antiquada e corr de la humiditat aygosa blanca o poyridura subtil, e alcunas veguadas so de aquestas fistulas alcunas penetrantz.	 This means "If that wound is old and infected with white or powdery moisture, then some of these fistulae may penetrate.
E aquelas penetrantz so conogudas per aquo que es eyssit de aquelas per la egressio e per ventosetat; e alcunas vetz use le malaute de egressio, e fort leu es eyssit de aquelas verm.	 This translates to: "Those which penetrate are known for being able to exit and make openings in the body; some veins may be used for exit only, while others burst easily.
E so de aquelas fistulas alcunas veguadas en l’espazi penetrantz entro a la vesica, e entro al meat de la vergua; e so de aquelas penetrantz entro la junctura de la coyssa e entro al notz de la coeta.	 This translates to: "Some of those fistulae are located in the space between the bladder and scrotum, or between the anus and rectum; some penetrate into the joints and into the veins.
E aquo en que es conoguda fistula penetrant entro al cul e no-penetrant, es que tu metas le tieu dit endic en le cul, e entrometas tenta subtil de eram o de ferr en la fistula quan no y es turtuositat.	 The first sentence translates to: In the case of a fistulous opening penetrating and non-penetrating, it is recommended that you make an incision in the anus with extreme care so as not to rupture the fistula
Mays si en aquela es turtuositat, lahoras entromet en aquela tenta subtil de plom o de pels de caval entro que tu sentas la tenta o le pel en le tieu dit.	 If there is a rupture involved, it is recommended to introduce the fistulas through a cannula in order to feel or probe for the passage into the external opening.
E si no sentas aquela de tot ni no procezeys del trauc alcuna causa de egestio ni verm ni ventositat, ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras sapias que es no-penetrant, e lahoras coyta te a la curacio.	 If there is no issue at all or if the fistula does not cause any discharge, vomiting, or other problems, then it may be non-penetrating, and you should seek medical attention.
E quan la fistula es penetrant entro a la vesica o entro al meat de la vergua, lahoras la significacio de lu es eyssiment de urina de aquela e prohibicio de lu ad aysso que·l loc am medicina sia consolidat.	 If the fistulous opening penetrates into the bladder or into the urethra, then its meaning is discharge of urine from that area and it should be treated as such so that the medical location has been established.
Mays si es penetrant entro la junctura de la coyssa o entro al os e envencio de dolor en le circuit, lahoras senhal de lu es que la tenta perve entro aqui si en lu no es turtuositat entro al os, e envencio de dolor en le circuit de la partida; e que de lu yeys poyredura tostemps; e que no val en aquela medicacio, ni es consolidada am enguent.	 If the fistulous opening penetrates into the joint or into the penis and causes pain in the circuit, then its meaning is that it can penetrate here if there is not rupture of the fistula at the anus, causing pain along the course; it needs further treatment; and it should be avoided for medical attention as it has not been established.
E en totas aquelas fistulas penetrant no es curacio de tot, e la curacio de aquelas es trebalh e vanetat dels folyls metges sobre·l qual so fermatz.	 For all those fistulas that are non-curative and the treatment of which is uncertain from the perspective of the physicians who have seen it, then it should be treated with caution as there may be no medical solution found for this specific condition.
Mays en aquela que no es penetrant e no antiqua, sanacio am ferr es sperada segon que yeu a tu recomtare, e aquo que ja yeu e proat.	 When pain occurs in the feet
E es que le malaute jagua entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos e eleva las cambas de lu entro sus, las coyssas sian enclinadas al ventre de lu, e aprop entromet tenta de plom, o de eram si es en la fistula turtuositat, entro que sapias le loc on perve la tenta.	 The patient has already had the opening made between their thighs and placed a cushion beneath them, another servant is positioned above their legs, and another one over their chest, holding their hands.
E si aquela sent le malaute entorn le cuol, lahora cove que tu entrometas le tieu dit endic en le cuol.	 If the patient feels a lump between their buttocks, say that you have made an incision in the bowel.
E si sentas en le tieu dit la tenta ja per si meteyssa descuberta penetrar, otra aquo que sentas entre le tieu dit e aquela siphac o carn, lahoras sapias certanament que aquela es penetrant; e adonc no trebalhes en aquela, quar no es en aquela sanacio, ayssi cum havem dit.	 If you feel that the lump is penetrating, then it may be a hernia or cancer between your thighs and the anus.
Mays empero diyssero alcus que es sana en alcus homes tart.	 However, please also note that healthy skin has elasticity, so any new lump could potentially be harmless.
E de la medicacio per la qual es sperat juvament en lu es que tu ignes cauteri subtil segon le ample de la fistula, ayssi cum es precedit, e intrometas aquel ignit en la fistula entro que pervengua entorn le cuol; e aprop itera aquel doas o tres vetz entro que sapias que ja son adhustas totas aquelas carns ajustadas fistuladas que so semblantz a cana de pluma de ausel.	 In the surgery for which the opening is made, you should gently insert a cautery needle into the fistula's lumen, as previously mentioned, and remove it from the bowel; repeat this three times or more until you are sure all those tightened fistulas have been opened up properly to resemble a candle wick.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder entro que en yescan totas aquelas carns que so adhustas, e aprop cura aquela am medicinas la carn engendrantz e consolidantz, e si es sanada, bo es; e sino, lahoras no es sana en degun temps per autra curacio.	 After all those tightened fistulas have been opened up, and after any other necessary surgeries are done, if it is healthy then good, otherwise there will be more treatments required.
E si la tenta intra, e no penetra entro·l tieu dit le qual es en le cul, e entre aquel e la tenta que es velament spes de carn o de ciphac, e vezes la fistula en aquo que siec la superficia de la codena, lahoras secca la codena del comensament de la fistula, e tu ve seccan am la tenta, e sia en la fistula entro que la seccio pervengua al loc en le qual perve la extremitat de la tenta, e per la tenta es liberat e catz.	 "When someone tries to penetrate the anus, and it does not penetrate into the rectum as expected due to a fistula or cyst in that area, sometimes the surface of the anal canal is dry up. The doctor will then apply something to lubricate the fissure so that penetration can be attempted again.
E aprop mundifiqua aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so asembladas a canula de pena de ausel e no romangua de aquelas alcuna causa.	 "The surgeon must remove any fistula that resembles an abscess and does not heal on its own, causing the skin to be damaged.
Mays si flux de sanc vezes que vengua entre tu e la tua opperacio quan ensideysses aquelas carns, lahoras le milh que sia e del pus leugier instrument es cauterizar am foc o am medicina acuta, quar cauteri am foc ajusta bonas doas habitutz: so es adhustio de aquelas carns ajustadas, e abscizio del sanc exseccacio de las humiditatz.	 "In cases where a fistula occurs between your hands and the operation when cleaning those parts, it is customary to use an instrument for cauterizing with heat or cold, as appropriate. The abscess should be treated using heat or cold application.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder o en caus trissat entro que·l loc geta brac, e aprop lahoras cura la plagua am enguentz carn dura engendran e consolidan.	 "The abscess should be treated with a compress soaked in warm water or hot oil applied to the affected area, and after several days of treatment it should heal and become hard.
E so medicinas en las quals so stipticitat e exseccio; quan lahoras es restaurada ja es sanada e no temes iteracio.	 "In cases where the abscess is dry and exsiccated, when it has been restored to its normal condition there will be no further treatment required.
Mays si la fistula ja perve entro al preon del cul e es elonguada de lu superficia del cos, lahoras entromet le tieu dit en le cul e inquireys am aquel.	 "If the fistula has perforated into the perineum and extends to the surface of the body, the doctor will examine it in that area.
E donc si centes la tenta e entre tu e ela es velament de ciphac o de carn, e es propda a la penetracio, lahora no es operacio en lu sino segon via di fiducia e de speransa.	 If you find cold humors between the thigh and your elbow, it is advisable to penetrate them with confidence and hope for success
La qual causa es aministrar en lu una de tres manieyras: o que cauterize aquela ayssi cum havem dit; o que secces aquela entro que consieguas la conquavitat de lu per que sia a tu possible entrometre las qualcas e la curacio propdana; e no procesiscas mot am seccio per so que no inscidas le lacert contenent le cuol, e que accidisque sobre le malaute eyssiment de la egistio ses voluntat; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit quar fort leu sira sanat; o que elongues aquel velament e mondes aquel pus que seccas aquel entro prop le cul, ayssi cum havem dit, o am tenta o am autre instrument de aguda extremitat, e aprop mondifique aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so en la seccio entro la on podes am percrustacio; e aprop esforsa te a far la restauracio de tota la plagua am seccio, e si le orrifici pus desus no es consolidat, e romangua la fistula uberta en la partida del cul, e sira pus leugier per le malaute.	 One of three methods to administer it: cauterize them as you have previously mentioned; dissect the hernia in order to remove it through a possible entrance and provide necessary care; or stretch the cloth over the anus, similar to what has been said before, using an instrument with a sharp extremity, making sure that all fistulas are opened up for inspection. After applying this method, if the obstruction persists, and the fistula is still open in the anal area, then perform the procedure on the patient's buttocks.
E alscunas veguadas la fistula es finida segon aquesta manieyra: es quan tu entrometas la tenta en la fistula, e es en le latz del cul entorn la superficia del cos am la codena e en le marge del cul, lahoras pren tenta de perforada extremitat, que es ayssi cum agulha de preparantz les coers segon aquesta forma:	 After the fistula has been finished through this method: when you enter it into the fistula, and there is a space between the buttocks and the surface of the body near the margin of the anus. The doctor will then take an instrument with a sharp point to make a hole in order to inspect all fistulas at once.
e entromet en aquela fiel envolopat de v fiels o entorn aquels; e aprop entromet tenta am fiel en la fistula entro que consiegua la conquavitat de lu.	 When entering into the fistula through a small hole, it is necessary to go slowly and carefully in order for the hernia to be removed successfully.
Mays si es penetrant en le marge del cul prop dedintz, lahoras tu extratz le fiel de aquel trauc ayssi que tu intrometas le tieu dit en le cul; e extraguas la extremitat del fiel e ajustes las duas extremitatz essemps, e estrenh cascuna, e leyssa aquo per un dia o per dos, e quan mays inscideys le fiel en la carn, estrenh be aquel entro que aquelas carns sian inscididas las quals so entre doas extremitatz del fiel e que cajan.	 When you are to penetrate the rectum and insert your penis into it, first remove any foreign object that may be inside there; remove the end of the sheath, adjust both ends, tighten each one separately, hold for 1-2 days depending on the pain level if anything is inserted in the flesh.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia consolidada e sanada.	 And once the pouch has been consolidated and healed
Mays si le orrifici de la fistula no es penetrant, lahoras fay aquel penetrar, en qualque manieyre sia a tu preparat, sino que sia mot en le preon, quar no es a tu que fassas aquo per que no inscidas le lacert; e aprop fay am aquela entro que sia sanada.	 If the fistula orifice is not penetrable, do not penetrate it unless otherwise instructed by your doctor, but rather treat with caution as if there were an open sore; and once healed, take care to keep clean.
La forma de spatum spinos am lo qual es fenduda la fistula: la curvitat del qual es mot aguda e l’autra partida es no-aguda, per so que no inscidas aquo que no es necessari, ayssi cum vezes.	 The shape of the pouch depends on whether it is formed from a fistulous deformity (which has an acute curvature and one non-acute part) or a normal pouch; if you suspect there may be a fistula without knowing for certain, do not insert anything into this region unless necessary.
De sutura de emorroydas en las quals corra sanc en la inscizio de aquelas.	 Suture the hemorrhoids in such cases running through the incision of those.
Emorroydas so segon dos manieyras, quar o so entre le cul semblantz aysi que es de carbos, o quays aquelas sian cum a gras de rasim.	 Hemorrhoids are often grouped into two types: external hemorrhoids appearing as protruding lumps around the anus and internal hemorrhoids swelling up inside of them.
E de aquelas so petitas e grans, e que le sanc corr de aquelas tostemps e es una, e so motas, e so fora·l cul, e en las extremitatz de lu.	 And from those are small and large, the pain that arises from them is sudden and severe, but moderate in some cases, and falls away after defecation or urination, in the extremities of it.
Mays empero aquelas que so foro le cul so segon las mes de pauca humiditat, de las quals corr aygua citrina o un petit de sanc am cos continuabla, e so segon la color del cos.	 When the buttocks are very dry due to low humidity and water content of which is citric acid or a small amount of salt continuously present on the body
E la curacio de aquela que es dedintz le cuol es que comandes al malaute que se assela e que se exprema entro que le cuol yesca e las emoroydas apparescan a tu.	 The urgency is that you ask the patient to lie down and explain what happens if it comes out or if there is any swelling in the buttocks
Adonc tu te coyte e suspen am uncis o que tenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, e aprop incideys aquelas deves las suas razitz.	 When you want to cut off circulation and support his back with your hand or arm, then move the fingers of that hand towards the patient's side.
Mays si les uncis no so tengutz en aquelas per la humiditat de lor e mollificacio de aquelas, lahoras pren aquelas am drap aspre o am coto o am flassada de lana, e extratz aquelas am les tieus ditz, e aprop inscideys aquelas e polveriza sobre lor alcunas polveras caudas aprop la inscizio, per que sian ad aquelas en loc de cauteri; o cauteriza aquelas segon que es precedit en le capitol de cauterizar.	 If there are no veins in the area due to low humidity and softening of that tissue, then put a gauze or cloth soaked in alcohol on it, and move it gently towards a cautery; or if you have already done so as described before for cauterizing, continue doing so
E aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	 The next procedure is to apply another cure in order to heal them
E si le cul no obezeys a egressio, lahoras cristerisa le malaute am cristeri en le qual sia mordicacio petita, e sia lavat am aquel aquo que es en le cuol e que obezesca a egressio leugierament quan le malaute s’esprem.	 If the buttocks are obese and prevent ejaculation from occurring when they are pressed down on, then apply a small knife to the wound in that area so it can cut through the flesh and prevent ejaculation from coming out.
Mays si las emorroydas so defora le cul, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiera, e es que tu prenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, o que prenguas aquelas am unci, e inscidas aquelas, e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit entro que sian sanadas.	 If the hemorrhoids are in the buttocks area and you want to treat them with a finger or hand, then press on those areas; if it is necessary to use another part of your body for treatment, then apply that instead. And continue the procedure as described before to heal them.
E aquel que avoreys inscizio, cove que aministres sutura de lor segon aquesta manieyra: pren fiel envolopat e entromet aquel en agulha e aprop extratz las emorroydas a las partidas dessus, e fay aquel penetrar am la agulha en la razit del autra part, e envolveys las doas extramitatz del fiel en la partida pus dejos de la agulha, e so latitudinalment; e estrenh la emorroyda am strectura fort, e aprop noza le fiel e extratz la agulha.	 "And whoever inserts a needle must remember to administer the second dose at that same place: apply a clean bandage and wrap around it with thread, so as to prevent it from passing through another part of her body; and if it penetrates in one direction then cover both holes made by wrapping them up.
E fay aquo a totas, e layssa de aquelas una e no la cozes, per so que la superfluitat del sanc corra de aquela.	 "And do all of this: leave some open and not close others, to prevent the overflow from that part flowing into another.
E aprop pausa sobre le cul drap enfus en oli rozat o en cerot; e pausa aquel sobre·l cuol e comanda al malaute que·s repause.	 "Place a bandage soaked in warm oil or vinegar over the anus and then place one on top of it, to tell the patient when to pause.
E aprop layssa aquela entro que caja; e quan es casuda, cura aquelas am enguentz o am autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	 "And after that: put a bandage in and then wait until it is completely dry or covered with another bandage to be safe.
De curacio de fistulas.	 "Caution for fistulas.
Motas veguadas accideys per exseccacio de fenda o per costriccio de natura.	 "Mouth ulcers caused by drying up of the mouth or from nature's stricture.
E cum so antiquadas e no val en aquela medicina, lahoras cove que tu razas aquelas am la puncta de spatum o am la tua ungla entro que sian faytas humidas e sia hostada de aquelas la escorsa pus desus, la qual prohibeys aquelas de consolidacio; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian consolidadas.	 "And if those are old and not treatable by that medicine: remember to use them in conjunction with moist bandages or compresses from these areas to prevent any further consolidation. And after they are consolidated you should apply them.
Lahoras tu osta aquelas am razio pus vehement que la primieyra entro que mot sancno e sian excoriadas; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	 When pain arises in the first joint, severe and fiery
De curacio de almesamir, so es clau.	 The cure for gout is essential.
Sapias que alamermar, so es clau, e no es si no notz redon segon la color del cors semblant a cap de claviel, e es fayt en tot le cors e majorment en las partidas dejos les pes e als ditz, e endeve per aquels dolor deves le anament.	 If you know how to relieve gout attacks by using cold remedies alone, it is important; otherwise, if only heat treatments are used instead of color treatments, you will need to seek medical attention for those pains.
E adonc cove que sia inscidit aquo que es en le circuit del clau, e sia tengut am les forfexs o am unci, e sia eradicat de la sua razit; e aprop cura aquel.	 If the gout attack has infiltrated the veins or arteries and is removed from its place, then it must be cured.
E si vols, cauteriza le segont que es precedit en le sieu capitol.	 Then, cauterize as mentioned in the previous sentence if you wish to do so.
Mays de veruca es eminencia petita aspre fistulada redonda sobre la superficia del cos, e motas veguadas veno en las mas dels enfantz.	 A small pimple on the surface of the body will often cause pain in many children.
E curacio de lu es que estendas e inscidas aquela, o que estrenhas aquela am fiel o am pel entro que caja.	 The cure for it is to spread and infiltrate that thing, or to cut off that part of the body altogether.
E si vols, cauteriza aquo, segon que havem dit, am foc o am medicina acuta.	 If you wish to do so as mentioned earlier, apply heat or an acute treatment (like a blister).
E ja so eradicadas enversas e no-enversas am le instrument le qual yeu diyre.	 And make sure it has been removed from the area that was affected by it and nothing else is needed to treat this.
Mays formica es eminencia petita feutrada o fistulada grossa sobre la superficia del cos anant mot en le preon, e quan le freg atroba aquela es centit en lu semblant de mordificacio de formigua, e es fayta entorn le cos.	 A small pimple on the surface of the body will often cause pain that makes you want to squeeze it or pick at it until it breaks open and causes a pus-filled boil.
E curacio de lu es que prenguas una canula de pena de auca o de pena de voltor, e sia fort, e pausa aquela sobre la formigua entro que la contengua le cercle de la canula de las partidas de lu; e aprop revolveys la tua ma am la canula entro que inscidas aquo que es en le circuit de la formigua, e pauses aquela en le preon de la carn, e que eradiques la formigua de la sua razit.	 "You should insert a needle with pain or thirst, and hold it over the rim of the cup so that it contains the liquid in the flow through its circuit; then release your hand from around the cup to indicate that you have finished drinking.
E si vols, fay aquo am canula de eram o de ferr segon aquesta forma:	 "If you wish, lay down a straw and proceed as follows:
Sia la partida desus de la canulha trahent a subtilitat, sorda (so es no-perforada), envolopada per so que sobre le dit la aprencio de lu sia ablaviada e la revolucio de aquela.	 "Make it narrow at the tip, soundless (non-perforated), covered so that you know when its opening is blocked and replaced.
E si vols cauteriza la formiga segon que es denant dit en la cauterizacio de atheyl en le capitol de cauteri.	 "If you wish to cauterize the ulcer in the same way as for arteries, then cauterize it at the tip of a cautery.
De forma dels instrumentz que so aministratz a dar cristeri.	 "From among the instruments that are used by doctors:
Alcunas veguadas es fayt cristeri de argent o de lato o de eram fondut o malleat; e alcunas veguadas es fayt de aquels instrumentz petit e gran segon aquels als quals so aministratz, quar aquel que es aministrat en la curacio dels petitz enfants sia petit; e de aquel dels quals los culs son freuls o doloyrozes, les cristeris de aquels sian petitz.	 "Some cauteries are made of silver or bronze or iron; and some cauteries are small ones used for the treatment of children's burns, which one is administered to treat children's burns.
La forma de cristeri gran e pauc:	 "The form of large ones (large cauteries):
Le cap de la canula de lu desus en le qual es liada la borsa sia ampla segon aquesta manieyra; e sia a lu distinacio la on la borsa es liada ayssi cum vezes.	 "The top of the needle's point, where you will place a bag wide enough in this manner.
E la extremitat de lu pus dejus, la qual es entromesa en le cul, sia sorda (so es no-uberta) mot leon, atrasent a subtilita; e en la un del latz de lu sian dos traucs, e en l’autre costat un trauc, e sia la amplesa del trauc segon la groseza dels rays e pus gros un petit.	 The extremity of him is introduced in the anus, which cannot be unseen by anyone, it causes great irritation; and on one side there are two ulcers, and on the other side one ulcer, and these ulcers become larger as the days go on
E sia la borsa en la qual sian pausadas las medicinas de vesica de bestia o de pel de ovelha, e la razit de lu sia un palm.	 The bag in which the bladder medicines of beast or sheep are placed is dry and rough
E sia perforada per motz traucs ayssi cum es revolvuda; e si l’espazi le qual es entre les traucs la grossetut del dit.	 It is perforated by sharp ulcers, which turn it around like this; if there is space between the ulcers then its surface will be rough
E aprop entromet en aquels traucs fiel fort de fiel cru le qual sia de detz fiels, o enviro aquels; e ajusta am aquel la borsa; e quan es pausada en lu la borsa, sia streyt en le cap del cristeri entre dos distingentz am fort costriccio, e aprop cristeriza am aquel quascun trauc: Mays la qualitat de cristerizar am aquel es que tu omples la borsa de la medicina, que sia escalfada segon la quantitat de la tolleransa del malaute; e guarda te que no sia trop cauda ni trop freja.	 Stretch the bag tightly between two strong strings like this, adjust it so that the mouth of the chest is between two sharp corners; and when it is placed on him, stretch it over his chest as much as possible, without causing too much pain or being too tight
E aprop le malaute sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos, e eleva las suas cambas en sus e pausa dejos lu un cuer sobre le qual ja so les homes o un lansol; e aprop unta la extramitat del cauteri am oli o am album de huou o am mucellage de fenugrec o de semblantz; e aprop entromet aquel en le cul am facilitat, e aprop le ministre prengua la borsa e exprema aquel am doas mas e essemps am vehemencia entro que sia evacuat en le budelh tot aquo que es en le cristeri; e aprop extra le cristeri e le malaute leva las suas cambas a la paret.	 Stretch the patient out onto his back, raise up their legs and place one hand over this area or another, and stretch it to remove the ulcer from its base into the chest; and extend the ulcer and the patient away from each other.
E si la medicina forsa aquel a eyssiment, tengua le tant quant poyra; e si dorm am aquel per tota una nueyt, es mays derier en juvament.	 When medicine fails to heal that illness completely, then it may be necessary in the future.
Mays si tu cristerizas aquel en las malautias de solucio de ventre e l’eyssiment de lu le coyta, lahoras tu itera le cauteri entro que sia sanat.	 If you are going to operate on that illness in the abdomen and its cause, then doctors will use a pointed cautery as treatment.
E si en le cul so emorroydas o apostemas ledens, lahoras sia le cristeri mot subtil e leon, dels cristeris am les quals les enfantz so criterisatz.	 If in the anus it appears or burns inside the body, then doctors will use a subtle needle and thread, similar to those used for circumcision on children.
De curacio de las plaguas.	 For healing of the wounds.
Yeu ja e dit en la divisio de la curacio de las plaguas aquo que convenia al libre, e yeu dic assi la curacio de aquelas am ma e am medicinas segon le conpliment.	 You have already mentioned in the previous part of the healing process that it was customary to follow a free course for treatment, and you mention here that medical treatments should be based on this course as well.
Donc dic que las plaguas son diversificadas segon aquo en que son faytas las plaguas e segon le loc sobre le qual cazo las plaquas.	 Therefore, the wounds are classified according to whether they were caused by cold humors or other factors affecting their location.
E las causas per que motas vetz son faytas las plaguas so ayssi cum getament de peyra, o inscisio d’espaza o de cotel, o percussio am lansa, o am fustz, o am sageta, o semblantz ad aquels de motas causas.	 The causes for which the wounds are caused by cold humors or other factors affecting their location will be listed here.
Mays las plaguas que so en les locz del cos so ayssi cum plagua la qual catz sobre le cap, o·l col, o·l pietz, o·l ventre, o·l fitge, e semblantz ad aquels dels membres.	 The wounds located on the body will be listed here as well, such as those on the head, neck, chest, abdomen, and other parts of the body.
E yeu so recomtant la curacio de alcunas plaguas per que pauses aquela ratiocinacio e regla sobre las autras plaguas.	 This sentence translates to English as: You should apply some plaguings in order to prevent another reasoning and regulation of the subsequent plaguings.
E yeu comensare de las plaguas del cap simplas, quar la rememoracio de las compostas vindra al comensament del tertz capitol.	 This sentence translates to English as: You should start with simple plagues, and then recall the complex ones will begin at the third capital.
Donc dic que quan accideys en le cap plagua simpla e no es fractura, lahoras considera: si es per getament de peyra o de semblant, e ja ha trinquada la codena tant solament e es gran plagla e temes sobre aquel malaute havinement de apostema caut, lahoras tu te coyta e fleubotoma la cephalica tantost, e no tardas aquo; e extrats ad aquel del sanc segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu si no mes alcuna causa prohibent de fleubotomia, majorment si·l sanc que es eyssit de la plagua es pauc.	 This sentence translates to English as: When you encounter a simple plague that hasn't broken it, the doctor considers: if this is for healing or relief, and there has been no bloodletting associated with its application, then apply this potion gently; but if any bleeding occurs, quickly remove the cephalica (a type of poultice used to stop bleeding) from around it.
E sia la flaubotomia del contrari de la partida plaguada; e guardase le malaute de replecio e de vi e de viandas grossas.	 This sentence translates to English as: And be careful of the opposite of the diseased plague, and keep the patient away from large wounds and from any excessive bleeding.
Mays si de la minuicio prohibeys alcuna causa, lahoras sia aminorat de la vianda e no apropinque a carn ni a vi.	 This sentence translates to English as: If there is no prohibited cause, then the doctor should gently remove the wound and avoid applying it to skin or to blood.
E pausa sobre la plagua, si a lu accideys apostema caut, coto enfus en oli rozat solet o en vi en le qual es stipticat.	 This sentence translates to English as: Upon the plague, if bleeding occurs in or on it, mix oil and vinegar (or any other liquid) with a compress applied gently over it.
Mays si est segur de apostema caut, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua, si es recent am le sieu sanc e le ayre no ha mudat aquela la polvera la qual yeu recomtare aprop petit.	 This sentence translates to English as: If you are sure of bleeding, then upon the plague apply a compress if it is fresh and the wound has not changed much from what was recommended for application earlier.
E si le ayre ja ha mudada aquela, lahoras pausa sobre alscus enguentz entro que sia sanada.	 When the patient's belly has been made open, put down cushions on either side to keep it from falling in, while someone holds their hands.
Mays si la plagua es gran o es per inscizio d’espaza e de semblantz, e no so ajustadas las labias de lu per puvils, lahoras ajusta aquelas am sutura segon que yeu recomtare de la sutura de lor.	 If the wound is large or gaping and cannot be closed with stitches due to risk of infection, then doctors adjust it to close later after making a separate incision for sutures.
Mays si la plagua ja es discuberta del os e pen, e no es retencio de lu sino un petit suspensori, lahoras inscideys aquela e aprop cura la plagua am medicinas e restaura la carn aprop en loc de codena, e comanda al malaute que sia pescut de viandas en las quals es groceza: caps e formen coyt e semblantz a lor, entro que sia compost.	 If the belly wound is visible and gaping, then doctors insert something to keep it open until healing is complete, making an incision for sutures as well in order to close it later on in another place, so that the flesh is stitched up correctly there while preventing waste from accumulating: heads and forms should be straight and similar.
E si atrobas en la codena putrefaccio e no adhereys al os, lahoras tu inscideys tot aquo poyrit e geta aquo, e aprop cura aquo.	 If the belly wound becomes rotten or adheres to the abdomen, then doctors cut through it and remove it, treating the affected area as necessary.
Mays si en aquestas plaguas es arteria o vena de la qual fluxs de sanc pot evenir, e no es abscindida per medicinas, lahoras tu inquier sobre la arteria, e si atrobas aquela no-inscidida, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am spatum, o lia aquela; e si necessitat te provoca que aquo que havem dit no comfereys, lahoras tu cauteriza entro que·l sanc sia abscidit.	 If the belly wounds are arteries or veins through which blood can flow, and not closed by medicine, doctors inquire about it to determine if they should remove it in order to prevent bleeding: if it is clear that it cannot be removed, then cauterize it so that bleeding stops before it is cut.
E si aquestas plaguas son simplas e petitas, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiere; enayssi que tu polverizas sobre aquelas aquesta polvera, quar consolidada aquela denant que l’ayre mude aquelas.	 If the belly wounds are simple and small, then their cause is easy to find: you can simply powder them over there with this powder, making sure that it settles down on those wounds before the wound of the belly heals completely.
E la manieyra de la polvera es aquesta: recipe oli de enses partida una, de sanc de drago partida doas, de caus no-extincta partidas tres; sia tot mot trissat e crivellat, e de lu sia la plagua omplida, e sia constrengida per bona constriccio entro que be sobre aquela aderesca, e sia coagulada am le sanc.	 The first sentence means: "The recipe for treating the patient's ailment is to apply a poultice once every day, and to change dressings three times; it should consist of linen well-padded with vinegar and strained cloth tightly bound around the afflicted part so that they do not loosen or separate from one another.
E aprop strengeys aquela desus am pulvils e leyssa aquela, e no la deslias mentre esta ayssi que no es apostemada, quar no es eredicada de lu la medicina entro que sia sanada.	 "The goal is to strain these poultices as tight as possible and leave them in place until they become so hardened that they cannot be torn apart by the patient's movements.
E alcuna vetz fa aquo sola cautz, quan no es a tu en present enses e sanc de drago.	 "It should not only involve applying poultices when there is also pain in the affected areas and legs.
E ja fa aquesta meteyssa operacio en las grans plaguas quan conveneys que sia pausada sobre aquelas e sian streytas, e so plaguas recentz am le lor sanc, las quals le ayre no ha alteradas.	 "The procedure is performed on large wounds when it has been observed that the poultice has remained in place for a long time and shows signs of hardening.
E si le ayre las ha alteradas, e majorment quan es en temps d’estiu, lahoras no es entencio a la posicio de aquesta polvera, mays adonc cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit, enayssi que tu pauses sobre aquelas alcus enguents degistius, o que pauses sobre aquelas pols de la farina del ordi am aygua e mel entro que getan poyredura; e aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	 "If the poultice has become damp and is becoming soft due to high temperatures, you should not apply it in its usual position as described earlier. Instead, you can place them on their chest or back between clean cloth and water to prevent infection.
Mays si accideys am la plagua fractura en os, e es petita, lahoras tu extratz aquo am gesti.	 "If the poultice breaks in half but is still small enough, you can remove it gently.
E yeu diyre la cura de las fracturas del cap en aquo que es envenidor.	 When fractures occur in the head
De las plaguas del col.	 Of the hemorrhoids of the lower part
Mays si la plagua accideys en le col, lahoras no es en lu differencia en medicacio, e entre la plagua del cap quan es simpla.	 When a hemorrhoid occurs in the anus, the doctors do not differentiate it from hemorrhoids of the head when simple.
Mays si ja le nervi del col es inscis o arteria, lahoras si es nervi, no es en lu engen sino que sia evitada curacio de lu am aquo que fa vehement stipticitat, ayssi cum ziniar e zegi que es vetriol e semblantz a lor quar nozo als nervis e contrazo aquel.	 If the nerve of the anus is injured or artery, doctors would treat it as a nerve if simple, but otherwise they would recommend avoiding treatment with strong painkillers and recommending against cutting off that part because it can damage other nerves near to it.
E no pauses sobre la plagua alcuna causa de tot freja, quar la sustancia dels nervis es freja e la continuacio de lu es am le cervel, le qual es le pus aut de totz les membres.	 And if the hemorrhoids are not caused by any cold humors, but rather by the substance of the nerves being chilled and continued to be so is the cause for this condition in all members.
E si’ aquo am que es curat de medicinas leugieras, ayssi cum es caus lavada am aygua dousa, alcuna veguada enfusa en oli rozat o no-rozat, e thucia quan es lavada am aygua dousa e las autras peyras minarantz segon aquesta manieyra, e enguentz humitz.	 If it is necessary to use medical ointments, or if you have used a hot water bath without oil and lotion after that, follow these instructions: moisturize the affected area as needed with warm water.
Mays si la plagua es gran, lahoras aministra sutura, o coarta las labias de lu, e aprop cura aquela am pulvils entro que sia sanada.	 If the hemorrhoids are large, doctors will give stitches or cut out part of the anus and repair it after it is healed.
Mays si a la plagua es profunditat o accideys en lu a la pus bassa partida poyredura, lahoras perfora aquela en le loc mays depremegut.	 If a hemorrhoid occurs at the very lowest part of the body, doctors will perform it in that area where possible.
Mays si en la plagua ja es inscisa arteria e es conseguit flux de sanc, lahoras separa o secca aquela, o lia aquela, o cauteriza aquela si necessitat te provoca ad aquo.	 When a patient has opened an artery with bleeding that cannot be stopped, doctors should cut into it to prevent further bleeding.
Mays si ja ha insciditz les spondils del golayro o tot, e so salvadas las venas del col, lahoras tu ajusta las labias de la codena am sutura sobre la cana del golayro e no toques aquel; abantz egala aquel e reduzeys aquel sobre la sua figura natural, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent, e leyssa aquela per alcus jorns; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz en les quals es stipticitat e excitacio entro que sia sanat.	 The doctor should cut into the groin area and save the veins of the colon, sewing over the anus to prevent the intestines from coming out, and place a bandage on it so that it can heal naturally for days; and apply heat or cold as needed to reduce swelling and pain in the affected areas.
Mays si la plagua ja en le os a fayta enprecio, lahoras percuireys aquela, e lahoras si en lu ha fragmentz de hos, extratz totz aquels que podes de lor; e aquo que a tu no es apparelhat, leyssa aquo entro que la plagua se poyrisca, e sia separat e la egrecio de lu sia alleujada.	 If the patient has a wound on their body that needs to be treated quickly due to complications, they should seek medical attention immediately and have any fragments of clothing removed as well; if it is not necessary to apply something to the wound itself, let them know to let doctors deal with it since wounds can become infected easily.
E si la plagua es recent lahoras polveriza sobre aquela polvera la qual t’e recomtada.	 If a patient's wound is recent, they should cover it with powder or something else recommended by the doctor.
Mays si en la plagua es fayta fistula, lahoras cura aquela am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra aprop en le sieu capitol.	 If a patient's wound is a fistula, doctors should treat it as if they were treating the patient elsewhere in their body.
De las plaguas del col o de semblantz quan fayta entre las spallas e es fayta am spaza o am cotel o am lansa o am semblantz.	 The wounds on or between the buttocks, anus, genitals, hands, or limbs should be treated.
Si es percussio de lansa o de cotel, e vezes de lu la profunditat, lahoras considera mays si de la plagua yeys ventositat quan le malaute elena; lahoras sapias que la plagua es mortal.	 "If it is a sprain of the ankle or calf muscle, and sometimes deep into them, doctors consider it as potentially fatal.
E si en lu no es profunditat e la plagua es recent am le sieu sanc, lahoras tu pauses en lu de la primieyra horo polvera, e no strenhas aquel per que no sia le sanc retengut en la profunditat de lu e que retorne al cor e que aucigua le malaute, mays pausa en lu enguent atractiu, e deslia aquela doas veguadas le dia.	 "If it's not deep and the sprain is recent to them, doctors recommend pausing on that spot for a while, so as to prevent the sprain from returning back into its original depth in the muscle or joint, and to return to the heart if necessary, holding down their hand over the area during this time.
E si l’enguent no es a tu present, lahoras tu pausa en le orrifici de la plagua coto viel per que sucque aquo que yeys de las humiditatz; e fay que le malaute dorma sobre la plagua per que corra aquo que es en lu ajustat.	 "If the sprain is not at the present, doctors recommend pausing on the surface of the joint and pressing it down gently so that water does not get in between them; and they also place the patient's hand over it to prevent it from coming out.
Mays si ja de la plagua son passatz tres dias o mays e no accideys al malaute spasme ni tremor de cor mal ni strictura de ale, e vezes las autras dispozicios bonas de lu, lahoras sapias que plagua es salva; e adonc cura aquela am calguas e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanada.	 "If the sprain lasts for three days or more and does not cause any heart problems such as chest pain, muscle spasms, tremors, constriction of airways, or bad feelings that make it difficult to breathe normally, doctors recommend keeping their hand over it while applying cold water and warm compresses until it is healed.
Mays si la sanacio de lu es excusada, e ja tot temps es uberta, lahoras sapias que ja es fayta fistula; cura donc aquela per le sieu capitol.	 "If the healing of it has been completed and they have already removed their hand from over it, doctors recommend to remove the cushion from above it.
E si la plagua es per inscisio de spaza o de cotel, e es simpla en la superficia del pietz o del dos, lahoras cura aquela am aquo que es precedit de sutura, si es gran, o am polvera, si es petita.	 When the abscess is due to strangulation of the throat or chest, and if it's small on the surface of the chest but big elsewhere, doctors cure that with sutures only where necessary, either large or small
Mays si ja ha fayta enprecio en le os, e so ja de lu inscizas pessas, lahoras tu torqua la plagua e coyta ad extrayre aquelas pessas, si so separadas.	 If you have already opened the abscess and it is small in one ear but large elsewhere, doctors will drain that abscess and cut away those abscesses if they are separate
Mays si no so separadas, lahoras leyssa las entro que se poyresca la plagua, que la extraccio de lor es alleujada.	 If the two abscesses are connected, then doctors will drain both of them easily.
E de las autras plaguas accidentz en les autres membres le juvament en curacio es le juvament de aquo que havem dit.	 Accidents happen in all members at times, and the cure for that which we mentioned is also timely.
De las plaguas del ventre.	 Abscesses of the belly.
L’indisposicio la qual accideys en le ventre es o gran, o pauc, o migiera.	 The discomfort that occurs in the belly is either large or small or moderate.
De la gran alcunas veguadas yeys le budel o nervi del budel, per que es fayta intromissio de lor e la sutura de lor esser pus vehement e pus subtil.	 From the great veins that surround the intestine or nerves of it, due to an intrusion by them and the suture needed being very strong or subtle.
E disrupcio petita es fayta dificil per autra manieyra, e siec se que la reduccio de lor es pus dificil, si no te coytes de la intromissio de lor al sieu loc tantost, quar se ubre e es engrossat per que le intrament de lu es fayt difficil.	 A small disruption is made difficult by other means, and if the reduction of them is very difficult, unless you prevent their intrusion into that place as much as possible, then they will be difficult to remove because the method of treatment itself becomes difficult.
E donc la milhor disrupcio es migiera, quar en aquela no es dificil la reduccio del budel, ayssi cum es dificil en las doas specias denant ditas.	 Therefore, the greatest disruption is moderate, where in that case reduction of the intestine isn't difficult, but it can be very difficult for two other things mentioned.
E sapias que sutura del ventre es segon quatre manieyras, mays doas suturas son comunas que conveneysso en suturas de las autras plaguas del cors.	 The incision of the abdomen is second to four layers, many sutures are common in the closure of other organs in the chest.
E duas autras suturas proprias comunican a las autras plaguas, mays empero so mays proprias en la sutura del ventre.	 Two separate incisions specific to that organ commonly join with those of adjacent organs, but no less common in the closure of the abdomen than they are for other organs.
E yeu recomti a tu quascuna am exposicio e declaracio.	 It is advisable to make sure you have made an exposure and declaration as well.
Donc dic que quan la plagua es petita e es eyssit alcuna causa del budel per aquela, e es fayt dificil a reduzir aquel, lahoras aquo es en una de doas manieyras: o per parvitat de la disrupcio ayssi cum havem dit, o quan al budel es venguda inflacio per la frigiditat de l’ayre.	 Then it says when the hernia is small and no other cause of the intestine can be found for that one, then there are two ways in which it may occur: either through the weakness of disruption or if coldness of the air has caused it.
E donc quan aquo es ayssi, lahora cove que tu scalfes aquel enayssi que tu submerges una sponga ho drap humit en aygua tebeza sola, o que coguas en aygua squinant, e cyperum, e spic, e embroques am aquela le budel entro que la imflacio sia resolvuda.	 When that is the case, you should either compress it with a damp cloth or spray water on it and cover it up, to prevent further inflammation.
E alcunas veguadas fa aquo vi en le qual ha stipticitat, e es milhor que la aygua sola en resolucio de la imflacio.	 Some remedies may include using a compress as that alone can help resolve the inflammation more effectively than just water alone.
E donc cum tu vezes la imflacio esser resolvuda, lahoras tu humecta le budel am aygua en la qual es coyta altea e malvas, quar per aquo es alleujat le intrament de lu am pauca causa.	 Once the inflammation has been resolved, you may gently wet the hernia and cover it with a cloth that is clean and dry as much as possible to prevent further irritation from small causes.
Mays si es escusat le intrament de lu aprop aquesta curacio, lahoras scindeys la disrupcio un petit am strument am le qual so inscididas emorroydas.	 When a gout attack occurs in the joints, you must apply heat to relieve the pain, as directed by doctors.
E la curacio primieyra es milhor, quan es propriada que no es seccio, e no sia occupacio a seccar aprop necessitat e defaliment.	 The first treatment is mild when it is not necessary, and does not require the application of any medication.
Del instrument, sec se la forma de lu:	 Of course! Please provide me with more context or details so I can better assist you in understanding the text.
La una partida de lu torta aguda, e l’autra partida no-acuta, e la extremitat subtil, e no sia am la subtilitat de spatum, abantz sia obtusa un pauc.	 The first course of treatment should be mild when it is not necessary and does not require the application of any medication; however, in cases where pain is severe or there are complications like pain in the feet, doctors may prescribe other treatments.
E donc cum la plagua es amplificada e yeys fora le budel, lahoras cove que la sua reduccio sia segon la forma de lu natural, en le sieu loc propri, si es possible sobre aquo, quar milhor es.	 If the pain is intensified and unbearable for the patient, doctors may recommend a more gentle approach to their treatment regimen, in their own location if possible, as this could be most beneficial.
Mays quan la disrupcio es ampla, e es en la partida pu bassa del ventre, lahoras cove que tu fassas jazer le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa las suas cambas pus autas que·l sieu cap; e si es en la partida pus desus del ventre, lahoras tu pause le cap de lu e·l pietz pus autz que las partidas dejos.	 When the disruption is widespread and in the lower abdomen, you should place a cushion on either side of their body to support them; if it's in the upper abdomen, hold their head gently and support them as well.
E semblantment si la disrupcio es en una de las doas partz del ventre, lahoras pausa la tua entencio e la tua consideracio tostemps en aysso per que la partida en la qual es la plagua sia pus auta que l’autra.	 Similarly, if the disruption is in one of the two parts of their stomach, you should support them with their head and arm as well so that the pain in the part where it occurs can be held back more than the other.
E ayssi cove que tu aministres aquo en las plaguas grans e en las plaguas migieras.	 When you administer this in great wounds and small wounds
E en las plaguas petitas, pausa aquo que es a tu preparat, e aprop fay que·l ministre sia entre las tuas mas pyatados, le qual tengua la disrupcio tota am la sua ma e ajusta las labias de lu, e aprop descuebre de aquela ad aquel que siec la sutura alcuna causa aprop autra.	 In small wounds pause to administer it and do as follows: place the minister between your thighs so that it holds the whole abdomen tight and adjusts the labia of him/her, and afterwards cover up with a bandage whatever is needed
E aquesta es la manieyra de sutura comuna: una que prenguas la agula, o comte de agula segon la cantitat de la amplitut de la plagua; e aprop layssa de la extremitat de la disrupcio del dit anular, e strenh la agula una, otre que tu no metas fiel en las doas extremitatz de la codena, am doas extremitatz del ciphac que es dejos la codena de las partidas dedintz, entro que fassas aquela penetrar de aquela partida; e tu ja has agreguadas doas extremitatz de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, e so faytas quatre ordes.	 The common method of suturing: pierce the wound with a needle or count how long it is and make sure to pierce one edge while leaving the other two untouched in order not to damage both ends of the artery; if you miss this part, do not enter through that hole; and then apply four orders.
E aprop strenh am fiel doble en le circuit de la agula, e alcunas veguadas de doas partz ensemps, e aprop agregua las doas labias e la plagua per agreguacio decent; e aprop layssa la grossitut del dit e fiqua una autra agulha en aquela, e aprop lia aquela am fiel ayssi cum fiest am la primieyra agulha; e no cesses far aquo si es necessitat am las agulhas entro que ajas complida tota la contriccio de la plagua.	 Stretch firmly in the circle of the needle, and place two stitches between each pair of parts, and sew up the top of the wound with another stitch; stretch out its length by inserting a second needle there, holding it so that it is firm as you start on the first one; do not stop doing this until all the thread around the wound has been used.
E sian las agulhas migieras entre groceza e subtilitat, quar las agulhas subtils mot leugierament insciden la carn; e las grossas so de dificil intrament en la codena, e donc per aquo cove que sian migieras en subtilitat e grosseza.	 Needles should vary in size and delicacy depending on how deep they go into the skin: thin needles are gentler but may pierce more deeply than thick ones.
E no cove que la agulha sia ficada en doas extremitatz de la codena propdana mot, per so que la carn no sia inscidida leugierament e que la plagua se huebra devant la sua consolidacio.	 When the needle is inserted into both extremities of his hand, to prevent injury and for better grip during the stitching process
E no sian prolonguadas de sutura per que la plagua no sia prohibida de consolidacio.	 Sutures should not be prolonged in order to prevent the closure from being prohibited.
E aprop inscideys las extremitatz de las agulhas per so que no ledescan le malaute deves le sieu dormier; e pausaras sobre la sutura pulvils expanduts de tota partida, les quals tenguan las extremitatz de las agulhas; e layssa aquelas entro que sapias que la plagua ja es consolidada.	 The needles are inserted into the extremities of the patient to prevent them from falling asleep during sleep and place a soft pad on top of the stitches, which covers all the extremities with the fingers; and ensure that it is known when the closure has been made.
E aquestas specias de sutura am agulhas en cal manieyra es pus convenient en las plaguas petitas, quar habasta en la sutura de lor una agulha o doas o entorn aquelas.	 These types of stitches are used with needles in a way that is most convenient for small wounds where only one or two stitches may be needed around them.
Mays la segonda sutura es cominal: e es que tu aministres am sutura las quatre extremitatz, de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, en una veguada, am agulha en la qual sia fiel envolopat engual en subtilitat e grosseza.	 The second stitch is as follows: and you administer the stitches on all four extremities, from the hand to both of his feet, in a single line, with a needle that is tightly wrapped up close to its tip in subtlety and thickness.
E aprop quan am la agulha auras penetrat aquestas quatre extremitatz, reduzeys la agulha de aquela meteyssa partida de la qual comensest, per so que le fiel retrayt caja de la pus subirana partida a la plagua, per so que la sutura sia segon sutura de drap am la qual les draps so strengutz.	 Once the needle has entered these four extremities, reduce it from that area which begins first, to prevent the tightly applied pressure on the cloth of subsequent stitches, and ensure that the second stitch in drap is as strong as the first one.
E pausa entre quascuna sutura la quantitat del gros del dit mendre.	 "Place a cushion under each thigh, another servant on their legs, and another one on their chest.
E aquesta sutura sabo les homes.	 This is the skin of the hand.
E am tal sutura yeu cozegui la plagua la qual era accidida a un home en le sieu ventre le qual era stat plaguat am un cotel, e era la disrrumpcio de la plagua major de un palm, e era eyssit dels budels entorn dos palms del budel del mieg loc e era la disrupcio en le mieg del membre; e adonc yeu reduzegui aquel depus que le budel havia stat foro la plagua per xxiiii horas.	 This skin was torn from a man in his stomach who had been suffering for 24 hours, and there were tears in the area around two of his fingers where it had ruptured the large vein (the largest in the palm) on both hands and had caused damage to the member; reducing it would prevent further tears.
E la plagua fo consolidada en le spazi de xv dias o entorn, e curegui aquel e es sanat; e aprop aquo visquec per motz ans, e es conversat en las suas disposicios.	 The wound had been healing for 15 days and over time it had become solid, so reducing it would have made matters worse, but doing so was considered impossible
E les autres metges havian jutgat que no fora sanat; e per miracle foc, quar yeu no curegui aquel am enguent, quar era en loc en le qual enguent no era atrobat ni deguna medicina, mays pausegui sobre la plagua coto viel dos veguadas lo dia e ablucio assiduo am aygua de mel entro que foc sanat.	 The other doctors thought it would not heal and so they decided to cover the wound with two gauze pads every day and applied a poultice made of honey for 2 days until it healed
Mays yeu diyre dos specias de sutura proprias segon narracio de Paraula.	 You should apply two pieces of your own skin separately in addition to the previous instructions.
E es que tu comenses am sutura de la codena, e entrometas agulha de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz.	 Cut an onion and use its stalk to wrap around
E donc cum la agulha penetra en la codena e en aquel meteys lacertz segon rectetut e en longetut de tot le cos, e layssa la extremita del ciphac en le qual has entromesa la agulha; e fay penetrar en la autra extremitat la agulha de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo en l’autra extremitat del mihat.	 Insert the needle into the onion and wrap around it as much as possible, leaving one end of the onion stalk outside to enter another hole in its other side for the second part
E don cum tu auras fayta aquela penetrar, lahoras tu fay aquela penetrar autra veguada en aquela meteyssa extremitat del mihat de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz; e leyssa la extramitat del ciphac que es en aquest latz, e fay penetrar la agulha en l’autra extremitat de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo.	 "When you insert it into the body part and cause pain to occur there, doctors usually call this gout.
E fay penetrar am aquela la tua penetracio am la qual fas aquela penetrar en le ciphac en la extremitat del mirat la qual es en la partida de lu entro que tot aquel penetre.	 "And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery.
E aprop comensa de aquest meteys costat e cus aquel am la extremitat que es del ciphac en l’autra latz, e extratz la agulha de la codena la qual penetrec, e aprop redutz aquela en aquela codena e cos la extremitat del ciphac que es en l’autra costat am aquesta extramitat del mirat; e extratz aquela de la codena la qual es de part de lu.	 "Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out.
E fay aquo una veguada e autra, e fay aquo una veguada aprop autre veguada entro que tu cozes tot aquo que es deforo segon aquel eysemple.	 "And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery.
E la suma de aquesta manieyra de sutura es que tu cozes am sutura de pellicies am la qual cozo las pels, enayssi que tu cozes le ciphac una veguada de la part de la extremitat de la codena, e que leysses aquela autra veguada entro que la ajas complida.	 "Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out.
Mays la segonda specia de sutura propria la qual dieys eyssament Gualia , e aquest es de sermo de lu e per lu recomtat, es que tu cozas aquela segon semilitut am la qual alcus medicantz cozo aquela, enayssi que agreguan tota partida a la sua compar partida a lu convenient per natura; e aplican la extremitat de autre de lu e la extremitat del mirat al autra extremitat de lu, e aquo es fayt segon que yeu a tu recomti.	 "And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery.
Cove que tu fiques la agulha en la extremitat del mirat a tu propdana de la partida deforo, e fassas aquela penetrar a la partida dedintz en aquel sol, e leysses dos extremitatz del ciphac; e aprop revolveys la agulha e fay aquela penetrar de foro a la dedintz en dos extremitatz del ciphac.	 When you put the needle in your right hand at its starting point of injury and advance it to the end, then withdraw both needles from their respective holes; and afterwards revolve the needle and advance it again into both holes on both sides of the wound
E aprop revolveys aquelas cascunas, e fay penetrar quascunas de la partida dededintz entro a la partida deforo en dos extremitatz del mirat autras que so en le latz contrari.	 Afterwards revolve those cushions and insert one into each of the holes on both sides of the wound; or if it is not in place, put another one in the same side as the previous one
E aquesta manieyra de sutura es milhor de la sutura comuna leugiera, e es sutura de la qual precedic rememoracio.	 This method of suture is superior to that used for common wounds and requires memory
Aquest es le sermo de Gualia	 It seems like a passage from the Gospel of Matthew
E mays le diyssero alcus, sutura del ventre es rectificada am dos agulhas, so es que tu entrometas en aquestas a quascunas un fiel, e comensa am intromiccio de agulha de aquo que es deves tu, e fay aquela penetrar entro al autra latz segon sutura de aquels les quals cozo les cuers engualment.	 If necessary, the sutures of the abdomen are corrected with two needles in order to enter it accurately into this hole and afterwards advance another needle from that one for the second suture of those which enclose them equally
E sapias que quan disrupcio es en le mieg loc del ventre, lahoras la sutura de lu es pus difficil que dels autres locs del ventre.	 You know that when the rupture occurs in the belly area, healing is more difficult than in other parts of the abdomen.
Mays le juguament de medicacio de plagua es jutgament de las autras plaguas.	 The practice of treating a plague is also judged by its consequences.
La qual causa es quar quan tu consieguas la plagua recent am le sieu sanc denant que l’ayre altera aquela, e reduses le budel e cozes aquela e aptas aquela decentment, lahoras pausa sobre aquela polvera encarnativa.	 When you have cured the plague that occurred recently at one time by applying another remedy and reducing the swelling of it gently, doctors pause over this inflammatory blister.
E si le ayre ja ha alterada la plagua, lahoras pausa sobre aquela alcus enguentz les quals so a tu presens entro que fassan peyra dura e cajan les fiels, e sian consolidatz ciphac e mirat; e aprop cura aquela ayssi cum es la curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat.	 When the patient's buttocks have already been opened and a cushion placed beneath them, pain is expected to occur at this point as hard pressure is applied, causing the skin to burst, and healing ointments are used; and with care that cushion must be attended by someone skilled in treating wounds for proper healing.
Mays si a tu no so presens las medicinas, lahoras pausa sobre aquela tantost, pus que comensa a getar brac, coto viel, e permuta aquel dos veguadas le dia, ayssi cum a tu e ensenhat, entro que sia sanat, quar tu no indigeysses de autra medicacio en motas disposicios quan las plaguas so simplas.	 If you are not present for the medications at this point, pain should be observed as it begins to worsen rapidly and becomes increasingly painful over time unless wounds have been properly treated with first aid dressings only.
Mays si tu temes que la plagua comunique en lesio als membres principals, lahoras cove que tu submergas lana leon en oli de trempada qualiditat, o en oli rozat, e pausa aquela en le circuit dels locs que so entre les angonas e dejos las aysselas.	 If the buttocks are injured and in contact with other parts of the body, pain is expected to radiate from that location towards the legs or arms, and pause at the area between them as it may be inflamed or swollen.
E si sent dolor o putrefaccio en les sieus budels, quar motas veguadas aquo s’endeve, lahoras cristeriza aquel am vi stiptic negre tebe, e majorment si la poyredura es pervenguda en le budel e es fayta exitura penetrant entro la conquavitat de lu.	 If pain or putrefaction occurs in the bowels themselves, it is advisable to apply a sharp remedy quickly, and especially if the perforation has occurred and there is an exit through the cavity into the body.
E sapias que aquela que es del budel gros es de pus leugiera sanacio que aquela que es en les budels subtils.	 You know that when it comes to healing, remedies are more effective in treating the delicate parts of the body rather than those with a large intestine as they contain less poison.
E es de dificil sanacio quar le budel le qual es apelat “gegunu” no recep sanacio de plagua que caja en lu de tot; e aquo es per la gran multitut de venas que so en lu e per la magnitut de lu que so en aquelas, e per subtilitat del cos de aquel, e per propinquitat de aquel a natura de nervis.	 It is difficult to heal when the intestine referred to as "gurgit" cannot receive treatment for its pain without causing damage throughout it and because of its size and being in that area near the nerve endings; so there are many veins nearby, due to its great number, and because of its magnitude within those areas, as well as its subtlety and proximity to nerve endings.
Mays si aquo que procezeys de la plagua es la tela, e conseguas aquela recent, redutz aquela segon la tua rectetut am la qual reduzes les budels engualment.	 When one applies a poultice to the skin, and it soon becomes warm, then apply another poultice over that first one so they both stay hot.
Mays si es passat a lu spazi e ja es feyt vert o negre, lahoras que tu strenguas aquela am fiel sobre le loc que es denigrat de lu, per so que vengua fluxs de sanc, quar en la tela so venas e arterias.	 When you have passed over the space and it has turned black or dark red, then make sure to stretch that tightly across the location where there is a blockage of blood flow in order to prevent any more blockages forming on the skin as well.
E aprop inscideys aquo que es otra aquel liament, e pausa dos extremitatz del fiel pendentz de la partida dejos de la plagua foro lu, per que sobre tu sia alleujada la atraccio de lu deves le cazement de la tela e emissio del brac de la plagua.	 Then apply another poultice over that first one and place both of the servant's hands on either side from where it was applied to prevent any more blockages forming in the cloth or artery, and ensure they do not touch each other as well
Rememoracio de las plaguas quan accideysso en le budel.	 Remember when you apply a poultice to the intestine.
Quan accideys disrupcio en le budel e es petita, lahoras es possibla que sia resteurada en alcus homes, per aysso quar yeu vi aquel le qual era stat plaguat en le sieu ventre am percussio de lansa et era la plagua de la part dreyta del stomac, e la plagua era antiquada e fayta fistula, e eyssic de lu gestio e ventositat.	 If disruption occurs in the intestine and it is small, then perhaps it could have been restored by those who had experienced that before in their own stomachs after a blow or a fistula was made into that part of the stomach on the right side of the abdomen, which was old and had already healed, but with pain and discomfort.
Adonc yeu pansegui la curacio de lu ja sia que no era confizat en la sanacio de lu, mays cessegui subtiliar aquel entro que foc sanat e le loc es consolidat.	 When you have finished applying the poultice as it was not thought to be effective in healing that part of his body, then stretch tightly over where the pain has been settled so it may remain consolidated.
E yeu pus que vi le loc ja consolidat, timegui sobre le malaute que endevengues sobre lu accident de mal en le sieu ventre; e no endevenc alcu per aquo mal accident e romas en las suas milhos disposicios mangant e bevent, e aprop entrec en banh e es exercitat en sos ditz.	 When the location has been stabilized, place a cushion on top of the patient's abdomen to prevent any further damage from this bad incident in their belly; do not interfere with that as it could lead to complications or bleeding, and stay away when you can no longer help because there are too many obstacles for them.
E ja diysero alcus experimentados que quan endeve plagua en le budel, e es petita, lahoras cove que sia liada segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas fromiguas de grans caps; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua e pausa una fromigua de aquelas que aja la boca uberta sobre las doas labias de la plagua; donc quan pren sobre aquelas e strenh la sua boca, abscindeys le cap de lu, quar adhereys e no es dissolvut.	 When you notice a small tear in the intestine and it is just that, doctors advise to use this method: adjust the two lips of the incision and place one finger over the two lips of the incision; when taking hold of those and squeeze your mouth shut, make sure not to open your jaw.
E aprop pausa autra formigua prop la primieyra, e no cesses aquo a far am formiguas una aprop autra segon la quantitat de tota la plagua.	 Then pause for another moment and proceed with another incision if necessary, depending on the size of the entire incision.
E aprop reduzeys aquela e cos la plagua; e romanguan aquels caps annexces en le budel entro que·l budel sia sanat; e no accideys al malaute degun nocument.	 Then remove that and cover the opening with another incision to prevent the intestine from coming out, but do not interfere when it is already healthy.
E ja es possible que·l budel sia liat am fiel subtil lo qual es fayt del budel de bestia annexs am lu, pus que es mes en agulha; e es que tu prenguas la extremitat de aquestz fiels de budel, e sia mot descarnat, e aprop lia la extremitat de lu am fiel de li, envolopat, e aprop entromet aquel fiel en agulhas e cos am aquel le budel, e areduzeys aquel en la disrupcio.	 Then make it possible for the intestine to be of a fixed length, which is recommended as being more flexible; and you will need to take hold of its two ends separately, making sure they are clean and neat, then insert them into each other with their points overlapping slightly but not too much, cutting away any excess.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura am formiguas no es sino segon via de fiducia e d’esperansa.	 This text describes a surgical procedure involving the patient's thighs, legs, chest, and hands to treat a condition that could be gout or another inflammatory disorder of joints caused by cold humors.
Mays si la plagua es gran e ampla, majorment si es en un dels budels subtils, quar lahoras no es engen sino subtiliacio, e no es sanacio de lu de tot.	 If the abscess is large and extensive, especially if it's in a small intestine or one of its branches, then pain may not be relieved completely from all parts of the body.
De curacio de zuchem e fistula.	 Surgery for abscesses
Sapias que tota plagua e apostema quan se envilheseys e se Antiqua, e es fayt ulcus, e no es consolidat e geta braç tot temps e no es abscindit, lahoras, en qualque membre sia, universalment es nompnada fistula e nos la apelam aquela azukem.	 A fistula occurs when a cavity or abscess heals and the opening does not close properly, universally it is called a fistula and we call that an ulcer.
E fistula segon veritat es nodacio feutrada, dura, blanqua am la qual no es dolor e a la qual es conquavitat ayssi cum es conquavitat de pena de ausel; e per aysso nompnat aquela alcus rizatz, id est pena.	 A fistula is truly an ulcer that occurs when the cavity or abscess heals with hard, dry, white membranes that do not cause pain and are found in areas where there is also swelling of edema, like the feet.
E es en alcus homes humida, la qual geta brac; e fort leu la humiditat es abscidida en alcunas horas.	 The membranes inside are moist, allowing for the fluid to be drained away in some hours.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta humiditat es mota, e es pauca, e es grossa, e es subtil.	 Some of these membranes become dry, thin, and rough.
E yeu ja he denant dit en la divisio, lahoras cum yeu diyssi las plaguas, que tot ulcus que no es sanat ni no es en lu nuda carn, no es aquo sino per una de ix causas: de las quals la una es o per pauquesa de sanc en le cos; o per malicia de lu; o quar entre lu e las labias es carn dura prohibent nativitat de carn; o quar es de mota legesa; o quar aquel ulcus en si meteys es poyrit e la materia que es a lu tramesa es de mala qualitat; o quar la medicina es enconvenient en la curacio de lu; o quan corrupcio catz en la regio, e es pestilencia; o per proprietat de regio ayssi cum endeve a Saragossa , en la qual es fayta difficil degestio de las malautias, e es tardada en aquela sanacio de apostema per natura; o quar en lu es os un, o motz osses.	 One of the causes for this condition could be due to malnutrition in the body or ill treatment by nature such as harshness that may occur during the healing process, making it difficult and slow to heal abscesses naturally.
Ja e mostrat totas aquelas causas, e·ls senhals de aquelas e la curacio de lor am medicinas en la divisio.	 When all causes have been stated and their symptoms explained to a doctor in division
E cove assi que yeu fassa a tu saber la curacio de fistula la qual es fayta per via de operacio am ma.	 And you should do this, if necessary, so that the doctor can perform surgery on it
E sapias que fistula accideys en totz les membres del cos; quar de aquelas son fistulas que perveno a las venas grantz e arterias, o als nervis, o al ciphac, o al budel, o a la vesica, o ad alcuna de las costas, o ad alcu dels spondils del dos, o ad alcuna de las juncturas compostas per composicio ayssi quo de la ma e del pe; e de aquelas so que dan a lu propinquitat del membre principal e de semblantz.	 Some fistulas occur in all parts of the body; such as those that infiltrate into great veins and arteries, or nerves, or the brain, or bladder, or any part of the flanks, or to the back of the spine, or to any joint composed of several parts; and from these come close proximity with the main limb.
E donc aquela de aquestas fistulas que es segon aquesta manieyra es de las malautias de dificil sanacio, e no recep curacio, e occupacio am aquela es trebalh e ignorancia.	 The latter type of fistulas that is associated with difficult or impossible surgery, and which cannot be cured, but only tolerated while working in ignorance and labor.
E si es de las fistulas alcuna la profunditat de la qual no perve ad aquestz locs que e dit, e esperas e confizas en la curacio de lu, e vols pervenir a cognicio de lu, lahoras pren tenta de eram o de ferr, e si la fistula va segon rectetut, e perquireys aquela am lu.	 If any fistulas are of such depth that they penetrate into the areas mentioned above and cause pain or discomfort in healing attempts, you should seek medical attention for it.
Mays si la fistula es tortuissitat, lahoras investigua aquela am tenta de plom subtil, quar plom am la levitat del sieu cors es alleujat e curvat deves la tortuositat.	 If the fistulas are tortuous, doctors should investigate to find a subtle probe as its use allows the slight bending of the body's structure and relieves the tortuosity.
E si la fistula es havent motz horrificis, no es a tu possible que signifiques sobre lu am tenta.	 If the fistulas are extremely painful, it is not advisable to seek attention for them in order to avoid complications.
Adonc cristeriza le orrifici per sos orrificis, quar la humiditat per la qual clisterizas aquela va deves las autras orrificis e corr de lor.	 When the intestines are being operated on through an incision made in another part of the body, moisture from that incision must be removed to prevent any infection from spreading there.
E aprop inquier exquisitament, segon qual manieyra a tu es possible que conoguas si aqui has os o nervi, e es la conquavitat de la fistula longinqua o propdana, o es una fistula a la qual so motz orrificis e esta sobre aquo tot am la suma de la tua fortaleza, am la tua enterroguacio, am la qual enterroguas le malaute, e la invencio de la dolor deves la tua compressio am la ma sobre le loc, e semblantz de las significacios e de las causas accidentz al apostema.	 Very carefully consider whether the nerve damage occurred or not, and if so, whether it is a long fistula defect or short, or rather an abscess caused by the intestine. You must compress this area with your thumb over that location to prevent further infection from spreading, as well as examining causes of abscesses in connection to the appendix.
E cum tu auras stat sobre totas aquelas causas am stacio veraya, lahoras ve a la curacio segon confidencia: e es que tu consideras lahoras si es fistula apparent propinqua o en loc sal, longinqua de junctura, o de nervi, o de arteria, o de vena, o de un dels locs les quals yeu a tu e ditz.	 Once you have examined all of the causes at that location and the pain is evident nearby, close to the joint, long of connection or nerve, artery or vein, or any of the locations where you mentioned earlier.
Lahoras tu secca la fistula segon que denant es dit de la naracio de lu, e osta aquo que es en aquela filtracio e de carns corrumpudas, e aquo que es nascut en le orrifici de la carn, o de theil e de semblantz, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	 Once you have determined that it is a fistula due to the breaking of its lining or due to contamination in this area, and that it occurred in an intestine's muscle layer, treat for healing that wound specifically.
Mays si la fistula es de longinqua profunditat, e es segon rectetut, lahoras cove que inscidas aquela en le preon atant quant a tu sira possible, e aprop mondifica aquela de totas las suas carns corrompudas; e aprop administra calguas envolopadas en medicinas acutas, e intromet aquelas entro a la conquavitat de la fistula, la qual has conprenduda am ferr.	 If the fistula is of deep origin and you suspect this to be the case, insert a bandage impregnated with antibiotics into its cavity as well, so that all contaminated tissues are treated in order for it to heal properly.
E fay aquo am aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la medicina acuta corroda tot aquo que es romas en la conquavitat de la fistula de la corrupcio.	 When acute medicine runs into this, it means that there is a fistula of corruption in the cavity of the rectum.
E aprop restaura aquela am enguentz les quals engendran carn sana entro que sia sanada.	 After restoring it so that healthy flesh grows inside where it was diseased.
Mays si no es sanada per aquo, lahoras tu cauteriza aquela segon que havem recomtat.	 If not healed by this, the doctor will burn it after we recommend.
Mays si la causa de fistula es os e es deves tu certificat aquo, lahoras tu inquireys aquela e secca aquela segon que havem recomtat, si tu no prohibeys alcuna causa de vena o de nervi o de membre principal ayssi cum havem dit.	 If the cause of the fistula is due to a vein or nerve or main member injury, then ask for this and seal it after we recommend if you do not forbid any reason from veins or nerves or main members as well.
Mays si le os es a tu descubert e es en lu alcuna corrupcio e negror, lahoras tu ratz aquel entro que la corrupcio sia hostada tota; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que lu encarne entro que sia sanat.	 If the cause is due to an ulcer or infection in it, then burn that off and treat this one with this as well, so the latter may become healthy.
E si no es sana e gieta brac ayssi cum fazia, lahoras sapias que tu no est pervengut a la eradicacio tota de la corrupcio; e adonc tu descuebre sobre lu segondanament e exquisitament fay la razio de lu e la mundificacio de lu am la deriera fortalasa tieua, e aprop restaura aquel.	 If it is not healthy and gets worse as well like that one, then ask if you have already burned off the corruption entirely; also carefully examine both of them and find out their causes and healing methods to strengthen your body further, and after treating that one restore it too.
E donc si es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras sapias que aquela corrupcio es en la profunditat longinqua del cors, la qual no ha conseguida, e adonc a tu en aquel no es engen sino laysar aquela.	 If it is healthy then go on and if not, ask that the corruption has gone deep into the body and hasn't been cured yet, and after examining there make sure to do something else.
E si le os corromput es petit, o es a tu possible atirar aquel, lahora tu le atira am forceps subtils las quals conveno ad aquo.	 When the stomach is small or it is possible to remove it, then take out with delicate forceps as are suitable for this
E si so motz osses, lahoras exquisitament fay la extraccio de totz aquels, e de aquels no laysses denguna causa am la tua fortaleza.	 If there is a blockage in the passage, gently remove it with your strength.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat alcuna causa de las humiditatz, e en lor inscizio no ha temor ni error, lahoras inscideys aquelas liaments o carns si so aqui, e deliura les osses.	 If there is no cause of concern regarding humidity or infection, and the incision has neither fear nor mistake, then close up those wounds with your fingers if necessary.
Mays si a tu no es preparacio de ostar les osses de la tua hora, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua aquo que poyresca la plagua aquela, e layssa aquela entro que aquo es al enviro de aquels osses de carns e de liamentz, e guarda la plagua que no sia consolidada, e sia constrengida la seccio la qual tu has inscidida en la tua operacio.	 If you are not prepared to remove the stitches from your operation, then let them remain as is, and leave it in place where they were applied on or near the wounds that you made during the surgery, and keep a pad to prevent any consolidation of the sutures.
Habantz, si temes, pausa sobre lu coto submers en sopre trissat am oli, o coto submers en anguent egipciac, o en alcu dels enguentz vertz, quar quan poyriran aquelas liaments, e les osses son de lor seperatz la ablacio, e de aquels atraccio es alleujada.	 If you fear that the stitches may have been submerged in oil or grease, or from some foreign substance that has entered into them, then when those wounds are healed and the sutures should be removed, and of those threads it is advisable to remove them carefully.
Mays si es un gran os ayssi cum le os de camba o de coyssa o semblantz ad aquels, e aquo que de lu es corromput es la facia de lu tant solament, lahoras ratz aquela am resio tant solament derriera entro que sia ostada aquela negror e corrupcio, e aprop restaura la plagua.	 If the intestine or hernia is large and protrudes to that extent, only then do you take out as much of it as possible without causing any injury, and afterward cover up with a bandage
Mays si aquo que de lu es corrumpyt es gran partida, e la corrupcio ja ha conseguida la medulla del os, lahoras es causa necessaria cerrar aquel e aquel tot inscidir entro al loc on es pervenguda la corrupcio, e lahoras cura aquel entro que sia consolidada.	 When it is necessary to make the incision of the part which has become corrupted and has reached its end into that location where corruption is occurring, then healing that incision as soon as it becomes solid is a necessity
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc ad un home en la sua coyssa per que pausez aquela a eyssempli e adjutori sobre la tua operacio.	 Recommend to the patient in their thigh to prevent that from happening again, and have an assistant stand next to you while performing the surgery
Foc un home jove per etat entorn xxx ans, al qual accideys dolor en la sua cueyssa, e de las partidas dedintz mauguda es sobre la materia dedintz le cors entro que la materia es pervenguda a la cueyssa, e es materia de apostema am gran apostema, e no foc a lu causa extrinseca.	 Focus on the younger person's condition in the xxx area, where pain occurs in that area of their chest, and it is related to an external matter.
E adonc foc extendut le temps am aquela per la error dels metges entro que l’apostema es hubert, e acorrero de lu materias motas, e la sua curacio foc aprop pausada entro que la camba foc fistulada, e faytz son en lu motz orrificis les quals totz getavan poyredura e las humiditatz del cos.	 After focusing on the younger person's condition in that area for a long time, and having corrected their matters, and had their healing taken care of by placing a cushion over them to prevent hernia, it is necessary to heal the wounds or injuries suffered from external matters in order to recover properly and restore humidity balance.
E adonc le curec multitut de metges entorn dos ans, e no foc en aquels savia ma en la art, entro que yeu fu appelat.	 After focusing on the condition of both sides for a long time, but not on what was wrong with them specifically and in that way, it is necessary to call upon a doctor
E vi la camba de lu e las materias que corrian de lu aquels orrificis per gran cors; e ja le cos de aquel home era tot stabozit e la color de lu era citrina.	 By the time we had finished with both sides of that person's chest, and their wounds and materials were all healed up to a large extent, and at this point they were no longer sick and their skin was back to its natural color.
E adonc yeu intromesi la tenta ad un de aquels orrificis e pervenguec la tenta al os.	 When you have inserted into her vagina a certain object which she will receive from us, gently introduce it to the anus as well.
E aprop yeu e perscrutat tostz les orrificis e trobegui aquels pervenir a lor de totas partidas de la camba.	 You should first examine the objects and choose one that fits all the openings of her vagina.
E adonc yeu me coytegui e inscidegui sobre un dels orrificis aquels entro que descrobegui una partida del os, e atrobegui aquel corromput, e ja era terros e corrumput e denigrat; e era ja corrumpuda una partida de la camba entro que havia penetrat entro a la mezola.	 You should insert it into the anus as well and make sure to clean up any debris that may be left after penetration in her vagina, so that there will be no infection or spread of disease from one orifice to another.
E adon yeu serregui aquo que a mi era discubert e preparat del os descubert.	 You should make sure it is clean and prepared for insertion by examining its condition closely.
E yeu cujegui que no fos en le os sino aquela corrupcio la qual abscidigui e serregui, e yeu ja havia derraziguada.	 If the object was not in the anus but there is some other impurity that you have noticed and cleaned up already, you should check if it has been removed properly.
E aprop pausegui la restauracio de la plagua am medicina consolidativas per lonc temps, e no es consolidada.	 After applying conservative treatments for a long time, but still not consolidated.
E aprop yeu iteregui e descubregui sobre le os segondament sobre le descubriment primier, e atrobegui continua corrupcio am le os.	 You should also examine the anus again to check if there is any other impurity present after having already checked for one.
E serregui aquo que a mi apares de aquela corrupcio, e aprop yeu fo perforsat fayre la curacio de lu e restauracio, e no es restaurat.	 You should ensure that you have completely treated and restored the infection after having examined it closely to check if there is any remaining impurity present in both the anus and vagina.
E adonc yeu descubri sobre lu autra veguada e no cessegui inscidir le os petit a petit particuladament e perforsa la restauracio de lu, e no es restaurat entro que inscidigui entorn un palm de lu, e aquel extraxi am la medula sua, e aprop restauregui aquel am medicinas, e es consolidat leugierament e sanat.	 You should examine it closely and perform the treatment bit by bit very carefully to ensure that there is no remaining impurity present in both the anus and vagina. It may also involve removing any foreign object inserted into the rectum or anus, restoring the rectal lining with medical procedures if necessary and ensuring proper healing afterwards.
E no es necessaria iteracio en la operacio de lu e seccio de lu sino per la disposicio de la freulesa de lu e per la paucitat de la tollerancia de lu e paor de lu de mort, quar a lu accidia en totas horas per superfluitat de evacuacio sincopi mala.	 "When performing the operation and cutting of it, only by ensuring that the veins are open and the patient's tolerance is low and fear of death, to avoid causing the patient any harm in all hours due to excessive discharge caused by a lack of fluid.
E donc sanat es per sanacio entiera, e nada es en loc de os carn dura; e es fayta bona la disposicio de lu en le sieu cors e retornec la vertut de lu; e es conversat en las suas disposicios e no fec a lu contrarietat en ambulacio ni nocument en denguna causa.	 "In order for healing to occur, and nothing is in the place of stiff, it is good to ensure that the arrangement is right within its own body and restore its health; and he spoke to his dispositions not to put on any contrary thing during transportation or avoid any cause.
Mays si es os eminent en loc del cors ja trauquat, lahoras cove que tu secces aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas liament e strenh aquel en la extremitat de aquel os eminent, e comanda ad alcu que extenda aquel en sus; e pausa aquel liament de lana pus gros del primier liament; e aprop lia aquel sobre la carn que es dejos le os, e exten la extramitat de lu per que atires la carn a las partidas dejos, e tu descuebras la carn sobre le loc le qual voles serrar per que la serra no leda la carn.	 "If the eye is located in the chest, then you should perform that procedure with the following method: first remove any previous stitches from the first incision; second, extend and stretch it at the top of the arm; third, place a cushion on it to prevent it from falling out; fourth, cut off the excess skin around the area where you want to make the scar. Make sure to clear away the excess flesh around the area where you want the scar so that there is no bleeding.
E pausa fust o taula dejos le os decentment, quar quan tu fas aquo no es prohibida la serra que no secce la carn corrumpuda.	 "Place a cushion on top of it to prevent any movement or falling out; because when you do this there is not forbidden the cut that does not heal the damaged skin.
E cove que sia la serradura sobre le loc corrumput petit a petit, quar si es en la concavitat del os corrupcio e no appar en la sua apparicio al sentiment, e forssa a serratura de lu autra veguada.	 "Cut the scar gradually in the concave part of the corrupted area and not to appear on its surface during inspection; force to make another incision.
E si le os es corrumput e no-eminent, abantz es la una partida continuada am la autra, e la corrupcio es al mieg loc o en partida de lu, lahoras tu descuebre la carn de totas partz tota; e aprop pausa fust dejos, e aprop serra aquel de la primiera partida la on es la corrupcio entro que sia continuada la serratura del autra partida.	 When the abscess is corrupt and not prominent, it continues in another place, and corruption enters into or through part of the body; therefore, doctors discover all parts with a pointed cautery to find where corruption has entered so that continuous treatment can be started at the other site.
E sia la serradura segon le loc de la corrupcio un petit, segon que havem dit.	 And when there is a lesion on the place of corruption as mentioned earlier.
E si la corrupcio es en la junctura, inscideys aquela junctura corrumpuda, e serra le os la on es continuat del autra part.	 If the corruption is in the joint, then identify that joint corrupted and search for a location continuing from another part.
E si de la corrupcio es en la continuacio de doas juncturas, lahoras no es en lu razio sino engen.	 If the corruption continues in two joints instead of one, doctors will not be able to find it through any means other than investigation.
E si la corrupcio es en le pecte de la ma o del pe, es mot dificil; empero cove que tu inquieras la corrupcio en qual manieyra appareys a tu, e que abradas aquela, e mondes aquela segon quascuna disposicio la qual es a tu possibla, e am cascum engen sia rectificat a tu, quan no fa a tu contrarietat vena o nervi.	 If the corruption is in the hand or foot it may be difficult; however if you want to look for where exactly the corruption has happened and that location could possibly be reached by any means available, then approach that way, and when possible correct it at that place regardless of whether it comes from a vein or nerve.
E sapias qual es inscididors e las serras a inscidir aquestz osses son motz segon le situament dels osses, e la preparacio de aquels, e la grosseza de aquels, e la subtilitat e la grandeza e la parvitat de aquels, e la duricia e la lor raritat; per que cove que tu prepares a tota specia de operacio estrument convenient ad aquela opperacio.	 You should consider the location of the incisions and scars to identify which bones are to be cut open, prepare for that, and also consider their size, subtlety, hardness, and rarity; in order to choose an instrument suitable for this operation.
E sapias que aquela operacio significa a tu sobre la specia del strument del qual indigeysses; quan am tu es gran studi e lonc e conoyssensa de las manieyras de aquesta art, e testimoni de manieyras de malautias, quar lahoras ja tu las avias per tu meteys aquo que es convenient a lu dels sturmentz a tota malautia.	 When that operation means the use of a special instrument which is necessary for its practice; when you are great at both science and medicine, and witness the diseases of both good and bad people, then it will be advisable to apply this treatment on all patients
E yeu so a tu formant en la fi de aquest capitol le nombre dels instrumentz les quals pausaras cum eyssimples am les quals proceziras a la tua prohibicio la qual experimentaras sobre las autras.	 You should write down the number of instruments you will use in simple and clear writing, so that you can refer to them later on if needed.
Forma de serra:	 How?
Forma de autra serra:	 Are you asking for another sentence from this text or about the translation of "forma de serra"?
Forma de autra serra:	 What do you want to know, specifically?
Forma de autra serra gran:	 I am not sure what you are referring to. Could you please provide more context or clarify your question?
Forma de ray:	 How can I help you today?
Sia le cap de aquest ray segon la forma de cap de clau stellat, e les puntz de lu sian segon la forma dels puntz alstefegi.	 The key to open this lock is the sequence of points as specified in its instructions.
E no conveneys sino que am aquel sian confricadatz les caps de las juncturas quan so corrumpudas, o es la boca gran ampla.	 If you cannot afford to replace them when they break, or if the big hole becomes too large.
Forma de razori major dels autres:	 I am unable to provide a translation for that phrase as it appears to be incorrect syntax in English and is not understandable based on the context provided.
Forma de razori menor:	 The smaller keyhole should be closed when pain occurs due to joint damage, or if the big hole becomes too large.
Forma de razori lat:	 I am unable to provide a translation for that phrase as it appears to be incorrect syntax in English and is not understandable based on the context provided.
Forma de serra autra decentment fayta: sia fayt arc de lu pus sobira e la acuitat de lu de ferr, e le membre de lu de boys punhal descentment fayt.	 The first sentence translates to "Take a step forward.
Forma de lu:	 Take your hand (and possibly something else) and approach the patient gently.
Forma de razori en la qual ha concavitat:	 When a concave space is present,
Forma de razori autra subtil:	 Another type of approach to use when there is no concave space available.
Forma de autra razori de curvada extremitat:	 When approaching the patient through an extremely curved limb (such as a leg or arm)
Forma de rasori petit semblant a tenta:	 To approach the patient in small steps like this.
Forma de incisori am le qual so inscidit les osses:	 To insert something that can penetrate the bones.
Forma de inscisori autra minor:	 Another smaller type of probe to use.
Forma de un autra inscissori; aquest semblant a ray, e la extremitat de lu es cum serra, e es exhibit en motz locs en la razio dels osses:	 This other smaller inserter tool is similar in shape and size to the one you mentioned. It fits into place similarly and can be inserted at various locations within the bones.
Forma de ray lo qual conveneys a rasio de aquel que es perforat dels osses:	 To use when aiming for an opening between the bones that has already been made.
E la extremitat de lu es triangulada e de aguda extremitat.	 The limb is triangular in shape and extremely curved.
E es fayt de ferr de India , e semblantment cove que totas las causas que havem ditas de rasoris e de inscissoris e de serras.	 Do all the things that were mentioned for probes, insertions, and incisions to be made with it as well.
De inscizio extremitatz e de la serratura dels osses.	 The incision of limbs and the cutting open of bones
Las extremitatz se poyresso o per causa intrinseca o per causa extrinseca, o cum tu auras medicat aquela corrupcio per curacio de aquelas medicinas e la curacio no comfereys, o vezes la corrupcio anar deves le membre la qual no percuteys denguna causa, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel membre entro aquo la hon acossec la corrupcio, per que le malaute evasesca per aquo de mort o de malicia que es major defeliment del membre.	 Extremities can be caused by intrinsic causes or extrinsic ones; if the corruption goes untreated and spreads to other parts of the body, it may lead to death or injury that is greater than any damage to the limb itself.
E le senhal de aquel al qual accideys, es que·l membre es fayt negre entro que sia cujat que foc la ja comburit, o se poyreys aprop la negror entro que la poyredura aquela ane entro aquel membre que siec lu e que prengua tot le cors; e donc coyta te am inscizio de aquel.	 When an accident happens to a member of the body, it is customary that part becomes black when touched by fire or cold and then heals itself completely if left untreated, so long as the heat remains on that part
E semblantment si es causa de la corrupcio percussio de alcunas causas venenosas ayssi cum de scorpio mari o de vupera o de rutela e de semblantz.	 Similarly, if it is caused by a venomous or poisonous substance like scorpion venom, adder poison, viper venom, or wolf venom, etc.
E si la corrupcio o la percussio es en la extremitat del dit, lahoras tu inscideys le dit e no dones spazi a la corrupcio per que ane entro a la ma.	 If the corruption or injury is in the finger, you must cut it off and do not place any space where the corruption has infiltrated into your hand.
E semblantment si accedeys a la ma, lahoras tu inscideys aquela de la razit del focil, e no dones spazi a la corrupcio entro que prengua en le focil del bras.	 Similarly if you enter the fire or hand, then cut off that part of your finger and do not place any space where corruption has infiltrated into your forearm.
E si envezeys aquel, lahoras inscideys le bras entro al coyde en la junctura.	 If you find it, then you must cut off the arm between the joints in the joint.
E si passa otra la corrupcio e la vezes enviro le coyde, lahoras en aquel es la mort del malaute; e aministrar autra causa otra aquo en curacio es quantitat de vertut.	 If another corruption and poison enters in the cavity then it is the death of the patient, and to administer another substance for treatment you should do that which brings good fortune.
E semblantment fay del pe quan corrupcio envezeys le dit del pe, lahoras tu inscideys aquel entro ad un dels nozes.	 Similarly if corruption enters the foot then cut it off and place it into one of your hands.
E si pren en la pente del pe, lahoras tu inscideys tot le pe.	 If you take from under the foot then cut off the whole foot.
Mays si pueja entro al denol, lahoras tu inscideys la camba entro a la junctura del denol.	 When pain arises in the foot, it's customary to call it gout by doctors.
E si la corrupcio ja es pervenguda sobre le denol, lahoras en lu no es engen sino dimissio, e layssar le malaute a la mort.	 If the corruption is spreading over his foot, then they must cut off their gangrene and bring them to death.
E la manieyra de inscidir le membre o de serrar lu es que tu strenhas le liament en la partida pus dejos la qual voles inscidir, e strenh autre liament sobre le loc; e extenda le ministre un liament a las partidas dejos, e extenda le ministra autra liament en sus; e tu separa la carn la qual es entre dos liamentz ain spatum lat entro que sia descuberta tota la carn; e aprop sia inscidit o serrat.	 The aim of the incision is to cut through the limb, and if necessary, sever it there where you want to make an incision, stretch another ligament over that place; and extend a minister's hand with another in its place; then remove the skin between two ligaments as far as it can be seen completely uncovered.
E cove que sia pausat drap de li de totas partidas per so que no toque le loc sa, e que vengua al malaute lesio ajustada e apostema caut.	 And when you have stopped the bleeding by pressing down on a cloth over that place to prevent further damage and call for an urgent dressing of the wound.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc quan obras, lahoras tu cauteriza le loc coytadament, o pausa sus lu alcunas polveras restrenhentz le sanc; e aprop retorna a la tua medicacio entro que sia complida.	 If there is bleeding when you cut the skin, then quickly cauterize the wound with something like sand or powder to stop it from spreading further and go back to your doctor for treatment as soon as possible.
E aprop lia le membre plaguat am liament al u convenient, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	 And when you've made a cut in the limb at its most convenient place, treat it immediately with anything available to restore health.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc a un home en le sieu pe, aquest meteys accident le qual yeu e a tu recomtat, le qual es quar accidic a lu negror en le sieu pe am adustio que era asemblada a combustio de foc.	 I recommend that you take it to the home of its owner who will have dealt with accidents similar to this one and call for help from them, which is important because the fire caused by this accident was assembled in such a way that it could be used again on his foot as an incendiary device.
E aquela corrupcio accidic primierament en le sieu dit entro que tendec tot le pe.	 "The pain originates in a part of the body that extends down to the feet.
E adonc aquel home preparec per si meteys pus que vic la curacio anar al membre am la vehemencia de lu que atrobec de dolor e de adustrio de lu, e el inscidic aquel pe entro a la junctura, e foc sanat.	 "When the pain is severe and affects both feet simultaneously, causing redness and swelling of the joint, it may be that gout has spread to one or more joints.
Lonc temps accidic a lu aquela meteyssa corrupcio en le dit de la ma indic.	 "The pain lasts for a long time in this particular case.
E adonc venc a mi, e so me perforsat repercutir aquela superfluitat am aquo que pausegui sobre la ma de las medicinas, aprop la mundificacio del cos de lu; e no es repercussa la superfluitat e comensec anar al autra dit entro que comensec en la ma.	 "And since it has spread throughout the body and caused damage to the extremities, it is advisable to consult a physician immediately.
E el apelec me a inscidir la ma de lu, e yeu no volgui far aquo sperant sobre la repercussio de aquela superfluitat, e mays que temegui deves la inscizio de la ma de lu mort, quar la vertut del malaute era sobre cazement.	 "The physician should examine the patient's hands and feet carefully to see if it is necessary to act quickly in order to prevent further complications from the disease.
E pus que el se desperec de mi, es retornat en la sua terra e pervenguec a mi que aquel home preparec e inscidic la sua ma tota, e es sanat.	 "The physician should examine all of them and note that gout has spread to various parts of the body.
E no he adhuzida aquesta narracio sino per que sia adjutori sobre aquo que catz de aquesta malautia, e que sia significacio per la qual sia significada e segon la qual sia obrat.	 "It was not written to instruct how the disease is spread or what its significance means but rather for medical practitioners to know about it so that they can treat patients accordingly.
De cura sinuum et qualitate clisterizationis cum medicinis.	 "To cure and improve your health with medicines.
Quan accideys apostema en alcus membres carnozes e·l spazi de l’apostema es prolonguat entro que fa colleccio de sania, e aprop es romput e perforat, e es eyssida de lu la sania, e roman le loc vuoyt quays cum si era vayssel, e la codena que es desobre lu ayssi cum drap subtiliat, e no es pervengut a deriera corrupcio, e no inprimeys en le os o en nervi ni en liament, es apelat sinu, e no es nompnat fistula.	 "When the gouty attack strikes one or both legs and lasts for several days, it becomes swollen; if you prick at its swelling, it will break and drain off the pain. If you apply a poultice made of subtle cloth soaked in vinegar to it, then the pain will go away.
Mays empero si le spazi es prolonguat entro que la corrupcio enprema en alcun membre, lahoras es appelada fistula e no zukem.	 Fistula
E la cura de lu es que inscidas aquela codena tota ayssi cum es revolvut, e majorment quan es subtiliada e es fayta cum drap, e comfizas que no adhereys al loc per la sua corrupcio.	 The cure for it is to apply a compress that fits tightly around it when it swells up, and especially if it becomes swollen and you squeeze it gently without adhering to the location of its infection
Mays si tu speras que la codena adheresca e que aquela corrupcio no aja conseguit per deriera consecucio, e en la codena ha spassitut de cara, lahoras tu cura aquel am clisteri.	 If you suspect that the blockage has become too tight and cannot be released through drainage, then apply a hot compress to it.
E es que consideras al sinu, e lahoras si es gran, e·l brac que yeys es de fetent odor, lahoras clisteriza aquel am medicament egipciac le qual es de oli e vi agre e ziniar recebent partidas enguals, e sian ajustadas en un vayssel, e sian coytas sobre le foc entro que’l medicament se fassa rog e pervengua a specitut de mel.	 Consider applying the Egyptian medicine ointment that has oil and vinegar as its ingredients, which can be applied by rubbing it onto a gauze pad, allowing it to heat up until it is burned off on the affected area.
E aprop tu pren de lu aquo que es necessari e dissolveys lu am aygua e mel; e clisteriza am aquel le sinu, e strenh le orrifici de lu, e layssa la medicina en lu per la quantitat de doas horas.	 Then apply the Egyptian medicine to it, massaging it onto your skin and rubbing it into its fur, until it has become absorbed by the body over a span of two hours.
E aprop extratz aquela am sprecio; e fay aquo per tantz dias entro que sia mundificat le sinu e sia remauguda la pudor.	 Then apply more frequently as days go on, until it becomes evident that the fur has been cleansed and odors have been eliminated.
E alcunas veguadas es clisterizat am aygua de cendre, quan no es a tu prezent aquest medicament; e es que tu prenguas la cendra de vitz, e met sobre lu aygua; e aprop cola aquela e clisteriza aquel am ela entro que te confizes que·l sinu lahoras es ostat.	 Sometimes you can apply the medicine by rubbing it onto a cloth when not present on your skin. Then apply this cloth to the fur and massage it into it until you feel that the fur has been cleansed.
E si le malaute no ha tollerancia sobre le medicament egipciac ni l’aygua de la cendre, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aygua e mel e quays sia mesclat ziniar trissat, e clisteriza aquel am vi e mel mesclat, quar de proprietat de mel es que mondifique e lave, e le vi fa adherir le sinu, e majorment quan en le vi ha superfluitat de stipticitat e de siccitat.	 When the patient is not tolerant of Egyptian medicine or water from the cradle, the physician shall cleanse him with water and vinegar mixed, then he shall cleanse his body thoroughly with them, because property of vinegar causes to adhere more firmly, and it makes the excess of dryness and stiffness go away.
E cum tu fas aquo alcunas veguadas e te comfizes que·l sinu ja es remaugut, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aquo que fa naysser la carn en lu.	 When you have done the above cleansing and find that the skin is reddened, the physician shall cleanse him with water to remove any redness from his body.
E es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e dissolveys aquel am oli rozat e vi stiptic; o que clisterizas aquel am alcunas medicinas e enguentz autres que hajan las proprietatz les quals ja he yeu scritz en le tractat dels enguents.	 It is necessary to use a defoaming solution and dissolve any rancid oil in it, or else cleanse the ointments that have been tested for their properties with other remedies known from this treatise on remedies.
E si le orrifici del sinu es streyt en le qual no es recebuda la canula del clisteri, lahoras tu le amplifique aquel am ferr petit a petit, e pausa en lu calgua envolopada en enguent egipciac o en enguent basilicon entro que sia amplificat.	 If the abscess of your skin is swollen and has not been treated with a needle, then increase it gradually, applying Egyptian or basilicon compresses until it is fully enlarged.
E semblantment si le orrifici es ample, lahoras tu agregua las labias de lu am sutura e layssa de lu quantitat en la qual intre le clisteri ses addicio.	 Similarly if the abscess is large, you will add more layers of it to the compresses and make sure that between each compress there are enough spaces for the pus to accumulate.
E si le orrifici de lu del qual corr le brac es elevat a las partidas desus, lahoras secca aquel en le pus bas loc que es en lu per que le brac corra entro dejos, quar quan le brac es coartat en la preondeza de sinu la carn esser en lu engendrada.	 If the abscess of your arm is elevated and causing pain when you touch it, then squeeze it until pus comes out, because when the arm becomes infected with pus, the skin may be damaged.
E si no es a tu possible seccar le sinu entro al enviro del os pus bas segon que voles, lahoras te perforssa que prepares le membre am preparacio per la qual corr de lu le brac leugierament segon que es a tu apparelhat e que no sia en lu retengut alcuna causa del brac.	 When the patient is ready to receive it inside their mouth, you should gently put your finger on his tongue, and then press down with some force so that the member goes down into the throat.
E pren medicinas consolidativas que sian pausadas sobre le sinu convenientz ad aquo que vols exxten aquelas sobre drap de li.	 You should administer conservative medicines suspended over his body in order to maintain them as he is requesting for a while longer.
E le drap sia de tan gran quantitat cum fa la comunicacio de tot le sinu; e aprop inscidey am las forfexs en le dreyt del orrifici del sinu un trauc pus ample un pauc que l’orrifici del sinu; e aprop exten sobre autre drap de li dels enguentz leons segon la quantitat del trauc, e pausa le sobre aquel per posicio longinqua del orrifici del sinu per que sia aleujat le eyssiment del brac de lu e no ostes le drap gran sino aprop alcus dyas una veguada.	 The drape must be sufficient to cover the entire body, and make sure you gently place your finger in his throat at a distance that is not too far but enough for him to swallow normally.
Mays aquel que es sobre le orrifici del sinu, le qual remauguas en tota hora per so que yesca aquo que es ajust en lu del brac.	 You should make sure it's placed at his throat where he can swallow in a timely manner to prevent any choking issues that may arise from the bandage slipping out of place.
E per que sapias si aquo que corr de lu del brac es mot o pauc, o es digest, o es no-digest.	 To determine whether it is solid or soft, digestible or not-digestible you should ask him which one he prefers and then apply the bandage accordingly.
E am aysso tu considera le loc de aquel sinu, si en lu sent le pacient dolor o no, e si es en lu apostema.	 When considering that location on his body, if he feels pain or not-pain there, and if it is being applied to him at the moment.
E cum la tua medicacio es prolonguada en la tal manieyra, e vesas la matiera que es gitada sobre le orrifici del sinu ja adhereys, o se apropria adherencia, lahoras le mayti tu le deslia o le tertz dia, e quan deslias la plagua, lahoras muda le drap per autre e renova le enguent.	 When your treatment is prolonged in this manner, and if you have already adhered the bandage to his throat as instructed, or it has been applied correctly, the doctor should continue administering medication every few hours until he is finished treating him.
Mays si del sinu aprop lon spazi yeys virus subtil, lahoras no te desperes de la adherencia de li, quar la sanacio de lu se apropria, quar so alcus homes en les quals tarda generacio de carn en las lors plaguas, e de aquels so en les quals es fayt le contrari de lu.	 When the body's joints become inflamed due to cold humors infiltrating them, doctors typically call it gout.
E si del sinu aprop motz dias es yssit brac indigest, lahoras sapias que·l sinu no adhereys; e si es tardada la adherencia del sinu e es la causa prolonguada, lahoras tu ajusta en exsiccacio de las medicinas, e si las medicinas so humidas en lor substancia e en la sua vertut, son seccas ayssi cum enguent dyafinicon, quan es en lu ajustada superfluitat de addicio de zegi.	 If the bowels become inflamed due to indigestion (or perhaps a prolonged adhesion), doctors may advise rehydration with medical solutions such as dry powders or other medications, in order to decrease fluid retention and adjust excessive body fluid balance.
E le mays derier am le qual es curat, es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e sia dissout en oli rozat, e sia sobre lu vojat vi antic engual en la sua substancia, e aprop comfeys aquel am lu, e usa de aquel.	 The doctor will examine the affected area and recommend care measures to prevent further complications such as dermatitis or other skin conditions related to excess fluids in the body fat.
E ja fa semblant en aquela accio, quan no y a brac, enguent dyafinicon, mel quan es coyt entro que sia engrossat, e usa de lu; o que prenguas mirra e aloen e enses, e trissa tot e polveriza sobre le mel quan es sus le foc, e aprop lineys aquo sobre drap e strenh aquel sobre le sinu; e lineys aquel am le mel le qual has cuoyt entro que es engrossat, e polveriza sobre drap e strenh aquel.	 The doctor may then treat the affected area with creams or powders that are applied to soothe the skin and prevent further thickening of the body fat.
E alcunas veguadas so administratz am lu aristologia longua e razitz de lili celesti (e es lili celesti) e farina de errs e centaurea, e usa de aquels simples o ajustatz, trissa aquels e cribela e polveriza sobre le mel le qual he recomtat; e husa de lu.	 The doctor may also use simple remedies such as those found in celestial lilies or farinata (chickpea flour), and recommend using the suggested creams or adjusting their application to assist with weight loss, while ensuring not to overuse them and instead continue taking other prescribed medications if needed.
E si es prolonguat le sinu, e no es sanat per aquesta curacio, lahoras sapias que la corrupcio es en le preon de lu, e ja fa enquisicio en les osses o en les autres membres durs o als liaments; lahoras tu le cura am curacio fistular, ayssi cum desus es dit.	 When a hernia is prolonged and not treated properly, it is believed that the corruption is in the preon of the patient, and they seek treatment for fistula surgery.
De curacio de panarici et unguis attritae et incisione digiti additi et sectione.	 In order to treat the hernia or hydrocele (swelling due to water retention), it is customary:
Panarici es apostema le qual nays dejos la ungla del dit pous de la ma o del pe, e fort leu nays en les autres ditz, e cum es prolonguat e la sua curacio es mens prezada, o es apostemat de apostema caut, o es corrumput, e gieta brac entro que corrodeys la razitz de la ungla, e fort leu corromp aquela tota, e fort leu perve la sua corrupcio al os entro que es a lu odor fetent, e es fayta la extremitat del dit lada, e la color de lu es fayta fusca.	 To treat the hernia or hydrocele swelling due to water retention, it is customary:
E donc quan tu auras aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas am ferr tota la superfluitat que es romasa de la ungla e aprop cauteriza la plagla aprop aquo, quar cauteri mot es juvatiu en aysso.	 Do not add any more lines to the translation as it has been completed already.
Mays si le os es sa e la ungla es sana, e las addicios de la ungla vuoydas ja compremen las carns a las partidas dedintz, e comensan lu punger e ledeysso aquela, lahoras cove que tu pauses ray subtil dejos le angle de la ungla que pungeys la carn, e impelleys aquela sus e inscideys aquela carn am facilitat, e pausa sobre aquo que roman de la carn de las medicinas comburentz corrosivas entro que sia tot remaugut; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	 If the body part is already healthy and the hernia is cured, then you should put a bandage over that area to prevent any injuries due to sharp objects or rough handling.
Mays si la corrupcio ja enprem en le os, lahoras cove que tu inscidas le os aquel e le extraguas, car nul temps no es sanat que sia en lu le os corrumput.	 If the corruption is already in the body part, then you should cover it up and apply a soothing ointment to prevent any more infections occurring in that area.
E si vezes la corrozio e la corupcio anar en le dit, lahoras tu inscideys aquel en un dels nozes segons que es premesa la sua rememoracio, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	 "When the heart attack and stroke occur together in one person, doctors advise that they should take measures immediately.
Mays si a la ungla endeve percussio o atricio, e endeve en aquela dolor vehement, lahoras cove que tu al comensament fleubotomes le malaute, e aprop secca la ungla am spatum agut am seccio transversa desus en jus, e guarda te que la seccio no pervengua entro a la carn que es dejos la ungla, quar tu faras accidir al malaute dolor vehement, e sira causa a nativitat de la carn ajustada superflua en le loc; e aprop cura aquel loc am aquo que ceda dolor.	 "When the gallbladder attack and stroke occur together in one person, doctors advise that you should immediately perform the following measures: first, do not vomit or urinate because it may cause further harm to your body. Second, spread out any urine with a cloth because it can damage clothing; third, if there is a sudden pain from gallbladder rupture, apply pressure to stop the bleeding.
Mays dit ajustat, le qual es nat en las mas de alcus homes, fort leu es carnos tot, e fort leu so en lu osses, o fort leu es en lu ungla.	 "When the heart attack and stroke occur together in one person, doctors advise that they should take measures immediately.
E alcus de lu son natz en la razit de la junctura, o es la nativitat de lu en alcus nozes dels ditz.	 "When the joint attack occurs between the ribs or in any other bones, it is called a rib fracture.
Mays aquel que es nat en alcus nozes del dit no se mau, e aquest que es nat en las juncturas fort leu es maugut.	 "When the joint attack is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout.
E de aquels que son natz carnoses, la seccio es leugiera, e es que tu inscidas aquel deves la sua razitz am spatum lat.	 "For those who have bone fractures, stretch out the skin to ease pain and prevent further harm.
Mays de aquel que es nat en la razitz de la junctura, la curacio es dificil; e donc guarda te de la abscizio de lu.	 "When joint attack occurs in the bones of the joints, treatment is difficult; therefore, it is necessary to keep a close eye on it.
Mays en aquel que es nat en dit deves les nozes, cove que tu inscidas al comensament la carn de lu am inscizio redonda entro al os, e aprop serra am una de aquelas serras convenientz ad aquo, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	 When a patient's navel is to be incised for the sake of surgery in that region, let there be a proper assistant present.
Mays consolidacio la qual accideys als ditz entre lor motas veguadas o per nativitat del home que nays enayssi, o per consolidacio de plagua o per combustio de foc, o per semblantz, adonc cove que secces aquela consolidacio entro que les ditz retorno a la sua forma natural.	 When the incision between the navel folds is necessary for surgical reasons or by accident during childbirth, or due to burns, fire, or other complications, it must be done in such a way that the incision returns to its original form as quickly as possible.
E aprop pausa entre lor draps de li enfuzes en oli rozat per que no sian consolidatz leugierament, e separa entre aquels, o pausa entre aquels una lamina de plom subtil entro que sia consolidat segon que cove.	 If the incision between their drapes becomes infected with pus that cannot be treated, or if it is separated from them, or a thin layer of gauze must be placed over them to prevent further consolidation until it has been consolidated as soon as possible.
E semblantment si accideys consolidacio en alcus ditz am la palma, lahoras tu secca aquela consolidacio segon que es preparada e conveneys a la figura del membre.	 Similarly, if the incision is made on the palm of the hand, then it must be closed after it has been prepared and fits into the shape of the member.
De inscizio de vices, so son varicas.	 The incision for veins are varicose veins.
Vices so son varicas, e so venas envolutas grossas plenas de superfluitatz melencolicas las quals veno en motz dels membres del cors, e le major adveniment de lor en las cambas, e majorment en las cambas dels itinerantz e dels laborantz e dels portantz.	 Veins are varicose veins and those that have swollen full of melanocilli (a pigment) which can be found in the limbs of the body, particularly on the legs, and especially in the veins of the feet.
Adonc cove que tu administres purguacio del cors de colera negra alcunas veguadas am expulcio fort, e aprop sangna le pacient de la vena basilica.	 After administering purgation for black bile with strong purging, you should give the patient a dose of blood to strengthen their vein.
Mays la curacio de lor am ferr es segon dos manieyras: la una es que sia inscizas e sia atirat aquel sanc negre, e l’autra manieyra es que sia elevada la vena e sia extrayta tota.	 The first servant will go in and inspect the incision; one is to wipe away any black matter that may be there (i.e., blood or other stains), while the second is to elevate the vein and extract it completely.
La seccio de lu es segon aquesta manieyra: embroca al comensament la camba am aygua cauda mot entro que le sanc gros sia resolvut, que es feculent de la camba, e aprop strenh la camba del malaute a la partida pus sobirana de la coyssa entro a la partida dejos del denol am una benda, e aprop secca la vena en un loc, o en dos, o en tres am seccio ampla, e aprop eleva le sanc negra am la tieua ma de la partida dejos de la camba entro en sus, e desus en jus, entro que del sanc sia yssida la quantitat que voles e que vezes habastar, e la qual tollera la vertut del malaute.	 The second task is to bandage the wound with water-soaked cotton, making sure that it does not get too saturated or heavy (i.e., avoid applying excessive pressure), and then press firmly on a specific point until blood flows out from the vein; if no blood comes out after three tries, loosen the bandage but continue to elevate the affected limb above heart level as much as possible.
E aprop lia aquela, e comanda a lu que abstengua de las viandas colera negra engendrantz.	 Afterwards, instruct them to avoid any black veins causing inflammation.
E itera la curacio per fleubotomia quan las venas so umplidas e aquo notz al malaute.	 Repeat the process for phlebotomy when the veins are full and unable to do otherwise
Mays la elevacio de lor es segon aquesta manieyra: tu que razas la camba del malaute, si en lu so motz pels, e aprop met le en banh e embroca la camba de lu am aygua cauda entro que s’enrogesesca e las venas sian exuberadas; o que sia exercitat per exercici fort, si banh no es a tu present, entro que·l membre sia scalfat.	 The second task is to elevate the patient's leg and bandage it with water-soaked cotton if necessary, to prevent further bleeding or excessive swelling of the veins; otherwise, exercise forcefully to stimulate blood flow (if not available, apply pressure on a specific point until visible blood flows from the vein).
E aprop secsa la codena en le dreyt de la vena per seccio en le lonc o en le derier de lu deves le denol, o en le pus bas de lu deves lo talo.	 When pain occurs in a vein near the arm or hand, it is customary for doctors to apply warmth there.
E aprop uobre la codena am uncis e excorja la vena de tota part entro que appara al sentiment, e es deves la appericio de lu que vezes aquela roga declinant a negror.	 When pain occurs in all the veins of that limb, it is customary to apply warmth there because sometimes this helps alleviate the discomfort.
E donc cum evazeys e de la codena tu vezes aquela blanca quays sia corda.	 In addition, when you pass through the passage where the vein is concerned, do so gently as possible.
E aprop tu met dejos aquela le ray entro que sia elevada e sia gitada de la codena, e sospen aquela am onci orp leon.	 Place that hand above and below the vein such that it supports its elevation and depression from the groin area.
E aprop secsa autra seccio aprop aquela seccio per tres ditz, e aprop excorja la codena de la partida desus de la vena entro que apparia.	 When pain occurs in a vein near the elbow or knee joint, it is customary for doctors to apply warmth there as well.
E aprop eleva aquela e inscideys aquela en deriera seccio deves le talo, e aprop extratz aquela e eleva aquela entro que sia yssida per la seccio segonda, e aprop extratz aquela de la seccio que es sobre aquela.	 Place that hand above and below the elbow or knee joint, such that it supports its elevation and depression from the second joint area, and place another one on top of the latter to support as well.
E fay aquo entro que extraguas aquela de la seccio que es pus sobirana o pus auta de totas las seccios, entro que tota es yssida; e lahoras inscideys aquela.	 Put that hand above the highest joint and below all other joints, to support its elevation and depression from every area; then apply warmth to those.
E si no obezeys a tu ad extrayre e elevar, lahoras intromet una agulha am fiel fort doble e ligua aquela e extratz la, o intromet dejos lu le ray e revolveys la tua ma a tota part entro qu’en sia getada.	 If you find it difficult to apply warmth from above and below simultaneously, place the needle securely in two places and rotate your hand over that area until all of them are down.
E guarda te que no sia inscidida; quar si es trencada, es fayt a tu dificil elevar aquela mot e es vengut sobre le malaute per aquela nocument.	 When the wound was not closed, if it was torn open, then do so gently raise that part and place it over the patient's chest to prevent any further loss of blood.
E cum aquela tota auras fora-gitada, lahoras pausa sobre le loc de la plagua lana submerssa en vi e oli rozat e oli no-rozat, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	 When the bandage was completely removed and soaked in wine or oil that had been rubbed with vinegar or not rubbed with vinegar, then cure it so that it is safe to use again.
E si la vit es contrayta havent tortuositat a la qual sia envolucio a las partidas, e no es segon rectitut segon que havem dit, lahoras cove que tu fendas sobre aquela a tota partida de tortuositat de lu e als locs de envolucio de lu, e aprop suspen aquela am uncis entro que eleves aquela tota.	 If the throat is affected by pain that is so severe as to cause it to be swollen in the neck or face, and you have already said this, then do cover it completely with a bandage on its entire area of tortuosities and locations from where it comes out, and support it upright until it recovers.
E guarda te deves la tua seccio que no inscidas la vena e que no plagues aquela, quar dificil sira a tu elevar aquela; e serva la tua prudencia en aquela.	 When you are taking care of your section that has not been sealed and does not cause any harm to it or others nearby, then do so gently raise it, and serve your prudence in this situation.
Forma del inscident am le qual es seccada vit:	 What type of incident occurred?
Forma de unci orp:	 A sprain occurred
No es a lu accuitat ayssi cum als uncis ni es de aguda extremitat per so que no plague la vena; e es de grossa flexibilitat leon, quar si era subtil, inscidira la vena per la sua subtilitat; habantz es en lu superflua grosseza ayssi cum havem dit.	 It is of a type that causes great flexibility to the limb and if it were subtle, it would cause the vein to rupture due to its subtlety; however, in this situation where there is excessive grossness like what we've mentioned, there may be nothing more serious.
De extraccio venae cruris.	 From the veins of the calves.
Aquesta vena es engendrada en las cambas en terras caudas ayssi cum al- Ategi en terra de Arabics e en las terras de India caudas e aridas de pauca teneritat e en las quals no nays erba ni aybre.	 This vein is generated in the legs below as well, at the time of giving birth and also on Indian soil, which is dry with little life force and lacks green vegetation
E fort leu es engendrada en autres locs del cors otra las cambas.	 And even further down it can be found in other parts of the body such as the legs.
E la gestacio de lu es de putrefaccio que ve dejos la codena ayssi cum venen dedintz le cors serpentz e vermps e scarides e verms engendrantz entre la codena e la carn.	 The process of it is one of decay, where the venom enters the body through veins and arteries and creates sores and worms as they spread between the skin and flesh.
E senhal de la suscepcio de l’adveniment de lu es de aquesta vena que accideys en la camba enflammacio vehement; e aprop le loc es vesicat; e aprop comensa la vena yssir del loc de aquela vesicacio quays sembla razit de planta.	 The indication of the presence of it is characterized by intense inflammation in the affected limb, which quickly becomes swollen and a vein appears to burst from that site as if with great force.
E adonc cum appar de lu la extremitat, lahoras cove que tu envolvas sobre aquela una pessa de plom del qual sia le pes de una drac. entro a ii drac., e noza aquela e layssa le plom suspendut de la camba.	 When you notice the appearance of it in an extremity, have you wrap your hand around that part and feel for its weight, which should be that of a dragon's claw.
E tantas veguadas cum yeys de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, envolveys aquo em plom e noza aquel.	 Whenever you find any cause to suspect it may be elsewhere, cover this with your palm and check there too.
E si mot es prolonguat, lahoras tu inscideys una partida de lu e envolopa le romanent; e no inscidas aquela de razit entro que sia fora yssida, quar si inscideys aquela es contrayta e intra en la carn e fa accidir apostema e poyredura en le loc e ulceracio mala.	 If it becomes prolonged, you suspect another part and wrap your arm around that too; but if you do not find any indication there either, then that is considered a sign of the presence in the flesh and causes great harm to the body with pain and ulcers.
Per que cove que sia tractada suaument e sia extrayta petit a petit, entro que sia fora-gitada del derier de lu e no remangua de lu alcuna causa en le cors.	 When joints are subjected to great amounts of cold humors gradually infiltrated into the body part by part until it reaches the feet and stays in them without any cause within the chest.
E de aquesta vena es yssit en alcus homes que es en la sua longitut de v palms e de detz e ja es pervengut a mi que yssic un de xx palms.	 And at that moment it arrives in the veins of those who are on their right side, reaching to the length of two fingers and is also present when venomed with one of these.
E si es inscidida en la hora de la sua medicacio, lahoras intromet lo ray en le trauc de lu e perfora aquela am lonc trauc am le cors, entro que sia evacuat tot aquo que es en la materia, e administra putrefaccio del loc per alcus dias am medicinas; e aprop cura aquela per la curacio de apostemas.	 If it is diagnosed during the patient's treatment, it infiltrates into their veins and perforates that area of the chest, until it is evacuated from that point in the matter, and administers putrefaction for a certain number of days with medicines; and appropriately treats it by the cure of ulcers.
E aquesta vena alcunas veguadas ha motz ramps, e majorment quan apar a la junctura del pe o en le pe, e veno a lu motz orrificis, e es yssit de quascu orrifici ram.	 That vein sometimes swells and especially when it appears on the joint of the foot or leg, and goes to that swelling with orifices, and is present in each one of them.
E donc cura aquela ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio e am aquo que es desus dit.	 So it is cured by dividing it as described above into that which it is due to.
De sectione super vermes generatos sub cute et dicitur aegritudo bovina.	 A section of the abdomen under the skin and called bovine itchiness
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en alcuna terra deves nos malautia bovina per so quar motas veguadas endeve als bious e es verm pauc un le qual es nat entre la codena e la carn, e va en tot le cos pujan e devalan, e es mostrat al sentiment deves le sieu anament de membre en membre entro que disromp la codena e yeys fora.	 This illness is commonly known as bovine itchiness where the hairs stand up on all parts of the body and then fall down, appearing only on one member at a time until it breaks through the skin and goes away.
E la generacio de lu es per putrefaccio de alcunas humors ayssi cum accideysso verms e serpentz e lombrics e ascaridas en le ventre.	 The generation of this occurs due to putrefaction of certain humors, so it causes worms and serpents and ulcers in the belly
E es temut per la malicia de lu, quar quan el va en le cors e es elevat al cap, e es pervengut al huel, lahoras fort leu uebre en lu e intra e destruzeys le huel, e aquo endeve motas veguadas.	 It is feared for the sake of malice that when he enters his body and is elevated to the head, it passes through the hole, causing great harm to him, so as to end up killing him.
E donc quan tu voles curar aquel e extraire lu, lahoras no se fa si no deves la sieua ambulacio e apparacio de lu al sentiment, e adonc cove que tu strenhas aquo que es sobre lu e aquo que es dejos lu am liament e constriccio fort, e aprop secca sobre lu e extratz aquel.	 And when you want to cure him and extract him out, the doctors cannot do so without first making his body feel it strongly and clearly, as well as holding tightly that which is over him and that from which he suffers greatly, then tighten on him and extract him
E si es preondat en la carn e no le atrobes, lahoras tu pausa cauteri am foc sobre le loc entro que mora, e la major causa que es temuda es corrupcio de lu am la qual corrump le loc ayssi cum havem dit.	 If it is necessary in the flesh and you do not harm him, then put a cautery fire over the place where he lies, and the main cause that we fear is corruption of his part and how this corrupts the location as well.
May si tu vezes aquel esser pervengut al cap prop del huel, lahoras strenh sobre le sobrecil am fort strictura, e aprop secsa sobre lu, e extratz aquel; e cove que·l malaute use de mondificacio del sieu cors am medicinas evacuantz humors putridas malas, e guarda se de viandas generantz putrefaccio.	 And if he enters his head first through the hole in him, then tighten on top of it with great stricture, and fix your hand over him, extract that, then; and concerning what the patient uses from medicinal evacuation of their body's bad humors to keep themselves healthy and prevent putrefaction.
De sectione super aegritudinem nafir.	 From a section above ignorance.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en nostra terra nafir, e es dolor la qual ve en alcus membres, e aprop es permudada de membre en membre.	 This ailment is commonly known in our land as an inflammation or gout.
E yeu ja e vista aquela segon que yeu te recomtare.	 You've already done the first thing that was recommended to you
Yeu fu apelat a una femna malauta ad una vila, e descubric le sieu bras e vi una imflacio petita en la vena funis del bras, e pus que fu romas per una hora, vi aquela imflacio anar ayssi cum va verm pujan ad aquest, mays pus leugierament que esser por, ayssi cum si fos argent viu quan corr de loc en loc.	 You were recommended to go to a female patient and you observed an inflammation in her arm vein, which lasted for one hour after which the swelling spread throughout the body uncontrollably as if it had become alive when exposed to different locations
E adonc anet s’en la dolor de aquel loc e fiquet se en le muscle, e aprop aqui stec per una hora.	 And then pain occurred in that location and spread into the muscle, after which you held them for one hour.
E aprop correc en l’autre cors entro que pervenc al autre bras.	 Then you moved to her other arm so as to also apply it to the other breast.
E aprop recomtec a mi que revolvia se per tot le cors sieu segon que yeu vi; e fo trop meravelat de la permutacio de lu e de la velocitat de membre en membre.	 Then you were recommended to spread it evenly over all her other limbs, so that the exchange of its properties and the speed at which they moved from limb to limb was increased.
E yeu ja havia vist denant aquo en les mieus huels segon aquela manieyra, empero yeu he vistz motz les quals atroban dolor esser permutada de membra a membre.	 You had already seen that before in the previous patient but this one's pain seemed to be more easily spread from limb to limb.
Mays no vi aquo am les huels ayssi cum en la femna.	 I saw it exactly as you described with her.
E yeu no cogiti esser aquo sino que es per aquo quar la femna era de viela, on so de secs cors e de venas descubertas, e en aquesta apparec al sentiment aquela ventositat permutada.	 You didn't think it was from that because the female patient had revealed both her legs and veins, and in this case there seemed to be an increased spread of the sensation.
E es necessari que no apparesca segon aquesta retro-curacio en aquels que son delicioses e am cors humitz de venas ameguadas.	 When the patient's thighs are delicious, or their veins are inflamed
E cum tu voles la curacio de lu, e le pacient sent aquela dolor, lahoras no es a tu aparent al huel ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras tu strenh sobre aquel e dejos lu leugierament e secse sobre aquel entro que sia yssida aquela ventositat coartada, e cauterize le loc.	 When you want to perform the procedure, and if the patient feels pain, then do not appear as though you are angry or upset like I mentioned earlier, gently touch that part of their body with your fingertips and place a heated cautery over it
Mays si tu no la vezes am los tieus huels, alhoras tu cura aquel am excussio del cors e am aquo que expelleys ventositatz, e carmina aquelas am pillulas fetidas e am pillulas de serapi e semblantz.	 If you are allergic to iodine, then apply hot compresses and warm pills of sulfur or similar substances.
De extraccio de sagetas.	 Extract the bowels.
Sagetas son diversificadas segon las specias, e segon les locs dels cors en les quals cazo, quar la lor diversitat es que de aquellas so que han grans puntas, e petitas, e concavas, e sordas, so es solidas; e de lor so que han tres angles, e de aquelas a las quals so que han lenguas; e de aquelas a las quals so astelas.	 The veins are diversified depending on the location, for example, those in the thighs may have large points and small ones, while others might be concave or straight.
E aquela que es segon les membres e las pessas en las quals cazo es segon dos manieyras: quar les membres o so membres principals concaus, ayssi cum le cervel, le cor, e·l fitge, e le pulmo, e les ronhos, e les budels, e la vezica, e a lor semblantz; e donc quan catz en alcu de aquestz membres e aparo a tu senhals de mort, la qual causa yeu recomtare aprop, lahoras cove que tu evites extraccio de aquela sageta en aquels quar la mort siec aquel en le qual en las majors disposicios, e quan a tu no appareysso aquestz mals senhals, e la sageta no es amaguada en la profunditat del membre, lahoras tu extratz aquela e cura la plagua.	 When extracting the bowels, make sure that you do not extract it from any of the main organs, like the stomach or intestines; rather, extract only what is causing pain in those locations.
E dels senhals del servel es quan catz en lu sageta, e trespassa le os, e es yssit del cyphac le qual es sobre le cervel, quar accideys per lu soda vehement, e scotomia, e vertige, e rogor en les huels, e imflamacio e rogor de la lengua, e spasme e permixtio de entendament e vomi de colera, e fort leu es abscindida la paraula e es destruida la votz, e es yssit del loc de la plagua humiditat blanca semblant a pols, e yeys de lu semblant ad aquositat de la carn.	 "When the patient's bowels are opened and penetrate through their anus, then immediately it descends to the throat, causing pain, vertigo, vomiting of bile, redness in the eyes and tongue, spasms throughout the body, confusion of mind, and destruction of the words spoken out loud, and is located at the place where a white dew-like substance appears similar to dust.
E donc si appareyso a tu aquestz senhals, lahoras tu abste de la curacio e de la extraccio de la sageta, si non es fora.	 "If you see this then immediately stop the cure and extraction of the incision, unless it is not outside.
Mays les senhals de la sageta quan catz en le cor, so que ela es prop de la mamila senestra, e sent am aquela quays sia ficada en causa dura, e no es causa vueda; e fort leu le movement de la sageta es semblant a movement del pols, e corr de la plagua sanc negra, e siec aquel fregiditat de las extremitatz, e suzor freja, e sincopi; e donc sapias que la mort descen ses tot dopte.	 "The intestines when they enter the chest then it is to be treated with a hard cause, and not from another cause, and the pain of the intestine movements are like a stroke in the black vein, that is coldness in the extremities, soreness, and lack of sleep; therefore you should know that death descends on top of this.
E les senhals quan la sageta ha plaglat le pulmo so eyssiment de sanc spumos de la plagua, e les vayssels que so prop del col so apostematz, e es mudada la color del malaute, e expira sperit gran aut, e demanda atraccio de ayre freg.	 "The bowels when the intestine has infiltrated the lung then it is with a great amount of black bile vomiting, and the veins that are associated with the heart become swollen, the color of the patient changes, and breathing becomes rapid, and calls for immediate attention.
E si catz la sageta en le velament le qual es en le pietz, e la dolor lahoras es prop de las costas petitas, e es fayt le ale gran am vehement dolor e am sospir, e no so maugutz totz les membres dels muscles.	 "The pain in the chest, which is felt at the edges of the breasts and is accompanied by sharp pains and a short breath, indicates a great amount of pain in the abdomen.
E si catz la sageta en le stomac, lahoras fort leu yeys de la plagua vianda alcuna indigesta.	 "If the chest feels as if there is an upset stomach with no indigestion symptoms accompanying it.
E si catz la sageta en le ventre, e es ficada en lu, yeys alcuna fenda de la plagua, o la tela, o budel le qual es disromput, e no es speransa en la curacio de lu extraccio de la sageta.	 "If the chest feels as if there is a tear in the stomach lining or gut, and it does not appear to be connected with an extraction of the chest.
E si la sageta catz en la vesica, e es yssida defora urina, e procesesca de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, e fort leu es dolor sobre le malaute, lahoras sapias que es mortal.	 "If the chest feels as if there is a bladder tear with urine process occurring and without any cause for the tears in urination, and extreme pain occurs over the abdomen, doctors know it to be fatal.
Mays les autres membres ayssi cum es la cara, le col, e·l golayro, e las spallas e le adjutori, e les spondils del dos, e la furcula, e la coysa, e la camba e a lor semblantz dels membres, son salvatz segon las majors disposicios quan la sageta no atroba vena ni arteria e no es sageta venenosa.	 "The other members are also affected; the face, rectum, elbow, thighs, spine, ribs, breastbone and all extremities of the body except for the heart, veins or arteries which do not show any signs of illness.
E yeu recomtare aquo a tu que he vist del esser de aquestas sagetas, per que signifiques per aquo sobre la curacio tieua.	 "So that you understand how to act when you see these chests, please indicate what this indicates for your own care.
La qual causa es, quar en un home cazec sageta en le lacrimal del huel de lu en la razitz del nas, e yeu extrayssi aquela a lu del autra partida, dejos le grays de l’aurelha de lu, e es sanat, e no accidic en le huel de lu nocument.	 "The cause is unknown; when an abscess forms in the tear of the eyelid and spreads to other parts of the face, it causes a skin infection but does not affect the eyelids.
E extrayssi autra sageta a un Juzeu la qual cazec en lu en lo grays del sieu huel, dejos la palpebra pus dejos, e la sageta ja era occultada e no so conseguit de aquela sino una petita extremitat am la qual adhereys al sieu fust, e era gran sageta de las sagetas agudas dels Turcs , am ferr leon en la qual no havia aurelhas.	 When a patient has severe jaundice and the pupil is dark or absent from one eye only, it's customary for that eye to be covered with a blindfold in order to prevent further damage to that specific part of the body by the jaundiced bile
E senat es le Juzieu , e no accidic en le sieu huel mal accident.	 The eye which has jaundice may not cause any more harm if you do not touch it.
E extrayssi una autra sageta a un home Crestia la qual era cazuta en le golayro, e era sageta arabica, e es aquela a la qual so aurelhas; e adonc yeu inscidegui sobre aquela entre doas guidegi, e ja era submersa en le golayro de lu; e adonc yeu so subtiliat am aquela, e aprop extraxi aquela, e es sanat le Crestia .	 When a patient has a covered eye (sageta) with jaundice and the other one is normal, make sure to guide gently that covered eye as it may be submersed in their body.
E extraxi autra sageta a un home la qual era cazuta en le sieu ventre, e cogitegui que moris per aquela; e donc, pus que foro passatz xxx dias e no es mudat sobre lu alcuna causa de las suas disposicios, inscidegui sobre la sageta e engenagui sobre aquela, e es sanat, e no accidic a lu accident mal.	 When you remove the bandage from one patient whose eye is covered in their belly and check it out, make sure that there's not any other cause for their discomfort within those days of rest; ensure its safety by gently examining it to prevent any accidents.
E vi mays un home en le qual cazec una sageta en le dos de lu, e consolidada es la plagua sobre lu, e pus que foc aprop set ans, yssic la sageta en la razitz de la coyssa.	 If you have a patient who has both eyes covered in bandages and the eyelids are swollen as well, make sure to gently examine the eyelids at this stage.
E vi una femna a la qual cazec sageta en le sieu ventre, e la plagua es consolidada dedintz lu, e no es mudada en las suas disposicios en re, e la femna no atrobec nocument en alcunas de las suas opperacios naturals.	 You have a woman who has a bandage on her belly and the eyelids are swollen as well; make sure she does not touch any of her natural eye openings to prevent further complications.
E vi un autre home al qual cazec sageta en la sua cara e consolidada es la plagua e romas la sageta, no atrobant aqui mota dolor, e motz semblantz ad aquestz.	 When another man came who carried a bag over his shoulder and settled it down on his face, the pain ceased and disappeared.
E extrayssi la sageta del home dels princeps del rey que era cazuda en le mieg loc del nas sieu e ja havia declinat a la partida dreyta un petit, e occultada era tota la sageta.	 And the man of the prince of the king who was seated at his table had already declined to the right side and hidden away was the whole bag.
E yeu fu appelat a la curacio de lu aprop le cazement de la sageta entro a tres dias.	 They called for care with which it would be removed within three days
E adonc yeu atrobegui la plagua de la sageta mot streyta; e adonc yeu inquirigui aquela am tenta subtil, e no sentigui aquela; mays el la sentia puncio dejos la aurelha dreyta, e adonc speregui que aquela punccio era per la extremitat de la sageta.	 And when the pain was taken from the bag of the face but still remained, they inquired about something subtle, and did not feel it; may he send a signal to his right hand, and then inquire that this pain was caused by the extremity of the body part
E amplastregui le loc am emplaustre en le qual es vertut atrectiva e digestiva, confizant de mi que·l loc se apostemes per que appares a mi le loc de la sageta, per que secces sobre aquela.	 He examined the place where he thought that it was an abscessive and digestive tract, noting that this location seemed to be associated with the region of the face, for which reason he suggested surgery on that part.
E no accidic en le loc accident significant que la sageta hagues conseguit aquel loc; e yeu continuegui am le emplaustre sobre lu per motz dias e no accidic accident; e consolidada es la plagua entretant, e romas le malaute de la extreccio de lu per spazi de motz dias entro que un jorn sentic la sageta dintz le sieu nas e recontec aquo a mi.	 He did not find significant pain in the accidental place that the face had suffered from it; and continued to examine him for several days, without finding accident; and returned the cushion under them, and placed the blanket of the man on their legs, to prevent the intestine or hernia from coming out during these few days until one day they felt the sack of his nose and returned to tell this to me.
E adonc yeu pausegui sobre la plagua medicina acuta corrosiva per motz dias entro que foc ubert, e am la tenta yeu assagegui aquel, e atrobegui la extremitat de la sageta subtil, la qual adhereys al fust.	 When the acute corrosive medicine is applied in such a way that it burns immediately and also touches the sensitive part of the hand, then let him put his thumb against it
E aprop yeu ajustegui en la apersio de la plagua per aquela medicina acuta entro que apparec a mi visiblament la extremitat de la sageta, e passec a mi temps am aquo per le spazi de temps entro quatre meses.	 Let him adjust the opening of the wound to that medicine acute within four months
E aprop pus que la plagua foc amplificada, e foc a mi possible entrometre las forfexs en lu, e remaure aquela, e no obezic ad eyssiment, lahoras yeu no cessegui subtiliar e ingeniar sobre aquela am manieyras de engen, entro que comensegui un dia sobre aquela am manieyras de engens pendre lu am forceps descentment faytas, segon que vindra la forma de aquelas en la fi del capitol, entro que extraxi aquela; e aprop restauregui aquela plagua.	 Let the wound be expanded and apply a compress to it so that the blood flows through the arteries, but not too much or it will stop bleeding, then let the doctors treat the wound with needles and tweezers until they finish treating it, after which you can close it up again.
E alcus metges jutgavan que la cartillage del nas no es restaurada, e yeu restauregui aquela e la plagua es consolidada, e sanat es le malaute per sanetat entiera, e no noguec en lu en deguna causa.	 The doctors will judge that the cartilage of the nose is not restored and you should reattach it along with the wound, so that the patient can be healed in every way, without any cause to hold back.
E yeu recomti a tu la qualitat de extraccio de alcunas sagetas per que pauses aquo regla e significacio sobre aquo que no he dit, quar las partidas de aquesta art e las difinicios de aquela no so conprehendudas am narracio ni no comprehen aquelas le libre.	 You recommend that you take some time to extract the meaning and quality of such sentences for which there is not much said or explained, as the parts of this art and its definitions are not comprehended from either reading or listening to them free.
E le artifexs savi compara am pauc sobre mot; e am aquo que es present sobre aquo que es absent; e atroba operacio novela e instrument novel deves le descendement de las causas extranhas del art quan accideysso.	 This sentence refers to the comparison of arts, presence and absence, as well as dealing with external causes that may arise from it
E donc yeu dic que sagetas no son fora-gitadas dels membres en les quals son ficadas sino segon dos manieyras: o per atraccio del loc en le qual intrec; o per le contrari de la autra partida.	 "The first members are to be treated with traction on the side where they occur, or against the opposite part.
E aquela que es gitada per le loc don es intrada, o es sageta procedent en loc carnos, e es atirada e fora-gitada.	 "The one that is treated by the location from which it entered, or the one treated on the side away from where it occurred.
E si no obezeys a eyssiment de la hora en la qual catz, lahoras cove que tu la laysses per alcus dias entro que poyresca la carn que es al enviro de lu, e sia alleujada l‘atraccio de lu e la sua egressio.	 "If there is no swelling of the time in which cause it, then pain that occurs will be treated with traction and its discharge.
E semblantment si es ficada en os e no obezeys a tu a eyssiment, lahoras layssa aquela per alcus dias e itera aquela am atraccio e mocio en quascun dia, e ja es fora-gitada.	 "Similarly if the hernia is in the belly but there was no swelling, then pain that occurs will be treated with traction and its discharge.
E si no obezeys a tu eyssiment aprop alcus dias, lahoras cove que tu perforas en le circuit de la sageta en aquel os de tota partida am taravel subtil entro que·l loc sia amplificat de la sageta, e aprop extratz aquela.	 "If there is no swelling on the day of treatment, then pain that occurs will be treated with traction and its discharge.
E si la sageta es ficada en le os del cap e ja ha procezit en un dels ventres del cervel, e apparo en le malaute alcus de aquels accidentz les quals yeu e ditz, lahoras abste de la extraccio de la sageta e layssa aquela entro que·l sieu esser sia equat aprop alcus dias; quar si la sageta perve al ciphac, lahoras la mort no es a lu prolonguada.	 "If the hernia occurs in the head and has already occurred on one of the sides from which it was said, then stop removing it and let it be equal to the amount that is appropriate after some time; if however the hernia goes through the diaphragm, the doctor will not extend its life.
E si la sageta no es ficada sino en le cors del os tant solament e no passa entro al ciphac, e roman le malaute per alcus dias, e no accideys a lu denguna causa de aquels accidentz, lahoras tu engenia en la atraccio de la sageta e en la atraccio de lu.	 When the vein is not closed and does not pass through the heart, Roman doctors apply it to the patient's days for six days, they do not cause any damage from those accidents, then the doctor puts them in the incision of the vein and on the arm.
Mays si es mot ficada e no obezeys a tu a extraccio, lahoras tu aministra taravels en le circuit de la sageta ayssi cum havem recomtat, e aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	 If it is not closed and does not come out of the vein, then the doctor will apply turpentine in the course of the vein as recommended by them, and cover the area to be treated with a cloth or bandage.
Mays si la sageta ja es amaguada en le loc del cors, e es amaguada del sentiment, lahoras tu inquireys aquela am tenta, e si tu sentas aquela, lahoras atira aquela am alcus sturmentz les quals so convenientz a la atraccio de lu.	 If the vein has been already closed and is covered with tissue or bandage in that part of the body, then ask about any wounds that may need to be treated; if you feel any, apply them with a cautery as it would be suitable for the area where they are located.
E si no podes sobre lu per la constriccio de la plagua e per la longitut del preon, e aqui no es os ni nervi ni vena, lahoras tu fen sobre la plagua entro que sia amplificada e que sia possible extrayre la sageta.	 If you cannot find it by the constriction of the vein and its length, even if there is no nerve or vein, then try to enlarge it as much as possible and extract the vein from within
E si so a lu aurelhas am las quals sia tenguda, lahoras tu deliura la carn en la qual es ficada de tota partida am tot le engen que poyras far; e ingenia sobre aquo, si no podes sobre la evasio de la carn en la fractura de las aurelhas e en torssio de aquelas entro que obezesca.	 If so is the area where it has been held fast with all its ties to the edge of the skin that you want to remove; and if not, then cut through the fat in the fracture of the ears and the twist of those parts enclosed by that which disturbs.
E quan tu administras la extraccio de la sageta en quascun loc on sia, lahoras tu usa am torcio de la tua ma am forceps a totas partidas entro que fassa aquela obezir; e subtilia am deriera subtilitat que la sageta no sia trencada e que sia fayta a tu dificil atraccio de lu e de aquela extraccio.	 When you administer the extraction of the abscess in any location, the pain will be eased using torcils from your hand and into all its parts until it is complete; and subtlety with care that the abscess not be broken and remain intact to its difficult traction.
E si no podes sobre aquela de la tua hora, lahoras tu layssa per alcus dias entro que se poyrescan las partidas que so en le circuit de lu, e aprop itera aquela quar lahoras es alleujada.	 If you cannot over that of your time, the pain will lessen as days pass and in the process may be healed.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat flux de sanc, lahoras tu administra aquo que havem dit de curacio en le sieu capitol.	 If there is conflict between what you must do for treatment of this ailment versus its capital city's instructions, then the course of treatment should be followed first.
E guarda la tua vertut de inscizio de vena o de nervi, o de corda, e aministra engen en tota manieyra a tu possibla de la evasio de la sageta; e fay aquo am facilitat e tranquillitat e tarditat e fermetat ayssi cum yeu e a tu recomtat.	 If you have made incisions into veins or nerves, cords, etc., and administer treatment with all diligence to the prevention of the abscess; thus, it brings ease, tranquility, speed, and firmness as well as your recommended course.
E donc que fassas contrayre la sageta per so que·l malaute sia segon la figura segon la qual foc deves le cazement de la sageta en lu, quar es mays juvatiu.	 Then you must do the opposite of what was done to ensure that the patient is in a position to allow for treatment and examination as soon as possible.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible, lahoras tu aministra aquo que es a tu possible per las figuras.	 If this isn't possible then you will administer what might be necessary according to the figures.
Mays las sagetas que son fora-gitadas per le contrari del autra partida, o que ja de lu procezeys alcuna partida a las partidas de fora, o fa gilbositat la extramitat de la sageta per sentiment de la partida pus desus de la codena propdana e vezes aquela eminent; adonc tu secsa sobre aquela; e sia la seccio segon la quantitat en la qual prenguan las forceps; e aprop atira aquela, quar ela es fayta leugiera a eyssiment.	 When fistulas or abscesses are outside the body's normal course of treatment, do not attempt to make an incision within them but rather create an opening for drainage and remove pus from the fistula if it exists; then place your hand on that area and secure it in order to prevent the abscess from coming out.
Mays si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu tortz lama segon contrarietat entro que la sageta enprema en le os, e amplifique a si meteys, e aprop extratz aquela.	 When joints are swollen due to cold humors, and pain occurs in the feet; it is customarily called gout by doctors
E sino, layssa aquela per alcus dias, e aprop itera aquela entro qu’en yesca.	 And if it's necessary, place it there and hold it with your hand to prevent its escape
E si le fust de la sageta es en aquela, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am lu.	 If the hernia is in that space, you will push it back into place.
Mays si le fust es cazut e voles aministrar inpulsio, lahoras tu intromet e aquela, si es sorda, sturment concau per so que intre la concavitat de lu en la coa de la sageta e aprop impelleys aquela am lu.	 If you want to administer an injection of medicine into the hernia sac, make sure it is not too far from both the cavity of the sac and place your hand over the area so that its point prevents the contents of the sac from coming out.
Mays si la sageta es concava, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am sturment fort intrant en aquela, quar la sageta es alleujada per aquela.	 If the sack is concave, you will push it back into place while making sure it doesn't come out that way.
E si la sageta es entoxiguada, lahoras cove que tu concaves tota la carn en la qual es le vere, si es a tu possible aquo, e aprop cura aquela am aquo que si conveneys.	 If the sack is extended, you should try to fill up all of it, as long as it's safe to do so, and then apply that back where it needs to be.
E si la sageta catz en le pietz, o en le ventre, o en la vesica, o en le costat, e es propinqua per so que tu tocas aquela am la tenta, e es a tu possible secsar sobre aquela, lahoras secsa sobre aquela e guarda te de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e extratz aquela, e aprop cos la plagua si indigeys, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	 If the sack is located in the chest, abdomen, bladder, side, or near a vein or nerve and it is close to being pushed back into place, you should try to push it back there again, as long as it's safe to do so, then apply that again where it needs to be.
Forma de forceps am las quals so atiradas las sagetas:	 With the help of a pair of tweezers
Sian las extremitatz de lor cum a bec de ausel que son faytas cum serra quan prendon sobre la sageta per so que no la layssen.	 The fingers of their hands were held by forceps, and they gently pulled on the toe to ensure that it did not break off.
E de aquelas son faytas motas specias, grans, paucas e migieras, segon la quantitat de la grandeza de la sageta e de la sieua pauqueza, e de la amplitud de la plagua, e de la constriccio de lu.	 Of the small, medium and large ones, according to the size of the toe and its fragility, as well as the width and tightness of the opening, they were used in order
Forma de impellent concau de aquesta extremitat conquava ayssi cum pena de ausel per so que sia alleujat le intrament de la sageta en lu, e impulcio de aquela sorda:	 With the help of this extremity it was possible to gently pull on the toe in such a way that its inside surface became loose and the sound is produced.
Forma de impellent de sorda extremitat:	 The sound can be produced by using one or both extremities (fingers).
ayssi cum ray per so que sia alleujat le intrament de lu en la sageta concava e es impellida am aquel.	 In such a way that it loosens the inside of the toe, and makes it emit the sound.
De fleubotomia de las venas.	 Venous thrombosis.
Las venas de fleubotomia de las quals corr costuma de fleubotomar so xxx, de las quals so en le cap xvi, so es doas venas pulsatils las quals so aprop las aurelhas, dic alhasisain; doas herbas que so en les dos templars apparentz; e doas venas que so en dos lacrimals de dos huels que son appeladas aspicientz; e la vena preparada en le mieg loc del front, e la vena que es en la extremitat del nas; e doas guidegi que so al col; e doas venas que so en la labia desus; e doas venas que so en la labia dejos; e — aquestas so las venas que so appeladas algelic —; e so doas venas que so dejos la lengua.	 These veins are affected by phlebotomy, which is carried out in the twelfth finger or thumb, and these are the two pulsating veins that go to the ears, called tympani; they are also found on the temple, and are situated at the corners of the eyes; there are two small veins on both temples, visible only when the skin is stretched. There is a prepared vein over the nose bridge, and one behind each nostril; there are also two guide veins in the groin; and there are two veins in the labia on either side; these are called algelic veins and they go to the tongue.
Mays las venas que so fleubotomadas en les brasses so v; quar de aquelas es una cephalica, e es deves le latz silvestre; e le poble appela “la vena del cap”, e sorda, e es vena migiera, e es composta de un ram de la basilica, e de autre ram de la cephalica; e nomna aquela le poble “vena de tot le cors”, e basilica es vena la qual es pausada en le latz domestic, e es nomnada “citillar”, e nompnan aquela les vulguars “vena del ventre”; e funis del bras, e es pausada sobre le focil, e es aquela en la qual es fleubotomat, e es aquela que appar sobre le poutz per apparicio manifesta; e salvatella, e es la vena que es entre lo dit auricular e·l pus petit dit, e so en lu dos ramps.	 "The veins in the thighs are inflamed and swollen; of those veins one is a cephalic vein, and it should be left free for hunting; and people call 'the neck vein', deaf, and the lesser vein, and it consists of one arm from the basilica, and another from the cephalic; and they call that 'the main body vein,' and basilica is the vein which is closed in domestic water, and called 'little finger', and name those veins' belly.
E en le pe e la camba so tres venas; la una de aquelas es que es dejos la curvatura del denolh del latz silvestre; e la segonda es sophena, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz domestic; e la vena sciatica, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz silvestre; e en la camba son autras venas semblantz ad aquelas.	 "In the leg there are three veins: one of those is to leave the curvature of the elbow from wild water; and the second is sophena, and its place is to leave the arm from domestic water; and the sciatica vein, and its location is to leave the elbow from wild water; and in the arm itself all similar veins.
Le juvament de las venas que so aprop las aurelhas es a cataris antics e emigranea e sahafati e ulceracios del cap malas antiquas.	 "The youth of the veins that are about to be removed from the ears is an old and emigrate, and it will cause bleeding and ulceration at the top of the head.
E la qualitat de sagnar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: es que sia ras le cap del malaute, e sia freguat le cap del malaute en le occipiti en le loc de amdoas las venas am drap ample am bona fricacio; aprop strenha le malaute le sieu col am una benda entro que apparan las doas e les locs de lor so aprop las aurelhas en dos locs depremegutz del cap; e quereys aquela am le tieu dit, e si tu sentes le pols de aquelas am le dit tieu, aqui senha am tenta.	 "The quality of the death of those is to recommend it as follows: first remove from the head of the patient, and put a cushion on his forehead in the occipital area so that both ears are covered with good friction; tighten the patient's hand into a bandage and place them in two locations behind the head at the same time. And you want to do this every day if you feel the symptoms mentioned below.
Aprop tu pren la lancea cutellar, e es aquela que es inscident, e aprop tu intromet aquel dejos la vena en la codena entro que·l fleubotomi vengua al os.	 When you have placed a cutting tool on the thigh, this is when it happens, and so you prevent that vein from entering into the groin.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am la vena e la codena a las partidas desus e inscideys la vena am inscizio inscident.	 You place your hand on the vein in order to prevent it from cutting through and causing an injury.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio la quantitat de dos ditz ajustatz o entorn de aquo; e fay yssir del sanc atant quant voles.	 The length of the incision is adjusted or determined according to how much you want it to be, as a matter of preference.
E aprop strenh am pulvils e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	 Then apply fine powder and gently place it over where it should heal.
E ja e precedit en le comensament del libre la inscizio de aquelas e de lor la cauterizacio.	 This is the beginning of making a free incision in order to perform surgery on those, or perform cautery.
Mays de las doas venas arterias que so als templars le juvament de la fleubotomia es a emigranea antiqua e sode malvada e obtalmia assidua e cors de superfluitatz acutas effusas als huels.	 The major veins and arteries that are used for the surgery on young patients, such as the one that occurs after a hernia operation, which is harmful to the liver, kidney stones, ulcers in the bowels, and others, should be avoided at all costs because they can be very painful.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: constrengua le malaute le sieu col mot entro que apparan las doas venas al sentiment per appericio manifesta e sia demonstrat le pols de lor dejos le tieu dit; e lahoras tu senha am tenta.	 The quality of performing the procedure on those is to make sure that the patient's body does not move around when you are trying to find or place a vein, and it demonstrates with its fingers where they want you to put them by showing their fingertips; as for your own safety precautions.
E aprop tu eleva la codena desobre la vena a las partidas desus am le tieu dit indic, e intromet le fleubotomi inscident dejos, e eleva la vena en sus; e inscidey aquela ayssi cum has fayt en las doas venas autras; e fay correr del sanc segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	 Then you place the vein over where it should go on your hand and prevent that from happening when performing surgery, or when placing a vein in them; then put it there as much as possible according to what is needed, be careful not to overdo it.
E aprop deslia la coartacio del malaute, e pausa le tieu dit sobre la vena per una hora, e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto e pulvils e strenh aquela desus am fort constriccio, e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	 The servant places a cushion on the patient's chest and holds their hand for an hour to prevent any constriction of the veins or pulmonary edema.
E ja es precedida la rememoracio de lor, e de aquelas la inscizio, e la atraccio en le comensament del libre.	 The servant then recites a prayer and puts their hand on the patient's forehead to start the treatment process.
E donc le juvament de fleubotomia de la vena del front es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a las malautias antiquas de la cara e a emigranea e rogor e ulceracios fetidas.	 The servant then administers a phlebotomy on the patient's forehead, which is a treatment for ancient migraines and facial ulcers.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es segon que yeu recomti a tu; so es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col am una benda entro que apparesca la vena; e aprop pren le insturment le qual es nompnat fossori del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	 The quality of the phlebotomy is such that it is recommended for you to do so yourself, as the patient must strain against something within reach when they first attempt this.
Pausa la puncta eminent la qual es al cap del fossori sobre aquela vena e percuteys sobre lu am penche o am autre causa en la manieyra de lu, e layssa lo sanc correr segon la quantitat la qual voles; e aprop deslia la perforacio del malaute e strenh aquela entro que sia sanada.	 Pause the point at which it is on top of the artery over that vein and strike against its side or bottom in the patient's hand, and let loose as much blood as you wish to; then place a finger over it to prevent any bleeding.
E alcunas veguadas es uberta am fleubotomi lat, empero no cove que·l fleubotomi sia de acuta extremitat ayssi cum les autres fleubotomis, abantz sia de lada extremitat, e fleubotoma aquela segon le tranvers, quar le os es propda e fort leu trencaria en lu le fleubotomi quan es subtil.	 Some vegetables are very painful during phlebotomy, however not as much when compared to other phlebotomies of the same area, except for the extremities; phlebotomize it second through the vein transversely so that its exit is close and easy to cut off in case of a fine one.
Mays le juvament de las duas venas que so als lacrimals de dos huels per scabia del huels per rogor e sebol en les huels, e a las malautias de la cara.	 When the veins of both eyes are inflamed and swollen in their sockets, and also in the cheeks due to weeping, it is called pinguecula by doctors
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia es que·l malaute strenha le col sieu am una benda, e aprop fleubotoma aquelas, e tu sias stant sobre le cap de lu.	 The quality of phlebotomy is that the patient's body strength is increased a bit and then the phlebotomist sits on top of their head.
E sia fayta la fleubotomia segon le transvers a longitut un pauc am fleubotomi pauc, quar en le loc no es carn; e si le fleubotomi es subtil, fort leu la extremitat de lu es trencada.	 The second sentence of phlebotomy is to make the incision at right angles for a short distance and then stop it when the flesh is reached; and if the phlebotomist is delicate, be very careful not to cut off their extremity.
E aprop fay correr del sanc atant quant es a tu necessari, e pausa sobre aquelas coto, e strenh aquelas per una nueyt, e aprop deslia aquelas.	 Then proceed with great caution as needed, pausing over the area and then tighten it up again, repeating this process several times.
Mays le fleubotomi de la vena del nas es conferent a febre acuta e a soda vehement, e a las malautias de la cara e emigranea e rogor que accideys en la cara, e majorment quan es antiqua.	 The phlebotomist makes incisions in the veins of the nose that cause fever and sweating, along with those on the face, and more so when they occur in the face, especially during a cold or flu.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col e aprop te le sieu nas am la tua ma sinistra, e pren le fleubotomi subtil lonc e fica aquela en le mieg loc del cap del nas segon rectitut, quar la vena no appar al sentiment aqui, e quar le sanc comensa a fluir tantost.	 The quality of phlebotomy in this case is that the patient's body strength increases and then the phlebotomist applies pressure to their nose with their left hand while holding the vein gently between their thumb and forefinger towards the front of their head, so that it doesn't show above the neck.
Cove que tu ultimes la tua ma am le fleubotomi petit a petit e fassas correr del sanc segon la tua necessitat; e aprop lia aquela per una nuoyt, quar aquela es restaurada leugierament.	 After that, proceed with great caution as needed and gradually make the incisions wider while holding them down, until they are restored to their proper size again.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de las doas guidegui a constriccio de ale e a comensament de lepra e a motas malautias e inpetige e malas ulceracios corrosivas ayssi cum herpotromeno.	 "This is the first stage of the plague or leprosy, characterized by stiffness and pain at its onset.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que el malaute strenha dejos quascuna en le sieu col am liament; e estia le artifexs sobre le cap del malaute, e le malaute sia sezent sobre una sezela.	 "The quality of plague or leprosy is that the patient feels pain in their limbs when they move them, and there may be numbness around the head as well.
E aprop fleubotoma la vena al lonc am fleubotomi ample petit a petit; e aprop extratz de sanc segon temprada quantitat o segon aquo que vezes de necessitat que es ad aquo; e aprop fay semblant del autra vena.	 "First, apply the plague or leproso to the affected limb slowly and gradually, and if it is necessary to do so, then place a bandage around that limb as well.
E aprop deslia le liament e strenh las doas venas am strictura migiera per so que·l malaute no sia prefocat, e laysa entro al mati quar la plagua es sanada.	 "Firstly, stretch out the affected veins gently to prevent further complications in the limb as it heals.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de las venas algerich, comfereys a petitas apostemas e pustulas de la boca e corrupcio de las gengivas e malas ulceracios e fissuras, e a malas ulceracios que so en le nas e en le circuit de lu.	 "The first stage of plague or leprosy involves lesions on the veins as well as blisters and sores in the mouth, gums, nose, and throat.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que fases cezer le malaute denant tu, e strenh le col de lu am una benda, e aprop revolveys las labias de lu e reguarda a doas venas de las quals la una es de la dextra de la labia e la segonda de la senestra; e la demonstracio de quascuna es per la negror de quascuna de amdos, e aquo mays es quar en le circuit de aquelas so venas menudas negras; e adonc inscideys cascuna per inscizio inscident.	 "The quality of plague or leprosy is that the patient loses sensation in their limbs as they move them, and stretching out the arm to examine each vein closely can demonstrate whether one or both are affected veins on the right side of the lips.
Mays si dubitacio es dejos tu, e no sabes qual es de aquelas, lahoras tu enten a inscisio de la major de aquelas, e de la pus manifesta de aquelas.	 When there is doubt as to which it should be done, you are unsure whether it is one of those or another, then explain in detail the manner by which they should proceed with the greater or more obvious of them
E fay le semblant de las doas venas que so en las labias desus.	 The same way as for the veins that are on the arms
Mays costuma corr mays a inscidir las doas venas que so en la labia dejos.	 They should proceed with puncturing the veins that are in both of their labia.
Mays de doas venas que so dejos la lengua le juvament es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a prefocacios que so en le guolayro, a la malautia de la uvula, e a malautias de la boca.	 The veins in the labia that they should puncture are located at the tip of their tongue and above their epiglottis, as well as below their uvula and within their mouth.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es que segue le malaute entre las tuas mas denant le solel, e eleva la lengua de lu, e reguarda dejos la lengua, de la un latz de lu vena e del autre latz vena, e la color de quascuna es declinant a negror.	 The quality of puncturing those veins is to move the patient between their sheets and lift their tongue up, ensuring it does not come out through either vein, and observe which one is draining blood more clearly.
E adonc fleubotoma quascuna; e guarda te que no ultimes la tua ma en fleubotoman aquelas, quar dejos aquelas so arterias.	 After puncturing each of them: ensure that you do not end your application there, as those veins are arteries.
E las tuas venas que so fleubotomadas en le coyde so en las quals corr costuma en totz les homes, e la fleubotomia de lor es fayta segon dos manieyras, o pongen am le fleubotomi mirtilat o olivar a subtilitat declinant; o secsar am fleubotomi cutellar, e apelha si alnessil, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	 The veins that they have punctured are located in the parts where all men's veins usually pierce through and their phlebotomies occur at two different sites or in a single spot on each thigh, depending on preference. Either way, the phlebotomy must be performed delicately so as to avoid any injury to them, unless it is planned for superficial phlebotomy, in which case there should be an additional check nearby
E aquest alnessil es que conveneys a seccio e de aquels so specias latz e subtils segon la amplitut de las venas e segon la strictura de aquelas.	 This must be done gently, slowly, in accordance with both the thickness of the veins and the constriction of those
Forma de fleubotomi mirti:	 Form of phlebotomy meaning?
sia le latz de lu ayssi cum vezes, e conveneys a obrir las venas concavas plenas procedentz apparentz grossas, e ad aquelas que conteno sanc gros torbat.	 To gently open veins that are thick and large, as well as those that contain clots or are narrowed
E aquesta es la forma de fleubotomi olivar:	 This is the olive phlebotomy method.
E aquest fleubotomi es de menor latitut e de pus subtil extremitat, e conveneys a fleubotomia de venas subtils que conteno sanc subtil citri.	 The olive phlebotomy method is gentler and less risky than others, suitable for veins that are thin but contain tiny clots.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena basilica la qual es una de tres venas: quar extratz le sanc de las malautias que so dejos le guolayro e·l col, e de aquo que siec le pietz e·l ventre.	 The phlebotomy of the vein called "basilic vein" which is one of three veins to be used for drainage of bile from the gallbladder and the abdomen.
E conveneys al fleubotomador, quan fleubotomia aquela, que guarde be aquela e sia sobre-temor en aquela, quar dejos lu ha arteria, e si erra e ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi, inscidira aquela arteria e accidira fluxs de sanc, per so que cove que no fleubotomes aquela am fleubotomi pungent, abantz sia sectant cum alnessil.	 The phlebotomist must hold tight when performing the phlebotomy to ensure it is strong and steady as he or she may damage the artery if not careful during puncturing and inserting the needle.
E si no appar la basilica per apparicio manifesta, lahoras cove que tu laysses aquela e que tu mudes a la autre, o que cerques alcun ram sieu; o que fleubotomes en loc de lu finis del bras, quar aquela es manifesta; e secsa aquela am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit.	 If the basilic vein is not palpable through superficial palpation, it means that you should move on to another vein or seek another approach, or puncture the opposite arm if necessary. And remember to perform olive phlebotomy in this manner as we mentioned earlier.
Mays si tu voles la fleubotomia de lu meteyssa, lahoras cove denant la strictura del bras que toques le loc entro que conogues le loc dels pols, e aprop senha sobre lu am tencha; e aprop lia le bras e secsa la vena am seccio concava am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit; e guarda te que caja la percussio per alcu spazi del loc de la arteria.	 When you want to do a phlebotomy on the patient, first place your hand inside the location where you want to take blood from their arm, and afterwards fix it firmly so that no other part of your body touches the vein, or else you will not be able to perform a proper phlebotomy.
E quan tu vezes, cum strenhes le liament, imflacio en le loc que has senhat am tencha, lahoras aquela inflacio es inflacio de la arteria, e donc squiva aquela.	 When you compress the limb while applying tourniquet, inflation of that location will occur in the artery and therefore it should be compressed immediately to prevent blood loss.
E si vezes le sanc fluir en la fleubotomia ayssi cum aurina de enfant, e·l sanc es subtil rog, lahoras sapias que es del sanc de la arteria; e lahoras tu coyta e pausa le tieu dit sobre aquel per lonc spazi; e aprop osta le tieu dit, e si lo sanc es abscindit, quar motas veguadas es abscindit, lahoras tu strenh le bras e layssa aquel.	 If the bleeding during phlebotomy occurs as a result of an artery injury and is severe enough to be life-threatening, you should compress it immediately with tourniquet, or else it may cause further blood loss.
E guardes le malaute de la moccio de lu, e sia sobre-temor de lu e no maugua aquel per alcus dias entro que sia sanat.	 The patient's condition is monitored closely and their pain medication is given to prevent any further complications from occurring during the time that they are being treated.
Mays si le sanc no es abscindit, e vezes que deves tu no es present medicina ad aquo, lahoras tu inscideys la arteria, si appar a tu; quar la extremitat de lu es contrayta, e es abscindit le sanc; o que prenguas scorsa de fistic, e fen aquela, e pren la una maytat e strenh aquela sobre le loc de la vena am strictura descent am liament e am pulvils entro al autra dia.	 If the bleeding does not stop and you need to administer pain medication at this time, apply pressure over the artery if it is visible or feel for a pulse in your hand; compress the extremity where the injury occurred, hold down on both ends of tourniquet until further assistance arrives.
E lahoras si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, lahoras cura aquel am aquo del qual es precedit a la rememoracio del loc de las polveras abscindentz flux de sanc.	 When joints are inflamed due to the passage of hot humors, then you shall cure that person with this remedy which was previously mentioned in the passage about the powders that should be taken out of one's bowels.
E la abscizio del sanc de lu es dificil en motas disposicios per le loc petit de la plagua e la possibilitat del liament del bras.	 The removal of a hernia is difficult due to limited space in the small area around it and also because of the limitations on use of one's arm.
Mays de la vena fusca la fleubotomia es juvament que extratz lo sanc de la partida subirana del cap e a la partida dejos del cors; per aquo quar es composta de ram de la basilica e de ram de cephalica, ayssi cum havem dit.	 The fistula vein surgery is done from the top of the head down to the bottom of the chest, and it consists of arteries from both the basilical region and the cerebral region as well.
E cove al fleubotomant aquela que sia sobre-temor en la fleubotomia de lu, quar dejos aquela es un nervi; e adonc si ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi e atroba le nervi, accidira a lu stupor, e es difficil la sanacio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot, E aquest nervi motas veguadas apar al sentiment; e si es ocultat ad alcus homes e es subtil e no es monstrat, lahoras cove que tu pauses le fleubotomi am le qual tu fleubotomas am seccio de alnessil, e evita le nervi am la tua fortalesa.	 The phlebotomist should take into account that there may be some soreness during the fistula vein surgery, as this could happen if a nerve is touched or injured; in such cases, it would cause stupor and can be difficult to recover from, and even without treatment, it might not heal completely. If you feel any numbness or tingling in your hands, avoid touching that area at all costs.
E si la vena es entre dos nervis, lahoras tu fen la vena en la longitut.	 If the vein is between two nerves, you should cut it along its length.
Le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena cephalica es que atratz le sanc del cap e comfereys a las malautias dels huels.	 The recent development of the fistula vein surgery is that they treat the condition from top to bottom, including treating any related conditions on the head as well.
E cove en aquest propriament, si vols que la fleubotomes pungen am fleubotomi olivar o am fleubotomi mirti; quar es la pus salva de totas las venas, quar no es dejos lu arteria ni nervi.	 In this particular case, if you want to stop the flow of blood from veins or arteries, do not damage the artery or nerve.
Mays empero conveneys a tu deves la fleubotomia que guardes que am le fleubotomi no punguas le cap del lacert tant solament, e cerques le loc pus leugier, e no notz a lu, si no es atrobat am la percussio primieyra que sia sobre aquela am fleubotomia alcunas veguadas.	 However, in this particular case, remember to perform the first cut slightly above where you want it to be on the vein that is being operated upon, seeking out a location as close as possible without touching the artery directly.
Mays empero fort leu es apostemat en alcus homes, quan no es fleubotomat en la primieyra percussio, mays no notz en re aquel apostema.	 However, very importantly when you're performing the first cut on a vein without performing a phlebotomy (taking blood), make sure to ensure that you are not cutting over an artery.
Mays la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquela e les accidentz de lu so motz, en les quals te cove cogitar en lor rectificacio.	 The quality of the phlebotomy and its potential complications should be considered when deciding on a correction or not to correct it.
Le primier de lu es del qual cove que sapias que fleubotomia no es aministrada sino en conservacio de sanetat e per speransa de lu e cautela de aveniment de malautias, e que sia fayta fleubotomia en la una de las venas que so en le coyde, so es: cephalica, fusca e basilica; e que sia fayta fleubotomia al comensament de primaveyra, sobre dejun en primaviera e autunppne, e en invern aprop la comestio, quan apparo significacios de replecio.	 The first cut should be made in one of the veins that is located on the head or neck region: cephalica, fusca and basilica; and the phlebotomy should begin from the beginning of this vein to another nearby vein, with care taken during application as significant bleeding may occur.
E sia fayta fleubotomia e le tertz dia o al primier pus que del jorn siran passadas tres horas.	 The third day or later in a 24-hour period should be the time for phlebotomy to take place.
Mays fleubotomia que es aministrada, mays quan provoca convenencia e necessitat ad aquo, o de nuoyt o de dia, en tota hora e en tot temps.	 When administering leeches to a patient who is experiencing discomfort or need it, at any time and in all times
E cove que efant no sia fleubotomat entro que aja xiiii ans, e femna que sia prenhs no sia fleubotomada sino del quart mes entro al sete, e les viels no sian fleubotomatz les quals ja han passatz lx ans.	 And if it is not administered to the patient within three months and up to seven, then these are the measures that have been taken without leeches.
E cum alcu vol esser fleubotomat per qualque manieyra sia, cove que mondifique les sieus budels denant la fleubotomia am clisteri leon, si en aquels ha mota fenda retenguda, per so que las venas no atiro las superfluitatz en la fleubotomia dels budels, que son puridas, e que no noguan als membres principals.	 And when it is necessary to administer leeches according to your opinion, make sure that the vessels of the intestines do not enter into their cavity during the application of leeches on the thigh, as if there are cracks in them, so that the veins will not cause any harm to the pure arteries and not affect the main members.
E no sian fleubotomatz les pascientz naucea sacertiva e crapula, ni evasent de malautia ni de ebretat entro que aquo sia remaugut aquo de lor, ni malaute de ydropici, e mays que fleubotomia sia temuda aprop colica passio e aprop vomit, e aprop cos de ventre, e aprop multiplicacio de coyt e de trebal e de exercici de dejunis o de vigilias e de tota causa que dissolveys la vertut, o sia corpore28 o animal.	 Do not administer leeches to patients who are suffering from a fever or delirium, nor from malady or fright until it is certain that this remedy does no harm, nor from jaundice or dropsy, and may the application of leeches be tempered with moderation so as not to cause vomiting or stomachache, nor excessive multiplication of worms, nor exercise of any kind or vigils, but all causes which dissolve the body or animal.
E aprop considera en subtiliacio de humos denant aquo si le sanc es gros, am viandas e beures, e am medicinas si aquo es a lu possible ad aquo.	 Consider with subtlety the qualities of those who are affected by this condition as to their tastes for food and drink, medicine if it is necessary according to your ability at that moment.
E aprop intre en banh si alcuna causa no prohibeys, o sia excersitat per alcun exercici per so que·l sanc sia subtiliat.	 Between a finger's breadth there should be no prohibition or exercise to prevent its subtlety
E pausa la fleubotomia de lu en le pietz del dia, so es enviro la hora de tercia, ayssi cum havem dit.	 The phlebotomy of the chest is done in three hours as well
E perforsa te que·l pietz de aquel sia guardat en aquel dia de totz mals accidentz animals, ayssi cum es angustia, ira, temor, e de totz accidentz corporals, ayssi cum es trebal e pena superflua e coyt e semblantz a lor.	 It is necessary to keep the chest protected from all kinds of animal accidents as well as angina, heart attack, fear, and bodily injuries, along with excessive sweat and coldness
E a la sua sezelha fassa esser presentz las causas en le us de la qual corr costuma dels homes am aromaticitat e odorament e am bals e semblantz ad aquels segon la cantitat de possibilitat.	 It is necessary to find the causes that correspond to the uses of which herbs are known for their scent and taste, as well as those who can be used in large quantities.
E segua le fleubotomador sobre un coyssi que sia pus aut que·l coyssi de aquel que deu esser fleubotomat.	 The phlebotomist should be careful when removing the one from which they have already taken blood
E aprop extragua le sieu bras, e fregue aquel am la sua ma le fleubotomador doas o tres veguadas; e aprop strenha le liament am correia e involva aquel doas veguadas.	 Then stretch the arm with both hands and pull gently on it for three seconds; after that, straighten out your wrist and extend your elbow.
E sia la strictura temprada, quar la strictura quant no es engual, o la strictura es am superfluitat, lahoras prohibeys de fluxs del sanc; o es am mollificacio, e lahoras prohibeys le cors del sanc eyssament.	 Tighten your fist and hold it for a moment while keeping the other one loose or stretched, if you want to increase blood flow; or you can use this as a massage, where you gently press on your chest.
E aprop la strictura, cove que aquel que deu esser fleubotomat fregue las suas mas ensemps entre lor entro que las venas sian imfladas, e sian declaradas al sentiment.	 Tighten the fist and hold it for a moment while keeping the other one loose or stretched to increase blood flow; or you can use this as a massage, where you gently press on your chest.
E aprop le fleubotomador unte le sieu fleubotomi am un pauc de oli antic propriament; e aprop pausa le sieu di indic de la ma senestra sobre aquela vena, dejos le loc del qual vol la fleubotomia, per que la vena fuja un pauc, e la percussio sia sessada quar de las venas es la qual atrobas ayssi cum corda fugent deves la fleubotomia, e de aquelas es que es plena de ventositat e quan pauses le fleubotomi sobre aquela es contrayta deves le fleubotomi, e es desceubut le fleubotomador; e le fleubotomi no uobre la vena, e si uobre, aquela es streyta.	 "The attendant first cleanses the patient's hand and forearm with a damp cloth to prevent injury.
E donc, per aquo cove que·l fleubotomador sia fermat e sia sollicit en totas aquestas causas.	 And then proceed as follows: The attendant ensures that the phlebotomist is firmly seated and encourages him in all these actions.
E aprop depause le fleubotomi, mays si la vena es huberta en una veguada, lahoras bo es; e sino, tu itera aquo autra vaguada dejos aquel loc un pauc, o sobre lu am festinacio, si le loc no es apostemat.	 Then pause the phlebotomy procedure and apply pressure if bleeding occurs, either over the elbow or onto a cloth to cover the area in case of injury.
Et si le loc es apostemat, o le malaute se spauresca, lahoras tu le layssa per un dia o per dos, e no strenha le liament, quar fort leu atirara apostema caut, ni no intre en banh.	 If the patient is bleeding or has fainted, wait one or two days and do not strain yourself too much in order to prevent further injury or loss of consciousness.
E aprop itera la fleubotomia si la ama.	 Then proceed with the phlebotomy procedure as usual if she/he comes around.
E si la apercio es petita e corr sanc subtilment, e temes que non yesca sanc la cantitat que voles, lahoras tu itera le fleubotomi en aquel trauc segon rectitut e ajusta en la appercio un pauc, e fay aquo am festinacio denant que·l loc sia apostemat, quar le loc es apostemat en motz homes deves pauca apercio.	 If the needle is small and risks causing too much bleeding or if you fear it may not extract enough blood, then proceed with the phlebotomy procedure in that way as before, adjusting to fit into a few seconds, but keep the pressure on so that the area does not become numb from lack of sensation.
Mays si vezes aquel ja apostemat, lahoras no iteres sobre lu, quar no escusa a tu alcuna causa; e pausa sobre aquel alcuna partida de la fenda de oli, quar alleuja le cors del sanc.	 "When one has opened the space between the patient's thighs and placed a cushion under them, they should then gently apply pressure on that area to prevent any bleeding from occurring.
E es milhor en aquest loc que oli e que les autres olis.	 The first sentence translates as: "It is best in this location to use it (the cushion) and the others too.
E semblantment aministra fenda de oli en tota fleubotomia am la qual fleubotomes las venas deves la prohibicio de cors de sanc, e fan aquo tyriaca alfadoc e sagzenea quan es pausat de la una de aquelas sobre le loc, quar le sanc es subtiliat e es revolvut quan es gros.	 Similarly, when administering bloodletting at the site of a fistula (a hole created to drain pus), it is customary to apply this procedure gently and carefully, as the wound may be sensitive and may bleed easily if too much pressure is applied suddenly.
E si en le loc de la fleubotomia es engendrat gran apostema, quar motas veguadas accideys, e majorment ad aquel que no es stat sangnat sino aquela veguada, o en la apercio de la vena pauca, e lahoras tu coyta, e pausa sobre le loc sponja infuza en aygua e sal, un pauc scalfada, e strenh aquela per una hora, quar es dissolvut.	 If there is a large amount of bleeding at the site of the phlebotomy (a procedure in which blood is drained), it's best to apply pressure with gauze soaked in water and salt for only a short time, as applying too much pressure can cause bruising or swelling that lasts longer than an hour.
E cove que fassa aquo aprop le yssiment del sanc de aquela vena am compliment de lu o de autra vena.	 It's best to use the same bandage on both sides of the vein at a time, and not just one side
E si roman en le loc per alcus dias alcuna negror o viriditat, no notz aquo; e si voles, pausa sobre aquel alcuna causa de aloen e de mirra dissolvut, o alcuna causa de suc de mentastre o de calament o semblant de lu.	 If you notice any redness or green discoloration at the site of application, do not apply it further and instead stop to assess the situation; if desired, place a bandage on that area as well to prevent further bleeding, put aside any causes for concern such as those causing ulcers or ulcers, and similar ones.
E motas veguadas accideysso apostemas e eminencias deves fleubotomia de la basilica.	 The first sentence translates to: "The veins of the head become paralyzed from excessive bleeding into the basilica.
E donc pausa la tua ma sobre aquela, e si lahoras tu atrobas mollicia deves la tua compressio sobre aquela, lahoras aquela eminencia es malvada e mala; e adonc guarda te que pauses sobre aquela alcuna causa de aquo que havem dit, quar fort leu fluira de la arteria sanc.	 Then, place your hand over it and if the pain increases with compression do not compress it anymore as this would be worsening the situation.
E fay emplaustre am aquo en que es stipticitat, per que le loc sia endurat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	 Then apply a plaster to that area in order to harden it and seek another remedy to heal it.
E cove que extraguas del sanc a tot hom segon la quantitat de la sua vertut e segon la color vencent sobrc le sanc segon que appar.	 And take from the sick one according to their quantity of health and the color they have lost in comparison with the normal appearance.
Quar si le sanc es negre, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia rog; e semblantment si tu le vezes gros, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia subtiliat; e semblantment si es agut, entro que sia ostada la acuitat de lu.	 If the sick one is black, you should use a dark color to heal them as this would be beneficial; and similarly if they are large, you should use a light color to heal them so that subtlety of healing could be maintained; and similarly if they are sharp then it's best to use a soft color for them.
E cove ad aquel que es ple e fort e ha necessitat de extraccio de sanc en una veguada, que sia amplificada la fleubotomia de la vena e le fleubotomi sia lat.	 And apply that which is thick and strong in a vein, increasing the bleeding of the vein itself as well.
E en aquel que es freul, sia fayt le contrari de aquel, e cove que extragua aquel en tropas veguadas, e que le trauc sia streyt.	 For one that is thin do the opposite and apply it in many places so that the flow of blood would not be obstructed
E le milhor que es administrat en fleubotomia de vena es que sia la seccio transversa, no punctura.	 The most beneficial thing to administer by a vein thrombosis is to perform transverse incision instead of puncturing it
E aquesta manieyra de fleubotomia es salva de flux de sanc e de inscizio de nervi, e es pus lausabla e pus salva que fleubotomia segon latitut e longitut.	 The first sentence translates to "This treatment for phlebotomy saves from the flow of blood and injury to nerves.
E a la qual es acostumat sobrevenir sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e cove que tu cures aquel denant la fleubotomia am un petit de pa infus en vi de milgranas o de oximel simple scalfat; e extratz a l u del sanc en tres veguadas o quatre.	 The second sentence translates to "And when you cure that disease, you will observe that phlebotomy is applied in three or four doses.
E si es enfregiditat de compleccio, lahoras prengua denant la fleubotomia pa infus en eyssarop de mirra o en eyssarop de mel aromatizat am specias ayssi cum am pebre, canela, gingiebre e semblantz, o en eyssarop aromatizat e mot odorant.	 The third sentence translates to "And if it is necessary to infuse phlebotomy with bitter or sweet aromatic substances such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and others, or with an aromatic and fragrant infusion.
E si accideys sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e es causa de lu issiment de mot sanc, lahoras cove que prengua en beure aygua de carn e eyssarop mot odorant subtil; e use de aromaticitat am algualea, e sia linit le sieu pietz am aquela.	 The fourth sentence translates to "And when you observe that disease, drink water with a subtle infusion of bitter or fragrant substances, and apply the aromaticity on it.
E usa de las autras causas que havem ditas en la divisio en le capitol de sincopi per evacuacio.	 The fifth sentence translates to "Use any other causes that are mentioned in the division of phlebotomy for evacuation purposes.
E qui vol eventar le sieu bras e dissolver le sieu sanc segonda veguada, cove a lu del qual la fleubotomia es per mota evacuacio, e la vertut de lu es freol, que evacue le sanc petit a petit, so es segon la quantitat de la vertut en les dias continuables.	 The sixth sentence translates to "If you want to have the hand dissolve and evacuate the sick part of two days later, this is because phlebotomy causes evacuation by removing it bit by bit as time goes on, until the quantity reaches a certain amount of persistent days.
Mays qui vol eventar le sieu bras, e gitar lo sieu sanc segonda vetz, e le sieu cors es fort, lahoras fassa aquo aprop vii horas o ix de la primieyra fleubotomia.	 "The first doctor will start the operation with a sharp incision on their left arm and then proceed to make an incision on their right side.
Mays qui vol atirar le sanc del cors sieu al contrari de la partida a la qual declina, cove que sia eventat en le segon dia o le tertz.	 "The surgeon will start the operation by making an incision on one side of the chest opposite to where it started from and then proceed with another incision on the third day if needed.
Mays aquel cors en le qual es mot sanc ja scalfat e es acuit e fa accidir febre, cove que sia gitat de lu sanc en una veguada e sia de lu gitada gran cantitat e sia amplificada la apercio entro que accidesca sincopi, pus que tu auras conservadas totas las condicios de fleubotomia; e que pauses la tua ma sobre le pols de lu deves le cors del sanc, per que no endevengua mort en loc de sincopi, quar motas veguadas endeve aquo quan le fleubotomador es ignorant e negligent.	 "The chest incision should be made on the side where the previous one was already made and was sharp but not too long to prevent complications like infection or bleeding, unless you have saved all the conditions for a thoracotomy; place your hand over his head so that no air is inhaled into the wound during surgery. If the surgeon is unaware of or negligent about this precaution, the patient may suffer more harm than good.
E no cove quan tu voles desliar le bras e evacua le sanc segonda veguada, cum ja sia claus le orrifici de la vena e sia fayt difficil issiment del sanc, que tu premas subre aquel am vehemencia e encurvat sia extendut leugierament, quar aquo es trop mal.	 "When you want to disconnect the second arm and remove the incision from that side, ensure that both veins are closed properly and take great care during surgery in order to avoid complications like bleeding or causing damage to other organs.
Habantz le layssa entro que sia fleubotomat segondament; o remau aquo am la acuitat del fleubotomi que es coagulat del sanc en le orrifici de la vena; o pausa sobre aquel de tyriaca alfarach, o de sagzenea, e comprem aquel am compressio leugiera entro que·l sanc sia fora yssit.	 "After the second thoracotomy incision is made, ensure that the blood clot in the vein at the bottom of the incision is removed; or cover it with a pad to prevent damage from swelling if needed.
E si la vena es apostemada, lahoras layssa aquela e no la toques entro que·l apostema sia sedat.	 When a vein is opened up, stop touching it immediately so that it does not close.
E si necessitat te provoca a evacuar le sanc segondament, e no es excusacio, lahoras tu sagna aquel sobre aquel loc o en l’autre bras en autra vena.	 If you need to evacuate the second vein and there is no other option, place it over another arm or another vein in that case.
E la vena apelada “funis del bras” es fleubotomada en loc de la fusca o de la basilica, quan no so atrobadas o so amaguadas, quar es composta de aquelas.	 If the called vein is located on the arm or in a similar location when it cannot be found or reached, then consider that it consists of these veins.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intrometa la sua ma en aygua cauda entro que·l focil se enrogezesca e que la vena apparia manifestament.	 The quality of the puncture is that the patient puts their hand in water with a pointed instrument inside, causing redness and visible veins to appear prominently.
E aprop sia strengut sobre aquel am liament am strictura migana; e aprop fleubotoma segon le tranvers petit, no latitudinalment ni segon la longitut.	 Place it so that the point is on or near a straight line (not diagonally) and do not use a small cut for this puncture
E sia la apercio ampla e sia la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas aquela sobre la junctura de la ma un petit.	 Do it wide and your puncture near where you make the small punch.
E si es prohibit le fluxs del sanc, lahoras tu itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e layssa le sanc correr en la aygua entro que consieguas la tua necessitat.	 If it is prohibited for blood to flow through the vein, place your hand in water and let it run into the water so that you fulfill your need.
Mays si tu eras en les dias d’estiu, lahoras tu yest excusat de la iteracio de la ma en l’aygua cauda, e le mes es pausat le cors del sanc en aygua cauda en temps de yvern.	 If you are in the summer days, be excused from the puncture of your hand into water and place it on the vein in water during a cold spell (drought).
E la fleubotomia de aquesta vena es pus salva que de totas las autras venas, quar dejos lu no ha vena pulsatil, ni nervi.	 When a patient has suffered from a phlebotomy of this vein that cannot be saved because all the other veins are also damaged, and there is no pulse or nerve found in it
E la fleubotomia de la savatella de la ma dreyta es conferent a las malautias del fetge.	 A phlebotomy of the right arm is considered an injury to the physician.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que tu strenguas la ma am liament o am la tua ma, pus que tu l’as mesa en ayga cauda, entro que la vena sia imflada e sia be demostrada al vezement; e aprop fleubotoma aquela transversan; e si inscidas aquela de tot no nozera aquo en re.	 The quality of the phlebotomy is that you should remove it from your hand immediately if you see swelling or it has already been demonstrated at once, and do not phlebotomize that which does not exist in this case
E conserve que no ultimes la tua ma am la fleubotomi, quar dejos lu so les nervis dels ditz denudatz de carn.	 Do not remove the bandage from your hand after the phlebotomy has taken place and may damage the nerves of the fingers being exposed to skin.
E aprop itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e laysse correr le sanc en aquela, quar si tu no iteras aquela en l’aygua cauda, le sanc sira coagulat en lo orrifici de la vena, e es prohibit de flux.	 Place your hand in water immediately and let the bleeding stop there, because if you do not remove the bandage from your hand while bleeding occurs, the blood may clot in the arm's artery, and it is prohibited to flow.
E cum es extrayt le sanc segon la quantitat de necessitat, lahoras tu pausa sobre la vena oli e sal, per que no sia consolidada coytadament; e semblantment cove que tu fassas en tot ram streyt.	 When the bleeding stops to a certain extent and it is necessary, then put pressure on the vein as well, so that it does not harden immediately; also do the same in all other limbs.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de aquela de la ma senestra, es que es conferent a las malautias de la melsa.	 A phlebotomy of the left arm is considered an injury to both physicians.
E fay semblantment en la fleubotomia de lu ayssi cum has fayt en l’autra.	 Do it similarly for the phlebotomy of this one as you have done with the other one.
E le juvament de la vena sephena de la fleubotomia es a las malautias que so en la partida dejos del cos, ayssi cum so malautias de la mayre, e a retencio de mestruas, et a las malautias dels ronhos e ulceracios de coyssas e de cambas antiquas, e a lor semblantz de las malautias.	 "The new vein from the phlebotomia is in the veins of those who are part of the body. It is also found in the veins of the larger ones and the retentive vessels. And it is present in the old veins of the legs and veins, as well as the sores and ulcers on the thighs and legs.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute entrometa lo sieu pe en aygua cauda e fassa sobre aquel fricacio entro que be apparen las venas; e lia sobre la junctura del pe am correia; e le loc de la vena le talo apparent deves le dit pous, e de aquela so ramificatz en la facia del pe motz ramps.	 "The quality of phlebotomia is that the patient's feet swell with water and become covered in a cloth as if they had been stuffed into it; furthermore, its location on the foot will be very apparent, and its branches will spread over the face of the foot.
E donc fleubotoma le pus ample ram o dejos la camba deves le talo deves la agreguacio de lu, quar es milhor e pus sal.	 "Therefore, phlebotomia must be treated with great urgency and care as it can cause severe damage.
E si fleubotomas aquela en la facia del pe, lahoras tu te guarda dels nervis que so dejos aquela sobre la facia del pe, e pausa la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas per le travers, quays cum si tu la volias inscidir.	 "If phlebotomia appears on the face of the foot, keep your hands away from it and postpone seeking medical help until you can safely reach a doctor.
E sia le fleubotomi vosil.	 Goodbye phlebotomia
Mays si es prohibit le issiment del sanc; lahoras tu itera le pe de lu en l’aygua cauda e layssa correr le sanc en aquela entro que sia evacuat.	 "If the phlebotomia is causing swelling, you should keep your foot elevated and try to drain it in that location.
E si le fleubotomador erra en la primieyra veguada, lahoras itera am le fleubotomi en sus un pauc, quar le loc es sal; e no temes de lu malician, mays que te guardes dels nervis ayssi cum havem dit.	 "If the phlebotomia occurs suddenly in one of your legs, do not worry too much - you can keep seeking medical help soon enough as long as you are careful to avoid touching it.
E semblantment fay de la sophena del autre pe engualment.	 Similarly, the pain of the other foot
E de la vena sciatica, le loc ayssi cum havem dit es deves le talo dejos la cavilha de la partida silvestra.	 And from sciatic nerve pain, it is customary to put a cushion under the wild part of their leg as well.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de lu es a dolo de anca quan es per sanc caut.	 The youthfulness of the phlebotomy procedure is the same no matter where they occur punctually.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intre en banh, e festine e strenha la cueyssa de lu del latz de la ancha entro desus le talo desus quatre ditz an una benda longua subtil, quar no appar sino per aquo.	 The quality of the phlebotomy procedure is that it can cause swelling and pain in the area around the vein, and if done improperly or inadequately, may result in a longer and more subtle injury which appears only at this point.
E donc quan appar, lahoras tu fleubotoma aquela segon cascun engen que es a tu possible e segon le tranvers, e es milhor; o inscidas aquela per inscizio o secces aquela per seccio, quar le loc de lu es sal.	 Therefore, when it appears, the pain from phlebotomy is similar to that of a second cut and transection, but may not be as serious if done properly or adequately, causing no lasting damage; however, incisions made improperly or inadequately may result in a separate cut which will heal more slowly.
E ela es en motz homes mot ameguada; e si atrobas aquela, e no appar al sentiment de tot, lahoras fleubotoma alcun ram de lu, e es aquel que appar en le dos del pe enves le dit auricular e le anular.	 The phlebotomy procedure is performed very carefully and the patient should not feel any pain at all; if it seems to cause some discomfort or there is no sensation of bleeding in that area, then a second attempt may be made by cutting another part of his foot near the ear and nose.
E guarda te dels nervis, e fay correr del sanc la quantitat que voles.	 Keep your nerves and let go of the pain as much as you want to.
E aprop deslia la strictura e pausa sobre le loc de la fleubotomia coto e strenh le loc, quar leugierament es sanat.	 Place a cushion on that part of the phlebotomy site and hold it tightly while bleeding occurs, as this is necessary for safety.
De ventozacio e de las qualitatz de uzar de aquelas.	 With regard to the use of those items.
Ventozas so de corns, o de eram, o de veyre.	 Those objects are for corn use, or maybe for veins, or maybe for a fire.
E ventozacio es fayta segon doas manieyras: la una de lor es am scarificacio e extracio de sanc, e l’autra es ventozacio ses scarificacio.	 The objects are used in the following way: one for incision and extraction of flesh, and another for making incisions.
E aquesta ventozacio que es ses scarificacio es segon doas manieyras, quar o es am foc o ses foc.	 This object that is used for incision is also in two forms; either it's to set fire to or the fire itself.
E a las ventozas que so administradas am scarificacio e extraccio de sanc son xiiii locs del cors, dels quals la un en lo qual so pausadas ventozas es alnocrati, e es la deriera partida del cap; e le mieg loc d’el de doas partz del col ensemp; e ventozas del mento dejos la mandibula pus dejos de la boca; e ventozas de doas spatulas; e ventozas de alohoster, e es sobre la fi de la coeta; e ventozas de dos focils, e so de dos brasses; e ventozas de doas cavilhas; e ventozas de doas cuoyssas.	 The objects that are used for incision and extraction of flesh occur in twelve locations on the body: one at the top of the head, the other at the bottom; two on each side of the neck; three over both arms; four on each hand; five below the chin; six on either side of the chest; seven on either side of the spine; eight under each armpit; nine in front and behind of each ear lobe; ten by the nose, and eleven at each buttock.
E ventozacio no extratz le sanc sino de las venas menudas sparssas en la carn, e per aquo no catz la vertut per aquelas, ayssi cum es cazement per fleubotomia; ni no cove que ventozacio sia fayta am foc o ses foc en alcuna malautia fayta per replecio entro que le cors tot sia evacuat.	 The object does not extract flesh but only the veins in small parts of the flesh, and therefore it is done together with phlebotomia; nor that an incision be made at fire or flames under any circumstances to prevent the body from being evacuated.
Mays si necessitat provoca a ventozacio per malautia o per continua, aministrem aquela en tota hora al comensament del mes e en la fi de lu, e en le mieg loc de lu e en qualque temps sia.	 When there is a need to perform surgery for the patient either in the middle of the month or at the end of it, we will administer that treatment from every corner of the place and whenever necessary
La qual causa es quar dels homes es en les quals es sanc multiplicat entro que indigeys de extraccio de lu per ventozacio e atroba en le sieu cap graveza e soda; e de aquels es que atroba replecio e rogor en la sua cara e en le sieu cap, e en le sieu col; e de aquels es que atroba pruziment en la sua cara e en le sieu front e tenebrositat e hebetut en les sieus huels; e de aquels que gieta le loc de la sua ventozacio; e de aquels es que le lor ris es multiplicat; e de aquels es que atroba gustament de sanc en la sua boca, o que la lengua es apostemada e escup sanc; e de aquels es que lor dormir es multiplicat, e de aquels que vetz sanc en lo dormir rogor e antics e plaguas e autras causas a lor semblantz.	 These are the men who have inflicted wounds that extend to their skull and cause severe damage, or those who inflict wounds on their face and tongue causing pain when speaking, or those who multiply sores in their sleep, or those whose sleep is multiplied leading to nightmares.
E donc quan vezes en alcuna causa de aquelas, e propriament si es en le tertz o miga del mes, lahoras comandam ventozacio esser fayta pus que so passadas del dia dos o tres horas.	 And when it comes to any of these cases, and especially if it is at the third or middle of the month, the doctors order that surgery be performed within three or two hours.
E juvament de ventozacio de la nuca es que quan aquela confereys a gravitat en le cap e ad aquo que es efondit als huels; mays cove que aquo sia aprop evacuacio de tot le cors.	 The first sentence should be translated as: "The doctors order that the treatment of surgery for that particular case is to occur as soon as possible, and it is necessary that the cause of this severity in the head must also bring about a complete evacuation from every part of the body.
E aquesta ventoza es en le loc de fleubotomia de la cephalica.	 The first sentence should be translated as: "The treatment for surgery performed due to cephalic phlebotomy is at the site where it occurs.
E no es legut que use de lu aquel que es de frega complecio, o en le qual es catarr, quar dona ad aquel gran nocument.	 When complex bleeding occurs or when there is a great abundance of phlegm in that part, it can lead to great discomfort
E per aquo no cove que uso de aquela les vielhs, e en les caps dels quals so malautias frejas.	 You should not use those vessels if they are clogged or the veins where swelling occurs
Mays ad aquel que sobre aquela es continuant sobre lu es fayta oblivio; e per aquo cove que tu comandes al ventozador que depause la sua ma un petit am la ventosa a las partidas dejos, temen de la generacio de oblivio.	 When you continue to cover the affected part with your hand while it is still painful and when you want to prevent a recurrence of gout, ask the phlebotomist to pause for a moment by placing a small bandage over the area where pain occurs
Mays ventozacio de alkehel es en loc de fleubotomia de la vena fusca e de la basilica: e per aquo confereys a asma, e a la constriccio de ale e a la scissura del sturment de ale, e a tos, e a replecio.	 When the phlebotomist is in the location of the femoral artery and the basilic vein, they will confirm that there are no obstructions or narrowing of the arteries or veins, which means the procedure can be safely performed
E cove que sia enpellida la ventoza alkehel un petit, quar si es pausada dejos, engendra debilitat en le cors e en le stomac.	 When you place a small bandage on the affected area and pause it if it is done, there will be weakness in the body or stomach
E la ventozacio de alhagdahan confereys a las dolors accident en le cap e a obtalmia, e emigranea, e prefocacio, e a dolors en las razitz de las dentz; e es en loc de fleubotomia de la basiliqua.	 The phlebotomist will confirm the presence of any discomfort in the head, sight, voice, and pain in the teeth or gums, as well as in the location of the basilic vein.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que no prema la sua ma am scarificacio per que no inscida la arteria e accida fluxs de sanc.	 Ask the phlebotomist to avoid making any small incisions that may cause bleeding in the artery and restrict blood flow.
E ventozacio dejos le mento comfereys a alcola en la boca, e a corrupcio de la gingiva, e a semblantz a lor de las malautias que so en la boca, e stan en loc de fleubotomia de aliheric que so en las doas labias.	 The phlebotomist will check the mouth for any ulcers or gum infections that may be present and in the location of the basilic vein on both sides of the neck.
Mays la ventozacio que es fayta sobre las doas spatulas confereys a caphatan, le qual es fayt per replecio de caliditat.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and when there is pain in the feet, it is customary for doctors to call it gout.
E la ventosacio de las doas partidas dedintz dels focils confereys juvament de la fleubotomia de tres venas, so es de la basilica, fusca e cephalica, quar aquela atratz le sanc de totas aquelas venas pus manudas que so en la carn, e aquelas venas menudas de las autras venas pus grossas entro que pervengua la atraccio a las tres venas.	 The veins of the two feet, when inflamed by phlebotomy of three veins, are called basilica veins, and fusca, cephalica; because those arteries that are in the flesh, and those veins small among the larger ones that come out through the opening in the three veins.
E comanda al ventozador que trop no procezesca en scarificacio, quar le loc es denudat de carn, e dejos lu so nervis e arterias.	 The phlebotomist is commanded not to proceed with cutting, because it will damage the flesh and arteries.
E es una ventoza am la qual es ventozat sobre alshosses e confereys a las emorroydas del cul e a las ulceracios pus dejos.	 It is a treatment that involves applying it to the thighs, and also to the hemorrhoids of the anus and ulcers.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que sia gran ventoza, e que sia de eram, quar le loc indigeys de fort seccio; e fort leu so traucadas ventozas subtils e sia scarificat am scarificacio.	 The phlebotomist is commanded to make a large incision and also to make the small ones because the location requires fine dissection; and very thick incisions are not suitable for this procedure.
Mays ventozas de las cambas minueysso per minuicio manifesta, quar atiran le sanc de tot le cors, e comfereysso a dolors antiquas dels ronhos e de la mayre, e de la vesica; e provocan las mestruas, e comfereysso a bothor e ademil; e stan en loc de fleubotomia de doas sophenas, e alahorcoben, e de doas cavilhas.	 The veins of the legs are exposed in detail for inspection, and cause pain from the kidneys and bladder, as well as menstruation, and discomforts to both sexes; and there is phlebotomy on two feet, and also the two calves.
Enpero mot debelitan tot le cors e fan accidir sincopi en motz homes.	 "In one breath, throughout the chest, let's spread it evenly over each part of the body.
E de las ventozas alahorcoben le juvament es propda al juvament a las ventozas de doas cambas.	 "From the top to the bottom, move both legs at once towards the back of two steps.
E la qualitat de la posicio de las ventozas es que pauses la ventoza al comensament vueda e sucguas per succio temprada, e no prolongues la posicio de las ventozas, mays pausa aquelas leugierament, e reman aquelas coytadament, e que las humors venguan al loc per adveniment engual.	 "The quality of the position of the legs is that you should put one leg first and bend it slightly early on, do not prolong the position of the legs, make sure to alternate them, and keep them relaxed while allowing the fluids to move naturally.
E no cesses iterar aquo e continuar entro que veja le loc ja enrojezir e inflar e que appara la rogor del sanc.	 "Do not stop repeating this and continue until you see the redness appear and inflation, as well as when the question comes.
E lahoras tu scarifiqua e itera la succio pauc a pauc, e aprop considera en la dispozicio dels cors.	 "The pain will decrease little by little, and carefully consider each time you breathe in deeply.
Quar aquel home que es de tendra carn de rars pors, cove que tu le scarifiques una veguada e no pus, per que le loc no sia ulcerat.	 "For someone who has a rough skin surface like sandpaper, you should apply it sparingly and not rub too vigorously to prevent the area from being irritated.
E comanda al ventozador que amplifique la scarificacio e pronde un pauc, e atempre la succio am facilitat.	 "Instruct the masseur or physiotherapist gently massage in small amounts while breathing evenly.
E si en le sanc es grossitut, lahoras cove que scarifiques doas veguadas, quar en la primieyra veguada es uberta la via de subtiliacio al sanc e a la aquositat de lu.	 "If the pain is severe, apply two compresses at once, with one being very gentle in its approach and touchiness to the area.
Mays en la segunda a la perscrutacio aquisida de la extraccio del sanc gros.	 "In the second compress be cautious about avoiding any extra pressure on the affected area that is sensitive or prone to injury.
E si le sanc es mot feculent, lahoras sia fayta scarificacio la tersa veguada per que consiegua le derier.	 When there's a foul smell from the patient, the physicians will make an incision in order to reach the affected area and cure it
E derierament, quan volem extrayre le sanc pauc a pauc o un petit, abasta a nos una scarificacio.	 And if we want to remove only a little bit or just a small part of the foul smell, then we make an incision in that area.
E si volem extraccio de mot sanc, scarificam am mota scarificacio; e si nos conoyssem que·l sanc es gros, lahoras cove que scarifiquem per scarificacio preonda.	 And if we want to remove the foul smell completely and/or if it is necessary for the foul smell to be larger, then doctors make a more extensive incision.
E le terme de scarificacio en la qual es la profunditat de la codena tant solament.	 The depth of the incision depends on its purpose.
E si aquel del qual la codena es grossa, dura, fusca, e les sieus pors so streytz, cove que les locs de las ventosas sian untatz lenitius, apertius resolutius; si es en temps d’estiu, ayssi cum es oli de aloen o oli de violat, o oli de amellas dossas, o oli de cemensa de coja; e si es en temps ivern, lahoras oli narci, o oli de liri, o oli de camamilla, o de sanc, e ad aquels semblantz.	 If the abscess is large and filled with pus that causes difficulty in exuding, then it may be necessary to make an incision through which air can pass out easily so as to release pus more quickly; if done during summer, one may apply oil of lavender or violet or chamomile, or the same thing mentioned earlier.
E si la superfluitat es grossa, freja, lahoras le oli sia amaranti, o oli de balsamita, o oli de aloen, o oli aneti, e a lor semblantz.	 If the pus is excessive and viscous, then doctors may apply oil of aloes or oil of balsamite or oil of lavender, or any other similar oil, according to their discretion.
Mays si le ventozador es de amples pors de tendra carn, lahoras cove que sia prohibit de oli, e cove que ad aquest les locs de ventozas de lor aprop la ventozacio sian lavatz am ayguaros o am aygua freja de solatrum, o am aygua de coja, o am aygua de bordolaguas, e semblantz ad aquelas.	 If the abscess is located in a tender part of flesh, doctors will avoid using oil and will have those involved perform a warm or cool compress on that area to help drain it out more quickly, applying water from sunlight, river, or any other source mentioned earlier; according to their discretion
E aquel del qual le sanc es de mota humiditat, lava las suas ventozas am vi agre, o am aygua de mirt e sumac e semblant ad aquels.	 When someone has a runny nose that is due to moisture, blow their nostrils gently or with warm air, or with water from mist and salt or similar things
E de aquel del qual las superfluitatz son grossas, lava las suas ventozas am vi antic, o am aygua de sansuc, que es majorana, o de decoccio de anet, o de camamilla, e a lor semblantz.	 When someone has thick phlegm in their nose, blow it gently or with warm air, or use a saline solution that is stronger than usual, or from camphor, eucalyptus, or chamomile, and similarly
E cove que la ventozacio sia guardada denant de banh; habantz cove que sia aministrada aprop issiment del banh per una hora o per doas, e cove que dorma aprop la ventozacio.	 If the nose is blocked up, you should blow it gently and administer a decongestant in the form of a spray or drops every hour or two, and make sure to rest your nasal passages properly.
Quid est quo oportet ut regatur ventosandus aus phlebotomatus ante ventosationem.	 What is necessary to regulate blood flow in the nostrils before using nose drops?
Cove que consideras al comensament: lahoras si le ventozador o aquel que·s deu fleubotomar es coleric e ventz sobre lu sanc agut e imflamacio, lahoras cove que prengua causas infrigidantz, ayssi cum milgranas acetosas, e endivia an vi agre e laytuguas, e secanabin, e julep, e a lor semblantz.	 First of all: When using decongestants or nose drops that cause irritation and inflammation in the nasal passages, it is necessary to prevent colds as well, eat honey and warm liquids such as tea, and avoid things like soda and alcohol, and similarly
E pausa a lor viandas ayssi cum poletz, e carns de auzels serbiges, e viandas conditas am agras, e a lu semblantz.	 Take breaks in between doses, eat foods that are cold, such as those containing caffeine or alcohol, and drink fluids that have been cooked to kill bacteria, and similarly
E de aquel del qual la compleccio es freja, cove que prengua en beure eyssarop almiva, o eyssarop de alsecanabin de semensas, e sumac, e vi mot odorant migier entre viel et noel; e que a lu sia comendat que use de paucitat de beure e de mangar, e pausa las viandas de lu poletz e canabir e pissers e petitz auzels e colombat.	 When the complexion is affected by dryness, it's necessary to drink water or foods that contain caffeine and alcohol in moderation, take breaks from eating spicy and hot foods, avoid cold drinks like coffee and tea, and ensure you have enough to eat and drink, and pause the consumption of beverages containing caffeine or alcohol.
E cove que en lo dia de ventozacio e de fleubotomia le beure sia major que la vianda.	 When it's cold outside or when someone has a fever, drink more than water.
E cove que sia donat en beure en alcunas horas ad alcus homes tyriaca alpharac, o medicamentz de musc, so es muscada, o alcelita denant la ventozacio o denant fleubotomia o aprop, per so que·ls membres principals sian confortatz e que·l sanc sia subtiliat; e no cove que prenguan aquela scalfatz.	 If someone is given medication for a fever or cold and they are shivering or their main members are being affected by the cold outside or by fever, then these main parts should be warmed up gently so that they become comfortable and this prevents the skin from becoming too sensitive; do not give them anything else.
Mays las ventozas que so ses scarificacio sian ventozas que so pausadas sus le fetge, e sobre la melsa e podagra, e sobre le umbelic, en les locs dels jonolhs, e la pixida del ancha, quar aquestz membres no suffertan scarificacio sobre si.	 When the fingers are cold and stiff or if they become numb from being in a cool environment, over the hand, elbow and thumb joints, these parts should be rubbed gently so that they do not suffer from stiffness; do not rub them too much as it may cause harm to their structure.
E no es querit per aquelas sino atraccio de sanc de membre, ayssi cum pausam ventosa sobre mamilha en malautia de flux de sanc del sanc de las nars; e usam de aquela per que sia dissolvuda ventositat freja inviscade del membre, ayssi cum pausam sobre le ventre e l’umbelic; quar aquela rarifique le membre e scalfa lu e ramau la dolor quar resolveys ventositat.	 It is not advisable to do this because if the numbness occurs in the fingers and reaches up to the elbow or the thumb joint, then it may cause harm to these parts of the body; also it will dissolve coldness that enters through the nose and reach down into the member, over the belly and the elbow, causing that part of the member to be stiffened and scalped, making pain worse as it resolves the cold.
E ja es pausada sobre les ronhos quan accideys en lor opilacio o poyra, quar per vertut de atraccio fort leu huobre opilacio e erradica le poyra de son loc.	 When you sneeze or cough, it is advisable to hold the nose tightly and pull back on the head so as not to let it become loose; when this happens repeatedly often enough that can cause damage to your head
E semblantment fa quan es pausada sobre le fetge e la melsa deves ventositat en aquels enclausa.	 Similarly placed when you are placed over the belly button and the belly will expand in these small spaces
E aquestas ventozas so administradas vuedas amb succio tant solament; e alcunas veguadas so administradas am foc.	 These openings are administered with suction only, while others are treated by fire.
E alcunas veguadas so administradas plenas de aygua tebeza en las malautias de la melsa.	 Some of these openings are filled with water droplets in the belly button's folds.
E aquo es per que la ventoza sia umplida e sia pus gran, so es aygua cauda sola o aygua en la qual sian cuytas herbas ad aquo convenientz.	 This is done to fill it and keep it full, whether water alone or a mixture of herbs suited for this purpose.
Forma de ventoza aministrada am foc: sia la amplitud del orrifici de dos ditz, segon que nos la havem formada; e la quantitat del preon sia la maytat de un palm; e sia en lo latz de lu, en le loc que es en le circuit, la maytat de lu, le trauc sia petit segon la quantitat que intre en lu una agulha.	 The size of the orifice is determined as follows: two fingers wide when formed, and the amount of urine to be measured with a pipette; and its length in relation to itself, or its circumference, by measuring it at one end against another.
Sia fayta de eram rog o citri, de grosses marges, leon, enguals e terses per so que no leda le membre deves la sua posicio sobre lu.	 The edge of the blade should be placed large enough to prevent the member from slipping off it.
E sia al mieg de lu vergua transversa de eram o de ferr, on es pausada candela am lo foc.	 It can either cross vertically or horizontally at right angles.
E ja sia aquesta ventoza gran major de aquela la qual havem recomtat; e la pauca mendre de aquela segon las malautias e la etat de aquel que usa de aquela.	 The larger the better, unless it is used for a small area like belly button or thighs, and only when they are not injured, should be very gentle.
E las ventosas dels efantz e extenuatz so autres que las ventozas dels joves e de grosses corssas.	 The openings of the fingers and thumbs differ from those of the smaller toes and larger buttocks.
E la qualitat de pausar aquesta ventoza am foc sobre le membre es que extenda la meca am foc de lenha decentment denant una pauca candela de cera, e pausa aquela sobre le mieg de la vergua transversa en le mieg loc de la ventoza, per que le foc sia accendut enviro la partida dejos per que no sia comburit le cors del malaute.	 The quality of the cushion to be placed over a member is that it extends the flame from kindling gently with just a small candle, and pause it on top of the transverse ribcage in place of the cushion, so as not to burn the patient's chest
E aprop sia pausada sobre le membre del malaute, e le dit sia sobre le trauc que havem dit, entro que quan tenem las ventozas e non indigem que osten le dit e que yesca la vapor sobre aquel trauc, lahoras la ventoza sira tantost dissolvuda.	 The cushion is placed over the patient's member and it is put on top of the ribcage where we have told you to place it, so that when you open up the wounds, do not say anything else but what has already been said and let vapor fall onto that ribcage, then the wound will dissolve itself.
E prop igneys la meca segon la sua manieyra, e itera aquela si indigeyssas de aquela.	 Place your hand on top of the body after removing the cushion.
Mays en ventosa que es aministrada en la malautia de plauressi, am aygua, en la qual no ha vergua transversa ni trauc, e no es aministrada sino que sia umplida de aygua, e es pausada sobre le membre tant solament.	 The wound is administered in the patient with water only, without a transverse ribcage or cavity, and it is not given but filled up with water, and placed over that member alone.
E aquesta es la forma de lu: E aquesta ventoza quant plus es gran, tant es milhor, per que puya recebre gran quantitat de aygua.	 The method of administering the wound is this way: When it becomes larger in size, so much better, as a large amount of water will be received.
Capitol .xcvii.	 Chapter 72
Sanguissuguas no so administradas en motz membres sino en les membres en les quals non es possible posicio de ventosas, per la parvitat de aquels, ayssi cum le pot e gingiva e semblantz a lor; o en membre denudat de carn, ayssi cum le dit e·l nas e lors semblantz.	 The wounds are not administered to the members of the body but rather to those that cannot be given an opening for them due to their smallness or delicacy, like the teeth and tongue, and so on; or in a member of flesh, such as the nose or lips.
E la qualitat de usar de aquelas que si has trobadas sanguisugas que so en las ayguas dossas de poyredura mundas.	 The quality of those you have found are in the waters or air, or if they are from other sources.
E aprop sian layssadas le dia e la nueyt en aygua dossa entro que sian famolentas, e que no romangua alcuna causa en le ventre de aquelas; e aprop sia evacuat le cors en le comensament am fleubotomia e am ventozas; e aprop fregua le membre del malaute entro que s’enrojezesca; e aprop sian pausadas sobre lu.	 It is necessary to make the incision at the bottom of the abdomen and from there it makes its way down through the small intestines, then the large intestines, finally reaching the member affected by gout - placing a cushion under them helps prevent any leakage into the belly or womb.
E cum son umplidas e caso.	 And now what?
E si es possible succio del loc am ventoza, es mays derier en juvament.	 If it is possible to remove from that spot the inflammation, I suggest doing so quickly and with caution in youth.
E sino, lahoras lava le loc am vi agre e aprop am mota aygua; e sia freguat e expremut.	 And if not, then wash the area gently and prepare for it to be treated.
E si es prolonguat le cors del sanc aprop le cazement de las sanguissuguas, e es aquo resudan, lahoras tu enfon un drap de li en aygua freja, e pausa aquel de sobre entro que sia abdida la resudacio.	 If the pain in the groin is caused by blood clots and this occurs often enough to be significant, then wash it gently with water and place a cloth over it to prevent further harm
E si le sanc es multiplicat, lahoras polveriza sobre lu vitriol trissat, o guallas e semblantz a lor de las causas stipticas, entro que·l sanc sia abscidit; o sian pausadas sobre le loc las maytatz de favas excocicadas, e sian layssadas entro que las favas aderescan al loc, e es le sanc abscidit.	 If the ailment is multiplied and the cause seems to be from a sour or gallic acid, then wash with vinegar, salt water, or other simple remedies until the ailment ceases; if it persists, place cushions over the affected area to prevent further spread of ailments and symptoms.
E cove, si es necessaria, iteracio de sanguissuguas, quan es possible mudar aquelas.	 And now, if necessary, change the blood that is causing pain when you can find a better one.
E si las sanguissuguas son prohibidas de suspenssio, lahoras sia freguat le loc am sanc recent o fique una agulha en les locs entro que yesca sanc; e aprop sian pausadas, quar aquelas quan sento alcun sanc tantost adarysso.	 When the blood vessels are prohibited from suspension and pain occurs in the location immediately or a needle is inserted into the locations where it happens, and if they are blocked, then those who feel any pain will be sent away
E quan voles que cajan, polveriza sobre aquelas un pauc de aloen trissat, o sal, o cendre, e cazo tantost.	 When you want to cause the foot to slip over onto that side of the line, sprinkle a little salt on it, or powder of lime, or charcoal, and apply as much as necessary.
Ayssi comensa lo prolec de la tersa partida: de restauracio.	 After starting from the beginning point (origin), to restore
Aquest capitol es motas veguadas necessari en la art de medicina; e es restauracio de fractura e de dislocacio accident en les osses.	 This chapter is necessary in the study of medicine, and restoration of fractures and dislocations occurs in the bones.
O, filh, sapiatz que jactan se de aquest capitol les fols metges e les vulguars e aquels que degun temps no reguardero les libres dels Antics ni legiro de aquels una letra.	 Oh son, hear that the chapters on medicine are for doctors and pharmacists who use drugs in ancient times
E per aquesta causa es fayt que aquesta manieyra dels scients in terra nostra es privat; e yeu no ho e obliat en aquo degun temps be de tot; e no he adhibit aquo que apres, sino per longitut de lectio dels libres dels Antics e studi sobre le entendement de aquels, entro que extrayssi la sciencia de aquels.	 For this reason it is necessary for the study of science in our land to be secret; and you are not allowed in these times unless otherwise stated, but only by reading the books of the ancients and studying their understanding of them, within which knowledge increases science.
E aprop adirigui a experiment e studi en la longitut de la mieua vida.	 I will go ahead to investigate and study in the length of my life.
E yeu ja he de aquo descrit en aquest capitol tot aquo que conte la mieua sciencia e sobre le qual es passat lo mieu experiment; pus que agui abreujat aquo a vos autres e deliuregui aquo de occupacio de elonguacio; e abreujegui aquo en la fi de abreujacio; et e monstrat aquo en la fi de declaracio; e formegui en aquo motas formas dels sturmentz que so administratz en aquel, cum es fayt per addicio de declaracio, ayssi cum he fayt en dos capitols precedentz.	 You have described in this chapter everything that concerns my science and what I have experienced the most important experiments; you will make them available to others and explain how they can be useful for further study; and you will show it at the end of explanation, and present it at the end of conclusion; and form it like these forms which are used in those cases as when addition is made, so that the same way has been done in two preceding chapters.
Capitol primier.	 The First Physician
Summae et collectiones ex esse fracturae ossium, ex eis quarum praemissio necessaria est, antequam incipiamus rememorationem membrorum fraftorum et diversorum si uniuscuiusque.	 Translation: We make our beginning by discussing the fractures of bones and dislocations or other such injuries in one member at a time.
Cove donc que diguam en le prohemi de aquest capitol las summas del sermo; e les capitols al entendament dels quals en le comensament es forsat le artifexs e a stacio sobre la veritat de aquels; so es vos e aquels que so promptz que sapian o aprenguan aquesta art nobla autres de vos.	 "Now that we've covered the basics of this chapter, let us proceed to discuss each of these topics in more detail; and let the commencement be upon the truth about them; for it is your duty, if you are able or willing, to learn and practice this noble art.
E donc dic que quan accideys a alcu fractura o dislocacio o torcio o cazement, lahoras cove que tu te coytes al comensament am fleubotomia o aleyar aquel, o quascu ensemps, si no prohibeys alcuna causa, ayssi cum debelitat de vertut, o es aquel al qual accideys effant, o viel en decrepitat, o es temps de vehement calor, o de vehement freg.	 "When fractures or dislocations or sprains or contusions occur, then in order to remove the pain, you should either apply immediate treatment such as leeches or poultice, or you should go directly to that part of the body where it occurred if there is no other cause for the pain. It could be a cold spot on your body, a sudden shock, excessive heat or friction.
E aprop sia content en vianda sieua de erbas frejas e de carns de auzels e de crabotz; e prohibem carns grossas e umplir si de viandas e de tota vianda que umple las venas de sanc, entro que siras segurat de apostema caut, e si no temes efusio de materia al membre.	 "And to be careful with the use of leeches and poultice: do not apply them too often or cover them up completely in order to prevent blockage of the veins, otherwise you may risk having your materials drained from a member.
E lahoras retorne le malaute al sieu regiment primier am le qual corr costuma de lu.	 "Then return the intestine back into its original position, as is customary with it.
E donc cum le os trencat comensa esser restaurat, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia pascut de viandas nutritivas de nutriment mot e gros e greu en les quals sia viscositat, ayssi cum so viandas faytas de froment cueyt am aygua, e ris, e caps, e pes, e ventres de vacas, e huous, e peys fresc, e vi gros e semblants ad aquels, e am aquest regiment es fayta coagulacio de fractura pus leugierament e miels.	 When the bone has been broken and is being restored, the doctor will feed it with nourishing food, moisture, salt, sugar, fat, from cows' milk, flesh, feathers, and animal intestines, to make its coagulating substance.
E sapias que les osses trinquatz quan so en les homes que so en la primiera vilura e en los decrepitz, no es possible que sian continuatz e sian consolidatz segon lur natura per la exsiccacio dels membres de lor.	 Bones heal more slowly when they are in the first and second stages of healing, as their nature requires drying out the members affected by them
E son consolidatz e continuatz segon lor natura tot temps per la exsiccacio de aquels membres, e so continuatz e consolidatz aquels que so de lor en la fi de la lenitat, ayssi cum les osses dels petitz effantz.	 They continue and consolidate with their nature over time for the drying out of these members, as well as any bones that are part of them in the end of healing, just like those from pets.
Mays empero natura ajusta e amnecteys sobre le os trencat de tota partida alcuna causa semblant a glut en le qual es grossitut que adhereys e strenh aquel entro que so ensemps conglutinatz e liatz ensemps, entro que venen la fi de fortitut e de fermesa, ayssi cum foc al comensament, entro que denguna causa no prohibeys aquel de las suas obres.	 Nature adjusts and unites the broken bone with great strength in such a way that it regains its elasticity as before, unless there is something to prevent this from occurring, such as excessive fat or hardness.
E per aquesta causa es necessari que pauses las viandas del malaute, viandas en las quals so gravitat e viscozitat e grosseza, ayssi cum havem dit.	 For this reason, it is necessary to stop feeding the patient with foods rich in viscosity and thickness as we mentioned before.
Mota diversitat de fractura segon diversitat del membre.	 The variety of fractures varies according to the part of the body affected.
E sapias que las specias de fractura son diversas segon la diversitat dels membres, quar fractura del os de la camba es diversa de la fractura del os del cap; e la fractura del os del pietz es divers de la fractura del os del dos; e semblantment totz les autres membres son diverses entre lor.	 "Joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet.
E yeu venc am rememoracio de tota specia de fractura, expausada en le sieu capitol distincta del autre.	 You remember the explanation of every kind of fracture mentioned separately in its own distinct chapter.
Mota diversitat de fractura en si meteyssa.	 There is great variety of fractures in that manner.
E son diversificadas las specias de fractura del os en lor meteyssas; quar es fayta fractura arcuada otra aquo que accidan en lu stellas; e alcunas veguadas es fayta fractura segon la longitut del os: e so las fracturas de lu satagia e astelhas e addicios procedentz e no-procedentz, ayssi cum es fayt en la pena quan es preparada a escriure, e es fractura am plagua e disrupcio en le cap, e es fractura fissura petita.	 The different kinds of fractures in the leg are: curved fractures that happen on top of each other; and some are called broken bones because they have dislocation or disruption at their ends; and there are also compound fractures where the bone fragments pierce through the skin but not into the muscle, such as the fracture that occurs with a blow to the head and disrupts it.
E a tota specia es engen o turment propri en restauracio de lu segon que vindra rememoracio de lu distincta en les sieus locs.	 Every type is unique in healing process after remembering its description in those locations.
Mota senhal de fractura del os.	 Message of fracture of the arm
E per aquo es conoguda fractura del os: es tortuositat de lu, e de aquel eminencia e appericio de lu al sentiment, e so de lu quan compremes aquel am la tua ma.	 The type of fracture mentioned is a spiral fracture that causes the bone to twist and protrude from the skin with swelling at its end; it may also cause dislocation when you try to touch your hand against it.
E donc quan no es en le loc tortuositat apparent ni so no es feyt deves le tieu tocament quan toques le os am agitacio e le malaute no atroba gran dolor, lahoras no es aqui fractura.	 If there is not an obvious spiral twist and it does not feel like a fracture when you touch the arm against anything but your own hand without causing significant pain, then it is not a spiral fracture.
Habantz es possible que sia tortuositat o petita fissura, adon no cove que tu mauguas aquel am la tua ma e am compressio de tot; habantz pausa sobre lu de las medicinas de las quals ve rememoracio aprop aquel moment le qual conveneys al loc; e aprop sia streyt per strictura subtil.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
E sapias que·l loc quan es arcuat e no es scindit en dos o otra aquo que no accidan en lu satagie, cum es remauguda tota partida de la sua compar, lahoras cove que comenses de la tua hora a rectificacio de lu habantz que a lu accida apostema caut.	 If the area has been bent without being split into two or more pieces and it is not torn in half or otherwise, then you should begin with your usual remedies to address this issue.
E si a lu accida apostema caut, lahoras layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que cesse le apostema; e aprop engualha aquel segon quascuna manieyra que podes de levitat e de engen.	 If the pointed cautery has been applied and it is necessary to wait for a few days before removing it, then apply equal force equally on both sides in order to lift and move.
E sapias que restauracio de lu e agulacio de lu es pus leugiera que del os en le qual accideysso sathagie.	 The restoration of the area and the incision are easier when it is not swollen, so wait until this swelling subsides.
E aprop strenh aquel segon que vindra la rememoracio de lu.	 After applying the pointed cautery, you should recall your remedies for treatment.
Mays si en le os so satagias, lahoras es necessaria extencio de aquest membre trencat de doas partz, si es la ma o le pe; o am la tua ma si le membre es petit; o am doas cordas o am una corda e la ma.	 If both legs are affected or if one leg is severely affected and the other less so, or if it's just your left hand versus your right hand, you should extend your arm in order to apply the remedies.
E sia la tua posicio am la qual pauses le membre loc engual segon la sua figura natural, mentre que las partidas so extandudas del membre trenquat, lahoras te perforsa que fassas retornar aquelas addicios am engen e segon quascuna manieyra que poyras en lor locs.	 Your positioning should be as close to the affected member's normal shape as possible while extending your fingers of both hands in order to apply the remedies at each location you need to go.
E guarda te segon la tua forssa que no accida sobre le malaute per la tua operacio delor ni lesio; e perforsa te segon le tieu poder que tu appliques la un os am l’autre son companho segon lors milhors formas.	 You should prevent the patient from falling during the operation or injury, and ensure that both hands are applied at once to each other in order of the multiple cuts.
E cove que en aquela hora aprofitablament tu toques am la tua ma aquel, e si vezes aqui alcuna causa diversa, rectifiqua aquel e enguala aquel per la quantitat de la tua vertut.	 You should use your strength at that moment to hold onto the patient's hand, and if there is no other reason for doing so, correct it by ensuring both hands are applied equally.
E exquiva vehement extenssio e compressio, ayssi cum fan mots fols metges que motas veguadas fan accidir apostema caut per la sua operacio, o fan accidir contraccio en le membre ayssi cum havem vist aquo per la operacio de lor motas veguadas.	 Perform vigorous stretching and compression, just like the muscles of your arms that are used for a specific operation, or use them to perform a contracture in the affected member as it was observed during the training of those muscles.
E aprop annecteys, aprop equacio e decent operacio e strictura de aquel membre, e repaus e tranquilitat; amoneste le malaute sobre aquo e fay le squivar que no maugua aquel en la hora de las suas vigilias e del sieu dormir, e ves la sua revolucio e agitacio, e deves la sua egestio, e deves totz les sieus movementz am tota la sua vertut; e aguarda se que la posicio del membre sia posicio am la qual sia asegurada la dolor, la qual causa es quar quan sent en la disposicio de la posicio del membre delor o lesio; lahoras cove que permutes aquel ad autra disposicio de aquela am la qual non senta dolor; e guarda am aquo que la posicio de lu aquela sia dreyta e engual, per so que al membre non accida tortuositat quan es restaurat.	 Place the patient in a position that prevents pain during their rest and sleep hours, and ensures all movements of the body are done with caution; ensure they hold onto this position until it is proven to be safe for the member's operation or injury.  When changing positions after successful restoration of the member, make sure both hands are applied equally so there will be no tortuosity when restoring the member.
E la qualitat de la strictura del membre tranquat es aquela que yeu recomti; per que sapias que·ls membres trencatz so diversificatz en lor parvitat e en lor grandeza e en la forma de aquels.	 The quality of the contraction should be such that you understand that members are different in their size, shape, and size as well as each other; this is important for understanding how to perform contractions differently according to the specific muscle being used.
E de aquels que son petits ayssi cum le bras e·l dit e·l focil e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras cove que la envolucio sia de drap mol subtil.	 When small sores appear on the body, it is customary to cover them with a very thin cloth
Mays aquels que so grosses ayssi cum la cuoyssa o la camba, cove que en aquels sia envolucio lada e dura, quar la liadura lada connecteys le membre gran e strenh aquel de tota part am strictura engual, enayssi que en lu no intre macula.	 When larger sores appear on the body, it is customary to cover them with a thicker cloth
E aprop comensa, aprop la tua evacuacio de equacio, pausar liament convenient ad aquo, sobre le loc de aquela fractura am tres envolucios o quatre segon que·l membre mereys; e strenh la tua ma un petit am le liament.	 After it begins to spread, stop the evacuation and place bandages in a three-layered or four-layered manner over the area of that fracture so as not to damage the member further; stretch your hand slightly onto them.
E aprop ve am aquel a la partida pus sobirana del loc de la fractura, e strenh mens que no foc la tua strictura am la qual has strengut le loc de la fractura.	 After placing it on the site of that fracture, stretch your hand so as not to cover up what you have already stretched onto that area.
E aprop elongua te am envolucio del loc de la fractura un pauc, e mollifiqua la strictura petit a petit, entro que prenguas del loc sa una gran partida.	 After placing it on the site of that fracture with a thin cloth, gradually reduce its tension little by little until you have reached from there to another large area.
E aprop pren una autra benda e envolveys aquela autra veguada sobre le loc trenquat am envolucio, e aprop ve am las envolucios a la partida pus dejos de la fractura; e sia la tua operacio en la strictura de la envolucio e en mollificacio de aquela segon que havem dit en la envolucio primieyra desus.	 After placing another bandage over the affected area, make sure to cover it with a new, thinner cloth; then place the bandages from that fracture; and stretch your hand in order to do both of these things on top of what you have already done with the first band-aid.
E aprop pausa entre las volucios de stopa leon o drap am le qual sia engualada la tortuositat de la fractura, si en lu es tortuositat; e sino, no pauses en lu alcuna causa.	 After placing bandages from the front or back of that part where the fracture is located and securing them in place, if there are twists to it; otherwise do not pause on it for any cause.
E aprop pausa sobre lu autra benda, e aprop enguala sobre aquestas envolucios stelhas decentment faytas tantost, si en le loc no es imflacio o apostema caut, e lahoras pausa sobre lu aquo que sede le apostema aquel e que oste la imflacio; e layssa aquela per alcus jorns; e lahoras tu strenh sobre lu las stelhas.	 When you have placed a cushion under their thighs and another on each leg, and still another on the chest holding onto them with your hands.
E sian las stelhas de la maytat de canna lada raza, e be formada saviament; o sian de fust de pi; o de ramps de palma ; e sia le ample de quascuna stelha segon aquesta forma e aquesta figura:	 The cushion should have a certain width and height. Or maybe it's formed with foam? Or perhaps made of palm leaves? And the size of each cushion in relation to its shape and figure is as follows:
Empero cove que la astelha que es pausada sobre aquela fractura sia pus grossa e pus lada un petit que las autras astelhas, e la longitut de la stela segon qu’es legut al membre en magnitut e parvitat; e aprop strenh sobre las astelhas am autra benda segon la tua primieyra strictura; e aprop lia desus am fiel decentment segon que havem dit de strictura, e es que sia la tua strictura segon le loc de la fractura mes, e quant mes es alonguat de la fractura, es mendre la strictura.	 The cushion placed on the fracture should be larger than the other cushions and not smaller by much, with its length related to the size of the member in terms of length and width; and when you stretch over the other cushion after your first stretch, make sure it's as close to the correct fit as possible.
E cove que les fils sian migiers en grossesa e subtilitat, e sian de li mol; e si les fils so grosses, ayssi cum yeu he vist per la operacio de alcus fols pausantz les lors fils de cordas de li tort, e es error gran, quan catz la strictura fora equalitat.	 The threads should be thinner and more subtle, but not too thin; if the threads are thick, then consider removing some of them during the surgery to correct this mistake as it is a great error when the fit is not equality
E eyssament fils subtils no so convenientz, quar tu no consaguiras per strictura am aquels aquo que voles, e no cove que entre astela e astela haja mens de un dit.	 If very thin threads are not suitable, then you should try to achieve the fit as closely as possible, and there shouldn't be much difference between one cushion and another
E si le malaute es ledit per las extremitatz de las stelas aprop la strictura en les locs sas, lahoras pausa dejos aquelas de stopa leon o lana carmenada entro que aquo no li fassa lesio.	 When the hernia is located between the patient's thighs and pressed into a constriction in those places, the pain stops when those of the cushion support prevent it from occurring
Alcunas veguadas fractura es am plagua, e accideys disrupcio en la codena, e yeu vindre am rememoracio en aquela en le capitol segon singularitat.	 Sometimes fractures occur and disrupt the conversation, causing you to remember something from that very moment on in the second person singular
E sapias que ges tot membre trencat no es streyt am stelhas al primier dia; la qual causa es quar le membre, quan es gran, no cove que pauses sobre lu stelhas sino aprop v dias o vii o mays, segon la tua seguratat de adveniment de apostema caut.	 If a member is broken and cannot be laid on the first day, it will cause you to wait over the days or weeks until an opportunity for observation arrives.
E aquesta es la manieyra dels emplaustres am les quals les Antics restauravan, les quals so pausatz sobre fractura e dislocacio e torcio.	 This is the way of caring for sprains as the ancients used to care for fractures and dislocations.
Manieyra de emplaustra comu abruejat de restaurament de fractura, convenient a motas compleccios e majorment a las femnas e als efantz, quar es de aquo sobre le qual no ventz calor ni freg: e es que prenguas de polvera de moli, e es la medula de la farina que pen deves le movement de la mola en las paretz del moli.	 The remedy for sprains as the ancients used to treat fractures is that you should not apply heat or oil: instead, use flour paste and rub it on with your fingers into the muscles of your thighs; this will aid in restoring movement and flexibility to the affected area.
E comfeys aquel ayssi cum es, sino que cribelles aquel am album de huou, e pausa la comfeccio de lu no-spessa ni subtil; e aprop usa de aquela.	 And how is it used then? Not by applying it to the whole body but by placing a small amount on affected areas and using it with care, avoiding excessive or delicate application; use this method as needed.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre restaurant fractura e dislocacio e torcio: recipe de assafetida, de lapdanum, de acacia, de enula, e migrach, que es razit de milgraner salvage, de totz ana drac. x; de mirra e aloen ana drac. v; alochil ana drac. xx; totz sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian mesclatz am aygua alichil o am album de huou si la compleccio del malaute es scalfada; e aprop usa de aquest emplaustre, quar es de bona composicio e restaura les osses trencatz leugierament, e confereys a motz homes.	 Another remedy for sprains and fractures is to use a poultice made from saffron, lavender, acacia, aloe vera or mallow: these are all known as herbal remedies; you can apply the poultice in water or on its own but if the pain has spread, it's recommended that you place the poultice directly on the affected area.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre le qual comfereys a fractura e torcio: recipe migrach e met de altea blanca ana drac. x; de mirra e de aloen ana drac v; de acacia drac. vi; de bol armenic drac. .xx.	 "The first man dies as the result of a broken bone and dislocation: the remedy is to apply white ointment and dragon's teeth, X; from marrow and claw of the dragon Y; from acacia leaves Z.
Totz sian trissatz en mortier am mota contricio, e sian cribellatz, e sian comfitz am aygua o am album de huou e sia administrat.	 "The three sentences are in a mortar and pestle; the first is to crack them, the second to mix with water or alcohol and administer.
Manieyra de emplaustre a juncturas e osses separatz de lors locs, e seda dolor accident en aquels e a fissuras e fractaduras: sia presa lana sutza e sia submersa en vi agre e oli cuyt e sia pausat sobre le loc.	 "The remedy for joint and bone separation is to separate the parts from each other; if pain occurs in these and fractures, place it submerged under water or oil.
Mays en aquest emplastre no es vertut de restauracio, de apostema caut e expelleys dolors propriament.	 "In this situation, do not attempt to restore the damaged part; instead, apply a pointed cautery and expel the pain immediately.
Autra manieyra de emplastre que restaura os trancat: pren fuelas de figuier sort e fuelas de papaver salvatge; contereys tot e fay emplastre de lor.	 "The remedy for a broken part that cannot be restored is to apply the figwort and rue salve, then apply the dragon's teeth.
Manieyra de emplastre abreujat aministrat deves la restauracio de fractura de os e quan tu voles resolucio del romanent de apostema: recipe razitz de altea, de camamilla e flors de violes, de farina de ers, de totz ana partida i; sian totz trissatz e sian cofitz am vi, si·l membre no es scalfat.	 "The remedy for a broken bone that has already been administered and you want to resolve the pain of the wound: apply the dragon's teeth, the camomile flowers, and viola petals; flour of horse chestnut, from all parts torn off; tear up the pieces and put them in vinegar. If no scalf is felt.
Mays si es scalfat, lahoras comfeys aquel am aygua de coliandre humit o am aygua e usa de lu.	 When cold humor infiltrates each part of the body and causes pain in one's feet
Autra manieyra de emplastra pus fort en resolucio que aquest primier, quan accideys apostema dur deves la restauracio del membre: recipe de razitz de altea e de semensa de li, e de balaustia, e mellilot, majorana, flors de viol, de camamilla, de totz ana partida i engual; totz sian trissatz e sian cofitz am aygua de sauze o am aygua dousa o am vi, tot aquo segon la qualitat del membre e le repaus de la color de lu.	 When the first ulcer is diagnosed and treated with a pointed cautery, you should also apply a balm or ointment of aloe vera to prevent further ulcers from forming and healing existing ones, as well as balms for greater pain relief, majorana, violets, camamilla, and all other part thereof; this balm will be applied externally.
Mays Ypocras no diyssec en le sieu libre que sia pausat sobre le membre trenquat deves la restauracio de lu sino cerot fayt de cera e de oli e no autre causa; e recomtec que sia migier entre grossitut e subtilitat.	 When treating the ulcer, you must place a cushion on top of it to prevent any further spreading and ensure that only ointment or balm is applied to heal it without causing any harm or other complications; also, recommend making the difference between thickness and delicacy.
Mays a Gualia es vist que sian pausatz sobre le membre trencat deves la restauracio de lu e las causas en las quals es exsiccacio am petit de caliditat so ayssi cum mirra, enses e semblantz a lor de aquelas causas que havem recomtadas.	 When treating the ulcer on a broken part of the body, you must ensure that it is covered with a cushion to prevent further spreading and that only ointment or balm should be applied to heal it without causing any harm or other complications; also, recommend making note of the causes related to heat so as not to repeat them.
Manieyra de emplastre que comfereys a lesio e dolor: recipe migat, de cezes, de pels de home inscizes o pena de auzel, e de altea, e sal, partidas enguals; sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian cofitz, e sia fayt emplastre.	 When assessing the lesion and pain: take note of any existing cuts or wounds, salt, parts from home remedies, ointments to soothe, aloe vera, balm for healing.
Mays la quantitat segon la qual cove que romangua la liadura e aprop sia disliada, es que consideres si no es accidit dolor ni pruziment ni le os es trencat no es maugut de son loc, lahoras tu no deslies de motz jorns.	 When the amount of pain that arises from the leg is such that it prevents movement or stretching, then consider if there has been an accident and neither injury nor cut on the limb, you should not regret days lost
E si accideys al loc dolor vehement o prusiment o imflacio, lahoras tu te coyte o deslie aquel en la hora, e osta le emplastre de lu.	 If an accident occurs with strong pain or discomfort that causes swelling, you should treat it as soon as possible and apply the appropriate treatment measures.
E pren drap de li e spongia marina leon humida, e submergeys aquela en aygua tebeza, e am aquela lava le loc entro que cesse aquel pruziment e la dolor sia sedada; e aprop layssa repausar le membre per una hora; e aprop pausa sobre lu lana sutza submersa en vi agre e oli o oli rozat, e lia sobre lu per una nuoyt entro que sias segur de apostema caut, e que repause la imflacio del membre, e sia remauguda la dolor de lu.	 Dip the leg and apply a damp cloth to cool it down, submerge that in lukewarm water for 15 minutes, and then gently massage the limb until the discomfort or pain is subsided; and place a poultice over it to prevent swelling of the limb, and ensure the pain subsides.
E aprop itera aquela strictura subtil e emplastre petit e no·l strenhas per la tua constriccio primieyra, e subtilia am aquel entro que sia sanat.	 Apply a small, thin strip to gently wrap around your finger first, and then gently apply that over the affected area so as to be helpful in healing.
E si vezes que le apostema e la rogor e la dolor e la imflacio e tots les accidentz ja so remaugutz de tot, e indigeysses de emplastre e de strictura, lahoras tu itera aquel ayssi cum has fayt al comensant engualment.	 If all the pain and swelling incidents are gone, and you apply a strip gently in the same manner as before, then proceed with treatment measures accordingly.
E si no accideys al membre alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no deslies aquel sino aprop tres dias o quatre o v o vii; e alcunas veguadas tot aquo es layssat per xx dias segon que a tu appar per la desliadura del membre, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que la fractura adhereys, e se acosta a la coagulacio de la carn sobre aquel.	 If there is no accident on the member that has been mentioned, then do not apply anything but proceed three days or four days later or seven days from now; and some bandages should be applied for 10 days after you appear before the doctor to have an examination of the limb as well, so that any fractures adhere, and it approaches coagulation of the flesh upon that.
E lahoras ajusta en la strictura mays que en la tua strictura primieyra tota, e ayusta en la engrossacio de la vianda del malaute, segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu.	 The first sentence is translated as: "The pains adjust in the main vein of the patient, and tighten up on the enlargement of the vein, after which you have made a note.
Mays si tu vezes le loc de la fractura ja desiccar e extenuar mays que no cove, lahoras sapias que·l nutriment es prohibit pervenir ad aquel; e donc embroca aquel am aygua tebeza deves tota veguada que delias aquel; e sia aquo en totz tres dias; e alleuja la strictura un petit, e per aquesta operacio corr al membre le nutriment, e es sanat leugierament.	 "The fracture site should be cleaned and extended so that no bleeding occurs, the doctor knows to prevent it from coming back; therefore, cover this with water tight dressing for three days; then after a little loosening of the bandage, you take nourishment by hand to the member, as recommended.
Mays aquo que fan les fols restauradors de la fractura del membre autra veguada quan no es restaurat al comensament, segon que cove, e es restaurat segon tortuositat, es error segon la operacio de lor, e temor gran, e si fos dreyturier aquo agrandit les Antics en lors libres e agueran am aquo obrat.	 "When the restorers of a fractured member are not restored at first, then after some time and restoration with difficulty, it is an error second in the operation; great fear, as if they were wrong; but if this happened to enlarge the ancients in previous times free from pain and swelling.
E yeu no he vist ad alcu de lor aquo far, per que es pus razonable que aquo no fassa.	 "You do not have to visit it at all for what is reasonable that this does not occur.
Capitol segon: De fractura quan accideys en le cap.	 "When a fracture occurs in the head:
Las specias de fracturas son motas, e las figuras de lor son diversas, e las causas son distinctas, quar de fracturas alcuna es fayta per percussio de spaza, e la percussio osta tot le os entro al ciphac, le qual es dejos le os, ayssi cum fay ayssa en le fust, e per aquo aquesta specia es nompnada ascial; o la spaza inscideys alcuna partida del os, e inscideys la carn de lu e no passa la inscizio entro al derier de lu; e aquesta specia de fractura es nompnada levatio absoluta.	 "The signs of fractures vary, and their forms are diverse, and the causes are distinct; except that some fractures do not come from a blow to the spleen, which can be caused by a stroke on it, as you say in its front part, so this kind is called the 'sword' one. If no part of the arm strikes the body without passing through the palm, and if there is no injury on the hand itself, then that kind of fracture is called absolute elevation.
E la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca, e de fractura que es contricio o atricio; e causa de lu es percussio am poyra o cazement sobre peyra, e a lor semblantz.	 When the joints are broken or have become stiff and painful, whether they are mild or severe, if there is a cause of pain or numbness in them, then it is customary for doctors to apply pressure on certain points
E aquesta fractura o es penetrant que ja apropinqua al pannicol le qual es dejos le os; o es en la facia del os, e la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca.	 When the joint pain is caused by a penetrating fracture that approaches the nerve endings in or on the wrist bones, it is customary for doctors to apply pressure at certain points on the area of the broken joints, whether they are mild or severe.
E de fractura es que es ameguada en le os, en la subtilitat del cabel petita, e per aquo es nompnada aquesta specia fractura capillar.	 When a joint pain is caused by a small capillary fracture in the delicate area of the finger, it is commonly referred to as a capillary fracture.
E es fractura que es fayta o per cazement o per percussio de peyra e a lu semblantz, que fa intrar alcuna lamina del os a las partidas dedintz, e es fayta en le loc concavitat ayssi cum accideys als payroles de eram quan accideys a lor percussio e es partida de lor intrada a las partidas dedintz.	 The fracture that is caused by pressing or hitting the affected finger and causing it to break through an opening in the skin, so that blood cannot reach the broken area, this type of fracture is commonly referred to as a fingertip amputation.
E majorment es fayt aquo en les cors de osses humitz, ayssi cum so caps de efantz.	 Additionally, it should be noted in the joints and bones that are mentioned earlier.
E so a totas aquestas specias fracturas satagias, so son pessas ayssi cum stelhas separadas.	 These various types of fractures have one thing in common - they all heal slowly due to the separation of the affected parts.
E yeu vindre am reremoracio de tot aquo en son loc.	 And you will remember this on your own.
E conoyssem totas aquestas specias de fractura per deteccio sobre aquelas e per inquisicio de lor am tentas e ostament de carn corrumpuda que es sobre lor.	 You will also be able to identify these types of fractures by observing them and investigating their causes, as well as determining the extent of any scarring that may result from them.
E specia capillar es conoguda per aysso que es descubert sobre le os, e es abstergit, e linit sobre lu am tentha, quar la fractura appar negra.	 "A particular instrument is used to examine inside the body, and it is withdrawn once removed from the bone or joint affected by fracture.
Mays en la curacio de fractura considera al comensament les accidentz del malaute, e lahoras si tu vezes per los accidentz que signifique per significacio manifesta sobre paor, ayssi cum es vomit de colera, e extencio, e perdement de entendament, e abscizio de votz, e sincopi, e febre acuta, e eyssiment dels huels e rogor de aquels, e semblantz a lor dels accidentz en las majors disposicios, ses dopte no es sanat.	 In the examination of fracture also consider at first those accidents that are evident by a visible sign of fear, such as vomiting with rage and anguish, loss of understanding, lack of consciousness, dizziness, sudden fever, weakness in the limbs, and shortness of breath, it's all part of these symptoms of shock.
E si vezes accidentz no-correntz tu speras salut, lahoras tu comensa la curacio de lu.	 If you encounter accidents that are not current to your health, then examine the injury.
La qual causa es quar si es vengut a tu le plaguat en le comensament cum es plaguat e aquo es en les dias de ivern, lahoras cove que tu studias en le ostament del os denant le dia xiiii segon tota disposicio.	 Where the cause is that it was caused by an injury to the first day of winter, then you should examine it every second day from that onwards as well.
E si es en les dias d’estiu, lahoras cove que te coytes ostar le os denant le vii dia, habantz que aquo que es dejos le os sia corromput del pannicol, e que accidescan les accidentz que havem recomtatz.	 If it is in the summer days, then you should examine it every seventh day and also check for any signs of foul play, accidents or injuries that may have occurred.
E si la fractura ja es pervenguda al pannicol cubrent le cervel, e es am partidas menudas e atricio, lahoras cove que inscidas la partida conminuta e atrita, segon que yeu recomtare a tu.	 If the fracture has already happened through foul play and it is also accompanied by pain in both legs or feet, then you should examine closely for any signs of injury and report to your physician immediately.
E es que tu razas le cap del malaute plaguat, e descuebres sobre le os segon costuma e manieyra a tu possible segon la figura de la plagua, e que sia leugier sobre le malaute.	 The first sentence is "Here comes the translation.
E si accideys a tu deves la deteccio del os, fluxs de sanc o apostema caut, lahora tu te oppausa a lu am aquo que cove, e es que huemplas le loc de draps infuzes en vi e oli rozat, e fassa repausar la plagua entro que sia sedat le apostema, e sies segur de fluxs del sanc; e aprop comensa en la circuicio del os e en la ablatio de lu.	 If you are dealing with the patient's discharge of sputum or pus from an abscess, it is customary to take a pause as they often come in waves and bursts, so that if there should be any leakage of the abscess, one can ensure that no more such leakage occurs, and to prevent any further leakage by covering it. This happens at the incision site on both the front and back sides of the body.
E aquo sia segon una de dos manieyras de operacio.	 The second sentence translates as "This is one out of two options for surgery.
E la una manieyra es que tu inscidas le os am inscisori de streyt tal, e aquesta es la forma de lu: E aprop administra un autre inscissori aquest, un pauc pus lat que aquel; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	 One option is to insert a needle into the incision site so as to drain any remaining fluid, and this is how it should be done. And after that one administers another needle of smaller size than the previous one.
E aprop administra mays le inscissori pus lat que·l segon.	 After administering the thinner needle, you administer a second needle:
E cove que sia deves tu nombre de inscissoris diverses, dels quals alcus so pus latz que alcus autres; e alcus de lor so pus breus que·ls autres e sian en le derier de acuitat de las suas extremitatz, e sian de ferr indi o felod.	 You may need to use multiple needles of different sizes which are thinner than the others. And some of them should be thinner yet, so that they are as thin as possible and can be used directly or for feeling purposes only.
E usa de lor am facilitat en percussio sobre le inscissori per so que no concutesca le cap e leda aquel.	 Use the thinnest needles to avoid piercing into the artery, which could lead to bleeding and damage of that area.
E si le os es fort, dur, lahoras cove que perfores en le circuit de lu denant que tu administres los inscissoris am les taravels, les quals so nomnatz taravels no-profundantz.	 When the stomach is strong and hard, then you administer the pills in the vein of that person, which are called veins without depth
E no so nomnatz ayssi sino quar aquels no pausan le terme de l’os del test ad aquo que es aprop lu, per so quar al taravel es redonda extremitat o marge sobre aquel que es dejos le cap de lu agut semblant a marge o a cercle petit, le qual prohibeys esser submergit e passar la spissitut del os.	 The vein is either at the extremity of that person's arm or side to prevent it from being submerged and passing through the orifice of the stomach.
E es convenient que tu prenguas de aquestz taravels gran nombre dels quals quascu convenesca a la spicitut de quascun os, entro que sia a tu present en tottz testz del cervel la extremitat del qual sia aguda, la quantitat en longitut e brevitat sia segon la quantitat de spicitut de aquest test.	 It is convenient to administer pills of many different types depending on which suits the nature of each stomach, from those in front of a sharp arm or side up until you are at the back of the throat and around it.
E aquesta es la forma de tres specias de teravels: La qualitat de perforar en le circuit del os trencat es que pauses le teravel sobre le os e revolvas aquel am les tieus ditz entro que sapias que l’os ja es penetrat; e aprop permuda le terevel ad autre loc, e pausa aquo que es entre tot trauc la quantitat de la grosseza del ray o enviro aquo.	 The three types of pills are: 1) to pierce through the broken vein and place it over the stomach so that you know that the intestine has been penetrated; 2) then move the pill to another location, and wait for the amount of fat in the area or around it;
E aprop inscideys am inscissoris aquo que es entre quascun trauc del os, e fay aquel pus subtil que podes sobre aquo en fi de levitat, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que erradiques le os, o am la tua ma, o am alcuna autra causa per alcus sturmentz les quals auras apparelhatz ad aquo, ayssi cum tanalhas e forceps subtils.	 Then insert the veins into that space between each part of the stomach, and then gently place it over the area with fat or around it; if you feel any discomfort, you should either put your hand on top, or use a small pair of tweezers.
E cove que tu guardes am tota cautela que l’inscissori no toque alcuna causa del ciphac.	 When you hold them securely so that they cannot cause any harm to your body
E donc cum auras circuit le os perforan, e sira separat del ciphac si es continuat am lu, e auras aquel extrayt, cove que razas e enguales aquel en la asperitat de lu de aquo que es en le os am autra sturment semblant a inscissori, mays empero cove que sia pus teon e pus subtil que les autres inscissoris.	 And when you pass through the orifice, and if there are no injuries to be treated with them, then remove it from your body, so that any injury or wounds may remain unchanged in its place of origin, like an incision
E si roman alcuna partida dels osses petitz e satagias, lahoras pren aquela am facilitat am aquo que es deves tu dels sturmentz; e aprop aquo cura la plagua am lichinis e enguentz les quals havem ditz.	 If there is no need for them to treat bones or joints and wounds, then take that from the instruments you have mentioned, and instead use it to heal the burns on the skin and remove any scars they may have mentioned
E l’autra manieyra de operacio es leugiera, longinqua de paor, la qual diyssec Gualia e la lauzec per gran lausor; e aquest es le sermo de lu: necessari es a tu en le comensament que comenses descobrir la partida del os del loc en le qual es la fractura pus vehement e pus manifesta, entro que quan auras descubert aquela partida e auras pausat dejos lu la extremitat de aquest inscissori lent e alegre del qual aquesta es la forma:	 The other procedure is easier to perform but also more frightening. It consists of lifting the skin up and exposing the fracture which was broken with great force and evident, until you have exposed that part and have secured it in place so that this instrument will now stretch gently and joyfully from where this one's form:
E es que la partida lenticular es leon e no inscideys alcuna causa, e la partida aguda es de lu en dos latz avantz en longitut, ayssi cum vezes; que la partida lenticular sia ajustada al ciphac am la facia de lu inscident aguda en le os.	 The procedure for the lens fracture is first and cannot cause any harm, while the acute fracture is done in two stages: first on both sides of the body, then afterwards
E aprop percuteys sobre le inscissori de una partida am un petit malhet entro que inscidas tot le os am facilitat ayssi cum es revolvut, e tu sias segur del pannicol que no accida en lu accident que temas en denguna manieyra, e si le medicant14 era le pus fol de totz les homes e le mays ignorant de lor; certament, e si era dorment.	 Be sure to keep the instrument steady as you slowly turn it around so that no harm is caused in this procedure, and if there was a mistake or accident on one of them, be very careful, because they can cause pain.
Lahoras si romania alcuna causa annexa al os del pannicol en alcus locs de os, inscidira aquel de lu am la extremitat del inscissori aquel lenticular, e deliuraria aquel de lu am facilitat, quar es deliurat de lu ses nocument e ses paor.	 When the gout is due to a cause that attaches itself to the edge of the foot, it will spread over the entire area of the affected foot and may even affect other toes on the same leg; therefore, the pain should be alleviated as quickly as possible by relieving this cause, for which relief must come from the relief of the discomforts or pains.
E si fractura del os no penetra entro al pannicol, e aquo que es abscidit o es ostat del os es la facia de lu, e roman en lu asperitat e satagias subtils, lahoras cove que razas aquela asperitat e erradiques aquelas satagias am razoris subtils per les quals tu has preparat le nombre, de diversas quantitatz per que sia a tu possible administrar de aquels en tot loc les pus convenientz de lor e le pus dreyt de aquels segon aquo en que te perduzeys la tua operacio aquel os trencat e la figura de lu.	 If the joint pain does not infiltrate into the foot, and it is necessary to determine whether there was a fracture or whether this particular area has become inflamed, you should examine that part carefully for any symptoms of inflammation, and then decide how to proceed from there based on your preparation of various options available.
E cove que administres en la tua razio am la qual razes le os al comensament le pus lat de aquels razoris, e aprop usa aprop lu del pus subtil de lu, e no cesses far aquo segon continuitat entro que pervenguas ad aministrar le pus teon e·l pus subtil de totz aquels.	 When administering the medicine to this particular area, ensure that you use a suitable amount and proceed with caution as you would continue administering all of them simultaneously.
Mays en quascuna de las autras fracturas petitas capillars e fractura subtil, cove que administres cura segon aquo que perduseys ad rectificacio de lu.	 When it comes to any of the tiny capillary fractures or subtle fractures, when you determine that care must be taken for correction of this injury.
E es causa que no es ameguada sobre totz les quals han studi en aquela art.	 It is assumed that all those who have studied in that field already know about it.
E stec sobre aquo que nos scriut havem mostrat en grans fracturas.	 We will show you how to do this on fractures.
E si le pannicol es retangut quan tu erradiques le os, lahoras cove que prenguas drap de li segon la quantitat de la plagua, e submergeys aquel en oli rozat, e pausa aquel sobre le orrifici de la plagua; e aprop pren autre drap doblat o triplicat e submergeys lu en vi e oli rozat e pausa aquel sobre drap prim e fay aquo al pus leugierament que podes sobre aquel, que no graves le ciphac; e aprop administra sobre aquel liament lat, e no strenhas aquel sino per quantitat que tengua la plagua tant solament.	 "When the patient vomits due to a blockage of the intestines, then cover him with a second sheet of gauze, immerse it in hot water and hold it over the opening of the stomach; apply another soaked cloth on top and let that soak into the first one while preventing leakage.
E layssa aquel am aquesta cura per un dia o per dos entro que sias segur de apostema caut; e aprop deslia aquel e aprop aministra medicinas am las quals es superflua siccitat, ayssi cum razitz de lin e farina de errs, e polvera de enses e de aristologia, e de semblantz ad aquels.	 "Use this treatment for one or two days depending on how sure you are about the efficacy; then remove it and administer medicines as if they were unnecessary dryness remedies such as flaxseed oil and flour of eggs, and powder of these and powders of the same.
E es que tu fassas de aquestas medicinas polvera que sia pulverizada sobre la plagua, ayssi cum son secas; e universalment, administra en aquel tota medicina de proprietat de la qual es que abstergesca e no mordique.	 "Make sure to powder the medicines as if they were already powdered on the wound, and universally apply all of the medicine that is property of which has the power to cleanse without poisoning.
E guarda te segon la tua vertut que la plagua en la tua curacio sia neta; e no sia en lu surdicia de enguent ni autra; ni no layssas agreguar virulencia en lu; quar quan es ajustada sobre le pannicol del cervel, corromp aquel e poyreys aquel, e accideys sobre le malaute aprop aquo malicia maligna.	 "Ensure that the wound in your care is clean; do not let it be infected or any other infection; nor do you add virulence to it; when adjusted over the patient's buttocks, cover and remove it, and apply a treatment for malignant evil.
E accideys en le ciphac del cap, cum de lu es mondificat le os e majorment quan es menspresada la cura de lu, e es negror en la superficia de lu; e donc considera lahoras si accideys al malaute les accidentz que havem ditz, sapias que es parnicios ses tot dopte.	 "When you apply it to the head as well as when it is applied to the treatment of him/her, and it is darker on his/her surface; so consider that if an accident occurs due to these treatments then know that this could be extremely dangerous.
E si no accideys negror sino de la medicina que es pausada desus, e es en vertut de aquela medicina que fassa aquela negror, lahoras cove que tu prenguas de mel una partida e de oli rozat partidas iii, e am aquels linieys un drap, e aprop pausa aquel sobre le ciphac; e aprop cura aquel am las specias de curacio que conveneys entro que sia sanat.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
Capitol .iii.	 Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out.
De restauracio del nas quan es trincat.	 When the nose is broken.
Sapias que no es trencat del nas sino doas partidas ensemps pus sobiranas, o una de aquelas alcunas veguadas, per so quar en lu has dos osses, quar la partida dejos es cartillaginosa, e no es trencada e no accideys a lu sino atricio e tortuositat e sinuitat.	 When the nose is broken and you have two nostrils that are both blocked or one of them is blocked while the other isn't, then it will cause pain and difficulty in breathing due to obstruction and constriction.
Mays si es trencada la una de las doas partidas de lu, lahoras cove que tu intrometas le dit petit en le sieu nas, e que engualhas aquela fractura dedintz am le tieu dit indic, e am le dit pous defora, entro que retorne le nas segon la sua figura natural.	 If one of the two nostrils is broken and you insert a piece into it to stop its bleeding, and make sure that you put on both sides as much as possible for them to align in position, so that the nose can return to its normal shape after being treated with care.
E sia fayt aquo per tu am facilitat, e guarda te que no caja per aquela tua operacio sobre le malaute delor.	 And let this be done for you to make it easier and remember not to put your finger inside during the surgery on the patient's belly.
E si la fractura es en la pus sobirana partida del nas, e le dit no perve ad aquela, lahoras cove que sia equat am la extremitat del ray en le qual sia petita grossitut.	 If the fracture is in the upper part of the nose and there is no way to repair it, then let them align on both sides as much as possible at their small end.
E si la fractura es en doas partidas, lahoras tu fay le semblant de aquo.	 When a fracture occurs in two parts, then let the physician handle it as such.
E coyta te am restauracio de lu en le primier dia de la fractura, si es possible; e sino, lahoras aprop le vii o·l x deves le repaus del apostema caut.	 You should attempt to restore the limb on the first day of the fracture if possible; otherwise, apply a splint or cast.
E aprop entromet en la extremitat del nas una meca de drap de li, si la fractura es en una partida, o metz doas calguas, si la fractura es en doas partidas, e sia en la calgua grossitut de tanta quantitat que umpla le trauc del nas.	 In the case of a single fracture in one part, apply a dressing to it; if there are two fractures, place two splints and make sure they fit snugly on both ends of the nose.
E diysso alcus dels antics restauradors que las calguas sian enfundudas en boder, e sian permudadas en tot dia, mays no es vist a mi; habantz cove que la meca sia enfunduda en album de huou comfit am polvera de moli; e aprop layssa la qualgua entro que l’os sia fermat e sia endurazida la cartillage.	 Ensure that the splints are tightly fitting on both sides of the nose, and be removed daily if not in use; also ensure that they remain inserted while holding the bone firmly and allowing it to heal properly.
E alcunas veguadas sia entromes en le nas, en loc de calgua, pena de auca pus que es envolopada de drap de li leon; e sia que ja te la fractura del nas pus vehement e que le malaute no sia prohibit de inspiracio.	 Splints should be placed inside the nose in addition to a cushion for support, lest there be any risk of swelling or injury from the dressing material around it; and also ensure that you cannot breathe out while there is pain or discomfort from the fracture.
E aquesta causa no es a tu necessaria; e si voles, fay aquo, e si voles, fay calguas.	 This matter may not be necessary; if you wish to do so, go ahead and place them if you wish not, avoid doing so.
E si accideys autra veguada apostema caut, emplastra le nas am cerot o am coto enfus en vi agre e oli rozat, o am diaquilon.	 If any other splints are needed for another bone injury, place them inside the nose at the tip or bottom, ensuring they fit snugly and gently rounded off to avoid irritation from being pushed through; otherwise you may choose not to do so.
Mays si no accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que emplaustres aquel defora am farina de sizami e am polvera de enses cofitz am album de huou; e aprop pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e no lies le nas am alcuna causa.	 When it does not happen that the pointed stick is stuck in something hard and difficult to remove (like a stone), then lay down the foot on top of them [the patient] so they don't come out through their nose
Mays si so trencats les osses del nas am fractura petita o so conminuitz, lahoras cove que scindas sobre aquels, e extraguas aquels am insturmentz que conveno ad aquels; e aprop cos la scissura, e cura aquela am aquo que encarna e consolida, e am emplastres ad aquo convenientz.	 When the bones of the nose are fractured or contorted in some way, then lay down a sheet on top of them, and stretch it out [the patient] as you would an instrument, so they don't come out through their nose.
E si accideys plagua dedintz le nas, lahoras cove que cures aquela am calguas e administra canulas de plom entro que sia de tot sanat.	 If a plague occurs in the nose, then lay down on top of them [the patient] so they don't come out through their nose, and administer plum-filled catheters that are to be inserted into whatever part of their body is most suitable for treatment.
Capitol .iiii.	 The end of this medical treatise.
De restauracio de la mandibula quan es trincada.	 When the jaw bone is broken
Quan la mandibula dejos es rompuda e la fractura de lu no es am plagua, reguarda lahoras si la fractura es deforas tant solament, e no es trencada en dos e es curvada a las partidas dedintz, lahoras la sua cognicio es leugiera.	 When the jaw bone is broken and the fracture is not infected (and thus cannot be opened), then keep the patient's mouth closed unless it is already fractured in two pieces and curved at its ends.
E cove donc, si la fractura es en la part dreyta, que tu intrometas le tieu indic senestre en la boca del malaute; e semblantment si la fractura es an la mandibula senestra, lahoras intromet le dit indic de la ma dreyta; e impelleys am aquel la gilbositat de la fractura dedintz am facilitat a las partidas defora, am la tua autra ma de la partida defora del os; am aquel decentment equa aquelam.	 And so if the fracture is in the right side of the jaw, then you put an index finger into the patient's mouth on that side; and similarly if it is at the left side of the jaw, then the doctor puts his thumb there instead; to prevent the bone from slipping out through the opening.
E si la fractura de la mandibula ja es separada en doas, lahoras cove que administres extensio de doas partz segon rectitut entro que sia possibla la equacio de lu.	 "When a fracture of the jaw has been separated into two parts, it is customary for doctors to administer extensions of those parts separately in order that they may be properly united.
E si accideys conmocio de dentz a disrupcio, lahoras strenh aquelas de las quals speras que romandran am fil de aur o de argent o de ceda; e aprop pausa sobre la mandibula trencada cerot, e aprop pausa sobre lu drap duplicat, e pausa sobre le drap gran stelha decentment fayta, o una pessa de sola engual a la longitut de la mandibula; e aprop lia aquela desus segon que a tu es apparelhada la liadura de lu e que conveneys la applicacio, entro que no es destruida.	 "If the teeth are loosened and disrupt the jaw, then apply strong bandages to those of which side one falls on or another, and place a large strap bandage over it gently, or if necessary only a single bandaged around the length of the jaw; and apply that when you have applied the strip above the jaw, and convenient application, so as not to be destroyed.
E comanda al malaute que use de repaus e tranquilitat, e pausa la vianda de lu sorbicios leons.	 "Command the patient to use rest and tranquility, and pause the medication for a while.
E si extimas que ja es alterada la figura en alcuna manieyra, lahoras tu te coyta e deslia aquel al tertz dia; e aprop rectifica aquo que ja es alterat de lu e emplaustra aquel am polvera de moli, am album de huou, o am farina de cisami, pus que tu auras ostat le cerot de lu, e pausa sobre le emplastra lana leon.	 "If the figure is altered in some way that you do not know about it, then tell her to take note of this and ask for the third time; and correct what has been changed on him/her gently, using oil or flour or other soft material, so as to cover over.
E adonc cum sta annex e ajustat aquel emplastre sobre lu, e la disposicio del os no es alterada, layssa aquel, que no le deslies entro que sia sanat e strenh la fractura; quar motas veguadas aquesta fractura es streyta en tres sempmanas.	 "When the plaster is properly placed and the condition of his/her hands does not change, then proceed with the application without delay so that it may be healed and strengthened in three sessions.
E si autra veguada accida apostema caut, lahoras administra aquo que havem dit motas veguadas en la sedacio de lu entro que sia sanat, e sia remaugut aquel apostema.	 When another vein is opened to insert a needle for bloodletting, doctors administer this potion that has been prepared with the ingredients mentioned in the passage on the same day at dawn when the patient lies down and becomes relaxed, so as to make him sick
E si la fractura es am plagua, lahoras considera si es pessa del os separada o satagias, lahoras tu te subtilia que ostes aquelas satagias am aquo que conveneys ad aquo en la remocio de aquelas dels sturmentz.	 If a fracture is caused by a blow, doctors consider whether it is necessary to separate the bone or not, and they will advise you on how to apply those remedies in order to remedy that injury.
E si le orrifici de la plagua es streyt, lahoras tu le amplifique am le fleubotomi segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	 If the wounds of a blow are severe, doctors will recommend increasing the application frequency based on your need for treatment.
E aprop quan tu auras ostat aquelas satagias, e de aquelas no sira remaugut re, lahoras tu cos le orrifici de la plagua si es ampla; e sino, pausa sobre aquela un dels emplaustres que conveneysso ad aquo e encarnan aquela, entro que sia sanada.	 After you have applied those remedies and if they are not effective, doctors recommend checking the severity of the wound and choosing one of the plasters that can be used in this case to prevent any further complications or sickness.
Capitol .v.	 .
De restauracio de la furcula quan es trinquada.	 Restoration of the collarbone when it is fractured.
Motas veguadas es trencada la furcula de la partida denant deves le muscle, e aquela fractura es fayta en una de tres manieyras.	 The veins that were broken during surgery to the collarbone will cause weakness in the muscles, and this fracture may be treated by one of three methods.
Quar o es trencada, o seperada, o es seperada en doas partz otra que no accidan satagias; e es leugier a la restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que accideysso en lu satagias, e es dificil a restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que la fractura es am plagua.	 It can be either separated or torn apart in two parts that are separate from each other and do not cause any harm to the patient, it is left to the surgeon for healing. Or alternatively, if this occurs during the procedure as well but causes difficulty in healing of the bone, then the fracture must have occurred separately, causing a more severe injury.
E la operacio en aquela, quan la fractura es ses plagua, es que tu fassas esser present dos ministres, per so que la un tengua le adjutori e siegua la furcula trencada, e l’autre extenda le col ves aquela partida.	 The operation in that case is when the fracture occurs within the pleura, it should be performed by two surgeons to ensure that one has the attendant and guides the broken rib, while another extends the incision at that point.
E aprop enguala la fractura am les tieus ditz entro que sia fayta la forma de lu segon que cove, e no sia en lu eminencia pauca ni concavitat.	 The bone should be fractured in a way so that it is directed towards the second part of its shape and not towards the small or concave part.
E si indigeysses mes de extencio, lahoras cove que pauses dejos le titillic del malaute spera de drap o de lana, e sia la grandesa de lu segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat; e exten e eleva la furcula e coarta la spera am la tua ma entro que enguales la frectura segon que cove.	 If you want to extend it further, the doctors recommend that you use either cloth or wool as a wrapping for the patient's arm, and make sure the surface is equal in size with your need; then stretch and lift the rib cage while keeping one hand inside so that the fracture occurs when desired.
E si no podes atirar la extremitat de la furcula a las partidas defora, per so quar es pervenguda al preon, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e pauses sobre le muscle de lu un coyssi migier en grandeza.	 If you cannot move the arm of the rib cage to outside the body, for fear it may be dangerous, have the patient lie on their back and place a cushion under one shoulder blade just slightly larger than the other.
E le ministre prema le muscle de lu a las partidas dejos entro que l’os de la furcula sia elevat que es en le preon en sus, e lahoras tu rectifique la fractura e enguala aquela am les tieus ditz.	 The minister should lift the muscle of that rib to outside where it would normally be in front, and then have the surgeons perform the fracture and guide it towards those areas.
Mays si sentes satagias de la furcula e so maugudas, lahoras cove que fendes sobre aquela e extraguas aquelas satagias am facilitat.	 If you feel pain in your ribs or shoulder blades, the doctors recommend to stretch and loosen those areas gently for ease of movement.
E si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu ingenia inscisio de lu am un dels inscissoris les quals has apparelhatz ad aquo, pus que havias pausat dejos la furcula le sturment que serve le ciphac; e es sturment de fust o de ferr del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	 If you hold the pharynx open with one of the instruments that have been used for this purpose, then it is necessary to loosen or remove that instrument.
E es semblant a culier del qual aquesta es la concavitat; e sia la sua latitut segon aquo que has necessitat de lu, segon la grandeza del os o la pauqueza de lu.	 It is similar to the opening of which cavity? The pharynx
Mays la longitut de lu sia segon que es a tu possible a la operacio; que haja doas extremitatz ayssi cum vezes, e la una extremitat sia ample e l’autre streyta.	 The length of the larynx may vary depending on which extremity is operated upon or if there are two different extremities involved in the surgery.
E si la disrupcio de la plagua la qual has inscidida quan has extraytas la satagia del os es ampla, e yest segur de apostema caut, lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura.	 If the disruption of the larynx that you have caused when removing the saddle is complete, then it is certain to close both flaps with sutures.
E si la disrupcio es pauca, o temes apostema caut, lahoras tu uemple la plagua am draps e pulvils segon la quantitat de la scissura de la plagua.	 If the disruption is minimal or if you are uncertain whether sutures should be used, then cover the flap with gauze and powder to control bleeding from a cut in the flap.
E si accideys apostema caut, lahoras infon drap en vi agre e oli rozat e vi, e pausa sobre aquel.	 If you need to apply pressure to stop bleeding, then cover it with a clean cloth and oil, and place something over that.
Mays la strictura del os quan es ses plagua e ses seccio, es que pauses emplastre fayt de farina de moli am album de huou, e pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e aprop pausa la spera dejos le titillic de lu, si indigeyssas de aquela, e aprop pren humemate, so es torca la qual teno les Sarrazis , que sia mot longua, e sia latitut de lu de un palm o entorn aquel; e aprop pausa pulvils duplicatz sobre la stopa e l’emplastre; e aprop pren una stela de taula subtil de la qual la latitut d’ela sia de tres ditz e en longitut semblantment; e aprop envolopa aquela en drap, e aprop envolopa aquel drap am la stela en lo loc sobre le loc de la fractura; e aprop pausa humemati ayssi cum es revout, e revol aquela sobre le col de lu e dejos le titillic de lu sa e dejos le titillic de lu malaute, e reduzeys aquela sobre tota partida, e quan vezes que la strictura de la fractura am strictura descent, e es aquo que no es occultat sobre tu.	 When the flap and the section have been sutured together, you put a fine tablecloth over it to control bleeding from that site. And after applying pressure as needed, cover that with gauze and powder on top of that, so if necessary, apply more pressure to stop the bleeding further down near your elbow or shoulder area, and then cover that also with something else like this:
E tot, que no sia mauguda la stelha desobre le os trencat; e per so cove que tu vejas le malaute quascun dia, que quan le liament es mollificat o vezas la stela ja esser remauguda, lahoras tu rectifica aquo e strenh la liadura.	 When the bone is broken above the mouth; and to see if there is a fistula in any day, when the ligament becomes slack or falls off the stone already be corrected
E aprop pausa le dormir del malaute sobre le col de lu, e pausa dejos le titillic de lu deves le dormir de lu en la nueyt un petit coyssi; per so que am aquel sia elevat le adjutori de lu del latz de aquel, e donc es elevada la la fractura de la furcula a elevacio del muscle; o sia le bras de lu liat al col de aquel.	 And place the cushion of the patient on his lower back, and also put the titillation on his buttocks to lie down in it for some time, so that this may be elevated the attendant's head from beneath him towards the latz level; then elevate the fracture of the ribcage upwards towards the muscle. Or you can lift up your arms towards the shoulder of them
E no deslies le liament si no accideys en le loc prusiment o apostema, entro a xii dias.	 If it does not happen within twelve days
E aprop renovelha le emplastre si has vista la facia de lu ad aquo, e ajusta en la strictura e restaura aquel e layssa entro que sia restaurat e sia coagulat la fractura de la furcula.	 And if you see the face of him like that, adjust it in its structure and restore it so that it is restored and coagulated with the fracture of the rib cage.
E es strenguda e comfortada segon le mes en xxviii dias, e alcunas veguadas en alcus homes es fayt en mens de temps de aquel.	 It is strengthened and comforted after twenty-eight days, and some vegetables are eaten to pass the time that day.
Capitol .vi.	 That's all!
De restauracio de fractura de la spalla.	 Reconstruction of the shoulder fracture
Spatula tart es trencada en le loc lat de lu e no so trencatz de lu sino les marges.	 The spatula is broken in the lower part of him, and not from his body but just on the edges.
E donc quan es trencat le loc de lu — e es trencat en le mieg loc de lu — e no es conogut sino per tocament, lahoras segon que es la figura de la fractura sforsa te la preparacio de lu e reduzir aquela segon la figura natural en tota manieyra de engen la qual es a tu possible.	 When it is broken at the location of him - and is broken in the middle part of him - and not understood but by touch, doctors will consider that as the figure of the fracture may require adjustment to bring it back into alignment with natural figures in any way you can do with engineering skills.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc polvera de moli am album de huou e stopa leon; e aprop pausa pulvil de drap duplicat; e aprop pausa sobre lu stela lada de taula subtil segon la quantitat de la spatula tota o mays un pauc.	 And place a pause over the area of the sharp blade, and another pause on powdered silk; and then place a pause above the table cloth in proportion to the size of the spatula whole or less
Mays si dejos la stela es concavitat en alcu dels locs de la spatula, lahoras tu enguala aquela concavitat am stopa leon, e aprop pueja la stela segon equalitat.	 Then place a pause over the area of the concave surface of the spatula, and then fill that space with the stop blade, aligning them in proportion to one another.
E aprop strenh desus am humemati longua ab constriccio decent e am fermesa de la stela entro que no sia remauguda del sieu loc.	 Ensure that the distance between each of your fingertips is even, and do not let them move beyond their individual space.
E considera le liament en quascun dia; e totas veguadas que sia mollificat, lia autra veguada e stren le e equa la stela si es remauguda del sieu loc.	 Consider each day as a separate unit of measurement; and all the measurements should be softened, another measure for each, and then fill in or align with one another if they are out of their space.
E jagua le malaute sobre le sieu latz sa.	 Place the patient on his back.
E la spatula es restaurada en xx dias o en .xxv.	 The spatula is restored in twenty days or less than that.
E donc quan es complit aquest nombre, lahoras tu dissolveys le liament, e que tu scias ensegurat quar aquela es dels osses dels quals la cominicio no es temuda ni lor dissolucio.	 When you have completed this number of measurements, then break the measurement and ensure that it is from the bones for which the beginning was not broken or dissolved.
E si procezeys del loc del os pessa e pongeys dejos la codena, lahoras tu scindeys sobre lu, e osta le, e fay segon que havem dit en la fractura de la furcula de sadacio de apostema caut si accideys aqui.	 If you have already placed the bone in position and secured it with a cord, then loosen that cord, remove it, and thereafter ensure that it is as if there were no such fracture of the furcula or sternum mentioned earlier.
Capitol .vii.	 When joints are afflicted by cold humors that spread throughout the body, causing pain in the feet, it is customary among physicians for such cases to be called gout.
De restauracio de la fractura del pietz.	 Restoring of a hernia or bowel injury
Le pietz alcunas veguadas es romput en le mieg loc de lu e aquo tart endeve; mays las extremitatz de lu mot endeve que so ciccadas e comminuidas.	 The intestines should be returned to their original position, and the doctor must ensure that both legs are kept apart from each other, in order to prevent any recurrence of the injury.
E dels accidentz de lu quan es trencat le mieg de lu es que declina a las partidas dedintz e accideys a lu gran dolor, e dificultat en lo hale, e tos, e fort leu e vomeys sanc; e es declarada en lu cavitat en le os trencat e no es occulta al sentiment.	 When the intestine is torn and falls out of its cavity it causes severe pain, difficulty in breathing, weakness, numbness, coolness, and sometimes paralysis or death. It is declared at the site where it was torn but not concealed from sensation.
E la restauracio de lu es que sia resupinat le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa entre las spallas de lu un coyssi; e aprop prem als muscles de lu, e ajusta las costas de lu am las mas de dos costatz, e subtilia te en la operacio de lu e en la equacio segon tota manieyra que es ad aquo possibla e que conveneys ad aquo, entro que retorne la figura del os segon que cove.	 The restoration of it is that the patient should be placed on their back and a cushion under them. A cushion between the thighs must also be used to prevent recurrence or any other complications arising from the surgery.
E aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e estopa e pausa desobre astela de taula subtil de sauze o de caligi e de a lor semblantz en levitat, pus que tu envolopas aquela en drap; e aprop subtilia te en lian aquela sobre le os trencat que no sia maugut; e vay am liadura segon retonditat al dors alcunas veguadas, e strenh aquel am strictura decent; e aprop considera la liadura en tota hora, e quan es mollificada strenh aquela.	 Carefully place it on the mattress and remove any cushion beneath that may be uncomfortable or cold. If you are using a blanket, cover the torn area to prevent infection; and make sure there is no swelling at all times. Make sure to monitor its position regularly during healing, especially if there was a significant injury.
E si necessitat provoca a desliament de aquela deves corrossio o pruziment, o dolor, o apostema que accideysso en le loc, lahoras tu coyta e deslia aquela e erradica le emplastre e rectifique aquo que accideys per aquo am manieyra de curacio de lu; e aprop reduzeys le emplastre, si vezes ad aquo la facia; e ajusta a lu strictura entro que sia sanat.	 When the patient has experienced a spillage or effusion of bile into the location, you should remove it from there and eliminate the abscess by removing its contents and rectifying this by means of care for that region of body.
Capitol .viii.	 Chapter VIII
De restauracio de las costas quan son trincadas.	 Restoration of the spine when it is ruptured.
Sapias que fractura de las costas no catz sino en locs grosses que siegon le dos; e de las extremitatz de lor de la partida denant no accideys ad aquelas contricio sino per aquo quar so cartillaginosas.	 If the fracture of the spine does not occur at a single point, but rather in several places that are distant from each other; and if this is accompanied by symptoms in the extremities which cause them to be torn, it will happen as a result of these cracks.
E cognicio de lu no es amaguada al sentiment deves la inquisicio de lu am les ditz.	 The understanding of him is not obscured by ignorance and his intellect remains sharp due to this investigation.
E la restauracio sia ayssi que enguales la fractura am les ditz segon la manieyra possibla, entro que sia engulhat segon que cove, e aprop emplastre e strenh le os trencat am stela, si indigeys de aquel.	 The restoration is as follows: if the fracture occurs alongside a possible weakness due to a cause that has been established separately and causes it to weaken at its base, then close and strengthen the broken bones after removing the damaged parts.
E si la fractura de las costas es declinant a las partidas dedintz, lahoras accideys al malaute dolor vehement e punctura, ayssi cum punctura que accideys ad aquel que ha pleureci, e per aquo quar le os ponh le velament; e accideys a lu difficultat de hanelit, e tos, e vomit de mot sanc; e aquesta es de dificil curacio.	 If the fracture of the spine is gradually weakening and accompanied by violent pain and puncturing injuries that occur as if they had been caused there where the pleurisy was present and through this cause a difficulty in breathing, vomiting, and a difficult cure.
E ja les Antixs so engeniatz en aquela am motz engientz.	 "The surgeon begins his work in that manner.
E de lor so que diso: cove que pauses viandas del malaute que engendro imflacio e ventositat, per que le ventre sia imflat e sia extendut, e la fractura sia impellida a las partidas defora.	 "He then says that he must inflate and expand the abdomen so that it is flat and extended, and the fracture is pulled away from the edges.
Mays nos avoreyssem aquo per so que no sia causa leugiera a generar apostema caut, si no accideys; e si ja accideys, lahoras ja ajuda ad aquo.	 "If this is not the cause of a gout attack, if it happens anyway; and if it does happen, then doctors help with that.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia pausada desus ventoza e aprop que sucque am fortitut; e es semblant a ratiocinacio, mays empero es temut que la ventoza atire las superfluitatz al loc per la debilitat.	 "They would do well to let the abdomen rest and apply heat with hot towels; it is customary to reason that such application prevents the superfluous fluids from escaping through weakness.
E diyssero alcus de lor: cove que·l loc sia cubert am lana que ja es submersa en oli caut, e sian pausatz pulvils entre las costas entro que sia umplida, que sia la liadura engual quan envolopas aquela segon retonditat; e aprop sia curat le malaute am curacio de pleuresi de vianda e de medicina.	 "They would do well to let the place be covered with a hot cloth that has been soaked in hot water, and spread thin layers of powder between the thighs so that it is full, such as when you pull up your leg; apply some poultice for pain control, and medicine.
E si causa vehement constrenh le malaute la qual no sufferta, e le os punh le velament am punctura ledent, temem sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que fendam sobre le loc, descubram de la costa trencada, e aprop pausem desobre aquela instrument que conserve le ciphac, la rememoracio del qual es precedida, e que inscidam le os am facilitat, e extraguam aquel.	 "If the patient suffers very strong pain that does not subside and pain occurs at the site of the fracture, then doctors say to apply pressure on the place torn open by the injury, spread thin layers between the thighs, and hold firmly a certain instrument used for stitching up.
E aprop que ajustem las doas labias de la plagua, si es gran, am cozidura, e curem aquela am emplastres entro que sia sanada.	 Open both thighs of the patient, if great, tighten them up, and treat that area with a plaster inside to be healed
E si accideys dedintz apostema, lahoras tu coyta e enfon pulvils en oli rozat e pausa sobre le loc, e que sia curat le malaute am aquo que cove a la apostema dedintz.	 If the abscess is located in that area, then place powders soaked in a fragrant oil and cover it with a cloth to prevent spreading
E sia ressupinat sobre le latz sobre le qual dorm, entro que sia sanat.	 Place a bandage over the affected area to prevent bleeding
Capitol .ix.	 Certainly.
De restauracio de fractura del spondil del dos e del col.	 Fracture repair of the spine from both sides and the pelvis
Alcunas veguadas endeve fractura als osses del col, e tart endeve a lor atricio, e semblantment als spondils del dos.	 Any broken bones in the lower part of the body, such as the pelvis, should be treated similarly to spinal fractures.
E cum aquo accideys ad alcu e voles saber si sara sanat o no, lahoras considera, quar si vezes las sieuas mas ja mollificadas e stupefaytas e mortas e no pot maure aquelas ni extendre ni strenher aquelas e quan constrenges aquelas am les tieus ditz o punges aquelas am agulha e no sent en aquelas dolor, lahoras sapias que no es sanat, e en las mes de disposicios es mortal.	 If it is determined that the fracture is severe and extends to parts of the body that are not protected by bones or muscles, such as the skull, spine or limbs, then those areas cannot be moved or straightened without causing further damage, which may lead to death.
E si mau aquelas e sent en aquelas constriccio am les ditz e punctura, lahoras sapias que la nucha de l’os es salva e que le malaute guereys am curacio.	 If the bone is not broken and there are no visible injuries or damage to those areas mentioned earlier, then medical treatment will be successful in healing the bone.
E si ve als spondils del col le semblant ad aquo e voles saber si sira sanat o no, lahoras considera als pes de lu.	 If you are asking if it is necessary to have surgery on the spine from both sides as well, then medical considerations will be taken into account for that part of the body.
Lahoras si tu vezes que so ja mollificatz, accideys ad aquels aquo que es accidit en las mas, e aprop quan jatz sobre le sieu dos, yeys ventozitat e egestio ses la sua volontat, e alcunas veguadas es resupinat sobre le sieu dos e vol urinar e no pot, lahoras sapias que es mortal, e adonc no trebales en la curacio de lu.	 When joint pain occurs frequently and becomes severe, when the gout strikes in its most devastating form on one or both legs, then you know that it is fatal and cannot be controlled by medicine alone.
Mays si no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, la causa es milhor e pus leugiera.	 If there are no other causes involved, the cause of gout is more severe and common.
E la curacio de lu es que te perforses a la sedacio del apostema caut que pauses sobre le spondil atrissat oli rozat sol, o am mugols de huous asatz; pausa sobre aquela aquel alcunas veguadas le dia entro que sia sedat le apostema caut.	 The treatment for gout is to apply a pointed cautery over the swollen joint or foot, usually at the heel or big toe, and leave it on until blisters form under it.
E lahoras pausa un dels emplastres confortantz e exsitans, e strenh sobre aquel am liament; e comanda al malaute que use de repaus e de tranquillitat e que no dorme sobre la partida am la qual atroba dolor entro que sia sanat.	 When the blisters have formed and healed, stretch over it gently as before, and tell the patient to rest and be calm, not sleeping on the part where pain occurs until it feels better.
E si accideys deves la atricio del os satagias o alcuna causa que ja es seperada de lu, lahoras cove que secces sobre la codena e que ostes aquel os; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua, am sutura si es gran; e aprop cura aquela am alcu encarnatiu dels enguentz, entro que sia sanat.	 If there are no other causes involved and the gout has settled in one or both of the legs, apply a poultice to that joint/leg and cover it with clean cloth, if large enough. Cover any blisters formed on top of that cloth as well. Gently stretch over affected area until pain subsides.
Mays si es trencat le derier del os alhoses, e es la fi de la coeta, lahoras cove que tu entrometas le dit pous de la ma senestra en le cul, e que enguales le os trencat am l’autra ma segon que es possible per equacio segonda; e aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e astelha, si indigeysses de aquels, e aprop strenh aquel.	 If the gout has settled in one or both of your legs and it is at an end, apply poultice to that joint/leg as before, cover it with a clean cloth if large enough. Cover any blisters formed on top of that cloth too. Gently stretch over affected area until pain subsides.
E si sentes satagias trencadas en lu, lahoras tu fen sobre aquela, e osta aquel, e cura la plagua am la curacio que es precedida entro que sia sanada.	 When a person has broken veins in it, the pain is located on that part of the body and remains there until treatment begins to heal,
Capitol .x.	 "Capitol
De restauracio de la ancha.	 Restoration of circulation.
Les osses de las anchas tart so trencats, e si trencan, lahoras la fractura de lor no es sino communicio en las extremitatz de aquelas e son inscidas en la longitut e declinan a las partidas dedintz; e accideys al malaute dolor en le loc e punctura, e la camba es stupefacta quan es fractura.	 When the bones of the arteries are broken and if they are broken, then the fracture of their is only communication in the extremities of those and is inscribed at the length and decline to the edges; and happens to the patient's pain in the place and puncture, and the artery becomes paralyzed when it is fractured.
E la restauracio de lu es que tu extendas la tua ma sobre aquel entro que sia sobre la fractura qual es la figura de lu.	 Restoration of circulation involves spreading your hand over the fracture area so that it covers the shape of the limb.
E si fractura es en la extremitat de lu tant solament, lahoras tu enguala aquela segon que a tu es apparelhat per equacio engual entro que sia asemblat a la sua figura natural.	 If the fracture is only in one extremity, then you need to apply something similar to normal shape on that limb to restore circulation.
Mays si la fractura es en le lonc o que ja declina a las partidas dejos, lahoras tu fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu ventre entro que sia preparada a tu la restauracio de aquela fractura.	 If the fracture is in the abdomen or has declined to the edges of those areas, then you should apply something similar to normal shape on the patient's belly as preparation for restoring that fracture.
E donc quan auras engualada aquela, pausa sobre lu emplastre, e aprop pausa sobre aquel astela de fust o de codena, e strenh per strictura sobre la qual no temas punctacio de fractura ni remocio de la stelha.	 Once you have prepared that area and applied the dressing over it, then place a bandage on top of that dressing or gauze, hold it in place with tape to prevent any puncture of the fracture or slippage from the plaster.
E enguala la concavitat am aquo que uempla aquela entro que aquela prengua la strictura segon equalitat, e comanda al malaute que dorma sobre le sieu dos o desobre le sieu costat sa.	 When a cavity is found between the patient's thighs, place cushions under them and have them lie on their back with their legs apart so that they do not press against each other, and command the patient to sleep on his side or the other side as desired.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu cessa de extencio de lu e de la sua restauracio entro que sia sedat le apostema caut, e pausa sobre lu aquo que sede aquel segon que es precedit; e aprop retorna a la restauracio de lu, e strenh aquel ayssi cum cove.	 If the cautery is painful, then stop excising it and its restoration until it has been settled by cauterizing that part next as described before; and afterwards return to the restoration of it, straining with care as much as possible.
E si accideysso en le os satagias o son comminuidas, lahoras tu las tratz.	 If this happens in the sacrum or any other part mentioned before, then do what was previously described.
Capitol .xi.	 Chapter XI
De restauracio de la fractura del adjutori.	 Restoration of the fracture of the arm.
Adjutori es aquo que es entre le coyde entro al cap de la spalla.	 The arm is where it is between the shoulder and the top of the shoulder blade.
E si es trencat, lahoras la restauracio de lu es en una de doas manieyras, de las quals es la una que tu prenguas fust pla de migiera groceza segon aquesta forma:	 If it is broken, then the restoration of it will be one of two ways. One way is to set up a splint in such a manner as described before;
E sian liatz en doas extremitatz dos liamentz, e aprop sia suspendut del loc elevat.	 And if there are two limbs and they both need the same treatment, then have it suspended from one of them elevated.
E segua le malaute sobre una sezela; e aprop gieta fora le sieu bras trencat sobre le fust entro que pervengua al titillic de lu en le mieg loc del qual sia annexa la curvitat del fust.	 And have the patient lie on his back; and afterwards gently place their broken arm down so that it is aligned with the curve of the forearm as attached to its curvature.
E aprop suspen sobre aquel alcuna causa greu, o·l minestre extenda aquel a las partidas dejos; e aprop le metge eque la fractura am las sieuas mas ensemps, entro que la fractura retorne segon que cove.	 When the cause of severe pain arises from any part of the body, let the physician extend it to the places where he can, and when the fracture returns after that, stop.
E l’autra manieyra es que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sieua cervitz e suspen la ma del col de lu am liament; e aprop comanda a dos ministres que la un de lor tengua aquo que es desobre la fractura am las suas mas; e l’autre tengua le pus dejos de lu; e quascu de lor extenda a la sua partida.	 The second servant's task is to place the other hand on his patient, and extend it towards the fracture site in order to assist him while he attends to the broken limb with his other hand.
E si voles que la extencio sia pus fort, lahoras tu strenh sobre la fractura am liament e sobre aquela am autre liament, e quascu dels dos ministres extendan a doas suas partidas.	 If you want to strengthen the traction, the doctor will apply pressure both on the fracture and also on another part of the body at the same time, with each servant extending his own limbs in two directions.
E donc si la fractura es propinquada a la extremitat del muscle, lahoras cove que sia pausat la mitat del liament sobre le citillic e l’autre dejos la fractura deves le coyde.	 If the fracture is close to the end of a limb, the servant should place his hand on top of the other and put pressure there as well in order to hold it firmly while he extends towards the fracture site with the other hand.
E semblantment si la fractura es propdana al coyde, lahoras cove que sia pausat le liament sobre aquel loc e sobre aquel coyde.	 Similarly if the fracture is close to a joint, he should place his hand on top of it and also hold it there while extending towards the fracture site with the other hand as well.
Enguala aquela am facilitat e ses trebal, e aprop quant sira engualada segon que cove e es applicada per bona applicacio, lahoras strenh aquela si no accideys apostema caut.	 With ease and agility in mind, if a servant finds that the traction is being applied properly, he should continue to apply pressure without interruption unless some sort of obstruction occurs or until otherwise instructed by the doctor.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras layssa la strictura entro al vii dia, e pausa sobre lu lana sutza enbeguda en vi agre e oli rozat entro que repause le apostema, e lahoras tu stren aquela.	 "When the arrow pierces through, and pauses at the tip of the shaft, it should be removed immediately, or else it will cause pain.
E la manieyra de strenher aquela es que pauses emplastre sobre la fractura, e aprop pausa envolopament de drap nau sobre le emplastre; e aprop ajuste le bras sobre aquel adjutori, e pause la sua ma uberta sobre le sieu muscle.	 "The manner in which to remove it is by gently placing a cushion over the fracture and wrapping it with cloth from beneath. Then place your hand on top of this protector and hold tight onto its muscles.
E pausa le drap e strenh sobre le adjutori le bras per so que·l bras sia en loc de stelhas, si no prohibeys de aquo alcuna causa del os trencat.	 "After removing the cloth gently place your hand on top of the protector and hold tight onto its arm to ensure it is in the correct position, or else risk causing damage.
E lahoras usa de stelhas.	 "The arrow's use is done.
E es que pauses sobre la fractura aquela stela que sia pus lada e pus fort de las autras stelas; e pausa entre quascuna stela la latitut del dit, e sia la longitut de las stelas segon la trencadura am addicio de tres ditz de tota partida.	 "After removing the cloth and placing it over the fracture with all its might, pause between each of the steles to determine their correct position, based on both the length and the latitude.
E aprop strenh sobre las stelas am la strictura la qual he dita al comensament del capitol.	 "Place your hand gently over the first stele at the beginning of the capital.
E es que la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura sia pus streyt.	 "The placement of your hand on top of the location of the fracture should be very firm and secure.
E quant pus es alonguada la fractura sia la strictura menor.	 "When placing over a fractured area, the strength of the pressure must be less than when pressing down on healthy skin.
E donc si vezes le situament de las stelas e la strictura ayssi cum havem dit en la hora en la qual restauras le membre al sieu assituament, lahoras tu fay.	 "If you find yourself in a situation where the steles and pressure seem to be causing harm instead of healing, then remove them immediately.
E si temes apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la strictura e las stelas entro al dia vii ayssi cum havem dit.	 When the patient's buttocks are spread open, let the physician tighten the area to be examined and stretch any tight bands as much as possible on that day.
E aprop considera le liament en totas partidas per tres dias per so que no accida en le loc pruziment o imflacio; o es prohibida la vianda pervenir al membre per disposicio de superfluitat de strictura; e donc rectifiqua tot aquo segon que havem dit.	 After three days to prevent bruising or swelling, it is forbidden for the bandage to be removed while there is excess tightness in that area. And after saying this, correct all of these instructions as well.
Mays si tu yest sobre confizanssa que no accida alcuna causa de aquo, lahoras no deslias la liguadura sino aprop tres dias o mays.	 If you are sure that there is no cause for this, then the bandage will be loosened after three days or more as needed.
E sia la sua dormicio del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e las sieuas mas sian sobre le stomac.	 And let them sleep on their side and place a pillow between their knees to support their stomach.
E pausa sobre le adjutori cocena plena de lana engualment, e considera en tota hora de la nueyt o del dia que no sia deliada ni dissolta la figura del membre trencat, o que sia le liament mollificat, donc rectifica aquo tot am la tua vertut.	 After removing the stitches and applying adhesive bandages completely soaked in lanolin, remember to check every hour during the night or day that no torn part of their body is still swollen or loose, then correct this as needed according to your expertise.
E pausa la vianda del malaute segon le orde le qual havem denant mes, enayssi que la vianda sia subtil en le comensament entro que es comensat strenher; e lahoras cove que egrossas la vianda de lu.	 After removing the patient's bandage according to our instructions earlier, make sure that it is mild as soon as it comes in contact with them and tighten it gradually. And after saying this, let us know if you have any concerns about its tightness.
Quar de constuma del adjutori e de la camba de lu es que sian strengutz en xl dias; e lahoras cove que sian desliatz e sia administrat banh e sia medicat am enguentz los quals rectifican aquel.	 The adhesive bandage on the wound and the pillow should be tight for at least two weeks, after which they will be loosened up a bit and treated with Band-Aid and medicine as needed to correct any issues that may arise.
E si la fractura es layha atrita, lahoras tu no deslies de aquela le liament e las stelhas entro a l dias o entro a dos meses.	 When there is a fracture, it will take time to heal or you may have to wear a brace for two months.
Capitol .xii.	 Section 12
De restauracio de fractura del bras.	 Treatment of a broken arm.
Bras es compost de dos osses les quals so appelatz dos focils; dels quals la un es petit, e es aquel que siec le dit pous, e l’autre es gran e es aquel le qual es pausat dejos le petit dit, de la partida pus dejus.	 The arm is composed of two bones that are called the humerus and radius; of which one is small, being the ulna, and the other large being the radius.
E fort leu es trencat le focil major solament, o le petit, e fort leu son trincatz ensemps.	 If only the larger bone (the humerus) is broken, or if only the smaller one (the ulna), then it will be easier for you to break them in half.
E quan es trencat le focil petit desus, lahoras la restauracio de lu es leugiera, e la sanacio de lu es pus leugiera.	 When the smaller bone (the ulna) is broken, healing and recovery will be easier than when only the larger one (the humerus) is broken.
E quan es trencat le focil de lu dejos la fractura de lu es mala, e la sanacio de lu es dificil.	 If both bones are broken at once, it makes recovery difficult and healing takes longer.
E pus mala de aquela es quan son trencatz dos osses essemps.	 When two bones are broken simultaneously, it is bad luck.
Donc si l’os le qual es trencat es le focil petit desus, lahoras es convenient al metge, deves la restauracio de lu, que pauze petita extencio am facilitat entro que aquel sia engualhat.	 If the bone that was broken is the smaller one (the ulna), it's advisable for a doctor to perform surgery and restore it as quickly as possible so that it can heal well without any trouble.
Mays si le focil gran es aquo que es trincat, lahoras cove que pause extencio pus vehement.	 If the larger bone (the humerus) is broken, then you will need surgery to restore it as soon as possible so that healing can occur well without any trouble.
E si les dos focils so ensemps trincatz, lahoras cove que tu pauses la extritura mot pus fort.	 When two needles are stuck together, then the doctor should gently remove them both.
E cove que pauses la figura de la ma deves la restauracio de lu e la extencio de lu estenduda sobre un coyssi, e sia le pols de la ma a las partidas desus, pus aut que totz les autres ditz, e le dit auricular sia pus bas dels autres ditz, e le malaute sia cezent sobre una cezela cayrada.	 After the removal of the fist and its extension on a cushion, place both hands as shown, and put them on their ears, then gently remove all other fingers except for those used to make the incision, so that they may be sewn up, unless otherwise specified in this text.
E sia un coyssi denant lu en la altetut o endreyt de lu, per so que·l malaute no encorra trebalh.	 And when a cushion is placed under him at the top or bottom of his body, then it should be such that he does not catch hold.
E aprop le ministre extenda le bras de la partida pus dejos am la sieua ma o am liament, e autre ministre extenda desus semblantment.	 Then extend the arms of both doctors as shown, with the left hand on the patient's right side and vice versa.
E aprop le metge engualhe le os entro que redugua aquel segon la milhor figura que pot.	 And if you are to remove a second incision along that same line (as indicated), then the doctor should perform it in the usual way, as specified here.
E si en la factura del os so satagias, lahoras te perforsa raduzir tota pessa en le sieu loc am la tua vertut.	 If a thread on his body is too short or tangled up, then the doctor should perform this procedure to remove all the excess in that area of his own accord.
E si appar en lu satagia separada que punh la codena e no es a tu speransa en la restauracio de lu, lahoras tu fen sobre lu e osta aquela segon la manieyra la qual havem dita desus.	 If it appears separated and is not to your advantage in removing the abscess, then you should gently cover him over and spread that second membrane as shown by our doctors.
Mays si la fractura es am plagua, yeu ja he fayt ad aquo capitol singular, e donc pren la curacio de aquel.	 If the fracture is already open, then you should proceed to the next step immediately and take care of it as specified in this text.
E si accideys apostema caut al comensament de la tua restauracio, lahoras tu lineys un drap am cerot fayt de oli rozat e cera blanca, e sia migier entre specitut e subtilitat, e strenh drap sobre aquel am strictura subtil entro que le apostema sia cedat; e lahoras remau le cerot e pausa emplastre preparat de polvera de moli am clayre de huou, e aprop pausa stelhas; e sia la stela la qual es pauzada sobre aquela fractura pus lada e pus fort.	 When the first incision is made in your restoration, you lay a cloth soaked in hot and cold oil onto it, which must be between thick and thin, and hold it over that area of stricture so as to prevent the abscess from coming out; afterwards, cover it with a prepared poultice of powdered mullein, and put a pause on the dressing.
E sapias que·l nombre de las stelas del bras so vi en las majors disposicios, o sia la fractura en un focil o en dos focils ensemps.	 You understand that there are two types of stitches - major and minor ones?
E aprop pausa la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura pus fort e pus vehement, e quan mays sira la extrictura a las partidas desus de la fractura o a las partidas pus bassas de lu, pausa la strictura un pauc pus molh segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu en le comensament del capitol.	 After the incision is made in the area of the fracture but before it is closed, pause the closure to allow for memory of that location at the beginning of this chapter?
E les draps que so envolopatz sobre la fractura sian draps mols humitz, e no sian durs ni aspres, e·l fiel am le qual es strenhut sia de li propriament migier entre subtil e gros, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	 The dressings on the fracture should be soft and not too tight or too loose; it is important to find a balance between thickness and size as we have recommended?
E considera le membre e·l liament aprop alcus dias.	 Consider the member of which you are referring?
E si accideys alcuna causa de la qual rectificacio es necessaria, ayssi cum prusiment le qual accideys al membre, e lahoras cove que tu enbroques le membre am aygua cauda entro que cesse aquel pruziment.	 If there is any cause for which correction is necessary, whether it occurs to the member or elsewhere, then make sure that you break into the member just above where this problem ceases?
E leysses le membre no costreyt entro que repause, e aprop torna la strictura.	 When the member is inside but restrained
E si la extrictura ja es mollificada e l’os ja es remaugut e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras rectifiqua tot aquo am la tua vertut.	 If the hernia has been reduced and the opening is already closed to those who are present, then you will rectify everything as usual.
E considera mays si le nutriment es prohibit pervenir al membre per superfluitat de strictura, quar lahoras cove que mollifiques aquel un petit e laysses aquel per alcus dias entro que corra ad aquel le nutriment, e aprop strenh aquel.	 Consider it if nutrition is prohibited to enter the member due to excess of hernia pressure, that you should soften it a little and let it out for a few days until it runs away from there in order to nourish it again.
Mays si al malaute no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no cove que sia desliat entro aprop xx dias o enviro de aquels.	 If the patient does not encounter any causes of those mentioned earlier, then you should keep it restrained for at least 20 days or until otherwise notified.
E aprop sia suspenduda la ma del malaute per la sua vertut de movement agitatius, e fay aquel dormir sobre le sieu dos.	 Then place your hand under the patient's arm to keep it still and let them sleep on their side.
E sapias que aquesta fractura es restaurada en xxx dias o en xxxii dias, o fort leu es restaurada en xxviii dias, e tot aquo es segon la disposicio de las compleccios e las disposicios de la vertut.	 You know that the fracture is restored in 30 days or within 42 days, and if it's longer than that then you follow the instructions provided with the complex and conditions of healing.
Capitol .xiii.	 The fourteenth chapter
De restauracio de fractura de la pinche de la ma e dels ditz.	 Of restoration of fractures of arms and legs.
Sapias que a la pinche de la ma e als nuzes dels ditz tart endeve fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio motas veguadas.	 You know that the arm bone or leg bones should be fractured in order to heal, and they will not occur except with care taken.
E quan accideys a la ma fractura o atrissio, lahoras cove que·l malaute segua cayrat e denant lu lies cezent segon equalitat, e aprop pausa la ma de lu sobre aquela extenduda.	 When an arm fracture or dislocation occurs, the doctors say that the patient should keep moving and maintain rest for the next 48 hours while lying on their arm raised above their chest.
E aprop le ministre extenda les osses trencatz e·l metge engualhe aquels entro que sian congongitz am bona congoncio.	 The surgeon extends his hand to help the patient's body, so that it can be cut open in a good manner and with proper care
E lahoras cove que pause emplastre e estopa, si no accideys apostema caut; e aprop pausa stela desus segon la quantitat del loc, e tu ja has envolopada aquela en drap de li.	 The doctor says to remove the bandage and cover it if any bleeding occurs, and place a second bandage on top of that
Mays si la trincadura es en las partidas dedintz deves le ventre de la palma, e lahoras fay semblant de spera de drap, e comanda al malaute que strenha aquela am la sua palma trincada; aprop sia strenguda am drap lonc.	 If the hernia is in the belly of the finger, and the doctor wants to remove the bandage from his hand, then command the patient to stretch that hand with a bandaged finger.
E sia la stelha de cuer am drap en le qual sia levitat, per so que le cuer sia aplicat a la palma; e strenh aquela segon que cove.	 The cloth over which the body is applied shall be thin enough to apply it to the palm of the hand, then stretch that second one out.
Mays si la fractura es a las partidas defora, lahoras cove que pauses desus stela e autre estela de la partida dejos en la palma, per so que la ma sia uberta e dreyta; e aprop pausa la strictura, ayssi cum es revolvuda la ma a la rateta entre les ditz am liamentz.	 If the fracture is in the forefinger area, then remove one bandage from the palm of the hand and apply another on top of that, so that the arm will be stretched straight out and not crooked between the fingers.
E si accideys fractura a alcu dels nozes dels ditz, lahoras si es le dit pous, sia engualat segon que cove e aprop sia strenhut am la palma e si·t voles, pausa a lu astela petita dreyta per so que sia elevada la fractura e no sia mauguda.	 If the fracture occurs in one of the fingers that are not the forefinger area, then remove both bandages and place them on top of each other to stretch it out fully, but if you want, pause a little bit to elevate the fracture and prevent further damage.
Mays si la fractura es en les autres ditz, ayssi cum en aquel del mieg loc, o en le indic, o en le auricular, o en le anular, lahoras sia engualhat e liat am le dit sa le qual siec aquel; o sian totz liatz segon continuacio, e es milhor; o pausa sobre aquel stela petita, ayssi cum havem dit en le pous.	 If the fracture is in one of the other fingers like that on the thumb, or ear, or nose, or ring finger, then stretch it out by placing both bandages together to make a band and place it on top of those places; if you want to continue stretching further, do so but pause with a small bandage over them; otherwise, remove one bandage from each and place them back where they were.
E considera, en la tua restauracio, e aprop aquela, la disposicio de apostema caut e oppose — am la tieua operacio — am aquo que cove quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, segon que es iterada la narracio de lu.	 In your treatment, and if that happens, place a pointed cautery against the arrow of your operation, and when you find any cause mentioned in this account
Capitol .xiv.	 Chapter 14
De restauracio de fractura del os de la coyssa.	 For treatment of fractures of bones.
Le os de la cueyssa motas veguadas es trencat e es declarat al sentiment segon que es convertit a la partida denant e a la pus sobirana.	 The bone of the thigh is broken and it is declared second that it has become part of the healing process, accompanied by swelling.
E la restauracio de lu se fa enayssi que·l liament es strenhut sobre la fractura e autre liament dejos la fractura, e le malaute sia prostrat sobre le sieu ventre e sobre la cara.	 The treatment is made by placing a splint over the fracture and another by keeping it, and the patient's abdomen is propped up on one side, facing toward the face.
E aprop le ministre extenda tot le liament a la sua partida segon la qualitat, quan la fractura es en le mieg loc del os.	 Extend the splint to its full extent after quality assurance when the fracture has been immobilized in place on the bone.
Mays si es propdana a la razitz de la cueyssa, lahoras sia le liament propda al denolh a la partida del pentenilh, per so que la extencio caja en sus, e le autre liament dejos la fractura.	 When it is necessary to apply the splint on the thigh, place it in front of the broken part of the abdomen for support and prevent its escape from the leg.
E semblantment si la trencadura es propdana al denolh, lahoras sia fayt le liament propda al denol, e sia la extencio a las partidas dejos.	 Similarly if it is necessary to apply the splint on the arm, place it in front of the broken part and prevent its escape from the leg.
E aprop le metge enguale le os am amduas las sieuas mas entro que reduzesca aquel segon la semblansa natural e l’os es conjungit per bona conjunccio; lahoras cove que pauses emplastre e strictura, si no accideys al membre apostema.	 Place the patient's hand on your chest and gently press it so that their arm is kept in place during surgery as closely to normal as possible, or else risk damaging the joint.
Mays si accideys en lu apostema, lahoras tu layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que l’apostema caut sia cedat, e aprop retorna a la tua curacio.	 When an arrow falls into the body, pain occurs at that point for some days until the arrow is extracted and returned to your care.
La strictura de lu sia ayssi fayta: cove que envolopes sobre la fractura una benda dura, e dobla aquela dos o tres veguadas, e remaugua de lu superfluitat; e aprop envolopa la camba entro que pervengua al talo e a la razitz de la cueyssa.	 This restriction is as follows: cover the fracture with something hard, and fold that over it two or three times, and wipe away any excess fluid; and cover the chest inside so that blood does not come out through the chest area
E intromet lonc fiel entre la cueyssa e la camba prop del denol a las partidas dejos, e venguan las extremitatz del fiel de la partida pus sobirana de las doas partz, e aprop revolveys sobre la camba e la cueyssa aquo que superflueys de la benda.	 Between the chest and the limb place it at the lower end of the two parts; and have its extremities placed so that they are opposite to both sides, and wrap around the chest and the area over which excess fluid flows from the object
E aprop pausa sobre la cueyssa en le loc de aquela fractura astelhas, e pausa de aquelas una stela sobre le os de la camba.	 And place a cushion at that spot of the fracture there, and on those a stone over the opening of the chest area.
E aprop uempli las vacuitatz entre la camba e la cuoyssa am draps mols, per so que sia coagulada la extrictura.	 And place a cloth between the chest and the cup to seal the gap
E aprop comensa am strictura fort del mieg sobre le loc de la fractura am tres envolucios o quatre, e quant mays tu te alonhas am liament del loc de la fractura, la tua strictura sia menor e pus leugiera e pus molha.	 And when the pain from a severe fracture is located in that area three or four times wrapped around it, and as long as you hold onto the place of the fracture your restriction will be less painful and looser
E aprop exten a doas extremitatz del fiel a las partidas dejos entro que pervengua a la cavilha del pe, e strenh amdoas las extremitatz de las stelhas del autra part per so que·l liament no sia remaugut del sieu loc.	 And extend the two limbs of the servant to both sides until it reaches around the leg from below and stretch both extremities of the other side in such a way that the line does not go away from its place.
E aprop leyssa la strectura sobre aquel, don esta ayssi que no accideys al membre corrosio ni apostema caut ni emflacio e semblantz ad aquels; e si accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, adonc cueta te am desliament de lu, e rectifica aquo que accideys tot aprop, segon que havem dit motas veguadas.	 When the hernia is restored over that part of their body, then let it be so that no injury occurs to any member by strangulation or effusion; and if such an event does occur, then make haste to apply remedies against this event after saying words favorable to the good will of God.
Mays si en le os es pessa del os la qual pongua, lahoras cove que tu engualhes aquel segon que a tu es possibla; e sino, fen sobre lu e remau aquel, e cura am aquo del qual es precedida la rememoracio entro que sia sanat.	 If the pain is caused by heat in the bowels that has penetrated there, then let it be so that you hold it off until it is possible to do; otherwise, go over it and cure what came before, after having remembered its cause for remembrance of this thing being a health matter
E alcunas veguadas es strenhuda aquesta fractura de la coyssa otra aquo que sian ajustadas a lu stelhas, ayssi cum havem dit en le adjutori e·n le bras.	 And some words are strong enough to mend this fracture of the thigh over there where they have been adjusted with linen and such like in the arm.
Mays empero en la restauracio de lu en tal manieyra fayta no accideys al malaute claudicacio; e si es restaurada sola, otra aquo que li sia applicada l’autra camba, lahoras es necessari que claudique aquel del qual es tostemps.	 However in the restoration of it this way a fault does not occur to the patient's claudication; and if it is restored alone, then another bandage should be applied after that, so that the other limb will remain silent for now.
E sapias que la coyssa es strenhuda en xl dias o un pauc mes o un pauc mens, e tot aquo es segon la diversitat de las compleccios e de las autras dispozicios.	 You know that the thigh is strained in a few days or one month or one week and so it depends on the diversity of complications and other circumstances.
Capitol .xv.	 The conclusion
De restauracio de la fractura de la rodela del denolh.	 The restoration of the fracture in the heel.
Sapias que fractura de la rodela del denol tart endeve, mays accideys a lu motas veguadas atrissio.	 When the thigh bone breaks through the skin, it causes swelling in the muscles below
Mays si accideys a lu fractura, lahoras no es sino fissura o trauc en las suas partidas, e aquo es am plagua o ses plagua, e sobre aquo tot es estat am le sentiment.	 When there is a fracture in the thighbone, it can cause a tear or wound on its parts, and this may be accompanied by pain as well, and over time, such an injury becomes inflamed or sore, making it painful to move around.
E la restauracio de lu es enayssi que sia engualat aquo que es romput de las partidas de lu am les ditz entro que sia agreguat e conjongit segon que es possible per equacio e facilitat e fabricacio.	 The restoration of such an injury involves first making a second incision between the parts, which is then closed in order to facilitate and simplify the healing process.
E aprop pausa emplastre e pausa sobre aquel stela redonda, si indigeysses de aquela; e strenh desus am strictura ad aquo convenient.	 Then place a round pedestal over it, if necessary, so that one can see it clearly and easily; and stretch out your arm to reach for this stone conveniently.
E aprop considera totas las disposicios las quals havem recomtadas en las autras fracturas, ayssi cum es apostema caut e semblant ad aquels enaissi que se oppause a tot accident am aquo que a lu es convenient entro que sia sanat.	 Then consider all the measures that were taken in previous fractures, such as applying cold and similar to those in this case so that the treatment is effective when it comes to preventing accidents like this one from happening again.
Capitol .xvi.	 This is the end of a medieval medical treatise written in Latin-influenced languages.
De restauracio de la fractura de la camba.	 The restoration of a broken bone.
Sapias que en la camba so dos osses dels quals la un es gros, e es le nompnat per nom de la camba; e l’autra es subtil, e es nompnat focil.	 In the thighbone there are two bones: one is thicker and is called the femur; the other is thinner and is known as the tibia.
E accideys a quascus de las specias de fractura aquo que accideys als dos osses del bras, e per aquo es fayta restauracio de lu ayssi cum restauracio del bras engualment, e la operacio de lu es una.	 When the two bones of the arm are broken together in this way, and for such a fracture as well, then the restoration process is carried out similarly to that of the leg, making it one operation.
E si so trincatz dos osses ensemps, la camba es convertida a totas partidas.	 When two bones are separated, the cavity becomes filled entirely.
E si es trinquat le os pus subtil, la camba es convertida a las partidas Denant.	 If you gently pull the bone apart, the cavity will be opened again
E si es trincat le os pus gros, atrobas aquel dejos, e es de aquelas causas que no so a tu ameguadas.	 If you forcibly separate the bones violently, then those causes are not to your advantage
E aprop aministra extencio e equacio e liguacio de las astelas segon aquel engualment.	 After providing assistance with respect and care towards others, it is beneficial to establish connections and relationships accordingly.
Mays empero cove, si la fractura de la camba es laja havent motas satagias, que la extencio sia mendre e pus leugiera, e alleuja am la tua vertut.	 If the separation of bones causes severe and persistent pain that is not alleviated by gentle care or assistance, then you should consult a doctor for advice and help.
E en la camba es alcuna causa de operacio sobre le bras, e es quan tu engualas las stelhas e que comples tota la tieua operacio, lahoras tu prendras pessas de fustz de pi le qual es pausat dejos las cauzas las quals so pausades en solies, e so faytas eyssament de brancas de palma; aligeys de aquelas a las quals es petita groceza, e no sia ges de las manudas, e sia la longuesa de aquelas segon la longuesa de la camba, e del denol entro al pus dejos.	 If the cavity is not an indication for surgical intervention and if you complete all necessary procedures, then your pain will be alleviated; except from those that are very small and without cause, which do not need any treatment or cure; as well as those whose length is proportional to the size of the cavity itself but shorter than the bone itself.
E aprop envolopa sobre quascuna drap en doas envolucios segon la longitut de lu, e pausa la una sobre la partida de la camba de la una part e l’autra del autra part, e sian del denol entro al pus bas loc del pe.	 After wrapping around the bone in two parts and placing one on either side of the opening at each end of it, close off with a small piece of cloth over both ends to prevent the bones from coming out.
E aprop lias las doas stelhas en tres locs de doas extremitatz e al mieg loc, quar am aquesta strectura la camba es prohibida de clinar a la partida dextra e sinistra, e sta per bona stacio.	 The two bones are wrapped around in three places on each side and at the middle, so that when stretching the cavity it is forbidden to touch both ends with either hand separately; this for proper alignment of the bone.
E ja es aministrat un brasset de fust segon la longuesa de la camba; e sia pausada en lu la camba per so que conserve aquel de movement.	 When administering a pessary to the thighs, it is necessary to place a cushion beneath them and another one on their legs in order to prevent the pessary from moving around.
E majorment cove que tu fassas aquo en fractura, e quan am aquela es plagua propriament.	 Additionally, if you break this, do so carefully.
E aprop considera en quascun jorn la camba e studia am aquel per derier studi, e tu le guardes de apostema e de imflacio o de autres causas semblantz; e cum accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, lahoras opausa te a lu am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	 When you administer this pessary on any given day and study it closely for the next few days, pay attention to any swelling, inflammation or other such causes; if you notice any of these, your doctor should stop administering it immediately so that it does not cause harm.
Capitol .xvii.	 Chapter Seventeen.
De la fractura del talo e dels osses del pe e dels ditz.	 Of the fracture of the foot and the bones of the leg, as well as the fingers.
Al talo no accideys fractura de tot; mays als osses del pe accideys fractura alcunas veguadas; e als ditz del pe pauc accideys fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio en las mes de disposicio.	 The foot does not always break in its entirety; sometimes the bones of the leg break and occasionally the fingers do as well; however, they rarely break separately, only tearing apart near where the fingers are used most frequently.
E si als osses del pe endeve fractura e vezes aquels osses esser elevatz sobre si entre lor, lahoras le malaute pause le sieu pe sobre la terra preparat ayssi cum anant.	 If fractures occur in the bones of the leg and sometimes these bones are elevated above one another; doctors must place a cushion beneath their feet on the ground so that they can move around as before.
E aprop pausa la un pe sobre aquo que es elevat de aquels osses, e aprop calca aquels, e prem, e engualha aquels entro que torno en los locs.	 And then place the foot over this which is elevated by those bones, and hold them in position; if you break or lose one of these, put it back into its proper place.
E aprop pausa emplastre e stopa desus, e pausa dejos le ventre del pe una petita taula a la qual sian dos caps plas.	 When you have opened up space between the patient's thighs using cushions beneath them, another servant to place on their legs, and yet another to support their chest with hands, here comes the first sentence.
E aprop strenh aquela am le pe am strectura descent, pus que tu has envolopada aquela am draps e am autres causes de las quals indigeys.	 The servant should now straighten up and wrap a bandage around their foot, making sure to include any other factors that may have contributed to the pain as well.
E cum a lu passan tres dias o quatre, lahoras tu deslia le liament, quar tu atrobaras les osses engualatz, o sian trincatz o sian dislocatz, e la operacio en aquels es ayssi co coneysses.	 After three or four days of pain, the servant should loosen it up and try to straighten their joints, whether they are twisted or dislocated; this operation must be done with utmost care in these cases as well.
Mays si alcus ditz son trincatz, lahoras restaura aquels, e enguala aquels ayssi cum yeu e recomtat a tu en la restauracio dels ditz de la ma.	 If the joints are sore and stiff, then the servant should restore them by massaging them gently as recommended in the treatment of the hands' joints.
E aprop pausa al dit trincat stela segon la longitut del dit, e sia pus lada de lu un pauc; e aprop dejos le pe aquesta taula la qual e a tu recomtada, e strenh aquela am strictura decent.	 After positioning the affected joint at its correct length and ensuring it is firmly in place on that table as recommended, straighten up that area carefully.
Mays si aquo que es trincat dels osses so dos o tres o mays, lahoras tu pausa sobre quascun dit astela de la sua quantitat envolopada en drap leon, e strenh la taula en le pus bas del pe, e sia stant sobre la un dels caps de la taula foro le ventre del pe per que la tengua am bona retencio.	 If the joints are sore and stiff for two or three days, then the servant should place a cushion beneath that joint on the table with its side closest to their stomach; hold it firmly in place against one of the heads of the table so that there is support from the belly as well.
E es convenient a tu que no oblides que no consideres totas las causas las quals que e ditas a tu en las autras fracturas dels accidentz que havem dit; e opausa te a tot accident am aquo que cove.	 It is important to remember that you should not forget all the causes of injury mentioned in other fractures cases, and stop all treatment at this point as well.
Capitol .xviii.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customary to call gout among doctors.
De fractura del conh de la femna e del os del pentenilh e de la vergua del home.	 The fracture of the thigh bone and the pelvis area are usually called a broken hip or dislocated hip by doctors
Quan le conh de la femna es trincat, lahoras fay aquela ceser en cezela cayrada, e aprop enclina aquela a la partida del dos un petit, e sia tenguda detras.	 When the thigh bone is broken, the doctor often makes an incision in the crease below it and approaches from behind it to place it back into position properly
E aprop la matrona umpla le conh de coto, e sia fayt en le conh de lu ayssi cum spera; e aprop la femna sia concutida, e eleva le dos de lu petit a petit, quar tot aquo es fora-getat entro que sia denant la partida del conh ayssi cum spera e l’os trincat retorna.	 If the thigh bone is cut through and through, approach it as you would do with one that has been separated, and elevate both legs slowly until this condition is corrected if possible
E aprop pausa pulvils sobre le dos de lu, e quan vol urinar remaugua le coto am facilitat e aprop urine, e reduzeys e retorna aquel segon la manieyra segon la qual mezist aquel al comensament, e aprop retorne al sieu pulvil primier.	 Place powders on both legs to help absorb the urine and make urination easier, reduce swelling, and return it back into its original position
E fassa ayssi per vii dias o enviro aquels, quar aquel es restaurat.	 Repeat this for seven days or more until it is restored.
E si voles, pren una vezica de ovela e strenh sobre le trauc de lu una canula de canavera; e entromet tota la vesica en le conh de lu, e aprop ensuffla en la canula am vertut entro que la vesica sia imflada dedintz le conh, quar la fractura retorna.	 If you want to use a catheter, insert it into the urethra and enter the bladder through that channel, apply gentle pressure with the catheter tip until the bladder is inflated enough for the bone to return properly if the fracture occurs.
E aprop sia umplida de coto e estia per alcus dias segon que havem recomtat, entro que sia sanat.	 Then apply a bandage and stay there for as many days your doctor recommends until you are healed
E quan le os del pentenil de home o de femna es trincat, lahoras aministra en la restauracio e agulacio de lu aquo que havem recomtat en l’os del anca.	 When a man's or woman's penis is circumcised, doctors provide anesthesia and analgesia to the area where they recommend it in the previous sentence.
E aquo que es dreyt no es occultat en aquestas fracturas proprinquas e que pauc endeveno, majorment ad aquel al qual es alcun studi e us e enten aquest meu libre mot; quar aquela fractura significa a tu en las majors disposicios via dreyturiera en la restauracio e en la strictura de lu, e donc enten be.	 In such cases where the fracture is recent and not severe enough to require immediate surgery, rather than that one would recommend it immediately in healing and tightening of the joint, they should consider other treatments available instead.
Mays en la vergua del home quan es trincada, pren guarguamela de auca, e met la vergua en aquela; e aprop pausa sobre lu envolucio de drap, e sia envolopada, e aprop sia layssada per tres dias o enviro aquels, e sia sanada.	 In a man when he is circumcised, you should wash the wound with salt water, cover it and keep it covered for three days or until healed.
Capitol .xix.	 The 19th chapter of the Capitularia, an important work on Roman law that was compiled by Emperor Justinian
De restauracio de fractura dels osses quan es am plagua.	 In repairing a broken bone when it is already bruised
Convenient es ad aquel al qual accideys fractura am plagua, e majorment si le os es gran ayssi cum es le os de la cuoyssa o de l’adjutori, o semblant ad aquel, que tu te cuoytes e fleubotomes aquel tantost si las condicios de fleubotomia a tu o testifican ayssi cum desus havem dit.	 It is more convenient to treat the fracture if it is accompanied by bruising or swelling in the area of the organ such as the thigh, arm, or leg, and if those conditions are present you should be cautious about applying any treatments that could exacerbate the condition like phlebotomy (bleeding).
E si la plagua eflueys sanc, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la retencio de lu enayssi que tu polverizes sobre lu zegi trissat, si a tu autra causa no es present.	 If the swelling is severe, doctors advise against applying anything to the wound unless you are removing something that has already been broken.
E aprop comensa restaurar la fractura en aquel meteys dia, e no prolongues aquo, si no accideys apostema.	 When a fracture occurs in that manner, do not delay it further if another accident should happen
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la restauracio de lu entro al ix dia, entro que sia cedat le apostema, e no apropinques a lu en le tertz dia e·l iiii de tot, quar tu faras accidir mals accidentz.	 If an accident occurs on the same day as the restoration, then perform the restoration within 24 hours and do not postpone it to another day unless absolutely necessary, because you risk making additional accidents.
Mays si le os trencat es eminent sobre la codena descubert, lahoras cove que te perforses reduzir aquel e engualar aquel am las tuas mas am facilitat e am pauca extencio.	 If the bone is about to break through the skin and you suspect this, then try to reduce it by gently pressing on both sides of it as much as possible without causing further harm.
Mays si extencio no es a tu preparada e la equacio de lu am las tieuas mas, lahoras tu reduzeys aquel am las tuas mas am aquest sturment; e es sturment le qual es fayt de ferr, la longitut del qual es de vii ditz o de viii e la latitut del qual es segon la quantitat de la plagua; e per aquo es necessari al metge que prengua de aquels tres o quatre segon la quantitat que indigeys ad aquo en la curacio en tota specia de fractura.	 If the injury is not prepared or balanced well, then try to reduce it with your strongest hand as much as possible in that direction; and stretch out until you have reached the length of seven digits or eight inches, whichever is greater, and from there measure its latitudinal extent relative to its longitudinal extent. This will be necessary for the doctor to determine how many centimeters should go towards healing this particular type of fracture.
E sia redon, e sia en lu pauca groceza per so que no sia doblat deves la comprecio sobre aquel en la hora de la operacio.	 And do not let the tension build up too much that it could be a problem during surgery.
E sia de aguda extremitat al qual sia marge en las sieuas extremitatz; e sia le desus de lu a grossetut tendent, e de la maytat de lu entro a las partidas.	 And if there is an acutely damaged part of the body that has margins around its extremities, and the swelling or edema of it towards all directions, then do so with great care.
E aquesta es la forma de lu:	 The beginning of this text can be translated as follows:
E es nompnat en grec “labre volentz atelarem”, so es paleta pauca.	 In Greek, it translates to "the pain is unbearable.
Per que cove que sia pausada la extremitat de lu acuda elevada sobre la extremitat del os eminent.	 Because the extremity of that person has been raised above their own prominent extremity.
E inpelleys aquel en una veguada entro que retorne le os, e sia engualat am alcuna equacio.	 He raises him to a certain height and then places his arm on it without any further adornment.
E donc esforsa te engualar las extremitatz de la fractura entre lor, e si la extremitat de lu trencada es subtil, e no pren aquela le sturment per bona axcepcio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas la extremitat de aquel os entro que l’insturment haja poder de aquo.	 If the limb is fractured and if it's very small, then you should put a splint on that extremity to prevent further damage.
Mays si no podes reduzir le os de tot am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras enscideys aquel am aquo que coveneys a lu dels inscizoris les quals havem ditz; o serra aquel am una de las serras en qualque manieyra sia a tu possible.	 If you cannot reduce the arm to that extent as we suggested, then put it on one of those rolls that we mentioned earlier or place it onto another roll that is easily accessible for you.
E aprop ratz aquel que roman en le os de asperitat e de scorsas menudas.	 Put a strip around the arm to prevent further swelling and redness.
E cum le os es reduzit, e aprop la reduccio le malaute atroba dolor vehement ledent, lahoras sapias que le os no es retornat al sieu loc natural; e adonc fay aquo quar tu confereyses al malaute gran juvament.	 Once the arm has been reduced and you apply the reduction ointment to the swelling and redness, doctors will know that it is too late to return to its natural location unless they act very quickly.
Cum es complida la tua restauracio la qual fas al os, e lahoras submergeys drap en vi stiptic negre, e propriament si es en estiu, e no pauses sobre la plagua cerot ni autre causa en la qual sia oli, per so que no fassa en lu accidir poyredura e corropcio.	 Once your restoration is complete and you have covered the arm with a black strip of cloth as well as in summer or if it is not in winter and does not touch any surface that may cause oil, then prevent its sticking to the wall by placing something under it to hold it down.
E aprop aministra stelas en la hora del tieu compliment de la restauracio de l’os, e layssa la plagua descuberta enayssi que inscidas le trauc am forfexs e uses de envolucios segon la quantitat de la plagua.	 "When a hernia is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body and pain occurs in the feet, it is customary to call gout.
E guarda te am tota cautela que no strenhas la plagua am la fractura, quar motas veguadas an fayt aquo les fols metges, e fero accidir sobre les sieus malautes mort o malautia corrodent o zuthement, so es sania.	 "Please be very careful not to stretch the hernia while it is still broken; otherwise, if it occurs at a crucial time or in an inappropriate place, such as during a fight or argument, it may lead to injury.
E si la tieua strictura leugiera, molli, diversa de la strictura de las autras fracturas.	 "If the same tightness of joints occurs with the same frequency and in similar places as joint fractures do.
E si la plagua es gran o es plagua mala, e temes sobre aquel alcus accidentz mals les quals havem recomtatz, e atrobas dolor en le loc, lahoras no cove que pauses sobre aquel astelas, mays fay ad aquel envolucio de draps durs en loc de stelas e strenh lu am aquelas.	 "If the hernia is large or painful and you are concerned about accidents that might occur and feel pain in the area, do not leave it uncovered, place a hard dressing over the incision to prevent infection.
E cum aprop un dia o dos vezes ja la plagua comensar, que en lu sia engendrat brac, lahoras tu osta desus le drap le qual havias pausat sobre aquel am vi, e aprop aministra calguas, enguentz am les quals de nostra constuma es que mediquem las plaguas, ayssi cum enguentz tetrafarmacon e semblantz ad aquel.	 "If you have already applied the dressing once or twice and it comes off easily, place a second dressing on top of the one that was previously placed over the area where it came off from, and apply cold water every few hours as recommended by our custom.
E conveneys a tu que deslias le liament e considera la plagua en quascun dia mati e vespre entro que sia consolidada e fermada, e cove que·l membre sia preparat en tal manieyra que la poyredura corra de lu a las partidas dejos am facilitat.	 "You should gently remove the dressing and consider the hernia to be stable and healed when it is solid and firm, and make sure that the member is prepared in such a way that any protrusion will not occur through the incision.
si a la plagua passan motz dias, e no es consolidada ni es abscindit de lu le brac, lahoras sapias que aqui so satagias de las petitas per que cove enquieras la plagua am tenta.	 When the plague passes through days and is neither consolidated nor removed from the body, doctors are aware of it coming to an end in a short time
E de aquelas satagias aquelas que so separadas remau e extratz, aquelas que de lor no so separadas e pongen le membre e fan accidir dolor, perforsa te a inscidir aquelas segon que a tu aquo es possibla.	 Those who are separated and retracted from there or not separated and penetrate the member cause pain to perform a sharp incision those for whom it is possible
E si accideys a la plagua zuchem o eluchen, so es stiomenios, o autra specia de corrupcio e de putrefaccio, lahoras cove que pauses a quada un de aquels am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio del qual es precedida narracio en le sieu capitol.	 If the plague comes or goes away, it is temporary, or another kind of corruption and putrefaction, doctors know that it will end in due time.
E de aquo en le qual cove que stia lo mieu sermo e tu fassas present la tua pessa: quan os gros es trincat, emineys sobre le membre ayssi cum le os de la coyssa e del ajutori e semblantz ad aquels dels membres grans, e que no presumas atraccio de lu, ni la extraccio de lu quar motas veguadas accideys per aquo la mort; habantz layssa aquel entro que poyresca, quar fort leu cayra per si aprop xx dias o xxx; e lahoras cura la plagua si a tu es vist, e si no layssa aquela.	 When the plague strikes you and your legs are numb, then lie on your back with your knees drawn up to your chest, like this for large limbs, without drawing attention to it or removing it as long as nothing comes out of it, doctors will treat it accordingly if they find it, but otherwise let them pass.
Capitol .xx.	 The plague capital
De la curacio de nodacio que accideys en le vestigi de alcuna fractura.	 Treatment for the injury
Motas veguadas accideys aquesta nodacio en le vestigi de sanacio de fractura, e majorment que es prop de las juncturas, e es orrasada per lu la figura del membre; e fort leu prohibeys le membre de la sua operacio natural.	 Treatment for the injury
Adonc considera si la nodacio es recent e aministra en aquela medicinas que han stipticat ayssi co es aloen, e enses, e mira, e sercacollo, e acrassia, e semblantz ad aquels; enayssi que prenguas de aquela alcunas o totas, e comfesiys aquelas am vi stiptic, o am album de huou, o am vi agre, e pausa aquela sobre la nodacio en estopa, e constringeys aquelas sobre lu per bona constriccio.	 When the bowel obstruction is recent and supplied with those medicines that have been prescribed as well, look at them, listen to their murmur, and pay attention to their appearance; see if they are from one source or many sources, examine their consistency, odor, color, and size; consider whether you should take them all together, mix them in a bowl of water, swallow them all down, pause before swallowing them into the throat, and ensure that there is no obstruction for the food to pass through.
E leyssa extrictura que no deslies aquela per motz dias; e aprop deslia aquela e itera autra, entro que sia remauguda la nodacio; o strenh sobre aquela lamina de plom descentment, quar plom ha proprietat de remaure tot aquo que es imflat en les membres.	 In case you suspect a blockage from the esophagus, do not force it down days later; instead, take it and try another one after some time. If the obstruction is still present, tighten the flap of the throat gently, so that the obstruction may be eased out.
Mays si nodacio ja es en peyra convertida e streyta es e nessessitat provoca a ostar aquela coytadament, e lahoras scindeys aquela per la partida pus sobirana de lu, e inscideys la superfluitat e eminent, o ratz aquela am alcus rezoris entro que sia remauguda; e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	 If the obstruction is in your throat and it needs to be removed immediately, have a servant take it out gently from under your chin, without causing any injury or pain to you, and remove any excess fluids that may cause harm.
Capitol .xxi.	 Chapter 21
De restauracio de fractura quan es restaurada e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul no segon la sieua natura.	 When restoring a fracture, it is important to approach the healing process gently and allow nature to take its course.
Quan fractura de os es restaurada, e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul, lahoras aquo no es fayt sino per motas causas: de las quals la una es multitut de solucio del liament e de la liguacio de lu fayta no segon que cove; o per superfluitat de strictura dels liamentz entro que·l nutriment sia prohibit correr al membre; o per multitut de embrocaccio superflua; o per movement superfluent no en la sua hora; o per pauquesa de sanc en le cors del malaute e per debelitat de lu.	 When restoring a fracture, there are several causes to consider: one is excessive tightness of the ligaments and joints that may prevent further healing or restrict mobility in some way; another cause could be excessive fluid restriction which prevents food from passing through the member; another could be excess lubrication; yet another could be unnecessary movement during the healing process. Finally, a lack of pain relief and weakness in the patient's chest can also hinder the recovery
E curacio de aquo es dar a mengar al malaute e far le cor de lu tendre entro que·l sanc sia multiplicat en lu; e aministra banh; e entromet gaug e leticia sobre lu.	 "You have to carefully apply this medication on the patient, and it should be rubbed into their chest, making sure that the amount of it is distributed evenly.
E aprop pausa pegua sobre le membre, per so que la pegua atire a lu mot nutriment, o continua embrocacio de lu am aygua tebeza, entro que·l nutriment corr e retorne a la sua figura natural.	 "Place the pillow over their member to prevent any movement that could interfere with nourishment or continued application of medication, returning it to its normal shape.
Capitol .xxii.	 Chapter xxii
De curacio dels osses trincatz quan so restauratz tortuozament e prohibeys la operacio de lor de aquo que cove.	 "When bones are broken and it is necessary to restore them, they must be forbidden from undergoing further operations of that kind.
Quan accideys al membre ja restaurat aprop la sanacio de lu de tortuositat e eminencia al os trincat e nodacio, e es per aquo fededa de forma del membre, mays empero le membre no es prohibit de la sieua operacio natural, lahora no cove que tu recipias la paraula de aquel que exsistima aquel membre sia de novel trincat.	 "When a member has already been restored to health from its injury and strength returned to the broken bone, it is allowed for that member to undergo its normal operation. However, one must not allow another member of an entirely new broken bone.
Mays ja so statz motz fols metges e restauradors les quals han fayt aquo en nostra tera; e aquesta operacio es mot vituperable perduzent a gran temor le senhal de la qual es mortal.	 "The physicians and restorers who have done this in our time, may their practice be cursed with great fear of that kind which is fatal.
Mays si claudicacio e nodacio son recentz, lahoras cove que sian enbrocatz am aygua tebeza en la qual so coytas erbas mollificantz, ayssi cum son fuelas de altea e razitz de lu, e mellilot, e semblantz ad aquels; e sia fayt a lu emplastre am emplastre mollificatio ayssi cum dyallaquilon ben fayt; o que sia preza mucillage de razit de altea e sia contucida am gray de gualina o am oli de cirami, e sia emplastrat am aquel; o que sian prezes figuas grassas e sian trissadas am fems de colom, e semblantz ad aquels de las medicinas que son nompnadas amermans consolidacio.	 "When recent claudication or nodication occurs, it is customary to bind the affected member with a damp towel in order to soften and soothe them gently; as well as apply warmth from above and below, and also have those placed on their belly and chest respectively; and put it on that place too.
E alcunas vetz es dissolvuda am assidua fricacio leugiera que sia am las mas humidas, e sia administrat movement del membre a tota partida en totas horas.	 Some veins are dissolved by cold fluids that run through the most humid parts of the body and move throughout it during all hours.
Mays si tortuositat ja es anada denant e es fayta fort e convertida es en peyra e provocada es necessitat a curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que sia le pus desus cecsat e la continuacio del os sia dissolvut, e sia inscidit aquo que superflueys de nodacio de aquel meteys am le os am inscissoris subtils, e sia aministrada facilitat en aquel am sollicitut e studi.	 The tortuous veins become enlarged and converted into ulcers when necessary care is not taken to treat them promptly. They are dissolved if the ulcer is not treated, and they may be accompanied by a discharge of fine matter from subtle pores, causing discomfort in that area.
Capitol .xxiii.	 The [section/chapter] thirty-three (33)
De sermo en dislocacio.	 This is the beginning of a sermon on dislocation.
Dislocacio es eyssiment de alcuna de las juncturas del sieu loc, per que es prohibida de movement, e es orrezada la figura del membre, e fa venir sobre le malaute dolors e lesios grans.	 Dislocation is the destruction of some of the joints in that location so as to prevent motion, causing a lump on the member and bringing about great pains and injuries.
Donc quan accideys ad alcu dislocacio, lahoras cove tantost perforsar que sia reduzit, e no tarde aquela reduzir, quar si es tardada, le loc es apostemat e fort leu am aquo es fayta dificil la reduccio de dislocaccio.	 Therefore when dislocation occurs, doctors must make every effort to reduce it as soon as possible and not let time pass by without reducing the dislocation lest it be difficult later on for that reduction of dislocation to occur.
E per aysso no cove que sia maugut ni stendut en la hora de la apostemacio, quar motas veguadas fa venir spasme e dolors ledentz.	 And thus do not let it be that the reduction is done in haste and without care lest spasms and pains follow.
Mays quan aquo accideys, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la flaubotomia del malaute, e aprop sia layssat entro que repause le apostema; e aprop le membre sia embrocat am aygua cauda e oli, e aprop sia reduzit am facilitat.	 When that occurs, doctors should apply to the patient a cure for gout, and also place something moist between their legs to keep them moist, and also reduce it with ease.
E tot membre sia curat am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra en son loc.	 When each part of the body has been infiltrated by cold humors causing joint pain, especially in the feet, it is commonly known as gout among doctors
E yeu ja e ordenatz les capitols de dislocacio segon que es precedit en fractura; de la partida del cos pus sobirana entro a la partida pus dejos.	 You already opened up space between the patient's thighs, placed cushions underneath them, another servant on their legs and another on their chest holding onto their hands.
Capitol .xxiiii.	 The twelfth chapter.
De curacio de dislocacio de la mandibula dejos.	 Care for dislocation of the mandible (lower jaw).
So dislocadas las doas mandibulas si no tart; e la dislocacio de amdos es fayta segon una de dos manieyras: que o son remaugudas de lurs locs per pauca remocio, e so mollificadas un petit; o so dislocadas per entiera dislocacio e complida, entro que sian mollificadas a la partida de la junctura entro que corro saliva del malaute e que no puesca tenir aquela ni puesca claure la sua boca, e la lengua de lu sia envolopada en sa paraula.	 If the lower jaw is dislocated and cannot be returned to its place with a slight force or by removing a small part of it, then it must be separated further so that saliva does not come out; if after separation from the mouth, tongue must still be covered inside the mouth.
Mays quan la dislocacio de lu es pauca, lahoras en las majors disposicios retorna per si an pauca causa.	 When dislocation is slight, doctors return to their original position with a small force.
Mays si la dislocacio es entiera e complida, lahoras cove que sia administrada reduccio de lu leugierament, e no sia tardada de tot.	 If the dislocation is complete and complicated, then it must be reduced immediately by skilled surgeons who will not wait for too long
E es que·l ministre tengua le cap del malaute, e entrometa lo metge le dit pous de la una sieua ma en la razit de la dislocacio de la mandibula dedintz la boca de lu, si la dislocacio es de la una part; o que entrometa les sieus dos pouzes ensemps, si la dislocacio es de doas partz, e les autres ditz de las mas de lu sian defora am les quals enguale; e comanda al malaute que cesse las suas mandibulas e absolva aquelas anar de quascuna partida; e le metge engualhe la mandibula e enpellisca la mandibula entro que retorne al sieu loc.	 The minister holds the patient's head, and the surgeon puts their thumb in the mouth to control it if there is only one dislocation or both thumbs inside as long as they are able to hold them properly; then the surgeon places the mandible back into its place.
E si dificil es la reducio de lu, e majorment si amdos las mandibulas so essemps dislocadas, lahoras aministra evoporacio am aygua cauda e oli, entro que sia fayta leugiera la reduccio de amdos e no tardes la reduccio de amdos de tot, ayssi quo havem dit.	 When it is difficult to reduce them, and especially if the jaws are very loose or dislocated, the doctor will administer a solution of water and oil into their mouth, so that they can swallow the reduction easily without difficulty
E donc cum retornam e so engualadas, e es clausa la boca del malaute e no es mollificada, lahoras pausa sobre aquelas polvils de drap am cerot, e sia fayt de cera e oli rozat; e aprop sia liat am facilitat am liamens mols.	 Once the jaws are returned and aligned as much as possible, do not open the patient's mouth too wide, the doctor will put a cloth soaked with oil onto them to facilitate swallowing the reduction gently.
E sia le dormir del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e·l cap de lu sia stant entre dos aurelhes, per so que no maugue aquel a la partida dreyta ni a la sinistra; e no li fassas per forsa masteguar alcuna causa; habans la sieua vianda sia forbicio leon, entro que quan las dolors sian remaugudas e las mandibulas so nozadas, lahoras maugue aquo que vol.	 The patient should lie on their back with the head between two pillows to ensure that they cannot move suddenly or to one side without being guided; have a pillow placed under their chin as well, for comfort and support.
E aquo sia aministrat am facilita, e no trebalhe sobre la apercio de la boca deves la comestio e beure e ocitatio, entro que la mandibula sia nozada e sanada.	 This is when it has been administered easily and the jaws are in good condition.
E si es dificil la reduccio de duas mandibulas quan so dislocadas en alcuna hora e no so convertidas als lors locs, lahoras motas veguadas accideysso febres e soda assidua, e fort leu es alerguat le ventre del malaute, e fort leu e vomeys colera pura.	 If the reduction of both jaws is difficult when they are dislocated at any time and not converted to their correct position, doctors will administer a purge with hot water, salt water, and vinegar, as well as heat pads for belly, as well as heating pad for coldness and vomiting.
E quan tu vezes aquo, lahoras sapias que es perdicio; e motas veguadas mor aquel al qual accideys aquo en x dias.	 When you do this, the doctor will tell you that they have lost it; and if you are experiencing this for more than two days in a row, then you should consult with another doctor.
Capitol .xxv.	 "When pain arises from cold humors infiltrating each part of the body, as when it occurs in the feet.
De reduccio de la dislocacio de la furcula e de la extremitat del muscle.	 Translation: To reduce or prevent dislocation of the shoulder blade and extremity of the muscle.
Furcula no es dislocada del latz dedintz per la sua continuacio am le pietz; e alcunas veguadas es dislocada a la partida defora, e aquo es declarat al sentiment.	 Translation: The furcula does not dislocate from below due to its continuous contact with the chest; and some vertebrae are dislocated at the start of the process, which is known as the feeling of being lifted up
E la restauracio de lu es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos e extenda les sieus brasses.	 Translation: The restoration or healing of it involves placing the patient on their back and extending their limbs.
E aprop coarta le loc am la tua palma am fort coartacio, quar ela retornara.	 Translation: And if you tightly hold down the area with a strong grasp so that it returns.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre e pulvils e strenh aquela.	 Translation: Then place your hand over this surface and dust, and firmly press it down.
Mays la extremitat de aquel que siec le coyde e·s continuat am aquel, no es dislocada en alcun dia; lahoras cove que sia reduzida e engualhada segon que havem dit e segon que es a tu aparelhat.	 Translation: When the extremity has been cut open and continues with it without dislocation occurring on any day, then the pain is reduced or prevented from happening as you mentioned earlier and secondly when you hold down their hand.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre, e pulvils, e extrictura, e comanda al malaute adherir a trenquilitat e a repaus entro que sia sanat.	 Translation: Then place your hand over this surface and dust; press it firmly down and command the patient to adhere to tranquility and rest so that they feel well.
E am aquesta meteyssa curacio es reduzida la extremita del muscle quan es separada del sieu loc.	 Translation: The reduction in the pain of the muscle extremity occurs when it is separated from its location
Capitol .xxvi.	 "When the pain arises from excessive heat, as when it occurs in the feet.
De la reduccio de la dislocacio del muscle.	 Translation: To reduce or prevent dislocation of the muscle.
Sapias que·l muscle no es dislocat sino segon tres manieras, de las quals es la una que sia dislocat a la partida del titillic a la partida dejos.	 The first sentence translates to "The muscle is not dislocated but rather in three ways, one of which it may be dislocated at the beginning/start of the thread and another at the end.
E la segonda es que sia dislocat a la partida desus del muscle, e aquo es fayt tart; e no es dislocat a las partidas detras per la spalla; e no es dislocat a las partidas denant per les nervis.	 The second sentence translates to "And the second is that it may be dislocated at the start of the muscle, and this occurs frequently; but it is not dislocated at the back part by the shoulder; nor is it dislocated in front parts through nerves.
E majorment es dislocat e defora eyssit a las partidas dejos deves le titillic, e majorment en aquels dels quals las carns son paucas, leugierament es dislocat; mays en aquels en les quals so motas carns, es eyssit fora am dificultat.	 The last sentence translates to "And most of all it is dislocated at the start parts of the thread, and frequently occurs in those where there are few veins; however, when it happens in those where the fat cells are present, then it is very difficult.
E fort leu accideys ad alcus homes percussio o cazement, e le muscle de lu es apostemat de apostema caut, e es cujat per aquo que ja sia dislocat.	 The last sentence translates to "In the unfortunate case of a sudden impact or collision that is made directly on it, and if this has been dislocated then immediately tighten/clamp it.
Adonc cove que tu sproes aquo entro que estias sobre-sertetut de lu, e lahoras procesiscas en la curacio de lu.	 The last sentence translates to "And now that you are on top of the treatment for him/her, proceed in the care of them.
E es conoguda la dislocacio de lu quan es a las partidas dejos deves le titillic; per so que distingescas entre le muscle dislocat e·l muscle sa, quar tu atrobas entre aquels diversitat manifesta; e atrobas en le cap del muscle concavitat e dejos le titillic deves le tocament del cap del muscle ayssi quo un huou, e al malaute no pot redusir la sua ma a la sieua aurelha, ni maure aquela per totz movementz.	 The last sentence translates to "You can distinguish between the dislocated muscle and the normal one by feeling for these various manifestations; you place your finger in the head of the concave muscle at which point it must touch the chest hair below, so that a hand cannot reduce its size or stretch over all movements.
Si es dislocat deves le pietz o ensus, e tu lahoras atrobas manifest tocament, e no es amaguat.	 When joints are dislocated, place a cushion on them, and the pains will subside immediately, without any delay.
E de aquesta dislocacio es fayta leugiera reduccio quan es fresca e le malaute es enfant.	 The dislocation should be reduced as quickly as possible when it is fresh and the patient is young.
E la reduccio de lu es que·l ministre eleva la ma de lu a las partidas desus; e aprop pause les tieus pouses dejos le titillic de lu, e eleva la junctura am fortaleza en sus al sieu loc, e·l ministre eleva la ma de lu, e extenda aquela en sus; e aprop pausa aquela dejos quar ela retorna leugierament.	 The reduction is done by placing the hand of the patient on their chest, and holding them tightly with both hands while extending it above where it should be placed, the minister places his hand over it as well to prevent its return.
Mays si per aquo que havem dit no retorna, e so del comensament que accidic la dislocacio, motz dias, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia banhat en aygua cauda e sia aministrada enbrocacio que mollifique e liniesca ayssi cum si so coytz razitz de altea, e fenugrec, e melillot en aygua, e sia administrada.	 If what has been said does not return or if it is the beginning of a dislocation, then days should be avoided, and pain must be administered by breaking up with cold water, soothing and linifying so that cuts may heal quickly, making them smooth, while avoiding cuts from swelling, softening and melting in water.
E aprop le malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu dos e sia pausat dejos le titillic de lu espera de lana que sia engual entre levitat e strictura, e aprop le metge pause le sieu talo sobre la spera, e eleva le cap del muscle am vertut, e atire la ma del malaute per que no sia mauguda a las partidas dejos, e autre ministre tengua le cap del malaute, que no sia maugut a las partidas dejos, quar aquela tantost retorna al sieu loc.	 The patient is placed on their back with their feet elevated and the doctor holds their head in order to prevent it from falling while also lifting up their arm above where they want the joint reduced or stretched out.
E si voles, reduzeys aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu fassas esser prezent un home le qual sia pus lonc que·l malaute, e estia de la part de aquel latz, e entrometa le sieu muscle dejos le titillic del malaute e eleve le titillic de lu a las partidas desus entro que·l malaute sia suspendut en ayre, e autre ministre tire la ma del malaute de las partidas dejos del sieu ventre.	 If you want to reduce that joint with another method: and it is necessary for the patient's spouse to enter from the side of his buttocks into their abdomen, where they place a finger over the affected joint of the patient while supporting them above in order to hold the joint down.
Mays si le malaute es leugier, lahoras cove que am lu que autre causa sia suspenduda, per so que grave aquel, quar la dislocacio retorna tantost.	 When a patient lies down, pain occurs between their thighs, therefore holding it tightly prevents further dislocation of the joint.
E es reduzit eysament segon autra manieyra: e es que sia ficat en terra un fust lonc le cap del qual sia redon de figura, ayssi cum pilo de mortier, que no sia gros ni subtil, e aprop sia pausat dejos le malaute; pus que so pausatz sobre·l cap del fust draps leons, e·l malaute sia stant segon la longitut del fust, e aprop sia extenduda la ma de lu a las partidas dejos del autra part; e sia extendut le cos de lu del autre part am fortaleza, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	 Another way to reduce pain is by placing the patient's head on a cushion of appropriate size and shape, such as one with a pillow placed underneath it to prevent suffocation, so that their legs are positioned over it; then extend both arms from the other part of the body towards where the joint should return.
E si es dificil reduccio de lu per totas las causas que havem ditas, lahoras usa de aquesta cura: e es que tu prenguas un fust la quantitat del qual sia en le lonc de dos brasses, e latitut de aquel sia de quatre ditz, e la grossetut de lu sia aleujat en le preon del tittilic segon aquesta forma:	 If it is difficult to reduce pain due to all the causes mentioned earlier, then doctors use this treatment: and take a cushion that has a length of two fists (approximately 14 inches or about half a meter), and its height should be four times as long.
E aprop sobre le cap redon sian liatz drap leons per so que·l fust no ledesca le malaute.	 Make sure the cushion covers their head to prevent it from slipping off.
E aprop sia pausat dejos le titillic del malaute, e sia extenduda la ma o le bras sobre·l fust entro a las partidas dejos, e sia liat le fust sobre le adjutori e le bras e la extremitat de la ma.	 Then place the cushion over their chest and put one arm on top of it to rest both arms there, covering the area between them with another hand or finger placed at its edge as well.
Aprop sia pausat le bras sobre un scalo de scala segon la latitut, e la ma sia extenduda a las partidas dejos, e l’autre cos sia suspendut de l’autre part, quar la junctura intra tantost.	 Then place both arms on top of each other at the height specified and put one arm or finger between them as well to hold it in place securely.
E cum le intrament de lu es complit segon quascuna maniera que es a tu possibla, e lahoras cove que tu pauses dejos le titillic spera de lana de engual quantitat; e aprop pauza emplastre perparat de polvera de moli am enses e album de huou sobre tot le muscle, ayssi quo es revolvut desus, e aprop strenh dejos le titillic am strictura decent; e le liament sia revolvut sobre le emplastre, e la ma de lu sia annectida al col de lu, e sia leyssat, e no sia mauguda la ma de lu per vii dias.	 The first sentence translates to: With the complete disintegration of each one in every possible manner that suits you, and after pausing, place a pillow over them as much as you want; and prepare for preventing from the pole of molly from this, and also the album on top of everything muscle, so it will be revolved by them, and tie up the leg of him to the column of him, and leave it, but not to hurt the leg of him per seven days.
E cove que sia pausada la vianda del malaute pauca, entro que·l membre sia confortat, quar es pus leugier a la sanacio de lu.	 After pausing briefly with the member of patient in comfort, once it is healed, you will guide him to the treatment of his illness.
E aprop la vianda sia donada major aprop vii o v e sia exercitat un movement; e donc si es fermat e no es mollificat, lahoras ja es sanat.	 Give the bandage a big one or two, and exercise it with some movements; if it is tight but not loose, then doctors have already done so
Mays si la junctura es dislocada motas veguadas per humiditat que accideys a lu o per autra causa, lahoras cove que en aquela sia administrat cauteri am tres traucs, segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri.	 If the joint is dislocated due to heat or another cause, then it should be treated with three cuts, after which a dressing of cautery will be applied in its capital
E si tot aysso es fayt e aprop vii dias es desliat le liament e la junctura no es fermada, e le emplastre e la strictura son reduzitz sobre lu alcunas veguadas, e no es fermada e catz e no pot elevar aquel bras a las partidas desus, lahoras sapias que·ls nervis de lu, les quals so al cap del muscle, ja so inscizes o extendutz o mollificatz, e sapia que la junctura nul temps no sira ficada en loc sieu.	 If all this is done and the joint and ligament are not tight, then loose them gradually over time, do not tighten it too much or make it tight; otherwise, you will know that the nerves of him, which are at the top of the muscle, will be injured, crushed or elongated, and may not be fixed in place.
De la dislocacio de aquela qu’es fayta deves le pietz e la mamilha o las partidas detras, la reduccio es fayta am impulcio e extencio am las mas, entro que retorne.	 "From the dislocation of that which you have spread open to release the bowels and buttocks or behind the legs, reduction is necessary with a swift impulse so that it returns.
E sia administrada en aquela l’autra strictura, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	 "Then apply ointment on the other restriction, and cure this one to be healed.
E si accideys aprop la sanacio gravitat en le membre e tarditat en le movement de lu, lahoras le malaute uze de banh motas veguadas entro que aquela gravitat sia alleujada e que retorne a la natura de lu primiera.	 "And if you see the swelling of the member and delay in its movement, then apply lotion to reduce swelling and restore back to normal.
Capitol .xxvii.	 This is likely referring to Chapter 27 of a larger work.
De curacio de dislocacio del coyde.	 "For the treatment of dislocation.
Sapias que la junctura del coyde es dislocada am difficultat e semblantment retorna am difficultat; e aquela es dislocada a totas partidas, e majorment a la partida denant a la partida detras, e la dislocacio de lu no es amaguada a tu quar es cazent dejos le vezement o dejos le tocament segon qualque figura sia dislocat, e quan ajustes le coyde disloguat am le sa, aquo es a tu declarat manifestament, quar la junctura es concavada e no pot doblar le bras, ni tocar am aquel le sieu muscle.	 "The joint of the thigh is dislocated with great difficulty and returns to greater difficulty; when it is dislocated on both sides, mostly at the front side as behind, and its dislocation cannot be healed by touch or movement because this joint is concave and cannot bend the arms, nor touch against that muscle.
E cove que·t coytes, e reduzescas la dislocacio tantost denant que vengua a lu apostema caut, quar si ve a lu apostema caut, dificil es la reduccio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot; e majorment quan es a las partidas detras, quar pus mala es de totas las autras specias de dislocacio, e de major dolor, e motas veguadas deyssen am aquela la mort.	 "And you say that the dislocation must be reduced as soon as possible to prevent further complications such as burns and frostbite; when it is a cauterized dislocation, if there are, difficult reduction of the joint occurs, and great pain occurs with all other types of dislocations, and many cases death.
E la restauracio de lu, quan es aquela que es possibla reduzir, es que la ma de lu sia extenduda am doas mas, e le bras de lu sia expandut, e las mas del metge sian sobre le coyde e dejos lu, e el empellisca la junctura am les pouzes de las suas mas ensemps, o am la razit de la sua palma entro que torne en son loc.	 When the restoration is possible to reduce it, extend the leg with both legs wide apart and expand your arms, so that the surgeon can see clearly inside the joints or the palm of his hand before turning back into place
Mays si la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras retorna ayssi que dobla la ma am la sua ma, entro que percuta le coyde am la razit de la sua palma.	 When dislocation occurs on the parts of the day and night, then return to double spread your arms as wide as possible inside so that you can cut into the palm area
E si la dislocacio no obezeys a la reduccio, lahoras aministra vehement extencio e mot fort.	 If dislocation cannot be reduced at all, then administer violent stretching and strong massage.
E es que dos ministres extendan le bras, e tenguan aquel eyssament dos ministres per so que no sia remaugut deves la extencio.	 And two servants extend your arms as wide as possible to prevent you from being stretched out.
E aprop sia revolvut le bras deves tota part, pus que es envolopat drap doblat lonc sobre la ma de lu, o liament.	 Then return your arms to their full range of motion, and place a folded blanket on the leg as well.
E quant le metge toca la junctura am la sua ma, unte aquela am alcun oli per so que aquo sia aquelas causas las quals ajudan en lubricitat de la junctura am facilitat; e aprop empellesca la junctura am empulcio vehement entro que retorne.	 When the surgeon touches your hand at the joint, then apply something to make it slippery and easy for him/her to move around inside that joint quickly and return it back in place.
E aprop la reduccio de lu cove que sia pausat sobre aquela empastre en le qual sia stipticitat e excequacio am album de huou, e sia extrenhut am strictura descent, e·l bras sia suspendut del col, e sia layssat per alcus dias.	 Then place the reduction on a cushion which has stiffness and looseness, stretch it with firm pressure, and hold your arm at an angle for some time.
E aprop sia desliat; e donc si la junctura es formada en le sieu loc, lahoras tu deslia le liament de lu e layssa aquela.	 When a joint is formed in that place, doctors remove the ligament of it and arrange it like this
E si vezas la junctura no be strenher, lahoras tu itera le emplastre e·l liament, e layssa aquela per alcus dias entro que sia extrenhuda; e aprop deslia aquela.	 If the joint is not too stiff, doctors put the splint and ligament together again, arranging them so that they are together for several days until it hardens
Mays si accideys a lu gravitat aprop la reduccio de la junctura, e la disposicio de lu es en movement, lahoras aministra humectacio en banh e fricacio subtil, e comprecio, entro que sia aleujat; o pausa sobre la junctura aleliati, so es coyssa de moto grassa; e aprop sia liada, e layssa aquela sobre le os le dia e la nueyt.	 If the joint is unstable and mobility is reduced, doctors administer a humectant (a substance that holds water) and lubricant (subtle friction reducer), so that it becomes loose again; or to pause the joint from excessive motion with a splint, as may be necessary; and arrange it in such a way that it can move freely when needed.
E aprop osta aquela, e met aquel en banh; e quan suza, lahoras tu fregua la junctura am fricacio temprada, e aprop itera sobre aquela aleliati, so es ronhonal de moto, una veguada, e la segonda, e la .iii.a.,	 Then apply the splint on top of that, and when you put it back in place, doctors will gently rub or apply a lubricant to the joint again to make sure there is no excessive friction, ensuring free motion one by one.
am intrament de banh, entro que sia linit.	 And if necessary, for example, as soon as the patient's condition improves
E si voles, pausa sobre aquela fenda de vaca humida e scalfada am boder e stren sobre aquel; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas, quar aquela es humida e reduzeys a la sua disposicio.	 If you want to, pause over the wet and cold bandage covering it, and then put that on top of him; and in this way arrange things so that he is moistened but does not get too stiff.
Capitol .xxviii.	 The end of the medical treatise
De curacio de dislocacio de malassen, so es de la junctura que es entre·l bras e la ma.	 When a dislocation occurs in one of the joints between the arm and hand, it can cause pain.
Malassen de la ma alcunas vetz es deslocada, e la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es leugiera, e·l contrari es de las autras juncturas, mays empero cove que sia velocitat en la reduccio de lu en la hora en la qual es deslocada, denant que le loc sia apostemat o que accida en lu apostema caut.	 To reduce the dislocation of the arm, it is necessary to quickly reduce it at the time of displacement, or else risk having it reappear if left unattended with a band-aid applied immediately
E la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es que tu pauses la junctura de la ma del malaute sobre una taula e le ministre extenda la ma de aquel, e le metge pause la sua ma o o la sua palma sobre la iminencia de la junctura, e empellisca aquela entro que retorne al sieu loc.	 To reduce the dislocation of the arm, you put the patient's hand on a table and have the surgeon extend their hand to that one, then place your own hand or palm over the imminent joint and press it into position so that it returns to its original location.
Mays empero cove que sia considerat si la palma ja es ostada al ventre de la ma, lahoras le malaute pause le dos de la sua ma sobre una taula deves la extencio e la reduccio; e si la dislocacio es precedent deves le dos de la ma, lahoras sia la posicio de la ma de aquel intrinicequement sobre la taula, per so que la ma del metge caja sobre aquela iminencia de la junctura.	 If the palm is already on the belly of the arm, then have the patient put their hand down flat on a table and reduce it; but if there has been an earlier dislocation you must place their hand in position within reach of the surgeon's hand so that they can press into its immediate location.
E donc si retorna tantost, bon es; e sino, lahoras strenh aquela am empastre cedant le apostema e layssa aquel; e no iteres aquo, quar sino, no soferta ni no podes sobre la reduccio de lu pus que passan a lu dias.	 If you return here, good; if not, then stretch the arm and let go of that one; otherwise do nothing else until after this action has been completed.
Mays empero la junctura roman segon la sua tortuositat; e no notz al malaute alcuna causa, sino que la ma es mollificada e no pot strenher alcuna causa; lahoras sapias que les nervis son trincatz o trissatz, e lahoras no es engen en lu sino que sia strenhuda am cauteri prop le cazament de lu e fort leu aquo confereys alcuna causa.	 The joint should be stretched as much as possible without causing the patient any pain; if there are no nerves to stretch or they are not flexible, then it is best to let them rest and have a cure applied gently at this time in case of an injury occurring
Donc cum malassem es retornada, lahoras pausa sobre lu empastre le qual havem recomtat, e sia layssat e strenhut per v dias; e aprop sia desliat e sia layssat e la ma de lu sia excercitada.	 When the ailment returns, the healer will lie on top of it as recommended, and work with all their might for days; and afterwards, the limb should be straightened out and worked properly
Mays si le movement de lu es ostat e accideys en lu alcuna gravitat, lahoras leniys aquela am aygua cauda e am fricacio alcunas veguadas, entro que sia alleujat.	 If the movement of that limb occurs and is accompanied by severe weight loss or excessive swelling, then the healer will try to reduce it as much as possible.
Capitol .xxix.	 The thirtieth chapter.
De la curacio de dislocacio dels ditz.	 Of joint dislocation care.
Alcunas veguadas so dislocatz les ditz a tota partida.	 When the swelling of that limb is so severe as to cause joint dislocation, then the healer will treat it in all its parts.
E quan es dislocat alcun dit de aquels al dos de la palma o al ventre de lu, lahoras sten le dit e impelleys la dislocacio de lu am les tieus pouses, entro que retorne.	 When one or more of the joints in that limb is dislocated at its top (the fingers) or inside it (belly), then the healer will bind up the joint and prevent its dislocation by supporting both extremities as mentioned above, until it returns to normal
E aprop sostenta le cap del dit, e suspen aquel deves la part a la qual es dislocat, e layssa aquel per dos dias.	 The healer will hold onto the top of the joint and suspend that portion in which it is dislocated, and then apply it for two days.
E aprop suspen aquel e exten aquel entro que dreyt sia engualhat en aquel sieu dia.	 They will hold that part as mentioned above until its condition improves on that same day.
E quan sira noyt, lia aquel segon aquela narracio, e no cesses desliar aquel en le dia e exercitar am movement, e lia aquel en la noyt; e fay aquo per alcus dias entro que sia streyt.	 If after that, you then describe the next situation and cease supporting it on that day and exercise its movement, and let it be in use for those days until it is straight.
E fay semblant am aquo, si es dislocat al ventre de la ma, e lia aquel ad aquela partida e fay am aquo la tieua primiera operacio, entro que sia sanat.	 If that is the case of dislocation in a finger or hand, and they do this procedure for each situation until it is healed.
E semblantment fay am aquo quan es dislocat a las autres partidas.	 When you are dislocated at other joints.
Capitol .xxx.	 You have provided a very incomplete translation, but I can make some educated guesses based on the Latin and Spanish words used in your text. The phrase "e semblantment fay am aquo" could be translated as "in a similar manner to this." However, without context or more information, it is difficult to provide an accurate translation for the entire sentence.
De la curacio de dislocacio dels spondils del dos.	 This would mean "The care of dislocation from the spine".
Quan accideys ad alcun dels spondils del dos o del col dislocacio complida, e so remaugutz motz spondils de lors locs, lahoras en aquela no es curacio, quar la mort se coyta al malaute.	 If any of the spine or collarbone is dislocated and becomes fixed, and it cannot be restored to its place, then pain occurs in that part of the body, which can lead to death for the patient.
E senhal de aquo es que la egestio del malaute es fora-eyssida ses voluntat, e no pot retenir aquela; e motas veguadas so mollificatz alcus membres de lu o doas cambas de lu o dos brasses de lu, o un de aquels; o es remaugut un spondil de son loc, quar motas veguadas es remaugut e motas veguadas es fayta la remocio de aquels a quatre partidas.	 The thing to remember here is that the exit of the patient's bowels is against their will, and it cannot be retained; furthermore, massaging the affected members or legs can prevent the intestines from coming out through them, or pressing on one of those could press the spine back into place.
Donc aquela ja es remauguda a las partidas detras e es nompnada gelbozitat.	 After that, it is said to be restored at the rear and is called "tailbone.
Mays la curacio de lu es que lahoras consideras si la gelbozitat accidey de puerissia, quar lahoras en aquela no es curacio ni de aquela no es sanacio de tot.	 The care of it is that if the tailbone injury occurs due to a disease or illness, then neither its care nor its health as a whole can be managed.
Mays en aquela que ve per cazement o per percussio o per semblant ad aquels, ja diyssero les Antics las manieras de curacio am sermo prolixs, del qual lo mays retorna am profieyt; mays yeu ja e abreujat de aquel del qual lo pauc escusa del trop de lu, per la mieua propinquitat a la entencio mieua exposicio, am la qual he aquo expausat et format ex instrument divers de aquel am le qual mostrero aquo e espausero aquel.	 If it is hit by hitting or striking or in any other way on those areas, then the ancient ways of care would be used which are very long and complex, from which may return to its profit; may you have already exhausted that for which little help was available through excessive use of it, due to our proximity to each other's exposure and because we have just explained this in a different way with an instrument like this.
E dic que en gelbosita que accideys de la partida denant en le pietz, no es engen ni sanacio de aquela; e semblantment en aquela que es fayta a dos latz.	 "If someone has pain in the chest area when lying down, it is neither healing nor soothing to that part; and similarly if one's gouty attacks are increased.
E de aquelas no es curada sino aquela que accideys en le dos propriament am aquo que yeu recomti.	 "And for those who have pain in the chest area, there is nothing to be done but what I mentioned earlier.
E es que·l malaute sia extendut sobre la sua cara sobre pug engual prop de paret, e sia extendut dejos lu esturment molh per so que no sia lidit le pietz de lu.	 "And the hernia is extended over her face towards the back of the head, and spread out to prevent the intestine from coming out.
E aprop un fust dreyt sia pausat, ficat en la terra en la extremitat del pug entorn le cap de lu, e autra fust en aviro les pes de lu en l’autra extremitat del pueg.	 "Place a cushion in front of her face near the back of her head, and another one on each foot next to her.
E·l ministre tengua le fust, e no sia fermat en fossa; e autre ministre tengua l’autre segon aquela forma.	 "The minister had the cushion but was not placed in a hole, and another minister had the other one in that way.
E aprop envolopa sobre le cap del malaute e dejos les titillic liamen leon ferm; e exten la extremitat del liamel al fust le qual es deves le cap de lu, e lia aquel en lu; e aprop strenh l’autre liament sobre las ancas de lu les denols de lu, e deves las cambas de lu; e aprop ajusta totz les liamentz e lia aquels en l’autre fust le qual es deves les pes de lu.	 "Wrap the cushion around the patient's head and place them firmly on each side of their neck, and stretch those to the cushion that covers the back of your head as well, and arrange the others over the thighs and buttocks, holding them tightly.
E aprop le ministre cascu extenda le liament a la partida del fust, e no sian remaugutz les dos fustz e les liamentz dels sieus locs en les quals son ficatz, mays empero no so fermatz ayssi cum havem dit.	 "The minister stretched the cushion to reach out and not tighten them on both sides of their locations where they were placed, but still firmly.
E le metge pause las suas palmas sobre le spondil am fortaleza entro que retorne, o que pause sobre aquela una taula, e aprop que ajuste sobre la taula les sieus pes entro que retorne.	 The doctor places his hands on the patient's back, firm and strong, so that they return or place them flat on a table, ensuring the patients' feet stay down while it returns.
Mays si no retorna per aquesta forma, lahoras pren una taula de la qual la latitut o la longitut sia en aviro de tres brassas, e cava en la paret de la qual havem dit que es prop le malaute un loc en le qual intre la extremitat de la taula.	 If this does not work, the doctor places a table where its length or width is three steps, and in the wall opposite to the patient there is a hole so that when you go through it from one end of the table to the other extremity
E aprop pausa la maytat de la taula sobre le spondilh, e·l metge pause les sieus pes sobre l’autre extremitat, e estrenha be entro que le spondil sia coartat e que retorne al sieu loc.	 The doctor places the mattress on the back and then the patient onto it, ensuring that they return to their original location.
E si tu voles, obre am torn le qual es revolvut am la ma; e es que tu fiques en terra deves le cap del malaute en le derier del pug dos fustz, la longitut dels quals sia d’un bras, e deves le cap de lu en le derier del pug eyssament dos fustz; e sia la longitut que es entre quascun fust un palm, e ja es fayt en quascun fust trauc en le qual corr torn, e quascun sia mot fermat en terra per so que no sia maugut.	 If you wish to do so, open a hole in the mattress where it rotates around your arm; and if you lie down on the ground with your head towards the back of the bed, place one hand at each end of the mattress such that they are both flat on the floor.
E sia mes un fust redon en le qual es le torn, e sia revolvut en les dos traucs dels dos fustz.	 And it is also important to note that when you open a hole in one side of the mattress and rotate around your arm as described above, ensure both holes are opened on each end of the mattress.
E en la extremitat de lu es un trauc en le qual es format le fust, la longueza del qual es un palm am aquo que es revolvut; e en les dos autres fustz es semblant de aquel.	 At one end of the mattress is a hole where it is shaped like your arm, its length being equal to that around which you rotate; and at the other two ends there are similar holes formed.
E aprop strenh les liamentz que has streyt en le pietz del malaute en le trau le qual es deves le cap de lu, e les liamentz que has streyts en las coyssas de lu en le torn le qual es deves les pes de lu.	 When you have stretched the linen that covers the chest of the patient and across the back where it should cover his head, tie them on both thighs to hold his legs, and tie them on her arms to keep his hands still.
E aprop deves quascun torn e stia un ministre que torssa le torn am la sua ma, e le metge engualhe le spondil segon que havem dit.	 You should put one hand around the patient's waist and hold it as if you were holding a pillow or cushion, while another doctor comes to check his spine after that was mentioned by the first doctor.
E aquesta es la forma del torn:	 The correct form is this:
E aprop pus que le spondil es retornat, e le loc es engualhat, lahoras cove que pauses empastre exciccatiu am album de huou, e aprop estopa; e aprop pause sobre le empastre astela de taula de la qual la latitut sia de tres ditz o enviro aquels, e la longitut de lu sia quantitat que prengua le loc de la gelbositat, e sobre la partida del spondil sa.	 After the spine is returned in place and a doctor comes to examine it closely, then apply pressure gently on the affected area with a warm compress soaked in vinegar or other suitable substance for pain relief, and then stop applying it and cover the sore area as shown below:
E aprop sia liat am liament le qual havem dit, e uze le malaute de nutriment subtil entro que sia sanat.	 After tying them on both thighs to hold his legs still, gently feed him nutritious food or a bland diet that is recommended by doctors for pain relief
E si roman alcuna iminencia en le loc en la fi de la sanacio, lahoras cove que sian aministradas medicinas que moilifico e liniscan am aministracio de la taula per lonc temps, la qual havem recomtada; e ja es aministrada en aquel loc lamina de plom.	 If there is no immediate threat to his life during the healing process and doctors recommend administering medicines that alleviate pain and can be administered over time from a table as recommended by them, it should also include taking medication orally at that location.
E alcunas veguadas accideys imminencia en le derier dels spondils del dos, e es cujat per aquela dislocacio; e es aquel os le qual ja imineys per que no cove que sia fayta prosompcio a lu am aquesta medicina, quar fort leu fara a tu accidir mort.	 Some vegetables may cause immediate pain in the back of the head and are recommended to be avoided because they can lead to severe complications if taken with this medicine, as it could prove fatal for you.
Capitol .xxxi.	 When a gout attack occurs in the feet
De curacio de anca dislocada.	 The dislocation or sprain has occurred.
Sapias que la junctura del ancha e la junctura del muscle no endeve sino dislocacio tant solament, e no accideys ad aquelas aquo que accideys a las autras juncturas de petita remocio e concavitat.	 The joints of the limbs and muscles are dislocated in only one place, not two places as occurs to smaller joints or cavities.
E la junctura de la ancha es dislocada segon quatre manieyras, quar es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, o a las partidas defora, o a las partidas denant, o a las partidas detras.	 The joint of the ankle is dislocated in four different places: it occurs behind the foot or forward on the foot or to one side and then the other side or diagonally across from front to back.
E majorment es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, e pauc a las partidas denant o a las partidas detras.	 Additionally, it is dislocated in the direction of the foot behind or forward on the foot but rarely at the side and diagonally across from front to back.
E senhal de la dislocacio de lu a las partidas de dintz es quar, quan tu ajustas la camba del malaute sana am la malaute, es pus longua e·l denolh es pus heminent que de la sana, e·l malaute no pot doblar le sieu pe deves le lenguonar, e es le loc que siec le lengonar apostemat de apostema caut, per so que·l cap de la coyssa ja es pervengut aqui.	 The dislocation of the joint at the back of the foot is four times when you adjust the cushion over the patient and the patient lies flat on their stomach; there will be pain as if the intestine had come out, and it's a sign that the hernia may not heal well enough or quickly.
E·l senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio es a las partidas defora, es que les accidentz de lu so contraris ad aquest accident.	 The indication of when dislocation occurs in the direction away from the foot is that the accidents caused by this type of injury are contrary to those occurring elsewhere.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas denant es quar expan la camba sieua segon compliment, mays empero no dobla aquela ses dolor que es en le denol, e si se perforsa ad anar e no pot sobre aquo a las partidas denant; e la urina de lu es retenguda e l’engonar de lu es apostemat, e deves la ambulacio de lu sobre le talo.	 The indication of when dislocation occurs in the direction forward on the foot is that the cushion will expand twice more than usual pain, but it may not relieve all of this pain and if necessary you must go to the direction forward and cannot return to where dislocation occurred; urine is retained and pain increases and you must take the patient to a hospital.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas detras es que no expande le denol, ni no puesca doblar aquel denant que doble le engonar, e la camba de lu es pus breva que l’autra, e l’engonar es mollificat, e·l cap de la coyssa es deves aquel loc.	 When a dislocation occurs behind the leg it is not allowed to straighten or bend that limb back; instead one servant will hold the knee firmly and another by its calf, making sure the calf is very soft so as not to be able to touch the ground.
Mays reduccio de las specias de aquesta dislocacio es que tu consideras, lahoras, si la dislocacio es vetusta et antiqua, que ja es anticada am le havent aquela aprop tu aministras reduccio de lu e roman segon la sua disposicio, lahoras no es en aquela curacio de tot; e adonc no cove que en aquela sia fayta prosompcio.	 In the case of a chronic dislocation that has already occurred and is not very severe but still painful, you must consider it to be necessary for the doctor to administer treatment as soon as possible, unless they find something else to treat first; otherwise, do nothing about treating it.
Mays en aquel del qual la dislocacio es recent, e es una de las quatre specias de dislocacio, lahoras te coyta ad aquo que volvas la junctura e extendas aquela a las partidas dedintz e a las partidas defora, e mau aquela a la dextra e sinistra, quar fort leu retorna e no indigeys de autra cura.	 If the dislocation is recent and one of the four types, you must have it examined to see if there are any fractures or dislocations in the joint itself or elsewhere, but do nothing else unless that examination shows another issue.
Mays, si no retorna en aquesta manieyra, lahoras cove que tu prepares ministre fort e extendas la camba de lu de la partida pus dejos, o am las suas mas, o am liament lo qual es liat sobre la camba desus le denol; e autre ministre extenda la ma de aquel desus enayssi que meta las suas mas dejos les titillics de lu; e aprop strenha am liament leon sobre la razit de la coyssa, e tengua autre ministre ters le extremitat del liament.	 If not, you should prepare the patient's bed very comfortably and extend their legs out as far as possible, or onto a support like pillows; another servant may also stretch their arms towards them if they are able to do so without causing pain, but make sure that nothing touches their chest directly. And have another servant keep an eye on the joint area itself, ensuring it is not twisted in any way, and also ensure another servant extends both of their extremities as far as possible.
E sia extencio de lu o de la partida dedintz a l’angonar a la partida de la furcula, o de la partida detras a la partida del dos.	 When pain occurs in the ribs or behind them?
E sia la extencio de totz aquels en una veguada entro que·l malaute sia elevat am le sieu cos de terra e que romangua pendent.	 It's when the patient lifts their leg to the knee, and they remain bent forward.
E aquesta specia de extencio es specia cominal a totas quatre.	 Yes, this special type of treatment is common in all four cases.
E donc si la dislocacio retorna am aquo que havem dit, sira bo; e sino, lahoras es necessari a tota specia aquo que dire de la propria curacio.	 If the dislocation returns to where we've said it is good; otherwise, pain will be necessary for another special type of treatment.
En la reduccio de lu propria, quan es dislocada, e la dislocacio es a las partidas dedintz, cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu latz sa; e aprop pausa les liamentz sobre la razit de la coyssa en aquel loc le qual entre le cap de la coyssa e·l loc que es dejos le langonar; e aprop exten le liament en sus de la part del angonar a la pus auta partida de la furcula.	 In the reduction of its own, when it is dislocated and it is at the joints between the ribs on one side, where the patient leans their head so that they can see; and place another ligature over the area below the neck to prevent the intestine from coming out in front of them.
E aprop autre ministre fort prengua les brasses de lu, e amerme le loc gros de la coyssa malaute e extenda a las partidas deforo per extencio vehement, quar aquela retorna en le sieu loc.	 Then place a strong minister on the patient's chest and tighten it firmly to hold the large cavity of the patient open and extend both legs forcefully towards the front so that this returns into its own location.
E aquesta specia es de pus leugiera curacio am la qual aquest membre es reduzit que las autres specias.	 This special treatment is more gentle than all the others for this member being reduced to these others.
Mays si es excusat sobre tu e no obezeys al entrament am aquesta specia de curacio de tot, lahoras cove que sian liatz les dos pes del malaute ensemps am liament fort, leugier, sobre amdos les talos e amdos les denols.	 I apologize for the late response and do not insist on entering into this special type of treatment with both feet firmly tied to a long board as well as around their arms.
E sia la longitut de quascun de son par la quantitat de quatre ditz, e sia la camba malaute extenduda mays que l’autre per quantitat de dos ditz.	 When one part of a limb is measured by its length to four digits and the other's measurement extends further than two digits,
E aprop le malaute sia suspendut sobre le cap del fust, e que sia en la mayso; e sia la longitut de lu de la terra la quantitat de dos brasses.	 The hernia is suspended over its top and to the side of it. And the length of the earth is measured by two breasts.
E aprop comanda a un jove fort que minuesca le cap de la coyssa, e sia suspendut am le malaute autre jove, e l’autre jove minuent la coysa am fortaleza empellesca, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	 The strong youth commands the top of the hernia to be suspended and also commands another youth to hold it down with force, so that the joint returns to its original place quickly.
Mays en la reducio propria, quan es dislocacio a la partida defora, cove que·l malaute jaga sobre pug segon que havem recomtat en le havent gelbozitat; e sia strenhut le liament sobre la camba malauta propriament e sobre le pietz de lu.	 When the dislocation occurs outside of the joint, he commands that the hernia be suspended with a second rope as recommended by the physician, and also tightens both ropes on the thigh of the patient.
E aprop dos fustz sian pausatz, la un als pes de lu, e l’autre al cap; e aprop sian pausatz fustz ajustatz al mieg del pueg ficat sobre·l qual draps humitz sian envolopatz, per so que·l malaute no sia dampnajat per que·l fust sia entre las coyssas de lu, per que deves la extencio a las partidas dejos no sia atirat.	 He suspends two ropes to the back of him and one to his head; he suspends another rope between the thighs from where the dampening occurs, so that the hernia is not pulled in or out through these openings.
E aprop quascun ministre extenda a la sua part, e·l metge am la sua ma enguala la reduccio segon l’art.	 The minister extends his hand to him and the physician tightens it according to the art.
Donc, si obezeys a revercio, sira bo grandament; e sino, pausa sobre aquela diligentment e ayssi quo havem dit en gelbozitat per aquela engualment.	 Thus, if you want recovery is greatly desired and not, pause over it diligently as we have advised in the cautery for this reason.
Mays cove que·l malaute jagua sobre les sieus latz sa quetament.	 The patient lies on their back
E quan la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras cove que la camba sia extenduda leugierament, e es segon aquesta meteyssa narracio sobre pueg; e le metge pause la palma de la sua ma dreyta sobre·l langonar malaute, e aprop coarte aquel am l’autra ma, e am aquela coartacio pausa aquel extendut a las partidas dejos a la partida del denol.	 When the dislocation occurs on one of the lower limbs, doctors ask that the bed be elevated accordingly to prevent complications.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas detras, lahoras no cove que·l malaute sia extendut a las partidas dejos, e es elevat sobre la terra; habantz cove que sia pausat sobre causa dura, ayssi cum cove le eyssament si l’ancha de lu es dislocada a las partidas defora, segon aquo que havem dit del jasement de lu sobre dos anchas; e es sobre la sua cara e les liamentz sian extendutz, segon que havem dit, no ha guayre.	 If the dislocation is on one of the upper limbs, doctors ask that the patient be elevated on their side to prevent complications.
E cove que sia aministrada compressio am taula sobre le loc al qual yeys la junctura.	 Doctors administer compression therapy over the affected joint.
Donc cum la reducio es complida segon que cove — e·l senhal de la reduccio de lu no es amaguat a tu, e es que tu extendas del malaute doas cambas, e quan tu vezes aquelas enguals e le malaute extrenh la sieua camba e expandeys aquela ses excusacio, lahoras sapias que·l membre segon que cove es retornat — e lahoras tu ajusta doas coyssas e pausa empastre e extrenh am benda ayssi que la ancha no sia mauguda en alcuna de las partidas; e adheresca le malaute a repaus per tres dias o per quatre.	 Once the reduction is complete, ensure that both legs are extended and apply pressure to the affected joint with the heel of one hand. Then gently press down on the other thigh as well. If you notice any excoriation or pain during this process, doctors recommend placing a cushion between your fingers while applying pressure to prevent injury.
E aprop deslia le liament e l’empastre, e compara la una camba am l’autra.	 Ensure that both legs are extended and press down on the affected joint with one hand.
Lahoras, si vezas aquelas enguals en vustament, lahoras sapias que la dislocacio ja es fermada, e adonc layssa le malaute anar.	 Joints become inflamed when there is a blockage in circulation to them.
E si vezas alcuna causa de mollificacio, lahoras tu retorna e emplastra aquel, e extrenh aquel segon la tua primiera strectura, e layssa aquel en tres dias.	 If no cause of pain relief is found, the physician will return and retest after three days.
E aprop deslia aquel, e fay aquel tardar en ambulacio sobre quascu per alcus dias, entro que sia confortat.	 And then apply this remedy, taking care to do it quickly before any blisters occur, until the pain is relieved and comfort is felt.
Capitol .xxxii.	 Chapter 32 of a book?
De curacio de dislocacio del denolh.	 Treatment for joint inflammation.
Le denolh es dislocat segon tres manieyras, quar es dislocat a las partidas defora, e a las partidas dedintz, e a las partidas dejos mays a las partidas detras; e a las partidas denant no es dislocat.	 Joint dislocation is corrected after three months at the front, back and below, but not in front of the belly button.
E le senhal de dislocacio de lu es que comandes al malaute que aplique la sua camba am la coyssa; lahoras sapias que·l denol es dislocat.	 The treatment for dislocation is that you command the patient to apply his cushion on top of the thigh, and it will be corrected by him.
E la restauracio de totas las manieyras de lu es que fassas cezer le malaute dreyt, enayssi que ja extenda la sieua camba, si pot sobre aquo; adherir le tieu dos a la cara de lu, e pausa le pe de lu entre les tieus pes; e aprop fay adherir le denol de lu am las tuas palmas, e rete aquelas entre les tieus ditz sobre le denolh de lu am fortaleza, e autre ministre extenda le sieu pe entro que·l denol retorne a son loc.	 The restoration of all the fingers is to make the patient put his hands on top, and then extend his cushion if able; hold two fingers in front of him, place one finger between each thumb and pointer finger of his hand; and then apply his hand over the dislocation holding it firmly until it returns to its place.
E senhal de reddicio de lu es que la sua camba adharesca am la coyssa am levitat no-laboroza.	 The abdomen of the patient will be opened up, allowing the surgeon to see inside.
E aprop emplastra aquel e fay adhirir la camba am la coyssa, e aprop lia aquelas emsemps am una benda per tres dias o per quatre, e aprop deslia aquelas.	 The servant is placed between the thighs of the patient and stays in place for three or four days depending on the situation, then removed.
E no uze le malaute de ambulacio per alcus dias, entro que sia sanat e cofortat.	 The patient will be taken care of during their stay until they are healed and comfortable
Mays si la reduccio de lu a tu es excusada, lahoras aministra fort extencio am liamentz dels quals en la curacio de la hancha precedit narracio.	 If the reduction is excused, it means that the surgeon will provide extensive care during the recovery period from previous surgery.
Capitol .xxxiii.	 The end of this text
De la curacio de la dislocacio del talo.	 And for the treatment and healing of the dislocation
Le talo alcunas veguadas es remaugut per petita remocio, e alcunas veguadas es dislocat segon compliment, e la dislocacio de lu es fayta o a las partidas dedintz o a las partidas deforo.	 The toes are bent and straightened once more, and the dislocation of it will be done by hand or with forceps.
E le senhal de la dislocacio de lu es que vezes le talo imflat procedent a la partida a la qual es dislocat.	 It means that after the dislocation is made, the toes should straighten naturally to their previous position.
Mays la curacio de la remocio de lu es de leugiera reddicio, e es que sia extendut am facilitat am las mas e sia engualhat entro que retorne.	 The treatment for straightening of the leg is by using a straightener device, and it should be used as easily as possible until it returns to its original position.
Mays en la curacio de lu quan es dislocat segon compliment, cove que fasses cezer le malaute dreyt, e tengua aquel un ministre fort e valent de la partida detras del dos de aquel en le mieg loc de lu.	 When a dislocation occurs for the second time after straightening it, you should make sure to pull gently on the patient's arm behind them and keep applying force until the leg returns into place.
E aprop te tu am la tieua ma dreyta le pe de la pus sobirana part, e am la tua ma sinistra de la part pus dejos del pe en le loc de la cavilha.	 The first sentence translates to "Here you place your right hand on the lower part of the thigh and left hand on the upper part of the foot in the hollow below.
E aprop atira le pe a tu am la tua ma dreyta, e aprop am la sinistra per dos veguadas, e aprop exten am la sinistra; e empelleys le pietz del pe am la dreyta deves la camba ses trebalh.	 The sentence is describing the correct positioning for performing a cautery procedure on the foot. Here's how it translates: "Place your right hand in front of your left hand, and put both hands over the hollow below to support them.
E fay aquo doas veguadas segon que havem comtat.	 The sentence implies that this is just a step taken after performing other procedures or actions related to the patient's condition.
E aprop empelleys le pietz del pe a la camba la tersa veguada, e tu es a la cavilha.	 This final sentence suggests that once you have performed the cautery procedure on one part of the foot (the lower part), proceed to perform it on the other part (upper part).
Donc si retorna en una veguada o en dos segon aquesta manieyra, e si vezes le pe engualhat, es bo; e sino, lahoras sobre lu itera la operacio, quar aquel retorna.	 This sentence implies that if the procedure is performed in one or two steps as described earlier and you successfully perform both procedures then everything will be fine. However, if things go wrong during either of them, doctors should intervene to correct this issue.
Mays si a tu es prohibida la reduccio de lu am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu dos sobre terra, e estrenh un paysel mot en terra fermat, e que caja entre las coyssas de lu, e tu ja has envolopat sobre lu drap per so que no ledesca le malaute.	 This sentence means that if the recommended reduction method is prohibited and doctors should proceed as follows: lay the patient on their back with a pillow placed firmly on the ground between their thighs, cover them completely with a blanket to prevent the hernia from slipping out of place.
E aprop le ministre de lu tengua las suas coyssas, e aprop autre ministre extenda le pe am las suas mas o am liament que lie sobre le col del pe; e aprop extenda aquel quascun ministre contre extencio del sieu par, e le payssel sia extant entre las coyssas del malaute retinent aquel, per so que·l cos de lu no sia atirat a las partidas dejos deves la sua extencio.	 The sentence suggests that after placing the patient on their back with the pillow placed below them between their thighs and covering them completely with a blanket to prevent the hernia from slipping out of place, another servant should extend one hand onto their waist or side while keeping the other hand extended against the chest as it is held by the first servant. This ensures that nothing protrudes outside so everything remains contained within the cavity below.
E aprop le metge enguala la dislocacio am las sieuas mas, e autre ministre tengua la coyssa sana a las partidas dejos, quar la dislocacio retorna am la facilitat.	 When the doctor makes an incision on your breast or leg, another attendant should hold the healthy shoulder to prevent it from moving around, and another minister should have the cushion in place at all joints of theirs, so that the dislocation returns easily.
E donc cum retorna la dislocacio e es declarada a tu la sanetat de la reduccio de lu, lahoras pausa emplastre e extrenh aquela am liamentz fortment, e ligua le pe am liament a la camba.	 When the dislocation is returned and declared as healed by your doctor, you should remove the splint and stretch that area gently but firmly, and bind it up with tape on the leg above.
E cove que temes o te guardes dels nervis les quals so detras sobre le talo, per que le liament sobre aquel no sia vehement e leda aquel fortment.	 You should take care of any nerves that are behind your heel to prevent them from tightening and causing harm to it.
E aprop layssa aquel per dos dias o per tres; e si le liament es mollificat, extrenh aquel.	 Leave it in place for two or three days if the bandage is loose enough, and if it loosens up you should remove it.
E aprop deslia aquel en le ters dia o en le quart, e prohibeys le malaute de anament per xl dias.	 Remove it on the third day at the latest, or preferably on the fourth, but do not let your patient go without it for more than four days.
Mays si es forsat de anar denant aquel spazi, no es fayta segurtat que la dislocacio no sia sobre lu dissolvuda e corrumpuda, e aprop aquo que no recipia curacio.	 If you want to take it off before the wound has healed and been cured completely, do not be afraid that the dislocation will remain open or infected, but rather prepare for care.
E si accideys a lu apostema caut, lahoras cove que tu aministre en la cedacio de lu aquo en lo qual precedic la nostra narracio, en autre loc de curacio e de embrocacio, entro que sia remauguda.	 If the pointed cautery is used at this stage in healing or anointing, be sure that it precedes our account and goes into other parts of care and anointing until it has healed completely.
Capitol .xxxiiii.	 Conclusion.
De curacio de dislocacio dels ditz dels pes.	 Treatment for foot dislocations.
Cove que aquel qu’es dislocat sia engualhat am pauca extencio ses trebal; e aquo que no es dificil, abantz es leugier.	 When someone's dislocated joint causes very little pain, then it is easy to move around.
Mays si la dislocacio es en alcus nozes del dos del pe, lahoras cove que fassas cezer le malaute le sieu pe sobre loc engual de la terra o sobre taula, e sia estant ayssi cum si anava.	 If the dislocation is on one of your feet, then stretch it gently towards a flat surface or table, being careful not to twist it as you would do otherwise.
E aprop tu sta de pes, e pausa le tieu pe sobre aquo que imineys de las juncturas, e aprop calca aquel am le tieu pe am vertut entro que retorne, e que vejas aquel ja engualhat e no aparesca en le loc eminencia.	 When you are on your stomach and place your foot over the area of the joints, stretch it gently towards a point where it will be straight if straightened out, then return to its original position without making any sound or noise.
E aprop pausa dejos le ventre del pe de lu una taula que prengua tot le pe, a la qual sian dos caps, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent e ferma per tres dias; e aprop deslia aquel e fay aquel repausar de ambulacio per motz dias, entro que sia estrenhut e de reddicio sia assegurat.	 When you place your foot on a table with two legs and stretch it gently for three days, then stop stretching when the pain is gone or reduced to the extent that movement becomes difficult, but ensure rest of three days before resuming activity again.
Capitol .xxxv.	 Chapter 55
De las specias de dislocacio que sian faytas am plagua o am fractura o am quascuna ensemps.	 Among the types of dislocations are those that occur in sprains or fractures, as well as any other kind.
Quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, e tu te perforssas en la curacio de aquela e en la restauracio de lu, motas veguadas succezeys la mort.	 When a cause of those dislocations occurs and you are unable to treat it or restore its function, that is what leads to death.
E per aquo no cove que sobre la curacio de lu presuma, sino aquel que es savi en l’art, de lonc uzatge, misericordios e pietados, tardiu, no-ardit ni presomptuos; e que use en le comensament de medicinas que cedan apostemas cautz tant solament, e leyssa le malaute al divinal jutgament, sino ad aquel al qual speras salut de perdicio, am de la malautia alleviacio, e en la qual appareys alcuna speransa.	 Therefore, instead of focusing on the healing process itself, it is better to treat the cause and use medicines that give hope only for recovery from disease or injury, rather than giving a cure for death itself, which does not appear possible; with all its consequences
E adonc esforsa te tantost far de lu la reduccio en le comensament de la causa, denant que endevengua apostema caut.	 When you have cut through the flesh of a patient so that the cause is evident from the beginning, then do not hesitate to use the cautery.
E adonc si le membre retorna segon que volem, lahoras aministra regiment le qual ceda apostema caut e cura la plagua am aquo que conveneys a lu dels enguentz desiccatius.	 After removing that member and you want to apply the treatment, then provide the cautery as well as cure for the pain in that area caused by the dry blisters
E si dislocacio es am fractura e accideys en le os satagias separadas, lahoras tu perforsa le stement de lor, e fay en aquo so que havem dit en las malautias simplas de aquo que es precedit en les locz de aquels.	 If dislocation is the fracture and occurs in separate parts of the body, then apply a statement as well to prevent it from spreading further, and make sure you've already done so in the preceding areas.
E guarda e esquiva segon la tua vertut aquel del intrament en las vias de temor segon que a tu es precedida la mia predicacio; quar aquo es milhor a tu deves le tieu Creator, e mays permanent a la tua gloria, e mays saludos al tieu cos verays aquels en le tieu temps.	 Save and avoid second the use of that which is forbidden in the ways of terror lest you may be preceded by my warning; for what I say here is most important to you so that it may last forever, and may greet your body on this day as well as all those after.
Ayssi fineysso las paraulas de Albucasim perfieytament de las quals Dieus ne sia benezeyt.	 And these phrases of Albulcasis are properly translated to the extent that God will be pleased with them.
Amen.	 Amen
