Ayssi comensan las paraulas de Albucasim .	 When the joints are affected by cold humors
O, filhs, pus yeu he a vos complit aquest libre, le qual es le derier de la sciencia de medicina, per le compliment de lu so consequit la fi en lu, e per las exposicios de lu, e per las declaracios de lu, es a mi vist que yeu complesca aquel a vos am aquest tractat, le qual es partida de la operacio am ma, so es cyrurgia.	 And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot
Quar la operacio am ma es prostrada en nostre regio e en nostre temps de tot privada, entro que fort leu peric la sciencia de lu, e le vistigi de lu es ostat; e no romasero de lu sino alcunas petitas descripcios en les libres dels Antics, les quals mudero las mas e endevenc ad aquels error e heyssitacio entro que son clausas las entencios de lu e es elonguada la forsa de lu e l’art.	 And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot
E es vist a mi que yeu vivifique aquela am ordenacio de aquest tractat en aquela segon la via de exposicio e de declaracio e de abreviacio; e per que vengua am las formas dels ferramentz de cautheri e dels autres instrumentz de la obra cum sia per addicio de la declaracio, e per preparacio de lu, la qual causa es necessaria.	 And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot
Mays la causa per la qual no es atrobat bo artifex am la sieua ma en aquest nostre temps, es quar la art de medicina es longua, e que cove le sieu actor denant aquo esser excercitat en la sciencia de anotomia la qual recontec Gualia entro que sapia les juvament dels membres e las formas de aquels, e la conjunctio e la separacio de lor; e haia la conoyssensa dels osses, dels nervis e dels lacertz, e·l nombre de aquels, e la egrecio de lor; e de las venas pulsatils e de las quietas, e dels locs del eyssiment de lor.	 And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot
E per aquo ditz Ypocras que am u nom es mot, mays en l’obra petit, e majorment en la art de la ma.	 It is customary that gout be called by doctors when joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet.
Mays nos ja avem dit de aquel en l’introit de aquest libre; quar qui no es scient aquo que li avem dit de anotomia, no es evacuat que no caia en error per la qual siran mortz les homes, ayssi cum yeu he vist trops de aquels, quar alscus son formatz en esta sciencia e gettan se de aquela ses sciencia e ses experiment.	 "You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs and placed a cushion under them. A servant is now positioned on their legs and another on their chest to hold their hands.
Quar yeu vi un metge folh e enperit aver incidit un apostema escrophilos en le colh de una femna, e incidic alcunas arterias del colh per que fluic gran sanc entro que la femna cazec morta entre las mas de lu.	 "When a doctor found an abscess in the vagina of a woman and incised some arteries from it to prevent excessive blood loss that could kill her.
E vi un autre metge que pres que el traguera una peyra d’un home le qual avia procesit en sa etat, e la peyra era gran, e venguet a lu e trayssec aquela peyra am un tros de la vesiqua, per que aquel home al tertz dia es mort.	 "Another doctor prescribed a poultice to someone who had suffered from it in his state, the poultice was large and he wrapped it around his thigh to prevent that poultice causing any more harm.
E yeu ja apelat fuy a estrayre aquela, e vi que per la grandesa de la peyra e per la disposicio del malaute conogui subre lu que morira.	 "You have already called for care for that, and saw that because of the size of the poultice and the condition of the patient it was likely to be fatal.
E vi un autre metge le qual prenia stipendic de un duc de nostra terra per cyrurgia, e endeven a un crastrat negre le qual era deves lu fractura en la coyssa de lu; e perparec le metge am la sua ignorancia, estrayssec la fractura, sobre la plagua, am pulvinas e astelas am forta strectura, e no layssec a la plagua espiracio.	 "Another doctor prescribed a stipendium for a duke of our land from surgery, and added a black ribbon to remind him not to fracture the bone in that leg; but he neglected it, broke his promise, overplowed the wound with poultice, burned the skin around it with firebrands, and left out to dry.
E aprop le desliet segons los sieus desiriers, e aprop le relieg, e aprop le leyssec per alcus jorns e comandec que nos deslies le liament; e estec ayssi entro que la coyssa e·l pe foro apostematz, e pervenguet a perdicio.	 "Then he did things according to his desires, and released the binding, and commanded that we would do it in accordance with our will; and thus began from what is called the beginning of life, and ended with death.
E yeu fuy apelat a lu, e aparelhegui a desliar le liament, e conseguida es tranquilitat e enayssi amermet de sas dolors.	 "You have come to alleviate the pain of your ailments.
Mays empero ja corrupcio era confermada en le membre, per que no pogui refrenar aquela, e no cessec perambular la corrupcio en le membre entro que·l malaute peric.	 "However, if this corruption is confirmed in the member to prevent it from spreading further and to stop walking around with it on your leg.
E vi un autre metge le qual perforec un apostema cancros, e fo ulcerat aprop alscus dias, entro que foc magnificada la malicia de lu am lo senhor de lu.	 "And I saw another doctor who prescribed a cancerous poultice and applied it daily, in order to cure the malignancy of that member.
La qual causa es quar le cranc caut es pur de humor melencolic, lahoras no cove que pervengua a lu am ferr de tot, sino que sia an membre le qual suffertes que de tot fos hostat.	 "If the gout is caused by melancholic humors, then it is not to be feared throughout the body but only in that member where you suffer.
E per aquo, filhs, necessari es a vos que la operacio am ma sia devisada en dos devesios: so es en operacio a lu qual es associada salut, e en obra am la qual es perilh en las majors disposicios.	 "Therefore, you see, it is necessary to perform the operation in two sessions: one for the member which is associated with health and another for that part of which there are greater possibilities.
E yeu ja he exsitat aquo en tot loc de aquest libre en le qual venc opperacio en la qual es error e temor; per que necessari es a vos que guardetz aquo e layssetz aquel, per que les folhs no atrobo via a parlar e a vos desonestar.	 "And you have already seen in every place of this kind where the operation is performed without any error or fear; so it's necessary for you to keep this and set aside that one, lest others stumble on their way and bring about misfortune.
E donc prenetz las vostras armas am sollicitut e am proteccio de Dieu , e les vostres malautes am falicitat e am fermetat.	 "So then remember your weapons of self-defense against God, your sins against righteousness, and your transgressions against firmness.
E usatz de la milhor via per la gracia de Dieu perdusent a salut e a lausabla successio, e laysatz las malautias terriblas de difficil sanacio, e ostatz las vostras armas de aquo que vos fa temer, per so que ysitatio en vostra fe e en le vostre nom no vos evasisca: quar mays es remanent a la vostra gloria, e pus aut en le mon e en derier a las vostras sanctitatz.	 "Take then the most direct way by grace of God to find salvation and victory over death, and lay aside the terrible sins that are difficult to cure, and your weapons for this purpose may cause you fear, so that righteousness in your faith and name will not fail: wherefore may it remain with your glory, or with the world and with those who hold your sanctities.
Gualia ja diyssec en alcunas sieuas monicios:	 In these veins run certain matters
“No mediquetz malautia mala, per so que mals metges no siatz nompnatz”.	 There are no bad doctors that I know of.
E yeu ja he devesit aquest libre segontz tres capitols.	 This liberty is given in three parts.
Comensa la divisio del libre, e primier de la primieyra partida.	 The division of the freedom begins with the first part.
Le primier capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, en las formas dels instrumentz e en les ferrementz dels cauteris, e de aquo que necessari es en la opperacio.	 The first capital ordered from above the feet in the forms of instruments and the procedures of cauteries, and that which is necessary for action.
La divisio de la segonda partida.	 The division of the second part.
Le segon capitol, de siccio e perforacio, e de ventosas, e de plaguas, e de extractio de sagetas e de semblantz ad aquelas, tot capitolat e ordenat de las formas dels instrumentz.	 The second capital deals with excision and perforation, and the use of leeches, and the extraction of abscesses and symptoms accompanying them, all in order and arranged according to the forms of instruments.
Divisio de la tersa partida.	 The division of the third part.
Le tertz capitol, de restauracio e de dislocacio, e de curacio de torcio e de semblantz ad aquels; capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, e de las formas dels instrumentz.	 The third capital deals with restoration and dislocation, and the care of tortures and symptoms accompanying them; all in order and arranged according to the forms of instruments.
De cauteri am foc e am medicina aguda e rememoracio de la opperacio.	 From the cauteries come acute medicine and remembrance of action.
Am aquel comensa le tractat de tot le libre.	 The treatise begins with the division of the freedom.
Cove que yeu digua la qualitat dels juvamentz de aquel cauteri e dels noccumentz de lu, e en qual compleccio sia prohibit cauteri.	 That you may examine the quality of youth and of the old in this cautery, and which composition is prohibited.
Donc dic que·l sermo de la qualitat del juvament de cauteri e del noccument de lu es sermo lonc e prolixs, e subtil per sciensa, e secret amaguat; e ja de lu a parlat gran multitut de savis, e de lu se son desacordatz, et a mi abasta un petit dels sermons de lor, temen perlonguacio.	 The speech of the quality of youth in cautery and the old is long and complex, subtle to understand, secret; and many secrets are contained within it, and there is discord among them, so that few sermons from this one are desired for their length.
E donc dic que cauteri comfereys a tota compleccio universalment la qual es am materia o ses materia, exceptat dos compleccios, las quals son compleccios caudas ses materia .	 "The treatment should be applied to every part of the body universally, which is the matter or its matters, except for two kinds of complications that are called the foot and leg ailments.
En la compleccio cauda e secca am materia se desecordero; quar alcus dyssero que cauteri es juvatiu ad aquela, e les autres dyssero le contrari de aquel, que cauteri no es convenient en malautia la qual es per qualiditat e per siccitat, quar natura del foc es qualiditat e siccitat, e enconvenient es que malautia cauda e secca am aquo que es caut e sec sia sanada.	 "In the complication of cold and dampness, treatment is administered; whereas in those who are afflicted by it, and others are harmed by that, which treatment is not beneficial for dry or wet ailments, because nature's fire is dryness and dampness, and it is convenient to treat cold and damp with a cautery to be cured.
E diysec aquel que ditz le contrari de aquel, que per cauteri es fayt juvament en tota malautia cauda e secca que ve en les cors dels homes, quar quan tu comparas le cors de home e las humiditatz de lu a la compleccio del foc, atrobas le cors de home freg.	 "Then those who say the opposite of that, for whom cautery is beneficial in all dry and wet ailments that occur on men's bodies, when you compare the body parts of man to their humidity with the complication of fire, you see the body parts of man inflamed.
E yeu dic per le sermo de aquel, que esperiment aquo ja a mi alscunas vetz a descubert.	 "You say through the example of that, may experiments be done to discover it.
Mays empero no cove que vengua sobre aquo aquel que ja es exproat e excersitat en le capitol de cauteri per derier exercici, e a conogut la diversitat de la compleccio dels homes e la disposicio de las malautias en lor meteyssas, e las causas de aquelas, e·ls accidentz de lor, e l’espasi del temps de aquelas.	 "Moreover, it is not advisable to insist on that which has been tested and exercised in the chapter of cautery for everyday practice, and know the variety of complications among men and the disposition of their ailments from them, as well as their causes and accidents, and also the passage of time involved.
Mays en las autras compleccios, no es sobre vos temor, e majorment en las malautias fregas e humidas, quar ja totz les metges se son acordatz sobre aquels, e no so desecordatz en le juvament am cauteri en aquelas.	 In complex cases without fear, and especially in the warm dampness of fevers or moist ailments that all doctors agree upon this, do not be hasty with a premature cautery there
E sapiatz, filhs, que del secret de curacio per cauteri am foc e de la bontat de lu, so sobre cauteri am medicina comburent, es quar le foc es simple, la accio del qual no perven sino al membre le qual es cauterizat e no notz al autre membre am lu ajustat sino am petit nocument.	 Sapientia, physicians, of the secret of curing by fire and the goodness of its heat is about cauteries that are in medicine, as long as the flame is simple, so only penetrates to the member on which it is cauterized, but not to another member near or far
Mays la accio de medicina comburent perven ad aquel en les membres le qual de lu alunhat, e fort leu fa venir en le membre malautia de dificil sanacio e fort leu ausit.	 In the members that are nearby it comes from medicine burns to heal in a member's difficult healing and it is very painful
Mays le foc, per la sua sublimitat e de la sua substancia bontat, no fa aquo sino que superfluisca E ja es a nos conogut per experiment e per longitut de servitut de studi am l’art sobre le veritat de las causas; e per aquo yeu so excusat de la longitut del sermo E si no fos que no es legut al mieu libre en aquest pausero a vos secret amaguat am le foc, e la qualitat de la operacio de lu en les cors e de la sieua expulcio per la qual expellis las malautias, am sermo philosophic demostratiu, le qual siria acuit en las vostras pessas.	 The fire for its sublimity and the goodness of its substance does not do this except to superfluity E already is known through experiment and length of service to study art on the truth of causes; And therefore you are excused from the length of speech, if it was not at mine free in that pause room A you secret about the fire, and the quality of operation in the bodies and its expulsion for which you expel illnesses, as a philosophical demonstration, which would be found in your troubles.
E sapiatz, filhs, que els se desacordan del temps en le qual es convenient far cauteri e pausan le milhor temps de primaveyra.	 Wisdom, physicians, that the discord from time when it is most convenient to do a cautery and pause at the best of times before
E yeu dic que cauteri es convenient en tot temps, per so que le nocument per le temps accident es submergit en le juvament de aquo que am le cauteri es atirat, e majorment si le cauteri es per dolors o de dolors necessaries, fortz e fistinas, las quals no suffertan tarditat per so que es temut de aquelas que vengua malicia, que es major que petit nocument entrant per lo temps.	 When the cautery is convenient at all times to prevent the discomfort from occurring in a time of need for cauterization and greater if it is necessary due to pain or necessary pains, then quickly apply them without delay so that you are afraid of those who will come with malice, which is more than small inconvenience coming through time.
E aysso no catz en vostras pessas, o, filhs, aquo no estiman sino le poble vulguar e les fols metges, so es que ad aquela malautia que es sanada per cauteri no es redicio tot temps, e pausan aquel consequen.	 And for those who do not believe in popular opinion and the opinions of doctors, that is because curing gout with cautery is not recommended all times, and they wait for that consequence to happen.
E la causa no es ges ayssi quo els cuydan per aquo, quar cauteri no es sino en loc de medicina la qual altera la compleccio e esicca las humiditatz las quals son causa per que veno las dolors.	 The cause is that they seek cautery as a substitute for medicine which alters the composition and moistures causing the pains to occur.
Mays empero cauteri superflueys sobre la medicina per volicitat de la sua valitut e vertut de la sua operacio e grandesa del sieu senhor.	 However, cautery should not be used instead of medicine for fear of loss of function and virtue of his operation and great damage to himself.
E es possible que la sua malautia retorne en alcuna hora del temps, segon la compleccio del malaute e la locacio de la sua malautia, e la vertut de lu, e aquo que es preparat en le cors de lu de la agreguacio de las superfluitatz en lu, e aquo que es pervengut a lu en la sua acquisicio en viandas e semblantz de aquelas causas; sino que la malautia en la qual sia aministrat cauteri sia malautia subtil en membre de paucas superfluitatz e humiditatz, ayssi cum cauteri de dent per dolor e semblantz ad aquel, possible es que en lu no retorne aquela dolor, mays aquo se fa en petitz.	 It is possible that his gout may return at any time due to the composition of the gout and its location in his body, as well as the virtue of it, which has been prepared for in his body through the accumulation of superfluities in him, and this is what he was subjected to in his youth and similar to these causes; but if cautery were used on that, then there would be no return of such pain, may that not happen.
E mays sermo vulgar es que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, e es sermo dreyturier, no ad aquo que els entendo en lu, quar els crezo que no es curacio que aprofieyta am medicina ni am autra causa aprop cauteri.	 When the pain occurs due to cold humors that infiltrate into each part of the body, and the feet feel it, it is customary for physicians to call it gout. And if it's necessary to make marks on its surface, do so with a pointed cautery. Then return the intestine or hernia back to its cavity, place your hand over the area to prevent it from coming out.
E la causa es en contrari de aquo; e la entencio que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina no es sino quan administram las manieyras de curacio en alcunas malautias, e aquelas medicinas no conferieysso, e aprop en la fi de la causa aministra hom cauteri, e aprofieyta ad aquela.	 The cause of this is contrary to that; and I understand that cautery is the remedy for medicine when administering cures in certain diseases, but not all medicines provide it, and at the end of the treatment administer cautery, and take advantage of that.
E lahoras de aqui cat16 que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, no segon la entencio la qual entendo les vulgars e trops dels fols metges.	 The pain from here is due to the remedy for medicine called cautery, which I do not agree with the opinion of many physicians.
E diyssero les antics que cauteri am aur es milhor que cauteri am ferr, e no diyssero aquo sino per la equalitat del aur e sublimitat de la sua sustancia.	 The old cautery was considered to be more beneficial than the new one, and not in equality with air or sublimity of its substance.
E diyssero que le loc de cauteri no fa brac, cum aquo no sia absolutament vertat, quar yeu ja he aquo proat e he atrobat que aquel no fa aquo sino en alcus cors ses les autres, e cauteri am aquel es bo e milhor que am ferr ayssi quo els diyssero; mays empero quan tu fas cauteri am foc am de aur, no es a tu declarat, quar es egnit segon la quantitat que tu vols per la rugor de l’aur, e quar prepara a recebre freg; e si ajustas sobre lu ignicio se fon l’aur per le foc, e caso en le foc alcunas laminas per que le artifex catz per la occupacio de aquel.	 You should not perform cautery with fire over the body if you do it for a long time and without pain relief, as it is painful to endure, and if you adjust it too high then it burns out of control, causing discomfort; additionally, there are flames that ignite from the cautery itself.
E per aquo es fayt cauteri am ferr deves nos pus leugerament e pus propdanament a rectitut de operacio.	 When joints are affected by cold humors, the doctor performs surgery to remove them from each part of the body.
E yeu ja he ordenat aquest capitol en le cauteri segon capitols, et he ordenat aquels del cap entro les pes, per so que aleugo le demandant aquo que vol de lu.	 The second sentence has a typo in it: it should be "ordered". I assume that this means the doctor orders the following two things to perform the cautery surgery procedure; first order is on the head and the other one is below the waist, so the person asking for the operation will specify which part they want.
De cauteri de dolor de cap per frigiditat e humiditat.	 The doctor performs a cauterization due to cold and dampness in joints of the head.
Le capitol primier.	 The first capital refers to the procedure itself, which is a cauterization surgery.
Aquesta cauterizacio confereys a la humiditat e frigiditat sobre le servel accident de la qual so doas causas, so es causa de soda e multitut de flux raumatic, apelat corissa, del cap a las partidas dels huelhs e de las aurelhas fluent, e multitut de dormir, e de dolor de dentz e del guolayro, e universalment de tota malautia que ve per fregiditat, ayssi cum paraliticament, sodo e apoplexio, e semblantz en aquelas malautias.	 This cauterization procedure is applied to the cold and dampness causing ailments such as inflammation of the eyes and ears, sleep disorders, tooth pain, and various other types of injuries caused by cold, both directly and indirectly.
La forma de aquesta cauterizacio es aquesta, que primieyrament comandes al malaute que sia evacuat am medicina lacsativa le cap mondificant, per tres o per quatre nueytz, segon que exhigeys la vertut del malaute e la edat de lu e la sua costuma.	 The form of this procedure is that it first commands the patient to be treated with a poultice on their head for three or four nights, while also inquiring into the patient's health and age as well as their usual practice.
E aprop comanda li que raza le sieu cap am razor, e aprop fay aquel sezer entre las tuas mas sobre una banca cayrada e que pause las suas mas sobre le pietz sieu.	 You then command them to shave off the growth on top of their head and to apply a poultice between your thighs as well as over their chest area.
E aprop pausa la razit de la tua palma aprop le pous sobre la razit del nas entre les huels sieus.	 Place a cushion under their thighs, another on their legs, and one more on their chest while holding their hands
Mays empero, cum le tieu dit del mieg loc es pervengut, signa aquel loc am tenta, e aprop igneys le cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma:	 However, once the location is identified as where it occurred, then examine that area and apply olive oil in the form of a poultice.
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le loc senhat am tenta, a manieyra que descent, am la qual la tieua ma sia constrengida petit a petit, e tu revolveys aquel.	 Once you've identified that as where it occurred, then examine that area carefully and apply olive oil in the form of a poultice gradually while wrapping it with cloth.
E aprop leva la tua ma leugerament e reguarda le loc, e si veses ja del os esser descubert alcuna quantitat del cap, ayssi cum la quantitat de gra de errs, lahoras eleva la tua ma, e si no torno la tua ma am aquel ferr, am autre de aquel, si es enfrigidat, entro que sia vist del os aquo que yeu he dit a tu.	 Once you've examined the area carefully and determined that it is not covered by any sort of covering, then spread your hand over it and apply the olive oil gradually while wrapping it in cloth. If nothing comes out, if you wish to remove your hand from there, then do so, but otherwise place it back on that spot as instructed.
E aprop pren un petit de sal e disolveys aquel sobre le loc e leyssa aquel per tres jorns.	 Take a small amount of salt and dissolve this in the area and leave it for three days.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto enbegut en boder e leyssa aquel sobre lu entro que sia destrusida la scara del foc.	 Once you've identified where it occurred, apply a poultice of olive oil to that area while leaving it untouched for three days and ensuring the fire is extinguished nearby.
E aprop cura le loc am anguent tetrafarmacon entro que sia sanat.	 Examine the area carefully until it becomes healthy.
E ja diyssero que quant la plagua roman uberta, tant mielhs geta le brac, per que es milhor e mays juvatiu.	 If a plague occurs while being rubbed with olive oil, then apply more of it as quickly as possible because it is the most effective and youthful.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia cauterizada la codena entro al os, e sia tengut le cauteri entro que sia adhurida alcuna partida de la specitut del os.	 When the codpiece is cautorized inside the anus, it should be held by a cautery that is not to be inserted into any part of the anus.
E aprop sia ras aquo que es adhust del os, e aprop sia curat.	 And when you're done with that, go ahead and apply the ointment.
E diyssero autres que am lo cauteri pervengua al derier, entro que enprema en le os forta enprecio entro que le os caga, e aquesta es la forma de alphecati petit:	 After cautorizing it in that area and after ensuring the anus is properly closed with a finger to prevent leakage into the bowel, this is how you should apply the ointment.
E estiman de aquel loc expiran la vapors del cap.	 And then exhale through your nose.
E sia tenguda la plagua uberta per lonc temps, e aprop sia curada entro que sia consolidada.	 Hold the plaster on for a while and then apply it after being sure it is solid.
Mays a mi no so vistas aquestas doas specias de cauteri de tot, sino en alcus homes segon via de temor; e layssa aquel, deves mi, milhor es am salut, quan es; quar le cap es develitat per solucio de continuitat de lu ayssi cum havem testificat en les autres membres, e majorment quan le cap del malaute es de freul natura.	 You should not use cautery in all cases but rather leave it as a last resort when it is necessary to prevent the loss of life or limb.
E la specia de cauteri primieyra es mays salva e milhor deves mi; e de aquela husi e am aquela obra am salut.	 The first method of cautery should be used as a last resort and it is most effective.
Capitol segon.	 The second method.
Del cauteri del cap.	 Cautorize the head
Quan en tot le cap accideys dolor cronica e longua e aquo es en le malaute prolonguat, e usa de gerras e de cochias e de capipurges e de emplaustres e de guatz e de cadels e de gualinas e de semblantz, e majorment si ja es cauterizat am un cautere le qual recontam e no aprofieyta a lu deguna de aquelas causas, lahoras considera quar si le cap del malaute es de fort creacio en la sua natura; e no es freul et atroba mot gran freg, lahoras aquel cauterisa am autra cauteri dejos aquel un pauc.	 When the pain on the head is chronic and prolonged and that it is in a prolonged illness of the patient, use needles, hooks, scalpels, plasters, gauzes, bandages, sutures, and glue, and if necessary cauterize with another cautery to remove those causes; otherwise consider whether the head of the patient has natural characteristics which require a different treatment.
E aprop cauterisa aquel sobre le corn del sieu cap am cauteri entro que la codena es partida.	 When someone's head is held down by a cautery, the skin on their forehead will peel off in layers as it is cut open
Incisa la codena e sia descuberta del os la quantitat la qual havem recontat e cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en la partida deriera del cap en le loc le qual es apelat vas, — e es aquel loc en le qual es pausada ventosa.	 Cut the forehead and it is revealed that there is a certain amount of skin which we have counted; cut off this part with an incision at the back of the head in the place called the nape
Et alleuja la tua ma en aysso, e no descobras le os, quar le malaute per aquo atroba mot gran dolor diversa de la dolor de totz les autres cauteris del cap.	 And if you feel pain differently from other cuts on the head, it is because this injury causes much more pain than all the others.
E yeu diyre aquest cauteri en son loc, quar cove que·l cauteri am le qual so cauterisatz les corns del cap e le occiput es pus subtil cauteri que aquel am le qual es cauterisat le mieg loc del cap; e aquesta es la forma de lu.	 You apply this cautery to the place where you have applied the other cauteries, that is a very subtle one which covers the back of the head and the nape of the neck; it's called 'the form'.
Capitol ters.	 Capitals.
De cauterisacio de emigranea no-antiqua.	 Cautery does not cause permanent damage.
Quan endeve en la partida del cap dolor sodo, o es stenduda dolor entro al uelh, sia evacuat am medicinas le cap mondificantz, e sia aministrada l’autra curacio, la qual yeu he dita en las devesios de las malautias; e tot no aprofieyta, lahoras cauterisacio en lu es en dos manieyras: o cauterisacio am medicina acuta comburent, o am ferr.	 When pain occurs at the back of the head or through it, they apply a remedy to remove the pain from the head, and if nothing else helps, there are two ways in which cautery can be used; either for an acute cautery (which quickly relieves the pain) or as a last resort.
Mays cauteri am medicina comburent es que tu prenguas una dolsa de alh, e escorgas aquela e abcindas las extremitatz de lu de amdos les caps.	 If you apply an acute cautery, the pain is quickly relieved and your hands are numb from holding them close to each other's heads.
E aprop incideys le loc de la dolor en la templa am una lanceta lada entro que sia en lu feyt loc dejos la codena, entro que sia occultada.	 The first sentence translates to "Here comes the location of pain in the temple as a sharp arrow into which place is hidden.
E aprop strenh sobre lu am stopada per descent constreccio, e layssa aquel per le spazi de tres horas; e aprop deslia le e tratz le alh, e laysa la plagua per dos o per tres jorn, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto submergit en boder entro que le loc fassa brac.	 "Here the arrow comes to stop that contraction, and place it in three hours; and take away its feathers, and lay the bandage over two or three days, and pause on the body part submerged into which place does it touch?
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	 "Here cure that which is injured.
E si tu voys, fe aquo am alcunas medicinas comburentz las quals yeu he scriutas en le douse tractat de medicinas comburentz.	 If you go to the other medical treatise, then it will be found here.
Mays la cauterisacio am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: igneys per cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	 The cautery can be done in this manner: insert a pointed object into the part to be treated as indicated by the cautery, which is its form.
e es apelat claus clavilhs, quar le cap de lu es ayssi cum forma de clavel en le qual es alcuna curvitat, e·n le mieg loc de lu es eminensia petita.	 It is called "clubbed" when the top of it has a form like that of a claw in which there is some curve, and its part to be treated is very small.
E aprop pausa sobre loc de la dolor, e rete la tua ma — per que no sia adhurida la arceria la qual es dejos — e revol le ferr petit a petit am velocitat.	 "Pause on the location of pain, and take your hand - to prevent it from being injured by the sharp object you hold- and roll it little by little at speed.
E si la quantitat de lu que es adhurida per la specitut de la codena ayssi quo la maytat de lu, e elava la tua ma per so que la arteria no sia adhurida la qual es dejos, per so que no vengua flux de sanc.	 If the amount of it that is desired by the size of the incision is such that the vessel is not injured which is there, for fear that there will be a flow of blood.
E aprop enbibeys coto en aygua de sal e pausa aquel sobre le loc, e layssa aquel per tres dias; e aprop pausa coto mulhat am boder, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	 When you have opened the space between a patient's thighs with a cushion under them and another on their legs as well as one on their chest holding their hands, it is customary for three days to be taken care of him while he recovers from his ailment
E si voys, cauterisa am la extremitat del cutellari segon cauteri, e guarda te de incisio de arteria en aquesta emigranea propriament no-antiqua.	 If you are going to perform cautery on the second artery of the arm, it is customary to guard against incision into an artery in this region specifically.
Capitol quart.	 The fourth quarter
De cauterizacio d’emigranea antiqua.	 Cautery on the third artery.
Quan tu curas emigranea am aquo que havem dit de la curacio precedent, e aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias, e no aprofieyta la curacio, e vezes per la malautia que no abasta a lu aquo que havem dit del primier cauteri am medicina o del cauteri am foc, lahoras cove que tu igniscas le cauteri cutellar entro que sia albificat, pus que significas sobre le loc de la dolor am linha de longuesa de la qual sia la maytat del dit, o quays aquel; e depausa la tua ma per una veguada e strenh aquela entro incidiscas la arceria e pervengua entro al os.	 When you have finished the cautery on that which has been described for the preceding cautery and those of the diseases, and if it is not sufficient to cure him or her, then make sure to cut off the skin where the pain runs along its length until it reaches a certain point, at which time; and place your hand over his abdomen and press down on it gently to prevent any bleeding from occurring.
Empero necessari es a tu que guardes de la continuacio de la mandibula, la qual es mauguda deves la masticacio, e que le lacert no sia adhurit e le nervi le qual mau aquela, e que no s’endevengua espasme.	 However, it is necessary that you keep your mouth closed so as not to continue the chewing and make sure they do not have any pain in their nerves and do not get spasms.
E si es sobre la custodia e cautela de flux de sanc de l’arteria que es abciza, quar en la abcizio de lu es temor, e majorment ad aquel le qual ignora aquo que fa e no es studios e esproat; e layssa la operacio en lu al comensament.	 And if it is about the care and caution when administering blood to a patient whose artery is blocked in such a way that they fear bleeding, and mostly avoid doing this as much as you can, and let's perform the operation on him or her at the beginning.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio del regiment de flux de sanc accident de la arceria segon la sieua manieyra, en le sieu loc de aquest libre.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet
E si veses de aquesta malautia que no abaste aquest cauteri e veses le cors del malaute tollerable, cauteriza aquel en le mieg loc del cap ayssi cum havem recontat, e cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	 If you wish to relieve the pain of this gout by that cautery and heat the patient's chest gently with a towel, cauterize it in its place at the head so as to cure the swelling into which it has infiltrated
E si voys, aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le capitol de streccio de arceria am cauteri havent dos cotels, e es milhor cauterizacio aquesta e mays conferent.	 If you wish to administer the cautery that we mentioned at the top of the chest with two cauteries, and prefer this one more than others.
Capitol .v.	 The head
De cauterisacio de las dolors de aurelhas.	 Gout treatment.
Quan en la aurelha ve dolor per freg e es curat am causas lacsativas e am l’autra curacio la qual he dita en la divisio, e no es remauguda la dolor, lahoras igneys le cauteri, e es aquest le qual ha nom puncta, del qual aquesta es la forma:	 When there is pain in the foot and it is cured by finding its cause and another cure that was mentioned at division point, and if this does not relieve the pain, the doctor applies a pointed cautery.
E aprop puncta aprop la ignicio, e sia menat al enviro de tota la aurelha ayssi cum roda es revolguda, o en le circuit de quascuna essemps si la dolor es en quascuna.	 Then apply it to the entire foot as soon as possible so that it becomes inflamed or in each attempt if the pain is in one of them
Alonga te am le cauteri de la razit de la aurelha pauc a pauc pus que aias senhat le loc am tenta.	 Then apply it to the root of the foot little by little, trying to reach where you feel the pain.
E si le cauteri de detz puntz en tota aurelha, e quays aquela, e aprop cura les locz entro que sian sanatz.	 If the pointed cautery is applied all over the foot and is effective everywhere, then cure the affected areas as soon as possible.
Capitol .vi.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
De cauterizacio de turtura.	 Cautery
Turtura la qual es curada e am cauterizacio no es sino de las specias las quals veno per flecma, segon que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias.	 Torture cure and cautery is nothing more than the specific treatments that come out by flame, as we mentioned in the sections of wounds.
Esquiva cauterizacio de la specia que endeve per siccacio o per spasme del nervi.	 Cautery for the specific treatment that relieves dryness or spasms from nerves.
Quan tu curas aquela specia de turtura am jerras e capipurgi e guarguarismes, e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas le malaute am tres cauteris: la i deves la razit de la aurelha, e·l segon un petit dejos le sieu templar, e le ters deves la conjunccio de doas labias.	 When you cure that specific treatment for tortures and bruises and guards, and does not interfere with your cure, the pain increases to three cauteries: the first is to burn a small part of the ear lobe, then a smaller one to place it on their temple, and thirdly put both hands together.
E pausa lo tieu cauteri per le contrari de la partida malauta, quar mollificacio no ve sino en la partida que apar sana.	 Pause the three cauteries for the opposite of healing that is only in the part that is healthy.
E la forma de cauterisacio es que cauterizas aquel am le cauteri en le dreyt de la extremitat de la aurelha pus sobirana un petit sobre le corn del cap, e en le templar autre, la longuesa del qual sia segon la longitut del dit pous, e depausa la tua ma am cauteri entro que sia comburida la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena.	 The form of cautery is that you burn in the right side of the ear lobe gently on top of their forehead, and then over their temple as well, the length being second to the distance from your hand to your shoulder blade. And pause your thumb inside so it can be burned with a quantity equal to half of the area of the target spot on their chest.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri, e es specia del cutellari, la forma del qual es denant mesa.	 This is the form of cautery, and it's specific for cutting, known as mesa.
Mays empero pus subtil es que aquel un pauc ayssi co vesas; e cove que cotel en lu de superflua groceza un pauc.	 When it comes to subtlety, I'm afraid that many people think similarly too much of a good thing is often just enough
E aprop cura le loc am aquo que es denant procezit entro que sia sanat.	 Do you mean "it is advisable to have the area cleaned thoroughly before it can be treated"?
Capitol .vii.	 Are you asking for a translation of a specific Latin phrase?
De cauterizacio de apoplextia antiqua.	 This translates to "ancient cautery.
Quan apoplextia es antiquada e curas aquela am aquo que havem dit e no confereys la tua medicacio e le malaute no ha febre, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris: sobre totz les corn del sieu cap; e am cauteri e le mieg loc del cap, ayssi cum havem dit; e am cauteri en le coguot.	 When ancient apoplexy occurs and the physician cannot find its cause or origin, then cautery is used to treat it: all over the head of the patient; and on the forehead and temple areas as well, just like what has been said before; and on the neck area.
E la manieyra del cauteri es fayta segon que es desus dit.	 The servant who performs the cautery is instructed to do so second after it has been explained to them.
E ja es cauterizat sobre la boca del estomac; e es mays derier; e aprop sia curat am aquo que procezeys.	 The cautery was applied over the stomach mouth; and now they say; and so that treatment proceeds.
Capitol .viii.	 Are you asking for a translation of another Latin phrase?
De cauterizacio de obblivio fayta per flacma.	 This translates to "cautery for palsy.
Cove que sian donatz al malaute en le comensament jerras grans e pilulas le servel mondificantz.	 When you visit a patient, first give them large pills and gradually decrease the dosage of the medication.
E aprop ras le cap tot del malaute e pausa sus le coguot de lu emplaustre de cetre descrit en le tractat dels emplastres.	 Then return to the top of the patient, place your hand over their chest and describe in detail how you will perform it according to the treatise on ulcers.
E pausa aquel alcunas veguadas, quar aquel es manieyra de cauteri.	 And pause that which has been heated with cautery.
E fay aquo segon aquel meteys orde le qual ja he dit.	 And after saying the first thing I said earlier.
E donc si per aqueles sanat bo es; e sino, lahoras fay a lu tres cauteris en la deriera partida de sieu cap, les quals sian deysendentz de la partida pus sobirana del cap entro a la partida pus dejos del col.	 And if for those people it is true, and otherwise the doctor will prescribe three ointments to be applied in the last part of their head towards the front side of the forehead down to the back part below the chin.
E pausa entre quascun cauteri la grossetut del dit, e aprop cura lo cauteri am aquo que es procedit.	 And pause between each cautery application and apply the one that has been done.
Mays si tu vos addicio e le malaute es aquo tollerant, lahoras fay a lu cauteri en le mieg loc; e si voys major addicio, lahora cauteriza aquel sobre les dos corns.	 If you are adding more salt to the water, put the cautery on it instead of using your hands; and if there is even greater swelling, the doctor will use two cauteries together.
Aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat; e sia le cauteri olivar segon la forma denant donat.	 And after doing that which was good, apply another cautery similarly in shape given.
Capitol .ix.	 9
De cauterisacio de parazili e de mollificacio de tot le cors.	 Cauterization of parasites and total mollification of the body.
Cove que tu procesiscas en mondificacio del cap am jerras e am aquo que havem dit; e aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap, e am cauteri sobre totz les corns del cap, e am cauteri sobre la deriera partida de lu, e am tres cauteris sobre les spondils del col.	 That which you had to do regarding mollification of the head and what was previously mentioned; apply a cautery on the patient's forehead, and place another one on the back part of his head, and apply three cauteries on the spine from below up towards above, also on the buttocks.
E si es necessari en la malautia de mollificacio del cors de trops aquel e les malautes tollerantz e la malautia es fort, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e dererament am cauteri entro que sia comborit de la codena mot de lu, e aleva la tieua ma.	 And if necessary in the case of multiple moles and a very severe condition, the doctor will burn off four moles on the back with cautery, also burn into that which is burning from below towards above, using only one cauterizing tool.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat, e aquest sia cauteri olivar.	 When healing begins, it should begin with a cure for gout.
Capitol .x.	 The text appears to be a medieval medical treatise discussing various ailments and their treatments, including gout. It seems like the original Latin is not grammatically perfect but has some similarities to other Romance languages such as Italian, Spanish, and French.
De cauterisacio de epilemcia.	 Cautery incision for epilepsy.
No es cauterizat le epilemtic sino aquella epilemcia es per flecma.	 It is not cauterization of epilepsy, but rather epilepsy itself must be treated as a separate matter.
E donc cove que mondifiques le cervel de lu al comensament de lu am yeras e am l’autra curacio la qual havem dicta en la divisio quan le malaute es gran e es tollerant la exceperacio de las medicinas.	 And you should also give the brain a treatment in addition to treating the other organs, as mentioned earlier when discussing the importance of treating large tumors and their tolerance for medicine.
E si es enfant le qual no sufferte las medicinas, lahoras aministra guarguarissmes e mastiguatoris le servel mondifican, denant aquo per motz dias, am bonifficacio de las viandas.	 If the patient does not respond to medicines, then the physician should provide a purgative and laxative treatment simultaneously, as mentioned earlier in discussing the benefits of food.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en le mieg loc del cap segon la manieyra precedent, e am autre cauteri en le occiput de lu, e sobre quascun corn del cap sieu cauterisa.	 Then place a pointed cautery on the top of the tumor, and also make another one at its location second to the previous one, as well as another at the back of its head, and over all these points do you cauterize each corner of the head separately.
E si le malaute es fort e es tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteris les quals he ditz, en havent paraliticament e mollificacio del cors sobre les spondils del col e les spondils del dos.	 If the tumor is large and tolerant, then cauterize it with the cauteries mentioned earlier, avoiding paralysis of the bowels over both sides as well as all around them.
E sia cauteri olivar segon qu’es precedit.	 The treatment should proceed in a similar manner to what was previously mentioned.
Mays si le malaute es enfant, lahoras pausa cauteri subtil segon aquesta manieyra.	 When a child has a hernia, they are given gentle points to stop it
Capitol .xi.	 You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs and placed cushions under them. Another servant is positioned on their legs, and another one on their chest with their hands held.
De cauterizacio de melencolia.	 Melancholy cautery.
Quan las causas de melencolia so humiditatz corrompudas e flacma gros, lahoras cauteriza aquel am les cauteris les quals havem ditz en le havent paralisi.	 When melancholy causes are damp and lead to numbness of the limbs, doctors cauterize those points that they have found in paralyzed individuals.
E si la causa de melencolia es superfluitat declinant a melencolia, e le cors del malaute es humit, lahoras da ha beure aquo que mundifica le cervel de lu segon aquo que ha precedut en la divisio.	 If the cause of melancholy is to increase by melancholy and the body becomes damp, doctors make it so that this solution which has preceded in sectioning enters into their mind through this one who precedes it in the division.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop fay tortora decentment fayta de li sobre le cercle, e aprop depausa aquela en le mieg loc del cap.	 Then place your head towards the patient and apply gently with a pointed cautery on its forehead, hold it over the circle, and place it at rest in the middle of his head.
E le malaute sia sesent cayrat, e sia tengut de tota partida.	 The patient has been calmed down completely.
E aprop pausa liniment; et es pus digne de boder antic de ovelhas.	 And place a warm compress over it to relieve the pain.
E escalfa aquel sobre le foc per calefaccio temprada per mesura, le qual le dit sufferta quan es mes en lu.	 Warm up that on their forehead so you can feel it as soon as possible to measure it properly
E aprop vuo’ aquel en le mieg loc del cap de lu en le cercle, e leysa lu entro que sia enfregidat.	 Then place it in the middle of his head and let him cool down.
E fay aquo am le malaute en tota semmana una veguada, am le autre regiment de lu bo entro que sia sanat; o si vols, cauteriza aquel fazen petitz puntz segon lo mays de lu, sino que tenguas la ma am un cauteri ayssi ordenat: aquesta es specia de cauteri la qual humecta le cervel am equalitat.	 Give this to the patient for a whole week and let another doctor do his treatment once it is well, or if you want, points can be made after every meal instead of having medicine regularly; this is special cautery that wets the flesh equally.
E aprop pausa aquel coto enbegut en boder o en grays de gualina.	 When a vein in the leg becomes swollen or painful.
Capitol .xii.	 Chapter 12
De cauterisacio de aygua descendent en le huel.	 The cautery is applied to draw out the water
Quan a tu es declarat le comensament de aygua en le huel per les senhals les quals yeu he ditz en la divisio, lahoras comensa e dona en beure al malaute aquo que mondifique le cap de lu, e guarda aquel de totas humiditatz.	 When a vein is opened for the purpose of removing water from it, doctors first give wine to the patient in order that he may become intoxicated and forget what has been done to him, so that he cannot recall anything afterwards.
E fay aquel suzar en banh en degu per alcus jorns.	 The vein is burned or cut open with a hot iron for several days.
E aprop comanda a lu que raza le sieu cap, e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap; e aprop cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre dos templas si es le comensament de ysement de aygua en dos huels, o de la un latz si es comensamen de l’aygua en un huel.	 The first vein is burned in the head and cauterized at two points on top of the temples if it is the beginning of gout in both legs, or from one leg if it is a single attack of gout.
Incideys am cauteri totas las venas e arcerias las quals so dejos la codena; e sian les cauteris en aquela lonh en la latitut de las templas.	 The veins and arteries that are to be cauterized are the ones leading up to the temples, and they must all be cautorized at a distance equal to or greater than their length.
E guarda te de fluxs de sanc quan es cauterizat; e si veses de lu fluxs de sanc, osta le am alcuna medicina, la qual es a tu possible.	 The cautery is applied and after it has been done, the flow of blood from that artery must be stopped for some time or until medical aid can be obtained to prevent bleeding.
E yeu vindre am savieza la qual es en extraccio de arcerias e am abscizio de aquelas e cautela de fluxs de sanc.	 The cautery should also include the excision of any other arteries and the cutting off or stopping of their flow of blood.
E alcunas vetz es cauterizat en le cervitz dejos dos osses am dos cauteris dererament produzitz.	 When two joints are cautorized in the buttocks of a patient, two pains arise from two cauteries.
Capitol .xiii.	 The thirteenth chapter
De cauterizacio de lacrimas antiquas.	 About the cautery for ancient tears.
Quan lacrimas dels huels so antiquas assuduament e per las venas e arterias las quals so en le loc manifest del cap defora e es verificat que aquo es superfluitatz frejas flecmatiquas, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri le qual havem recontat en le capitol de comensament de aygua cazent en les huels, e am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos templas, e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos osses.	 When ancient tears are abundant in the veins and arteries visible at the top of the head it is found that this is unnecessary and the doctors cauterize the same vein with the same cautery as was applied to begin bleeding from the hands, on the forehead and two cauteries in the temples above both eyes.
E si indigeyses de addicio, lahoras cauteriza aquel en tot latz de la coa del huel sobre la extremitat del sobrecilh am petit cauteri.	 If there is a desire to add more, doctors cauterize it on the surface of the foot near the extremity of the lower limb with a small cautery.
Capitol .xiiii.	 The fourteenth chapter.
De cauterizacio de fetor de nas.	 About the cautery for nasal odor.
Quan tu medicas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no aprofieyta la tua medicacio, lahoras tu aparelha e dona en beure al malaute las cochias per tres noytz; e aprop ras le cap de lu, e cauteriza le am cauteri migier am cauteri olivar.	 When you miss the dose and your remedy is not applied correctly, the doctor will give a patient three doses of the ointment to drink; place their head on it, and cauterize with the smaller cautery the same as for bleeding.
E aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri clavelh am dos cauteris sobre les dos sobrecilhs dejos les cabels un petit.	 Then the doctor will cauterize with a small cautery on both sides of his temples, near the hair.
E guarda te de la arceria que no incindas aquela.	 Keep from burning that.
E del cauteri clavilh aquesta es la forma.	 And a pointed cautery will be used for this.
Capitol .xv.	 Chapter fifteen.
De cauteri de mollificacio de palpebras dels huels.	 Cautery of mollification on the eyelids.
Quan la palpebra del huel es mollificada per malautia o per humiditat, lahoras cauteriza aquela palpebre1 am un cauteri am aquest cauteri lunar; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	 When an eyelid is mollified by either malady or moisture, the doctor cautorizes that eyelid with a cautery of this type. And this is its form.
E si vos, cauteriza aquel sobre les dos sobrecils un petit am dos cauteris en tota partida, e sian elonguatz de las timporas.	 If you cautorize both eyebrows with just two cauteries in one go, and those will be enough to heal the wounds quickly.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la quantitat del sobrecil.	 The length of each cautery is proportional to the amount of eyebrow.
E no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri, mays segon la quantitat que la tersa partida de la palpebre sia adhurida.	 Do not use too much cautery, but instead measure the amount needed for a single eyelid.
Capitol .xvi.	 Chapter sixteen.
De cauteri de la palpebre del huel quan les pels so convertitz a las partidas dedintz e punho le huel.	 Cautery on the eyelids when hairs become split and torn, causing eye irritation.
Quan les pels del huel son convertitz a las partidas dedintz ayssi que pungo le huel, cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, quar cauteri o es am fer o es am medicina comburent.	 When hairs on the eyelid become split and torn in this way that cause eye irritation, cautorize them with two tweezers or another medical method.
Si am cauteri de lu am foc, comanda al malaute denant aquo que leyse les sieus pels ayssi cum aquels les quals les mundan, entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz; e si punho aquel deves le lor naysement, lahoras tu strenh les huels de lu am una benda per so que no sia maugut entro que·ls pels sian nascutz.	 If the cautery burns, instruct the patient to soak their hairs in something that soothes them like this, until they become as smooth as those from the other eyelid; and if you touch it accidentally, the doctor will gently pull out their hairs so that no injury occurs.
Donc cum siran nascutz e engualhatz, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop senha sobre la palpebre dels huels de lu am tenta, am senhal le qual sia segon la figura de fulha de merta, e sia le comensament del senhal prop dels pels.	 "When someone is about to be born or circumcised, doctors stop the flow of blood and place a cushion on the patient's chest, and then apply pressure over the eyes to prevent the blood from coming out.
E aprop pausa coto enbegut en album de huou o en mucillatge de ptilli sobre le huel.	 "And after stopping the bleeding in the circumcision area or the nosebleed, do place a bandage soaked with vinegar over it.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu.	 "And when you're done using the cautery, make sure this is how to use it.
E aprop cauteriza sobre la figura la qual as senhada, petit a petit, em motas veguadas, entro que sia comburida la superficia de la codena la qual es ayssi cum fuelha de mirta, tota aparent propriament.	 "And when you're done cauterizing over the figure that has been burned little by little and exposed to sunlight until it becomes completely charred on the surface of where it was burned.
E senhal de sanetat de la tieua obra es que tu vegus la palpebre de l’huel ja esser contrayta e·ls pels de lu esser elevatz deves la punctura del huel.	 "The healing process is that you should cover the patient's eye already with a bandage, and then elevate their head to prevent bleeding.
E donc eleva la tua ma e laysa aquel per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eredicada la scara.	 "Then lift your hand and lay it on him for three days, and then place a bandage over his back until the scar is healed.
E aprop cura aquela am enguent entro que sia sanat.	 "And after curing that with this treatment, be sure to have been cured.
Mays si retorna per les pels alcuna causa aprop lor naysement e la palpebra es mollificada, lahoras fay autra vetz le cauteri sobre aquel tot ayssi cum avias fayt primieyrament.	 "And if after using the cautery there is no more cause for concern and the eye has been relaxed as before.
Mays si les pels so en la palpebra dejos, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que sia elevada al sieu loc natural e sia engualhat e que les pels no punhan le huelh.	 "And if there are any problems with the patient's eye after using the cautery, stop and make sure to elevate it back into its natural position and also apply pressure so that bleeding does not occur.
Mays le cauteri am medicina comburent aquest es que comandes al malaute que leyse les pels entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz, e aprop sia fayta de carta de drap la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	 When the patient lies down and requests that his feet are raised and gently pulled apart, a servant should hold their hands and perform a pointed cautery on each of these parts one by one, making sure to do it carefully with a dressing cloth wrapped around the finger.
E aprop pren de sabo conogut e de caus viva ana unc. i, o quays aquo, e aprop mescle3 aquelas causas be, e fay aquo am festinacio per so que no sia enfregidat; e aprop expandeys de aquo sobre la carta la qual es fayta ayssi cum forma de fulha de mirtra, e pausa aquel sobre la un huel od amdos; e pausa dejos le huel coto enbegut en album de huou, e el cap del malaute sia en le tieu se.	 After the initial preparation is complete and a servant has been instructed on how to perform it, they should apply a small amount of warm water and gently wash around each cause one by one with a clean cloth, making sure not to touch them directly but rather using their hand or arm as a barrier between themselves and the causes. This ensures that no moisture gets trapped in the paper coverings during application, preventing them from becoming damp. After washing each cause, they should then spread out the soaked cloths over the patient's body evenly, ensuring all parts are covered with one large cloth that has been treated just like the others.
E pausa le dit sobre le medicina e prem aquela un petit e no la mauguas entro que lo malaute senta la mordicacio de la medicina, quar mordicacio es en lu ayssi cum de foc.	 After washing each cause and spreading out the soaked cloths on the patient's body, they should instruct them to gently apply a small amount of medicine onto the wounds with their finger or hand while covering it as before, making sure not to touch any other part of the body during this step.
E donc cum percevera aquo que el atrobo mordicacio, lahoras leyssa la medicina e mau aquela am le tieu dit; donc cum cessa la mordicacio, lahoras remau la medicina he lava le huel am aygua; e lahoras considera si vezes la palpebra ja es levada ayssi cum es lavada deves la costriccio am foc o am incisio, quar lahoras esta be; e si no torna sobre aquela de la medicina sobre le loc en le qual no ha empremut la medicina e no se denigra entro que sia engualhada la tua operacio e sia contrayt le huel.	 After the initial application is complete and a servant has verified that all wounds have been covered, they should then instruct them to apply the medicine gently onto the wounds with their finger or hand while covering it completely just like before, ensuring no part of their body is exposed during this step. They should also check whether each eyelid is closed properly by feeling for any cracks in the lid or tear that might indicate a problem and correct it if necessary, as well as ensure there are no gaps where the medicine has not been applied correctly to prevent mistakes when it comes time to perform the surgery itself.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eradicada la codena de la adhustio, e aprop cura aquel am enguent deafinicon o am autre entro que sia sanat.	 When it's necessary to make a cut on the abdomen in order to remove adhesions or other injuries, then the servant should gently cut through them as best they can.
E es necessari a tu, deves la tua operacio que guardes am pervigil diligencia que en le huel no caia re de la medicina, e si la palpebre aprop alscus dias es mollificada e alcuna causa dels pels punh en le huel, lahoras itera la tua medicina sobre aquel loc le qual de la palpebre es mollificat, e propriamen ayssi quo as fayt al comensament, e aprop enaviro lu entro que sia sanat.	 You must ensure that you take great care in performing your surgery to avoid causing harm to the patient and if at any point during the operation it is found that there has been excessive swelling or other reason for concern, then repeat the medication over this area where the eyelid was swollen, ensuring that the procedure should not be repeated without good cause.
E aquesta es la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	 That's how to apply makeup.
E sapias que les huels dels homes son diversificatz segon la magnitut e la parvitat, e donc segon aquo es fayta la tua contraccio.	 The sizes of men's ears vary based on the size and shape, so make sure that your mold fits accordingly.
E no sira amaguada la via de rectetut ad aquel al qual es studi en aquesta art.	 Do not miss the approach you take to study this art.
Capitol .xvii.	 The 17th chapter of Capitol
De cauterizacio de fistula que es en le lacrimal de l’huel.	 Cautery on the tear duct
Quan tu curas fistula am aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquela segon aquesta manieyra: comanda al malaute que pause le cap sieu en le tieu se, e tengua le cap de lu alcun ministre entre las tieuas mas en tal manieyra que no sia maugut ni agitat am le sieu cap.	 When treating a fistula in this manner that you have described to the patient's divisions and they still refuse your cure, then you should cauterize it as follows: instruct the patient to keep his head bent at an angle with the tip of their chin resting on their chest, ensuring there is no movement or agitation from the head.
E aprop pausa coto enfus en album de huou o en mucellage de ptilli sobre le huel de lu.	 And place a cushion under them, another on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	 And then apply the cautery in this manner:
le qual sia conquau, ayssi cum es forma de cana o de pena de voltor, de la una extremitat am la qual es fayta lo cauteri.	 By using it on both ends of the part where you applied the cautery, making a full circle around that area.
E si voys, sia penetrant entro a la autra extremitat.	 And if he does penetrate into the other extremity.
E si vols sia sort ayssi cum tenta.	 Then do it as customarily done by doctors.
Mays empero aquel que es concau es milhor a la tieua obra.	 However, remember that this is the most usual way to perform it.
E aprop prem la fistula si es uberta, e tra de lu sania et exsicca aquela.	 If you need to close a fistula if it was open, and then apply something wet and dry as necessary in order to heal that place.
E si no es uberta, lahoras obre aquela e extratz la poyredura de lu.	 And if not opened, leave it open or cut through the discharge of that part.
E aprop pausa sobre lu le cauteri le qual sia be ignit, e te am aquel la tieua ma un petit deves le cauteri del huel a la partida del nas, per so que no erre la tua ma o le malaute sia enquietat, e lahoras pausa le cauteri en le grays del huel e corrompas aquel.	 And if the cautery is burning too much, then place your hand over it near the nose to prevent its flame from touching your hand or the patient's face, and afterwards remove the cautery in the gray part of the belly and burn that instead.
E donc si al comensament del tieu cauteri perve entro al os, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera le cauteri una veguada o dos, si mestiers era; e layssa aquel ayssi per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre aquel coto am boder e enviro lu am enguent exsiccatiu entro que sia sanat.	 Then first apply the cautery through the nose if it is safe to do so; otherwise continue applying and increase its application as necessary for two or three days, depending on how much pain relief you get, after which remove that part and then apply another one over your palm and onto the patient's face in order to cool them down, being careful not to burn yourself with excessive dryness.
Mays si eran passatz xi dias e no es sanat, lahoras pausa sobre lu medicina aguda corrosiva entro que l’os sia descubert e sia ras segon que conveneys en le sieu capitol.	 When the illness lasts for more than ten days without improvement, doctors discontinue corrosive treatment and focus on other remedies for its second phase
E es autra manieyra de cauteri de fistula la qual alscus primiers diysero: enten al loc de la fistula e fen aquela e aprop pausa en aquela fissura camaen subtil del qual es la forma de lu: E fon en aquela la quantitat de i unc de plom fundut; e te la tua ma am camaem am bona retencio, e no sia maugut le malaute per so que le plom fundut no pervengua al huel de aquel; e cove que pausas sobre le huel del malaute coto enfus en album de huou o en aygua, quar plom adhureys le loc de la fistula e sana aquela per sanacio meravilhora.	 The next remedy involves puncturing the fistulous opening with a pointed cautery tool to drain the discharge from the fistula; after that, place a finger over it to prevent any discharge entering into the eyes; and afterwards apply a bandage soaked in ointment or water near the fistula to heal and close it naturally.
E si la fistula es sanada am aquo que havem dit del cauteri e de la curacio, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari aministrar trauc del nas e reduzir la fistula al cors del nas segon que vindra en son loc propri.	 If the fistulous opening has been treated and cured as previously mentioned, then it's good to proceed further; otherwise, doctors will need to administer a nasal tourniquet in order to reduce the size of the fistula at its location.
Capitol .xviii.	 Chapter XVIII
De cauterizacio de la fendedura des potz.	 The treatment for fistulous discharge from sores
Motas veguadas accideysso fissuras en las labias, e majorment en las labias dels enfantz.	 The remedy is used to treat fistulous discharges in the vaginal area, and especially in the vagina of children.
Donc cum tu curas aquelas fissuras am aquo que nos havem dit en las divisios e no aprofieyta la tua cura, lahoras igneys le cauteri petit cutellar segon aquesta forma que s’ensiec:	 Then if you do not cure these fistulas as previously mentioned and do not finish your treatment, doctors will perform a skin punch excision according to this method.
E sia la conquavitat de lu segon la subtilitat de cotella.	 The second step involves the removal of the overlying tissue of the fistula.
Aprop pausa aquel init cuytadament en aquelas fissuras entro que·l cauteri pervengua al preon de las fissuras.	 When a pointed cautery is inserted into the fissures of the thighs, it runs through to the front of the wounds.
E aprop cura aquel am cerotz entro que sia sanat.	 It must be gently applied so that it does not cause harm.
Capitol .xix.	 The 19th chapter.
De cauterizacio de fistula en la boca.	 Cautery of the fistula in the mouth.
Quan en la razit de uvula o en le paladar o en las razitz de las dentz endeve apostema e aprop fa brac, e aprop es rompuda, e aprop es antiquada, e corr brac e es fayta fistula, e aprop tu curas aquela e no aprofieyta a curacio, lahoras cove que tu igniscas cauteri segon la quantitat que sia receubuda en la fistula, e aprop met aquel ignit en le trauc de la fistola, e te la tua ma entro que pervengua le ferr ignit al preon de lu, e al derier de lu fazen aysso una veguada o dos; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que nos havem dit de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	 Cautery to the uvula or palate in order to treat it and prevent further inflammation of the fistula, ensure that you use cauteries proportional to the amount of discharge received into the fistula, place them gently within the track of the fistulas so they may cause bleeding at a moderate level over two days; after which cure this condition with caution.
E donc si la sania es abscindita e es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari de descubrir le loc e hostar le os corrumput segon que vindra en son capitol.	 If the discharge stops and is healed, it's good; otherwise, it is necessary to investigate further in order to determine whether there are any complications that may come up later on.
Capitol .xx.	 The 20th chapter.
De cauterisacio de las dentz e de mollificacio de las angivas.	 Cautery of the teeth and mollification of the veins.
Quan las angivas son mollificadas per humiditat e las dentz son maugudas, e curas aquelas am medicinas e no confereys, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra aprop aysso, enayssi que tu pauses la quanula sobre la dent e entromet en aquela le cauteri ignit festinantment, e te la tieua ma un petit entro que·l malaute cente la calor del foc a la razit de la dent esser pervenguda.	 When the veins are mollified by humidity and the teeth are ulcerated, cure these with medicines and do not delay them; the physician should hold the patient's head steady, apply the cautery in its proper form that will cause bleeding as soon as it reaches a vein or tooth, and also ensure there is no heat from the flames reaching into the mouth.
E aprop leva la tua ma, e aprop itera le cauteri alcunas veguadas segon que vols.	 When you have prepared your patient, then apply a towel soaked in cold water to their feet, after which they will ask for another servant who will use hot water on the back.
E aprop le malaute huompla la sua boca de aygua de sal e tengua aquela per una hora, e pueys stupa aquela, quar la dent mauguda es fermada e la gengiva mollificada es strenguda e la humiditat corrompuda es exsiccada.	 When the patient has been given a solution of salt water and kept it in their mouth for an hour (or until the bad tooth is softened up), then spit out that, as the rotten teeth are hardened and the soft gums are strengthened and the dampness is restored.
Capitol .xxi.	 XXIX.
De cauterisacio de dolor de dent.	 Treatment of toothache.
Quan dolor de dent es per fregiditat, o en lu es freg o verm, o no comfereys la curacio am medicina, lahoras cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am boder de vacas, o cauteri am foc.	 When toothache is caused by coldness or numbness in the gums, or if there is no relief from medicine, then doctors will use one of two methods to treat it: apply a cautery on the back of the veins (back cautery) or apply one on fire.
Cauteri am boder es que tu prenguas boder de vacas e bulhas aquel en culhe de ferr , e aprop pren coto e envolopa le sobre la extremitat de la tenta, e aprop enmergeys aquel am boder bulhit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolorosa festinantment entro que sia enfregidat.	 Back cautery is to put a towel soaked in cold water on the back of their veins (back of the arm), wrap it around the painful part and hold it there until the affected area becomes numb.
E aprop itera aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la vertut del foc pervengua a la razit de la dentz.	 After doing back cautery, put another servant who will apply heat to the cheek of their face in order for warmth to reach the tooth area.
E si voys, submergeys lana o coto en le boder desus dit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolent, e pausa sobre aquel ferr ignit entro que·l ferr pervengua al preon de la conquavitat de la dent.	 If you have done back cautery and are satisfied with the effect of warmth on their toothache but still feel cold in general, then put another servant who will submerge a towel or cloth into the back of theirs and place it over the painful part to warm up that area as well.
Mays empero la cauterizacio am foc es que tu atendas a la quannula de eram o de ferr, e sia en le cor de lu alcuna grocesa e la acuitat del foc no pervengua a la boca del malaute.	 When doing the cautery on the surface of the foot, do not let the heat go to the mouth of the patient
E aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra, e pausa aquel sobre la dent e te la tua ma entro que·l cauteri sia enfregidat; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas quar la dolor sira remauguda o en aquel dia o en l’autre dia.	 After putting the cautery in the shape that will come, place it on the tooth and put your hand inside to keep the cautery cool; do this a few times until the pain subsides or goes away over time.
E cove que per empressio de aquel cauteri que·l malaute umpla la sieua boca de bon boder e tengua aquel per una hora e aprop scupa le; e aquesta es la forma del cauteri.	 After applying the cautery to the patient's mouth, keep it on for one hour and then remove it. This is how the cautery should be applied.
E cauteriza am qual que tu voys extremittat segon que a tu es possible.	 Cautery may be applied as soon as it is possible to do so.
E aquesta es la forma de la cannula:	 This is how the cannula should look like:
Capitol .xxii.	 The capital of Italy (Capitolio).
De cauterizacio de extrophulos.	 Cautery on extremities.
Quan extrophulos so de flecma e de humors fregas e no so hobedientz a digistio per medicinas e tu voys la digistio de aquelas leugerament, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri conquau la forma del qual es aquesta seguen, havent dos extremitatz hubertas per que yesca le fum deves le cauteri per l’autra extremitat, e pausa aquel ignit sobre aquel apostema una veguada, e autre si indigeyses de aquel, entro que pervengua al preon del apostema.	 When extremities are affected by cold humors and do not respond to medical treatment you apply the cautery in its shape as this one, having two extremities held so that heat does not go from one extremity to another, after applying it on one side pause it over the other side for a moment, then remove it.
E si l’apostema es pauca, lahoras pausa le cauteri segon la quantitat del apostema, e aprop leyssa le per tres jorns e pausa sobre lu coto enfus en boder entro que sia remaugut aquo que·l foc ha comburit.	 When the arrow is short, then place a cushion beneath it and apply heat for three days to prevent freezing in the body as long as the flame does not freeze.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent e tentas e draps entro que sia sanat.	 Apply the ointment immediately and wrap it around until you are healed.
E la forma de la cannula o deu cauteri a tal es comveyter.	 The form of the cautery or what is being cauterized to be determined.
Capitol .xxiii.	 Chapter 33
De cauterizacio de rauquiera de votz e de constriccio de ale.	 Cauterization for wounds and constriction of vessels.
Quan las humiditatz veno sobre le quanal del pulmo, e majorment quan aquo es am fregiditat de compleccio, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia evacuat al comensament am medicinas laxativas, e aprop cauteriza aquel deves la razit del golayro en le loc depremegut.	 When the humidity is over the part of the lung and especially when this is cold body temperature, then doctors advise that the patient should be evacuated first by laxatives and an immediate cautery to the affected area.
E guarda te que no pervenguas am le cauteri al golayro ni no comburas de la codena de lu sino un pauc.	 Keep in mind not to cauterize the wound or apply heat to it, but rather use a small amount of cool water only.
E cauteriza aquel am autra cauteri deves la junctura del col en le derier espondil de lu.	 Cauterize that part immediately with another cautery after the first one in the lower abdomen area.
E·l cauteri de lu sia clavilh sego la maniera precedent.	 The cautery of him should be done as previously stated.
E aprop cura aquel am aquo que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	 Apply that part where it was previously stated to be healed.
Capitol .xxiiii.	 Chapter 34
De cauterizacio de malautia del pulmo e de tos.	 Cauterization for pneumonia and coughing.
Quan tos e malautia de pulmo so de humiditatz fregas e le malaute no ha febre ni tisic e es malautia antiqua, lahoras cauterisa aquel am dos cauteris sobre la furcula en les locz depremegutz leontz e buoytz; e am autra cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz entre dos mamillos; e sia le cauteri clavilh segon la forma precedent.	 When the pleurisy is caused by cold humors and the patient does not have a fever or dyspnea, it is customary to cauterize in two places: one on the furcula of the neck below, and another on the middle of the chest between the breasts; also to place the second cautery as before.
E si vols, sia la tua cauterizacio punctan am le cauteri que es apelat puncta, la forma del qual precedeys en la ponctacio de dolor de aurelhas.	 If you wish, the cautery point can be made at the same place as that which precedes it in calling for pains of the ears.
E sian puntz entro cays ad aquels; e aprop cura aquel am aquo meteys que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	 These points should go between them, and they should be treated exactly as if what precedes it were a disease that needs treatment.
E ya sia le cauteri haventz tres ramps quar cauterizacio es am aquel: am una veguada podes far tres cauteris segon aquesta forma:	 And if the cautery points are three, each cautery is to be done in this way: perform three cauteries according to this form.
Capitol .xxv.	 Chapter xxv.
De cauterizacio de titillic que es le cap del ajutori.	 Cautery of the head, which is part of the therapy.
Quan le cap del ajutori es dislocat per causa de humiditatz lubricas e no es fermat en la hora del sieu retornament deves la sua dislocacio entro que sia a lu aquo costuma de retornar, e aprop per un petit movement es deslocat ayssi que s’endeve, ayssi cum nos havem testificat, lahoras cove que primieyrament redusiscas la dislocacio, e aprop le malaute sia reversat sobre le sieu dos o sobre le latz sa; e aprop eleva la codena la qual es en la partida dedintz del citillic a las partidas desus am les ditz de la tua ma sinistra, si la junctura es dislocada a las partidas dedintz.	 When the head of the patient is dislocated due to humidors and cannot be returned in its return trip, you should move it back into place so that it is on top as usual, except when reversing it over the right side or left side; and lift your hand towards where it was removed from.
E aprop igneys le cauteri havent dos caps; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	 First servant carries a pointed cautery
E aprop cauteriza la codena entro que penetre aquela entro al autre latz; e vindra la figura de cauterizacio lahoras de iv caps cauteris.	 The first servant cauterizes the area between where it penetrates into another layer, and then performs the cautery procedure on all the other affected areas.
e so aquel subtils segon la quantitat de tenta; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	 Then comes a second servant who measures the quantity of effort required; this is how things go.
E alcunas veguadas es ajustat segon aquest comte i per que son les cauteris .viii.	 Some servants are adjusted after that, and then there will be cauteries.
E aprop pausa sobre le cauteri porys cuytz am sal, e aprop fay adherir le malaute a trenquilitat, e lo membre no sia maugut per alcun temps entro que sia confortat.	 Then comes the pause on the cautery as you may say, and also adhere to the patient's tranquility, so that the member will not be hurt in any time until it is calmed.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas desus e tart es fayt aquo, lahoras cauteriza sobre le muscle am cauteri clavilh o am motz cauteris puntan, quar la junctura es confermada e la humiditat es romauguda e le malaute es sanat.	 If the dislocation is at joints and tendons it is customary to cauterize over a muscle or point of cautery near the joint, where the joint has been confirmed and the dampness has been removed and the patient is healed.
Capitol .xxvi.	 The end.
De cauterizacio del stomac.	 Cautery for the stomach.
Quan veno en l’estomac freg e motas humiditatz entro que aquel extrazo de la sua compleccio e so multiplicatz raumases a lu, e si tu continuas las manieyras de curacio e no confereyso, lahoras cove que le malaute sia sobre le sieu dos ressupinat, e extenda las suas mas e las suas coysas, e aprop cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris: an un cauteri dejos le pietz per la quantitat d’un dit am cauteri clavilh, e am dos cauteris dejos del dos costatz del cauteri, entro que vengua la figura de cauteri triangulada; e elonga entre els que no sian ajustatz que faran poyredura.	 When the stomach becomes inflamed and moisture is present inside that extends from its circumference and spreads throughout the body, if you continue with care treatment but do not confirm it, then doctors advise putting a hernia on both sides of the abdomen, extending its side and thighs, and apply cauteries as follows: one cautery in place for the quantity of one finger of cautery on the chest, two cauteries over the two sutures of the cautery, so that there is a triangular figure of cauterization; and it extends between those who are not adjusted to do perforation.
E si la profunditat del cauteri la quantitat de les dos terses de la grocesa de la codena.	 When the depth of the cautery equals two thirds of its length
E sia la figura del cauteri segon aquesta forma ses addicio, E si vols, cauteriza am gran cauteri en le mieg loc del estomac segon aquesta forma; et aquest sia un cauteri segon la forma de cercle segon aquesta forma:	 If the figure of the cautery is second in this way, and if you want to, cauterize a large cautery into the stomach's location by that shape; it will be an all-encompassing cautery with the circle shape.
E sia cauterizat l’estomac punctan ad aquel que de aquest cauteri es spaventat: e es que tu senhes sobre l’estomac punt segon la quantitat que voles am tenta, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en les puntz; e aprop cura aquel am la curacio qu’es precedita entro que sia sanat.	 If you have cautorized the stomach punctually as per that shape and it is necessary for this cautery to be applied, then apply it at those points; and also ensure that the previously applied cure is followed, so that there may not be any harm caused.
Capitol .xxvii.	 The 27th capital
De cauterizacio del fietge fret.	 Cauterization of the flesh wound.
Quan endeve en le fietge dolor per fregiditat o per humiditat o per grossa ventositat entro que de la sieua normal compleccio sia getat per egressio superflua, e es curat le malaute am aquo que havem dit e no comfereys, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e senhes am tenta tres cauteris segon aquesta forma et aquesta quantitat meteyssa sobre le fietge dejos dels ipocondres, la hon perve le decubit de home.	 If a patient experiences pain due to cold or dampness or excessive wind entering the wound when their normal healing process is being hindered by an unnecessary escape of fluid from beneath them, then apply this cautery and do not interfere with it; allow the bad humors to subside over its area, and if necessary try three cauteries in that manner with that amount on the foot of the patient.
E sia l’espazi le qual es entre quascun cauteri segon la grossetut del dit, e sia le cauteri segon la longitut del cors dreyta.	 The space between each cautery is equal to its girth; and also the cauteries are proportional in length to the body.
E no compremas la tua am le cauteri mot.	 "When joint pain arises from cold humors that infiltrate every part of the body, and when pains occur in the feet.
E si la quantitat de aquo que es adhurit la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena, e no y sia pus ajustat; e si le malaute stant sobre les pes de lu; e si no es estant, lahoras sia jassent, le qual ja ha extendudas las suas coysas, e eleve les sieus brasses.	 "And if the quantity of this which is applied in proportion to the size of the space on one side, and it cannot be adjusted; and if the patient remains lying down; then the doctor should stretch them out as much as they can, holding their arms wide open.
E es aquesta la forma del cauteri:	 "This is how to perform the cautery:
E a tu es possible que cauterizes aquestz cauteris am cauteri cutellar, quan es am tu subtilitat e prudencia en l’art.	 "And if it's possible, you should burn away a small cautery on the cheek when you have the subtlety and prudence in your art.
E guarda te que trop no procesiscas en la cauterizacio, e sia adhurida la specitut de tota la codena per que sia adhurit tot le cors e pervengua entro als budels, quar la codena aqui es subtil; e sapias aquo.	 "And remember that you should not perform the cautery in all cases and only apply it to the entire body and through the bowels when this is subtle; and understand this.
Capitol .xxviii.	 Section 28
De perforacio de apostema del fietge am cauteri.	 The perforation of the fistula with cautery.
Quan endeve excitura o apostema en le fietge e voles saber si aquel apostema es en le carn del fietge o en la tunica de lu, lahoras si es en la carn del fietge, le malaute atrobo gravitat e dolor ses acuitat.	 When you want to extract a fistula from the leg and want to know if it is in the flesh of the leg or in the tunic of this, the doctor should determine whether it is in the flesh of the leg; otherwise he will have a serious attack of gout.
E si es en la tunica del fietge, am la dolor es acuitat gran e vezes que ja afatiguatz les metges la cura de lu.	 If it is in the tunic of the leg, then the pain is great and the doctors will exhaust themselves trying to cure him/her.
Donc cove que·l malaute sia enversat sobre la sieua cervit; e aprop senha le loc de l’apostema am tenta; e aprop igneys le cauteri le quel es asemblat a rag, la forma del qual a precedit en l’autra pagina.	 The patient should be turned towards his face; and place the area of the anus on his chest; and place the cautery at its edge; and put in order what was described earlier in another page.
E cauteriza am aquel i cauteri entro que tota la codena sia comborida, entro que pervengua al ciphac, entro qu’en yesca sania.	 Burn the abscess at its edge with a cautery; and burn through to the phlegm that has entered it, and into the healthy part of it.
E aprop cura aquel per curacio dels autres apostemas entro que sia sanat.	 And place him there for curing other abscesses where he is in good health
E no cove que de aquesta forma de cauteri use sino aquel del qual le estudi en l’art de medicina es prolonguat, e en las mas del qual motas malautias an conogut; mays aquest am esperiment alcunas veguadas sia ardit sobre aquesta operacio, mays empero leyssa aquela deves nos, e es miels.	 Do not use this cautery form if the one known for its long period of practice and in curing many illnesses does not suit you; may I suggest another operation that is suitable to your needs, or perhaps I should ask a different doctor.
Capitol .xxix.	 Chapter 29
De cauterizacio de plauresi.	 Burn treatment
Diyssero les antics cauteri de las razitz de aristologia a plauresi frega segon aquesta manieyra esser fazedor, e es aquest que tu prenguas de las razitz de aristologia longa secca una razit pun longua que es trobada, e sia de la grossetut del dit.	 Burn treatment
E aprop submergeys aquela en oli e eysen aquela al foc, e aprop cauteriza per un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre la continuacio de la furcula am le col; e am dos cauteris petitz dejos guidazi, un pauc declinans a la partida que es dejus la barba, e am dos cauteris en aquo que es declinant entre la quinta costa e la cizena, declinant un pauc a las partidas detras; e am autre cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz; et am autre sobre l’estomac, et am tres cauteris de las partidas detras; et am un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre las dos spallas, e am dos cauteris dels dos latz del pietz, dejos le cauteri le qual es entre doas spallas.	 Burn treatment
E no cove que compremas la tua ma am le cauteri, ans sia en le manifest de la codena en obra.	 When you have opened up the space between the patient's thighs, place a cushion underneath them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
E ja diyssero alscus antics que so alscus dels homes les quals uson de cauteri de ferr semblant a ray e igneysso aquel, e meto aquel en aquel loc le qual es entre las costas, entro que pervenguam am aquel ad aquel apostema e sia foragetada sania, ayssi cum havem dit en l’apostema del fietge.	 Those who want to perform cauterization in a similar way will also put that between the coasts, and when they come near it, apply that wickedly well, so it has been said by doctors of that field.
Mays en aquesta perforacio am cauteri no es ses temor, quar hu mor tantost ho accideys en le loc fistula a la qual no es sanacio.	 In this cauterization procedure, there is no fear, as it usually occurs in the location of the fistula that is not healing.
Capitol .xxx.	 Capitulation
De la cauterizacio de la melsa.	 Of the cauterization on the breast.
Quan tu curas la malautia de la melsa am aquo que havem dit de la curacio en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cauteri en lu es segon tres manieras, las quals totas son dreyturieras, de las quals la una es que fassas tres cauteris o quatre linhan segon la longitut de la melsa segon la figura dels cauteris del fietge, la figura dels quals ha precedit.	 If you do not trust the cure mentioned in the passage and want to perform the cauterization yourself, then it is advisable that in such cases, if necessary, cauterize in it, which should be done as follows: first make three punctures or four in a second for the length of the breast following the figure of the cauteries on the body, the figure of which has preceded.
E sia entre quascun cauteri la grossetut d’un dit o un pauc mes, e la manieyra del cauteri sia la manieyra la qual havem dita en le cauteri del fietge engualment.	 And between each cautery make a small incision or a few more, and the manner of the cautery should be similar to that mentioned in the figure for the cautery on the body as well.
E no compremas la tua ma am le cauteri; e le malaute sia eves sobre lo sieu dos.	 You have already positioned a cushion beneath their thighs, another underneath their legs, and one over their chest, holding onto them tightly with your hands.
E es autra manieyra de cauterizar, so es que tu igniscas le cauteri haventz dos vertimentz, la qual causa havem dita en le capitol de dislocacio del muscle, e elava la codena la qual es en le endreyt de la melsa la hon perve le jazer del malaute sinistre.	 Another method of cautery is to use a heated probe; the purpose of this is that you should not have direct contact with it, as this can cause damage to the muscle fibers and lead to a severe infection in the affected joint if done incorrectly or improperly.
E sia la tua elevacio am la qual elevas la codena segon la longuesa del cors, per que sian faytz cauteris segon la latitut del cos.	 The elevation method is used when you want to apply the cautery directly on the chest wall; it should be done at a certain angle of the body.
E aprop entromet les dos vernimentz, ignitz mot, en aquel entro que am aquels penetres la codena de la autra part.	 When applying to another area instead of the first one, you must enter through an opening in that other part.
E aprop extrayt le cauteri; e donc son faytz quatre cauteris.	 After applying the cautery and before continuing on with it, do this action four times.
E si voys, cauteriza am cauteri havent tres vernimentz.	 If you are done with cautery after three applications.
E aprop tu cura le cauteri pus que aia laysat de getar brac per trops jorns, quar mays es comferent que las autras causas precedentz en la curacio.	 After a certain number of days have passed when using the cautery, it is important that all preceding treatments are completed correctly.
Capitol .xxxi.	 Thank you!
De cauterizacio de ydropici.	 Thank you for your assistance in translating the text.
Cauteri no catz en ydropici sino en alcinte3 propriament.	 Do not use cautery on the affected joint, but rather apply it at a specific location instead.
Quan tu curas le ydropic am las manieyras de curacio las quals havem ditas en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que aquel cauterizes am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic e am un cauteri sobre l’estomac, e am autre cauteri sobre le fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa, e am dos cauteris entre les spondils del dos, e un cauteri en lo dreyt del pietz, e am autre cauteri sobre l’estomac.	 When curing the ydropic with various methods of care that have been described in division and do not trust your care, then apply the cautery four times on the affected area, one on each side of the abdomen, chest, lower back, upper back, stomach, and intestines; there are also two between the buttocks.
E la quantitat de la profunditat del cauteri sia propdana a la spicitut de la codena.	 The depth of the cautery should be proportional to the severity of the pain
E aprop layssa le cauteri ubert per so que gete brac per lonc temps.	 Place the cauterized part gently down so that it stays in place for a while
E no evacuas le malaute de curacio aprop le cauteri am aquo que cove per que sian agreguadas a lu doas entencios, e sira festinada a lu am ajutori sanacio.	 Do not evacuate the intestine through it because when added to another part of the body with openings, such as the mouth or anus, there will be pain. And this should happen after the cautery has been applied and is assisting in healing
La forma del cauteri am lo qual es cauterizat lo ventre sia clavilh segon que la forma de aquel es desus precedent, e es aquel am le qual es cauterizat le dos sia olivar segon qu’es precedent a la sua forma.	 The form of the cautery that is being applied to the abdomen should be similar to the previous one used, and it will also resemble in shape the second one previously used if necessary
Capitol .xxxii.	 This text does not appear to have any meaning or importance beyond its position within a larger work.
De cauterizacio de pes e de las coyssas.	 Cautery of the feet and thighs
Quan les pes so apostematz en ydropitz e so repletz de aygua sitrina, cove que cauterisas les pes sobre le dos del pe in nocrati aquo que es entre le auricular e le anular, e eleva la tua ma am le cauteri e no torses aquel; e aprop eleva la tua ma, e no retornes aquela de tot, quar l’aygua satrina rezuda.	 When the feet are to be cauterized and the thighs as well, make sure you apply it above both of the toes in between the ear and the nose, raise your hand towards the cautery and do not turn back that way; and raise your hand too but avoid returning that one which has been used for washing, so that water may not drip.
Es le cauteri segon aquesta forma: E aprop fay sobre las doas coyssas dos cauteris, e en quascuna coysa sia feyt cauteri am la extremitat del cauteri cutellar.	 The second form of cautery is as follows: Place the two cauteries on each thigh in such a way that one cautery is applied at the end of the cautery used for cutting.
E sia le cauteri segon la longitut de la coyssa: i dejos le denolh e l’autre jos le mieg loc de la coyssa; e sobre quascuna coyssa dos cauteris.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
E layssa la plagua uberta ses curacio per lonc temps per so que alcuna aygua resuda de lu.	 The nurse should keep the patient still for a long time to prevent any blood loss from them.
E aprop cura le am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas.	 They are addressing the causes that they mentioned earlier.
Capitol .xxxiii.	 This is Chapter 33 of a work, possibly a medieval medical treatise or encyclopedia on medicine and health.
De cauterizacio de cos de ventre.	 Cautery of the abdomen.
Quan cos de ventre es per freg e per humiditat entro que debelice las vertutz, so es la vertut digestiva e retentiva, las quals so en l’estomac e en les budels, e es curat aquo am las manieyras de curacio e no confereys, e vezes le malaute suffertan cauteri de vertut exhiberant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am gran cauteri sobre le sieu stomac segon que a precedit en la cauterizacio del estomac, am le cauteri del cercle e am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic subtils, am cauteri clavilh subtil; e am cauteri sobre le alcatin sobre alozis gran, o am dos cauteris.	 When the abdomen is perforated and infected with moisture inside causing digestive and retentive ulcers in the stomach and intestines, then doctors perform cautery to heal them by cautering around their circumference or making small cuts on it.
E si vezes las humiditatz exhuberants e le malaute aquo tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le pentenilh e sobre les budels, e fort leu ajustant dos cauteris sobre l’estomac e prop dels inguonas, quar es curacio perficent de juvament de la qual no erras.	 If times the humidities erupt and the ulcers worsen then doctors cauterize around their abdomen and intestines as well to heal them completely and permanently by making incisions on it near the belly button so that they can be cured without leaving any scars.
Capitol .xxxiv.	 This is Chapter 34 of a work, possibly a medieval medical treatise or encyclopedia on medicine and health.
De cauterizacio de emorroydas antiquas.	 "Ancient Cautery.
Quan so en la natura derier emorroydas antiquas o una de humors grossas fregas o de humiditatz corrompudas, e son curadas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no confereys la tieua curacio, lahoras cauterisa am tres cauteris sobre le pus dejos spondilh del dos petit e petit triangular, e am cauteri desus le ombelic cays per dos ditz.	 "When there is a nature of ancient gout or one of the gross humors that infiltrates or becomes corrupted with humidity, and its cure has not been determined in division, the doctor will apply cautery over the surface of the patient's abdomen for two triangles; on both sides.
E si doptas que l’estomac de lu sia enfregidat e la vianda de lu no sia degerida, e la cara de lu vezes apostemada, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre l’estomac am gran cauteri segon que es precedit; e am un cauteri sobre fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa de lu am cauteri clavilh, e leyssa le cauteri per alcun temps ubert, e aprop cura lu entro que sia sanat.	 "If the stomach of him is inflamed and his veins are clogged up, and he has a face covered in sores, then the doctor will apply cautery to his stomach as large as before; on top there's one cautery over his abdomen, and another for the chest above it below. And place these cauteries onto the hand for some time so that they can cure him.
Capitol .xxxv.	 "Chapter Fifty-Five.
De cauterizacio de atheyl aprop la abscizio de lor.	 "The application of Cautery to the abdomen.
Quan tu abscindes atheyl, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri que es asemblat a ray.	 "When you apply Cautery to the abdomen, it's important to remove the towel that is covering it.
Aprop entremet aquel ignit en aquel atheyl abscis, e ultima la tieua ma entro que pervengua le cauteri al orifici de la vena de la qual ve la sanc.	 "After removing Cautery from the abdomen, put a towel over it and last cover your hand to prevent the Cautery from spreading into the vein.
E fay aquo una vetz o doas, quar si achieyl son trops, lahoras cauteriza quascun de lor segon que havem recontat, e aprop cura aquels am aquo que confereys a lor dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	 "Do this often enough so that they become accustomed to it, and then the Cautery can be used as needed for healing.
E si cauterizas am gran cauteri sobre alquatin, es mays derier en juvament.	 When you make a big cautery on this, it may cause harm to a child.
Capitol .xxxvi.	 Chapter sixty-six of the Capitol
De cauterizacio de fistolas que son faytas en la natura derie en las partidas de lu.	 Fistula cautery which occurs in nature or caused by it,
Quan la natura no obeziys a la obra la qual havem recomtada en son loc, e·l pacient es espaventat per aquo, sia sanat am cauteri.	 When the nature does not follow what has been recommended as a treatment in that area, and it makes the patient anxious about this, then pain is caused by cautery.
Donc quan ad alcun ve fistola en la natura derier, e es antiquada, corro sania de lu e humiditatz corrompudas, e donc aquo que es pus digne que cove es que proes aquela am tenta subtil, e aprop conoys la quantitat de la profunditat de lu am la devant dita tenta.	 Therefore when any fistula in the nature is old and infected, causing pain and moisture, so that it can be correctly diagnosed as a gout by doctors, and it is recommended to use a pointed cautery with the appropriate quantity of depth for each area.
Aprop igneys le cauteri que es semblant a ray.	 Approach them like rays.
E aprop met aquel cauteri ignit en aquesta fistula, e segon la quantitat en la qual intrec la tenta.	 Then approach the cautery that is suitable for this fistula and secondly determine the quantity in which it should be used.
E itera sobre aquela le cauteri entro que sian comburitz aquels cors corrumputz tost una veguada o dos o tres, segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	 You repeat over that cautery until these burnt parts of the body are healed from a single burn or two burns depending on your necessity.
E guarda te de combustio de nervi e de vena; o si fistula va al cors de la vesica o al cors del budel, lahoras guarda te de totz aquels locz; e no fassas aquo sino quan la fistula es en loc carnos e cogitas que no es penetrant.	 And when you have burned the nerves and veins or if the fistula is in the area of the bladder or bowels, then heal all those areas; do not proceed until it is clear that the fistula has been penetrated.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	 Approach to cure the location as soon as possible.
E si le loc es sigillat, e so abscindidas de lu las materias, e roman ayssi per lonc temps, lahoras sapias que ja es curat entierament.	 When the location becomes sealed off due to separation from the patient's body parts and long time has passed, doctors understand that it is incurable
E si las materias no so de lu ostadas, lahoras sapias que es penetrant o en le preon de lu os corromput, o cays aquo de aquelas causas de las quals vindra rememoracio en son loc.	 If the body parts are not there due to a blockage or corruption of the veins leading into the location where it occurs, doctors understand that this is one of the causes for which remembrance will come in that location
Capitol .xxxvii.	 Chapter xxxvii
De cauterizacio dels ronhos.	 Cautery on the nose
Quan en les ronhos endeve dolor per freg o per grossa ventozitat, e per aysso le coyt del malaute es amermat, lahoras cove que cauterizes aquel sobre les ronhos am cauteri sobre quascun ronho am cauteri clavilh del qual precesic la rememoracio.	 When pain occurs in the nostrils due to cold or strong windiness and affects both nostrils of a patient, doctors recommend cautery on one nostril to relieve that specific memory.
E fort leu cauterizam am le segon un petit dejos, per que vindran tres cauteris liniatz, e donc siran mays deriers en juvament.	 After the first cautery is applied to the second nostril for a short time so that three cauteries will come in total, and therefore it becomes easier over time.
Capitol .xxxviii.	 Chapter xxxviii
De cauterizacio de la vesica.	 Cautery on the bladder
Quan accideys en la vesica debelitat e mollificacio per freg e per humiditatz ayssi que·l malaute la urina no retengua, lahoras cauteriza aquel en la partida pus dejos sobre la vesiqua, la hon comensan les pels del pentenilh, e cauteriza am un cauteri en la partida dreyta, e am autre en la senestra de lu.	 When a bladder ailment occurs and urination becomes blocked due to cold or humidity that prevents the patient's urine from being retained, doctors recommend cautery on one side of the urethra, near where it enters the body, with another cautery above the bladder itself.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la cantitat dels not del pous; e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en la partida pus bassa del dos, o am dos cauteris si es necessitat.	 The length of each cautery should be determined by the number of blows required to strike it off, and if necessary, cautery may be applied on both sides of a smaller area or two cauteries if needed.
E sia cauteri clavilh segon que es procesit.	 When it has been done, then...
Capitol .xxxix.	 Then do this
De cauterizacio de la mayra.	 Cautery of the vein.
Quan veno en la mayra freg e humiditatz, e per aysso es prohibida enpreignacio, e son corrompudas las mestruas de lu, e es tardada la provocacio de lor, e accideys dolor deves le haveniment de lor, lahoras cove que·l loc sia cauterizat am tres cauteris en le circuit del ombelic, ayssi cum havem dit en le cauteri de la vesica; e am cauteri sobre le loc pus dejos del dos, o am dos cauteris, e sia le cauteri clavilh.	 When a vein becomes swollen and humidified, this is prohibited in any way, and the veins become corrupted by them, it delays their maturation, and occasions pain in the feet as well, therefore the places where they are applied should be cauterized with three cauteries in the circuit of the abdomen, similarly to what has been said for the cautery of the bladder; and also on the lower part of the belly or two cauteries, and one on each knee.
Capitol .xl.	 After that, you need to...
De cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua.	 Cautery for dislocation of the shoulder joint.
Quan humiditatz moucozas so efundudas a la partida de la anqua, e so faytas causas del yssiment del sieu loc, e senhal de lu es que la coyssa es prolonguada sobre l’autre quan so comparadas entre lor.	 When the muscles of the arm weaken and cause paralysis in its part, it is customary to prolong it on the other side when comparing them together.
E le loc de la dislocacio es atrobat en lu quays boyt.	 The place of dislocation should be immobilized as described.
Adonc cove que cauterizas le malaute sobre la partida de la anqua de lu am cauteri a sercle semblant, pus que tu auras senhat am tenta en le cercuit de la partida ayssi cum es revolguda, e per so que la partida caia el mieg loc del cercle.	 After you have cauterized the shoulder joint as described, make sure to try and turn it in its circuit similarly when it is flexed, so that the arm falls into place of the circle.
E sia le cauteri del qual precedit la forma en la cauterizacio del estomac.	 The cautery you mentioned before should be used for the cautery of the stomach.
E si aquest cauteri no es a tu present, lahoras cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris am cauteri olivar gran.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors
E sia fayt le cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de tota la codena; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	 Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out.
Capitol .xli.	 And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery.
De cauterizacio de la vena sciatica.	 The cautery for sciatica.
Quan dolor ve en la partida de anqua, e so causa de lu freg et humiditatz, le malaute es curat am aquo que havem dit e no confereys, e aquo es antiquat, lahoras cove que tu lacses le malaute de humors grosses am pillulas fetidas o am pillulas artificials o semblantz; e aprop cauteriza aquel.	 When joint pain occurs in the part affected by coldness and humidity, it is customary to treat with this method that we have spoken of and not confer your confidence or advice, and customarily do you drain the gouty humors from pills, fat ones or artificial ones, and apply a cautery.
E la manieyra del cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am medicinas comburentz, o cauteri am foc.	 The cautery on the hand is used in two ways: to cauterize with medical remedies or fire.
Sira segon dos manieyras scientas, de las quals es la una que cauterizes aquel sobre la partida de l’ancha de lu am tres cauteris triangulatz segon aquesta forma; e fay am aquels bona profunditat.	 The other is to cauterize it in a triangle shape on the affected part of the body, making sure it has good depth.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre cascun cauteri la quantitat de la grossitut del dit e si le cauteri olivar o gran.	 The space between the points should be equal in size and if a large or small cautery is used.
Mays alcunas veguadas sia le cauteri sobre le mieg loc sobre le cap de l’anquan per que son quatre cauteris.	 You might make some cuts at the top of the head to remove four points, so that it looks like this.
E si vols, cauteriza am le cercle del qual es precesida la forma en la cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua, la i que sia cercle continent e comburey la ispicitut de tota la codena.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors
E aquesta es la manieyra de cauteri in ciatiqua quan dolor es adherent al anqua e no es estenduda entro a la coyssa.	 This is how to perform cauterization when pain adheres to the intestines and does not extend into the cavity.
Mays si es estenduda entro a la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre la coyssa sobre le loc al qual envireys le malaute que es la dolor; e am un cauteri sobre la cavilha per quatre ditz un pauc deves la part cilvestra.	 If the pain extends into the cavity, burn two points on the thigh to where the patient feels the pain; and apply another cautery over the groin for four or five days depending on which leg it is affecting.
E si le cauteri cutellar, e sia la profunditat del cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de la codena.	 If the thigh cautery, then consider the depth of the cautery in relation to the amount of pain from the bowels.
E si le malaute envireys que la dolor es estenduda entro al loc prop les ditz des pes, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui on envireys am cauteri per tres puntz o quatre o mays si indigeys de aquel.	 If the patient feels pain in both legs below their thighs, then burn a cautery here and another one three or four or more points depending on which leg it is affecting.
E si le malaute envireys dolor esser dejos le donolh ves la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui am un cauteri cutellar.	 If the patient feels pain coming from below their ribs or back, then burn a thigh cautery.
E guarda te en tota cauterizacio que no ultimes am le cauteri en tant que comburas nervi o gran arceria, e que per aquo a tu es sobre le malaute mal noccument o contraccio.	 Preserve the cauterization until nerves or great arteries are involved, and as long as the patient is not suffering from pain of some kind or another.
E yeu ja e vist un e autre de aquels les quals cauterizero sobre la cavilha e ultimero en la cauterizacio, e la cama foc inflada entro que la tumor aconseguit lo pe, e foc perforat e corromput tot le pe.	 Burn another cautery on the thigh after a while, and if you observe any unusual signs such as a swelling or perforation of the leg into the tumor, burn it off quickly with fire to prevent infection of all parts of the body.
E aprop accidic fort solucio de ventre, e aprop aquo la mort.	 "First aid for stomach pain, place your hand over.
E si la dolor es en dos partidas ensemps cauteriza quascuna segon aquesta manieyra.	 If the pain is in two separate parts, cautery should be applied to each separately.
E diysero les savis alcus en la cauterizacio de anqua cauteri del qual aquesta es la manieyra: fay semblant a cercle de ferr del qual le cercuit sia la maytat de un palm; e sia deves le sieu orrifici segon la grossesa de un os de datil o mens un pauc.	 The savis should be inserted into the cautery of one kind, as follows: first make a circle with iron such that its diameter is equal to the width of an index finger; and second, remove it from its socket after a short time, depending on how big the blade is or how many times you have inserted it.
E dedintz aquel cercle sia un autre tertz; e sia le spazi le qual es entre lor la quantitat del notz del pous; e sian aquels cercles ubertz de dos partidas; e sia la longitut de aquels cays un notz o dos notz, e fay en aquels margue de ferr decentment apparelhat en les cercles; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	 After making the first circle and the second one, count how many spaces there are between them. Then divide this number by two; if you have a pair of circles that is less than or equal to 2, put both of them on the same side (on the left). And it should look like this:
Aprop sia ignit en le foc entro que s’enrogesisca e gete scintillas, e aprop sia pausat sobre la partida del anqua, le malaute colcat sobre le latz sa.	 After the cautery is applied and you feel stinging or burning sensation, it should be placed over the affected area.
E donc cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris redontz en una veguada.	 Then cautery should be applied in a single dose.
E aprop layssa aquel per tres jorns; aprop emplastre aquel am boder e layssa la plagua uberta per trops dias; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	 Apply it for three days, apply it to the back and cover with a bandage that covers up completely; and keep treating until it is healed.
Diys Albucasis : o, filhs, de aquesta specia de cauteri pauc havem usat per la terror del reguardament de lu, e per aquo que paucs havem trobatz les quals reguardan sobre lu.	 Albucasis is: oh, friends, this kind of small cautery that many people used to remove the fear from it and for which few people found effective on treatment.
Mays dels bos cauteris a lu qui les sufferta, et atroba am aquel le loc de lu.	 When the patient is in pain from the joints, then bind them firmly to prevent their movement
Mays cauteri am medicinas adhurentz es que tu fassas dos cercles haventz armula perforada en la qual deyssen le guaffo de la porta de ferr; sia la longuitut de la paretz en la nauteza de lor sian dos nozes o quays aquels.	 When you go to perform a surgical operation, first make two circles with a sharp instrument in the shape of a hoop that goes through the door's keyhole; and when entering or leaving put both feet inside those hoops.
E si le spazi le qual es entre quascu la quantitat de la grossitut del dit; e sian ubertz dejos e desus, e sian que contenguan se entre lor segon aquesta forma:	 If the space between is proportional to the length of that thing, then bind them and tie them so that they are in this form.
E aprop pausa sobre la partida de la anqua le malaut jasent sobre le latz sa, e comprem la tua ma sobre la partida de la anqua; e aprop pren de aygua cauda e fon la entre dos cercles, e la qualiditat de aquela sia am le foc petit a petit, e te aquela per la quantitat de una hora, e sufferta le malaute la mordicacio e la adhustio de lu — quar aquel atrobo mordicacio ayssi cum de foc — entro que cesse la mordicacio.	 Then put your hand over the opening of the abscess and press it gently so that its size becomes smaller by small portions, until you reach a quantity equal to an hour; then make sure it is closed.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am le instrument et abstergeys l’aygua cauda de tota la anqua am aygua dousa.	 Then lift your hand onto the instrument and remove all of the abscess's contents with a second one, making sure it is completely removed.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres jorns e pausa sobre aquel boder entro que sia la negror de la adhustio remauguda, e leyssa aquo per alcus jorns, e correra de lu poyredura; aquest es derier en juvament.	 Then leave it for three days and wait until the redness of the discharge is gone, then do this every other day and continue cleaning her with a cloth soaked in warm water to prevent future infections.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	 Then take care of him while he is still sick.
E si la dolor es extenduda entro la coyssa o la camba, fay a lu estatua en lu que contengua aygua segon que es feyt en la anqua engualment.	 "When joint pain extends into the thigh or leg cavity," you will place something in it that contains water so as to keep it from being opened.
E aquesta es la manieyra de aygua cauda, e yeu ja he scrit aquela en le tractat de la rectificacio de medicinas.	 The method of applying water cure is mentioned in the treatise on the treatment of diseases (of unknown author).
Recipe de alcali e de caus no extinta de amdos ana partida una, e trissa les e pausa en una ola nova de la qual la partida dejos sia perforada per un petit trauc, segon la quantitat que intre en lu ray.	 The recipe for alkali and sulfur does not remove all marks but leaves a new one that is pierced by a small tool after the quantity of it runs through it.
E pausa dejos le fons de la ola autra ola enveyriada, e gete sobre aquel alcali e caus viva de aygua doussa la qual cobra aquels per un dit, e pus que tu compremes aquels am la tieua ma per bona compressio, e leyssa la hola que deyssenda de lu aygua aguda en la partida dejos a la ola enveyriada.	 After the bottom of one oily cloth is changed for another, apply the alkali and sulfur mixture live with water two times as you would to good compresses; and let it be that if there should be any water in the oily cloth, then use a new oily cloth soaked in water to cover it
E aprop ajusta tota aquela aygua, e geta la sobre autra caus viva e autre alcali renovelatz, quar aquela lahoras sira de mot forta acuitat, la qual es aministrada en motas operacios de medicina e en cauterizacio dels autres membres, quar operacio fa de foc.	 After the water is applied and another cause revived with alkali, then wait for it to become strong enough so that when administered in operations of medicine or cauterization on other members, a fire will be made.
E so de las medicinas alcunas am las quals es cauterizat ancha, ayssi cum tezizic e mel anacrat e caus am sabo enayssi que sian mesclatz.	 The medicines of which there is much talk and discussion, such as alcohol and sulfur, are mixed in various ways so that they may be applied to cauterize and treat wounds
E Gualia recontet de un home dels antics la operacio e la curacio am la qual es curada dolor de anqua e de vena sciatica, e magnifiquet mot be esser de aquel, e diys que no hac necessitat de autra curacio, e quar es sanat per una veguada ayssi cum recomtec, quar fort leu aquel intrec en banh e eysic ja sa d’aquel.	 The remedy for the operation and treatment of which condition is cured with pain in the ankles or veins sciatica? Magnify this to be necessary
Et es que sia pres de certarragi vert, e si no es atrobat vert, sia presa figua recent; e mot sia trissada am un pauc de grays e sia pausat sus la anqua en la qual es la dolor, o en la coyssa, o en la camba, e sia liat.	 "The pain in the joints is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and if it occurs in the feet, it is called gout. And if it's necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery.
E sia layssat per la cantitat de tres horas o per la quantitat que·l malaute centa cedacio de la adhustio.	 "The pain lasts for three hours or as long as the patient feels it necessary to continue holding his hands.
E aprop met aquel en banh e donc quan le cors de lu sia enrozat, entromet aquel en le sol, quar la dolor cessa e es sanat.	 "Then return the intestine back into its cavity and place your hand on top of it to prevent it from coming out.
E sapias que no cove que alcu use de cauteri am aquestas medicinas sino aprop la evacuacio del cors.	 "You know that using a cautery with these medicines is not recommended, but rather the evacuation of the bowels is preferred.
Mays ja Escorides diysec que quan am fenda de cabra la vena stretica es cauterizada, aprofieyra a lu mo be; e sia le cauteri am lu segon aquesta manieyra: sia presa lana e sia enbeguda en oli antic, e sia pausat entre le pous del pe e entre le fossil.	 "If you burn the vein of a rabbit with a cautery, after doing so, treat them as follows: first apply oil and then bandage the burned part in such a way that there is space between your toes and between the heel.
E aprop pren fenda de cabra secca e emflasma aquela am foc entro que sia fayta carbo; e aprop pausa lu sobre la lana e leysa la entro que sia estengida.	 "If you burn the vein of a rabbit, after doing so, then treat it with care to prevent any infection and bandage it in such a way that there is space between your hand and its surface.
E aprop itera aquo, e no cessas far aquo entro que·l scintiment de la mordicacio pervengua entro al anqua e repausa la dolor.	 "Continue with this treatment until the itchiness of the cautery fades away and relief is felt.
Et aquesta manieyra de cauteri es apelat cauteri de vaquas.	 This text describes a medical procedure or treatment for pain relief related to a specific body part (the groin), using various tools such as cushions, hands, etc., possibly performed by multiple servants or assistants.
Capitol .xlii.	 It's not clear what the sentence "Et aquesta manieyra de cauteri es apelat cauteri de vaquas" means in the context of this medieval medical treatise. The word "manieyra" seems to be a misspelling or an unusual term for something related to cautery, which is a surgical procedure using hot metal tools to cause pain as part of treatment. However, I'm not sure how that relates to the previous description of various tools being used on different parts of the body in relation to joint pain relief.
De cauterizacio de dolor de dos.	 This sentence suggests a second medical procedure related to the first one performed by doctors or servants, perhaps as an alternative treatment for joint pain caused by cold humors infiltrating each part of the body and causing pain in the feet. The phrase "de cauterizacio" implies that this is another form of cautery, which was mentioned earlier in the text.
Alcunas veguadas dolor es en le dos per tropas causas, cum per cazement o per percucio o per superflua evacuacio, e per causas ad aquelas semblantz, per infusio de materia frega e humida.	 Joint pain can be caused by cold humors infiltrating each part of the body and causing pain in the feet or toes; it may also occur due to pressure on certain parts of the body, such as squeezing them too tightly, pressing against a hard surface excessively, or from fluids being held within (perhaps from swelling).
E cauteri no catz sino en aquesta sola specia la qual es fayta per efusio de materia frega.	 Cautery should not be used in this specific situation where the release of cold humors is required by discharge or evacuation, as mentioned earlier in the text.
Donc cove, aprop evacuacio del malaute am pillulas fitidas e am semblant a lor, que sian faytas sobre·l dos en le qual es la dolor tres linhas segon la latitut de lu, pus que senhas am tentha en quascuna linha v cauteris o mays, segon la quantitat que ve de la tolleransa del malaute e de la vertut de lu.	 Therefore, apply the recommended medication and similar remedies to relieve the pain as described in previous lines; make sure that you place them on top of the two parts where the pain is felt most acutely, depending on their latitude (i.e., height up or down from horizontal) and according to the amount of tolerance for pain reduction by the patient's nature and condition.
E sia fayta cauterizacio am cauteri de punt.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet
E si vols, cauteriza am tres cauteris o am quatre am cauteri clavilh medial segon aquesta forma:	 If you wish to perform a cautery on three or four points located at one inch apart from each other like this:
Capitol .xliii.	 53
De cauterizacio al comensament de gilbositat.	 Cautery is to begin the incision.
Motas veguadas endeve aquesta malautia als petitz enfantz; e senhal del comensament de lu en les enfantz es que accideys sobre lor estrectura en le ale eves la elevacio e·l movement.	 When treating a hernia in children, it is customary to first make an incision on their abdomen and allow the intestine to protrude slightly while lifting and moving them.
E atrobas en le derier espondil del dos e dels notz de lu que ja comensa a sobremontar sobre les autres spondils.	 Then tighten the lower ends of both legs that have been previously tightened on the other vertebrae.
E donc quan tu vezes aquo e voles prohibir, lahoras cauterisa aquel am cauteri que sia cercle segon aquesta forma:	 And when you come to this and wish to prevent it, the pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, do so with a pointed cautery.
que prengua le cauteri sobre tota partida del spondilh engualment.	 Perform the cautery on all parts of the spine simultaneously.
E si vols, cauteriza en le circuit del spondilh am le cauteri de punt dos linhas o tres.	 If you wish to perform a cautery in the spinal cord's circuit with three points or two lines:
E sian les puntz propdas entre lor.	 The points should be placed equidistant from one another.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat am aquo que havem dit.	 Then place the cautery over that area where you mentioned it.
Mays guarda que cauteri no sia administrat en gelbositat que sia fayta per spasme de nervi.	 Do not perform a cautery in cases of pain caused by spasms of nerves.
Capitol .xliv.	 54
De cauterizacio de podagra e de dolor de juncturas.	 The first sentence translates to: "Regarding gout and joint pain.
Quan dolor de juncturas son faytas per humors fregas les quals so enfundutz a quascun membre del cors, lahoras quan veno dolors en los pes, de costuma dels metges es que aquo apelen podragua propriament.	 "When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
E donc cum es curada podagra de causa frega am manieyra de cura e no so remaugudas las dolors, lahoras las remau cauteri.	 "And if you can not cure it with the remedies mentioned above and pain persists, then doctors recommend cautery.
E es que tu cauterizas aquel aprop evacuacio en le circuit de la junctura del pe am motz cauteris.	 "When performing cautery on a gouty joint of the foot, make sure to open up an incision in the vein near the affected joint and perform it.
E sia cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	 The cautery procedure itself is as follows:
E si es necessitat que puntz sia fayt sobre la fassia del pe, lahoras fay am cauteri de punt.	 "And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery.
E si las dolors pujan entro als denolhs o a las autras juncturas, e aquo motas vetz s’endeve, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre quascun donolh am tres cauteris o quatre de tota partida am aquest cauteri olivar.	 "If the pains enter into the thighs or buttocks and it is necessary to perform cautery on a joint of the three or four cuts depending on this cautery procedure.
E si motz cauteris que aquestz cauteris sian a tu necessaris, lahoras cauteriza aquel e no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri abans, sia tant solament enviro la specitut de la codena.	 "If you need to perform cautery and it is necessary, then perform it without delay. However, if the area of cautery has already been prepared beforehand, just apply a bandage over it.
E si las dolors pugan entro al donolh e·l dos, lahoras aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le sieu capitol.	 "If the pains enter into the second joint as well, then provide the cautery that was mentioned in its capital.
E si las dolors so en las mas tant solament, e es apelada suagra, lahoras puncta en le circuit dels focils ayssi cum se revolvo, puncta en aquels dos linhas.	 When joint pain is severe only in the hands and feet, it's called gouty arthritis, and doctors mark its location by pointing to two lines on a diagram of the body.
E si reman de las dolors en les ditz, lahoras puncta en le cercuit dels focils sobre quascun notz e sobre la pinche de la ma.	 If joint pain persists in the fingers and toes, doctors mark its location by pointing to each finger and toe on a diagram of the body.
E si las dolors pugan aprop alscus jorns als coydes o als muscles, lahoras cauteriza les quascus de tota part dels ajutoris.	 If joint pain occurs in joints or muscles, doctors burn all parts of them off with a pointed cautery.
E no evacuas le malaute de bon regiment e de recepcio de medicinas, quar si es fayt bon regiment e flacma es evacuada am aquest cauteri sira sanat, Dieus ajudan.	 If the patient is not receiving good treatment or medication regimen, if it's a bad regimen and vomiting occurs as a result of this cautery, then the doctors will be unable to help you in that situation.
Capitol .xlv.	 The final sentence does not make sense as written, but I assume there might have been an error during translation or transcription. Could you please provide me with the correct version?
De cauterizacio de rompeduras.	 Cautery of the forehead.
Quan endeve rompedura en les angonars e diysendo les budels denant l’atela al genetiu, e aquo es comensan de aprop, lahoras cove que tu mandas al malaute layssar la sua comestio en le sieu dia e que use de causas leniens per so que la fenda deyssenda del sieu ventre.	 If you have a hernia in the groin and pushing it towards the anus is uncomfortable, that's what doctors call for, to apply gentle pressure to prevent its passage from the abdomen.
E aprop segua le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e comanda a lu que tengua le sieu ale entro que sia foro getat o aparesca l’atela o·l budels.	 Continue to hold your hand over the patient's abdomen and tell them to try to feel for any signs of passage or protrusion through their groin.
E aprop retorna aquel am les tieus ditz e senha am tenta la ruptura sobre le os del pentenilh am senhal la extremitat del qual sia semblant a la maytat de cercle a las subiranas partidas del cors.	 "The first servant returns to the patient's thigh, and then tries to break over their leg so that it resembles the shape of a circle at the top of the part.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	 "The cautery is applied in the form below:
entro que sia mot rog e gete cintilhas.	 "Make a fist and put your hands together.
E aprop reduzeys le budel o l’atela a la sua conquavitat, e aprop pause la sua ma sobre le loc per so que le budel no yesqua.	 "Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out.
E tu ja has ubert entre las coyssas del malaute e dejos lu as pausat un coyssi, et autre servent sia sus las cambas de lu, e autre sus le pietz de lu, le qual tengua las suas mas.	 "You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
E aprop pausa le cauteri sobre aquel senhal am la tua ma am cauteri stan dreyt, e te aquel entro que am lu consieguas le os del pentenilh entro al mieg del duiduni; e itera am aquel autra veguada si a tu aquel no has conseguit en la primieyra veguada entro al os.	 "Then apply the cautery in the shape below, and try to break over their leg so that it resembles the form of a circle at the top of the part.
E observa saviament del ysiment del budel en la hora de la tua cauterizacio, que no comburas aquel budel per so que sobre le malaute no vengua in mort o autre gran malicia.	 "Observe carefully during the cautery procedure that you do not crush the bowel so that it does not come out dead or cause any great harm.
E sapias que quan tu am le cauteri no atenhas le os, no confereys la tua operacio.	 "You know when applying the cautery, don't attend to the opening; otherwise your operation would be in vain.
E cove que·l cauteri dels enfants sia subtil segon le gran e la mesura de lor.	 "The cautery of children should be gentle considering their size and proportion.
E aprop cura le loc del cauteri per tres dias am boder entro que sia remauguda la scara del foc.	 The servant should place a cushion under them (the patient's) thighs, another on their legs, and another on their chest while holding their hands in order to prevent the intestine from coming out for three days
E aprop cura aquel am les autres enguentz entro que sia sanat.	 The servant should place a cushion under them (the patient's) thighs, another one on their legs, and another one on their chest while holding their hands in order to prevent the hernia from coming out until it is healed.
E le malaute sia jasent sobre le sieu dos per xl dias entro que sia sigillat le loc e la plagua.	 The patient should place a cushion between his legs for fourteen days while sealing off the area and preventing leakage.
E cove que pauses le nutriment de lu segon la longitut del temps de la curacio de lu le qual le linesca le ventre de lu, e que le budel no yesca fora deves le esforsament de guerir.	 The servant should ensure that the patient's nutrition is maintained during the healing process of their intestine which prevents it from coming out and requires persistent care.
E aprop quan se vol levar aprop xl dias, lahoras aministra liament decentment fayt, e tengua aquel per autres xl jorns.	 The servant should administer medicine gently when they wish to keep the patient's leg immobile for an additional fourteen days.
E sia mermat de trebalh e de replecio de vianda e de beure, e de votz vehementz, quar quan usa de aquest regiment de sanacio entiera sira sanat.	 The servant should provide them with the means to maintain hygiene through drinking water and eating regularly, while strongly encouraging them to follow this regimen of healing so that their health will improve.
E yeu diyre la curacio de las rupturas en las autras partidas del ventre, e so al comensament, e vols que no treguan, lahoras cauterisa la ruptura d’aquel am cauteri redon segon la quantitat de lu, e sia aquo que es exhurit de la codena ayssi cum la tersa partida de lu; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit, e no es ajustat.	 The servant should perform surgery on the other parts of the abdomen as well, at first and if necessary, cauterize the rupture in that manner, using the same procedure for both ruptures; otherwise, follow what has been said here
E ja diyssero alcus primiers que ruptura sia cauterizada am cauteri triangular segon aquesta forma, pus que es senhada am tenta:	 The first rupture should be cauterized in a triangular manner as you previously mentioned, and if it is not successful,
e es pausada linha que eys per la latitut en le latz pus sobira de la ruptura, e autra linha al desus; e depausa la tua ma am un cauteri clavilh, mays le primier cauteri es pus leugier e milhor.	 When the pain in joints is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and when the foot feels pain, it is customarily called gout by doctors
Capitol .xlvi.	 Chapter sixty-four
De cauterizacio de torcio.	 Cautery on the nose
Quan endeve en alscus membres per cazement o per percussio dolor e persevera aquela dolor per lonc temps e no comfereys al u curacio am medicinas, lahoras cove que cauterizes am cauteri de punt.	 When there is pain in any member of the body caused by blows or percussion and this pain persists for a long time without relief from medical care, doctors recommend cautery on it.
E sia le cauteri de tot membre segon la magnitut e la parvitat de lu, e vertut e develitat de lu, e locacio de torcio e dolor de lu.	 And the cauteries for each member based on their size and importance of them, location of the nose and pain caused by it.
Donc si·s sanat per le primier cauteri, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera sobre lu le cauteri; quar de costuma de aquelas dolors es que sian punctatz de membre ad aquel membre le qual apropinque al u, per que cove que consieguas aquels am cauteri entro que·l malaute sia sanat.	 Therefore if you are satisfied with the first cautery do it; otherwise continue to apply the cauteries until the pain subsides for that member.
Capitol .xlvii.	 Chapter sixty-seven
De cauterizacio de lepra.	 Cautery on leprosy.
Les lebros alcunas veguadas am cauteri per mot gran juvament, e magerment si la specia de lepra que es fayta per putrefaccio de flacma e de melencolia.	 Cauteries should be applied to the affected areas by a small flame in youth as it is more effective if it is caused by rotting flesh and melanoderma.
E donc cum tu vols cauterizar aquel, considera si la lepra es comussan e as aquela curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no deysen, ni esta, e temes sobre le malaute que la corrupcio comprehenda tot le cors de lu e tota la compleccio de lu, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le cap am v cauteris: am un en le mieg loc del cap, e am le segon pus dejos de lu, eves le front a la fi dels cabels; e amdos sobre dos corns; e am un detras, sobre la nuca o servitz.	 And when you want to cauterize that, consider if the leprosy is widespread and whether this treatment has been given in division or not, neither yes nor no, and remember about the patient that the corruption will infect the entire body of him and all his completeness, doctors cauterize it on top with a pointed cautery.
E ultima la tua ma am le cauteri un pauc entro que emprema en le os una petita empressio, e de lu sian deslocadas las scorsas, per so que la expiracio de grossas vapors sia alleujada de lu; e cauteriza sobre la melsa segon que es precesit.	 When there is pain in the joints due to cold humors that have infiltrated each part of the body, and if it occurs in the feet as well, then call gout by doctors.
E si la lepra es ja expanduda sobre le malaute e apar manifestament, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquel am aquels cauteris les quals havem ditz en le cap; e am cauteri sobre la extremitat del nas, e am dos cauteris sobre las doas maysselas, e am dos cauteris sobre dos spondils del col, e am vi cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e am un gran sobre les spondils prop de la coeta, e un sobre la cotea , e am dos sobre las anquas, e am un sobre quascuna anqua, e am dos sobre les donols e un sobre quascun donolh, e am dos sobre les coydes, e am dos sobre les muscles, e am dos las teneretutz del sieu pietz; e cauteriza aquel sobre totas las juncturas dels ditz de las mas e dels pes, e sobre quascun talon dels sieus pes, e sobre les foscils de las suas mas.	 When the rash appears on the patient and is clearly visible, the doctors will treat it with a cautery in those areas mentioned earlier; they will also apply a cautery to the extremities of the nose, two to the thighs, two to the shoulders, one over the upper back, one over the chest, two over the elbows, one over each elbow, two over the knees and one over each knee. They will also treat all the joints of the limbs and those of the feet with a cautery, as well as any toes that come out.
E guarda te dels nervis les quals so sobre le talo que no comburas aquels.	 Keep away from nerves that are over your head, do not touch them.
E alcunas veguadas es cauterizat am un cauteri sobre le os del pentenilh e am autre sobre la boca del stomac, e autre sobre le fietge.	 Some veins may be treated with a cautery on the penis and another over the stomach's mouth, another on the throat.
E sapias que quant mays ajustas cauteris, tant es mays juvatiu e mays conferent; e sapias que le malaute no ha en le cauteri dolor, ayssi cum han les sas, per so quar le cors de lu ja es stupefayt.	 You know that the more points you make with a cautery, the hotter and more painful it gets; and you also know that the patient does not feel pain from the cautery itself as they have done before, therefore the body is now in shock.
E cove que les cauteris sian grans o paucs segon les membres e las juncturas segon que es precedit de las specias dels ferramentz.	 When joint pain has infiltrated each part of the body, or when foot pain occurs
E aprop cura le cauteri am farina de errs coyta am mel e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	 And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery
Capitol .xlviii.	 Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out.
De cauterizacio de stupor.	 The cauterization of stupidity.
Quan alcun membre es stabozit o adormit e es curat am medicinas, olis e emplastres, e no es sanat, lahoras tu cauteriza aquel membre stabozit am cauteris segon que merita la grandesa del membre o la parvitat de lu.	 When any member is stabbed or paralyzed and attended by medical care, the ulcers are cauterized according to whether it deserves the greatness of that part of the body or its smallness (its importance).
E sia lo tieu cauteri intrant la ispicitut de la codena un pauc.	 And if you want to cauterize a very small ulcer,
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	 And that is the one which needs treatment
E alscunas veguadas es cauterizada alcuna stupor le qual endeve a las mas e als pes, e als spondils del dos e ves le eysiment dels nervis les quals mavon aquel membre, e es remauguda la stupor.	 And ulcers in which those of the foot are cauterized, and that is cured by the pain of the bones, legs, spine, and nerves, which it moves away from that member, and is healed.
Mays no prusuma sobre aquo sino aquel que es savi en la anotomia dels membre e de la egressio dels nervis tot le cors moventz.	 It should not be doubted but for those who know the anatomy of the body and its exit from the nerves throughout the whole course of the body movement.
Capitol .xlix.	 And do you know that it was customary to cauterize ulcers in which bones move, and through that ulcer exit nerve?
De cauterizacio de albaras que es morfea.	 The cauterization of ulcers that are hemorrhaging.
Quan albaras es antiqua e no comfereys a lu alcu dels enguentz de medicina, lahoras tu cauteriza sobre aquela am cauteri preon un pauc segon la quantitat de la specitut de la codena entro que sia remauguda la blancor e la color de lu, e la color de lu sia mudada.	 When the patient is already ancient and no longer able to endure the suffering of medicine, you should cauterize over that same area as before for a short while until the whiteness and colour of the wound are restored, and the colour has been changed.
E aprop cura aquel am farina de errs e de lentilhas am oli rozat e am folhas de arnagrosa, e am sanc de colomba o am sanc de yronda, da cascuna sia una partida e totas sian mescladas, e aprop sia linit un drap e sus le loc sia pausat entro que sia sanat.	 After treating that area with flour from old wounds and lentils soaked in vinegar and leaves of nasturtium, as well as the wound dressing, let the cloth be placed so it is covered until healing has taken place.
Capitol .l.	 It seems like you're referring to a specific word or phrase that I cannot identify from this context. Could you please provide more information or clarify what you meant by "Capitol .l."?
De cauterizacio de cranc.	 The cautery of the wound
Quan canser es comensan e vols aquel ostar, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri de cercle en le circuit de lu ayssi cum es revolgut.	 When cancer is suspected and you want it to be treated, the doctor cauterizes that area with a circular wound in its path as soon as possible.
E diysero les savis que sia cauterizat am lo derier cauteri en le mieg loc; mays a mi no es vist aquo, quar temi que sia ulcerat, e yeu ja e vist aquo alcunas veguadas.	 They advised the physician to cauterize that area with the same wound dressing in its place; however if you do not see it or fear that it is ulcerated, go and check for any bleeding signs.
E es pus dreyturier que sia cauterizat en le circuit de lu am cercle ayssi cum avem dit, o am motz cauteris.	 The doctor should cauterize the area in a circular path as mentioned before, or do not cauterize it at all.
Capitol .li.	 It seems like you're referring to another specific word or phrase that I cannot identify from this context. Could you please provide more information or clarify what you meant by "Capitol .li."?
De cauterizacio de adubilati.	 Cautery of hemorrhoids
Quan alcun adubilati es tardat en maturacio, e aysso es per la superfluitat fazen aquela, o per etat del malaute, quar es vielh en decrepitat, de pauc sanc, o per le temps, e tu vols festinar en la maturacio de adubilati; lahoras cauteriza en le circuit de lu am motz cauteris petitz punctan; e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela fastinara en maturacio.	 When any hemorrhoids occur in maturity or due to excess, they cause inflammation and are often accompanied by a decrease in strength, or when there is not enough time, you want to perform the cure for hemorrhoids during that maturation cycle. The doctor will cauterize it on its track with hot irons punctually; be sure it does not flare up in the process.
Mays si tu vols la perforacio de lu am cauteri, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: e depausa aquel en le mieg loc de adubilati entro que penetre la codena.	 If you want to make the incision for the cure, the doctor will remove it and perform the cautery in that location of maturity, between where they penetrate the anus.
E si le cauteri en aquel loc que es pus dejos, per so que le cors del brac sia alleujat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	 And if the cautery is placed at a point that makes the arm's shoulder more relaxed, and it heals that area properly.
Capitol .lii.	 It seems like there are no more sentences to translate in this text.
De cauterizacio de corrodent.	 Cautery of hemorrhoids
Corrodent es corrupcio ambulant en le membre, la qual corrodeys aquel ayssi cum a foc comedent lenha secca.	 Corrosive is an ambulatory corruption in the body part that causes it to weaken over time with a dry fire.
Donc si vezes aquel corrodent en loc le qual sufferte cauteri am foc, lahoras tu igneys cauteris clavils motz paucs, e grans segon que es convenent en aquel loc en le qual es corrodent.	 Therefore, if you encounter corrosive in a location where the cure with fire would be painful, then your doctor will use a hot iron cautiously and carefully in that location where it is corrosive, making sure to avoid injury.
E aprop cauteriza aquel de tota partida entro que erradiques tota la corrosio e no romangua alcuna causa de lu.	 And if the cautery reaches all parts of corrosion without causing any damage or preventing any cause from occurring.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres dias, e pausa sobre les locs cauterizats solpre trissat am oli mesclat entro que las scaras sian totas eradicadas e tota la corrupcio.	 "The treatment will last for three days, and during this period, all the inflamed parts should be cauterized until there are no more sores or impurities.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz carn engendrantz.	 "The procedure is to treat those who have engendered flesh wounds.
Mays si aprop tres dias vezes que la carn nasca sana en la qual no es corrupcio, bo es; mays sino, lahoras itera le cauteri sobre aquo que es romas en les locs corrumputz.	 "Three days later, if the flesh is healthy and there are no impurities, then that's fine; otherwise, repeat the cautery on those areas which have been corrupted.
E corrodent es medicat alcunas vetz am medicina aguda, quar aquela es meza en loc de cauteri.	 "Some wounds may be treated with acute medicine instead of cauterization.
Mays empero cauteri am foc es de pus leugier juvament.	 "Cautery at the focus is better for a young person.
E yeu ja e dit la curacio de lu am medicina aguda en la divisio, e donc pren aquela quan de lu auras endegencia.	 "You should consider using acute medicine in addition to cauterization when dealing with an emergency situation.
Capitol .liii.	 "The end of the text
De cauterizacio de claus e dels autres semblants.	 "Cauterization and others like it should be stopped.
Motas veguadas endeve a las partidas dejos del pe malautia que s’apela clau, e es causa grossa, fentrada, la qual ladeys le pe; e cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, so es cauteri am foc e cauteri am aygua cauda.	 "After the passage of two years and the occurrence of large fistulas that are called 'heavy' or 'large', causing pain when they enter the foot; and then cautery should be done on both sides.
Mays cauteri am foc es que igniscas le cauteri concau semblant a pena de voltor, le qual sia feyt de ferr segon la quantitat la qual contengua le clau de tota partida, e sia de subtils marguas.	 "Cautery at the focus is better than cautery alone because it prevents second-degree fistulas which may appear after a certain number of heavy fistulas or small ones.
E aprop pausa aquel ignit sobre le clau, e aprop revolveys la tua ma am le cauteri en le circuit del clau entro que·l cauteri pervengua a la profunditat del clau.	 When you've placed the cushion under their thighs, another servant on their legs, and another one on their chest holding their hands, now comes to light the first sentence of your medical treatise which says: "And when you place the pointed cautery over the hand, and revolve your arm around it in a circuit until the cautery penetrates into the depth of the hand.
E leyssa aquel per tres dias entro que comense getar brac.	 And after three days of holding the hand thusly, blisters begin to form on it.
E aprop emplastre aquel am malvas salvatges trissadas am sal, e leyssa le emplastre sobre aquel per una nuoyt, quar aquel sira eradicat de las suas razitz.	 And after placing that ointment made from crushed salt onto the hand and keeping it there for one night, the rash will be removed from its skin.
E aprop cura le loc am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanat.	 And after applying a cream to the genital area that brings health, then it is cured.
E si so no-convertitz, e motas veguadas accideysso en la superficia del cors, majorment en las mas e les pes, lahoras cove que tu aministres en aquels cauteri am aygua, e es que prenguas una quannula de eram o de ferr o de pena de voltor, e pausa aquela sobre le clau; e aprop geta en la quanula de aygua cauda pauca cantitat, e rete la tua ma, e tu revolveys aquela am compressio de la tua ma de tot, e sia enpremut le marge de la canula en la razit del clau, e atrobara la aygua cauda via al preon de la razit del cau; e espera le malaute un pauc la mordicacio de l’aygua cauda per una hora, e aprop remau aquela, quar le clau am las suas razitz sira erredicat.	 If you are unable to convert it, and if its symptoms appear on the surface of the body, especially in the hands and feet, then apply water cauteries as mentioned above, place a cushion over it; and when its quantity is minimal, take your hand away from it, and rotate that cautery with compression of your hand throughout. And bind it to the side of the vessel at the depth of the vein, so that the liquid enters through the opening in the vein's side; and wait for one hour until the pain subsides, then remove it, as its course will have been corrected.
E ayssi fe am aquels la i aprop l’autre entro que venguas sobre totz les quals de lor so en le cors.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
E aprop cura aquels pus que las razitz dels claus so erradicadas am aquo dels enguentz les quals la carn ve engenran.	 Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over that area to prevent the intestine from coming out.
Capitol .liiii.	 E tu ja has ubert entre las coyssas del malaute e dejos lu as pausat un coyssi, et autre servent sia sus las cambas de lu, e autre sus le pietz de lu, le qual tengua las suas mas.
De cauterizacio de tremor.	 Cautery of the tremors.
Quan endeve ad alcu tremor per freg en le nervi o per febre de causa frega, o per autra causa semblant, lahoras cove que tu cauterises aquel am quatre cauteris o am v sobre les spondils del dos, entre quascun spondilh am un cauteri; e am cauteri en le pietz de lu, e sobre l‘estomac de lu, am cauteri olivar.	 When you need to cautery a tremor because of an injury in the nerve or fever caused by heat, or for any other reason similar to it, it is customary that you cauterize with four points and over each spine between two spines one cautery; and on the stomach and liver as well.
E la tremor de lu se repausa e festina la sanetat de la malautia frega.	 The tremor of him will cease and heal his illness.
Capitol .lv.	 E tu ja has ubert entre las coyssas del malaute e dejos lu as pausat un coyssi, et autre servent sia sus las cambas de lu, e autre sus le pietz de lu, le qual tengua las suas mas.
De cauterizacio de albati accidentz al cors.	 Cautery of the broken bones in the body.
Quan en le cors so espellitz albati, e so pustulas fendas las quals so feytas de materias grossas corruptas; donc cove al comensament cum apareyso, que sia cauterizat sobre tot cap de la fistola am cauteri subtil am fustz de mirt, la extremitat del qual es estenduda am foc; o am razitz de erestologia longua; o am cauteri lentecular.	 When the bones in the body are broken and pus comes out of wounds filled with coarse and corrupt materials, then from the outset, it is customary to cauterize on all sides of the fistula with a subtle cautery at its base, extending the extremity towards fire; or at the end of the esophagus; or at the cranial cautery.
E alscunas veguadas es cauteri ademamil al comensament de la sua expulcio segon aquesta manieyra; e no so cregudas, e es disrumpuda la superfluitat fazens aquels, et sana de aquels.	 When the first sentence is finished and you have guessed its translation, please reply with "next".
Mays empero cove que aquo sia fayt aprop evacuacio am fleubotomia.	 After translating the second sentence, please respond with "next
Capitol lvi.	 The third sentence to translate is: "Capitol lvi.
De cauterizacio de fluex de sanc accident per incisio de arceria.	 Cautery incision of the artery, caused by a blow to the head
Tropas veguadas endeve fluex de arceria que es inciza deves la plagua la qual endeve deforo, o deves la incizio de apostemas o cauteri del membre, e alor semblantz, e es dificil remaura aquel.	 The fourth sentence to translate is: "Tropas veguadas endeve fluex de arceria que es inciza deves la plagua la qual endeve deforo, o deves la incizio de apostemas o cauteri del membre, e alor semblantz, e es dificil remaura aquel.
Donc cum accideys ad alcu aquo, lahoras tu·t coyta am la tua ma a l’orrifici de la arceria, e pausa sobre aquel le tieu dit endic estrenh aquel motas veguadas entro que sia ostat le fluex del sanc dejos le tieu dit, e que non yesqua.	 When it comes to treating the artery blow, doctors hold a hand over the area and place another on their legs to prevent the intestine from coming out.
E aprop pausa en le foc les cauteris olivars paucs e grantz, per nombre motz, e exsuffla sobre aquels entro que sian mot ignitz.	 And they put a few small holes and large ones, for specific purposes, over which to let the air out.
E aprop pren de aquels un petit o un gran segon le loc e la plagua en la qual es rompuda la arteria, sobre aquela vena festinantment pus que auras remaugut le tieu dit, e te le cauteri entro que sia abcindit e restreyt aquel sanc.	 And they put a small hole or large one on the area and vein where the artery has been ruptured to release pressure from it, and apply the cautery over which is blocked off and tightened by that artery.
E si le sanc es expellit de l’orrifici de la arteria quan tu remaues le tieu dit e extringeys le cauteri, lahoras pren la un autre cauteri coytadament dels cauteris les quals en le foc son preparatz, e donc no cesses fer aquo un aprop autre entro que le sanc sia restrengit.	 When the abscess is expelled from the artery when you move your arm and remove a cautery, then it will take another cautery immediately to prepare them as needed because otherwise you should not stop doing this until the abscess has been restrained
E guarda te que no comburas le nervi que aqui es, e que vengua sobre le malaute autra malicia.	 Remember that you do not touch the nerve here and go to another part of the body.
E sapias que quan de l’arteria flueys sanc, lahoras no es possible en aquels restrenge la sanc, e majorment quan l’arteria es gran, si no am una de quatre manieyras: o am cauteri ayssi quo dit havem, o am extraccio quan no es extrayta, quar quan es extrayta las extremitatz de lu miels son comburidas e es restreyt le sanc, o que sia liat am fiel o am liament per fort strectura, o que sian pausadas sobre lu medicinas de las quals la vertut es restringir la sanc; e sian strengudas am pulvinar am costriccio decent.	 Remember that when a sac exits from the artery and it is possible to restrain it in those cases, but if not, there are four possibilities: either cautery should be applied as indicated above, or extraction without delay if it cannot be extracted, because when the extremities of the patient are burned and it is difficult to extract it, or that it should be left alone with a firm and strong stretch to prevent it from coming out, or that they should be restrained by a medicine whose purpose is to restrain it.
Mays aquel que aministra restriccio decent de lu am liament e am strictura am draps o per posicio de causas comburentz e de semblantz, no comfereys sino tart.	 Remember that if you administer restraint by the means of bandages or positions which cause burns and discomforts but not deathly, then it should be done gently only
Mays si aquo endeve ad alcu e no sia le metge present ni medicina, lahoras obre am pausament del dit indic sobre le orrifici de aquela vena ayssi cum havem dit, e entenda a la gran costreccio de lu entro que le sanc sia ostat de la sobirana partida de la plagua, e sobre la arceria le dit no sia remaugut; e de sobre la arceria sia aspergit am aygua frega de mot gran fregiditat entro que·l sanc sia congilat e engrossat; e mays cossire en que ha de cauteri o de medicina necessitat.	 Remember that if there is no doctor present or medicine available, then the procedure to extract from the artery as indicated should be done immediately because of the severity of the injury, and about the large cut on which it occurs so that the abscess falls out of its cavity at the time of falling off the plate. And remember also to make the hole in such a way that no water is added or excessive coldness can occur for fear of freezing and swelling the sac.
Comensa la segonda partida.	 And then?
De incisio e perforacio e ventozas e de fleubotomia e de plaguas e de lor semblants.	 And in incision, perforation, and extraction; as well as bloodletting and leeches and the like
Aquestas son paraulas de Albucazis.	 These are procedures of Albucasis
Ja havem dit en le primier capitol tota malautia en la qual cauteri am foc es convenient e am medicina comburent, e las occasios e las causas de lu, e les instrumentz en aquels necessaris am las formas dels cauteris; e he ordenatz les capitols de la subiranetat del cap entro als pes.	 I have mentioned in the first chapter all kinds of medical procedures which are necessary and useful for medicine when indicated, as well as their causes and instruments needed to perform them; and I order the chapters on anatomy down below into sections
E yeu procesire en aquest capitol per aquela meteysa guisa, per que sia alliujat lo querent aquo, lahoras sobre aquo que aura demandat.	 You will proceed in this chapter to explain it as such that what is sought here may be understood by those who request it.
E denant que yeu comense aquo, cove, fils, que aprenguatz que en aquest capitol es per terror aquo que es en le capitol primier de cauterizacio.	 And when you start doing this one, then learn that in this chapter is the beginning of the first book on surgery
E per aquo que cove que sia en lu gran cautela, quar en la operacio la qual es en aquest capitol motas veguadas catz evacuacio la qual es am sanc am le qual esta la vida deves la aspersio de la vena o incisio sobre l’apostema o apercio de exsitura o puracio de la plagua o extraccio de sageta o incizio de peyra e a lor semblantz.	 For this purpose, in order to perform surgery properly and safely, consider the evacuation of blood clots that may endanger life by cutting into an artery or vein or incision on the sternum, extirpation of organs such as the bladder, extraction of gallbladder, purges of leeches or incisions on herniae.
E de totz aquels so acompanhatz temor e tremor e en le mas de lor catz la mort.	 And all these things are accompanied by fear and trembling and in most cases even death.
E yeu amonesti vos que sobre vos no caia aquo en le qual es esitacio, quar alcunas veguadas cazo deves vos manieyras de homes am manieyras motas de malautias.	 You should know that in such cases where this is done, some wounds can occur and you may harm yourself or others with injuries as well as illnesses.
E de lor es alcu que s’irays am la sua malautia e es leugiera deves lu la mort, e aysso per la vehemensia de aquo que troba de sa malautia, e per longuesa de la malautia de lu, e am la malautia es paor la qual significa mort.	 "The pain is increasing rapidly and the patient may die soon.
E de aquels es le qual dona a tu son aver e ditta, tu esperant am aquel sanetat, e la sieua malautia es perniciosa.	 "That means it's worsening and could be fatal.
E donc no cove que tu consentas en aquel que ve a vos del qual es aquesta manieyra; e la vostra cautela sia major que covesitat e la vostra rapacitat; e no presumatz alcuna causa sobre aquo sino aprop sciencia certa la qual virifica aquo deves vos, e al qual perve successio lausabla.	 "Do not engage in anything that could harm your health and safety; exercise caution above all else; and do not blame any cause on this without a certain knowledge of which you are capable, by means of which these results can be verified, and from which the consequences follow.
E usatz en la curacio de totz vostres malautes de pronosticacio e indicacio de lu al qual es salut convertida, quar en aquel es a vos ajutori sobre adquisicio de fama e de memoria, de lausor e de gloria.	 "In the treatment of all your ailments, prognosis and guidance in relation to which health has been converted, it is beneficial for you in order to acquire fame and memory, praise and glory.
O, filhs, Dieus en vos spire le sieu entendement e no oste a vos direccio e proteccio, quar aquo es en la sua ma.	 "Oh sons, may God give you understanding and not command or protect your path; for this is in its own way.
E yeu e ordenat aquest capitol distingent per capitols segon que precedit en le capitol de cauteris, de la cura del cap entro als pes, per que sia a vos alleujat aquo que demandatz de aquo e del qual havetz necessitat.	 "This chapter is distinguished from the preceding chapters by its own unique characteristics; as it deals with care of the head to feet and what you require.
Capitol primier.	 "First chapter.
De la curacio de aygua la qual es contenguda en le cap dels enfantz.	 "Treatment of water that is contained in the head of children.
Sapias que aquesta malautia motas veguadas endeve als enfantz deves le enfantament e quan la noyrissa estrenh le cap del enfant ses livitat.	 When a child has convulsions due to this illness, its head must be held steady by someone
E alcunas veguadas endeve per causa amaguada la qual no es saubuda.	 The illness is hidden in the cause that isn't well understood.
Mays yeu no vi aquesta malautia sino en les enfantz; e a totz aquels les quals yeu vi se coytec la mort, e per ayssi es a mi vist layssada obra en aquels.	 You may not know this illness in the children, but those who see it frequently witness death, and thus they are used to seeing it often.
E yeu e vist que un enfant le cap del qual era d’aygua omplit, e·l cap de lu era totjorn ayssi magnificat entro que ceser no podia sobre si meteys per la grandesa del sieu cap, e mays que la humiditat fe aucmentada entro que foc mort.	 You saw that a child's head was filled with water and the head itself was also magnificent due to its size; it seemed as if death were imminent because of how quickly it died after this had occurred
E aquesta humiditat o es agreguada entre la codena e l’os, o es agreguada dejos le os sobre le ciphac.	 The cause was either between the bone and the flesh or inside the skull itself.
Quar la operacio en aquel si la humiditat es entre la codena e l’os e le apostema es pauc, lahoras cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am una fissura en la latitut, e sia la longitut de la fissura cays dos notz entro que corra la humiditat, e aquesta es la forma del spatum:	 If the cause was between bone and flesh, but the aperture was small, then you should make a hole in your hand at an angle on the skull, so that its length is two fingers wide.
E donc si la humiditat es mays augmentada e l’apostema es major, lahoras son aqui dos fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	 If the cause was increased and the aperture larger, then you should make two holes for this purpose.
E si la humiditat es dejos le os, senhal de lu es que tu vezes la comissuras del cap ubertas de tota partida e l’aygua es spremuda quan tu compremes aquela am la tieua ma a las partidas dedintz e no es aquo a tu amaguat.	 If the cause is in the bone, then you should open up your skull completely and let water out when you press on these parts of the head with force, but it's not something to worry about if you do this often enough and don't feel any pain.
Cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am tres fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	 "You are opening a hole in my head for three punctures, following this procedure:
e aprop la inscizio extratz ne tota la humiditat; e aprop strenh las fissuras am draps e plumassols; e aprop enbroca aquo de sobre am vi e oli entro al quint dia, e aprop deslia le liament e cura la plagua am tentas e enguentz, e strenh le cap am equalitat; e mange le malaute am vianda secca de pauca humiditat entro que·l membre sia confortat e sanat.	 "You are opening a hole in my head for three punctures following this procedure: first you extract all the moisture with rags and towels, then you wrap the incisions with gauze and plaster bandages; on day five, you open them up again to drain out any remaining fluid from within the bandage itself, after which you will apply ointment and care around it until it becomes comfortable and healthy.
E es autra manieyra de incisio, que consideras hon apar la magnitut del apostema e la colleccio de l’aygua, quar alcunas veguadas es mays en le occipicii, o en la partida denant, o en la destra, o en la sinistra; e donc aten am la incizio on appar le apostema e la replecio de l’aygua, e fen aquo segon que a tu es miels possible.	 "The second procedure is as follows: consider the size of the opening and the amount of water to be removed from the scalp or forehead, arm or leg; when you have made an incision on any one of these areas, make sure to remove all the remaining fluid afterwards.
Et observa que no inscindas la arteria e endevengua flueys de sanc e mora le malaute per aquel flux de sanc am evacuacio de humiditat.	 "Remember not to cut into an artery and prevent bleeding from any wounds that may occur during the removal of excess moisture.
Capitol .ii.	 ".2nd Capitol
De inscisio de las arterias las quals so aprop las aurelhas, apeladas hilasseysse.	 "Do not cut into arteries which are close to the ears, also called the hilasseysse.
Capitol segon.	 ".2nd Capitol
Quan endeveno ad alcu catars o raumas als huelhs o al pietz, e es antiquat aquo, e no confereys en aquo la curacio de las medicinas, lahoras la deriera curacio en aquest es incizio de aquelas dos arterias.	 "When he encounters cats or rats among the wounds or in the chest area, it is customary to do this and not confer on this medical treatment; however, if there are two arteries involved.
E donc cove quan tu vols inscidir aquelas que le malaute raza lo sieu cap, e aprop fregua le loc am drap aspre per so que aparan las arcerias, e aprop sia strengut le col del malaute am alcu drap; e aprop considera on polsa la vena; e les locs de quascuna sobre les locs les quals so aprop las aurelhas depremutz, e tant se occultan sino en alcus homes.	 When you want to insert those that the patient's head is open, and then apply the bandage tightly as possible in order to prevent bleeding, and place your hand on top of his stomach, covering it; and after, consider if there are any pulses on the vein; and the places mentioned above should be covered with a handkerchief.
E aprop senha sobre la arceria am tenta, e aprop inscideys quascuna am le spatum de quascuna partida agut am inscizio pervenient entro al os, e sia aquo per la latitut del cap.	 And then apply the bandage over each of the wounds as quickly as possible in order to stop bleeding, and place your hand on top of her head aiming for its center; this is how you insert it into the mouth.
E si vols, entromet le spatum dejos la arteria e trenqua aquala a las inciden a las partidas desus.	 If you want to, then introduce that artery through those openings as quickly as possible.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio cays dos ditz ajustatz, quar quan alcuna vena es inscizida le sanc es eyssit am egressio pulsatil, le qual saut deforo per saut frequent.	 The length of the incision is set at two fingers; when any vein was inserted there can be a pulse on leaving, which prevents the blood from flowing out frequently.
Mays si la arceria no apareys al cintiment, lahoras cove que tu mesures de la aurelha la quantitat del spazi de tres ditz, e aprop senha am tenta, e fen entro al os.	 If there is no artery visible to the eye, then you measure the distance from the top of the ear lobe to three fingers, and then apply pressure tightly, and insert into the mouth.
E aquo que cove getar del sanc es quantitat de vi unc., e fort leu ne geta de lu mays o mens, e tot aquo es segon la quantitat la qual appareys de la vertut del malaute e de la replecio de la arceria de lu.	 The amount of this force is one-quarter inch; the lesser amount may be a half or less, and it depends on how much you can apply without causing injury to the patient's arm or artery.
E aprop considera la plagua, e donc si reman sobre le os alcuna causa del ciphac, lahoras inscindys aquo per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
E aprop strenh la plagua am plumassols e am liamentz de drap de li, e aprop cura aquela am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	 And if necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery.
Capitol .iii.	 The third book is in Latin
De extraccio de las arcerias las quals so en las templas.	 From extracts of the arteries that are in the temples.
Quan ad alcu accideys emigranea antiqua o catertz agutz, per humiditatz agrimonials e per qualiditat en les lacertz des templas, o sodo antiqua vehement e semblantz ad aquels, e es medicat am las manieyras de curacio de medicina e aquo no comfereys, lahoras nos hem sproatz en aquestas malautias extraccio de las arcerias en les templas, o cauterizacio de aquelas ayssi cum havem mostrat.	 When an old and cold wind strikes the temples, causing a hemorrhage or fracture of the veins in the temples, or when such a thing occurs violently as is sometimes seen, and the doctor's treatment does not involve any harm, we must burn out these arteries in the temples with a cautery.
E la manieyra de la operacio e extracio de aquelas es que·l malaute raza les pels les quals son en les templas; e entenda a la arceria apparent en le templar quar ela es a tu mostrada per le sieu pols, e·s occultada sino en paucs homes per vehemencia de freg.	 The operation and extraction of these arteries are to be performed on the patient's temples; and understand that it is necessary to cauterize them in the temple where they are hidden from sight by a few men due to the force with which they escape.
E si a tu es occultada, lahoras le col del malaute sia strengut am alcun drap; e aprop fregua le loc am un drap aspre o evapora le loc am aygua cauda entro que aparesca a tu la arceria manifestament.	 If it is hidden from sight, the doctor should tightly bind the patient's arm with a bandage; and if necessary to cauterize them in an unbandaged area so that their bursting becomes evident at once.
E lahoras tu pren le spatum del qual aquesta es la forma:	 The pain that results from this cause
E aprop tu scorja la codena am aquel am facilitat entro que pervenguas a la arceria; e aprop geta en lu onti e extratz aquela a las partidas sobiranas entro que extraguas aquela de la codena e descobras aquela de las tunicas las quals so dejos aquela, de tota partida.	 You can do this by first removing the bandage that is causing pain and then applying it to another part of the body
Mays si la arteria es subtil, lahoras envolveys aquela am la extremitat del oncii, e aprop inscindeys de aquela una partida segon la quantitat per la qual sian alonguadas las extremitatz de lu e sian contraytas, e no endevindra flux de sanc, quar si no so inscididas no pujara le sanc de tot.	 If the artery is thin, wrap it around a part of the body that is far away from where you want to apply it and make sure there's enough distance between them such that if they are not sealed properly, there won't be any blood flow loss, as if not sealed properly no longer will provide circulation to all parts.
E aprop evacua del sanc de vi unc. entro a tres.	 You remove the bandage from your hand and then put it on three times.
E si la arceria es gran, lahoras cove que tu lies aquela en dos locs am fiel dopble fort de ceda o am cordas a lonc, e no coyte a lu putrefaccio denant la consolidacio de la plagua e endevengua flux de sanc.	 If the artery is thick, wrap it around two separate points far apart and secure it with adhesive to prevent leakage of blood and ensure circulation remains.
E aprop incideys la superfluitat la qual es entre dos liamentz; e fay aquo en aquela hora o aprop autra ora.	 If there is a surplus between the two points, do so in this location or another place instead.
E si vols, cauteriza aquela am cauteri entro al os am cauteri cutellar entro que sian incididas las extramitatz de lu, e stara en loc de aquela meteyssa obra.	 If you want to do so with a cautery tool, apply it on the cutaneous cautery on your hand and then place them in the location mentioned earlier.
E es milhor obra sino que·l malaute aia febre o es de escalfada compleccio; quar cauteri es de aquelas causas que ajudan a las humiditatz finidoras, e donc es milhor en juvament.	 If it is more convenient than treating with fever or severe inflammation, cautery can be used to help bring about final dryness and therefore is better for young people.
E cove aprop la extraccio de las arcerias que huomplas le loc de coto antic, e sian pausatz sobre lu polvils decentement fayt, e aprop sia curat am medicinas seccas fazen naysser la carn e am calguas entro que sia sanat.	 "The surgeon has removed the appendix from where it was attached and placed a cushion over its cavity, so that when it moves gently, he prevents it from coming out of place with his hand on its back.
E si mentre obres autra veguada endeventa flux de sanc de la arceria, lahora tu te coyta a restrenger aquel sanc, o am cauteri, o que omplas le loc de coto, e strenh la tua ma entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	 "And while working on the second incision of the appendix, do you tighten that incision or use a cautery? Do you press your hand over it to keep it in place, and stretch tight?
E si deguna causa de aquelas no es a tu present, lahoras pausa le tieu dit sobre le loc entro que·l sanc sia congilat, e enbroca le loc am aygua de vehement fregiditat entro que la acuitat repausa, e sia strengut segon que cove.	 "If the cause is not immediate and it's necessary to have a temporary closure of that incision, then pause the tourniquet over the location where you want to keep the appendix closed tightly, avoiding the blood flow with cold water into which the urgency has been reduced, and tighten it as much as possible.
E aquo que es pus leugier en extraccio de arceria es que tu cauterizes la vena am aquest cauteri haventz dos cotels, pus que tu has senhat les dos locs am tenta, e depausa quascus, mot ignitz, entro que pervenguan al os e inscindan la vena en dos locs, per so que sia elonguat aquo que es entre las extremitatz de lu, quar no son consolidadas de tot am aquest cauteri.	 "The surgeon cautorizes the vein with two clamps to prevent bleeding from both locations during removal of the appendix, preventing it from passing through and breaking open at either location so that it is stretched between the extremities where they are not consolidated by this clamp.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri:	 "The cautery procedure:
E sia la acuitat dels dos cotels esemps.	 "You test the sharpness of both clamps.
Mays empero si so mendres acuitat que dos cotels es milhor, quar si so agudas cum dos cotels propera a quascuna freg, e no enscideysso la carn am velocitat.	 "If two clamps are too sharp to come close together without causing injury, then you use only one clamp.
Donc cum en aquels es alcuna grossitut, es tenguda la calor del foc en aquels e la carn es abscindida leugierament.	 Then heat was applied to those, causing flesh to separate gradually
E aquesta obra es milhor en tota obra e pus leugiera.	 This work is the best in all works and very simple.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre dos cotels la quantitat de la grossesa del dit.	 The spaces that are between two tails amount to the thickness of what they represent.
Capitol quart.	 Quarter.
De la cura de cors de lagremas agudas e aciduas dels huels.	 The treatment for severe and acidic ulcers on the body.
Quan so lagremas aciduas, e es le cors de aquelas venas las quals so sobre le test del cap deforo, e no comfereys en aquo alcuna causa de la curacio de medicina, e vezes la cara del malaute ja enrogesir e sent en le sieu front deambulacio ayssi cum si era deambulacio de formiguas, e·ls huels de aquel so extenuatz, humitz enayssi que ja les pels de lor son conodutz, e las parpelas so scalfadas per la acuitat de las lacrimas, les antics agro mesties en la curacio de aquelas de aquesta operacio, e nompnero aquela curacio am spassa.	 When acidic ulcers occur in the veins that are above your head and it is not a medical condition causing pain or discomfort, and often the face of the patient already swollen by the previous ulcer care, you should place the solution on top of them to soothe the pain of the new one as before.
E es que tu comandas al malaute rayre les pels les quals son en le sieu front, e aprop inscideys en le front tres fissuras engualment distans segon la longitut del front.	 It is that you command to the patient remove the hair on the part of their face where it is already swollen and place incisions at three equally spaced locations along the length of their forehead.
E si’ la longitut de la fissura cays dos ditz: la una fissura sia engualment distant a la longitut del nas en le mieg loc del front, e la segonda segon la longitut un petit del movement dels lacertz les quals so en le lacrimal, e la tersa del autre part.	 If the length of the incision is two fingers: The first incision should be equally distant to the length of your nose in terms of facial location and the second one along a small portion of the tear ducts that are present on the eye socket, and the third one at another place.
E guarda te de la incizio de las arcerias las quals so en dos latz, e elongua la tua ma de la continuacio de amdos las mandibulas.	 When you begin to open up the space between the thighs of a patient positioned on their back that is two spans wide, and continue with your hand towards closing up the mouth of the abdomen.
E si’ l’espazi de quascuna inscizio la quantitat de tres ditz ajustatz.	 When you have opened the space from each incision by a distance of three spans adjust it accordingly.
E si’ a tu una pessa d’espongua apparelhada o draps seccatz motz am les quals exsiccas le sanc.	 If there is a pressing need to remove wet dressings or cloths from those that are drying out, take them off immediately.
E aprop entremet le spatum de dos agudas extremitatz, del qual aquesta es la forma de la inscisio de lu:	 Then place the spatula between two sharp extremities of it; this is the form of incision which
que es de la partida des templas entro a la segonda inscizio.	 From the start until the second incision
Exxcorja am aquel tota la codena la qual es entre dos incizios am le ciphac le qual es sobre le os, e aprop fay aquo de la inscizio migera entro a la segonda inscisio.	 Expose all the flesh between two incisions on it; and apply this to the incision as it moves towards the second incision.
E aprop stratz ne aquest spatum e entromet en la primieyra inscizio autra vetz un autre instrument le qual es apelat cutellar, agut de una part e del autre no agut.	 Then press on this spatula and insert it into the first incision or another tool which is called a scalpel, one from each side.
E pausa le latz de aquel agut deves la carn annexa deves la codena, e le latz de lu leon dintz le os, e empelley aquel entro que pervengua a la fissura migera, e abscindeys am aquel totz les vaysels que descendo del cap als huels.	 Pause the length of that and add flesh to the skin, the length of it reaches the ear, and press this in so that it may come out from the incision as it moves towards its exit, and remove all the veins descending from the head to the feet.
Mays que sia continuada la inscizio ad aquo appar de la codena, e aprop fay aquo en la fissura migana entro al autra fissura.	 Continue with the incision as you are doing at this point on it, and apply that to the next incision as it moves towards another incision.
E pus que corr del sanc quantitat engual, exprem les locs de las pessas del sanc congilat.	 The first part of this text translates to "Start by cleansing the quantity of blood".
E aprop pausa en quascuna fissura calgua de coto vielh, e pausa sobre aquels polvils enbegutz en vi e oli e vi agre, e vegas que no endevengua apostema caut.	 "Fill a small basin with warm water and place it on the blisters gently. Do not apply any pressure that might burst them.
E en le tertz dia deslia le liament e aministra gran enfusio de aygua cauda o tebeza, e aprop cura aquo am enguent bazilicon am oli rozat e autres entro que las plaguas sian sanadas.	 "In the third day you'll apply a large bandage soaked in cold water or ice and gently wrap it around the blisters to help heal them.
Capitol .v.	 Sorry. I cannot find any meaning based on the limited information provided. Is there anything else you would like me to try?
De la cura de lagramas per catartz e als huels descendentz de las partidas dedintz del cap.	 "The cure for burns involves cooling and covering them, descending from the top of the head.
Quan ad alcu veno catartz agutz e continuantz, e vezes les huels del malaute extenuatz petitz, e ja le reguardament de lor es debelitat, e las palpebras ulceradas e de lor cazo les pels, e en le preon del cap es dolor aguda ledent e extrenutacio consequent, lahoras sapias per aquestz accidentz que las materias e catartz no veno sino de motas venas de las partidas dedintz procedent.	 "When applying cold compresses and continuing with them for a while, the patient's burns are sometimes treated as well. The ulcers of their skin begin to heal and the pain decreases slightly but suddenly becomes acute again when it is applied on top.
E la milhor curacio en aquels es aquesta: que comandes al malaute que raza lo sieu front, e aprop inscideys en aquel una fissura al mieg loc del front, un petit per la latitut (e comensa am la fissura del templar senestre entro al dextre templar; e sia inscisio entro al os; e eslongua la tua ma dels lacertz del templas lesquals son maugutz deves la mastigacio), entro que sia le os descubert.	 "The best cure in these cases is that you ask the patient to hold their head still, and then make a small incision into the forehead near the temple (starting from the left temple towards the right one; continue to the nose; stretch your hand across the temples as shown). Then uncover the face.
Exsicca tot le sanc am espongua o am drap secc e aprop repleys entre las doas labias de la fissura am coto vielh o am draps de li.	 When the anus has been opened up or dried out, place a cushion between two thighs and insert it into the opening of the anus.
E aprop estrenh desus am polvils enbegutz en vi e oli per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	 Then put some oil on your finger to lubricate it, so that it won't cause any discomfort when inserted.
E quan deslias aquo e veses que l’apostema ja es diminuit, lahoras cove que fregua le os entro que comensa en lu nayser carn, e aprop cura aquel am regiment exsiccatiu le qual fassa neysser la carn, ayssi cum si tu prenes de farina de froment dos partidas e de colofania quatre partidas e mescla o, e de lor sia fayt emplastre e sia aministrat en aquestas plaguas a de la carn nativitat.	 When the anus has been diminished in size and you're done cleaning it up, apply some ointment into it as soon as possible to prevent any discomfort when inserting something inside of it later on, either by applying two parts of flour and four parts of colophonia, mixed together, or just using a simple one. Place this ointment and administer it onto the natural skin in these places that we mentioned.
Capitol .vi.	 When you have completed all the preceding steps, you may proceed to this next step by placing some ointment into the anus as soon as possible to prevent any discomfort when inserting something inside of it later on, either by applying two parts of flour and four parts of colophonia mixed together, or just using a simple one.
De la cura de aquo que catz en las aurelhas.	 From the treatment for that which is done in the anus.
Tota causa que catz en las aurelhas es una de quatre specias, quar o es peyra mineral o causa semblant a peyra, ayssi cum ferr e veyre, o es de planta ayssi cum ceze o fava, o es causa fluxtibla ayssi cum aygua e vi agre e a lor semblantz, o alcuna bestia.	 The cause of that which occurs in the anus can be one of four types: it could be mineral, or caused by something similar to poison ivy; alternatively, it could be from plant food like beans or fava beans; or finally, it may have fluctitious characteristics such as being water or windborne.
E donc quan peyra catz en l’aurelha o autra causa semblant de aquelas causas que no ajustan ne creysso en l’aurelha, e pausa la aurelha al solelh, e si vezes la peyra, lahoras distilla en aquela alcuna causa de oli violat o sizami, e aprop aministra la extraccio de lu, e fay le stornudar am condizi, e oppila las nars deve le aveniment de stornutacio.	 And when you suspect that it may be the result of one of those causes not mentioned in the anus or any other cause similar to them, place the anus on a level surface and if times come again for pain, then apply oil to the affected area or lesion, take the extract from it, wash it off with water, cover it by putting the nostrils closed together.
E aprop pausa en le circuit de la aurelha alscunas pessas de drap o lana, e dextendas la aurelha a las partidas desus, quar motas veguadas es foro-getada am aquestas causas.	 When pain occurs in the feet and is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
E si no n’es getada, lahoras aministra extraccio de lu am le instrument apelat gesti epicicarios subtil del qual aquesta es la forma:	 If not done properly, the doctor will use a pointed cautery implement to make puncts on the surface of the foot.
E si es foro-getada am gesti, bo es; e sino, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am onci subtil de pauca duplicacio.	 If it is done properly, yes; otherwise, the doctor will use a less pointed cautery implement with fewer puncts.
E donc si no es foro-getada per aquo, lahoras fay una canula de aram e entromet la extremitat de la canula en le trauc de la aurelha e claus a l’enviro de la canula am cera e am oli mollificada per so que no sia ubert sino la canula.	 If not done properly, the doctor will insert a needle with an open end into the thigh and thread it through to the hollow of the elbow, securing it at its lower part to prevent the needle from coming out.
E aprop extratz am le tieu vent am fort atraccio, quar tropas veguadas cum aquo que havem recontat.	 Once the cautery is in place and properly secured, then proceed with your treatment as usual.
Mays si no es foro-getada en aquesta manieyra, lahoras pren de halka alumbat o de vecz aparelhat am le qual son preses les ausels una patita quantitat, e pausa aquel en la extremitat de ray, e aprop envolopa sobre aquel coto decentment pausat.	 If not done properly in this manner, the doctor will take a straight needle or awl and place it at its edge, placing one end near to the patient's ear, and then wrap around that part gently.
E aprop entromet aquel en le trauc de la aurelha am facilitat, e aprop excicca la aurelha de la humiditat.	 Once the needle is in place through the elbow hole, gently apply pressure to prevent leakage of the blood or phlegm that may be present.
E donc si no es foro-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recontadas, lahoras tu coyta a talhar aquela denant que endevengua apostema caut o espasme.	 If not all the causes of the pain are addressed by this method, then you may also apply a cauterizing agent or spasmolytic medication as needed.
E la manieyra de talhar aquela es que tu al comensament sancnes le malaute de la vena sephasica e extratz del sanc segon la mannieyra de la vertut de lu, e aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas e converteys l’aurelha a las partidas desus, e fen am petita fissura en la razit de la aurelha deves lo greys de lu en le loc be premegut de lu.	 The first sentence is: "You have already placed the cushion under them, and another servant on their legs, and another one on their chest, holding their hands.
E sia la fissura de figura lunar entro que pervengua a la peyra, e, la peyra atrobada, osta aquela si podes am instrumentz apropriatz; e aprop cos la fissura en aquela hora am velocitat, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	 If the lunar figure is about to enter through the vagina and if there has already been a penetration, then you should use an appropriate tool for it. Prepare this as soon as possible, and take care of it so that it heals properly.
E si la causa cazent en la aurelha es un dels gras que creysso e so inflatz, lahoras aministra la curacio e la extraccio de lu; mays si no obezeys a tu ad eyssiment, lahoras tu pren spatum teune subtil segon aquesta forma:	 If the cause is on the vulva and it's one of those that you mentioned earlier, then the doctor will take care of it and extract it. However, if you do not wish to undergo this procedure, the doctor may suggest a subtle approach instead.
e aministra am aquel la abscizio de aquel gra lo qual es cazut en l’aurelha.	 The doctor will administer an excision of that fat that is found on the vulva.
E no fassas aquo quan cogitas que aquel ja es humectat per la vapor del aurelha, e pausa aquel en motas pessas, e prop extratz ne aquelas am les oncis o am gesti subtil, o ab inscizio ayssi co dit havem, quar es alleujada la extraccio de lu.	 Do not do this if you suspect that it has already been moistened by the vulva's steam, or if the pain persists even after a pause and an external application to those areas, instead of performing excision as described here, we recommend applying a soothing ointment as mentioned earlier.
Mays en l’aygua la qual es intrada en l’aurelha cove que·l malaute use de sternutacio am condizi al comensament, e omple la sieua aurelha am alcu coto vielh, e jagua sobre aquela aurelha en la qual es l’aygua, e si per aquo es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, lahoras pren tropas peyras teunas e leons segon la longitut del dit, e calfa aquelas en le foc un pauc, e le pacient entrometa una de aquelas en le trauc de la sua aurelha e saute sobre la un pe sieu de aquela partida e percussia am una autra peyra sobre la peyra la qual es dintz la aurelha.	 Also wet the cloth that is inserted into the vulva, so it can be used to clean inside of it, and if needed, apply a soothing ointment over those parts as well. If this procedure requires additional time or resources, then take some towels and lay them near the affected area, and have another servant wipe off any excess water from there, ensuring that they are placed at an angle so the patient can slide over one of these towels to the other side for wiping.
Donc no cesse aquo am peyra entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada.	 When the gouty pain has infiltrated each part of the body
E ja l’aygua sira foro-getada enayssi que tu prenguas de papier o de gonc i, e met la una extremetat de lu en l’aurelha e estendas l’autre extremitat am foc entro que sia comburit le may de lu.	 The first servant places the cushion under them and holds their hand to prevent the intestine from coming out.
E prop met i autre gonc e fay aquo tantas veguadas entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada, e stratz aquel am canula ayssi co desus es dit de la peyra extrasadora.	 The second servant holds a needle as well to prick the same veins, and this is called puncturing of the gouty vein.
Mays en la extraccio de bestia intrant en aquela aurelha, si es a petit cos, ayssi piussa e a lu semblant, cura aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio; mays si es de gran cos la qual causa apar al sen del vezement, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am gesti e oncis, e la causa de lu es pus leugiera de totas las autras causas que cazo en l’aurelha.	 If the patient is small, then prick it gently and similarly place a similar thing on their chest, as this is done in the division; but if it is a large object causing the pain to come out of the body, then treat its cause by incision and removal, because all other causes are put into the cavity.
Mays en la extraccio de verm engendrat en la aurelha, quan tu curas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e en le tractat de distillacios e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu reguardes la aurelha al solelh.	 If the patient has a swollen vein in its cavity that you've already treated with puncturing and without disturbing your cure, then let it be exposed to air as much as possible.
E donc si apar aqui alcuna causa dels verms, lahoras extratz aquel am gesti o am onci subtils, mays si no apar deguna causa, lahoras pren una canula dejos streyta e desus ampla de la qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	 If there is no other cause of the worms, then treat it with a needle prick or incision, and if not, let the vein be exposed for drying.
E entromet la extremitat subtil en la aurelha segon la quantitat la qual suffertar puesca le malaute; e aprop sucgeys am aquela per succio fort, e fay aquo motas veguadas, entro que totz les verms sian foro-gitatz.	 The physician gently inserts the small extremity into the patient's anus, after measuring its size to prevent excessive pain from the patient.
Mays si no obezeysso a tu al ayssiment, lahoras tu opila e claus en le circuit de la canula am cera ayssi cum havem dit; lahoras aministre distillacios las quals han ja esproadas les antics en la curacio dels verms, e atrobaras aquo en le tractat de distillacios.	 If the patient does not allow it to be done at once, then you should administer a sedative and wait until their circulation recovers after having previously used the anthelmintics as prescribed by doctors in order to treat worms.
E sia la tua efusio am la qual efundas les olis medicinas en la aurelha am aquest strument del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	 It is your duty, if you find medicines in the anus with this instrument that it is customary for them to use,
E fay aquela de argent o de eram, dejos streyt, en le qual sia un petit trauc, e am pla desus.	 And if one finds gold or silver, let us say nothing about it; only the amount should be mentioned, and we are to avoid discussing it further.
E donc sia cum empellent a que es en la conquavitat de la canula de continent aqui on sira necessari.	 Then they will try to force the intestine back into its cavity here where necessary
E si vols, pren le ray e envolveys en la extremitat de lu decentment coto, e aprop gieta oli en la concavitat del auziment, o suc de alcuna herba, o aquo que vols de aquestas medicinas en la canula — e aquela es en la aurelha —, e aprop entromet le ray am coto desus e exprem am la tua ma aquel am compressio temprada de lu entro que l’oli sia expellit en la concavitat del auziment e le malaute senta le oli dedintz.	 If you want, take hold of the ray and gently insert it into the patient's anus cavity, or apply a soothing oil to that part of the anus - or both -, then put your hand on top of them so as to compress the intestines and prevent their expulsion from the anus cavity while the patient feels the oil being applied.
E aquo que sia enfundut en la aurelha sia ja scalfat am foc un petit.	 This is what you should do if you have already inserted it into the anus, but feel a little pain.
E guarda te que la causa la qual distillaras en l’aurelha no sia trop frega, quar las medicinas de aurelha no suffertan aquo.	 The cause that you will extract from the urine should not be too cold or hot, as medicines of the bladder are not equipped to handle it.
Capitol .vii.	 It is the 7th book of the Roman history written by Livy
De curacio de opilacio de aurelhas.	 About curing or treating bladder stones.
Alcunas veguadas alcus enfantz yeysso dels ventres de lors mayres no-perforatz, e aquo ja accideys en alcus homes, opilacio en le meat de la aurelha per plagua o per carn nada en aquela; e aquesta opilacio alcunas veguadas es fayta en le preon del trau de la aurelha la qual no consiec le vezement, e alcunas veguadas es en las partidas defora.	 The treatment for bladder stones should be carried out when they occur in the urethra or external meat of the bladder; and this kind of treatment is customarily called urethrotomy.
E aquela que accideys en le preon de lu, la qual no comprehen le vezement, es en las majors disposicios de dificil sanacio.	 The one that occurs in the anterior part (or urethra) which cannot be comprehended by treatment is considered to be more difficult surgery.
E en aquela en qual consegueys le vezement, cove que tu pauses la aurelha del malaute al solelh e reguarda en aquela.	 In that one where you open the bladder of a patient and place it in sunlight or otherwise expose to air.
E donc si vezes oppulacio apparent, obre aquela am espatum subtil del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	 And if time comes for an obvious operation, then apply that method which is subtle yet effective, this being the form of it.
Si’ la extremitat de lu en la qual sia petita la latitut, del qual la una partida sia aguda e l’autra no; e le spatum sia de dos latz leon per so que no fassa lizio al aurelha.	 If the part of it where the angle is small (or urethra) has a sharp angle on one side and a non-sharp angle on another, then its opening should be made with two blunt objects to prevent injury to the bladder.
E donc si la opilacio es per carn nascuda en la aurelha o en le meat de lu, lahoras te aquela am oncis subtils e incidiys aquela vehement facilitat entro que sia ostada tota la carn.	 If the treatment is to be done with a new cut in the bladder or through its meat, then use those subtle and delicate incisions which are easiest to handle all around that exposed skin.
E si opilacio es en le preon de la aurelha, lahoras pren ray subtil leon e escalfa aquel am foc un pauc, e aprop met aquel en le meat de l’aurelha.	 When a patient has a hernia, the doctor will do this first: gently lift and move them away from the focus of light or heat with few movements
E donc si as scentit oppulacio am aquo que le malaute atroba am facilitat, per gravetat de ausir, esforsa la oppressio de lu am facilitat; e guarda te que no plagues les nervis del aurelha.	 When the patient is too heavy to be easily lifted, it's important to prevent excessive pressure on their abdomen and ensure that they don't press against any nerves in the hernia area.
E aprop pausa en l’aurelha drap de li segon la quantitat del ample del trauc lo qual tu as envolvutz en l’enguent egipciac; e fay aquo per alcus jorns entro que sias segur de la consolidacio de la plagua; o que prenguas qualgua e enfon aquela en ayguaros e pulveriza sobre lu segi trissat e usa de lu; e si vezes la aurelha ja esser apostemada, lahoras cove que tu estraguas la qualgua e permutes aquela am autra qualgua la qual tu envoloparas en cerot que sia fayt am oli rozat, entro que sia le apostema caut cedat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	 Then gently place it back into its original position and cover it with a dry cloth to prevent further irritation or infection.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras submergeys esponga o drap en aygua frega e pausa sobre la aurelha, e usa del autra curacio la qual restrengeys le flux del sanc, la qual es dita en le tractat de distillacio.	 If a flow of blood arises from the hernia, apply cold compresses or damp cloth to it and place over the hernia area, using another caution that restricts the flow of blood mentioned in the treatise on distillation.
Capitol .viii.	 This sentence appears to be incomplete as it is not clear what follows after "Capitol" in this context. Is there a missing period or space?
De cura de athezil le qual endeveno a las palpebras.	 To treat the eyelids
Athezil les quals endeveno a las paupebras dels huels alcuna veguada so humitz, alscunas veguadas son secs.	 When eyelids swell due to dryness of the air, eye drops are used that have some moisture in them.
Donc cove que tu tenguas aquels am tenhalhas o am onci, e inscindas aquels am espatum de las suas razitz, e aprop pausa sobre les locs segi trissat.	 "When you have these items in hand or near the patient, remove any coverings from their feet and place a cushion under them, then pause over the legs as if about to examine.
Mays si dolor am flux de sanc veno, lahoras tu cauteriza aquels am cauteri lanticular subtil.	 "If joint pain occurs due to cold humors coming in through the veins, you should burn away these subtle lancet points with a heated tool.
E la milhor cauterizacio es aprop las inscizios e tropas veguadas retornam quan reman alcuna causa de sas razitz; e quan so cauterizadas am foc, aquelas razitz son comburidas e no retornan.	 "The more intense the cautery is applied to the affected areas and veins that have been burned away, the quicker those areas will be consumed by fire and cannot return.
Capitol .ix.	 "This concludes our medical treatise on pain management. May it help you in your healing journey!
Cura de grandeyssa que veno a las palpebras dels huels.	 "Please ensure that the affected areas are well-covered.
Motas veguadas endeve en las palpebras dels huels alcuna causa la qual es asemblada a grandissa en sa fortalicia e duricia, e per so grandissia es apelada.	 "Burn away all excess matter in the affected areas to enhance their strength and durability, making them more resilient.
E es agreguacio de humiditat grossa en la palpebra dejos e desus.	 "Add excessive moisture to the affected area above it and below it.
Donc la opperacio en lor es que consideras lahoras si la grandissia es procedent en lu en aquo que apar de la palpebra e es mauguda a tota partida; e la causa de lu es leugiera.	 "The operation is to determine if the excess size comes from this area above it and ends at the bottom, or is it just an enlargement of that part? The cause of the enlargement can be determined.
Donc fen sobre aquela am fissura per la latitut, e aprop escorga aquela de tota partida am facilitat entro que evasesca, e aprop suspen aquela am onci e abscindeys aquela.	 "Then, after making an incision through the latitude of that part, you should remove any coverings entirely to make it as simple as possible and then close it up with stitches.
Mays si a tu no es apparelhada la incizio de lu si no pus que penetras la palpebra am inscizio pauc a pauc, lahoras aquo no notz en deguna causa.	 When you do not have any cause for concern, then the pain is referred to as a trivial matter.
E si la figura es gran, lahoras tu l’ajusta am sutura; e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	 If the figure is large, it should be adjusted in width and depth so that it is cured (or treated).
E si es pauca, a tu no sobrevindra mal per aquela quar l’anguent de lu restaura aquela e encarna.	 If it is small, you will not encounter any issues with the healing of its wounds as long as it has been restored and healed.
E si la grandissia es declinant a las partidas dedintz de la palpebra deves la superficia dedintz, lahoras evesa la palpebra e suspen la grandissia am onci, otra que tu indigescas de incizio, e prem aquela de tota part, e si la palpebra per inscizio es alonguada, aquo no notz en deguna causa.	 If the size is decreasing at the edge of the eyelid, you should reduce its width and depth to prevent it from becoming detached. Then place a cushion under its entire surface, if the detachment occurs on one side only; otherwise, do so immediately across the face and cover every part.
E aprop la incizio, lava le huel am aygua salada; e cura le loc am aquo que encarna entro que sia sanat.	 Then place it in a container filled with warm salty water for healing purposes.
Capitol .x.	 The end of the medical treatise
De la cura axcirnah en la palpebra desus del huel.	 End of cure section
Axcirnath es grays le qual es engendrat en las tunicas de la palpebra desus, e majorment endeve als enfantz, agrava les huels de aquels et accideyso a lor catartz le mayti; e no podon reguardar la claror del solelh per aquo quar lagremas se coytan ad aquels.	 Those born with cataracts of the eyelids must endure their discomforts and live in darkness, as long as they cannot be treated.
E per so tu vezes aquels jaser sobre les lors caras tot temps, e sobre les lors caras dormen; e so a las palpebras de lor dejos les sobrecils humidas, las quals ja ha cuberta imflacio, e iminencia de accernac apparent es en l’uelh; e que quant tu premes le loc am les tieus ditz, tu centes accernac entro aquels.	 Such people are often troubled with tears and moist eyelids from birth on, which have been covered by inflammation, and an impending cure may be near the eyelid; should you attempt to cover it over time, a cure will emerge among them.
E alcuna manieyra de opperacio es en aquel que le malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop pausa drap de li e de lu fay calgua, e fay de lu cercle segon la quantitat la qual contena arthernach de tota partida, e aprop pausa aquel sobre aquela e prem am les tieus ditz de tota per que sia agreguat arcernac en le mieg del cercle, e aprop fen en le mieg de aquela humiditat am spatum inscident am fissura per la latitut, e la fissura no sia major que la fissura que es fayta en flaubotomia.	 "In the beginning of treatment, when a hernia is placed under the chest to support it and prevent it from falling out during coughing or straining, and then later in the same treatment, if there are any tears present near the opening, that tear must be cauterized with a pointed cautery.
Mays en le preon cove que tu fendas la codena tota entro que pervenguas ad arcernach, quar en las mays desposicios proceseys arcernach per fissura segon la forma de grayseza blanca.	 "After the initial incision has been made to open up the hernia sac and allow it to protrude through a small opening at the top of the chest wall, if there are any tears present in that area which may have caused excessive bleeding during the operation, then those tears must be cauterized using a pointed cautery.
Donc extratz aquela am draps los quals tu as envolopatz entre les tieus ditz a las partidas deforo e revolv entre la ma dextra e sinistre entro que sia dispargut.	 "So, after the initial traction has been applied to both sides of the chest wall to keep it open during surgery and prevent any collapse or distortion of the opening, then you must retract that area between your right hand and left hand separately.
E guarda te que no ajustes en la fissura per so que am le spatum no pervenguas al huel e ladescas aquel.	 "Remember to not adjust any flaps or sutures in the chest wall to prevent it from coming out through an opening, and secure them tightly.
Mays si no apar a tu arternach en le comensament de la fissura, mays que tu ajustes en la fissura un petit am fecilitat entro que procesisca arternach; e aprop extratz aquela ayssi quo havem dit; e aprop submargeys draps de li en aygua e vi agre e pausa les sobre le loc e estrenh aquels am polvils.	 "Do not adjust the flaps or sutures at the beginning of an incision, and make sure to adjust them with a little bit of flexibility in order to prevent any movement or distortion during the procedure; then apply pressure on both sides gently over the area using gauze pads and cotton balls, and hold firmly.
E so alcus que trissan sal e pausan aquel en la conquavitat de la fissura per so que aquo que es remas de aquela humiditat.	 When you are cutting between the patient's thighs, first place a cushion under them to prevent injury, then place another servant on their legs and another on their chest holding their hands.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	 And hold that in order for it to heal
Mays si accideys en le loc apostema caut, lahoras cura aquel am emplastres cedatils entro que sia sanat.	 If the bleeding occurs at the incision site, then treat it immediately with pressure applied dressings to prevent infection.
Capitol .xi.	 The twelfth chapter.
De manieyras de tactimi del huel.	 Many ways of treating pain
Quan en las palpebras dels huels so natz pels ajustatz dejos les pels naturals e so antiquatz, lahoras aquels noso al huel e fan endevenir manieras de malautias ayssi cum lacrimas assiduas e mollificacio de palpebras e tela entro que aquo sia causa de destruccio del huel que s’apela tactinir del huel, e cura se en quatre manieyras: o per cauteri am foc; o am medicina acuta segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri; o es fayt atactini per inscizio e sutura; o per cannas segon que yeu diyre.	 When there are problems with the eyes, they use natural remedies and traditional treatments to alleviate pain and discomfort, but if it is a cause of damage to the eye that is known as tendinitis or keratitis, four ways are used: cautery, acute medicine; incision and suturing; or canes.
E donc cove que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se; aprop converteys la palpebra del uelh am la tua ma sinistra, e si es convertida, bo es; e sino, entromet agulha en aquela en la qual sia fiel de la partida pus dejos de la palpebra, e fay penetrar la agulha am fiel desus, e aquo sia — prop del marge de la palpebra en le qual naysso les pels — prop dels pels, e tira le fiel a las partidas desus am la palpebra, e converteys aquela am le ray.	 When performing an eye operation on the patient's forehead, place your left hand over it and if you are inserting something, insert the needle in that part of the eyelid where there is no eyelashes; or pierce through the lashes to get at them, then withdraw from there.
E aprop fen en la partida dedintz de la palpebra dejos les pels ajustatz am spatum inscidentz del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal mendre; e aprop extratz le fiel e pausa dejos la palpebra polvilhs petitz de coto o de drap, e aprop senha sobre la palpebra am tenta, e sia ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirt.	 When the eyeball is inflamed and causes pain in the eyelids of a patient, put ointment on it, place your hand over its surface to prevent it from falling out, and then hold it tight
Mays empero cove que sia la figura segon la quantitat de helevacio de la palpebra, quar aquo ja es diversificat en les homes, quar de aquels es le quals indigeys que sia inscidit de la palpebra gran quantitat segon la quantitat per la qual la palpebra es mollificada.	 However, remember that this depends on the height of the eyelid itself, which varies among people, because these are the ones who determine how much should be applied to the inflamed eyelid depending on its thickness
E aprop fen am le spatum sobre las doas linhas las quals has senhadas, e comensa del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal menor.	 And then place your hand over both of them
E si’ la tua fissura prop dels pels naturals ayssi cum es la grossetut del rey.	 If the natural fur is so thick, do it as you would normally do.
E aprop met le onci en un dels dos angles de la codena, e aprop excoria aquela tota, e aprop ajusta am la scitura las doas labias am gula o fiel de lana subtil, e abstergeys le sanc, e fay adherir aquo que superflueys dels fiels sobre dos sobrecils am alcunas causas enviscans, si voles far aquo, e sino, non cures.	 Place it on one of the two angles of his elbow, cover its entire surface, and adjust a soft pad over both hands that is made from fine wool to absorb any bloodstains, and tie it tightly to prevent them from moving around.
E aprop leyssa la sutura dels fiels entro a tres dias o quatre, e aprop cura aquo.	 Then apply this treatment for three or four days.
E si vols, layssa la plagua ses sutura, e cura aquela am aquo que exsicca e constrenh, quar la palpebra es alevada deves la sigillacio de la plagua e la agreguacio de lu; mays sutura es milor E donc aysso diysso les antics de taxanir.	 If you want to, apply this treatment and keep the bandage on until it dries up completely and tightens, so that the eyelid is relieved from its heaviness and pain, may the stitches be better and this will have more effect than any other method.
Mays empero en lu sia sollicitut sobre le malaute, e es de bona operacio, e no es en lu temor.	 In this case, the first sentence translates to 'In this matter, let us be patient in doing our work and not afraid of it.'
E es autra manieyra en taxmir, e es que senhes sobre la palpebra figura ayssi cum fuelha de mirt, e aprop eleva la palpebra am tres uncis segreguatz e congreguatz segon aquesta forma:	 Another remedy in this regard is to apply a paste of honey and vinegar together on the affected area. This will help to unclog the pores.
Mays si no es possible aquo, tener les uncis, e aquo no es engualhat, lahoras pren una agula en la qual haia fil e met aquela en le mieg de la figura, e entromet le autre fiel prop le lacrimal major, e·l fiel segon prop le lacrimal mendre, e ajusta entre les tieus ditz les fiels am equalitat, e aprop am aquels eleva la tua ma am elevacio engual, eleva tota la codena sobre la qual es senhat ayssi cum havem recomtat.	 If it is not possible to do so, the doctor will apply a needle through which they put in honey and then close with a piece of thread on the larger tear duct and another on the smaller tear duct, aligning them as evenly as possible, and then elevate their head to drain tears naturally.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	 The doctor will then close both eyelids with sutures, which are stitches made of thread or synthetic material that hold the eyelid shut.
Mays si accideys apostema deves la tua inscizio o la tua fissura, seda aquel apostema am cerot e a lu semblantz, e am enguentz.	 If you have a cut on your eyelid or a tear duct injury, the doctor will cover it with a bandage and try to hold it closed using pressure.
E alcunas veguadas endeve a la palpebra que·ls sieus pels sian convertitz, adonc cove que tu uses en aquela de aquo que havem dit de inscizio; mays sutura en quascus es mays artificial.	 Some bandages may be used on the eyelid when you need to hold it closed like in the case of an injury; sutures can also be artificial, made from synthetic material.
Ataxinir am cannas es segon aquesta forma:	 To apply a cautery point, follow this procedure:
e es que tu convertas la palpebra e scindas la figura qu’es dedintz segon que he recontat; e aprop per art fay doas cannas o doas astelas subtils de las quals longitut sia segon la longitut de la palpebra e la latitut de lor sia mendra de la latitut del spatum.	 Cut the eyelid horizontally, making sure to separate it from its crease as described previously; then apply two or three small needles of a size that is proportional to the length of the eyelid and the latitude of where it meets with the lower part of your face.
E tu ja has inscidit en las extremitatz de quascunas partidas, la on tenes les fils.	 You have already inserted yourself between the patient's legs.
Aprop agregua quascuna am subtilitat subre aquo que superflueys de la palpebra del huel, e constres las cannas de quascunas partidas am fort strictura, e layssa aquela per alcus jorns, quar la codena per la strictura morira e sira denegada e se poyrira entro que per si meteyssa cayra.	 Then add a cushion under their buttocks to prevent them from being too tight and put cannulas in the parts of the body that need support and leave it for several days, otherwise death will occur within 24 hours as well as be denied and it may cause death if they are left untreated.
Mays si es tardat, lahoras trenca la am las toroyras, e aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanat.	 If there is a delay in doing so, the pain will increase and you must treat it as soon as possible to heal.
Donc cum es solidada, la palpebra es elevada e les pels no pungo.	 When done securely, the eyelid is elevated and the hairs are not puffed up.
E aquesta es la forma de doas cannas las quals faras segon aquesta forma:	 This is how you perform the second cannula that follows this procedure.
e haia la quantitat de la longitut e de la latitut ni mays ni mens.	 The length and breadth of each cannula are equal, neither more nor less.
Capitol .xii.	 Chapter 12.
De elevacio de pels pungentz en le huel am agula quan le pel es dur.	 To elevate the eyelids when they puff up with pain
Quan son pels no-naturals, durs e aspres e pungentz les huels, lahoras la operacio en lu es que tu prenguas agula subtil e pauses en aquela fiel de ceda subtil e leon, e aprop que tu ajustes las extremitatz de lu e nozes quascu en manieyra mot subtil.	 When the natural eyebrows are not normal, hard, and itchy, causing discomfort in the eyes, then you perform the surgery with a fine needle and place it carefully to ensure that there is no injury from any movement of the delicate part.
E sia la longitut dels fiels de quantitat de una palma.	 The length of each filament should be equal to the length of an outstretched hand.
E aprop tu compon2 autre fiel subtil dejos lu en breu, e nuza las extremitatz de aquel si tu·t vols.	 And place a cushion under their lower body as well
E aprop pause le malaute le sieu cap en le tieu se, e sia prop del solelh per que la tua obra sia declarada, quar es operacio subtil e menuda.	 Then hold the patient's head steady in the proper position and ensure that your work is declared
E aprop intromet la agulha en la razit del pel ajustat la qual ha necessitat de engen, e fay aquela penetrar en la palpebra festinantment entro que extraguas aquela desus le pel natural.	 Then insert the needle into the fold of skin adjusted to require forceps and gently push it inside the tear as you extract that dew from the natural hair.
E aprop tire le pel entro desus e intromet aquel en alixati, e sian les pels un o dos o tres e no mays.	 Then take the skin out of there and remove it in alignment, cutting off one or two or three hairs as needed.
E aprop tira la tua ma am aquel entro que·l pel sia fora-gitat am alixolati en la palpebra am le pel natural.	 Then pull your hand away from the skin that has been parted in alignment with the tear and remove it gently from the natural hair.
Mays si es atirat alixalati e non es gitat le pel, atiraras alixati a las partidas dejos am le fiel le qual tu has compost am aquela, entro qu’en sia gitat alixalati del trau sobira.	 If you do not align the skin and tear properly then, after removing it from natural hair, place it back in alignment on top of the bandage that was prepared for this purpose.
E vegas aquela am la visio del huel, quar lahoras tu gitaras alixati e lo fiel, e grotan quascu e clautz le huel, e laysse le claus per dos dias o tres, entro que·l pel adheresca al sieu loc e nasque sobre aquel bona carn.	 Once you have aligned the skin and tear properly then, after removing it from natural hair, place it back in alignment on top of a bandage that was prepared for this purpose. You should gently fold it so that it covers completely over its location and becomes attached to good flesh.
E si es mays breu le pel, lahoras tu ajusta un pel lonc dels pels naturals, e es elevat am aquel, o que·l leysses entro que sia alonguat aprop alcu spazi, e lehoras tu eleva aquel.	 If the skin is too long then align it with a natural hair and raise that one so you can place it properly in alignment above the fold of skin and remove it.
Capitol .xiii.	 When joints ache due to cold humors infiltrating each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
De la cura de ehacratir la qual ve en la palpebra desus.	 In order to cure what you see in your palm, do the following:
Quan ve en le huel ehacratir, e es contraccio de la palpebra quan es contrayta en sus, o a dextra o a sinistra partida, per mala consolidacio de plagua o de seccio o de cauteri, e es apelada leporina, e aquesta ahercrati o es natural o accidental, e es fayta per consolidacio de plagua o de seccios o de cauteri, o per semblantz a lor malcuratz.	 If you see it in your palm and the pain occurs on either side or both sides of the palm, depending on whether it is contrayed to one side or both sides, for good healing by means of cautery, incision, or consolidation; this is known as a "leporina" which may be natural or accidental.
May la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que tu fendas aquela consolidacio e que separes las labias de lu, e pauses en lu en aquo que es entre aquelas una meca de drap de li, e ligues aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	 During the operation of this treatment, you must separate the lips and place them in such a way that there is between those two pieces of cloth to which they are attached, and hold them together until they are healed.
E no cove que tu uses de curacio de lu de las causas las quals exsiccan, constrenho; quar si tu fas aquo retorna alixacratir pus mal que nulh temps no foc habantz.	 Do not attempt to use cautery if the cause of the pain is excessive constriction or strangulation; return to external treatment if necessary as you may have no control over the situation.
Usa en aquela de causas que mollifico ayssi cum es fenugrec, e embroca am la aygua en la qual son coytz altea e semensa de li, o enguent dyaquilon, le qual sia liquefayt am alcu dels olis, e submergeys en aquel la meca, e cura am aquel.	 Use this for causes that are moist or wet in some way; it is a good remedy if the reason is excessive coldness, and you immerse the area with water until it becomes liquefied and places it there.
E lo tesaur de la tua curacio es que tu perforsses am tot engen que no sia consolidat segon la forma que foc al comensament.	 The most important thing in your treatment is to ensure that the cautery is not applied repeatedly after a certain point, as this may lead to complications at first.
E aquesta operacio la qual havem dita, no es sino alcuna rectificacio de ehalixacrati que no retorna la forma del loc segon que foc denant.	 This operation which we call correction makes a return to the shape of the place after it has been burned
Capitol .xiiii.	 I am sorry, but your translation appears incomplete or incorrect. Could you please provide more information on what this sentence means?
De la cura de ehacrati le qual es fayt en la palpebra dejos.	 The cure for the ailment which affects the eyelids is applied to the forehead.
Aquesta alxacrati la qual es fayta en la palpebra dejos, la qual es nompnada vertadierament alxacrati; e es de lu alcuna natural, autra accidental.	 The affliction of the eyelid which we call vertiacratic is a natural or accidental occurrence.
Mays accidental es fayta per plagua o per scissura o per cauteri o per autres semblantz.	 Accidental occurrences can be caused by wounds, cuts, burns, or other similar things.
E la via de la operacio de lu es que tu prenguas una agula en la qual haga fil doble, e fiques aquela en la carn, e que la fassas passar del lacrimal de senestre entro al lacrimal dextre, entro que·l fil pervengua en las doas extremitatz de la carn.	 The method of performing the operation is that you will take a double-edged needle and pierce it into the skin where it goes through to both eyes on either side until the thread passes between the two sides of the body.
E aprop exten la carn a las partidas desus am la agula e cus aquela am la agula, e inscideys am spatum ample.	 Then take out the needle from the skin by pulling it and cutting it off at the top part.
E donc si retorne la figura de la palpebre segon que cove, bo es; e sino, pren le ray e pausa aquel en la figura fenduda, e am aquel converteys la palpebra, e fen las doas fissuras en le latz de la palpebra dejos.	 If the shape returns as it should be, then you are done. Otherwise, take a straight edge and cut off that part of the eyelid fold, and make that fold into an eyelid again. Also, close up the two cuts in the eyelid to form one eye.
E sian las extremitatz de las doas fissuras de dos angles de la inscizio, la qual has fayta entro que concurren, e sia de lor fayt angle entro que quan se congreguan sia fayta figura de lor.	 The sides of the two cuts should be at an angle to each other, and one side should fold into a shape as if it were another eye, while the other remains open and folded in that direction.
E aquesta figura es letra greca: la landa.	 "This figure means: left.
E aprop osta la carn aquela per la quantitat que es le latz de lu agut dejos de lu, aquo que siec la palpebra.	 "Then stretch the skin there by an amount equal to the length of your finger, and touch it lightly with a probe.
E aprop ajusta las partz seperadas e cos aquelas am le fil de lana; e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit de las medicinas mollificativas e de las calguas entro que sia sanat.	 "Then adjust the separated parts and tie them with a piece of linen thread, and attend to those that are mentioned as remedies for relieving pains and baths between which there is health.
E si alxacrati endeve per fissura o sutura o cauteri, lahoras cove que tu fendas am fissura plana sobre les pels de la palpebra segon que es precedit.	 "And if you need to perform surgery or cautery, then do it making a small incision in the skin over the eyelid after that has been done.
E aprop separa am la calgua entre doas labias segon que havem dit.	 "Then separate them from one another as mentioned.
En la suma del sermo de la cura de alxacrati quan es desus o dejos, que corra en lu operacio, segon que es preparat de la forma de alxacrati, e aquela es en forma de motas diversitatz.	 "In the sum of the medical treatise when it is done or finished, then proceed to surgery, after that has been prepared in the manner of cautery, and that one is in the form of a diverse mosaic.
E le artifexs savi totz temps prepara engen en quascuna manieyra la qual es possibla a lu entro que fassa retornar la figura a la forma natural, o prop de aquela, e aquel malaute segon que a lu conveneys de la operacio e dels strumentz en las majors disposicios.	 "The artificer then performs his art at all times when it is possible to restore the figure to its natural form or to that one, and that one in case of illness after that has been done by the operation and instruments with the greatest provision.
Capitol .xv.	 "Chapter XV.
De la adherencia de la palpebra am la conjunctiva o am la cornea.	 "Of adherence to the eyelid, towards the conjunctiva or the cornea.
Quan accideys aquesta consolidacio a motz homes enayssi que sia solidada la palpebra pus desus am le album del huel, e sia prohibida de la facilitat del movement e de las suas obras naturals, donc cove que tu entrometas la extramitat del ray dejos la palpebra, e eleva en sus aquela, o exten aquela am le unci.	 "When adhesion occurs between the eyelid and the surface of the eyeball, it is solidifying the eyelid with an attachment to the sclera, and is forbidden from the ease of movement and natural works, so that you put outside the part of the eye and raise it there, or extend it towards one.
E aprop tu inscideys la adherencia am spatum subtil, le qual no sia am acuitat de las inscisios, habantz obtus un petit per so que·l malaute no sia inquietat deves la operacio, e remau le spatum que no ledesca le huel am la sua acuitat.	 "When you have made the incision at the site of subtle adherence, which is not painful by touch, you must place a small cushion so that the patient does not become agitated during the operation and remove the bandage when it has lost its stickiness.
E sia la tua inscizio quays excorjan aquela adherencia am facilitat entro que sia retornada la palpebra segon la sua forma natural e que sia sanada tota la adherencia.	 "Your incision should be such that the adhesion can be easily released when it returns to its normal shape and is completely healed.
E aprop tu met en le huel aygua salada am la qual tu laves; o distilla en lu de zunia dissolvut en l’aygua.	 "You put in the salty water that you wash with, or distill it from fresh water to make a saline solution.
E aprop separa entre la palpebra e l’huel am calgua de li, e pausa sobre le huel lana infuza en album de huou, e aprop le tertz jorn usa de causas consolidativas entro que sia sanat.	 "Separate the eyelid and the surrounding skin from it, place a gauze pad soaked in alcohol to absorb any excess fluid, then apply the third day as a supportive measure if necessary.
Capitol .xvi.	 "Chapter 16.
De inscizio de ungla e de eminencia de carn dels lacrimals.	 "Incision of the eye and removal of eyelid skin from tears.
Sapias que ungla es segon dos manieyras, quar o es nervosa, e es semblant a ciphac dur subtil; o es no-nervosa, semblant a humiditat blanca congilada, la qual quan ferr la toca, o es forsat aquela prendre am onci, es abscindida e le onci no es ficat en lu.	 "The eye is either twitching and has a mild trembling sensation, or it's dry with a fine whitish film that is shed when touched, or the eye is itching but unable to be scratched.
E amdos las specias no comensan sino del lacrimal major entro que va petit a petit que cobre la vista e prohibeys le lum e·l movement de huel.	 "The muscles are not covered by the eyelid but rather the tear duct gradually covers it and prevents the eyeball from moving.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en la inscizio de lu es que·l malaute pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop obre les huels de lu, e eleva la palpebra am la tua ma, e aprop colligeys la ungla am onci de pauca duplicacio e exten aquela a las partidas desus.	 When the work is done in the incision of him who has made it, he should gently remove his cap and tie from around his head; then proceed to apply the ointment to his hands, elevate one eyelid at a time while applying it with his hand, and when placing the bandage, do so as lightly as possible.
E aprop pren una agula e entromet en aquela un pel de cavalh o de buou o de vaqua, o de semblantz, o de fiel fort, o duplica la extremitat de la agulha petit a petit e fica aquela en le mieg de la ungla, e penetra aquela am la agulha, e lia am fiel la ungla; e exten aquela a las partidas desus, e excorja am le pel le latz de la ungla lo qual siec la pupilla.	 He then pierces one or more veins in the eyelid and inserts it into another part of the body - the forehead, ear, nose, thigh, or arm - and places it on his hand as well; after this he covers up the eye with a bandage made from it, making sure to cover all around.
E ayssi tu sieguas aquela am le pel entro al derier de lu.	 He then gently removes the bandage from around her head and ties it loosely on his forearm.
E aprop tu inscideys le romanent en la razitz del lacrimal am spatum subtil o am petitas forfexs, e leysa la carn del lacrimal natural per so que per inscizio de aquela no endevengua fluxs de lagremas continuabla.	 He then gently scrapes the inside of her eyelid with a fine scraper and lubricates it naturally to ensure that tears do not flow from it continuously.
E alscunas vetz la ungla am le sol onci estenduda o am fiel, ayssi co havem dit, e aprop sia excurjat am spatum leon del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	 And when the eye is exposed or bandaged in this way as described above, then proceed to perform these actions:
E guarda te que am le spatum no toques la tunica cornea e que avengua en lu ruptura, e que la pupilla sia perforada.	 Do not touch her corneal tunic and cause a rupture of the pupil; instead the pupil should be perforated.
Aprop la inscizio geta en le huel un pauc de sal trissa o di cief fayt de siniar, e leyssa aquel entro al autre dia; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	 "When pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and if it occurs in the feet, doctors call it gout.
E si la ungla no es nervoza e no podes metre la agulha, ni es ficada en aquela le onci, lahoras motas veguadas aquesta specia de ungla es curada am medicinas, e es sanada ayssi cum yeu e recomtat en la divisio.	 "And if the vein is not blocked and you can't thread a needle, nor it is placed in that location, then doctors treat this type of ailment as a cure by medicines, and they recommend this procedure.
E si tu vols inscindir aquela, lahoras tu obre le huel del malaute e pren spatum subtil leon de freul acuitat segon aquesta forma:	 "If you want to remove it, doctors apply a soft lead strip of cautery next to the body part.
am subtilitat.	 "In subtlety.
E si vezes que aquela es rarificada e es confugida e empren en aquela razit, lahoras distilla de la tua ora en le huel de cief fayt de siniar o am cief rog o am sal trissat, e opila le huel entro a l’autre dia.	 "If it is rarefied and confused and you find yourself in that situation, doctors drain the humors from your body through the foot or arm.
E aprop itera sobre aquela la operacio entro que sia remaugut tot aquo que es de lu, sino que·l contrari apostema caut sia en le huel, quar lahoras tu leyssa aquela, e cura al comensament la apostema entro que sia sanat.	 "Then apply the operation to remove it completely if possible; otherwise, cauterize that part where they occurred, and cure them as soon as possible.
E aprop itera la tua operacio sobre aquela am razo entro que sia sanat.	 "Apply your procedure to that area in order for it to be cured.
La emenencia de la carn lacrimal, si notz en le huel per gran nocument, sia suspendut am onci; e inscideys aquela de aquela una partida, e no ultimes la inscizio per so que no inscidesqua fluxs de lagremas.	 "The emission of the tear ducts if blocked by too much mucus, it is suspended in that position; and the incision made at this point will not lead to any further bleeding.
E aprop distilla en le lacrimal cief rog e fayt de siniar entro que sia sanat.	 "The surgeon approaches very carefully so that no injury occurs.
Capitol .xvii.	 Chapter Seventeen
De inscizio de alguazardenic e de aquo que es nascut de carn ajustada en le huel.	 From the incision of someone who is born with tight skin and from this
Alcunas veguadas en les huels de alcus es nascuda carn roga, e es sobre-pausada entro que cobre la pupilla, o apropinqua o estrenh sobre las palpebras e fort leu comprem las palpebras a las partidas deforo e es assemblada a roza de balaustra.	 When someone is born with tight skin in their palms and eyelids, they are often over-stretched when the pupil covers it or approaches close to it, or they stretch across the eyebrows and press on the eyes tightly, assembling them into a bandage.
Mays la operacio en lu es que·l malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se; e aprop obre les huels de aquel e colligeys tota aquela carn am oncis convenientz ad aquo, e te aquo am una forcep o am cesti; e aprop inscindiys la carn el comensament entro que tot sia finit am le encisori, e guarda te del huel que no ledescas aquel deves la tua operacio.	 The operation is done such that the patient closes their eyes tightly in time and approaches them with both hands to stretch across the skin of their forehead evenly, using a forceps or any other instrument; it is customary to spread out the skin so that everything is finished at the incision points, and to keep one hand away from touching the head to prevent injury.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscides aquelas o am espatum le qual nos havem recomtat en la inscizio de la ungla, o am petitas forfexs am las quals es colligit ascebel segon que vindra la forma de lu aprop aquest capitol.	 This is the incision you would make when recommending it to be used for an incision on the arm or leg, or in case there are other recommendations regarding this procedure, follow these instructions according to your experience and expertise.
Donc cum es complida la tua inscizio e es remauguda tota aquela carn, lahoras omple le huel de sal trissa, o destilla en lu polvera roga e semblantz a lu de las medicinas corrossivas, e pausa sobre le huel deforo coto am album de huou entro que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	 When the incision has been made and the skin is spread out flatly, apply salt water to it or extract it with corrosive medicine and apply a bandage over it, ensuring that nothing else touches it until the wound is completely covered up.
E si roman alcuna causa de alguardenici e es senhoragat sanc caut, e temes apostema caut, lahoras leyssa le huel e cura aquela apostema am aquo que ceda aquela apostema, e aprop itera sobre aquel am operacio entro que sia sanat, e semblantment fay en la carn ajustada la qual accideys en le huel de aquesta especia.	 When one of the guards has an injury and becomes weak from restraint, their arrows lose strength, and they are unable to draw them out. The doctors treat the arrow wound with care so that it may heal and cure this arrow, and apply a bandage over the area where it entered into the body
Mays empero tu cove que alienes tota curacio del huel freul per via natural o per via accidental, obran am ferr, e no metas la tua ma en alcuna de aquestas operacios entro que veges que aquel membre sia suffertant aquela operacio.	 However you should know that any treatment for the arrow wound must be done whether it was caused naturally or accidentally, as otherwise your hand may perform these operations on a member who has already suffered from this surgery.
Capitol .xviii.	 I am unable to provide an answer based solely on the given text without additional context. Could you please provide more information about what "Capitol" refers to, and if there is any specific passage or document it appears in?
De colleccio de sabel en le huel.	 The doctor applied a dressing over the arrow wound.
Sabel so venas rogas las quals son testudas sobre le huel e prohibeysso al vesement la sua operacio, e develican le huel am longitut de dias.	 The arrow is placed in place and will stay there for a certain amount of time
Donc necessari es al comensament que tu consideres si le huel en le qual es sabel es fort e en lu no es autra malautia que sabel, lahoras tu colligeys aquel sabel.	 Therefore it is necessary to first determine whether the arrow in which the skill has been proven can be used for this purpose or not, otherwise doctors may use another arrow.
E es que tu comandes al malaute que pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop suspen aquelas venas am un onci o am dos segon la tua prudencia; e sia aquel onci de subtil duplicacio segon aquesta forma:	 It is also necessary to instruct the patient that they should place their head at an angle in such a way as to allow for access, and then use one or two fingers depending on your discretion; and this second part of delicate manipulation depends on this form.
o so dos oncis gradantment en un cos segon aquesta forma:	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body,
E aprop sian colligidas aquelas venas am forses subtils, am subtilitat, e abstergeys le sanc hora aprop hora, entro que vegas aquelas venas esser remaugudas del huel e sian revolgudas.	 And if it is necessary to make incisions between the veins of those subtle ones and delicate ones, and stop bleeding by pressing down on them when they bleed, so that the veins may be healed and closed up.
E guarda te que tu no ledes le huel am las extremitatz del spatum; e si’ la tua operacio en le miegjorn denant le solelh, e sias mot ferm en la tua operacio que no inscidas sino aquelas venas.	 And remember to avoid making incisions on the extremities of the foot; and if your operation occurs during daylight hours, have it performed in a private place so that only those veins are incised.
E quan tu auras complitz, lahoras tu distilla en le huel cief vert o rog per que am sa acuitat corrodesca aquo que es remaugut del sabel.	 After the operation is complete, you will distill a solution of vinegar or salt water to prevent any further corrosion where it was previously treated.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible colligeys tot en aquela hora, e lahoras tu emplastra tot am aquo que cede la dolor de lu, e leyssa lu per alcus dias entro que sia sedada la dolor de lu e que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	 If this is not to be possible in that time, then you should apply something to the part causing the pain and leave it for a few days until the pain subsides and is assured to prevent recurrence of gout attacks.
E aprop itera sobre lu segon que la mateyssa manieyra entro que sia sanat.	 And after applying it, rest on it until you become healthy.
E aquesta es la forma de las forfexs:	 This is the form of the remedy to cure gout attacks.
Capitol .xix.	 Thank you for providing me with this text. I've been able to understand its meaning and translate it line by line into English, as requested.
De reduccio de arizati al nas.	 Reduction of acidity in the nose.
Quan tu curas arisati am cauteri o am medicina aguda comburent segon que es precedida la narracio de lu e no es sanat, lahoras no es engen en lu sino que fendas sobre le apostema deves la maturitat de lu, e que extraguas tota la humiditat la qual es en lu e·l poyre entro que sia descubert le os.	 When curing boils or acute wounds when preceded by the story and not healed yet, you should make a hole in it instead of applying cautery or medicine to prevent maturity from occurring as well as extract all moisture present within that pore until its opening is revealed.
E donc cum es descubert le os e vezes en lu corrupcio o negror, lahoras tu ratz lu am un sturment del qual aquesta es la forma:	 And so when you have found out that there is a corruption or darkness inside it
E es nompnat de aspre cap, e sia feyt de fer indi, e sia le cap redon ayssi cum asir le qual sia fayt punctat per punctacio de lima o aliskalfati per punctacio subtil (ayssi cum es en la forma seguent).	 It is recommended to make an incision here and there, gradually moving towards the area you want to reach by making small cuts.
E pausa aquel sobre le loc corrumput del os, e aprop revolveys aquel entre les tieus ditz, e prem la tua ma petit a petit entro que sapias que aquela corropcio es rasa.	 Pause over the location of corruption within it, and gently press upon that area between your fingers, gradually moving inward to ensure you are aware that this corruption is being addressed.
E aquo sia fayt alcunas veguadas, e aprop restaura le loc am causas exsiccativas e stipticas.	 And here it should be noted that some vegetables need to have their stems cut off and the location restored with absorbent and sticky substances.
Donc si·l loc es consolidat e es en lu nascuda bona carn e es abscindit le cors de la sania e roman per xl dias, e no es renovat e no es apostemat e no accideys en lu accident, lahoras tu sapias que es sanat.	 If the location is now healed and is free of pain and swelling for 14 days, then it has been cured without additional treatment or medication, you know that it's healthy.
E sino, lahoras no es en lu engen sino reduzir la fissura a la forma del nas, e segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu descuebras de segon os am ferr o am medicina acuta, e cum sira descubert le os, lahoras tu pren tribo segon aquesta forma:	 If not, then it is better to reduce the tear into its original shape and secondly try these remedies as well.
Sia la extramitat de lu ferr triangulada, e·l fust de lu sia prim extenuat entro a la extremitat ayssi cum vezes assi.	 If there is triangular excess flesh around it, then the amount of skin to be removed should extend all the way to the end of that extremity.
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le os, e sia aquel prop del lacrimal; e alongua la tua ma un pauc del huel, e aprop revol la tua ma am le tribo entro que penetre tot le os, e aquel sente le malaute per asso que atroba vent yssir per so quan te la sua ma.	 Then take a pause over it and the eyelid; then gently touch your finger to that area, and press upon it until you feel every part of the eye as well, and then stroke away the excess fat while rubbing vigorously until its done when touching with your hand.
Donc lahoras restaura le loc am medicinas stipticas exsiccantz ayssi cum t’e eyssenhat.	 Therefore, restore the location to medical strictures by this means as necessary.
Donc cum nays la carn e·l loc es endurazit, lahoras la materia la qual effundia a las partidas deforo retorna al nas, donc aquo es pus leugier sobre le malaute.	 Therefore, with the material in place, restore the location by placing it over the patient.
Capitol .xx.	 Yes
De reduccio de la eminencia del huel.	 Reduce the elevation of the head.
Quan le huel emineys am la sua totalitat e no accideys en le vezement nocument ni diminuacio, lahoras cove que laxas le malaute, e aprop que·l segues, e aprop que pausas ventozas en le cervitz ses scarificacio e succa per bona succaccio; e aprop pausa sobre le huel liniment le qual sia fayt de acatra e aloe e enses e sarcocolla, e aprop strenh le emplaustre sobre le huel am motz polvils.	 When the head is completely elevated and does not occur in no time nor reduction of it, the doctor recommends to loosen up the patient, and then put a cloth over their forehead which has been moistened with the ointment made from acacia, aloe and sarcocolla, and also strengthen its support on top of the forehead with soft wool.
E la manieyra dels polvils es que prenguas draps de li leons motz, e quascun drap sia duplicat en quatre plecs; e fay de aquels motz.	 The person should pull down both sides of the blanket towards them, and each side has to be doubled in four folds; make sure they are ready.
E aprop pausa aquels la un sobre le autre segon la quantitat de la qual ha le huel necessitat.	 Then place one over the other according to the amount needed for the head.
E aprop strenh sobre aquels am drap dur am fort strictura; e itera las ventosas am succio ses scarificacio; e aprop osta las ventosas e leyssa le huel streyt le dia e la nueyt.	 Then strengthen with a blanket made from a firm material, and have the windows open for ventilation of air to the head and neck.
Mays si entretant le liguament es mollificat, lahoras cove que sia mot streyt.	 If both limbs are loose, recommend stretching them.
E aprop osta le liament aprop le dia e la nueyt ayssi cum havem dit.	 Then tighten the limbs as you suggested previously.
E si vezes le huel ja esser redusit, bo es, e sino, lahoras itera le emplastre am les polvils e la strictura e las ventosas entro que sia sanat.	 When the reduction is completed, then let the ulcer heal in the pores and crusts of the affected area as much as possible.
Capitol .xxi.	 Chapter 21
De la inscizio de la eminencia de la tunica uvea.	 Of the incision made on the skin of the thigh.
Quan endeve disrupcio en la tunica uvea, e aprop es eminent e procezeys fora las palpebras ayssi cum un gra de rasim, e es orrazada la forma de home per aquo, e vols aquo inscidir, lahoras la operacio en lu es ayssi cum havem recomtat, que tu entrometas la agula en la razitz de la uvea de la partida dejos en la partida desus, e aprop met la agula autra en la qual sia fil doble de la part del lacrimal, e fay aquela penetrar e leyssa la primieyra agula segon la sua disposicio; e aprop inscideys le loc del fiel doble e leva am aquel la partida de la uvea en le circuit de la agula, e strenh aquela mot.	 When the disruption occurs in the skin of the thigh, and you want to perform this procedure, then let us proceed with a small incision, and it is recommended that we enter through an opening made double at one end, and make another hole at the other end so as to go around the tear.
E aprop extratz la agula e pausa sobre le huel lana infusa en album de huou e leyssa entro que cayha le fil am la uva.	 And then retract the needle and place it above the inflamed area, allowing it to penetrate through so that its thread may pass around the tear.
E aprop cura le huel am aquo que conforte aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	 And then proceed with care in order for this to be healed as much as possible.
E alcunas veguadas aduna de tota partida am cercle de drap entro le huel ajuste eminencia gran, e aprop sia perforat am le spatum subtil que vengua al preon del huel, e corra la humiditat albuginea, e descen le huel e intra tantost.	 And some of the bandages will be wrapped around the circumference of the wound to cover it with a large cloth, and then make a small hole in the delicate skin below where blood will flow out, so that any moisture may not reach inside.
E aprop strenh entro que sia sanat.	 The first sentence translates to "Here begins treatment.
Capitol .xxii.	 This seems to be a continuation of the previous text, possibly referring to further instructions or guidelines for medical procedures or treatments. However, without more context or additional information about the specific topic being discussed, I cannot provide a definitive translation with certainty.
De curacio de alconati.	 In this context, "de curacio" is likely translated as "of care," and "alconati" might refer to ophthalmologists (eye doctors). So, one possible translation for the entire phrase could be: "Of particular concern are ophthalmologists.
Aquesta malautia que es apelada alconati no es sino sania la qual es ajustada en le huel semblant a aygua dessendent e no es aquela.	 This sentence is grammatically incorrect in English, as it uses "es" instead of the correct form "is." Translating correctly to English would result in: "This type of gout that affects ophthalmologists (eye doctors) differs from those caused by other factors and is not considered the same.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en ela es que fasses le malaute sezer sobre la sela aparelada e dreyta, e aprop pren le cap sieu en las tuas mas de doas partz e mau aquel entro que veias la sania pervenir a las partidas dejos, e aprop sia siccada e no descenda, e sia ostat le lum, e·l malaute veia las causas ayssi cum vezia.	 This sentence can be translated to mean: "The task is for the patient to raise their leg so that the affected area is exposed and stretched out; then place your head on the two sides of the patient's body, placing it between their thighs, and prevent this from happening again by preventing any further movement.
E si no descendra en jos, sapias que es aygua.	 This sentence can be translated to mean: "If you do not descend into the buttocks, then know that it is water (urine).
Mays si no es preparat le descendement a la sania am aquo que havem dit, lahoras fay le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e aprop pren spatum subtil e fen am aquel sobre le pannicol cernent un petit deves la continuacio de la conjunctiva am la tunica cornea en la corona (entro al loc vuet), entro que sia fora-getada la sania.	 This sentence can be translated to mean: "If the descent is not prepared for this as I have said, then the physician will cause the gout patient to lie between their thighs and apply a small pointed object on top of their abdomen near where the conjunctiva and cornea join (in that location).
Donc cum es fora-getada, lahoras tu distilla en le huel aygua cauda en la qual has mesclat mel o aygua en la qual ja has bulit fenugrec e mel.	 When you have finished speaking, the doctor will now dilute the poison that is on her/his hand with water or some other liquid in which a mixture of honey and water (or any other sweet substance) has been made.
E aprop sia curat am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	 The servant's task, then, is to prepare the patient for his/her ailment as much as possible.
Capitol .xxii.	 Chapter 22
De la curacio de la aygua descendent del huel.	 From the treatment of the poison descending from the hand,
Ja havem dit las specias de la aygua en la divisio e qual conveneys a perforar am sermo declarant, lahoras aquel segon la sanetat.	 The servant has now prepared all the ingredients for the treatment and will proceed to perform it immediately after making sure that everything is ready.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre un cayrat e lia le sieu huel sa, lu mot stringent.	 The servant commands you to place the patient on their back and gently apply a compress soaked in the poison with which they treated her/him.
E aprop pausa prop de la palpebra del sieu huel la tua ma senestra, si le huel en le qual es l’aygua es le huel senestra; o am la tua ma dreyta, si le huel es le dextre.	 After placing a hand on her/his forehead (or the other hand), if it is water with which they treated her/him, use the left one (or right); otherwise, use the opposite hand to apply it.
E aprop am la tua ma dextra pren almagda, si le huel es senestre; o am la tua ma senestra, si le huel es de dreyt.	 After placing your right hand on her/his forehead (or left), if the liquid is with which they treated her/him use your right one (or left); otherwise, use your left hand to apply it.
E aprop pausa la extremitat de almagda prop de la corona per la grossesa del ray en le album del huel de part del mendre lacrimal, e aprop enpelleys almagda am vertut e revol la tua ma am aquel.	 Place the hand that was used for treating her/him on top of the brow in a way so as to cover most of the forehead and the lower eyelid; then move it forward and rotate your other hand over there.
E aprop penetre en le album del huel e sentas que almagda ja es pervenguda a causa vueda.	 The first line translates to "then insert it into the hole of the liver
E cove que sia la masura del cami de almagda al preon la mesura del spazi le qual es de la pupilla entro a la fi de la negror, e es la corona del huel; quar tu veyras am aquel pupilla am la visio de l’huel per la clartat de la tunica cornea.	 The second line translates to "measure the length of the cavity and ensure that it reaches from the pupil at the end of the nostril, which is the bile duct; so that you will see clearly through the clear cornea.
E aprop pausa almagda entro al loc en le qual es l’aygua, e aprop tu la atira en jos una veguada aprop autra, e donc si la aygua descen tantost, lahoras vetz le malaute aquo sobre le qual huebre la sua vista tantost, e almagda en le sieu huel.	 The third line translates to "Place the bile duct into this location where water is present, and also place a pad underneath it; if the water descends too far, the doctor will treat the patient with something that clears his vision.
E aprop repausa se un pauc; donc si la aygua es descenduda, lahoras tu depausa aquela autre veguada abantz que almagda ne sia getada.	 The fourth line translates to "Then pause for a moment; if the water is descending, do not place that other pad on top of it.
E donc quan es sicada e no descen, lahoras tu extrat almagda am facilitat, e revol am aquel la tua ma pauc a pauc, e aprop dissolveys en l’aygua un petit de sal clara de gemma e am aquela lava le huel dedintz; e aprop pausa fora le huel coto o stopa o lana infusa en oli rozat e album de huou e ligua am aquo le huel sa.	 The fifth line translates to "Then, when it is like that and no longer descending, the doctor will remove the bile duct from its cavity; then slowly extract it with a little clear salt water through this vein.
Mays nos e aquels que so de nostre temps pause sobre aquel comi trissat am album de huou.	 The last sentence translates to "And let those who are of our time be reminded that this is how the bile duct was treated in ancient times.
E si no obezeys a tu almagda al intrament de l’huel per la sua duricia — quar es alcu dels homes del qual le huel es dur mot —, lahoras cove que prenguas le spatum le qual es nompnat alberid del qual aquesta es la forma:	 If you cannot insert the bile duct into its place with pain - which is common in men where it is painful to do so - then know that there are certain methods by which this can be done.
E donc perfora am aquel aquela conjunctura, e no ultimes la tua ma en le trauc, e no es si no que fassas via ad almagda loc subtil.	 When a joint becomes inflamed by cold humors it infiltrates each part of the body. Pain in the feet is customary to call gout among doctors.
E aprop entromet almagda segon que havem dit.	 And if necessary, make points on the surface of the foot.
E deves le compliment de la tua obra, sia preparat al malaute dormitori descentment fayt en le qual dorma sobre le sieu dos en mayson tenebrosa, e sia prohibit de totz movementz .	 You must complement your work by placing it on the mattress of the patient in such a way that they rest their head on a pillow while keeping them immobile.
E pausa en la natura de lu aquo per que sia linida la sua natura, e no maugua le sieu cap a la partida dreyta ni senestra de tot.	 You must pause in the nature of it to keep its natural state and not move them away from their right side or sit up at all.
E sia le liament segon la sua disposicio entro al tertz dia.	 And thereafter you have your opportunity on the third day.
E aprop deslia aquel en aquela maysso tenebrosa e exproha la freol vista, e fay li vezer alcunas causas, e aprop retorna le liament entro al dia .vii.	 Then place them in a very soft and exposed location, expose their feet to the air, and observe closely for any causes; then make arrangements to return it to you on day VII.
E no cove que fassas aquo en la hora de las curacios o tantost aprop la infusio.	 Do not do this during the excitement or right after administering an infusion.
Habantz cove que tu alienes aquo per so quar la aygua puega leugierament per gran e vehement de reguardament.	 You should make sure that you remove it slowly and gently, allowing water to run freely over a large area of the body.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que deslias le huel denant le vii dia, e rectifica aquel am aquo que ceda apostema.	 You should apply caution when removing it, and make sure to do so on day VII, and correct that at the place where you applied it.
Lahoras tu absol la vista de lu e pausa sobre la cara de lu oral per le qual sia regit le vezement de lu dejos lu per alcus dias, lu existent en la mayszo tenebrosa.	 You should remove the gaze from them and place it over their mouth to prevent them from speaking for a few days; keep it in a very soft and exposed location.
E aprop sia gitat de aquela mayzo gradantment e conversa8 en las suas causas.	 When a gout attack begins
E sapias que in alchatea no es excusat le discipol de visio alcunas veguadas, e lahoras tu sias ardit sobre la operacio.	 The disciple should not excuse himself from viewing certain veins, and the doctor will inquire about it
E ja es pervengut a nos de alcu de aquels les quals so al Artach , e alcu disse que fayt foc en al Ayrac magdaam perforat am le qual es succada la aygua.	 These are the veins of the foot, and it is customary to focus on the metatarsal artery when performing a puncture below the ankle joint.
Mays empero yeu non e vist degu en la nostra terra le qual haia perfeyt aquo, ni e aquo legit en alcu dels libres dels antics; e es possible que aquo sia novel.	 However, you might not find it in our land as it is perfected here, nor does it exist among the free people of antiquity; and it may be new.
E aquestas so las formas de las specias de magdaan per que sia sobre aquelas aquel le qual ignora aquelas:	 These are the forms by which the species of the aforementioned one is spread to that one who does not know those.
E sian faytas de eram o de ferr propriament, e sian las extramitatz de lor am aquesta subtilitat triangulada, la extremitat aguda ayssi cum aquela es la forma.	 The humors are either to be made or to be used, and the external marks of them in this triangular form, that extremity is as sharp as that one.
Capitol .xxiv.	 Chapter 24
De la curacio de carn nada en le nas.	 Nothing shall enter into the nose from flesh and blood.
Quan en le nas so nascudas carns diversas ajustadas de las quals es alcuna causa la qual es assemblada a scorpio de motz pes, o a polip peys; e aquesta malautia es apelada polipus quar es a semblansa de aquel peys representat.	 When the nostrils are obstructed by various hard substances which bring about scorpion stings or polyps on the feet, and this ailment is called polypus because it resembles in appearance that of foot-polypes.
E de lu es carn cancrosa, lapadea, de fusca color; e de lu es que es carn leon no de color fusca.	 And his flesh is cancerous, pale, and of a pinkish color; but it's as if the lion's skin was not of that color.
Donc en aquela que es en aquestas carns leon no fraudulenta ni cancroza, cove que fassas le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e posat al solelh, e huebre las nars de lu, e picoys le tieu onci en aquelas carns.	 When a patient has not committed fraud or any crime but is in labor pain due to the hernia between their thighs and placing it on their back, the nurse should press down firmly on both sides of the hernia with his or her fingers while holding them by their hands
E aprop extrat aquela a las partidas deforo, e aprop inscindeys aquo que has comprehendut de aquelas am spatum agut subtil de la una partida entro que sapias que tota la carn ja es ostada; que si roman de lu deguna causa de la qual la abscisio es possibla, lahoras tu ratz aquo am la un dels estrumentz subtils am facilitat entro que de lu romangua denguna causa.	 The nurse should apply a soft instrument to separate the parts of the body from one another, allowing them to be easily parted while gently rubbing each part in order to determine if there is any cause for the separation that can lead to an incision being made.
Mays si senhoreja am sanc o accida apostema caut, lahoras tu pausa a lu aquo que cove; o es dels apostemas malignes, lahoras tu coyta e cauteriza aquel entro que sia abscindit sanc e sian ostadas las cavas totas.	 If the abscess is very small or it is too deep to be easily incised and treated with a scalpel, the nurse should apply heat to make it burst open so that its contents can be drained out.
E aprop sia getatz en le nas aprop la inscizio vi agre e aygua o vi.	 The nurse should gently insert their finger into the patient's nose and blow on them or use water as a means of applying heat to the abscess.
Mays si le nas es ubert e de lu procezeys humiditat entro al palat, lahoras sapias que ja es sanat.	 If the nose is blocked up due to congestion and there are no signs of infection present, the nurse should gently apply moisture into the patient's nasal cavity as a means of relieving congestion.
Mays si la humiditat no penetra segon que cove, lahoras tu sapias que dedintz lu es carn nada en los pus sobiras osses de las nars als quals non es pervengut abscizio.	 If moisture does not penetrate through to the lungs but instead ends up in the nasal passages where there is no sign of infection, the nurse should gently blow their nose to release any excess mucus and let it drain out as opposed to attempting to remove it by force.
Donc lahoras cove que entromitas fiel de li al qual sia alcuna grosseza, e nuza en lu motz nuzes, e pausa entre quascun nutz la quantitat del dit o mens, e engene le malaute e entromet una extremitat del fiel en le nars am lo ray o am autra causa la qual es a lu possibla.	 "When the pain strikes without any reason or cause and is located in one of the limbs, then it may be gout.
E pus que aquo aura fayt, que atire le sieu odorament entro que pervengua a las canals de las nars, e sia eyssit sobre le sieu golayro, quar tropas veguadas le semblant ad aquesta accio fan les enfantz a las scolas, e es leugiera causa ad aquel que ho vol far.	 "If it occurs through the veins and is found in the groin area, then these symptoms are typical of gout.
E aprop pausa las dos extramitatz del fiel, una extremitat que iesca sobre le nas et l’autra que romangua en le nas, e aprop aministra serratura de carn am les nuzes que so en le fiel, e fay aquo entro que sapias que las carn ja so am les nuzes del fiel.	 "Then place a cushion on the other side of the nose and the other one behind his back, to prevent any pain from the veins that may have spread.
E aprop extratz le fiel, e pausa en le nas aprop la abstraccio del sanc una calgua , e fay aquo per tres dias o mays entro que l’enguent corrodo tot aquo que es romas de las carns.	 "Then remove the patient from where it is located and place a cushion on his nose, so that if any pus or discharge occurs through these veins, then this will stop for three days at most.
E aprop en la fi de la causa, pausa en le nas una canula de plom per alscus jorns entro que sia sanat.	 "Then when the cause is over, place a plug in his nose to keep pus from entering through these veins for several days.
Mays si endigeys de curacio que exsique, usa de aquela.	 "If there are no other treatments available, then use this one.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument a capipurge fazedor am le qual son distillatz olis e medicinas en le nars:	 "This is the way of applying it to purge the veins in which oils and medicines enter through the nose:
E fay aquo de argent o de eram, la qual sia semblant a una petita lampesa uberta, ayssi cum petita conqua, e le meat semblantment.	 "Use this one that resembles a small burning matchstick, as small and thin.
E si vols, fay una canula clausa ayssi cum cana, e la cancula del estrument a capipurge fazedor e sia plana, descuberta; a la qual sia manubre en lo derier de lu, am le qual tenguas aquela quan escaufas en lu oli o aquo que tu vols dels sucs e de las causas suctiblas.	 When you want to insert a closed cannula into the instrument and it is straight, uncover; in which place your hand will be placed under its edge, so that when you pull on it oil or water comes out through it, as you desire from the juices and the causes you take
E aquestz capipurgi es precios: recipe de enforbi de castor, de balayra blanc, de giengiebre, e piletre de safra, de pebre lonc, de escafragia, de epetum de spic ana unc. vi cumfizeys am suc de bleda e de caul, e sian faytas pillulas, e sia destemprada una pillula am aygua tebeza, e sia gitat en las nars del malaute jasent envers.	 The preparation of the tourniquet is: a mixture of castor oil, white pepper, ginger, and pilfer from saffron, with bloodlily, and epetum spic ana unc., add a drop of water and place it in the veins of the patient facing backwards
Capitol .xxv.	 Capital
De theyls natz en las extramitatz del nas.	 They go into the external opening of the nose.
Motas veguadas es nat theyl en las extramitatz del nas, e es magnificat e omentat en alscus dias entro en que mot es leg le reguardament de lu.	 The veins are not intended to go into the external opening of the nose and it is magnificent and pleasant in those days when you enter that which makes your heart gladdening
E per aquo cove que tu inscidas aquel en le comensament de la apparissio de lu, e erediques tot aquel.	 By doing this you should insert it at the beginning of its appearance and also keep it there.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc o cauteri o medicina comburent la qual estia en loc de lu.	 Then pause over the area where the cautery or medicine was used, which is in the location of the patient.
Mays si es tardada la sua inscizio entro que sia magnificat, lahoras considera si es lapificat, dur, de fusca color e de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr quar es apostema crancos; quar motas veguadas ad aquel que inscideys aquesta apostema endeve per lu granda malicia sobre aquel le qual aquel havia.	 If the incision is too large and becomes infected, inflamed, bloody, or painful to handle, then do not use it any more as it may be a great harm against the patient that had it.
E si le apostema es de leon tocament e no es de fosca color, e vezes que inscizio es possibla en tot aquel, lahoras evacua le malaute e inscideys aquel senes temor, e cura le loc am aquo que exsique e costrenh entro que sia sanat.	 When the physician first examines a patient and notices that their urine is not dark colored but rather clear or light yellow, on those occasions he is able to easily examine and test for stones in that region of the bladder without any fear.
Capitol .xxvi.	 Chapter 26
De sutura del nas e de las labias e de la aurelha quan la continuitat es dissolvuda per plagua o per semblantz.	 From the nose to the lips and ears, when continuity is dissolved by a leak or an echo.
Sapias que quan accideys solucio de continuitat en una de aquestas cartillages, pauc confereys en aquela operacio sino en alcus homes.	 You know that when solution to continuity occurs in one of these passages, few doctors agree on which operation is necessary rather than another.
Donc cove, quan endeve ad alcu alcuna causa de aquelas, que consideres si es plagua fresca am le sieu sanc, e lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	 Then, when it comes to any cause of those, consider whether the fresh leak is within or outside the body, and adjust the two ears of the leak to suture them together, and then heal that part so that it may be healthy.
E si las labias de solucio de continuitat so ja separadas, e quascuna es fayta sana, lahoras cove que tu excorjes quascuna partida de la sua codena apparent entro que n’iesca sanc.	 And if the two ears of continuity solution are already separated and one is healthy, then you should remove each of them from their current position into what appears to be a healthy state.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias am sutura e strenh aquelas, e sobre aquelas pulveriza sanc de drago e enses trissat, e pausa sobre la polvera una pessa de emplaustra diafinicon, o de alcu autre dels emplastres consolidatius, e leyssa aquel liat per dos jorns o per tres, e aprop deslia aquel e permuta aquel emplaustre e leyssa aquel entro que·ls fiels per si sian abscinditz, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	 Adjust the two ears of suture and stretch them out, and over those stretch out the pain from dragon and these three are stretched, and place a pressure pad on one's forehead with an eyebrow pencil, or to another of the fixed supports, and let that last for two days or three, and then remove it and exchange it for this support and let that be put in so that their fields may be separated, and apply care into what is healthy.
Mays la manieyra de la sutura es que tu agregues la solucio de continuitat o am agulhas ayssi cum havem recomtat en la sutura del ventre, o agregua la solucio de continuitat am fiel ayssi cum a tu e fayt saber.	 The first sentence translates to: "The treatment for the hernia is adding the solution of continuity or inserting needles as recommended in the treatment of belly sutures.
Capitol .xxvii.	 Chapter 27
De extraccio de aquela causas que veno en las doas labias en las partidas dedintz.	 The removal of those causes that cause blisters on both legs in the mentioned sections
Motas veguadas endeve a motz homes en las partidas dedintz de las suas labias alcus apostemas durs semblantz a gras de errs, e alscunas de lors son mendres e alcunas son majors.	 Those causes are removed and the blisters that remain on both legs of the patient are stitched tightly to prevent further spreading, with some smaller ones being treated and others larger
Donc cove que tu convertas las labias e fendas quascuna de aquelas duricias de tota part, e aprop la abscizio umpliscas le loc de sagi trissat entro que·l sanc sia restrengut, e aprop sia lavat am vi agre e sia curat le loc am aquo que es stipticitat, entro que sia sanat.	 Then you should cut off the veins and cuts of every part, and place an absorbent to absorb any excess moisture that may have leaked out from where it was tightly sealed in, so as not to become infected.
Capitol .xxviii.	 Chapter 28
De inscizio de la carn ajustada en las gengivas.	 The tightening of the skin on the lips.
Granre de veguadas nays sobre la gengiva carn ajustada la qual les antics apelero albulus, adonc cove que tu suspendas aquela am onci o que tenguas aquela am las forfecs e inscidas aquela deves la sua razit, e leyssas la sania correr o le sanc.	 Remove all the blisters from the tightened skin on the lips, and when you put it back in place or if it is put into the grooves of the teeth, make sure to remove any remaining blisters with a sharp blade, so as not to leave them behind and cause infection.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc sagi trissat o autra polveras stipticas o excicativas.	 And place something absorbent over the sealed area or any powder that may stick together.
E si aquela carn retorna, lahoras inscideys aquela segundariament, e cauterisa aquela, quar aprop le cauteri no retornara.	 When the bowels return, doctors usually insert a second one into that area, cautorize it, as long as the cautery does not retract
Capitol .xxix.	 XXIXth Capitulum
De razo de dentz am ferr.	 Reason for cutting.
Quan en la superficia de las dentz de las partidas dedintz e de las de foro e entre las gingivas so ajustadas escorsas aspras, legas, e alcunas veguadas son de nigradas e son faytas citrinas o vertz entro que a la gingiva ve per aquo corrupcio e son faytas las dentz legas.	 When the surface of the teeth and their surrounding gums are well trimmed and neat, without any rough or jagged edges that may cause injury when the gum touches it, then the teeth will be smooth and free from damage.
E donc cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas e pausar le cap de lu en le tieu se, e ratz las dents en las quals apareysso aquelas escorsas e causas semblantz arena entro que de lor no romangua deguna causa, e aquo fay de la negror e de la citrinitat e de las autras entro que sian mondificadas.	 So that you put the patient between your thighs and hold his head in place with a tie or string so that nothing touches the teeth which are damaged as shown on that side, making them smooth and free from harm, while keeping it black and shiny to prevent any damage.
Donc si es ostat aquo que es en aquelas del comensament de la razio, bo es; e sino, lahoras tu itera la razio sobre aquelas al autra dia e al segon e al tertz entro que vengua al derier stament en aquo que tu vols.	 So that if you start from the beginning of a reason, but otherwise repeat the reason on those days and following ones until you reach the last statement in this order so that you want to.
E sapias que las dentz han necessitat de motz rezoris de diversas formas e de motas figuras segon que es preparat a la tua operacio.	 You should know that the teeth may require different treatments and forms depending on how your operation is prepared.
E per so quar le razori am le qual la dent es raza de la partida dedintz es autre del razori am le qual es ras entre las dentz segon autras formas, e aquestas formas de razoris sian deves tu preparadas las quals veyras tantost:	 So that for the reason which causes pain in one of your teeth to be different from the cause between the teeth and other forms, these form should be prepared by you so that you know how to perform them.
Capitol .xxx.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, it is customarily called gout by doctors
D’eradicacio de dentz.	 To eradicate
Cove que tu cures la dent de la sua dolor am tot engen e tardes en tota eradicacio de lu, quar no es denguna causa que suplisqua la veguada de lu quan es eradicada, quar es sustancia sublima entro que es excusacio en la eradicacio de lu.	 Cure the tooth of your pain completely and treat it with a complete eradication that is not caused by any external agent when eradicated
Mays cove quan le malaute es forsat aquela dent eradicar, que fermament deves tu sia certificat quala es la dent dolent, quar motas veguadas la dolor descep le malaute e cuga que sia en dent sana, e tu eradicas aquela e aprop la dolor no cessa entro que la dent malauta e dolent sia eradicada, quar nos ja havem vist aquo per operacio dels barbies.	 If the patient is cured of that tooth by eradication, you must certify that it has been eradicated because any remaining pain from the affected area indicates incomplete eradication, and if the tooth causing the pain has been eradicated, then your treatment will cease as there are no more such cases for the surgeon's operation.
Donc cum deves tu es sertificat qual es la dent dolent, e que o sabes be, lahoras cove que tu scarifiques en le circuit de la dent am spatum en le qual sia alcuna vertut, entro que sia dissolvut de la dent de la gingiva de tota partida, e aprop mau aquel am les tieus ditz, o am forfexs subtils al comensament petit a petit entro que aquela concucesquas.	 In order to be certified as the tooth causing pain and so that you know how far it has been removed down to the gums completely, do the following: after making a small incision on the surface of the affected tooth, gradually remove more until the entire tooth is removed from the gum tissue one piece at a time.
E aprop alogua en lu fortz tenalhas grans per bona loquacio o estuptura fort, e pausa le cap del malaute entre les tieus denolhs que be le tengues que no·s maugua, e aprop tratz la dent segon rectitut en manieyra que no trenques aquela, ni al malaute major dolor no dones.	 After doing a large incision for a successful removal or severe injury of the tooth and closing off its exit between your fingers to prevent further injury, then proceed to remove it second by second carefully so that you do not miss it, nor cause further damage to the affected area.
E donc si no es foro-getat, lahoras pren un de aquels instrumentz, e met aquel dejos lu de tota part am facilitat e esforsa la remocio de lu ayssi que es feyt al comensament.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
Mays si la dent es trauquada o corrosa, lahoras cove que tu comples de drap aquel trauc e estrenguas aquel am la extremitat de ray subtil per so que no sia trinquada en la hora de la tua constriccio sobre aquela am tenalas.	 If the tooth is broken or burned, doctors advise to cover it with cloth and hold it tightly in place at that spot to prevent injury when you tighten your jaw later on over that area.
E cove que tu obres exquesitament am scarificacio en le circuit de tota part de la gingiva e guarda mot la tua fortaleza que no trenques aquela e romangua partida de lu, e retorne sobre le malaute per la malicia que sia majo que la primieyra dolor de lu.	 Cover the entire surface of your gums and hold it tightly in place there to prevent injury when you swallow, making sure not to tear or rip that area off, then return it gently back into the patient's mouth for further examination by a doctor because this is their first pain from what may be an ulcer.
E guarda te que no fassas aquo que fan alscus ignorantz barbiers en lor fistinacio e audacia sobre la eradicacio de lor, ses que no aministran aquo que nos havem recomtat; quar motas veguadas fan venir sobre les homes malautias grans las quals son pus dificils que sian trinquadas, e las razitz de lor remaugudas totas, o alcunas de aquelas, o que extrayguas aquela am alcus osses de la mandigula ayssi cum motas veguadas havem testificat.	 Please note that even though it may be tempting to do so out of ignorance or recklessness about getting rid of them, doctors recommend against administering this substance as they are very difficult to remove and some can cause serious harm if they tear their way into the bones of the jaw - many have tested positive for traces after using such substances.
E aprop la eradicacio de lu sia lavada la boca am vi caut o vi agre am sal.	 The method used to remove it is either a sharp cut in the mouth or a strong saltwater solution.
E si endeve fluxs de sanc per aysso, ayssi cum motas veguadas endeve, lahoras trissa alcuna quantitat de zegi e aspergeys sobre la plagua, e si no confereys aquel zegi, cauteriza.	 If too much blood flows from the wound at that time, as many have tested positive after using such substances, doctors recommend applying a cautery to stop any further bleeding and prevent infection.
La forma de las forceps e tenalas subtils am las quals es mauguda la dent al comensament sia de longua extramitat, de breu manubre e gros, per so que no sian doblatz quan am aquels deves obrar.	 The form of the pliers is such that they are gentle enough to be used at first for breaking through an extra-small space between two objects quickly and efficiently
E sian ayssi cum vezes de gros manubre entro que quan estrenhas am aquelas no sian dobladas, sian breus extramitatz.	 They may also be used with great force if you need to break through a larger gap when they are first broken into smaller pieces.
E sian faytas de ferr de India descentment faytas de dreytas extramitatz, e en las extramitatz de aquelas sian dentz de las quals las unas intron en las autras e estrenhan per constriccio descent fort, e alscunas veguadas las extramitatz de aquelas sian la forma del bec d’un auzel le qual ha nom ciconia, so es guanta, e son de fort constriccio.	 They may also be used with great force to break through smaller gaps and from the outside in, they are sharp enough that if you press them together tightly, it will cause pain, and are of great strength.
Capitol .xxxi.	 Chapter 21.
De erradicacio de dentz e d‘estraccio dels osses de las mandibulas trincadas.	 To prevent the breaking of teeth or bones in the mouth.
Quan deves la eradicacio de dent le qual es trinquat roman alcuna causa, lahoras cove que tu pauses sobre le loc coto am boder per un jorn o per dos entro que·l loc sia mollificat; e aprop entromet algesti o tenalhas las extramitatz de las quals so asembladas al bec de un auzel apelat ciconia o guanta, la forma de las forceps:	 If you want to remove a broken tooth that cannot be treated with vinegar and salt or other home remedies, place the hand on the side of your mouth where it is sore for one or two days until the area becomes softened; then apply a sharp instrument like a small spatula.
Las extramitatz de lor sian faytas dedintz ayssi cum lima o alfagi.	 The pliers may also be used gently, with caution.
E si no obediys a tu a eyssiment am aquestas forceps o tenalas, lahoras cove que tu caves sobre la razit e descrobas tota la carn e entrometas le instrument le qual ha nom atali, so es palanca petita del qual la forma es aquesta:	 If you do not obey the order to use these pliers or they are torn from your hand, remove all of the flesh and insert the instrument whose name is like that.
E sia de breu extremitat grossa un petit, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	 When a limb becomes swollen due to dropsy
Donc si per aquo la razit es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, ajuda te am aquestz autres instrument dels quals aquestas son las formas: la forma del primier instrument es de triangulada extramitat en la qual sia alcuna grossesa:	 If the reason for this is dropsy, then yes; otherwise help me with the other instruments of which these are examples: an instrument shaped like a triangle but with varying sizes
La forma del segon instrument es que sia de triangulada e de pus subtil extremitat.	 The second shape is like that of a triangle but subtler in size.
E ja so ajudatz am aquest instrument havent dos ramps del qual aquesta es la forma aprop la seguent:	 And assist with this instrument, which has two ramps whose shape corresponds to the next one:
e am autres instrumentz les quals precidero en rasura de dentz; quar juvament es fayt am aquest instrument le qual es asemblat a onci gran, e aquesta es la forma:	 assist with another instrument that is used for shaving the face, which originally was assembled into one piece but now has this shape:
de la triangulada extremitat torta o curta, la qual sia alcuna grossesa, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	 The point of the triangle is either short or long depending on its size and should not protrude from the surface such that it does not cause a cut
E otra sapias que·ls instrumentz de las dentz motz so e semblantment les autres instruments.	 And other similar instruments used for shaving will have a similar shape.
Mays le artifexs savi e subtil en l’art, atroba per si mateys segon aquo que a lu significa la operacio e las malautias diversas; quar son de las malautias a las quals les antics no diysero ni pausero propri instrument, per las formas de diversas specias.	 The subtle arts are necessary to avoid the mistakes that occurred in previous operations and various ailments; for these are the types of ailments which the old instruments were unable to treat or prevent, because of their diverse forms.
Mays si es trinquat l’os de la mandibula o dels autres osses de la boca, o si poyreys, lahoras sia pes curat sobre aquel en son loc am aquo que es a lu convenient dels instrumentz e de las forceps las quals havem dit en la extraccio de las razitz de las dentz, e ajuda te am gesti del qual aquesta es la forma:	 If it is necessary to cut the mandible or any other bone of the mouth and if you want so that its position in this way makes it convenient for using the instruments and the forceps which we have mentioned when extracting the roots of the teeth, then assist with the action of which this shape corresponds:
E sia en lu alcuna grosseza petit a petit, e sia instringida o tenguda am la boca per que no evasesca o fuga entro que l’os de tot sia foro-getat; e aprop restaura le loc am medicinas convenientz ad aquo.	 When the humors of cold are infiltrated into each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
Mays si en l’os es petita poyredura, lahoras ratz aquel de aquela poyredura e de la sua negror, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	 If an abscess forms in the body, then treat it with poultice and apply it to that area only and cure it until it is cured.
Capitol .xxxii.	 This appears to be a number at the end of a sentence or passage, possibly marking a particular chapter or section within a larger work such as a medical treatise or text on anatomy.
De la cura de las dentz eminentz sobre las autras.	 The cure for toothache is more important than that for any other ailment.
Quan las dentz so eminentz no segon lor cors natural per aquelas la forma es laga, e majorment quan endeve a las femnas, e majorment a las piuselas venerablas; donc cove que tu consideras: si dent es nada aprop autra dent, e no es possibla sarradura ni linament de lu, lahoras radica aquela; mays que no sia annexa am autra dent, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am aquest instrument del qual aquesta es la forma; e es semblant a morr de porc, e sia feyt de ferr de India de extramitat mot aguda.	 When toothache is so severe that it cannot be relieved by the natural means of the mouth or nose, then use this instrument to relieve it. If there are no other teeth nearby with which to replace it, you must cut out and discard the affected one; if not, place a poultice on its place using another instrument in such manner as is shown here, so that it may be rubbed gently by a gentle touch from India.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscideyses aquela en trops dias per la duricia de la dent, e que no sia comauguda autra de las dentz.	 And if you find that it is necessary to cut out and remove the tooth due to its severity or because there are no other teeth available nearby, then do so without further delay.
E si es dent eminent expausat a limadura, lahoras lima aquel am lima de ferr de India del qual aquesta es la forma:	 And if the toothache is especially severe and cannot be relieved by using this instrument, then apply another one as shown here.
E sia tot de ferr de India e·l margua eysament; e sia de motz menutz puntz ayssi cum lima am la qual son faytas agulhas, am la qual la dent sia limada pauc a pauc en motz dias am fecilitat, per so que no sia autra dent comauguda e caga.	 When a toothache is caused by cold air infiltrating the mouth and causing pain in the gums of the lower teeth, it is customary for dentists to fill the cavity with lime paste, making sure that there are not other cavities or openings through which such air may enter.
E aprop lineys aquela en la fi, e ratz aquela am alscus razoris.	 Then return the intestine from where it has come out and place a cushion under them to prevent the intestine from coming back out again.
E si es dent del qual una partida es trinquada e lideys la lengua, lahoras cove que tu limescas aquel entro que l’aspretat de aquela fraccio sia ostada e engualhada, e sia aplenada per so que la lengua no ledesca ni la paraula no corrumpa.	 If a toothache occurs from where the cavity was filled and the tongue is sore because of it being pushed up or pulled down, then do fill that cavity with lime paste to stop its pain and make sure the tongue does not touch the floor or the word does not come out.
Capitol .xxxiii.	 Chapter xxxiii
De restauracio de dentz maugudas am fiel de aur o de argent.	 When restoring teeth, use either gold or silver.
Quan accideys a las dentz devant concussio e remossio per percussio o per cazament, e le malaute no pot strenher sobre aquo que manga, e tu has curat aquel am medicinas stipticas, e no ha valgut la tua curacio, lahoras per so que no cagan es engen en aquelas que sian strengudas am fiel de aur e no de argent, quar argent se fa vert e aprop se poyreys aprop alscus dias, mays aur nul temps no es mudat.	 When a patient's teeth are injured through impact or collision, and they cannot be treated by conventional methods, then use medical dentistry to treat them and ensure that the mistake was not caused due to negligence in care.
E sia le fiel en tal subtilitat e grocesa segon la quantitat que puesca entrar entre las dentz; e la forma de la reccio es que prenguas le fiel e pren lo doble de lu entre doas dentz sanas, e aprop que cresques am doas tortuositatz del fiel entre doas maugudas, o si’ una o motas, entro que pervengua la tela a la dent sana del autra partida.	 When it comes to subtlety and sharpness in the amount that can enter between teeth; and shape of incision is done so that you place one half of the thread between two healthy teeth, or if only one or less than that, so that there is tension on both sides of the healthy tooth.
E aprop itera le teyssiment entro a la partida de la qual comenciest, e strenh la tua ma am facilitat e savieza entro que no sia mauguda.	 Upon starting to work on it, stretch your hand gently and easily inside so that there's nothing bad happening
E sia la tua striccio am la qual strenhas le fiel deves las razitz de las dentz que no evasesca.	 And make sure you use the correct teeth when flossing, to prevent any harm.
E aprop inscindeys las extramitatz del fiel superfluens am las forceps o tosoyras, e agregua aquelas en quascun loc am gesti, e converteys aquelas e las occulta entre la dent sana e la dent mauguda, per so que no fassa lesio a la lengua.	 Make sure when using tweezers or other tools for flossing that they are clean and smooth on all parts of the teeth, placing them in between healthy and affected teeth to prevent injury to the tongue.
E aprop leyssa aquela ayssi streyta cum roman.	 Stretch it gently like this
Mays si es desliada o rumpuda, strenh aquela o aquelas am autra fiel en tal manieyra en tot son temps.	 If you're feeling tired or weak, stretch that way or the other way with another finger at all times.
E aquesta es la forma de las dentz e la figura de la rectacio de doas dentz sanas e de doas maugudas, ayssi cum vezes aquestas liadas:	 This is the shape of a healthy tooth and an affected tooth; similarly as follows:
E quan se fa que retorno una dent o doas aprop le cazement de quascuna en lors locs, e sian recrescutz ayssi cum havem recomtat, e que remauguan.	 When returning a tooth or teeth to its location in these locations and as recommended before, make sure it is inserted correctly, and gently put back on.
E no fa aquo sino bo artifexs e savi.	 This isn't just an illusion; this is a trickery and deceit.
E alcunas veguadas es aptat alcuna causa dels osses de vaca, e es fayt de lor ayssi cum forma de dent, e es pausada en loc en le qual defayl la dent, e es strengit ayssi cum havem dit, e reman e serveys am aquel per lonc temps.	 Certain vegetables are bad for cattle bones and should be avoided; the teeth should look like this, and placed in a location where they will fall off, and it is stretched like I said before, and remain and service over time.
Capitol .xxxiv.	 When joints are affected by cold humors that invade each part of the body, causing pain in the feet as well
De inscizio del liament le qual ve en la lengua e prohibeys loquela.	 The incision is made on the ligament which enters the tongue and prevents its speech
Aquest liguament le qual ve dejos la lengua alcunas veguadas o es natural am le qual hom nays, o accidental e accideys per plagua la qual ja es consolidada.	 Ligament that comes from the tongue and causes numbness or paralysis is natural, while other ligaments occur by accident and cause a solid knot.
E la operacio en lu es que huobres la boca del malaute, le sieu cap existent en le tieu se; e eleva la sieua lengua, e aprop inscideys aquel liament nervos segon la latitut entro que sia solvuda la lengua de la sua recencio.	 The operation is to make a cut in the mouth of the patient, and it should be such that his head cannot emerge from its hole; then elevates her tongue, and cuts off the nerve ligament after reaching the extent at which the tongue can still move.
Mays si en aquela es alcuna duricia o denodacio, e aquo es stat per consolidacio de plagua, lahoras tu gieta unci e scindeys aquel per la latitut entro que aias inscindit le liament e sia dissolvuda la nodacio.	 If there is no pain or discomfort, then it's done to prevent the knot from being broken, you will tie and cut off that ligament at the point where you first noted its presence and dissolve any knots formed due to this process.
E guarda te que no sia fayta fissura en le preon de la carn e que scindas aqui arceria e vengua flux de sanc.	 Remember to not make a cut in the front of the flesh, or it may bleed and cause damage.
E aprop sia lavat le vestigi de la inscisio am ayguaros o am vi agre o am aygua frega; e aprop pausa dejos la lengua licini; so es meca la qual tengua le malaute dejos la lengua en quascuna nuoyt per so que no sia consolidat autra veguada.	 And be sure to wash away the remnants of the incision wound, or it may become infected and cause another problem.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, pausa sobre le loc vetriol trissat; mays si le sanc ventz, lahoras cauteriza le loc am cauteri lantiginos le qual conveneys ad aquo.	 If bleeding occurs, cover the burned area with a linen bandage to prevent further bleeding.
E aprop aquel cura am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	 When a person becomes sick
Capitol .xxxv.	 Chapter 55
De extraccio de ranula dejos la lengua.	 The tongue is paralyzed
Alcunas veguadas accideys dejos la lengua apostema asemblant a nomla petita prohibent la lengua de la sua operacio natural; e fort leu es magnificada entro que huempla la boca.	 When the paralysis of the tongue occurs, it is forbidden for speech to be made by the little finger, and very light it makes the mouth magnificent
E la operacio en lu es que huebras la boca del malaute sesent devant le solel e considera le apostema.	 The operation in this way serves as a punishment for the person speaking.
E si tu le vezes de fusca color o de negra, dur, al qual le malaute no atroba sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel quar es cranc.	 If you see a sudden redness or blackness, which is hard and does not provoke aversion in the patient, do not touch it as it may be a tumor.
E si es declinat a blancor, en le qual es humiditat, lahoras tu met le onci en lu, e inscideys aquel am spatum subtil, e inscindeys le de tota partida; e si sanc te ventz en la hora de la tua operacio, lahoras tu pausa desus zegi trissat, so es vetriol, entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	 If white and humid, put it on a plate, and scrape it with a fine knife, and if you forget to wash your hands in that moment of the operation, do not resume washing them after the procedure is over, as this is a poison, unless otherwise instructed.
E aprop retorna a la obra tua entro que lo haias trayt am compliment de lu, entro que sia lavat am vi agre e sal; e cura aquel am l’autra curacio ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	 Return to your work after giving the appropriate treatment for it, after washing well and using salt; and attend to another cure here as soon as you are sick.
Capitol .xxxvi.	 Chapter 56
De extraccio de apostema de doas aurelhas e de aquel que es nada en le golayro e de las autras apostemas.	 The removal of the tongue and its paralysis are discussed in this chapter, as well as the other paralyzed limbs.
Quan endeveno en le golayro godat, so son glandulas las quals son asembladas algodat, las quals accideysso deforas e son nompnadas doas aurelhas, las quals quan tu las curas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no es sanat, lahoras tu considera si le apostema es dur, de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr.	 When you see redness or blackness in the throat, which may indicate paralysis of the tongue and other limbs, if they are cured as mentioned before but do not heal properly, then consider whether it is a tumor that has caused this color to appear.
E si es de roga color e la razic es grossa, lahoras no toques aquela am ferr per le flux del sanc; abantz layssa aquel entro sia madurat, e lahoras o tu trauqueras aquel, o sira romput per si.	 When the bile is heavy and the gallstones are large, do not squeeze them by force from the vein as they will burst. Instead, break this down into smaller parts, so that you can extract each one separately.
E si es de blanqua color, radon, e la razit de lu es subtil, lahoras aquel es que cove esser inscidit.	 When the bile is light and the gallstones are thin, it should be squeezed gently to remove them.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras, denant la tua operacio, si ja ha repausat le apostema de lu caut am repaus complit o si es deminuit am alcuna deminucio; e lahoras fay sezer le malaute denant le soleyl, e·l cap de lu sia en le tieu se, e huebre la boca de lu, e le servidor prenent entre las suas mas prema la lengua de lu dejos am instrument mot noble del qual aquesta es la forma:	 Before the operation is performed, depending on whether or not you have already passed urine, it should be checked that there has been a complete relaxation of the external sphincter muscle or if it needs to be slightly relaxed. The doctor's head will be in place, and a hand placed between your thighs to prevent leakage; the mouth of the patient is opened, the servant holding their tongue gently with the instrument used for this purpose being an important part of the form:
E sia fayt de argent o de aram, e sia subtil cum cotel.	 It should be performed using silver or gold wire and a small catheter.
Donc cum tu premes am aquel la lengua e es mostrat a tu la apostema, e catz sobre aquel le tieu vezement, lahoras pren onci e fica aquel en l’amenla, e tira aquel a las partidas defora tant quant podes.	 After you have inserted it into the patient's mouth and shown them the sphincter, they should tighten their anus as much as possible and leave this in place for some time, until they want to remove it.
Otra aquo que tiras alcuna causa de las tunicas, e aprop incideys aquela am instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	 And another thing is that you should not cause any disturbance of the bladder, and be careful with this instrument which is its form:
e es asemblat a forceps, empero las extramitatz de lu son corvadas, ayssi que l’orrifici de quascuna de aquelas es en le endreyt del autra, mot agudas, le qual sia de ferr indi enbegut.	 And if the forceps are used instead of them, make sure that each one is placed on its own stand, so that the needle can be inserted gently into it, avoiding being too close to avoid injury.
Mays si aquest instrument no es a tu present, lahoras inscideys aquel am spatum del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: E sia agut de la una part, no agut del autra part.	 When this instrument is not at hand, the doctor may prescribe another remedy to be applied in its place; and that other means shall be used as follows: On one side, do nothing; on the other side, apply this
E pus que has inscidit una mella, inscideys l’autra segon aquesta meteyssa manieyra de inscizio, e aprop la inscizio le malaute guarguarise de aygua frega	 Apply a poultice on the other side of the wound to keep it moist and clean
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, guarguarise aygua de decoccio de scorsa de milgrana o de fuelha de mirtra e semblantz ad aquel de las causas stiptiquas entro que·l flux del sanc sia restreyt, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	 If there is an abscess in the vein, guard it with a poultice of moist linen or a poultice made from dried millet or flaxseed; and apply this to keep it clean and healthy
E alcunas veguadas naysso en le guolayro autras apostemas otra aquelas doas aurelhas, e inscideys aquelas segon que yeu e dit en la inscizio de doas mellas engualment.	 After cleaning the wound with warm water and a soft cloth, apply a poultice on both sides of it.
E yeu ja fu medicat una femna de apostema le qual era nat en le golayro de lu, le qual apostema tendia a color fusca, de pauc sentiment, le qual ja havia claus le golayro de lu, e la femna respirava am meat streyt, e ja havia prohibit a lu comestio e beure de aygua, e ja era pervenguda a la mort si mays agues stat per un dia o per dos.	 The poultice was made from an ointment that had been used to heal the wound but no longer worked as it should have; the ointment turned to a dark color and lost its scent, indicating decay of the wound; it became infected, and she could not eat or drink water, and her condition grew worse by each day.
E l’apostema ja tant havia pugat que havia mezes dos ramps entro que eyssiro per dos traucs.	 The poultice had been applied so long that pus has been oozing from it for two days.
Donc yeu me cuytegui fisturalment e fiquegui en un de lor onci, e tiregui aquel, e atirada es de lu gran porcio, e aprop yeu incidigui aquela de on comprendegui del autre trau, e aprop yeu obrigui la boca de lu, e compremegui la sua lengua, e aprop yeu fiquegui le onci en aquela apostema.	 Then, cut off the poultice gently and carefully in one piece; throw away the large part of it, keeping only a small portion for further application; put your finger inside that remaining part, and taste its contents.
E aprop yeu abscizi gran partida de lu, e no corria de lu sino un pauc de sanc.	 When you have opened a large hole in him (the patient), do not let it close unless there are only one or two stitches necessary
Donc absolut es le guolayro de aquela femna, e comensec tantost beure aygua, e aprop presec vianda, donc yeu no cessegui inscidir de aquela apostema motas vetz per lonc temps, e succesia apostema en loc de aquel, le qual inscizia entro que es prolonguat aquel.	 Absolutely do not remove the bandage from that part of her (the patient), and continue to feed water, and make sure you don't close it until a longer time has passed and then close it in its place, ensuring it is properly prolonged.
Donc yeu engen agui e cauterizegui le guolayro de lu, donc astec de addicio; e aprop yeu perambulegui e no saubi que fec Dieus de aquela aprop mi.	 Then make an incision and cautery on it, after which you will apply a bandage without removing that one first.
Capitol .xxxvii.	 Chapter 70.
De inscizio de huvela quan es apostemada.	 The opening of the veins when they are opened up.
Quan catarr deysen a la huvula, e es apostemada e es longa, lahoras ela es nompnada perpendicular; e si es en la partida dejos grossa e redonda, e lahoras ela es apelada buba.	 When the catarrh is broken in the throat and it is long, the pain is called a nasal perpendicular; if it occurs in the opening of the chest, then it is called a bubonic.
Mays quan es curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio, e no comfereys la tua curacio, e eyssament ja vezes que apostema caut ja es ostat de lu e es subtil, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquela que es agreguadas redonda; e si es ad aquela longitut, e es sanguina, de fusca color o de negre, e no es a lu centiment, lahoras cove que tu temtes la inscizio de lu, quar en aquela es temor sobre le malaute.	 When you have already done as mentioned in the division and do not interfere with your cure, except that sometimes when it is cauterized there are also many wounds that are added round; if it is on that length of the veins, which are full of blood either black or red, and are not at the center, then cover them so you will make incisions in their place as long as you have fear over the patient.
E quan tu vezes aquela segon la manieyra que yeu he dita de la sua blancor e longuesa, que tu fassas sezer le malaute e premas la lengua de lu am instrument del qual procesic la sua forma e aprop fica le onci en la nuva, e tira aquela en jos e inscideys aquela am un de dos instrumentz les quals e ditz en la inscizio de dos mellas.	 When you make this incision above the patient's belly button and below their naval, put a cushion under them to prevent their fall, place another servant on their legs, and yet another on their chest holding their hands, here comes the first sentence.
E cove que no inscidas aquela sino aquo que es ajustat sobre le terme natural ses addicio, quar si tu inscides de lu mays, lediyras le sieu parlar.	 And when you make this incision above their navel and below their belly button, place a cushion under them to prevent their fall, put another servant on their legs, and yet another on their chest holding their hands, the first sentence is:
E aprop la inscizio, usa de aquo le qual havem recomtat en la inscizio de dos mellas, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	 When you make this incision as recommended in the incision of two parts and cure it so that it may be healthy.
Mays si era le malaute espaventat per la inscizio de lu, cove que use de engen en la cauterizacio de lu ses temor, e la manieyra del cauteri en lu no es sino am aygua aguda, e es que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop prem la lengua de lu am le instrument le qual havem dit, e aprop pren de l’aygua la qual havem dita en le capitol de cauterizacio, e comfeys am aquela caus viva, e pausa aquela no spessa ni subtil, e de aquela omple la concavitat de l’estrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	 When the patient is startled by making this incision, use the knife to make a cautery of it; their fear should only be intense water and not too sharp or subtle. And place the instrument that has been described in the passage below on top of the wound, completing its shape and ensuring its flatness
Sia la extramitat de lu conquavitat en la qual sia pausada la medicina ayssi cum la conquavitat de culher de ray, e pausa le strument am la medicina sobre la vula, e·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu latz per so que corro saliva o musellage de la boca de aquel per la intrinscequa medicina, per so que no deyssenda de aquela deguna causa sobre le golayro de lu e que ledesca aquel.	 And if it is necessary to remove the intestine or hernia from its cavity, you can place your hand over that area and prevent the intestine from coming out.
E aprop te la tua ma am la medicina, e exprem aquela sobre la uvula per l’espazi de miega hora entro que vegas aquela esser denegrada e sedada per la mordicacio de la medicina.	 'And you place your hand upon the medicine and extend it into the space between your thumb and forefinger to ensure that it does not become dry or spoiled by the bite of the medicine.'
E si vols, prengues coto e envolopes aquel sobre la extremitat del ray, e submergeys le coto en la medicina, e entrometas le ray am le coto en una canula de sobre entro que·l coto adheresca en aquela canula, e fay aquo tantas vetz entro que consiegues aquo que vols de la cauterizacio de la uva, e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela se seccara e cayra aprop tres dias o quatre.	 'If you wish, take a cotton swab and apply it to the affected area of your arm, submerge it in the medicine, and insert it into the vein using a needle at an angle so that the cotton adheres to the needle, then proceed with the cautery procedure.'
E si indigeysses que iteras la medicina, itera aquela, e aprop la cauterizacio abstergeys en le circuit de la uva am coto enbegut en boder, e mondifica am aquel aquo que es en le circuit de lu de la medicina, e sia lavat am aygua frega, e sia curat deforo am embrocacio, e dedintz am guarguarismes entro que sia sanat.	 'If you are to administer the medicine, apply it and proceed immediately with the cautery procedure inside a vein, ensuring that there is no blood in the vein or the surrounding area, washing your hands afterwards as well.'
E aquesta especia de curacio es pus salva que inscizio e pus long de temor.	 'This specific treatment method requires caution and patience.'
Alcunas veguadas es curada la uvuola am aquo que es pus subtil que cauteri e inscizio, quar es curat am subfumigacio en aquesta manieyra: recipe calament, ysop, origua, ruda, scicados arabic, camamilla, broyda e semblant ad aquels de las erbas, e ajusta totas aquelas causas, o alcunas de lor, en una ola, e sian submergidas am vi agre, e bulhan; e la ola sia be lutada am lut decentment, e sia en le mieg loc de la ola un trauc, sobre le qual sia pausat un instrument conquau de aram segon aquesta manieyra; sia fayt de argent o de aram.	 'Some plants are used in the treatment of gout because they have cold humors and can infiltrate into each part of the body as well: add all those herbs to a mixture, submerge them in vinegar or blood, and place the mixture on an object so that it is held with an instrument capable of piercing through this manner; either gold or iron.'
E sia entromesa la extremitat en la boca del malaute entro que la vapor poge a la uvula sobre la quanula, entro que la uvula sia mot ofuscada.	 The doctor inserts a probe into the patient's mouth to check if they are experiencing pharyngitis or not.
E aprop itera sobre aquela motas veguadas entro qu’es secca, e guarda te que no fassas aquesta curacio al comesament de l’aveniment de apostemas, quar trop ajustaria en le apostema, e no cove que tu fassas aquo, sino deves la declaracio de apostema de lu caut.	 The doctor gently pulls away any mucus obstructing the probe's path as it enters and holds tight to prevent the probe from being pulled out by swallowing, so that they cannot be removed unless the doctor specifically instructs otherwise.
Mays si no es a tu present aquest instrument, lahoras pren una cana e compon en la extramitat de lu un clos de huou, per so que la boca del malaute sia comborida, quar le closc del huou prohibeys la vapor comburir la boca.	 If you don't have this instrument, the doctor will place a hood over the patient's mouth to prevent the probe from entering it and block any phlegm or mucus from entering their mouth.
E aquesta curacio es bona am salut.	 This procedure is good for health.
Capitol .xxxviii.	 Chapter xxxviii.
De extraccio d’espinas e de aquo que adhereys en le golayro e de las autras causas.	 Of extirpating spines and the like, adhering to the guidelines provided earlier in this chapter.
Motas veguadas adhereys en le guolayro o spina de peys o alcuna autra causa.	 Mucus obstructed areas or any other cause must be carefully inspected before proceeding with extirpation.
Adonc cove que tu extraguas aquo que de aquels es apparent, sobre le qual catz la vista, pus que tu premes la lengua am instrument denant solelh, per so que a tu sia declarat aquo que es en la guola.	 Once you have confirmed that it is visible and can be observed with your tongue, place the tool in front of them so they declare that this is what is causing their pain
E aquo que no apar e es a tu occultat en le guolayro, cove que tu fassas vomir le malaute denant que la vianda sia degerida en l’estomac, quar fort leu la causa annexsa le golayro sira foro-getada per vomit; o que deglusia le malaute una pessa de nap o de razit de laytuga o un boci de pa sec; o prengua una pessa de sponga marina sequa leon, e lia aquela fortment am fiel, e aprop le malaute transglussia aquela, quar cum perve al loc en le qual so spinas e es extrahuda, lahoras so foro-getatz.	 If you observe no symptoms in their throat and suspect that the cause of pain is in their stomach, make them vomit to examine if there are any food or drink residues inside their stomach, as strong evidence for gastrointestinal causes can be found after vomiting; or provide them with a glass of saltwater, which will clean out their mouth thoroughly while preventing it from spilling over.
E mays pren una anguila e be am fiel liada, e sia dedintz mesa e soptament sia extrayta; o pren un porr e soptament le metas e soptament l’en tratz.	 A doctor has inserted a needle and is now administering an extract from the bowels and sweating chamber to purge the patient of pain, or inserting a probe into the rectum for evacuation.
Mays si no so foro-getatz am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas, lahoras husa de un instrument de plom segon aquesta forma:	 The doctor is not using instruments from those causes they mentioned earlier, but instead will use a tool with a pointed end for this purpose.
E sia pus gros que ray un petit, e en la extramitat de lu sia conquavitat la qual tu entrometas en la sua guola am facilitat.	 The size of the probe may be large or small, in the area surrounding its cavity it will enter easily and quickly.
E el aga le sieu cap elevat en sus, e guarda te que·l tocament del sieu os de la gola, per so que endevengua a lu cos e am aquela que enpellesca le os o la spina, o que aquel le metge am la sua ma.	 The doctor puts his head up to hear the patient's breath and feels for any signs of obstruction in their throat or spine, or where they place their hand on the surgeon.
Mays empero que·l malaute aquel entrometa es miels, per la sua sciencia del loc de la causa annexa e enpellisca en jos, e tira la sua ma am le instrument en sus, tot aquo segon la quantitat la qual es a lu preparada entro que sia foro-getada.	 The patient may enter the extract without difficulty due to their knowledge of how to perform this procedure correctly and prepare for it in advance.
Capitol .xxxix.	 Section 39.
De extraccio de sancguisugua annexsa al golayro.	 The extraction of the gallbladder is also part of the treatment.
Quan es medicada sanguisugua am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la curacio am medicinas e no comfereys, considera lahoras en le guolayro del malaute al solelh, pus que tu aias compremuda la lengua de lu am instrument le qual a tu havem recomtat.	 When treating bloodletting in conjunction with other treatments and not interfering, consider the doctor's instructions for applying leeches to the patient's chest area or wherever recommended by the doctor.
Donc si tu vezes la sancguisugua, extratz aquela am onci petit o am gesti subtils decentment.	 When you see the sign of gout, gently apply a warm compress or a cold one as may be appropriate
E si no es a tu possible estrayre am aquel, lahoras pren una canula concava e entromet aquela en lo guolayro del malaute, e aprop pausa en la concavitat de la canula un ferr ignit, e fay aquo tantas vetz (entro que la sancguisugua sia morta e se osta del guolayro) e abstengua se le malaute tot lo jorn de aygua.	 If not, put a warm compress or a cold one into the hollow of the patient's leg, and place your finger over the opening to prevent the patient from removing it.
E aprop prengua una veyria plena de aygua frega, e obra la boca de lu en aquela, e lava la boca am aquela; e no trasglucia de aquela alcuna causa e maugua l’aygua una hora aprop autra am la sua ma, quar la sancguisugua tantost cum sent l’aygua catz.	 Give a full glass of water and place it in the patient's mouth, then wash their mouth with it; do not swallow any cause or harm from that liquid for one hour at most, unless you feel the need to vomit sooner due to the pain.
Mays si no es foro-getada am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras subfumigua le malaute am cimetz o am assafetida per le instrument le qual havem recomtat en la sufumiguacio de uvula.	 If you do not feel comfortable with that which has been recommended to you, then place a warm compress on the patient's chest or back near the instrument of which they recommend for warming their throat.
Fay aquo, so en quar cayra.	 Do it as follows.
E es un’autra manieyra de operacio en sufumiguacio de aquela, es que tu prenguas una ola en la qual sian carbos ignitz e la ola sia cuberta am una cobertora en le mieg de la qual sia un trauc, e sia compausat en aquel trauc la extremitat del instrument; e aprop dega desus la subfumigacio; e pause le malaute la sua boca en la extremitat de la canula, e claugua la sua boca per que la subfumiguacio no sia foro-getada entro que sapias que la subfumigacio es pervenguda a la sancguisugua, quar la sancguisugua tantost cayra.	 This is another way to perform the procedure of warming their throat, which is that you should take an oil in which there are small embers and cover it with a covering cloth over its surface such as a scarf; and place this on top of the instrument's part of the mouthpiece, and keep it closed so that the heat does not leak out from between them. Then gently place their lips against the opening of the mouthpiece to warm up their throat.
E si no catz, lahoras tu itera la subfumiguacio motas vetz, e abstengua le malaute de beure, e mange causas saladas e alhs, e no begua aygua, e ayssi necessari es que am aquest regiment sia fora-getada.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body and if drinking salted water or eating salty food does not help to relieve it, then it is customary for doctors to prescribe this regimen as a remedy.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument am le qual es trayta sancguisugua del guolayro quan es vista; e es semblant a forceps ayssi cum vezes, sino quar es en lu alcuna curvitat:	 This is the shape of the instrument used to draw out the gout when it appears; and it resembles tweezers in some respects but not all.
le qual sia mesa al guolayro, e la extremitat de lu es semblant a bec de ciconia, que es guanta, en la qual es aspretat de lima, per so quar, quan comprem alcuna causa, aquela no leyssa.	 When placed on the gouty part it resembles the beak of a crane in shape; and where it touches it is sharp like a lime-stone, such that when any cause presses upon it it does not let go.
Capitol .xl.	 The end
En le qual es la suma del sermo en apercio de apostemas e en seccio de lor.	 It is the sum of the meaning in the beginning of a sentence and at the end of each line.
Les apostemas so motas specias, de motas manieyras, segon que ve rememoracio de lor, de quascuna en aquest libre.	 The commas are used as spaces; they mark the end of a word or phrase and also separate clauses in longer sentences.
E so diversas en perforacio e seccio de lor per doas manieyras, de las quals la una es per la specia de apostemas en si meteys; e per aquo que comprem de las humiditatz.	 They are used in both the arrangement and division of them for two reasons: one is to specify a type of comma used within it and another is to indicate which ones are part of humidity check
E la segonda manieyra es prop les locs en les quals accideys del cos, quar le apostema accident en le cap es autra de la apostema accident en le cul; e le apostema en le loc carnos accident es autra del apostema accident en junctura; e a quascun de lor es son juguament per operacio.	 The second reason is to indicate the location where an error occurs, such as when an apostrophe in the head is different from that in the buttock or vice versa, and each of them is subject to operation.
E mays de apostemas so alcunas las quals cove que no sian perforadas sino aprop maturacio de la sania en aquels o compliment de lor.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet
So autras apostemas les quals cove que sian traucatz quan son cruzes, e no son maturatz segon lor compliment, ayssi cum apostemas que son propdas a las juncturas, quar apostema quan ve prop junctura, lo esser de lu es prolonguat entro que·s poyreys aquo que es en le circuit de lu, e fort leu son corromputz les liamentz o les nervis de aquela junctura, per que es fayta causa de contraccio de aquel membre; o es apostema prop de membre principal, e si tu tardas la perforacio de lu entro sia madurat nosira al membre principal; o es prop le cul, donc perfora aque no-madurat; e no cove que·l perforas cru, de no-complida degestio, sino aquel que es prop del cul, per so que no poyresca le preon de lu e sia elonguat a las partidas dedintz del cul, e sia fayta fistula, o que sia fayt en le terme de lu que no sia sanat.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customary to call gout for doctors.
Mays cove que tu sapias la hora de la perforacio de la apostema, e aysso es quan es maturat.	 When you know the time for making an incision with the lancet, and then it's when it is mature.
E sapias que es madurat quan es la cedacio de la dolor e la cessacio de la febre, e aprop la diminucio de la rogor e de la pulsacio, e la acuitat del cap del apostema, e les autres senhals.	 When you know that it is mature when the cutting of pain and fever ceases, and when the redness and pulse diminish, and the sharpness of the lancet, and other nerves subside.
E quar cove que sapias la perforacio cazer en le loc pus dejos del apostema e de pus venient de curacio de la eminencia.	 And if you know that making an incision here will cause the lancet to move downwards towards the belly button, and when it comes out of the navel.
E perforacio tostemps sia per le lonc de la carn o del cors, si las apostemas son en las partidas de las mas o dels pes, e en loc dels lacertz, de las cordas dels nervis, de las arcerias; e, al derier, en totz locs enguals en les quals no es reflecio; quar en aquels que so reflectitz, usa de perforacio segon aquel membre.	 The incision should be made on the skin or body part, if it is in the areas of the feet or legs, and in the places where there are cords or nerves, such as the arms; and elsewhere, use a different location for each member.
Mays quan le apostema es en loc carnos, lahoras miels es que leysses la perforacio de lu entro que sia confermada la digestio de lu segon compliment, ayssi quo havem dit; quar si tu perforas aquel denant aquo, es prolonguat le cors del poyre de lu e de mota sordicia, e fort leu las labias de lu so enduradas e la profunditat de lu.	 When the aperture is in a place that is not very good for digestion, then it will be necessary to puncture its entrance and confirm this through another process, as I have said; if you pierce this at this time, it will prolong your torment and cause much suffering, especially to the lower part of the body and to the intestines.
Mays alcus apostemas so perforatz segon la latitut de la carn o del cos deves la necessitat, o segon aquo del qual lo membre indigeys.	 When you perform an aperture in the upper parts of the body or where it is necessary, or if you do this part that causes great torment and suffering to the lower part of the body and the intestines.
E cove que administres petita perforacio , e·n les apostemas grans gran perforacio e ampla o motas seccios segon la diversitat de la grandesa dels apostemas.	 When you administer a small aperture, or in larger ones, large or medium-sized openings depending on the size of the opening.
E autras so dels apostemas en les quals cove que la codena sia conquavada e sia encidida, quan es fayta ayssi quo pan e fayta es en terme que ja stigua, ayssi cum aquel que accideys en trops de dubelec e de bubos.	 When the intestines are both full and empty at once or when they have a continuous flow of both fluids as I mentioned earlier, then it is customary to act quickly in order not to fall into a state that is harmful, such as when it happens many times on top of each other or both.
E de aquels so que so insciditz am seccio havent tres angles; e de aquels es en le qual es inscidit ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirtra, ayssi cum las apostemas dels angonars.	 When the intestines are filled with a solid substance that has three angles and when they are closed in such a way as to resemble a corkscrew shape or if it is closed in this manner of the elbows.
E de lor so en les quals es administrada seccio redonda e seccio lunar, e semblantz ad aquels.	 When you administer round and crescent shaped openings, like that which resembles an arrowhead and a crescent, for example.
Mays aquel al qual no es cap ayssi cum son apostemas leons superficials, cove que tu perforas aquel am perforacio superficial, o plana tant solament.	 When a patient has pains in their chest, you shall make an incision on the surface of the chest as deep or shallow as necessary.
E cove quant le apostema es gros e ya ha colligit mota sania, que perfores aquel e no te coytes que extraguas tot le poyre en aquela hora; habantz extratz de aquel una partida, e aprop opila le apostema entro al autre dia, e aprop extratz una partida major, e aprop fa aquo motas veguadas segon graduacio entro que sia foro-getat.	 When the incision is deep and has already gone through muscle tissue, you should not extend it further but stop at a certain point; then go back to make another cut in a different place on that same day or after that, depending on how deep the first incision was made.
E majorment si·l malaute es de freol vertut, o femna prens, o enfant petit, o viel en decrepitut, quar l’esperit animal motas vetz es resolvut am la egressio de la sania, e fort leu mor le malaute, e tu operte les.	 Additionally if the patient is in a hurry or in pain, you should make an incision and act quickly to relieve their suffering; also if the patient is old, weak, frail, or decrepit, then take that into account when making your decision about whether to make another incision.
Don guarda aquest capitol am gran cautela, e aprop la tua perforacio en la qual perforas aquestz apostemas, cove que abstergescas las plagues e consideras donc si la plagua del apostema es pauca, o es una seccio plana, lahoras tu aministra las qualguas de li o de coto antic; e si le apostema es gran, e las fissuras de la perforacio son motas, lahoras cove que tu pauses meca en quascun trauc entro que pervenguan ensemps.	 Be extremely careful with this step and consider whether to go for a deeper or shallower incision based on the condition of the patient; if the incision is small enough without causing complications then proceed, but if it's deep then you must stop your incision at least halfway through so as not to cause further complications.
E si en le apostema es abscindit una partida de la codena o has concavada aquela en le circuit, lahoras cove que tu la complescas de coto viel o de fil fayt de drap de li, ayssi cum quan has traytz pans o razizos, ses humiditat; e strenh aquel entro al tertz dia; e aprop proceseys aquel e cura le am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	 If the incision is through to the bone or forms a cavity in the circuit then you should cover it with a piece of cloth, bandage that and keep it moist until after three days.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc en la hora de la operacio tua, lahoras tu aministra aygua frega e vi agre en les quals mules un drap de li, e pausa aquel sobre le loc del fluxs del sanc motas veguadas.	 When a patient's operation starts and the flow of blood stops, you will give them cold water to drink from a bag attached to their legs, holding it over where the flow of blood is supposed to go.
Mays si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras cove que tu aministres regiment e curacio e polveras las quals he recomtadas en motz locs de aquest nostre libre e de divisio.	 If the flow of blood continues, you should provide them with medication to alleviate pain and powders to be applied in various locations as recommended by our free medical manual and division.
Mays si es en temps de hivern, e·l loc de la apostema es loc de motz nervis, lahoras cove que tu enfundas pulvils en vi e oli caut, e pauses aquels sobre les locs.	 In winter, the area around the anus is a nerve-sensitive location, so be cautious with powders of vinegar and oil when applying them there.
E si es en estiu, e les locs son carnoses, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils enbeguts am aygua e oli o am vi e oli, e tot aquo sia freg entro que sia le ters dia, ayssi cum havem dit, e lahoras cove que tu deslies le apostema e abstergescas aquel e aministres en la curacio de lu aquo que a lu conveneys entro que sia sanat.	 In summer and sensitive areas, you should be careful when applying powders of water or oil, or vinegar or oil, as previously mentioned, so that the anus is kept clean while using the powder to prevent infection.
E aysso es aquo que es necessari de la cognicio de la curacio de apostemas universalment, mays segon la via de distinccio ja he dit de tot apostema en qual manieyra es via de la cura de lu per capitols singularment.	 This is why it's necessary to have a universally recognized protocol for cleaning the anus, so that each time you cleanse one, all areas can be done individually as needed.
Capitol .xli.	 Thank you!
De seccio de apostemas les quals veno en la codena del cap.	 From any area of the anus that may come into contact with the head
En la codena del cap petitz apostemas, e so de specias de nodes les quals conteno tunicas que so a lor factz ; e las specias de lor so motas.	 When the anus touches the head, they are especially sensitive and contain skin that is particularly vulnerable; it's important to take extra precautions with them.
E de lor son pingas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditat semblant a lima.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and when pain occurs in the feet
E de aquelas so las quals conteno humiditat semblant a pols, et asemblantz a lor; e de aquelas so que son lapideas, durs.	 And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery.
E en la seccio de totz, e en la extraccio de aquels no es temor, cum deves la exteccio de aquels no fa contrariat arceria.	 In the section of everything, and in the extension of those, there is no fear; but because you do not want to create a conflict of those.
E la operacio en seccio de aquels es que tu esproes aquels am instrument la forma del qual ve aprop aysso, le qual es apelat entromes, entro que sapias que contengua.	 The operation in the section of those is that you apply those with an instrument like the one mentioned below, which is called between, through which you know it contains.
Quar si aquo que conte es humiditat, lahoras scindeys aquel am seccio segon la longitut per seccio superficial segon aquesta forma:	 If there are humors in that area, the doctors will cut out another part for a surface section of about this size.
E comensa en la seccio de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G. Donc cum la humiditat es evacuada, lahoras tu excoria aquela pel que conte aquela humiditat, e no leysses de aquela alcuna causa de tot, quar tropas veguadas retorna, si roman de aquela alcuna causa.	 Once the humors have been evacuated from that area, then you should remove it and not let another cause of any kind occur there again because all causes are to be prevented, if Roman is in that way.
E aprop submergeys coto en enguent egipciach, si es present, e sino, en aygua e sal; e umpleys am aquel la plagua e layssa aquel entro ad autra dia, quar am aquo corrodeys tot so que es romas de aquela pellicula.	 Then put it under the armpit if you find it, and otherwise in water and salt; and immerse it with a cloth to prevent it from coming out again, for as long as this substance lasts on that film layer.
E aprop itera sobre aquel coto am enguent egipciach segondament e tersament si indigeyses de lu, entro que·t comfides que no y haia romas alcuna causa de aquela pellicula; lahoras cura la plagua am enguent entro que sia sanada.	 Then repeat the process on that part again and again if necessary until you are confident there is no more cause for that film layer, then cure the cloth by immersing it to make sure it is healed.
E si apostema conte nodi gras, lahoras tu inscideys aquel segon aquesta forma:	 And if you suspect signs of gas in the stomach, then follow this course:
am seccio havent forma de crotz, e geta oncis entre doas labias de la seccio e scorsa aquel de tota partida, e esforsa la tua vertut en extraccio de la tunica la qual conte aquel.	 If you suspect signs of gas in the stomach, then follow this course: remove the food from that part and open it completely to be able to see what is inside; otherwise force your intestines to release whatever is stuck there.
Mays si a tu arceria fa contrarieta, lahoras fay aquo que yeu t’e recontat primieyrament.	 If you notice any contradictions in your account, then go back and check it again immediately.
E semblantment fay en le apostema lapificat de seccio e de curacio segon que a tu havem dit; e seccio sobre apostema lapificat es pus leugiera, quar es de pauc sanc e de pauca humiditat.	 Similarly, if the symptoms of gas appear in your stomach and intestines, say that you had previously mentioned it, then open up both the stomach and intestine to see what is inside; because this may be a sign of little pain and little dampness.
E alcunas vetz so alcus de aquestz apostemas les quals so en le cap en alcus homes am los quals de tot no es humiditat; la qual causa es quar yeu inscindigui sobre un apostema en le cap de una femna vielha e atrobegui le apostema ayssi cum peyra sorda, aspra, blanqua, la qual no podia esser trinquada, e si a alcu fos am aquela percussit, plaguera aquel.	 Some people have symptoms of head pain or numbness on their forehead; the cause is because they squeezed it tightly with their hand, so that it could not be moved and caused numbness, which required urgent medical attention.
Mays en les autres apostemas accidentz en le cap otra aquest no es aquest capitol, ayssi cum les apostemas que veno als caps dels enfantz e deves las razitz de las aurelhas, mays la seccio de aquestz totz sia seccio superficial.	 The other symptoms may appear in the head or even on children's heads, so they are superficial cavities that only require medical attention for their removal.
E pausa la perforacio de aquels de la partida pus bassa de lor per so que sia alleujat le cos de la sania a las partidas pus bassas.	 Pause the puncture of these parts to make it easier for your body to heal from the discomfort caused by them.
E aprop cura aquelas am aquo que conveneys ad aquel de curacio.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body,
Capitol .xlii.	 And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery.
De seccio de scrophulas las quals accideyso en le col.	 The servant who opens up that space in the hollows will also serve those under the arm.
Motas veguadas endeveno aquestas apostemas en le colh e en las aysselhas e en les angonars; e alcunas veguadas accideyso en las autras partidas del cos.	 The servant who opens up that space in the hollows will also serve those under the arm, and a few others to serve at the back of the body.
E so aquelas que accideysso en le colh, e so motas que so engendradas entre lor, e tota scrofula de aquelas es dintz la sua tunica propria, e ayssi cum en les nodis e apostema del cap, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	 And those who serve in the hollows will also serve those under the arm, and a few others to serve at the back of the body, as well as with the servants who open up that space between them and their tunic, so that the scrofula may be cured by its own power, just like when there are servitors for the neck and extremities.
E las specias de aquestas scrophulas son motas, quar de aquelas so alcunas lapideas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditatz, e de aquelas so malignas las quals no obeseysso a curacio.	 The servants of those hollows are servants who have opened up that space between them and their tunic, some of whom can offer lotions or ointments, while others contain moisture, and some contain poisons which cannot be cured.
Donc en aquela la qual tu vezes de bona disposicio en le Tocament, de la qual la color de aquo que es manifest es propda a la color de la codena, e es mauguda a tota partida, e no es annexsa am le nervi del colh, ni am las venas, ni am la arceria, e no es preonda, cove que tu inscidiscas aquela am siccio superficial de la partida desus a la partida dejos del cos de la linha de .G. entro la linha de .B., e scorja aquela de tota partida, e exten dos labias de la codena am onci, o am motz oncis si has necessitat de aquels, ayssi cum havem dit en las apostemas del cap, e extratz aquela petit a petit.	 Therefore in that part where you find good disposition and color matching the veins of the body as far as line B., it is smooth throughout, without nerve or artery, nor any other thing, unless you wish to bring it up by superficial incisions from this point downwards along the lines of .G. through .B..
E es mays cautela que no sia inscidida la vena o nervi.	 When pain occurs in joints due to cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body.
E sia le spatum no mot agut, que no ajuste a tu la tua ma am inscizio, o que enquiete le malaute, e que inscidas aquo que no es necessari inscidir; quar si inscideysses vena o arceria e prohibeys tu de la tua operacio, lahoras pausa en la plagua vetriol trissat o autras polveras las quals ostan fluxs de sanc, e estrenh la plagua, e layssa aquel entro que·s repausa la acuitat de la apostema e sia mollificada la plagua e comense esser poyrida.	 When pain occurs in joints due to cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body and you have already opened space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest holding their hands, do not cut an artery or vein as long as it is not necessary.
Quan le sanc es abscindit.	 When pain occurs in joints due to cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, if you are sure that no artery or vein has been cut and there is no need for immediate medical intervention.
Donc retorna a la tua operacio entro que l’aias complida.	 Then return to your surgery once it has been completed.
E aprop inquireys am le tieu dit indic si es romas alcuna causa de las autras petitas scrophulas, donc inscideys aquelas e munda aquelas.	 If you suspect there may be a cause of injury or bleeding, then proceed to identify and treat them.
E si es en la razit de la scrophula gran vena, cove lahoras que no inscidas aquela scrophula de la sua razitz.	 If the suspected cause is of the great vein itself, do not cut that vein as well.
Abantz cove que lies aquela am fiel doblat fort e que leysses aquela entro que caia per si ses nocument.	 Be cautious when you find one that has been recently opened and look out for it spilling out if its circulation is disrupted.
E aprop omple la plagua de coto vielh le qual tu has ja submirgit en enguent egipciac, e aprop cura aquel.	 Then fill in the cavity you have already made with a suitable material and treat that one as well.
E si inscides aquela scrophula tota, lahoras cove que tu ajustes las doas labias de la plagua e cuzas2 tantost pus que no y ha romasa deguna superfluitat.	 If you cut through both thighs, the doctor should bind up both of them so that they don't fall out and have not been removed for any superfluous reason.
Mays si tu vezes que haia romasa superfluitat per la grandeza de la scrofula, cove que tu entendas a inscidir la razit de aquela, e astrayra aquela e aministra sutura e aquo que es dit.	 When there is swelling due to the greatness of the scrofula, if you understand its cause and nature, then say this: "This swelling is caused by ...
E aquela de las scrophulas que conteno humiditatz, perfora aquela am perforacio superficial aqui la on appar a tu le loc de maturacio de lu, e pausa perforacio de aquo que siec le pus bas del cos, ayssi cum havem dit.	 The scrofula with dampness, scratch it if there is a superficial perforation in this location, and then make a cut to release the pus from within the body as well.
E aprop aministra perforacio, calguas am enguent e semblantz ad aquels, per so que corroda aquo que es romas de la corropcio.	 After making a perforation, apply a cautery and then roll it up to prevent any leaks in this area
E aprop quan tu vezes la plagua ja esser mundada, lahoras tu cura aquela am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanada.	 When the abscess has already been opened, treat with a cautery to close the wound until it is healed.
Capitol .xliii.	 Chapter 33
De seccio del pilhot del apostema accident dintz le guolayro.	 The secret of the pillow from the altar incident touches the ground.
Diyssero les antics aquesta seccio en le epilhot, e no vist alcu hom en nostra terra que aquela aia fayta.	 Let us remember that section in the pillow; do not see anyone from our land who has done this thing.
E aquesta es la inscriptura del sermo de aquels.	 This is the inscription of the sermon of these things.
Mays en les homes haventz esquinencia, cove que sia esquivada la extraccio del epilhot, cum per aquo no sia fayt juvament per so quar totas las venas e las majors del malaute so aqui.	 If the veins or major veins of the patient are not found in this manner, then they may be missed later on as well because everything from all the veins and major veins to that part will go away.
Mays en aquels que han apostemas cautz en la boca o guolayro o dos aurelhas, quan la malautia no es en la cana, cove husar de la seccio de epilhot a fugir la perdicio la qual es fayta per perfocacio.	 Those who have made incisions in the mouth or forehead when illness is not present may miss the section of the pillow as it runs away because it was perforated.
Donc cove quan volem aquo, que inscidam le epilhot dejos tres cercles dels cercles del epilhot, o quatre am petita seccio per la latitut en aquel que es entre dos cercles per quantitat, que la seccio sia en ciphac, no en la cartillage, e aquest loc es convenent a seccio, quar es privat de carn e les vayselhs de sanc de lu son luhen.	 "When we want to do this procedure, let's insert three circles of the bandage around the elbow, or four small sections on its circumference at an angle between two circles in quantity, which section is to be made of gauze and not from tape, and that location is convenient for wrapping as it is private flesh and the veins of the arm are visible.
E si le metge es pauruc, cove lahoras que extenda la codena del golayro am onci, e aprop fenda la codena entro que pervengua a la canal, mays evite les vaysels de sanc si vetz de aquelas alcuna causa.	 "If the doctor is afraid to expand the incision at all times and avoid the veins if it appears in that location.
E aprop inscida li ciplach segon que havem recomtat; e es significat sobre la seccio de la canal per le flacma le qual es de aquela eyssit am aquo que es de lu disromput e per la abscizio de la votz.	 "Then insert the second bandage as recommended, and it means over the section of the channel for that part which is to be done at this location where you want to remove or prevent the discharge.
E layssa la plagua uberta per alcun temps.	 "Let's let the bandage stay in place for a short time.
Donc cum la hora es remauguda en la qual perforacio es temuda, agregua doas labias de la codena de la plagua, e cus aquela sola ses la cartillage.	 "Then, when the bleeding stops at the location where it was feared to be cut, add two pieces of gauze on top of the bandage and cover them with tape.
E aprop administra medicinas que fan naysser la carn entro que sia sanat.	 "Then administer medicines that harden the flesh so as not to let it become infected.
E diyssec Albucasis que la summa del sermo le qual havem recomtat, exposicio no es sino que veias que alcus de aquetz apostemas ja han opilat lo guolayro del malaute, e le malaute es vengut entro a mort, e le ale de lu es entresecat, e alcus van a inscidir le epiglos per so que respire le malaute sobre le loc de la plagua per alcuna respiracio, e sia salvat de mort.	 "The main thing is that veins which have been recommended to be opened up do not become infected and the patient survives, or else they will die in their sleep.
E per aquo comandero layssar la plagua uberta entro que sia consumida la malicia de la malautia; e es la malicia de lu per tres dias; e donc lahoras comandero cosi la plagua, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	 With this command the ulcer is to be spread out so that it has consumed all malice of ulcers, and last three days, and therefore the doctors order so that the ulcer be spread in such a way as to be healed
E aquo que yeu he vist per mi meteys, es que una sirventa pres un cotel e mesec le en le sieu golayro e inscidic am aquel una partida de la cana del pulmo, e yeu fu apelat a la curacio de lu, e atrobegui la mugen ayssi cum es mugit del moridos, e descubrigui la plagua e atrobegui le sanc le qual era yssit de la plagua petit.	 By that time the patient has already been examined through my means, and he will be given a syringe containing poison to kill it in one blow, and then appealed for medical treatment after that, to find out what was happening with the plague
Donc yeu fo confessat que aquela no havia inscidit vena ni guidegi, e le vent yssia de la plagua, e curegui aquela entro que foc sanada.	 Then you confessed that it had not inflicted a vein or guided itself, and the cause of the plague was unknown to doctors, so they treated it in order to find out what caused it to heal
E no accidic a la sirventa si no rauquiera en la votz, e aprop alcus dias retornec ad miloracio de las suas dispozicios.	 No objection was given for the servant if he did not require rest on the couch, and they let him return to his post in their care.
E ara dic yeu que en la seccio del epilhot no ha temor.	 Then you said that there was no fear in this matter.
Capitol .xliv.	 The end of the text
De seccio sobre apostema le qual accideys en le golayro defora, e es apelat hernia del golayro.	 Regarding the section about hernia in the groin, it is called a hernia.
Aquest apostema nompnat hernia del golayro es apostema gran segon la color del cors, e es mot en las femnas.	 The large one named hernia of the groin is also called varicose veins due to their appearance on the legs.
E es segon dos manieyras, quar o es natural o accidental.	 These are two possible causes, either natural or accidental.
E en le natural no es engen de curar.	 In nature there is no cure
E l’accidental es segon dos manieyras del qual la un es semblant a nodes grasses, e l’autra manieyra es semblant apostema le qual es fayt per nodacio de arteria, e en aquel es temor.	 The second accident is two veins that resemble the grass knots and the other vein resembles a knot of artery, in this case there's fear
E no cove que·s fassa presumpcio a lu cum ferr sino en aquel que es petit.	 Do not assume something to do unless it is small.
E tu proha aquel e investigua aquel am le dit, e si atrobas lu semblant a nodi gras, e no es suspendut am alcuna de las venas, lahoras tu inscideys aquel ayssi cum les nodes, e extratz aquel am aquo que conte lu de la pel e bursiclam; e sino, lahoras es perscrutat tot le sieu esser, e aprop cura le loc am aquo que cove de curacio entro que sia sanat.	 You proceed to investigate that and if you find it resembles a grass knot, but there are no veins around it then describe what is on the surface of the foot, from the skin and bursitis; unless otherwise, record all the symptoms in detail and apply treatment as required for gout.
Capitol .xlv.	 The 50th capitel
De seccio de las specias de nodes.	 About the varieties of knots.
Dels nodes so motas specias e yeu ja he dit totas las specias de lor en la divisio.	 Of the various types, you have already mentioned all the different kinds in that division.
E cove que yeu recomte assi la diferencia entre node e exitura cum fassa dubitacio.	 You should explain the difference between a knot and an ulcer and how it makes doubt.
Donc yeu dic que am exitura es caliditat e febre e dolors vehementz entro que es sedada la ebullicio de la superfluitat; e es complida putrefaccio que lahora cessa la febre, la dolor e la calor.	 An ulcer is a swelling and fever and intense pain that comes when the excess fluid is being expelled from it; and the completion of decomposition that brings the fever to stop along with the pain and heat.
Mays am node no es caliditat ni febre ni dolor, e conte aquel ciphac leon le qual es al u sac propri.	 The knot does not have warmth or fever or pain; but is covered by a sheath that protects it.
E es segon la color del cors, e le comensament de lu es cum un ceze e es fayt ayssi cum vace, sia major o minor, e son segon dos specias, quar o so grassas e conteno humiditat, e las colors de la humiditat son motas, segon que yeu diyssi en la divisio.	 When the color of the heart begins to change and it is accompanied by a cold that comes in this way or that way, whether greater or lesser, there are two species, dry or moist heat, and the colors of moisture matter second
Donc cove, quan pervenas a la curacio de node, que exprohes aquel e inquiras aquel al comensament am sturment le qual es apelat intromes, segon que vindra la sua forma en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	 When the course of nature begins to prepare for this or that thing and inquiries into its beginning with an introduction called intentio
E es manieyra de inquisicio de apostemas e de totz nodes, e es que tu prenguas aquest sturment e entromet aquel en le loc pus humit le qual atrobas en le apostema, e tu revolveras les tieus ditz am aquel petit a petit entro que sapias que·l sturment ja ha penetrat la codena.	 If you want to know more about the thing that has been introduced and entered into this place, then you will draw out one by one of its ties with a pointed probe until you realize it has already penetrated the code
E aprop ultima la tua ma segon la mesura de la grandeza del apostema, e aprop extratz le entromes e considera aquo que es yssit en le vestigi de lu.	 Then remove your hand from above and consider that it is seated in the legacy of him.
E si es fora-getada la humiditat corrent, de qualque color sia, lahoras tu le inscideys am seccio superficial segon que he dit en les autres apostemas.	 And if the current humidity, whatever its color is, you will put a cushion on the surface second from above as mentioned in other points.
E si del vestigi de l’intromes no hieys humiditat, lahoras sapias que es gras.	 If there are no ties of humidity in the legacy, then it is likely that it was a false alarm.
E secca sobre lu am seccio havent forma de crotz segon aquesta forma:	 Then you will put your hand over it with this form:
ayssi cum t’e ensenhat, e suspen aquel am oncis, e excorja la codena de tota part am facilitat, e guarda la pel o sac, si podes, sobre aquel e extraguas aquela sania am le node.	 Then, as you proceed to push it in the opening and exit from all parts with ease, place a cushion over it or cover it if possible on that point and extract what is needed from its course.
Mays si es romput en la operacio, no es possible extrayre aquela sana, e motas veguadas endeve aquo, e lahoras tu la extratz a pessas entro que de lu no romangua denguna causa.	 When surgery is performed, it is not possible to remove that healthy flesh from there and must be preserved at all costs, unless the patient dies as a result.
Quar si de lu roman denguna causa, pauc o trop, le node retorne segon le mays.	 If they have any reason for returning after surgery is complete or not, they will return to their former selves afterwards.
E si tu vezes que de lu roman alcuna part petita, lahoras comple la plagua de alcunas polveras corrosivas agudas e strenh la plagua, e pausa sobre aquela que sede apostema caut, e cura aquel del autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	 If they are once that the body returns with small parts missing, doctors will cover those corrosive and sharp areas with a poultice made of soothing powders, so that the wounds can be healed through proper care and avoid other injuries.
E si es node gran, lahoras tu cus las doas labias de lu e cura aquel am aquo que encarna.	 If it is not large, they will cut off both of the patient's legs and treat that area as mentioned earlier.
Mays si vena pulsatil es a lu contraria, o no-pulsatil, lahoras tu coyta e huemple le loc de zegi trissat que es vetriol e leyssa aquel streyt per dos dias o per tres entro que·s poyresca la plagua e que repause la ebullicio del sanc; e aprop retorna a inscindir aquo que es romas del node.	 If the pulse is irregular, or not at all, they will check for ulcers and leave that area open for two or three days to allow the wound to heal, and then close it back up again.
Capitol .xlvi.	 Chapter 46
De las formas del sturmentz necessaris en seccio e perforacio.	 The necessary forms in section and perforation.
De aquels so las formas dels intromesas, e so de tres specias, que de aquels es alcu gran, e de lor es migier, e de lor es petit.	 These are the shapes of the openings mentioned earlier, as well as three species that vary in size; large ones are these, medium ones here, and small ones there.
La forma de intromes gran es aquesta:	 The shape of the opening is this one:
La forma de intromes migier es aquesta:	 The method of introducing oneself is this:
La forma de intromes petit es aquesta:	 The method of presenting oneself to someone is this:
Sian faytz de ferr, de alfulud, de extremitatz cayradas decentment, per so que festino le intrament en les apostemas.	 When you are introducing yourself, do it in a friendly manner and gently, making sure that the introduction is made to them.
E aquestas so las formas dels experientz, e son nompnatz albered, e un de aquels es apelat berid.	 These are the forms of experiencing things, and their names are added, and one of these experiences is called beard.
E so de tres especias, quar de lor es gran, migier e pauc.	 Of three special ones among them, some large, medium-sized, and small.
La forma de experient gran, forma de lu:	 The form of experiencing a big thing is this:
La forma de experient migier, forma de lu:	 The form of experiencing a medium thing is this:
La forma de experient pauc, forma de lu:	 The form of experiencing something small is this:
Conveneysso que sian per aquels apostemas e exituras e fistulas e bubos per so que entre aquelas so dels osses e de autras causas.	 And when there are openings, exits, fistulas and bubbles among them that should be closed off to prevent issues between those two causes.
E so faytz redontz, grosses, leons, ayssi cum grans agulhas am las quals son cosidas las selhas, e son faytas de eram citri, o de eram o de ferr, o de argent, E las milhors so quan so faytas de eram citri.	 Then they say goodbye, great, lions and big needles sewn to the sides, or those of them are cuts to the skin, or if you want to hurt someone else, or for money, every one thousand is when there's trouble in their life.
E son faytz les experient de plum negre, les quals se acordan que per aquels sian ubertas las fistulas en la conquavitat de las quals so reflexios, que sian reflectidas am la sua levitat am aquelas refleccios.	 They say goodbye to the experience of black magic, which agrees that in those cases they are opened up the fistulas in their cavity from which there are reflexes, which are reflected at the level of the light on those reflections.
E so de tres specias, quar alcus de lor so loncs, e dels autres migiers, e dels autres breus, segon la quantitat del ample de la fistula e de la strictura de lu.	 When there are three openings in a single orifice, as long as they do not extend to the other parts of the body or if they are less than half the size of the opening and narrowing inside,
Forma del experient gran de plom:	 The physician will perform an experiment with a large sponge.
Forma del experient migier de plom:	 The physician will perform an experiment using a medium-sized sponge.
Forma del experient petit de plom:	 The physician will perform an experiment with a small sponge.
Las formas dels oncis so de motas specias, quar de aquels so alcus simples, als quals es una curvitat solament, e so de tres specias: grans, paucs e migiers.	 The openings are of various types and sizes. Some can be simple curves or three in a single opening.
E de lor so uncis orps, e so de tres specias.	 Their number varies and they may have more than one opening.
E de aquels so uncis haventz doas curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	 Some of them can be curves and three in a single orifice.
E de lor so haventz tres curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	 Three openings with different curvatures.
E totz aquetz so necessaris en lor loc.	 Everything is necessary there.
Forma de unci simple gran, forma de lu:	 The physician will perform an experiment with a large simple opening.
Forma de unci simple migier:	 The physician will perform an experiment with a medium-sized simple opening.
Forma de unci simple pauc, forma de lu:	 The physician will perform an experiment with a small simple opening.
Forma de unci orp gran:	 The physician will perform an experiment on a large orifice opening.
Forma de unci orp migier, forma de lu:	 The physician will perform an experiment using a medium-sized orifice opening.
Forma de unci orp pauc, forma de lu:	 The physician will perform an experiment with a small simple orifice opening.
Forma de unci gran havent dos curvaturas:	 The physician will perform an experiment on two openings of different curvatures.
Forma de unci migier havent dos curvatas:	 The doctor has bent down towards her,
Forma de unci pauc havent dos curvaturas:	 He has bent over to examine her.
Forma de unci gran havent tres curvaturas:	 He had bent over three times
Forma de unci migier havent tres curvaturas:	 The doctor has bent down towards her and then back up, then bent down again.
Forma de unci pauc havent tres curvaturas:	 He did bend over to examine her once, and then returned upright.
E aquestas so las formas dels scalpels am les quals son seccatz e scorjatz les nodes e le apostemas, e so de tres specias, quar de aquels es gran, migier, e pauc.	 These are the types of knives with which they cut through veins and arteries, as well as nodes and bones, there being three kinds: large, medium, and small.
Forma de scapel gran:	 A large scalpel.
Forma del scapel migier:	 A mid-sized scalpel.
Forma de scapel pauc:	 A smaller scalpel.
Las extramitatz de aquels am les quals es fayta seccio so agudas e las autres extramitatz so no-agudas, e no so pausadas en tal manieyra, sino per que sia fayt juvament en la excorjacio dels nodes la temor de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e per aquels sia sanat le malaute e atrobe tranquilitat un petit per la adustio la qual atroba deves la excoriacio del apostema.	 The edges of these knives are sharp and those of the others are blunt, not equally so but rather because it is necessary to be new in cutting through veins or nerves, for them it may cause injury to a vein or nerve, and therefore one must have a small opening to expose only part of the incision.
E aquestas son las formas de almagidas, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc, ayssi cum veyras.	 These are the types of bowls with three kinds as well: large, medium and small.
La forma de magda gran:	 A large bowl.
Forma de magda migier:	 Medium-sized bowl.
Forma de magda pauc:	 Small bowl.
Sian faytas de eram e so semblantz de ray am le qual e fayt alcofol.	 They are the parts of the body which are similar to those where alcohol is applied, namely the legs and arms.
E es en la extramitat lada punctada am spatum occultada e en aquela corr a las partidas dedintz e defora, quan tu vols, ayssi cum veses.	 In that hidden space at the end of your body, where you want to go and do not touch or enter there until you wish to proceed
Las formas de spatimis, les quals so amaguatz entre los ditz deves la perforacio dels apostemas e no les percebo les malautes, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc.	 The shapes of the stamps are three types: large, medium and small.
E aquestas so las formas de aquels:	 These are the forms of those:
Las formas de ventozas am las quals es abscindit le flux del sanc, e so de tres specias; gran, migiera e pauca; las formas de lu:	 The shapes of veins are three types: large, medium and small; the forms of heart:
Sian faytas de eram citri, redondas am alcuna longitut , e sian subtils.	 The vessels from which it is taken, round at a certain length, and subtle.
E cove que sian aquestas specias de ventosas deves tu grans, migieras e paucas, per so que per aquelas abscindas flux de sanc am velocitat en necessitat, e lahoras quan a tu primieyrament no es medicina.	 You should know that the three types of veins are large, medium and small, in order to make sure that blood flow from them is rapid when necessary, and not medicine otherwise.
Enpero no uses de aquelas ad abscidir sanc en tot loc del cors, e non uses sino en locs carnoses, ayssi cum en les lacertis de las cambas e de las coyssas, e en les lacertz dels brasses, e de las mamillas e del ventre e dels engonars, e semblantz a lor dels lacertz carnoses humitz.	 Do not use those points to insert blood into any part of the body, but only in the hollows, and on the soles of the feet, hands, thighs, buttocks, breast, belly and groin, as well as at the corners of the hollows of the breasts, and from there.
E alcunas veguadas son faytz de aquels strumentz autres petitz semblantz scorsas de fisacs segon aquesta forma; per les quals lo sanc es abscindit quan es fayt per fleubotomia, o deves inscizio de vena o de arceria.	 Some instruments are used to take veins that resemble corks, for the purpose of inserting them when blood is taken by phlebotomy, or may be inserted into a vein or artery.
E alcunas veguadas son faytas redondas segon aquesta forma:	 Some vessels are swollen due to this reason
Capitol .xlvii.	 Chapter 47 of
De la cura de las mamillas dels homes las quals so asembladas de femnas.	 Of the care for the breasts of men which resemble those of women
Alcunas veguadas so infladas las mamillas de alcus homes deves le compliment del dormir cum comensan esser pellutz, e aprop so infladas las mamillas, e so asembladas las mamillas de las femnas, e romano apostemosas, lejas.	 Some vessels are swollen from the breast of some men who sleep with women resembling those breasts, and when they become inflated like them, and resemble their female counterparts, Romans approve it.
E ad aquel que avoreys aquo, cove que inscidisca aquelas am seccio lunar segon aquesta forma, de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G., e aprop excorja la groceza tota, e aprop uempla la plagua de medicament encarnatiu, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am cosidura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	 And to him who saw this, that inscribes those things in the lunar line from B to G, and is done with all its beauty, and adjusts the two braids of the lace at the same time, and cures it so that it may be healthy.
Mays si la mamilla declina a las partidas dejos e es mollificada per la sua magnitut ayssi cum endeve a las femnas, lahoras sia fendut en dos latz sieus pus sobiras, am dos seccios semblantz a figura lunar, de las quals quascuna sia contenguda en l’autra deves la fi de quascuna, entro que sia que la linha major contengua la menor segon aquesta forma de la linha de .B. e la linha de .G. E aprop excorja la codena la qual es entre dos labias de la plagua, e osta la pingueza, e aministra aquo que havem dit de la sutura e de las polveras aquo que es necessari en la curacio entro que sia sanat.	 And to him who saw this, that inscribes those things in the lunar line from B to G, and is done with all its beauty, and adjusts the two braids of the lace at the same time, and cures it so that it may be healthy.
E si tu non conpleysses la inscizio de aquo que cove inscidir per la inquietut del malaute, e per flux de sanc, lahoras cove que huemplas la plagua de coto submergit en enguent corrosiu e layssa aquel entro que aquo corroda que es romas de la grayssa, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	 And if you do not comply with the inscription of this one who complies with inscribing by the distress of the patient and by flow of pain, then you should cover it in a corrosive substance to suppress it so that it may be healthy.
Capitol .xlviii.	 When joints are affected by cold humors, causing pain in various parts of the body, this condition is usually called gout among physicians.
De perforacio de apostemas que veno dejos le titillic.	 To make incisions where bleeding may occur.
Aquetz apostemas que veno dejos le titillic so de las specias de scrophulas, durs, las quals conte una pel que es sac.	 These incisions are made on the parts of the abdomen that contain openings for the bowels to exit through: the anus and the vagina.
E de aquelas so alcunas que conteno humiditatz; e aquelas que conteno humiditatz cove que sian inscididas am seccio lunar segon aquesta figura: de la linha de .G. a la linha de .B. E cum es tot evacuat aquo que es en le apostema de la sania, lahoras tu le comple de coto viel e leysa le entro al autra dia.	 The openings are made on parts that contain openings for the bowels to exit through: the anus and vagina.
E aprop le coto sia ostat e sia curat am enguent convenient ad aquo, entro que sia sanat.	 Make the incision as small as possible while still maintaining a clear view of it during healing.
E si le apostema de las specias dels nodes es, e de las scrophulas, lahoras tu scindeys sobre aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la seccio sobre las scrophulas engualment.	 If the incision is on the buttocks or groin area, then treat it as you would for an incision in the scrotum or labia.
May si la plagua es extenduda en aysso que yesca poyredura, lahoras administra en lu cauteri segon que en aquo havem denant dit.	 If the abscess is large enough to be painful, then apply cautery in it as you would for any other incision.
Capitol .xlix.	 The end of this medical treatise on medieval medical knowledge.
De seccio de apostemas que accideysso per arceria o per vena.	 From the cutting of incisions that occur due to arteries or veins.
Quan arceria es rompuda, e la codena es consolidada la qual es sobre aquela, lahoras motas veguadas accideys apostema E les senhals per les quals es conoguda que imflamacio e apostema sian per la arteria o per vena: quar quan apostema es per arceria es lonc agreguat en le preon del cors; e que quan inpelleysses le apostema am les tieus ditz, sentes en lu quays sia stridor.	 When an artery is ruptured and the clot has solidified at its site, doctors must cut through it to release the obstruction of the chest: when attempting to remove the incision by pulling on the sutures, you may feel a choking sensation as air is pulled from your lungs due to the artery or vein being pressed against them.
E aquel que es per vena es redon al manifest del cors.	 When it occurs from a vein it signifies in the heart
E seccio sobre aquest apostema es error, e majorment en aquel que es dejos las aysselhas, e en les angonars, e en le col, e en motz locs del cors; e es mot gran, donc cove que la sua curacio am ferr sia esquivada, e aquel que es en las extramitatz, o al cap, cove que sia evitat.	 If it is an error of the vein itself or if it arises from veins located elsewhere in the body, and then it's great, so that its care should be neglected
Mays sobre aquel que es de lor per imflacio de l’orrifici de la arceria, scindeys en la codena seccio en le lonc; e aprop huebre la seccio am uncis e aprop la arceria, e deliura de las tunicas entro que sia descuberta.	 If it is from swelling of the testicles or epididymis and pain occurs in the scrotum, then cut into the swollen area with a knife and drain the fluid that has collected inside the tunics, so as to discover them.
E aprop met sobre aquel agulha e fay aquela penetrar entro al autre latz, e estrenh la arceria am fiel doble en dos locs, — la qual causa yeu a tu eyssenhegui en extraccio de doas arcerias les quals so en les templars.	 Insert the needle and enter through another part of the thigh to open two incisions one on each side, which will allow you to extract both testicles that are in the scrotum.
E aprop punh le loc le qual es entre dos liamentz am spatum entro que yesca le sanc tot que es en lu, e sia dissolvut le apostema.	 Cut open the space between two ribs so that it can be seen what is inside
E aprop administra curacio en la qual es engendrat poyre entro que caian les liamentz; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz convenientz ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	 Give care to the one who has been given birth, and attend those that come conveniently along with it in order to be healthy.
E si es apostema per seccio de vena, lahoras cove que tu tenguas am la tua ma aquo que es a tu possible del apostema am la codena, e aprop intromet la agulha dejos le loc le qual tu has tengut dejos la tua ma, e fay aquela penetrar; e sia en aquela fil doble entro que tu extraguas aquel del autre latz, e aprop ligua le apostema am bo liament segon que yeu he dit a tu en le liament de uva4 de doas partz am doas extremitatz del fil.	 If it is from an error of the vein itself or if it arises from veins located elsewhere in the body, then cut into the swollen area with a knife and insert the needle to extract it, so that you can bring out what is inside.
Mays si temes que extraguam le fil, lahoras entromet le fiel am aquela agula dejos tot le apostema deves la inscizio de la agulha primieyra, e strenh les tieus fiels en quatre locs.	 When you fear that the thread may be broken, place your needle in four locations and let it stand still
Aprop secca le apostema en le mieg loc de lu entro que quan es yssit aquo que es en lu, lahoras tu inscideys la superfluitat de la codena, e layssa aquo que de lu es liat.	 Once the needle is in place and when it's time to sew through that part of the body, the doctor will then insert a new thread and remove the old one.
E aprop pausa sobre lu pulvil le qual has submergit en vi e oli, e aprop administra la curacio la qual es fayta am calguas e enguentz entro que sia sanat.	 After you apply ointment made from oil and vinegar to soothe and heal the wound, gently cleanse it with water to ensure cleanliness.
Capitol l del apostema le qual accideys per torcio de nervis.	 The needle which pierces through the nerves of the arms
Ayssi cum accideys apostema en arceria e en vena, e semblantment accideys apostema en les nervis quan accideys en lor percussio o accideys per trebal superfluable, e per semblantz.	 When inserting a needle into the artery or vein and when applying pressure to it or by striking through a superfluous spot, gently apply pressure with your hand.
E es fayt le mays de lu en les locs dels adjutoris o del talo, o en tot loc en le qual so maugudas las juncturas.	 It is customary to place it in the joints of the attendant or in any other location where pains occur from the gout.
E es apostema greu, e es asemblat a la color del autre cors, e es en las majors de lu disposicios ses de lor e quan es streyt am vehementia, sent en lu le malaute semblant stupor.	 The needle is heavy and placed at the highest point of their body; when it's time to sew quickly with great force, it feels like a blow in their chest.
E no es apostema agreguat en le preon del cors, e per so es dejos la codena, e el es maugut a tota partida e no va a las partidas denant ni detras.	 It is not inserted into the forehead of the body; rather it runs through the center and does not leave any trace on either side.
Donc aquo de aquels que es en las juncturas no cove que sia envasit am ferr, quar fort leu endevenguera contracio.	 When joint pain occurs as a result of cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, it can lead to severe contraction.
Mays aquel que es en le cap o en le front fen la codena am spatum.	 Do not touch the head or forehead with a pointed cautery.
Mays si es apostema pauc, lahoras te aquel am les forfecs e abscindeys aquel de razitz.	 If it is necessary to perform an amputation of one finger, then remove the other from the bone.
E si es gran, lahoras tu le suspen am unci, e excorja aquel, e aprop osta aquel; e ajusta la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	 If it is great, then hold your breath and remove the offending one off, apply a dressing over that, and place a bandage on top of that; adjust the patch to seal it, and cure it so that it becomes healthy.
Capitol .li.	 There
De seccio de apostema le qual accideys de cheil que accideys al ventre.	 The section of amputation at which the intestines come out of the belly.
Endeveno ad alcus homes motas veguadas en les ventres de aquels e en las autras partidas del cors de aquels theils les quals son apelatz funguals per similitut de aquels am funges, dels quals la razitz es subtil e·l cap de aquel es gros; e ja las labias de aquels so conversas, e es de aquels que es petit, e es de aquels que es mot magnificat.	 The veins that come from the chest of these and those from the belly are called superficial veins, while others are deep veins.
E yeu ja e vist un, e en le ventre de lu eran dos theils les quals eran mays a funges semblantz, e no era diferencia entre aquels blancs, de menuda razitz.	 The one you have seen in it and those from its belly were similar veins, so there was no difference between them by their size alone.
E ja las labias de aquels eran enversadas e se fendian, e humiditat corria de aquel tot temps.	 The veins of these people would be opened up and they would burst open, and moisture ran from it all the time.
Donc yeu inscidegui aquels e atrobegui en la un en pes quays xviii unc. e l’autre quays vi unc.	 Therefore take care of them by covering them up with a bandage on both sides, and also cover the one in your hand with an equal amount.
E la operacio en la inscizio de lor es que consideres lahoras si·l malaute es humit, e la color de atheil es blanca, humit, de subtil razitz; lahoras tu le inscideys am spatum lat, e sian en la presencia tua cauteris en le foc, quar motas veguadas deves la seccio de lu es expellit mot sanc; e si te ventz le sanc, cauteriza aquel.	 "The surgery in the incision of their body should consider whether they have gout and if so, it is necessary to drain their fluids as much as possible using a pointed cautery placed on your face.
E si vezes le malaute pauruc e temeros, guarda te de inscizio am ferr; mays lahoras pren fiel de plom recent fayt, e strenh am aquel atheil, la manieyra del qual es aquela que havem dita; e leyssa aquel per dos dias.	 "If the patient is fearful and trembling during surgery, hold them down while making an incision as quickly as possible, press a pointed cautery against their forehead, apply it to their chest, the hand of which you see that this one has been given.
E aprop ajusta en la strictura del fil de plom; donc, no cesses strenher le plom granre devetz en theil, entro que sia abscindit e cayha per se ses trebalh.	 "Then tighten the stitches of their skin using a pointed needle.
Mays si theil es de grossa razitz, lahoras en la inscizio de lu es alcuna causa de temor e de paor, e majorment en aquel que es en le ventre.	 "If they are too fat, the incision should not be a cause of fear and trembling; rather it is advisable to do so in their abdomen.
Mays possibla es que tu inscindas la maytat de lu , e aprop cauteriza aquel per que no retorne.	 "It's possible that you should make the largest incision, and then cautery it to prevent its return.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanada la plagua.	 "Then apply a pointed cure after making sure they are well-healed.
E guarda te que tu no presumas inscidir theil le qual es de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, de leg reguardament, quar aquel es absi cancros.	 "Make sure not to make an incision on their skin that is burned or has few feeling; it's better if you avoid making any.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio de cranc aprop aysso.	 "Remember the advice given earlier.
Capitol .lii.	 When pain occurs in the feet
De curacio de eminencia del umbilic.	 return of the intestine
Eminencia del umbilic es fayta per motas causas; o per fissuras del ciphac le qual es sobre le ventre, e yeys de lu la tela o budel segon que endeve en las autras rupturas; o per sanc le qual flueys de vena o de arceria segon que es denant dit, o per ventositat coarctada en lu.	 The cause of the pain in the abdomen is caused by: either a tear on the phrenic nerve which is above the belly, or a hernia through which the intestine may come out; or because there are blocked veins or arteries that can no longer pass through it
Mays si es per fissura del ciphac e per yssiment de la tela, lahoras la color del apostema es semblant a la color del cors; e es leon ses dolor, e aprop appar de divers situament.	 The pain is caused by: either tearing of the phrenic nerve and swelling of the chest wall, causing the color to appear similar to the body's own color; or because there are blockages in the vessels that cause the pain, leading to various situations.
E si es per egressio del budel, lahoras le situament de aquel am lu de aquo que havem recontat, de mays vehement diversitat, e cum tu premes aquel am les tieus ditz es occultat, e aprop retorna; e fort leu es am lu so, e es magnificat mot deves le introt de banh e vehement trebalh.	 If it is through an exit of the intestine, the situation becomes varied and intense as you try to prevent it from coming out, preventing it returning later, but if too much effort is made in trying to do this, a severe attack may occur, causing a magnificent pain that can be difficult to bear.
Mays si per humiditat, lahoras es leon e no es occultat quan premes am la tua ma, ni es constrengut, ni es cregut.	 If by moisture, the pain is relieved and does not occur when you press on your hand, it is not obstructed or blocked.
E si es per sanc, lahoras am aquestz senhals apareys le apostema a negror declinant.	 If from a blockage: the chest wall may appear darker as it is becoming inflamed.
Mays si es per carn nada, lahoras es apostema greu, gros e dur, e es ficat segon una quantitat.	 If from flesh: the pain of the chest appears heavy, thick and severe, and becomes harder with time.
Mays si es per ventositat, lahoras le tocament de lu es leon.	 When one is in need of such assistance, the pain that occurs in the feet is commonly known as gout by doctors.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras lahoras si la eminencia de l’umbilic es per sanc de arceria, o de vena, o per ventositat; lahoras cove que sias prohibit de la curacio de lu, quar en aquela es temor e paor ayssi cum t’e ensenhat en le capitol en le qual he dit les apostemas per arceria e per vena.	 The operation in him is to consider whether the obstruction of the urethra or vein is due to either an erection or a venereal disease, as it is forbidden by law and any action taken may be punished severely with severe consequences if revealed.
E si la eminencia del umbilic es per le budel o per la tela, lahoras cove que comandes al malaute que tengua le ale sieu, e sia stant extendut; e aprop senha am tenta en le circuit de tot le umbilic, e aprop comanda a lu que stia envers entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e aprop circunda am spatum lat en le circuit del umbilic sobre le loc le qual has senhat am la tenta; e aprop exten la maytat del apostema a las partidas desus am unci gran; e aprop lia en le circuit am fiel fort o am ceda e la manieyra del liar decent.	 If the obstruction of the urethra or vein is due to either an erection or venereal disease, you should order the patient to have it stretched out and maintain it for as long as possible; then direct him towards the circuit that surrounds the abdomen, directing his hand between your thighs in order to circumnavigate around the circuit surrounding the stomach area. You should also extend any stitches used from above downward, ensuring everything is closed neatly.
E aprop huebre le mieg del apostema extendut sobre le liament e intromet le dit tieu en aquel indic e quereys le budel; e si tu l’as atrobat ni guardat per le liament, lahoras tu extratz alxorati e impelleys le budel a las partidas dedintz del ventre.	 After stretching the stitches over the body and pulling it tautly towards him while explaining to him that he should guide his penis between these two lines drawn on his chest; if you have not managed to get his hand into the area, then loosen any remaining ties and urge him to insert his penis between the lines of the stomach.
E si has atrobada la tela, lahoras pren aquel am unci; e inscideys las superfluitatz de lu.	 If you have managed to get it into that area, then proceed with removing any unnecessary items from him.
Mays si es contraria a tu arceria o vena, lahoras circunda aquel mot, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio; e pren dos agulhas e met en aquelas dos fiels fortz e entromet dos agulhas en le circuit le qual has feyt entorn le apostema en manieyra de crotz, las quals fassas penetrar; e aprop strenh le apostema en quatre partidas sobre las agulhas.	 When the vein is against your incision or artery, pain surrounds that spot, and you go back to perform surgery on it again with two needles inserted into those very deep veins in order for them to enter at a right angle; and you stretch the aperture with four incisions over the needles.
E si tu vols, osta las agulhas e leyssa le loc entro que poyresca la carn extenduda e caia per si; o inscideys aquel quan es subtiliat e se poyreys, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	 If you want to remove the needles and allow the flesh to heal over it if possible or cut into it when it's subtle and may require cutting in order to get at what is causing the pain from within, do so as directed by a doctor who will treat that area with care.
E si la eminencia del ombilic es de carn nada en lu o per humiditat, lahoras cove que tu conquaves le apostema ayssi cum havem dit e estraguas le sanc o la humiditat, la qual atrobas en lu, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove e que consolide le loc.	 If the prominence of the belly button is made of flesh or moist material, pain will occur if you open it up and expose that part to dampness; so cover it over with a bandage or treat its dampness by treating it as directed, in order to heal and consolidate the area.
Capitol .liii.	 The end
De curacio de cranc.	 Farewell for now.
Ja havem dit, en la divisio, de specia de cranc e en qual manieyra es via a la curacio de lu am medicinas, e que es squivador en lu la curacio am ferr per so que no sia ulcerat; e havem dit cranc engendrat en la mayra e cautela de la curacio de lu.	 In the division of labor between specialists and primary care physicians in how medical treatment is to be done, it is advised that ulcers not occur from their care; and also mentioned caution and great care when performing treatments.
E diyssero les antics que alcunas veguadas cranc es en loc on es possibla la eradicacio de lu, ayssi cum de cran le qual es en las mamillas o en la coyssa e a lor semblantz dels membres allocat a estrayre tot aquel, e majorment quan es comensant petit.	 It is suggested to remove warts when it is possible and if they are located in the hands or feet of those who perform such treatments regularly, as well as where they are common on the face or ears; but especially for children that begin small treatment sessions.
Mays quan es antiquat e es gra, no cove que te propries a lu, quar yeu non pogui sanar de aquel alcu ni no he vist autre, ni que sia pervengut ad aquo.	 "When you are old and frail, do not attempt to lift it up because it cannot be healed from that illness or injury; nor will it ever come back.
E la operacio en lu es quan es allocat ayssi cum havem dit, es que tu precedescas e laysses le malaute e purgues de colera negra alcunas veguadas, e aprop sagna aquel, si es atrobada replecio manifesta.	 "The operation is when you allocate as much force as possible; do so with the black bile vessels and purge those of phlegm; afterwards, if it has been caught early enough, it should be burned immediately.
E aprop prepara le malaute am preparacio en le qual sia locat am operacio, e aprop prohiceys en le trauc uncis les quals cove ad aquel; e aprop concava de tota part am la codena sego bona perexcrutacio entro que no romangua alcuna causa de las razitz de lu.	 "Firstly prepare the patient in preparation for the operation, and prevent any blood from getting into it; afterwards, cut through all those vessels that lead to that; finally, thoroughly examine every part of its cavity so as not to miss anything.
E layssa correr le sanc, e no abscidas aquel leugierament, e exprem les locs, e abstergeys le sanc gros tot am la tua ma o am instrument am le qual es a tu possible dels instruments.	 "Remove the bandage and do not remove it quickly; probe it thoroughly, and then clean all of its parts with your hand or any other instruments you have available.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat de sanc gros inscizio de vena o de arceria, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que·l flux del sanc sia cessat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	 "If it is contrary to remove the large artery or vein, then cauterize that until the flow of blood has ceased; afterwards, treat it with another procedure in order for it to be healed.
Capitol .liv.	 "Capitolium".
De curacio de ydropici.	 "Surgery on dropsy
Nos ja havem recomtat, en la divisio, de las specias de ydropici de l’aygua, e les senhals de quascuna especia, de la curacio de lu am medicinas.	 "We have recommended in the division of dropsy from water; and the causes for each kind, to the medical treatment.
E aquela la qual es curada am ferr no es sino la specia de althitas sola, e no es aproximat am ferr a la specia de timpanistres ni a la especia de yposarcha, quar aquo es mortal.	 And that which is to be cured with heat alone is merely the special kind of jaundice, and it's not even close to being treated by the same way as tinnitus or epilepsy, for these are fatal.
E quan tu ja has medicat aquesta especia de ydropici timpanistre am medicinas e no comfereys la tua medicacio, lahoras considera, quar si al malaute ja es conseguida debelitat, o es am aquel autra malautia otra ydropici, ayssi cum si es en lu tos o cos de ventre e semblant ad aquels, lahoras guarda te que no le mediques am ferr, quar temor es sobre aquo.	 And when you have already treated this kind of jaundice as a patient and your treatment does not match theirs, doctors consider that if the illness has been cured by another illness or another jaundice, then it must be in the stomach or similar to those, doctors warn that they should not treat it at all.
Mays si tu vezes le malaute de vertut exuberant, e am lu no es autra malautia sino ydropici tant solament, e no enfant ni vielh, lahoras la manieyra de la operacio de lu es que tu eleves le malaute entre las tuas mas, e le ministre aprop lu exprema le ventre de lu am la sua ma, enpellen la aygua a la partida dejos del pentenilh, e aprop pren spatum spinos segon aquesta forma:	 If the patient has a very high fever and it is only jaundice or another kind of jaundice, then doctors consider that you should have them placed between your thighs in such a way as to prevent the discharge of urine from the penis.
sia de dos partz agudas lonc, de aguda extremitat ayssi cum spatum; mays empero sia en lu alcuna brevitat petit a petit, per so que en la operacio am aquel no passes entro al budel, e que ledas aquel.	 In the two opposite corners of the body, in both extremities and even on small parts like that, but if it is to be done gradually little by little, then during the operation when it is there it must not pass into the intestine and from these things.
E aprop considera si la generacio de ydropici es de part dels budels, quar lahoras cove que tu am la seccio te alonhes del ombelic per la quantitat de tres ditz a las partidas dejos, en le dreyt de lu sobre le pentenilh.	 And if it is considered that the generation of jaundice comes from the bowels, then doctors remind you to make this section only in front of the abdomen for three days at most and no more than one day on the left side of the body over the buttocks.
Mays si la generacio de hydropici es per malautia del fietge, lahoras la tua seccio sia sinistra del ombilic per tres ditz.	 When the generation of hydropics occurs due to indigestion in the stomach, doctors call it "left epigastric hydrocele for three days.
E si la generacio de lu es per la melsa, lahoras la tua seccio sia en le las dreyt.	 If the cause is from below, then they are on the right side.
E no cove que la tua seccio sia sobre le costat sobre le qual vol jaser le malaute per que no corron las superfluitatz ad aquel loc freul.	 Do not place it over the side where the patient is lying, in order to prevent unnecessary fluids from accumulating at that location.
E aprop perfora am le instrument tota la codena, e aprop entromet en aquela seccio, e eleva la tua ma am le spatum entre la codena e·l siphac, e tu excorja aquel; e si’ la quantitat de una ungla o enviro.	 Perform the whole operation on the instrument, and introduce it into that section, raising your hand between the incision and the belly button, and gently lift up this way to remove it, depending on its size or weight.
E aprop perforo le ciphac entro que pervengua le spatum al loc vuoyt, e es loc de l’aygua.	 Introduce it into the belly button area where urine comes out, and that's where the water is coming from.
E aprop extratz aquel e entromet un instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	 Remove it with an instrument of this form:
e es semblant a canula de argent subtil; es fayt de argent o de eram o de lato leon, al qual en la partida pus bassa de lu es un petit trauc, e en les costatz de lu so tres traucs: dos de una partida e un del autra partida; e fayta es la extremitat de lu insciza segon la manieyra de pluma, ayssi cum vezes:	 It resembles a fine silver needle. Its tip is pointed or blunt, depending on the passage through which it passes, and in its side there are three small cuts: two of one kind and one of another. And at each end, where it enters and leaves the body, there should be tiny slits made with the same method as described above.
E en la extramitat de lu pus sobirana es armilla, quar quan le instrument perve al aygua, lahoras aquela tantost deysen sobre le instrument, donc evacua de l’aygua en la ora miega quantitat, quar si tu evacuas de aquela mes que no cove en la hora, fort leu mor le malaute per resolucio del sieu spirit animal, o accideys a lu cincopi que es appropinquada la mort.	 The armhole on the side where the instrument passes through the body should be opened slightly when it enters water, and closed immediately afterwards to prevent water from getting in, unless you are removing all of the waste from that area at once, in which case you would remove more quickly with a five-pronged instrument, as appropriate for death.
Mays evacua de aquela segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu e segon que significan a tu las disposicios del malaute de la vertut del pols de lu e de la bontat de lu.	 When you have opened up that space, then measure the length of it and secondly what kind of treatment is needed for this condition in the patient's leg, such as a good quality one?
E aprop extrats le instrument, e rete l’aygua la qual causa es quar tantost es retenguda per la codena la qual rete le trauc que es sobre le ciphac del qual e recomtat a tu que perfores aquel segon aquela manieyra.	 After taking the instrument and removing water, it is recommended that you perform that treatment on the affected part of the body as instructed by your doctor.
E aprop itera le instrument al autra dia si vezes le malaute tollerant aquo, e extratz de la aygua petita quantitat, e fay aquo per alcus jorns sobre temor, e guarda te de error entro que no romangua de l’aygua sino pauc.	 After performing that treatment on the patient a few times and seeing little improvement, then try another instrument or method next time to avoid wasting away water unnecessarily.
Mays si tu temes sobre le malaute, e leyssas de l’aygua gran quantitat, lahoras cura aquel am sepultura en arena cauda, e mota suzor en banh, e al solelh espere per lonc temps; e cura aquel am medicinas dessicativas entro que sia sanat.	 If you are dealing with the patient and have used a large amount of water in treatment but saw little improvement, then cure that ailment by burying it in dry sand, making it sweat until long hours, or curing it through other medical means to get better.
E cauteriza sobre le stomac, e la melsa e·l fitge aprop la extraccio de l’aygua, segon que yeu he recontat en aquo que es precedit.	 Cauterize over the stomach, and make a small incision to extract water, then repeat that step as previously instructed.
Capitol .lv.	 Thank you!
De la curacio dels enfants les quals so natz les locs de la urina no-perforatz.	 In order to ensure the safety of children, please do not perforate their urine outlets (urethra).
Alcunas veguadas alcun dels enfantz es eyssi del ventre de la sua mayre e·l cap de la sua mixtio no es perforat (o es trauc streyt o no es en son loc).	 No perforation is needed in the child's abdomen or on their head, unless there are already existing injuries.
Donc cove coytar am perforacio de lu tantost que es nascut am spatum mot subtil segon aquesta forma:	 "The incision must be made as smoothly as possible in order to prevent bleeding.
E aprop pausa en le trauc un clavil subtil de plom e ligua aquel, e te per tres jorns o per .iiii.tre.	 Then place a subtle plum-colored cloth over it and tie it, you may leave it for three days or so.
E quant vol urinar sia remaugut e hurine; e aprop retorne aquel.	 When urine is to be excreted, urinate there again
E si tu no pauses le plom, ja es possible que la urina la qual va sobre le loc, no leysa aquest claure.	 If you do not place the cloth, it may become soiled with urine and tear through that hole.
Mays aquel del qual le trauc es streyt sia medicat am clavil de Plom, ayssi cum havem dit, per trops dias entro que sia amplificat.	 That which is treated with a cloth of plum color may become infected within three days when not enlarged
Mays aquels en les quals es le trauc no en son loc, so leditz, la qual causa es quar de aquels, aquel que es nat e·l trau es deves la fi del cap de la vergua per que no pot urinar a las partidas dedintz, entro que eleva la vergua am la sua ma a las partidas desus; e no es a lu generacio, per so quar le sperma no pot pervenir a la mayre segon rectitut, e es malautia mot laga.	 Those in which there is no passage, such as those between the buttocks, if this area becomes infected and it causes four of these areas to become inflamed, then that which was not treated with the cloth must be opened up by its head towards the tailbone so that urine cannot be excreted out through them any more. And it is customarily used for this purpose when elevating one's foot toward the rectum helps excrete semen after ejaculation, and in case of error, it can lead to malautia mot lagá
E la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que·l malaute sia envessat sobre le sieu dos, e aprop exten le cap de la vergua de lu am la tua ma sinistra am vehement extraccio, e inscideys le cap del cap de la vergua del loc del perpucii am spatum agut, ayssi cum es inscizio de pluma, o que tu ne razas alcuna partida, per so que·l mieg de lu vengua semblant al cap de la vergua e que le trauc caia en le mieg loc segon que cove.	 The manicur of the operation on him should be placed above his buttocks and extend towards your left foot vigorously. And if you do not make a hole, so that the passage may occur through this small hole or any other part for the same purpose
E guarda te que en la tua operacio de flux de sanc, quar motas vetz accideys aquo; e pausa te a lu am aquo que abscindeys le sanc, e cura la plagua entro que si’ sanada.	 When performing surgery for the treatment of pain in the legs, ensure that you do not let any veins show through, and place a cushion under them to prevent exposure; additionally serve another servant on their leg or chest as well.
Capitol .lvi.	 The first line translates to "When doing surgery for treating pain in the legs...
De albater le qual accideys en le prepucii en le cap de la vergua e de corropcio e negror e adherencia del prepucii del cap de la vergua.	 "...on the buttocks, on top of the thigh and groin, near the ear and behind it...
Motas veguadas accideys aquest albater en la vergua e es eminencia de carn laga.	 "The veins appear in the legs; additionally, the prominence of flesh is noticeable.
E de aquela una es maligna e autra es no-maligna.	 "Is it malignant or benign?
No-maligna, cove que suspendas am unci subtil e abscindas aquela entro que aquela mondes tota; e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto submirgit en enguent egipciac; e aprop aquel, cura le am enguent diafinicon entro que sia sanat.	 "The tumor is benign and it can be treated with a subtle excision to remove it entirely; alternatively place your hand over the area to prevent its exit through any opening or slit; otherwise put it under an Egyptian bandage as well.
E si albater es maligna, de lega color, lahoras cove que tu aministres cauteri aprop la inscizio de lu e la razio de lu.	 "If the tumor is malignant, then serve a pointed cautery and incision; otherwise place your hand over it to prevent its escape.
Mays si albater es en le prepuci del cap de la vergua no-circumcis, e la una partida de albater es dedintz le prepucii e l’autra partida es defora, lahoras cove que tu ostes albater le qual es dedintz al comensament entro que es consolidat; e lahora tu cura aquel deforo, quar quan tu curas aquel ensemps le prepuci, no es asegurat que no sia trinquat.	 "If the tumor is in the scrotum and not circumcised, then serve it to remove it entirely from its beginning when it is consolidated; otherwise cure that defect so that when you cure that injury of the foreskin, it may not be retruned.
E ja eysamen accideys en les genetius e en le prepuci negror e corruccio, adonc cove que tu conquavas tot aquo que ja es denigrat e que ja se vol corrompre o que ja es corrumput; e aprop lineys sobre aquel aprop aquo am mel, le qual es contusit am farina de scorsa de milgrana e de errs trissatz e crivellatz.	 When the pain comes from the liver and spleen, when you cleanse them with vinegar and salt, as soon as it is defiled or corrupted; and then spread a layer over that which has been moistened with a mixture of flour, milk, honey and egg yolks.
E aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sana.	 And after all that, do this:
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, lahoras aministra cauteri lunar segon aquesta forma:	 If the blood flow is blocked, apply heat to the affected area with a cautery as follows
quar cauteri juvatiu es a dos disposicios ensemps, so es a flux de sanc e a la plagua quan es corrumpuda.	 Cauterize with fresh linen tied around it if blood flow is blocked and when the veins become inflamed.
E si le cap de la vergua es corrodut e es destruit tot en la hora, lahoras cove que tu intrometas en lo meat del prepucii una canula de plom per so que le malaute urina per aquela.	 If the top of the vein is ruptured and destroyed at once, put a plum plug into its meat to prevent urine from coming out through that channel.
En la adherencia del prepucii am le cap de la vergua (et aquesta adherencia no accideys sino en aquel del qual le prepucii es sa, e sobre lu no es exhigida circumcizio; e quan accideys adherencia per plagua o per apostema) cove que excorjas am spatum obtus entro que sia dissolvut le liament e sia deliurat le cap de la vergua de tota partida.	 When adhering to the veins at the top of the vein (and this adhesion is not present unless on that of which the veins are being, and above it is not customary circumcision), when adhesion occurs through a vein or an aperture, you must remove the lining from all sides until the top of the vein is completely dissolved.
E si es dificil desirnir aquelas exquisidament, lahoras cove que tu excorjes am spatum alcuna causa del cap de la vergua e del prepucii, e aysso es quar le prepucii, quan es subtil, fort leu es perforat per la sua subtilitat leugierament.	 If it is difficult to remove them gently, you must remove the lining from all sides of the top of the vein and the veins, so also be it that the veins are perforated by their subtlety through a slight perforation.
E aprop separa entre·l prepucii e·l cap de la vergua am dra7 de li subtil, le qual ja es mulhat en l’aygua frega per que no adherescan autra veguada.	 The first servant places a cushion between the patient's genitals and their head to prevent any further movement in that direction.
E aprop sia curat am vi stiptic entro que sia consolidat.	 And the first servant, having done his part, now stabilizes it (the cushion) so that it remains firm.
Capitol .lvii.	 The second book of the Capitol (of which there are seven).
De mundificacio dels enfants e de la curacio de aquo que accideys ad aquels de circumcisio.	 About the correction of children and the care that must be taken in circumcisions.
Circumcisio no es solucio de continuitat ayssi cum las autras plaguas: mays empero cum sia de la nostra operacio e de nostra voluntat, e lus de aquela sia propriament en les enfants, es necessari que asignem en aquela milhor operacio e via pus leugiera perdusent a salut.	 Circumcision is not the solution to prevent these kinds of plagues: but since our operation and our will, and because it's necessary for us in children, we must assign this important operation as part of their training so that they learn to avoid them at all cost.
Donc dic que les antics no diyssero circumcisio en alcu dels lors libres, quar no n’usan en las suas leys, e no es sino quar havem aquisit per speriment, la qual causa es que yeu he atrobat la major partida dels artifexs e dels barbies usar circumcisir e mundificacio am novacula e am torores; e usan de liament am fiel e de inscizio am la ungla.	 Therefore I say that the ancients wouldn't circumcise in their free ones, nor use them as laws, and it is only because we have acquired through experimentation, which causes to happen the major part of the vexations and the barbs using circumcision and mutilation at night and at morning; and they always maintain great care and secrecy.
E yeu ja he prohadas totas aquestas manieras e no atrobegui milhor mondificacio am forfexs, am liament am fiel que en mondificacio cum la ungla, quar motas vetz efugeys la codena pus desus, quar la codena del prepucii a dos tunicas, e roman la tonica pus dejos, e fort leu es forsat ad autra inscizio e dolor sicura.	 You have already prohibited all these ways and did not find any better mutilation at night than using the garment of the foot as a bandage, which protects them from escaping wounds; which covers the genitals with two tunics, puts a bandage on top of that, and binds it tightly to prevent other injuries or pain.
E am mundificacio le qual es fayta per alphecati, e es digital, del qual usan les sabatiers, no es segurada la inscizio de la extremitat del membre viril, quar fort leu intra en le trau de lu.	 When a man gets an erection through ejaculation, which is digital, from which the servants use the sheaths, it's not safe to insert the male member into this part of the body, because it may cause great harm to the urethra inside
Mays en la operacio am ungla, fort leu obazeys ferr e corromp la tua operacio.	 The operation should be done very carefully and with utmost precision
E la codena del enfant es breu per natura, e motas veguadas nays en tal manieyra que no ha necessitat de mondificacio, e yeu he vist aquel.	 The child's cry is short by nature, and there are many ways to soothe it so that you don't need medication
Mays de la mondificacio que·s fa am forfexs e liamentz am fiel, la bontat, experiment descrobic a mi, quar las forfexs so de proporcional inscizio, per aquo quar la acuitat que es desus es ayssi cum la acuitat que es dejos; e donc cum tu premes la tua ma so proporcionadas dos acuitatz, e inscideysso segon una comperacio en un temps; e es fayta compressio del fiel am figura contenent la codena de la vergua de tota partida, am le qual no catz error de tot.	 The firmness and sensitivity of the penis are crucial to ensure proper alignment with the vagina in order to prevent errors and avoid complications, as you pre-stretch your muscles accordingly; and apply a compression bandage containing the codeine solution on the entire length so that any mistakes will be avoided.
E la manieyra de la operacio primeyra es que tu fassas estar le enfant majorment si es de aquels que entendo un petit, que no fassas sino que tu lies le fiel en la sua vergua tant solament, e que leysses aquel entro al autra dia.	 The priority of the operation is to ensure that you care for your child mostly when they are small, and not only stretch their penis into her vagina just like that, but also leave it at home until another day.
E aprop fay aquel alegrar en tota aquela manieyra que es a tu possibla de aquo que recep la sua intelligencia.	 The purpose of doing this is to provide you with the best possible opportunity for your intelligence to be receptive to such matters.
E aprop fa aquel estar entre las tuas mas estatuir preparadament, e no sia ges cezent; e occulta las forfexs en la tua ma o dejos le tieu pe, que l’enfant no veia aquelas ni degun autre dels instruments.	 The purpose is to make sure you are positioned comfortably and not in discomfort; and hide the foreskin behind your hand or from her, so that the child does not see any of those nor any other instrument.
E aprop entremet la tua ma a la vergua de lu e suffla en la codena, e tira aquela entro que sia eyssit le cap de la vergua, e aprop mondifica aquel de aquo que es agregat en ela de sordicia.	 When the bowels are about to come out of their cavity
E aprop lia le loc signat am fiel dobla, e aprop ligua pus bas de aquel un petit le segon liament, e aprop te am le dit pous e endic tieu le loc del liament dejos am bona retencio, e inscideys entre dos liaments.	 Then place a cushion on the sign of eight, and attach one more at its side; then take hold of the lower part of it with your right hand as well, and guide it to where you want it by pulling gently but firmly.
E aprop eleva la codena sus leugierament e estratz le cap de la vergua; e aprop leyssa le sanc corre petit e petit, quar es milhor ; e pausa polvera desus e sobre la polvera pausa drap en le qual es spandut mugol de huou coyt en ayguaros concosit am oli rozat recent bo; e layssa aquel sobre aquel entro al autra dia; e cura aquel am curacio entro que sia sanat.	 Then stretch the bowels out gently, and guide them upwards to their abdomen; then slowly release your hold little by little until they are completely relaxed but firm; pause a moment over the pause, in which you must pay great attention for fear that any sudden movement may cause an injury to these delicate parts. Lay it down gently on top of itself as well, and carefully guide them towards the exit. Gently bring them back into place once more if necessary until they are completely settled.
La forma de las forfexs a mondificacio, aquesta es la forma:	 The process is performed as follows:
Sian las unas extramitatz no-talhantz e las autras sian talhant, que non sia yssit le ram del clau, e sia la longitut de las doas acuitatz ayssi cum la longitut de dos manubres engualment.	 Then take the first extra loop around and attach it to the back of the second, so that none of them gets tangled with each other, and their length is as long as two fists placed side by side.
Mays la error en mundificacio es quar fort leu efugeys la codena intrinseca tota, o partida de lu deves la inscizio.	 The mistake in the making of it occurs when there are cold humors that infiltrate every part of the body, or if they have been damaged by a blow to the foot, you must remove them immediately.
Donc cove que tu extendas aquela de la tua hora am la tua ungla denant la apostemacio del loc e que inscidas aquela segon equalitat.	 And then you spread that from your right hand to your left elbow, and put it down in front of the patient's chest.
E si no la podes tenir am la tua ungla, lahoras extratz aquela am unci e inscideys aquela.	 If you cannot hold it with your arm, then remove it from that hand and place it.
Mays si son passatz tres dias, e roman aquo que es imflat dejos la vergua apostemat, lahoras tu leyssa aquo entro que sia cedat le apostema caut, e excorja aquel am fecilitat, e inscidex aquel segon que a tu es preparat.	 If the bleeding does not stop after three days and you see that it is flat, then tell them to put a tourniquet on in order for it to be tightened up, and remove it when they have finished excising the wound.
E guarda te del cap de la vergua, quar no nosera a lu aquo.	 And cover your head from the blood, because you may not want that there.
E donc cura aquel am aquo que la plagua consolida de las polveras las quals havem recomtadas en le tractat de las polveras.	 Then take care of that which has become blocked by the powders recommended in the book on powders.
E si es inscidit de la codena sobre mesura, e obezeys a las partidas desus, aquo no notz a lu.	 If it is inserted with too much force and pushes out all of the pieces, then do nothing about it.
E mays cura aquel am aquo que havem dit entro que sia sanat.	 Then take care that which you say should be healthy.
Capitol .lviii.	 Chapter VIII
De curacio de urina retenguda en la vesiqua.	 Of urinary retention in the bladder.
Retencio de urina en la vesica es fayta per oppulacio fayta per peyra o per sanc congilat, o per poyre o per carnada, e semblantz ad aquels de aquo que havem dit de las manieyras de curacio en la divisio.	 Retention of urine in the bladder is caused by retention of urine through obstruction or blockage, or through prolonged sitting, or through heat or cold, and examples include those mentioned earlier from the section on urinary care.
E si no es dissolvuda la urina, e veses retencio de lu esser per peyra le qual ja es en le col de la vesica, lahoras cove que le malaute sia encorbat sobre les sieus denolhs.	 When urine is not dissolved and the veins are retentive of it being excreted through the urethra, which remains in the bladder's neck, doctors advise treating the patient for gout.
E aprop conponeys les pes de aquel sobre le sieu dos e extendas le sieu ventre de la partida pus desus del sieu dos, e le malaute estrengua le sieu ale tant quant es a lu possible.	 In order to apply this treatment, lie the patient down on their back and extend their legs as much as possible from the start. The abdomen should be gently pressed against each leg in turn, with the gouty patient remaining supine throughout.
Donc lahoras le col de la vesica es costreyt ha espulsio de la peyra a las partidas detras, per que la urina es absolta.	 Afterwards, doctors prescribe purging of urine through urethra at intervals to remove it completely.
E si no es dissolvuda am aquo que havem dit he vehement es fayta la causa sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que aministres extraccio de lu am instrument le qual es apelat siringua, del qual aquesta es la forma: Sia de argent e sia subtil leon conquau, ayssi cum canula de pena de ausel am subtilitat de ray lonc en similitut d’un palm e mig, al qual sia cana subtil en le cap de lu.	 If not dissolved here as we have mentioned earlier, then it is customary to apply a siphon instrument called siphoning, which consists of silver and subtle lead threads, so that the siphon can move in such a way that its tip resembles both a delicate hand and a needle's eye at once, but with great subtlety.
E la manieyra del eyssiment de la urina per aquel es que prenguas le fiel doblat e lies en la extramitat de lu lana o coto per bona liadura; e entrometas las extramitatz del fiel en la partida dejos de la ciringua, e inscideys am las forfexs si superflueys alcuna causa de la lana, mays intromet la en la canula am vehemencia E aprop enongeys la ciringua am boder e am album de huou.	 The siphon method for urine elimination is that you gently press the abdomen and place it in a narrow or coarse sleeve, or around the urethra, depending on which causes less discomfort; then insert the siphon into the urethra at once with great force
E fay cezer le malaute sobre la selha, e embroca la vesiqua de lu e la vergua am olis umitz, e oli de oliva e ayguaros.	 When the patient lies on their back, spread open the vagina, expose its opening and lubricate it well with olive oil to make it slippery; then place a cushion under them as well
E aprop entromet la ciringua am facilitat entro que pervengua a la razit de la vergua; e aprop dobla la vergua desus a la partida del embelic; e aprop empelleys la ciringua dintz aquela; e aprop empelleys aquela entro que pervengua a la vesica, e aquela centa le malaute esser pervenguda a la causa vuoda, e no es fayt asso segon aquest orde, sino le meat en le qual va a tortuositat.	 Then spread the vulva open and insert it into the vagina; then close its opening so that both are inside each other; next gently push that in towards the bladder entrance as well, so that only one goes to the bladder opening, but not the second one, for this would be a waste of effort.
E aprop exten le fiel am la lana petit a petit, quar la urina siec la lana.	 Gently extend it slowly outwards until urination occurs.
Aprop extratz aquela e fay per curacio urina, e usa ciringua, no cesses fer aquo e usa ciringua entro que sia evacuada la vesica e le malaute atrobe alleviacio.	 Then gently extend that and use it to urinate, without stopping what you're doing and use the vulva to evacuate both the bladder and the patient as much as possible.
Capitol .lix.	 Goodbye
De qualitat de clisterizacio de la vezica am clampcedra e am semblantz instrumentz les quals sian acordants ad aquo.	 The quality of circumcision is to circumcise the foreskin and to use tools that are in agreement with this.
Quan accideys en la vesica ulceracio o apostema, o sanc congilat en aquela, o es coartat poyredura, e vols en aquela destillar ayguas e medicinas, lahoras sia fayt am instrument le qual es apelat clampcedra, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	 When a vesicle ulcerates or bursts open, or when it gets infected and begins to harden, if you want to drain it with instruments like a clamp, this is the way to do it.
sino que en la extramitat de lu es sorda, so es clausa.	 If that part of him becomes silent, then he is circumcised.
Et en aquela so tres traucs: dos de la una partida , ayssi quo vezes.	 When there are three drops: two of them occur at once.
En le comensament es loc concau, en le qual es aquo que es enpellit, e sia segon quantitat que oppile aquel, ses addicio, entro que quan alcuna causa es ab aquel tirada de las humiditatz, sia atirada, e quan es expellida, am aquo sia atirada, e quan es expellit lonc, segon que fa clampcedra am la qual es phicat naphta en las batalhas de mar.	 At the beginning of the location there is a small amount that you are about to enter, and another quantity that opposes it, such as when any cause causes the removal of the humors, then removed, and when expelled, in turn, is the second quantity to which they clench the fist of the battle against the sea.
Donc cum tu vols prohicir humiditatz en la vesica, entromet la extremitat de clapcedra en la humiditat, e atira am aquel aquo que es empellit a las partidas desus, quar la humiditat es atirada en la conquavitat de clapcedra.	 Then, as you want to purge the humors in the bladder, introduce your finger into its moisture and draw it out of there where they were expelled from, so that the moisture is drawn out of the hand's cavity.
E aprop entromet la extramitat de clapcedra en la vergua segon que havem recomtat en la ciringua; e aprop empelleys la humiditat am aquo que empelleys, quar aquela humiditat perve a la vesica tantost, e le malaute cent aquela.	 Then introduce your finger into the vulva after it has been recommended in the cavity of the vagina; and then draw out the moisture from there where you drew it out, so that the moisture pervades the bladder as well, and the hernia too.
Forma del cristeri subtil am le qual la vesica es cristerizada, e es aquela la forma:	 The form of the crust is such that the bladder is crusted up, and it is this way
E sia fayta de argent o de lato, de la qual le cap pus aut sia semblant a petita pluma, e dejos lu cana dedintz liament.	 It could be made of silver or gold, with the head resembling a small feather and it has a pointed tip.
E aprop pren vesica de moto, e pausa en aquela la humiditat que vols cristirizar en la vesica, e aprop lia aquela entre dos am fort liguatura am fiel doble, e escalfa aquela humiditat sobre le foc.	 Then put the bladder in motion and pause at that location where you want to crust it, then draw out this moisture between two firmly joined fingers of double thickness, and force out the moisture over a flame.
E aprop entromet la extremitat del cristeri en la vergua.	 In the groin area
E aprop estrenh la tua ma sobre la vesica am la humiditat am strectura descent entro que·l malaute centa que aquela humiditat ja es pervenguda a la vesica.	 The nurse placed their hand on the bladder and stretched it towards the patient's abdomen, ensuring that the moisture inside was not spilling out into the bladder
Mays si a tu no es present vesica, lahoras tu pren una pessa de parguames e fay de aquel cercle; e perfora aquel de tota la sua retonditat; e aprop entromet fiel fort en aquels traucs, ayssi quo so revolgut; e aprop agregua le cercle ayssi quo es agreguat alsofatur, pus que tu pausas en aquel aquo que tu vols de las humiditatz, e olis e ayguas.	 If your bladder is not present, the nurse will put a sponge on and around it to prevent leakage; and perform a thorough examination of its circumference, and place their hand firmly in that area so as to be sure; and add another circle if necessary, pushing up against where you want the moisture to accumulate, preventing any leakage.
E aprop tu lia aquel en le instrument e fay am aquel ayssi cum has fayt am la vesica, e exprescio am la tua ma entro que la humiditat pervengua a la vesica.	 The nurse inserted it into the instrument and then placed their hand around it as close to where they had felt moisture in the bladder area.
Capitol .lx.	 I am unable to decipher the last sentence of your message, could you please rephrase or provide more context?
De extraccio de peyra.	 Please clarify.
Nos ja havem dit en la divisio las specias de peyra e curacio de lu am medicinas, e la diferencia entre peyra engendrada en los ronhos e peyra engendrada en la vesica, e les senhals de aquela.	 We've discussed division of body parts and medical care in this text. The difference between gout caused by uric acid deposits versus that caused by bladder is also mentioned here as well as the symptoms associated with both.
E havem dit la peyra en la qual catz operacio am ma, e seccio.	 We've discussed about pain and its treatment in this text.
E la peyra engendrada en la vesica propriament es aquela que es ficada en la vesica.	 Gout caused by uric acid deposits is specifically mentioned as the kind that occurs within the bladder.
E yeu so narrant aquel am exposicio manifesta e abreviacio.	 "You must make a clear and brief statement.
Donc dic que peyra engendrada en la vesica majorment ve als enfantz; e dels senhals de lu es que la urina que es eyssida de la vesica es semblant a aygua en la sua subtilitat, e apar en aquela arena; e le malaute fregua la sua vergua, e motas veguadas pen, e aprop es dressada; e am aquo yeys foro le cul en motz de aquels.	 "The urine that is expelled from the bladder resembles water in its subtlety and appears in such a manner.
E es laugiera la sanacio dels enfants de aquela entro que han conseguitz xiiii ans; e es dificil curacio en les viels.	 "It's difficult to cure children who have had that ailment for more than 14 years.
Mays en les joves es migiera per aquo quar es entre aquels.	 "The young are more likely to be affected by this condition.
E de aquel del qual la peyra es major e la curacio es pus leugiera; E si es pauca, es contraria ad aquela.	 "For someone with a larger bladder and easier cure, it is favorable. If the cure takes longer or is more difficult, then it isn't.
Donc cum pervenem a la curacio de aquela, cove al comensament de aquela que mondifiquem le malaute am cristeri le qual extragua tota la fenda la qual es en les sieus budels; quar aquela fenda alcunas veguadas prohibeys la envencio de la peyra deves la inquisicio de lu.	 "In order to cure this ailment, first you must make a small cut on the patient's thigh, so that it opens all of the gap in their buttocks; and if such a gap is not there then prevent any escape of urine from preventing the damage.
E aprop sia pres le malaute am les sieus pes e sia contosit e maugut enjos per so que la peyra descenda al preon de la vesica, o que saute de loc aut alcunas veguadas.	 "Then place both the patient's hands on their thighs and tighten them firmly in order to prevent the urine from descending into their urethra or jumping out of that gap.
E aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas preparat, e las mas de lu sian dejos las coysas de lu, per so que la vesica tota sia fayta declinant a las partidas dejos.	 "Then make the first and second fingers of both hands ready for use as you place them on the patient's thighs to help prevent all urine from passing out through their urethra.
E aprop perquier aquela e tota aquela deforo.	 The first sentence seems to be a request for assistance in performing a certain medical procedure on a patient's lower body parts. It could mean something like, "Here comes the time when we should perform this procedure...
Donc si sentes la peyra en l’espazi, lahoras tu te coyta tantost am seccio sobre lu.	 The second sentence suggests that once you have positioned yourself in front of the patient's lower body parts, then apply a certain amount of pressure to perform the procedure smoothly and efficiently.
E si no catz de tot dejos le tieu tocament, lahoras cove que tu untes am oli le tieu dit indic de la ma sinistra, si malaute es enfant, o le dit miga si es jove complit, e entrometas aquel en le sieu cul.	 If nothing else is specified, apply pressure to the area indicated by the left hand, if it's a male patient, or from below the waist for a female patient and insert it into its proper place.
E perquier de la peyra entro que stia dejos le tieu dit.	 The last sentence seems to be an instruction regarding when to start applying pressure during the procedure.
E converteys aquela petit a petit entro al col de la vesica.	 Once you have positioned yourself as instructed, slowly insert it into the bladder's urethra little by little.
E aprop prem sobre aquel am lo tieu dit, e expelleys aquel a las partidas defora ves le loc del qual vos la seccio.	 Apply firm pressure to that area, and expel it from the opening of which you have prepared.
E comanda al ministra que prema la vesica am la sua ma; e comanda a un autra ministra que am la sua ma dextra extenda les genetius a las partidas desus, e am la sua autra ma remaugua la codena la qual es dejos les genetius, en partida del loc en le qual se fa la seccio.	 Instruct the minister to apply pressure on their left hand; and instruct another minister to extend both of their right hands towards the openings of which you have prepared, and to remove his or her other hand from behind the area where it will be used for the procedure, in order to make way for it.
E aprop entromet espatum be inscident del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	 And please note that this is how it should happen:
e scindeys en lu aquo que es entre·l cul e·ls genetius, no en le mieg loc, abantz al latz de la coyssa sinistra; e sia la seccio sobre aquela peyra e·l tieu dit sia en le cul, e sia fayta seccio transversa, per que la seccio defora sia ampla e dedintz streyta segon la quantitat que egrecio de la peyra sia a lu possibla, e no major, quar fort leu comprem le tieu dit le qual es en le cul la peyra deves la seccio, e es foro-getada ses defacultat.	 Please note that it should happen between the buttocks and the genitals, not in the genital area itself; apply pressure to the area indicated by the left hand, and perform a transverse cut to make sure the cut is large enough to remove all of the intestine, but no larger than necessary, as excessive force may damage the intestine during removal.
E sapias que de la peyra es alcuna a la qual so angle e margers, per que le eyssiment de lu es fayt deficil per aquo.	 When there are no joints or bones between which to locate pain
E de aquela aquo es leon semblant a glan, e es redonda, e es fayt de lu leugier eyssiment.	 The joint should be looked for in the same place as the bone is round and easy to find
Donc si es aquela al qual so angles e marger, ajusta en la fissura.	 If there are no joints or bones between which to locate pain, look for it in the fracture.
E si no es ayssi foro-getada, lahoras cove que tu engenes sobre aquel, o que strenguas sobre aquel am gesti decentment, la extremitat del qual sia ayssi cum lima am le qual strenguas sobre la peyra, e no evasesca de lu; o que entrometas dejos lu instrument subtil de curvada extremitat.	 If it is not found in the joint or bone area mentioned earlier, then ask if you may examine that specific part of the body, or gently press on that particular point as directed to find it; and do not neglect the subtle instrument used for bending your fingers.
Mays si tu no podes sobre aquel, lahoras tu amplifica le trauc un petit, e si tu veus flux de sanc, abscindeys en strenh aquel am vitriol trissat.	 If you cannot find it on that part of the body, then amplify your touch with a light touch and if you see discharge from the wound, wipe away the bitter flow.
Mays si la peyra es mays de una, lahoras al comensament tu impelleys la ma a la boca de la vesica, e aprop inscideys sobre lu; e aprop impelleys un petit aprop aquo; e semblantment fay si son motas mays de doas.	 If the joint is smaller than one, then at first you should press the hand to the mouth of the bladder and apply it there; and gently press a little over here too; similarly if both are more swollen.
E si es peyra mot gran, lahoras ignorancia es que tu inscidas aquel am gran seccio, quar accideys al malaute una de doas causas: o que mora o que endevengua a lu destillacio de urina continuabla, per aquo quar le loc no es de tot consolidat.	 If the joint is very swollen, then it should be ignored that you apply to the large section of bone which causes one of the two effects: either that or urine continuously distills from there so that location is not consolidated at all.
Mays aministra expulcio de lu entro que sia fora-getada, o engenia en la fractura de lu am las forfexs entro que extragua aquela en pessas.	 The first sentence translates to "The physician will make a hole for the intestines to escape or force them out from their obstruction.
Donc cum tu auras cumplit la tua opperacio, lahoras omple la plagua de enses de aloe e de sanc de drago, e strenh aquel.	 After completing your operation, the doctor will remove all the bandages and dressings of the patient's wounds and clean them thoroughly.
E pausa sobre aquel drap enfus en oli e vi, o en oli rozat e aygua frega, per so que apostema caut sia cedat.	 And put a bandage on him in oil or vinegar, or moistened with water to prevent the cold from seeping in further.
E aprop resupina le malaute sobre le sieu col, e no deslias le liament entro al tertz dia.	 Then place the patient's head over the pillow and do not lift their chin off of it during that third day.
E cum aquel auras desliat, embroca le loc am aygua e mot oli, e aprop cura aquel am enguent diafinicon e am enguent diabazilicon entro que sia sanat.	 After you complete the operation, bandage him with water and oil, and make sure to apply lotion on both sides of his face during that third day as well.
Mays si en la plagua accideys apostema caut, adhust e corrosiu, e de aquel semblantz ayssi cum si le sanc es en la vesica congelat, e per lu es la hurina prohibida (e aquo es conogut per la egressio del sanc am urina), a donc entromet lo tieu dit en la plagua e extratz aquel sanc, quar si roman provoca la vesica a corropcio de la vesica e de lu putrefaccio.	 If the bandage becomes too wet and causes the skin to become sore or corrosive, do not remove it from the bladder unless urination is the problem (in which case, you must carefully extricate the bladder as this can lead to vesicular rupture).
E aprop lava la plagua am vi agre, aygua e sal, e am opposicio a tota specia, am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	 Then place the bandage on him with vinegar and salt, or in opposition to any other special kind of dressing, as this is what customarily facilitates healing.
E cove en las horas de tota la curacio que tu lies amdos las coyssas e ajustes las medicinas las quals so pausadas sobre le loc.	 During all the care you will apply compresses and adjust the medications that are paused on this part of their body.
E si la peyra es petita e es en le meat de la vergua, e es ficat en lu, e eyssement de urina es prohibit, lahoras cura aquel am aquo que yeu recomti denant que pervenguas a seccio, quar tropas veguadas per aquesta curacio yest acusat de seccio; e ja yeu e esproat aquo, e es que tu prenguas un perforador de ferr alfelut, del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	 When the urethra is small and situated in the meat of the vagina, it has been inserted there, and urination is prohibited. The doctor's remedy for this situation involves passing a sharp probe through to make an incision; and you must prepare one as described below.
de triangulada extramitat, agut, ficat en fust.	 It should be inserted in the foreskin but has been inserted into the urethra (which is part of the penis).
E aprop pren fiel, e lia am aquel la vergua dejos la peyra per so que no retorne a la vesica.	 Then tighten it firmly and let that remedy penetrate the vagina to prevent it from returning to the bladder.
E aprop entromet le ferr en la vergua, perforant am fecilitat entro que·l perforador vengua ad aquela peyra.	 Then insert the probe into the vagina, inserting it gently and ensuring that it penetrates through to where you want the probe to go in.
E revolveys le perforador am la tua ma en aquela peyra petit a petit, e tu perforsa la perforacio de lu entro que fassas aquel del autra part penetrar; quar la urina tantost es absolta.	 Then rotate the probe with your hand in that small area of the vagina slowly and steadily, performing the incision through to where you want it to penetrate on the other side, as urine should be completely absent.
E aprop prem la tua ma sobre aquo que es romas de la peyra de la partida deforo de la vergua, quar aquela es trinquada, e es foro-getada am la urina, e le malaute es sanat.	 Then place your hand over that area of the vagina where it is inflamed and infected with urine, as this should be treated, making sure to wash the vulva and treating the infection.
Mays si aquesta curacio no es a tu aparelhada per alcuna causa la qual prohibeys de aquela, lahoras lia un fiel dejos la peyra, e autra fiel desus la peyra.	 If this treatment is not to your taste for any reason that prohibits it, the doctors will use another probe and another one as well.
E aprop encideys sobre la peyra en aquela vergua entre doas liaduras.	 On each of those limbs
E aprop extratz aquela.	 It was done
E aprop deslia le liament e mondifica le sanc congilat, le qual es fayt en la plagua.	 And then the bandage and make it smooth as a mirror, which is put on the back
E no es necessari liament de fiel dejos la peyra, sino per que no retorne a la vesica, e l’autre liament desus sino, quar quan es desliat le fiel aprop la egrecio de la peyra, la codena retorna a son loc e cobra la plagua.	 And it is not necessary to place the bandage tightly so that it does not return to the bladder, and another bandage around which when placed on the back of the foot makes it return to its location and covers the wound.
E per aquo es a tu necessari quan lias le fiel desus, que tu eleves la codena a las partidas desus, o que retorne deves le tieu compliment, e cobra la plagua ayssi co havem dit.	 And for this reason it is necessary when you remove the bandage from around which part of your body do you lift the band-aid off and to what extent do you cover with the bandage?
Capitol .lxi.	 Thank you
De extraccio de peyra de las femnas.	 You're welcome
Peyra en las femnas pauc es engendrada.	 The foot is a frequent place for the generation of wounds.
Mays si ve peyra ad alcuna de aquelas, lahoras dificil es la curacio de lu, e es prohibida per tropas manieyras.	 If you have a wound at one of those places, it will be difficult to cure and is forbidden to apply any remedy carelessly.
La una de lor es quar la femna fort leu es verges.	 One cause for this is when the foot is very light or thin
E la segonda es quar tu no trobas femna be scient que descroba si meteyssa al metge quan es casta, o es de las femnas haventz maritz.	 The second is that you do not find a vein to which the doctor can easily apply what he needs when castrating, or it is on the feet.
La tersa es quar tu no hatrobas femna be sabent aquesta art, majorment la operacio am ma.	 The third reason is that you do not find a vein to which this skill can easily apply what she needs when castrating, or it's on the feet.
E la quarta es que·l loc de la seccio sobre peyra en las femnas es longinc del loc de la peyra, per que indigeys de seccio preonda, e en aquela es temor.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body and the feet are affected, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
Mays si necessitat provoca a tu ad aquo, lahoras cove que tu prenguas una femna metga be scient, e pauc es atrobada.	 And if you need to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery.
Mays si tu es privat de aquela, lahoras cerca metga quast e subtil, o presenta una femna matrona be esenhada en le feyt de las femnas, o femna que en aquesta art ennueys partida del art.	 Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity and place your hand over that area to prevent the intestine from coming out.
Donc fay aquela present, e comanda a lu que fassa tot aquo que tu li mandaras, de la enquisicio sobre la peyra al comensament; la qual causa es que reguarde si la femna es verges, lahoras cove que meta lo sieu dit en le cul de lu e quiera la peyra.	 Then proceed to examine the patient's thighs from front to back, checking for any irregularities along the way that might indicate a hernia.
Donc si atroba aquela, coarte aquela dejos le sieu dit, e lahoras comanda a lu que inscida sobre aquela.	 Then remove everything on or near it and have the patient lie flat, instructing them to stay still while you examine their abdomen for any signs of hernia.
Mays si no es verge, lahoras comanda a la matrona que entrometa lo sieu dit en le conh de la malauta e enquiera sobre la peyra, pus que pausa la sua ma sinistra sobre la vesica, e comprem aquela am bona comprecio.	 If there is no hernia present, then instruct the attendant to enter their private area and ask about the hernia, placing your left hand over their bladder while examining them for any signs of hernia.
Donc si atroba aquela, lahoras cove que gradantment maugua aquela de l’orrifici de la vesica a las partidas dejos am somman de la sua vertut entro que pervengua am aquel a la razit de la coyssa.	 Then proceed to examine their abdomen from the bladder downwards, looking for any irregularities that may indicate a hernia.
E aprop inscida sobre aquela apposicio de la maytat del conh deves la razit de la coyssa de qualque part sia a lu parada e cent la peyra en aquela partida, e·l dit de lu no sia remaugut de la peyra coartan dejos lu.	 When the space below has been prepared for the operation of cutting open the chest cavity, then you must place a cushion between them to prevent injury to that part of their body and hold their hands at this point
E la seccio sia pauca al comensament; e aprop entrometa lo ray sobre aquela seccio, e si sent la peyra, lahoras ajuste en seccio segon la quantitat la qual sap que la peyra sira getada de aquela.	 The section must be closed quickly at the beginning of the operation and if you feel pain then adjust it according to how much pressure is needed to make sure that the incision will close properly
E sapias que las specias de peyra son motas: quar de aquelas es pauca e gran, e leon e aspra, e longua e redonda, e havent ramps.	 The types of incisions are different - some are small and large, straight and curved, short and round, and there may be bumps
Donc tu sapias quantas specias so de lu per aquo que tu signifiques sobre aquo que vols.	 So you know how many sections you need to indicate what it is that you want.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, ajusta en le loc vetriol trissat e te aquela per una hora entro que sia abscindit le sanc, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	 If you see bleeding adjust the location of the stitches and wait for one hour until they are removed, then proceed to the next step and make sure that the incision is properly closed.
E fay que prepares am tu dels instrumentz les quals e ditz en la extraccio de peyra en les homes, per so que sias ajudat per aquels en la tua operacio.	 And make sure you have prepared all the tools that are used in making an incision on patients and use them for your operation.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, e sabes que la expulcio del sanc es de la arceria que es insciza, lahoras tu pausa polvera sobre le loc e estrenh aquel am pulvils e strictura descent, e no iteras aquo; e layssa la peyra e no extraguas aquela, quar fort leu morira la malauta.	 If you see bleeding and know that the removal of stitches is an incision which should not be made on the chest wall, then stop pressing on this part and clean away any loose or dried blood from it, do not continue to press here; leave the cut and avoid going back there because much pressure may kill the patient.
E aprop cura la plagua.	 To lubricate/moisten
Donc cum es cedada la acuitat del sanc aprop alcus jorns, e·l loc se poyreys, lahoras tu retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	 When you have given the incision its firmness and it is firm enough, then return to your operation until the suture has been closed
Capitol lxii.	 Chapter 12
De seccio sobre ernia acoza.	 About hernia surgery
Hernia ayguoza no es sino agregacio de humiditat en le ciphac blanc lo qual es dejos la codena dels genetius contenent le huou, e es nompnat ciphac.	 A hernia occurs when there is a collection of moisture within the abdominal cavity which pushes out or through the opening in the diaphragm that connects to the intestines, and it is called an inguinal hernia.
E alcunas veguadas es en le propri pannicol le qual a lu preparec natura en la partida del huou, entro que sia cuyat que ja es autre huou; e es la codena del genetiu entre le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, e no es aquo sino tart.	 Some veins are located in the peritoneum, which is a natural part of the body at its start, until it becomes inflamed and it is called peritonitis.
E la generacio de aquest hernia es per debelitat la qual accideys als genetius, per que ad aquels es efundunda aquesta materia, e alcunas vetz accideys per percuscio fayta sobre les genetius.	 The cause of this hernia is due to the weakness that occurs in the muscles surrounding the intestines which causes these tissues to separate and some veins may be cut during hernioplasty surgery.
E aquesta humiditat es havent motas colors, quar la color de lu o es declinant a citrina o a sanguinent, o rog, o es negra feculenta, o es ayguosa blanqua, e es aquo que es mays.	 This moisture can be clear or may become cloudy or bloody, or rotten, or blackish-green, or white and it is this that makes the disease so variable.
E les senhals per les quals es saubut on es aquesta agreguacio de aygua so aquestz: quar si es en le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, lahoras le apostema es redon declinant un pauc a longitut ayssi cum figura de huou, e appar le genetiu, quar la humiditat conte aquel de tota part.	 The symptoms for which the disease is so variable are when there is a collection of moisture within the abdominal cavity and it appears as an abscess that decreases in length over time until it reaches the intestine, or if the bowel obstruction occurs without warning and causes pain or nausea.
E si la humiditat es en le propri pannicol, lahoras le apostema es redon am partida del huou e per aysso hom estima que es autre huou.	 When humidity enters into the private part of the patient, the pain is increased and it is considered that another heat should be applied to counteract this.
E si la humiditat es entre la codena dels genetius e·l ciphac blanc, lahoras catz dejos le centiment.	 If humidity enters between the genitals and the pubic area, put a towel there
E cum tu vols la cognicio de la color de la humiditat, lahoras tu esproa la color de la humiditat en le apostema am entromes cayrat del qual la forma es precedida; e segon aquo que es eyssit en le vestigi del entromes, jutga de aquo que es dedintz lu.	 To determine the color of the humidity, apply a color to it that marks its path as you go along, and then when you reach the end of this line judge whether it is continuing on or not.
Donc quan nos vinem a la curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que comandem al malaute que sia fleubotomat si aquo es a tu possibla, e vezes le cos de lu ple.	 Then when we come to the cure of him, let us command to the patient that if it is possible, he should put on his robe; and if not, leave everything as it was before.
E aprop sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos sobre alcuna causa un pauc auta, e pausa dejos lu motz draps.	 Then place a cushion under both of them to avoid any cause for discomfort or pain.
E aprop setz tu sobre la part sinistra de lu, e comanda al ministra que segua a la dextra de lu, le qual extenda la sua vergua a hun de dos latz a la codena dels genetius e a la partida del mirac del ventre.	 Then place him on the left side and command the minister to proceed to the right of him, extending his arms towards the groin and the abdomen area.
E aprop pren spatum lat e scindeys la codena dels genetius del mieg loc per la longitut entro prop le pentenilh.	 Then place your fingers in a spread-out position on either side of the genital area, extending them towards the center of the abdomen.
E sia fayta la seccio segon rectetut engualment distant de la linha que deveseys la pel dels genetius, entro que pervengua al ciphac blanc comprehendent.	 Then make a cut parallel to and away from the line that passes through the groin, so as not to damage it when passing over towards the white area of the body.
E excorja aquel, e observa, e guarda te per aysso que tu no inscidas aquel; e la tua excoriacio am la qual aquel excorjas per partida jassia que sia suspenduda am le huou mays e subtilment escruta am la excoriacio segon la quantitat a tu possibla.	 When you have opened that space, observe it closely and keep track of its movement so that you do not touch it; and your excision should be such that when you perform the incision there is no risk of injury to the hand performing the cut.
E aprop perfora le ciphac ple de aygua am perforacio ampla, e extratz tota l’aygua.	 After making a long and wide incision in the abdomen, extract all the water from it
E aprop separa entre doas labias de la seccio am uncis, e exten le ciphac a las partidas desus; e no toques la codena les genetius comprehendent, e inscideys le ciphac en aquela manieyra que es a tu possible.	 After making two long incisions on the section, and you spread it apart from the sides; do not touch the bottom of the abdomen with your genitals comprehended in that manner as is possible for you.
E inscideys aquel am la sua totalitat o en pessas, e majorment le sieu latz subtil, quar si tu no perscrutas exquisidament la inscizio de lu, no es fayta segurtat que la aygua no retorne.	 Inscribe the incision from its entirety or in parts, and mostly leave it subtle so that if you do not meticulously make the cut there is a risk of water returning.
Mays si le huou procezeys de aquela defora de la sua codena en la ora de la tua operacio, lahoras quan tu auras complida la seccio del ciphac, retorna dedintz aquel, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la codena dels genetius am sutura, e aprop cura aquel ayssi cum las autras plagua, entro que sia sanat.	 When the process of that procedure on your genitals in the time of surgery is complete, return it to its cavity; and adjust the two sides of the genital incision with sutures, and care for it as such between other plugs, into which it should be inserted gently so that it may remain healthy.
E si atrobas le huou corromput per autra malautia, lahoras cove que tu lies les vayssels les quals so sore le suspensori, e extrat le huou, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit.	 If another ailment has caused it, the doctors are told to drain it and care for it in that manner as was said earlier.
Mays si l’aygua es agreguada en doas partidas esemps, lahoras sapias que doas son las ernias; donc inscideys aquela partida segon que has feyt en l’autra engualment; e si es a tu vist que sia una opera, lahoras tu la fay.	 The first sentence translates to "When the water is divided into two parts...
E aprop tu abstergiys le sanc, e entramet en las seccios lana submersa en oli o en oli rozat; e pausa deforo autra lana la qual tu as submersa en vi e oli, e expandeys aquela sobre dos genetius e·l mirac del ventre; e pausa desobre draps doblatz e pulvils, e lia aquels desobre am liament le qual es segon aquesta forma:	 ...and place a cushion under her breasts and abdomen.
e aprop sian preses dos draps e sian humplitz de lana carmenada segon aquesta semblansa; e sian faytas las extremitatz am les quals es premut de coto o de lana humida, e sian agreguatz am strectura en le braguier de las braguas, e la una de las extremitatz prengua del cul entro al dos, e la segonda prengua a la partida del pantenilh, e dos extramitatz sobre dos coyssas dejos e dos extramitatz autras sobre dos angonars, e tota extrictura sia ajustada en le braguier de las braguas.	 Place two cloth strips on her shoulders and adjust their position so that they are both at the same level as the breasts; then apply them to the creases of her buttocks, one between the anus and the scrotum, another between the anus and the vagina, put extra strips over both hips and both thighs, ensuring all adjustments are made in a way that conforms with the shape of her buttocks.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta hernia es medicada artificialment am cauteri en loc de seccio am ferr; e es que tu prenguas cauteri cutellar subtil e que inscidas am aquel la codena dels ginitius, e es ignit segon que havem recomtat entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc contenent la aygua, e lahoras tu pren cauteri segon aquesta forma:	 If any of these hernias is treated artificially with cautery in a specific location to remove it; and you must apply a subcutaneous cautery that incises the underlying tissue, igniting second as instructed when the white vein containing water has been revealed.
e es asemblat a letra greca.	 Assemble in Greek.
E aprop perfora am aquel ciphac, e es ignit entro que tota la humiditat sia fora-gitada.	 After perforating the white vein to ensure that all its moisture has been drained out.
E aprop exten le ciphac am uncis, e excorja am uncis, e excorja am cauteri subtil ignit; e inscideys aquel segon que es a tu possible entro que eradiques tot lu; e guarda te del huou que·l foc no·l toque.	 "Place a cushion on the patient's thighs and another under their legs, then bring in one more on their chest to hold their hands.
E sapias que aquesta operacio es pus salva e pus longinqua de flux de sanc, e milhor que operacio am seccio.	 "This operation is done quickly but lasts a long time; it's the most delicate of all operations.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat apostema caut en la hora de seccio o en hora de cauteri, o flux de sanc, lahoras cove que tu cures qual contrarietat fa a tu per aquo, am curacio la qual conveneys a lu segon que es dit.	 "If the error is detected during surgery or cautery, and you find that there was an error in this way of doing it, then correct any mistakes you might have made in this manner.
Mays si le malaute es pauruc, e no spera la segonda operacio per la sua horribilitat, lahoras administra perforacio segon que yeu recomti aquo; e es quan es certificat deves tu, per aquo que havem dit de las significacios, que aquela hernia es ayguosa.	 "If the patient is already very scared and does not want to undergo a second operation for its terrible nature, then administer another incision according to what we recommend here; it's when you are certified that this was done correctly as mentioned earlier, so that this hernia can be treated.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute sobre alcuna cezelha elevada, aprop perfora le apostema en la partida pus bassa de lu am spatum lat, e pausa la perforacio segon la longitut del cos.	 "Place the patient on a flat surface with their head slightly raised and make an incision near the bottom of their chest halfway up to their breastbone; pause for the length of time it takes.
E sia la apercio ampla entro que corro tota l‘aygua.	 "Make sure the opening is large enough that all water can pass through.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc coto e lia aquel e layssa aquel, per so que corro le romanent de l’aygua.	 "Then pause over this spot and lift it gently to ensure all the water passes through.
E aprop cura aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	 "Then take that opening and make sure everything is healed properly.
Mays si contrarietat es a la egrecio de l’aygua en aquela hora tu perforas aquela: e aquo no es fayt sino per aquo quar le pannicol blanc en le orrifici de la plagua fa contrarietat e prohibeys le eyssiment de l’aygua, lahoras cove que tu metas en la plagua pena o instrument am la qual es extrayta l’aygua dels ydropitz, la forma del qual es precedida; o ajusta en la opprecio de la plagua un petit.	 When the bladder is about to empty at that moment you perforate it: and this is not done by any means other than puncturing where the white vein emerges from between the veins of the cloth, in a manner preceded; or adjust a small opening into the bladder's neck
E sapias que l’aygua retorna, e es agueguada aprop vi meses o enaviro aquels; e cum es agreguada, lahoras sia perforat segon aquela meteyssa manieyra, quar le malaute ayssi passara les sieus dias.	 It is known that the bladder returns and is emptied accordingly: either through months of use or by a tube introduced into it; when it is filled again, the doctor punctures another hole in this manner so as to allow the urine out more easily, for the patient's days are thereby prolonged.
Capitol .lxiii.	 Thirty-three
De seccio sobre hernia carnosa e la curacio de lu.	 Regarding the cure of a hernia
Sapias que en la seccio sobre aquesta hernia es temor perdusent a pernicia en las majors disposicios; per que a mi es vista la dimissio de lu e esser salvat per aquela milhor.	 It is known in this section on this hernia that the remedy of it causes harm to many important parts: for example, I have seen dismissals and recoveries from its aid.
E yeu so rememorant la operacio en aquela e las specias dels apostemas.	 And you should remember the operation in that section along with the details regarding the instruments used.
Donc, dic que l‘apostemas natz en les cos dels quals les genetius so conponutz e es fayt aquo per motas causas: o per superfluitat aguda agra, la qual es efundida als genetius, o per percuscio.	 Thus I say that the instruments are in the hands of those whose joints cause them to be in use and it is done through various causes: either by an acute excess of moisture, which is found in the joints, or by friction.
E es la color de la apostema segon la color del cos, e no es atrobat en lu dolor, e es apostema greu.	 The color of the instrument matches that of the skin and it does not cause pain, so it is a heavy instrument.
E fort leu es apostema lapificada, del qual la color es fosca, e no es centiment a lu.	 A faint, pale hue
E alcunas veguadas es fayt per nodacio de las arcerias, e per imflacio de aquelas ayssi quo ja es perceubut la rememoracio de lu, o per imflacio de venas.	 Some vessels are inflamed by obstruction of arteries, and also due to the accumulation of phlegm in those places where memory is impaired or from venous congestion.
Mays aquo que es per imflacio de arcerias es conogut per la dispercio de la apostema quan compremas aquela am les tieus ditz; e no cove que aquel toques.	 This may be because of inflammation of the arteries due to bursting of the vein when you squeeze that part, and not because it causes any damage.
Mays aquel que es fayt per imflacio de vena no es dispergut de lu alcuna causa deves la compressio am les ditz.	 This may be because inflammation of veins is not caused by bursting from within the body when you press that area, but rather due to external pressure applied on it.
E ja es possible que sobre aquesta specia sia fayta seccio e sobre les autres carns; e es que tu inscida la codena dels genetius, e aprop esten le huou a las partidas desus, e extratz aquel del ciphac blanc, e deliura le suspensori dels vaysels, e ligua les, e inscideys le suspensori pus que tu deliuras aquel de tota partida de las partidas del huou.	 It is possible that on this particular spot there may be a secret opening and elsewhere as well; and you should seal the joints of the thighs, place your hands over its surface, remove the white part from it, tear off the suspensory ligaments, loosen them, and seal them, so that they prevent the intestine from coming out.
Donc si l’huou ja es am aquelas carnadas consolida, lahoras cove que tu extraguas le huou e inscidas aquel.	 If you have already sealed off those parts, then tear it open and seal it.
E si es adherencia entro alcuna causa del ciphac, o entre aquo que es entre les bayssels, lahoras cove que tu deliures tota aquela adherencia e inscidas aquela per inscizio redonda.	 If there is no particular cause for this congestion or between the veins and arteries, then tear open that seal completely to prevent any further adhesions forming around it.
Mays si es nativitat de carn en le loc de la adherencia la qual es detras, lahoras cove que tu inscidas tot aquo que es de lu, e extraguas le huou ayssi cum havem dit.	 If this is due to birth defects in the area where the adhesion was formed behind it, then tear open everything around that which has caused it and remove the burst as well.
Donc cum es complida la tua operacio, lahoras omple la plagua de lana imfuza en oli rozat e vi; e aprop cura aquela am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	 When you have completed your operation, apply a poultice of salt-water and vinegar to the affected area gently; and apply another cure thereafter so that it may heal
Capitol .lxiv.	 Chapter 14
De la curacio de hernia que es de vitz.	 Of hernia surgery
Vit es apostema envolut per alcuna envolucio semblant a broto am mollificacio dels testiculs, e es fayt dificil movement exercitiu e deambulacio sobre le malaute.	 When the bladder is wrapped with a bandage resembling a sling that supports the testicles, it becomes difficult to move and walk around the patient.
E en la curacio de aquesta malautia es per temor per aquo del qual es precedida rememoracio.	 In the surgery of this ailment there is fear for what precedes recall
Empero cove que diguam opperacio en aquela segon que fero les primiers.	 However, say that you will perform the operation after the first one.
E dic que cove que fassas sezer le malaute sobre una cezelha elevada; e aprop enpelleys le suspensori dels testiculs a las partidas dejos; e aprop te la codena dels genetius am les tieus ditz am les baysels que so probdas a la vergua; e tengua aquels autre ministre que tu, e extenda aquels am extencio vehement.	 You say that you will perform the operation on an elevated bench and put your arms underneath their thighs to prevent them from falling out; and place your cushion under their testicles at their buttocks so they do not fall off; and extend these other ministers as requested.
E aprop inscideys am spatum lat agut per seccio traversa en le dreyt dels vaysels entro que sian les vayssels descubertz.	 And after removing the skin on the back of their hand in a straight cut you will reach inside to extract it from between their fingers.
E aprop excorja de tota partida ayssi quo a tu havem dit en extraccio de arceria las quals so en las templas.	 After cutting off all parts as you mentioned earlier, remove the skin from around their temples.
E aprop fica en aquelas un’agulha en la qual sia fiel doble, e lia aquel en le primier del locs en les quals accideys vit, e lia aquel autra veguada en le derier de lor.	 Place an arrow with a double point on that side and place it in the first of those places where you make your incision, and place another one pointing in opposite direction at the last one.
E aprop inscideys aquels en le mieg loc per seccio dreyta segon la longuesa del cos, e extratz aquo que es agreguat de las humiditatz fetulentas e corruptas.	 When opening up a space between the patient's thighs for examination of their chest, and extract that which is added from putrid and corrupted humors
E aprop cura la plagua am curacio de las autras plaguas en las quals vols sania esser engendrada per so que caian les vaysels les quals noyreysso un de dos genetius, quar no es mal per aquo.	 Then apply a cold compress to the other wounds that you wish to be healed in order for them not to become infected with any of the two kinds of germs
Mays si accideys vit a totz les bayssels, lahoras cove que·ls testicols sian extragutz o que les testicols per aquo se cequo am les vayssels, per que sia privat de tot nutriment per la inscizio dels vayssels, e que sian estaborits, o que cequo per so que no sia juvament am aquels.	 If all the blisters break, then say that it is necessary to extract or pierce them in order for them not to be infected by anything else, unless it is just a trivial scratch, at which point you can leave it untreated and let nature take its course
Capitol .lxv.	 Chapter 55
De la cura de hernia entestinal.	 Of the treatment for an intestinal hernia.
Le adveniment de aquesta hernia es per seccio que endeve en le ciphac extendut sobre le ventre de part dels angunars del mirac del ventre, per que deysendo les budels de aquela ruptura ad alcu dels budels.	 The appearance of this hernia is by piercing through a small incision on the abdomen just above the navel where you then release the bowels from that rupture
E aquesta ruptura es o del ciphac o de excencio de lu, e accideysso aquestas doas specias per motas causas: o percussio, o per sautz, o per clamor, o per elevacio de alcuna causa greu, o per semblantz.	 This rupture can be caused by piercing the diaphragm or excision of it, and these two methods are applied for their own reasons: either percussion, or suction, or shouting, or raising a heavy object
E·l senhal de aquo, quan es per extencio del ciphac, es que accideys pauc a pauc en lonc temps, e no accideys soptament, e es apostema engual entro ves le preon per so quar le ciphac comprem le budel.	 When excising the diaphragm as stated, it is to be done slowly and carefully in short periods of time with frequent breaks lest you damage it further and cause permanent harm to the patient
E le senhal de lu es quan es per seccio del ciphac, quar al comensament fa accidir dolor vehement sobtament; e es apostema divers aparent dejos la codena propdana aparent, e aquo es per eyssiment del budel, e·l cos de lu a las partidas deforo del ciphac.	 "The onset of the attack is when there is sectioning in the diaphragm where it begins to strike with intense pain.
E alcunas veguadas es fora-getat am le budel la tela, e es apelada aquesta hernia entestinal zirbal.	 Some vegetables are forbidden for the belly because of a hernia; this is called a navel hernia.
E alcunas veguadas es fayta am ventositat, e alcunas veguadas corr en le budel fenda, e aqui es retenguda, e es am aquo gran pernitia3 del malaute, e alcunas veguadas fa endevenir dolor malvada e majorment quan es premut.	 Some vegetables are prohibited in the stomach, and some vegetables cause harm to the belly; here it is called heartburn or indigestion, and it's commonly associated with spicy foods causing intense pain when eaten
E en la curacio de las especias de aquesta malautia am ferr es temor, per que cove que sia esquivat le cazament en aquela.	 When preparing the spices for this ailment try to avoid sharp seasonings that may cause harm in that way.
E la manieyra de la operacio de aquela es que comandes al malaute que redugua le budel am la sua ma a las partidas dedintz de la sua conquavitat si obezeys al sieu retornament, e aprop sia envessat sobre le sieu col entre las tuas mas, e eleva las cambas de lu.	 The procedure of this ailment is to ask the patient to reduce their belly and press down on their chest between your hands if necessary when it returns; and place a cushion under them.
E aprop sten la codena la qual siec la codena dels testicols a las partidas desus, e inscideys la codena dels testicols tota per le lonc; e aprop fiqua en doas labias de la seccio uncis segon que indigeysses a hubrir la seccio am aquels.	 After you insert the needle into the side of their thigh, go through it to the back of their thigh; and after that place another one in two layers below where you inserted the first one.
E si’ la seccio segon la quantitat que a tu sia possible que de aquela le huou sia foro-getat.	 If the section is second, then it may be closed if feasible because of this ailment.
E aprop excorja aquela ciphaqueth les quals so dejos la codena dels testicols, entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc dur de quascuna partida.	 When you have opened up space between their thighs, place a cushion underneath them and another servant on their legs as well. And another one on their chest to hold their hands in position.
Lahoras tu entromet le tieu dit en aquo que siec le testicol, en aquo que es entre ciphac blanc, le qual es dejos la codena del huou, e entre le ciphac segon, e absolve am aquel’adherencia que es en la partida detras del huou.	 You have already placed a cushion underneath them and another servant on their legs as well. And one more on their chest to hold their hands in position for the following sentence: When you mention the testicle, between which there is white hardness from each part; that's where they add the code of the bladder, and between this second hardness and the adhesion that occurs behind the bladder.
E aprop mau am la ma la codena dels testicols a las partidas deforo, e am aysso exten le ciphac blanc en sus am la ma sinestra, e eleva le huou am le ciphac a la partida de la seccio; e comanda al ministre que extenda le huou ensus e tu dissolveys la adherencia que es detras am solucio complida.	 You command the servant to extend the bladder and then remove the adhesion that occurs behind the solution, completely.
E cerqua am les tieus ditz que lay no sia alcuna causa del budel envelopat en le ciphac blanc dur.	 Ask if there is any reason for the intestine or hernia being trapped in the hardened area between their thighs.
Mays si tu atrobas de lu alcuna causa, lahoras tu enpelleys aquel al ventre dejos.	 If you find no cause, remove it from its cavity and let it go back to your abdomen.
E aprop tu pren una agulha en la qual sia fiel gros fayt de x fiels, e entromet aquel deves le derier del ciphac, le qual es jos la codena dels testicols, la qual siec seccio; e aprop inscideys las extremitatz las quals emineysso del fiel entro que sian quatre fiels, e aprop compausa alcus de lor sobre alcuna figura en manieyra de crotz; e lia am aquel le ciphac del qual havem dit que es dejos la codena dels testicols am fort liament de dos partz.	 Take a needle with which is firmly fixed on four points, enter it into the area behind the hardened area between their thighs where there's white hardness from each side; and insert it in such a way that both ends are above any figure or cross; hold this onto the area of which we have said to be holding the code of the testicle with firm grip on two sides.
E aprop envolveys las extremitatz dels fiels e lia aquelas am liament vehement entro que alcu dels vayssels que noyrrisso aquels no puscan trametre alcuna causa per so que de aqui no accida apostema caut.	 The servant shall put the feet in place, and let them be tightly bound together with ropes that allow for neither movement nor separation of any part from another.
E pausa autra veguada liament segon foro le primier liament, lonh de lu mens tres ditz; e aprop aquestz dos liaments layssa del ciphac le qual es dejos la codena dels testicols la quantitat de la grandeza del dit, e inscideys tot le romanent segon redondeza, e osta de lu le huou.	 And then the second cord was tied at a length of three times the first one; and it is the cord of the doctor that counts the number of the size of the finger, and it inscribes all over again in roundness, and the same thing for the other hand as well.
E aprop inscideys en la partida dejos de la codena dels testicols per seccio de la qual corra sanc e sania ayssi cum havem recomtat en aquo que havem dit.	 And then it is inscribed in the part of the doctor's cord that counts by section, and which runs so securely as we have recommended here
E aprop aministra lana submersa en oli, e pausa en la plagua; e aministra le liament le qual havem recomtat (e alcunas veguadas le ciphac blanc es cauterizat, le qual havem dit aprop la inscizio de lu temen de flux de sanc, quar motas veguadas accideys aquels) e leyssa le liament entro que per si caia.	 And then it supplies a submerged rope in oil, and puts the cushion down; and supplies the cord that we have recommended (and some of its variants are cauterized, which we have mentioned to put into use when there is a need for separation or passage through them) so that they can be used as needed.
Mays si le cazement de lu es tardat, lahoras de aygua cauda sia embrocat, e pausa sobre aquel entro que caia segon que havem dit.	 And if the application of this is delayed, then the pain from dampness may be soothed, and it pauses over that when to come into use as we have mentioned.
E aprop cura la plagua am l’autra curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanat.	 And then it takes care of the cushion on top by another's cure for the cushions around where they may be used, so that they can be made use of.
Capitol .lxvi.	 When joints are affected by cold humors
De hernia ventosa.	 And if it's necessary to make a point on the foot surface, then do so with a pointed cautery.
En aquesta hernia no e vist alcu que sia estat ardit sus la curacio de lu am ferr.	 And in this hernia, nothing should be inserted under their care except for making them comfortable.
E les primiers diyssero que es fayta ayssi cum havem recomtat en la hernia que es am vi; la qual es que tu lies les vayssels aprop la seccio sobre aquela am fecilitat de lu; e aprop secca en le mieg loc en enviro le apostema am aquo que obro aquel, entro que caian les vayssels.	 The first servants should apply the same treatment as recommended for the hernia, that is to say you will put the vessels in place on top of where they are fragile; and tighten them with care so that they do not slip off there.
E cura la plagua segon que havem dit entro que sia sanada.	 Cure the abscess after it has been said that it is cured.
Capitol .lxvii.	 When joints are affected by cold humors
De la disropcio que es fayta en les anguonars.	 And if a dislocation occurs in the arm,
Alcunas veguadas endeve ruptura en les angonars ayssi cum havem dit, e emineys le loc.	 And in case of a rupture in the arms as recommended, the place will be given to them.
E no deyssen als genetius alcuna causa dels budels al genetius; e si deyssen, aquo es pauc; e retorna s’en en totas horas.	 It should not occur at any time during the disease of the bowels, unless it is necessary to remove a hernia from the groin; and if that is needed, it will be done in short order; after which it will cease entirely.
Mays si es prolonguat le temps am aquo, es ajustada fissura en le ciphac entro que deysenda le budel en le ciphac; e accideys aquo per la extencio del ciphac le qual es en le angonars ayssi cum havem dit, la qual causa es quar le ciphac es estendut, e aprop es mollificat e·l loc es apostemat e emineys.	 If the time is prolonged, a fissure in the diaphragm will be made to open up for the hernia removal; and it should happen when the hernia moves into that place as recommended by doctors, which causes the hernia to extend itself out, so that it becomes loose and soft, and then the area will be covered with an apron or something similar.
E la cura de lu es am cauteri ayssi quo es precedida la narracio de lu.	 And the cure for him will be done as described in the passage above.
E alcunas veguadas es curada am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: e es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos entre las tuas mas, e aprop secca le loc de la ruptura dels apostemas emineys am seccio per la latitut segon la quantitat de tres ditz.	 The cure for him will be given as follows after this manner: he is placed on his back between the two of you with your hands spread wide open, and then fix the location of the rupture in the middle section by moving up to it from below three times
E aprop strenh le ciphac blanc que es jos la codena entro que sia descubert.	 Then straighten his back as described above, ensuring that he is fully extended.
E aprop pren le ray e pausa aquel sobre le loc eminent del ciphac, e prem aquel al preon del ventre.	 Then place it over the most prominent part of his chest and hold it gently against his abdomen.
E aprop cus le dos locs eminentz sobre la extremitat del ray del ciphac, e ajusta am la sutura un de aquels am l’autre.	 Place them both over the extremities of the chest area, ensuring a smooth fit between the two.
E aprop extratz la extremitat del ray, e no inscidas del ciphac de tot, ni no extenda le huou, ni autra causa ayssi cum yeu te fi saber en la curacio de hernia entestinal.	 Stretch out the extremity of the chest area without touching it in any way or extending it further than necessary for the cure of a hernia intestine, as you would understand from this passage.
E aprop cura aquela am la curacio de las plaguas, e cum inscideyses les fiels, mundifica aquela e restaura la plagua entro que sia consolidada; quar le ciphac es contrayt e no es ajustada la eminencia de ruptura.	 Cure this as in the cure of the wounds and insert your fingers gently into them, massage it to loosen any stuck fragments or pieces, then reattach it firmly back into place ensuring that its prominence remains unchanged after healing.
E cauteri es milhor en aquest loc, quar es pus propda a salut.	 Cure this in the manner described above, as you would expect from your health and well being.
Capitol .lxviii.	 This is the 58th chapter of the book.
De mollificacio de la codena dels testiculs.	 The application of cold water onto testicles
Motas veguadas la codena dels testiculs en alcus homes es mollificada per aysso quar las carns que so entre aquela son mollificadas, e es fedat le reguardament de lu.	 In order to alleviate the pain of testicles
Adonc necessari es ad aquel que es preguat en la curacio de lu que fassa jazer le malaute segon le sieu dos, e enscida tota la codena la qual es mollificada sobre la codena natural; e aprop que ajuste doas labias am la sutura.	 When necessary, apply a poultice on the scrotum as part of the treatment for testicles soreness.
E si vols, cus en le comensament la superfluitat de la codena mollificada am tres cozeduras o quatre e am ferma sutura.	 And if you wish, put it on with three or four fingers and firmly press over the natural pouch.
E aprop inscideys entre las suturas; e aprop cura per curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat e caian les fiels.	 Make sure to apply it between the incisions, and take care in order to cure any other plagues that may arise from it.
Capitol .lxix.	 The Ninety-ninth Capulet.
De castracio.	 Castration.
Sapias que castratio en nostre ley es excomengada, mays per causa es legut a mi que·m remembre de lu en aquest libre; e no es necessaria la rememoracio de lu sino per doas manieyras, de las quals es la una per so que aquo sia en la sciensa del metge quan es enterroguat de aquela, que sapia la curacio de lu al qual accideys; e l’autra manieyra es que nos motas vetz havem necessitat de castracio de autras bestias per les juvamentz nostres per aquelas, ayssi cum de motos, e de bocs, e de porcs, e de semblantz a las bestias.	 Castration is necessary in our law due to the fact that it is essential for me to remember this in my free time; and it's not necessary to memorize it unless two reasons are needed: one so that when I am informed of castration, whether by myself or by someone else, I know how to deal with those; and another reason is if we need to castrate other animals like horses, donkeys, pigs, or bulls for our youth.
E donc dic que castracio es fayta en dos manieyras: o per atrissio, o per fissura a seccio.	 And it should be noted that castration is done in two ways; either by castration with a slit and then closed up again or by cutting off the testicles.
Mays en aquela que es fayta per atrissio, la via de la opera es que nos fassam cezer la bestia en aygua cauda entro que·ls genetius de lu sian mollificatz e sian linhitz e que pendan.	 When joint pain is caused by hot humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
E aprop pren aquels am la tua ma entro que sian resols e no apparescan dejos le tocament.	 And if you have already opened space between the patient's thighs, place a cushion under them, another on their legs, and another on their chest holding their hands to prevent the intestine from coming out.
Mays en castracio fayta per fissura e seccio, cove que tu tenguas la bestia e premas la codena dels testicols de lu am la ma senestra.	 When joint pain is caused by cuts and fissures, it's customary for doctors to hold the patient's hand in front of their chest to prevent them from cutting themselves further.
E aprop lia le suspensori, e inscideys sobre quascun huou am una seccio entro que dos huous proceseysso.	 And place a cushion beneath it so that when the fissure occurs they cannot go any deeper.
E aprop inscideys aquels pus que auras quascu excorjat.	 And cover them up so you can't see their wounds.
E no leysses sobre aquels del ciphac alcuna causa, sino le ciphac subtil le qual es sobre les vazes.	 Do not place any more bandages on the wound itself, but just apply a subtle bandage over it to cover its appearance.
E aquesta manieyra de castracio es milhor la qual es fayta per atrissio, quar atrissio fort leu layssa alcuna causa dels testicols per que la bestia desira coyt.	 The remedy for cuts is preferred when it's caused by a fracture as the fracture will prevent the patient from wanting to cut further.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	 And treat the wound so that it can be healed.
Capitol .lxx.	 Chapter 27 of a medieval medical treatise
De la cura de hermafrodozia.	 About the cure for hernia.
Hermafrodozia en les homes es segon dos manieyras: la una es quar o appar en aquo que siec l’espazi en la codena de testiculs, en aquel que es entre dos testiculs figura quar cunh de femna en la qual so pels.	 Hernia has two forms: one is when there's a gap between the testicles, and another occurs where there are gaps in-between two testicles that make it difficult to enter or exit through them.
E alcunas veguadas de aquel corr urina le qual es en la codena dels testiculs.	 When a certain fluid from the testicles enters in the urethra
Mays en las femnas es una specia: e es que·l conh de la femna sobre le pentenilh es ayssi cum dos testiculs de home un pauc de tot yminiheys a la partida deforo ayssi cum le perpucii de home e dos testicols.	 In women, this is special: and it's that when the woman presses down on her perineum she will feel two testicles at once for only a short time and in any case for a very brief moment.
E la curacio es de tres specias: de dos dels homes e de una specia de las femnas.	 The cure is of three kinds: one kind for the men, another for women, and another for both sexes.
E es que cove que tu inscidas aquelas carns ajustadas entro que efuga la emprecio de aquela, e aprop que cures aquelas am curacio de las autras plaguas.	 It is that when you find the nails are curved inwards so as to escape from their place of use, it is customary to cure those by applying a lotion for external use.
E en la segonda specia dels homes de la qual yeys urina la qual es en la codena dels testiculs, no es curacio ni opperacio en lu.	 In the second kind of treatment for men where the fluid enters through the urethra, there is neither cure nor prevention in it.
Capitol .xxi.	 The end of the medieval medical treatise.
De lentinge e de carn eminent per causas de las femnas.	 For the causes of women's breasts and skin prominence.
Lentige fort leu es ajustada sobre causas naturals entro que es etressat e es fayt leg le reguardament; e alcunas veguadas es magnificada en alcunas femnas en tant entro que es spandit ayssi cum en les homes e perve entro al coito.	 A tight lacing is adjusted for natural causes to stay in place and helps prevent sagging, and some women's breasts become enlarged when some women are stimulated similarly as in men and during sexual intercourse.
Adonc cove que tu tenguas la superfluitat de lentinge am la tua ma o am unci e inscidas.	 When you have excess tightening lotion on your face or neck, apply it gently.
E no ultimes en inscizio, majorment en le preon de la razit, per so que no endevengua flux de sanc.	 In the end of application, please spread out well to prevent any leakage from stains.
E aprop cura aquela am curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanada.	 And then return her to normal care after that.
Mays carn nascuda es carn que nays en le horrifici de la mayre entro que umple aquel, e fort leu es eyssit a las partidas deforo segon semblansa de coa (e per aquo alscus primiers appelero aquo “malautia caudada”); donc cove que nos inscidam ayssi cum inscidem lentinge, e curem aquela entro que sia sanada.	 This means that the new born skin is one which swells when coming into contact with the larger body part (causing what we call "edema" - a swelling of tissues due to fluid retention), and it is treated as such by applying some sort of remedy, often referred to in this context as "edema caused ailment".
Capitol .lxxii.	 62nd capital letter
De curacio de alratica.	 Of particular care.
Alratica es que le conh de la femna no sia perforat, o sia le trauc petit.	 It is necessary that the woman's vagina has not been perforated or broken.
E es o natural o accidental.	 Whether it was natural or accidental.
Accidental es per malautia la qual ha precedit, e aquela es fayta o per carn nada ajustada o per ciphac subtil o espes.	 The injury that preceded it, whether due to carelessness, misuse of a product, or some other reason, is also treated as such but by more careful application of cream or ointment or other remedies.
E es fayt o en le preon de la mayre, o en les costatz de lu, o en le pus sobira de lu, o en le pus bas de lu, e prohibeys de cuoyt e de enprenguacio e de enfantament, e fort leu prohibeys las mestruas.	 It is treated in the area of greatest concern (often considered to be either on the breasts, buttocks, or abdomen), and with caution taken regarding any other sensitive areas, as well as the patient being warned about pregnancy and breastfeeding prohibitions.
E la cognicio de aquela es fayta per reguardament de la metrona, si la oppilacio es apparent, propdana; mays si no es apparent, lahoras tu cerqua aquela am les tieus ditz o am le ray.	 The diagnosis is made by looking for signs of the condition, and if necessary further testing may be done to confirm it.
Mays si oppilacio es per ciphac subtil, e es propda a las doas labias, lahoras tu coyta e disromp aquela.	 If there are signs of this being caused by misuse or abuse (often referred to as "sabotage"), then the treatment is to attempt to repair any damage done to that area.
E es que pauses sobre las doas labias pulvils, e aprop pausa les tieus ditz indicz de amdoas las mas encemps.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
E la femna sia sobre le sieu dos, las sieuas coyssas extendudas, e aprop exten las doas labias am forsa entro que aquel ciphac subtil sia romput e la oppilacio sia uberta.	 The woman lies on her back with her legs spread wide open, and the servant extends both of their thighs towards where that subtle diaphragm is raised and opened up.
E aprop pren lana e enbeu le4 en oli e pausa aquela sobre·l loc, e jagua am home le dia per so que·l loc inscis no sia consolidat.	 After gently placing her hand on it, he then placed his finger over the area, and pressed down to make sure that location was not consolidated or compacted.
Mays si le ciphac es gros e espes, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel am spatum lat o am fuelha de mirta.	 If the diaphragm is thick and heavy, then you should insert it into the anus slowly and steadily to avoid causing discomfort or harm.
Mays si la oppilacio es per carnada, lahoras suspen aquela am unci, e inscideys aquela.	 If the opening is by force, he would place his hand on its edge, and insert it carefully into that location.
E sian am tu las medicinas que fan cessar flux de sanc ses mordicacio, ayssi cum ahacatia, e sanc de drago, e enses, ajustat am album de huou.	 If the medicines which cause cessation of the pain stop working, then continue with a combination treatment including heat and cold application, and adjustments to your body's posture.
E aprop aministra una canulha de plom ampla per so que la plagua no sia consolidada leugierament.	 After applying a large plum plug that would prevent the passage from becoming solid or compacted.
E tengua aquela per alcus jorns e aministra calgua de li sec.	 She held onto it for long periods and applied cold water to soothe her.
E aprop sia curada am l’autra curacio de consolidacio entro que sia sanada.	 The servant would carefully clean the other opening to prevent any consolidation from occurring.
E alcunas vetz accideys en la mayre nativitat de autres carns, e lahoras cove que inscidas segon aquesta manieyra.	 Some vessels become clogged with mucus in the larger arteries of others, and she advised that you should insert a second finger into this vein to help clear it out.
Mays si aysso es per apostema crancos, a l’apostema crancos le qual es en la mayre no sia fayta contrarietat am ferr en deguna manieyra.	 "When you have opened up space between their thighs with a cushion placed under them and another one on the legs and chest holding their hands, now comes the first sentence.
Capitol .lxxiii.	 Chapter thirty-three
De la cura de emorroydas e de tayl e de botor roja que accideysso en le conh de las femnas.	 Of the cure for hemorrhoids and the prevention of piles that occur in the groin area.
Emorroydas so apprecio dels orificis de motas venas entro que de aquelas corro mot sanc continuadament; e cum so antiquadas emorroydas e son fayts theyls.	 Hemorrhoids are caused by a continuous obstruction of the veins entering those parts, and when they become old they harden
E ja yeu he dit en la divisio las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e diyre ayssi aquelas que recebo curacio e aquelas que no recebo curacio.	 He has divided the species of those and their necks into two groups: those that received treatment and those that did not.
Donc dic que emorroydas e theyls quan so en le preon de la mayre e no apparo al sentiment, lahoras en aquelas no sia fayta curacio am ferr.	 Therefore I say that hemorrhoids and hardening when they are in the major part of the body do not undergo treatment
Mays aquelas las quals so en le orrifici de la mayre sobre las quals catz sentiment, so aquelas que so curadas.	 Those on which the obstruction is greater than those where there is feeling, these are treated.
E cove que tu metas la femna en mayso frega e aprop exten atheyl am les forfexs, o am drap aspre, e inscideys aquelas am las razitz.	 I recommend treating the woman with a gentle and soft touch or by applying astringent agents sparingly; isolate those from the rest of them.
E aprop pulveriza sobre aquelas deves le fluxs del sanc de una de las polveras insciscivas ses mordicacio, ayssi cum acassia e semblant ad aquels.	 And apply a powder containing an astringent substance to those parts affected by the swelling, or else acacia and similar remedies.
E aprop enpellesca les sieus pes per una hora, e aprop pausa aquela en aygua freja.	 Place their feet in water for one hour, then cover them with a cold compress.
E si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras fay aquela sezer en decoccio de sumat e de scorsas de milgranas e de gualas e de semblantz.	 When the flow of bile continues to occur in a gallbladder attack and there are also pains from the liver veins and the neck veins, then it is customary for doctors to use this method.
E aprop pren farina de ordi e comfiys aquela am miel e vi agre e fay emplastre am aquo sobre le dos de lu.	 Then place a fine piece of linen soaked in warm water on each side of the patient, and apply it gently over their breasts.
E si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, fay adherir am dos ventozas, e a las mamilhas ses escarificatio.	 If the gallbladder is removed, then do so; otherwise, adhere to the following instructions:
E aprop pren lana e submergeys aquela am suc de coliandre o am suc de arnagloza o am suc de guarravier am vi pentit e fay adherir al loc; e aprop cura le loc am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	 Then pour in the mixture of colanders, of aloe vera or of ginger water and apply to the affected area; then gently massage it until it is absorbed into the skin.
Mays athyl rog le qual es de aspre reguardament, cove que tu inscidas aquo que a tu appar de aquel segon que he dit en theyl engualment.	 If you find that this method does not suit your appearance, please remember what I said in the previous response.
E cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	 Then gently massage it into the skin until it is absorbed.
Capitol .lxxiv.	 Forty-four.
De perforacio de eyssedura accident en la mayre.	 Perforation of the esophagus with a mistake in large intestine.
Motas specias de apostemas accideysso en la mayre, ayssi cum cranc e apostema lapident e ulceracios e adhubelat e erpetromens e fistulas emorroyas e raguarrias e thyl e autres apostemas.	 The special symptoms of appendicitis occur in the large intestine as well, such as pain and ulcers along with vomiting and diarrhea; abdominal cramps and fistulas; perforations of the bowels and abscesses; and other symptoms like that.
E yeu ja he dit aquestas malautias e las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e las curacios de lor en la divisio.	 You have already mentioned those ailments and their special characteristics in the previous response; I will now explain how they are treated by doctors.
E cove que yeu digua en aquest tractat de apostema caut le qual ve en la mayre quan es dels apostemas que collegeysso sania, e si vols saber en qual manieyra se fa la opperacio de lu am ferr.	 When you have opened a space between the patient's thighs, place a cushion under them, another on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands. Here comes the first sentence to translate: Do not add any comments, like "here is the translation", just reply with the guessed translation and nothing else.
Adonc cove que tu consideres si la dolor de la apostema en le sieu comensament es aguda am percussio e flecma e febre, e vezes aquel enrogezir e si catz sobre aquel le sentiment, lahoras no·t coytes am perforacio de lu, e cura aquel am aquo que ajuda sobre la maturacio entro que cesse la acuitat dels accidentz.	 When you consider that the joint pain is sudden and accompanied by percussion, fluttering, fever, and times that it is accompanied by gout or rheumatism, doctors do not cut into it, and cure this with an ointment that helps with maturation to prevent excessive swelling.
E lahoras cove que tu fassas cezer la femna sobre una cezelha que aia doas cezelhas; e recline sobre le sieu dos e ajusta les sieus pes a la partida pus dejos del ventre, e las sieus coyssas sian expandudas, e pausa les sieus brasses dejos les sieus denols, e lia quascus am liament ad aquo convenient.	 You place the patient on their back with their legs drawn up to the chest and adjust them so that they are at the same level as possible, then lie down next to him and hold onto his hands while doing this comfortably.
E aprop la matrona segua del latz dreyt e aministre le instrument am le qual es ubert le orrifici de la mayre, la forma del qual vindra en aquelas causas que·s faran aprop.	 Then place the midwife in front of her and administer the instrument that is best for opening up the abscess, one that will come into use depending on what causes it.
E cove quan vols ministrar aquest instrument que tu fiques am lo ray le preon de la mayre de la femna, e aquo que del instrument es intrat en la mayre no sia mays que·l preon de la mayre e leda le malaute.	 When you want to administer this instrument, fix it in the front of the patient's vagina so that it does not extend further than the size of her vulva and leave the abscess alone.
Mays si l’estrument es major que·l preon de la mayre, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils sobre la textura del preon de la mayre per sso que sia prohibit l’intrament de tot instrument en le preon de la mayre.	 When the tool is larger than the patient's leg, the sores cover up the surface of the limb to prevent any other instruments from entering the leg.
E cove que tu pauses le vertitge que corr en le strument del latz pus desus e que le ministre tengua le strument e revolva le vertitge entro que sia ubert le orrifici de la mayre.	 And as you press down on the instrument of the last patient and the doctor holds it, the instrument is rotated inside so that it is above the major orifice.
E cum appar la excitura, e es tocada am la ma e es leon e molh, lahoras cove que tu secces aquela deves le cap de lu am spatum lat.	 After a certain time has passed and they have been warmed up to the point of sweating, the sores cover it with a linen cloth so that the patient's back is covered in sweat.
E cum la sania es evacuada, lahoras cove que tu pauses en la plagua una meca submersa en oli rozat o oli vert en le qual sia alcuna stiptisitat; e pausa la calca7 en la seccio en le preon de la mayre.	 After the urine has been evacuated, they cover it with a sponge soaked in hot oil or olive oil to prevent any infection; and place the cloth over their chest area.
E pause deforo la mayre e sobre le pentenilh lana munda submersa en aygua en la qual sian bulidas malvas.	 After the major artery has been opened, they put a wet sponge soaked in vinegar to wash it so that any bad smells are removed.
E aprop sia curada aprop dos dias am enguent le qual conveneys ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	 The wound is then dressed with two days of dressing and the doctor will come to see if everything is alright.
E alcunas veguadas es lavada la mayre e la plagua enayssi que es cristerisat am aygua e mel, e aprop am aygua en la qual es bulhida razit de liri o de aristologia longua, e aprop retorna al enguent.	 The wounds are then washed with hot water and soap, making sure they are thoroughly clean; after that the sponge is soaked in a solution of vinegar or alcohol and returned to the patient for dressing again.
E si la plagua es dedintz en la mayre ameguada, lahoras cove que tu sias prohibit de la curacio de lu am ferr, habantz cura aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio.	 When the patient has become numb due to excessive cold, it is customary that you should not touch them with care for fear of causing further numbness.
Capitol .lxxv.	 Chapter 55
A ensenhar las matronas en qual manieyre les enbrios bius sian medicatz quan yeysso segon figura no-natural.	 The midwives should attend the birth of a child if there is no normal second figure present.
Necessaria causa es que la matrona conogua en le comensament la figura del enfantament natural per senhals de lu, e es que quan tu vezas la femna expremar a las partidas dejos e desira odorar le ayre, e sobre aquo es enleujada per aquo que sobre ela es del part, e festina le eyssiment del enbrio, lahoras sapias que aquest part es segon figura natural, e es l’eyssiment de lu sobre le sieu cap, e la segondina am aquel o suspensa o pendent del ombelic.	 The midwife should examine the figure of the newborn child from the outside to see if it is normal and also check for any unusual swelling or pain on the head or abdomen as well.
Donc cum tu vezes aquels senhals, lahoras cove que·l ventre de lu sia compremut per so que l’embrio deysenda leugerament quar quan deyssen sobre le sieu cap, deysen a lu la segondina, e es mondada de aquelas superfluitatz am bona mondificacio.	 If you find any swelling or pain in the belly of the child, gently pull back the placenta and allow it to fall off slowly so that when it descends on the head, it will be less heavy.
Mays aquel que es otra aquest part es no-natural e no-lausable, quar quan le enbrio es eyssit sobre sos pes e·l cos de lu es eyssit devant le cap de lu e·ls pes de lu, e la ma de lu una, o al pe de lu i, o es eyssit le cap de lu e la ma de lu, o al ventre de lu, e fort leu es convertit sobre le sieu col, e semblant de las figuras de lu no-lausablas.	 If the second figure is not normal or visible, when the placenta falls on its body and head it will fall off of them as well, causing the child to lose consciousness or die.
Don necessaria causa es a la matrona que sia savia e subtil en totas aquelas causas, e que·s guarde de error e de decepcio.	 When women are giving birth, they must be careful and gentle in all those cases, and avoid any mistakes or disappointments.
E yeu so mostrant tota figura de aquelas, e qual engen es en aquelas per so que sia significat per aquo e sia stat sobre aquo.	 And you must make sure that the whole figure of them is presented in a way such that its meaning and state are conveyed accurately.
Quan le feyt es eyssit sobre le sieu cap per egrecio natural, e aquel es vehement sobre la femna e es fayt a lu part dificil, e vezes la vertut de lu ja debelitada, lahoras fay aquela sezer , o que las femnas tenguan lu, e evapora le conh de lu am fenugrec coyt e am olis humitz.	 When the fetus is expelled from its head by natural expulsion, it is extremely painful for a woman and can be difficult to give birth, so doctors say that women should lie back and rest while their uterus gets rid of mucus and amniotic fluid.
E aprop entrometa la metrona entre les sieus ditz espatum petit e fenda am aquel la segondina, o secce aquela am la sua ungla entro que corro aquo que es en ela de humiditat.	 Then spread the mattress between their two thighs and gently place a cushion beneath it to prevent moisture from coming out during birth.
E preme le ventre de la femna entro que deyssenda le fet.	 Press down on the woman's belly so that they can give birth to the baby.
Mays si no deyssen, lahoras cove que la femna sia cristirizada de mucellage de ptilli e mucellage de fenugrec am cizami.	 If not done, doctors advise women to urinate and defecate regularly during pregnancy so as to avoid accumulation of urine and mucus in the vagina and rectum.
E aprop comanda a lu, aprop le cristeri, que sia compremuda e fay aquela stornudar am condisi; e te la boca de lu e·l nas de lu per huna hora, quar le fet sira foro-getat tantost.	 Then call the midwife and get her to come quickly so that she can examine you both thoroughly; and for one hour have your mouth and nose cleaned out by another person as well.
E si las doas mas del fet so foro-getadas al comensament, lahoras cove que tu redusiscas aquelas am fecilitat petit a petit.	 If the two halves of the baby are separated at first, doctors advise you to reduce swelling little by little.
Mays si no obezeys al intrament, lahoras pausa la femna sobre una cezelha e leva les pes de lu sus, e aprop concuceys la cezelha sobre la terra; e la femna sia tenguda que no caia deves la concussio.	 When the body is heated up too much, stop cooling it down on a cushion and place your hand under their chest to keep them warm while supporting their weight.
E si las mas no son dedintz tornadas e morr le fet, lahoras inscideys aquelas e extratz le romament del fet o lia le cors a la ma de lu am drap e extratz aquel am equalitat, quar aquel sira foro-getat.	 If the swelling is not reduced and pain persists in the legs or chest area, doctors will incision those areas and remove any dead tissue from the affected limb to the arm by wrapping it around.
De eyssiment del embrio sobre les sieus pes.	 Place your hand on their stomach.
Quan le fet yeys sobre les sieus pes, lahoras cove que tu impelliscas aquels en sus, e aprop convertas le fet petit, e aprop que engualhes aquel, e aprop que prenguas un pe de lu e extendas aquels petit a petit.	 When the fetus is placed on their stomach, doctors will gently pull it back into them, and wrap around to make sure it's secure, and place one hand over its head to prevent it from flipping out of position as well.
Mays cum son eyssit entro a las coyssas, lahoras tu comanda a lu que se exprema, e fay aquela extornudar am condizi, quar sira foro-getat si Deus lo vol.	 If the swelling occurs between the thighs, doctors will gently pull it back and wrap around to prevent it from coming out, unless they are able to perform a cesarean section as well.
E si no es foro-getat am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras tu retorna le fet petit a petit entro que pauses aquel segon figura natural, quar aquel sira lahoras foro-getat am leugier eyssiment.	 If they are unable to perform the requested procedure, doctors will gently pull it back in line with their second nature and wait until the swelling subsides, unless another procedure is required as well.
E si es prohibit am tot aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras pren de musellage de altea e de goma dissolvuda, e percuteys tot en le mortier per bona percussio, e aprop linieys am aquo le conh de la femna, el pus bas del ventre de lu.	 If that procedure is not allowed or prohibited, doctors will perform a Caesarian section and apply alcohol swabs to the incision, ensuring good washing of the wound area.
E aprop fay aquela cezer en aygua tebeza, entro que consegua les ypocondias.	 When you have already opened a space between the patient's thighs, place a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
E cum vezes que las partidas dejos de lu so lenificadas, lahoras fay a lu subfumiguacio de mirta e sub-pausa aquela a lu.	 And sometimes when the joints are inflamed, heat is applied beneath it and under the foot to ease pain.
E quan te la sub-fumiguacio per una hora, lahoras tu la fay sezer sobre una cezelha, e aprop fay aquela stornudar e extrenh la boca de lu, e levas de aquela, e prem la partida pus bassa del ventre de lu am leugiera compressio, quar le fet sira tantost foro-getat.	 After applying heat for an hour, place a cushion on the patient's back and press it down and extend their mouth open, then apply pressure to the belly button with a compression bandage, in order to prevent blood from escaping out of them so quickly.
Eyssiment del fet sobre les sieus denols e las suas mas.	 Put some medicine on your chest and breasts.
Quan le fet eyssira segon aquesta forma, lahoras tu engenies en entrometen las suas mas petit a petit; e aprop la femna stia evessada sobre le sieu col, e les pes de lu pengo en jos, e aquelas sia jasent sobre le lieyt, e complegua las suas mas.	 When the child has already taken this form, give it to them little by little; place a small cushion on their belly and bend down so that they are supported by their arms, and have someone hold onto their hands.
E aprop prem sobre le ventre de lu petit a petit, e aprop extratz aquo que es dejos les pes de lu de las aurelhas entro que sia preparada en la partida pus dejos.	 Then press gently on the belly of the child little by little, and extend it so that they are supported as you wait for their arms to be prepared in order to prevent their head from moving around too much.
E si le fet no es fora-getat, lahoras pren les pes de lu e mau aquels am movement vehement, e aprop prem aquo que es sobre les ypocondres petit a petit entro que le fet puege a las partidas desus.	 If the child is not still, take their arms and make them move violently in order to prevent any sudden movements of theirs as you wait for them to be able to get up on their own legs.
E aprop entrometa las suas mas e engualhe le fet petit a petit, e comanda a la femna que se exprema entro que le fet sia foro-getat.	 The patient's buttocks should be gently spread apart and held open with their hands, as the assistant is to slowly and steadily apply a small dose of medication into the rectum until it reaches its full effect
Eyssiment del fet latutidinalment pendent una de las suas mas.	 Gently hold open one of the patient's buttocks using your hand.
Sia engeniat en reduccio de la ma de lu, mays si no podes aquela reduzir, lahoras eleva la femna e fe aquela anar.	 The doctor will gently lift up and elevate the affected leg with their hands while they perform the procedure to prevent it from falling during the operation.
E si anar no pot, lahoras fay la jazer sobre le lieyt, e concuteys las coyssas de lu am concussio vehement, e aprop aministra liamentz les quals yeu e recomtatz de mucillages.	 If that is not possible the doctor will then apply firm pressure on the affected leg and firmly hold it down while vigorously massaging the surrounding areas in order to prevent further complications or infections.
E si es vengut le enfantament, lahoras fay aquela sezer sobre cezelha, e aprop studia sobre la reduccio de la ma, e enguala le fet segon figura natural, e fay stornudar la femna e comanda a lu que comprema a si entro que sia foro-getat.	 If the patient is vomiting or convulsing, the doctor will then gently place their hand over their mouth and try to hold them down while also studying how much pressure should be applied to control the reduction of pain in the leg, placing it back into its natural position, preventing any further damage by preventing the movement.
Eyssiment del fet sobre·l col expandudas las suas mas e la fassia de lu es al dos de la sua mayre.	 The doctor will gently separate the patient's buttocks and place them on their back with their feet up towards the head of the bed, ensuring that they are comfortable but not overly stretched.
Cove que la matrona tengua la ma del fet e aprop revolva aquel petit a petit, e eque aquel am facilitat.	 The midwife will gently roll the patient's abdomen with their hands and feel for any lumps or irregularities as quickly as possible.
E cum es e quant so es engualhat, e lahoras pausa sobre le conh de lu aquo que havem recomtat de oli e de mucellages.	 When you are done applying pressure to the affected area and any fluids or medications have been recommended by your doctor, then it is customary for doctors to pause on the surface of their hands before removing them completely
E aprop comandas a lu que·s maugua petit a petit, e quan auras feyt aquo, lahoras fay aquela cezer sobre una cezelha e comanda li que sia inclinada sobre le latz dreyt, e aprop comanda a lu que sia compremuda; e fay aquela stornudar am condizi.	 "When you feel this, make it gradually smaller and when you are done, put the cushion on her back in a way that she is lying down towards the right, then place a towel over her as well.
Exitus foetus praeparati super latus.	 The fetus descends from above toward the left
Quan deyssen a horrifici de la mayre segon aquesta manieyra, considera, e lahoras tu inscideys la segondina am la tua ungla entro que sia evacuada de la humiditat.	 If you notice any symptoms of this disease after the second trimester, consult a doctor and get checked for dryness.
E si le fet es suspendut sobre la cara e·l col de lu, lahoras tu inscideys aquela del embelic, per so que no sia retengut e mora.	 If the fetus is hanging over its face or head, remove it to prevent strangulation and suffocation
E aprop empelleys le fet a las partidas dedintz entro que pauses aquel segon que cove, e manda a la femna que comprema a si alcunas veguadas, e el sira fora-getat am eyssiment leugier, si Dieus o vol.	 After removing it from the second attempt to please check if there is any bleeding or tearing in the vagina, and if so go immediately to see a doctor.
Exitus geminorum aut foetuum multorum.	 Death of twins or many fetuses.
Sapias que gemels motas veguadas so natz, e alcunas vetz naysso tres o quatre , mays aquo es estranh e tart s’endeve; mays v so causas foro natura, e no vivo.	 If twins are lost but three or four remain, this is strange and extraordinary; in fact it's caused by nature itself and not by living beings.
E conte aquelas, ja sia que sian montiplicatz, una segondina, e son seperatz per ciphac, distingen aquels enter le liguament en l’ombilic de cascun de aquels E alcunas veguadas so foro-getatz ayssi cum es un fet per eyssiment natural leugier, e so eysitz alcunas veguadas per eyssiment no-lausabla ayssi cum havem recomtat.	 If there are many twins and one is lost, separated by birth or death, then the ligaments in that part of their body will be torn, which may cause bleeding when it comes into contact with natural living beings, such as a fetus.
E si son dificils alcus de lor deves le enfantament e perveno ad aquo que havem dit de las figuras no-naturals, lahoras tu cura aquels ayssi cum havem recontat.	 "If there is difficulty in achieving the desired results through natural means, then you should attempt to achieve it through artificial means.
E si’ la matrona subtil e fassa aquo que fa am facilitat e subtilitat, e am tarditat, e sia ingeniat segon tota figura segon que es a lu preparat de l’engen amenant a salut.	 "If the mistress is subtle and wants something simple, subtle, slow and engineered according to every figure as it were ready for health's sake.
Rememoratio eius quod formatur in matrice ex embrionibus et Abortiuntur.	 "They are formed from embryos that abort (die during early development).
Alcunas veguadas son formatz en la mayre un, e dos, e tres, e quatre, e v, e vi, e vii, e mays x, e ja es deves mi verificat que una femna abortem ne getet vi, e una autra x totz formatz, la qual causa fo fayta per mensuracio dels glorios savis.	 "Some vegetables are formed in the first, second, third, fourth, fifth, sixth, seventh and eighth month; the ninth is shaped by a woman who has aborted before, and one more that causes great sorrow to those skilled in art.
E tot aysso cove que sia en la sciencia de la matrona quar fort leu ad aquela parve semblant de aquo, e donc opause se ad aquo am so que cove.	 "And every time one finds science on the mistress's part as light and easy to understand, then you will also find peace.
Capitol .lxxvi.	 "Chapter sixty-six of the Capitol.
De extraccio del fet quan es mort.	 "From the corpse when it is dead.
Quan tu curas le fet mort am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la medicacio e no es defora eyssit, e tu yest forsat usar de opperacio am ma, lahoras cove que consideras si la femna es de sana vertut e no es am alcu dels accidentz per les quals sobre ela es temuda perdicio.	 "When you are treating a dead body as in the division of medicine and it is not forbidden by custom, but if you suspect that the woman may be suffering from any accident for which she has cause to fear loss.
Lahoras cove que la femna sia envessada sobre le lieyt sobre le sieu dos, e sia le cap de lu enclinat enjos e las coyssas de lu sian elevadas.	 When a woman is exhausted after giving birth to her child on her back and lifting it onto her chest while the head of the baby rests gently in its cradle at her breast, then elevate the legs of that person?
E·l ministre tengua aquela de doas partz o sia liada en le lieyt per so que·l cos de lu no se extenda deves la extraccio del fet.	 The minister should be on the left side to prevent the body from extending downwards towards the baby's head.
E aprop tu humecta la boca de la mayre de lu am olis humitz e am mucellage de altea e de fenugrec e de semensa de li.	 Then moisten the mouth of the woman with honey, warm water, and wine vinegar, and give her some food or drink as well.
E aprop unte la matrona la sua ma am aquels olis e mucellages, e aprop entrometa la sua ma am fecilitat en la mayre, e aprop cerque am la ma loc en le qual fique les uncis en le fet.	 Then gently support the mother's body with her arms, and place a soft cushion or pillow behind her back to keep it in position while holding onto the child.
E locs convenient en aquo: adonc tu considera si le fet es preparat que deysenda sobre le sieu cap, e lahoras tu fique les uncis en les huels de lu, o en le col, o en la boca, o en le palat, o dejos la barba, o en la furcula de lu, o en les locs propdas de las costas, o dejos les ypocondres.	 The place of convenience in this situation is to allow the baby to be placed on her head or back or chest or forearm, or chin, or palate, or under her arms, or buttocks, or thighs.
Mays si le deysendiment es sobre les pes de lu, lahoras en le pentenilh, o en le mieg de las costas.	 If the delivery is on his feet, then place it on the abdomen or back of her legs.
E cove que tengua le unci am la ma dreyta, e pausa la curvitat de lu en aquel loc le qual es entre les ditz de la ma senestra, e entrometa la ma am facilitat e fique le unci en alcu de aquels locs les quals havem ditz, entro que pervengua a la causa boyda.	 The minister should be on the right side to support her while keeping her spine straight in that region where it is between his left arm and hers.
E aprop pause e fique en la apposicio de lu un autre unci, o le tertz si es necessitat, per so que sia atraccio engual, e no sia extencio segon la sua rectetut tant solament.	 And place another cushion there as well, or if necessary for it to remain attached, and not be removed after the exam is complete.
Ans sia maugut a tota partida, per so que l’eyssiment de lu sia alleujat ayssi cum es fayt en dent deves la eradicacio de lu.	 And make sure that all of it has been removed in order to avoid any injury during the exam.
E cove en lu aquo que es entre lor que la extencio sia mollificada; e si alcuna partida de lu es retenguda, lahoras cove que la matrona unte alcus sieus ditz am oli e entrometa aquels espertament e revolva am aquels aquo que es retengut.	 And make sure that the extension is loose; and if any part of it is retained, then apply a firm touch to straighten it out as much as possible.
Donc si la partida del fet es fora-getada, lahoras les uncis sian permudatz entra loc le qual sia pus aut; e fay aysso entro que tot le fet sia fora-getat.	 If the part of the body is already detached, then loosen any cord that may be there in the area where it is loose enough to remove the part completely.
Mays si la ma es eyssida denant l’autra, e no es possible reduzir aquela per la coartacio de lu, lahoras cove que drap sia envolopat sobre aquela; e aprop extratz aquela entro que tota sia fora-getada, e inscideys aquela o en la junctura de la ma o en le coyde.	 If the hand is already swollen and it's not possible to reduce that by cord tightening, then cover it with a bandage instead; and place it back in its cavity or near where it was removed from.
E ayssi cove que fassas en l’autra ma e en les dos pes.	 And do the same for the other hand and both feet.
Mays si le cap del fet es gran, o accideys a lu coartacio en le eyssiment, o es en le cap de lu aygua ajustada, lahoras cove que entrometa entre les ditz espatum spinos e fenda le cap e extragua la aygua, o que discroba aquel am un instrument le qual es nompnat “alundat”, la forma del qual vindra am las formas dels autres instruments en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	 If the head of the body is large and you find it difficult to compress or adjust its position, then place your fingers between the patient's teeth and squeeze water out of them, using an instrument known as a "spoon" which has the shape that matches all other instruments in this department.
E semblantment fassa si·l fet es de gran cap per natura: e lahoras cove que inscida aquel am algematu, o que prengua aquel am alunda ayssi cum havem dit; e aprop extra les osses am les forceps.	 "The physician should apply a sharp instrument to make an incision in the patient's abdomen and remove any obstruction.
E si le cap es eyssit e es coartat deves la furcula, lahoras sia fendut entro que la humiditat la qual es en le pietz sia efunduda.	 "If the incision is complete and there are no obstructions within it, then let the moisture in that area be drained.
Mays si no es complicat, ni obezeys a eyssiment, lahoras tu inscideys le cap tantost segon que a tu sira possible.	 "If it is not complicated or excessive, you should make the incision as soon as possible.
E si le dejos del ventre es apostemat o es en lu ydropici, lahoras cove que tu perfores aquel entro que corro la humiditat que es en lu.	 "If there is no exit from within the belly button or if it's in contact with water, you should drain the moisture inside.
Mays si le fet es sobre les sieus pes, lahoras la atraccio de lu es leugiera e la direccio de lu a la boca de la mayre es leugiera.	 "If it is on your body and you've found the exit to it by its mouth, then guide that exit towards the larger opening.
Mays si es coartat deves le ventre e·l pietz, lahoras cove que tu extraguas aquel am drap le qual auras envolopat sobre la tua ma, e que fendes le ventre e·l pietz entro que corra aquo que es en aquels.	 "If there is obstruction in the abdomen and chest, you should remove that object and guide its exit into your hand, and place it on your lap so that it runs out through this hole.
Mays si les autres membres so ostatz e torna le cap, lahoras la metrona entrometa la ma senestra; mays si la boca de la mayre es huberta, lahoras intrometa la ma en le preon de layre, e cerque am aquela le cap, e atira aquel am les ditz entro a la boca de la mayre, e aprop entrometa en lu un unci, o dos uncis, e atire lu am aquels.	 "If the other members are obstructed and you return to the head, place your hand on his chest; if the larger opening is blocked, guide it into her palm, and insert it into that opening or one of two openings, and hold it in until they're all clear.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada per apostema caut le qual accideys a l’u, lahoras cove que no sia trebelhat sobre lu; abantz cove lahoras aministrar efusio de causas humidas grassas.	 When the mouth of the patient is covered with a cloth that chokes him when he speaks, doctors are advised to not apply too much pressure or else it may be troublesome for the patient
E aministre emplastres; e segua le pacient en ayguas que mollifican e humectan.	 Apply plasters and continue to moisturize the patient as much as possible.
E si le fet es sobre le sieu costat, lahoras si possible es, sia agulat: e sia aministrat aquo que havem dit en le fet viu.	 If it is over his side, doctors should do their best to avoid that; if necessary, apply what has been said in the live demonstration.
E si aquo no es possible, lahoras sia inscidit en pessas, e sia extrayt.	 If that's not possible, have them sit down and remove it.
E cove que non layssas alcuna causa dedintz de la segondina.	 Do not cause any other trouble for the second time.
E cum tu auras complida tota la tua opperacio, lahoras aministra aquo que havem dit de la curacio en les apostemas cautz les quals accideysso de la mayre.	 After you have completed all your treatment, doctors will apply this preparation to the patient in the way that has been described by the care provider in order for it to be applied on their chest.
E si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras deyssendas en ayguas stipticas e aministra l’autra curacio.	 If there is pain arising from another place, then they should proceed with the other treatment and administer it next.
E yeu ja e vist una femna en le ventre de la qual era fet mort, e aprop sobre aquel foc autra veguada emprenhada, e aprop foc mort es le fet autre.	 You have seen a woman in her belly who was dead, and you apply another bandage to the same place where she died, then on the other side, which is now also dead.
Accidit al u aprop lonc temps apostema en le sieu embelic; e inflat es entro que foc ubert, e comensec a getar brac.	 The clot that was applied earlier in her abdomen entered as well into the other part where she had died and began to grow from it.
E yeu fu appelhat a la cura de lu, e medicat a lu per lonc temps, e la plagua no es consolidada.	 "You have summoned the cure for him and treated him for a long time but it hasn't been cured.
Adonc yeu pausegui sobre lu de alscunas causas emplastra de forta atraccio, e eyssic de lu un os, e aprop passero alcus jorns, e eyssic un autre os; e yeu fu trop meravilhat, cum en le ventre no sia os.	 "You have given him a pill to stop the forces that tear apart his bowels and you put one finger in each of his ears so he can hear better inside.
E adonc yeu cogitegui que eran dels osses del fet mort.	 "When you realize it's time for death, then...
Donc yeu enguisigui la plagua, e extrayssi de lu motz osses , la femna existent en las sieuas milhos disposicios, e ja visquec en tal manieyra per lonc temps, correc de lu un petit de brac.	 "You give him the cure and also remove his bones, so that there may be no room for them in the small cavities of his body.
E yeu no afermegui asso esser stranh, sino quar en aquo es sciensa e ajutori ad aquo que le metge artifec am la ma per curacio aministra.	 "You do not need to force him, but rather know that the artificial cure is being done by the doctor.
De las formas dels instrumentz que so necessaris a extrayre le fet.	 "Using the necessary instruments for removing the body.
Forma de vertitge am la qual es uberta la mayre:	 "The form of justice is most preferred:
Aquesta es la forma de strenhedor en le qual so engualhatz les libres, al qual engualhament sian dos virtitges en doas extremitatz de dos futz.	 "This is the form of strength that makes everyone equal and it is equally balanced between two extremes.
May empero aquesta virtitge cove que sia pus subtil de strictori, e sia fayt o de eba o de fust de boys.	 "But for this virtue to be truly subtle in its strictness, there should be equal division of good and evil or good and bad.
E sia la latitut de quascun fust quays dos ditz e le marge de quascu amdos quays un dit, e la longitut de quascu es un palm e mig; e en le mieg loc de dos fustz so dos ajustaments de aquel meteys fustz les quals ja son fermatz, dels quals la longitut es la maytat de un palm e un pauc mes, e la latitut de quascu es quay dos ditz, o un pauc mes.	 "The latitude of one fist is twice that of a thumb and the length of one fist is about half a palm and a quarter more; and when they are placed side by side there should be two adjustments for each other's faults which have already been fixed.
E aquestz dos additamentz sian entromeses en la boca de la mayre per que sia uberta am aquels quan tu revolves las doas prescriptas virtigges.	 The first sentence translates to "This two additions will enter the mouth of the patient in order that it be opened when you rotate the two prescribed virtues.
Forma autra semblant de aquela pus subtil e pus leugiera:	 Another similar way is as follows, more subtle and less obvious:
Sia fayta de fustz de eba o de boys segon la semblansa de forceps.	 The translation of "this two additions will enter the mouth of the patient in order that it be opened when you rotate the two prescribed virtues" is as follows, more subtle and less obvious:
Mays empero en la extremitat de lu so dos additament ayssi cum vezes, e la longitut de aquels additament es quays un palm, e la latitut de quascu es dos ditz.	 The second sentence translates to "May they be placed in the extremity of him as two times, and the length of those additions is such that one hand spans them, and the latitude of each is about two inches.
E cum tu vols am aquels ubrir la mayre, lahoras tu fay cezer la femna sobre le lieyt les pes pendentz, ubert aquo que es entre las coyssas de lu.	 When you want to open the mouth of the patient, place a cushion under his thighs and insert them between his thighs.
E aprop obre la tua ma am le instrument ayssi cum fas am forfexs engualment segon la quantitat que vols de la aprecio de la boca de la mayre entro que la metrona fassa so que vols.	 When you want to open the mouth of the patient, place your hand on that tool as much as you wish in order for it to fit into how wide you want the opening of the patient's mouth to be.
La forma de vertitge la qual diysero les antics:	 The form of truth which they used formerly:
Forma de impellent am le qual es empellit le fet:	 Method by which the deed was performed:
Forma de amisidat2 am le qual es conterit le cap gran	 Form of application 2, in which the big head is applied.
E es asemblat a forceps al qual so dentz en la extremitat, ayssi cum vezes, e alcunas veguadas es fayt lonc ayssi cum forceps segon aquesta forma, ayssi cum vezes, al qual so dentz ayssi cum dentz de ressegua am le qual es inscidit e conterit.	 The assembly of the forceps at which they were inserted into the extremity, as two times, and some parts are also done with that tool in this way, and the same fingers do it in order to insert them properly and to hold them correctly.
Forma de amesidat pauc:	 Form of address for many men
Forma de unci havent una spina:	 For a single man
Forma de unci havent doas spinas:	 For two or more men
Forma de forceps a la qual so dentz de cerra am le qual le cap del fet sia conterit:	 Form of using forceps to hold the head of the foetus
Forma de spatum havent dos extremitatz am le qual le cap es abscindit:	 Form of using a spatula to remove extremities that are cut off.
Forma de dos espatums latz:	 Form of using two spatulas
Totz aquels instrumentz so excersitatz, e quan mes so multiplicadas las specias de aquel e so preparadas deves le artifexs, quant es pus leugier a la sua opperacio e pus aut deves les homes per la sua quantitat.	 These instruments are exercised in this way, and when many of them exist and they have been properly prepared for use, as soon as their master wants to operate or if it is necessary for them to be used by the people according to their quantity.
E no obres de aquels instrumentz ja sia qua sia deves tu aparalhat, quar la necessitat de aquels no es excusabla.	 The tools are not to be used without any doubt, as it is not necessary for them in this case.
De extraccio de la segondina.	 Extraction of the second one.
Quan la segondina es retenguda deves le enfantament, lahoras cove que tu comandes a la malautae que retengua le sieu ale, e aprop fay aquela stornudar am condizi, e strenh la tua ma sobre la boca de lu e sobre las nars de lu, e si per aysso es defora eyssit, bo es.	 When the second is withdrawn you tell your assistant to call out loud for help and apply pressure to the site of injury with both hands, covering the mouth and nose, and if this is necessary exit from it as well.
E sino, lahoras tu pren una ola e perfora en la cuberta un trauc e pausa en aquela erbas ubrent la boca de la mayre, ayssi cum calament e ruda e anet e camamilla e scicados arabic e cassia lignea e santaurea.	 If not you take a cloth and soak it in the water and place it over the wound to keep her from biting or scratching herself as well as covering her mouth gently, calmly, softly, calmly, cautiously, and cautiously, with words of Arabic, cassia lignum and Santaura.
Totas aquestas erbas o alcunas de lor sian submersas en aygua en la ola, e pausa aquela sobre le foc.	 When herbs or some of them are submerged in water on fire
E aprop pausa una canula de canaviera en la boca de la mayre, e tengua aquela entro que la evapor vengua a la concavitat de la mayre.	 Then put the cannula into the mouth of the patient and have it enter so that its vapors come out to the cavity of the patient's chest
E aprop fay aquela stornudar ayssi cum havem dit, e la segondina sira fora-getada am velocitat.	 Then you should immediately do the following: take a second syringe and inject it quickly
Mays si roman aprop aquesta curacio e no es eyssida, lahoras tu comanda a la matrona que submerge la sua ma sinistra en oli sizami o en micellage de altea, e aprop entrometa aquela en le conh e queresca am aquela la segondina, e cum aquela auras trobada, lahoras pren la e exten aquela pauc a pauc Mays si es annexsa en le preon de la mayre, lahoras entrometa la sua ma segon que havem recomtat, e quan aura trobat la segondina, extragua aquela petit a petit segon rectetut per so que la mayre no caja deves la atraccio vehement.	 When you make the incision and it does not bleed, ask the nurse to submerge her left arm in olive oil or micellar water (if available), and then put that in too with its purpose being to cool down the arm so that the patient's arm does not draw blood excessively.
Abantz cove que sia permudada als costatz dreyt e sinestre am facilitat.	 Begin by applying pressure to both the right and left sides of the chest easily.
E aprop sia ajustat en la quantitat de atraccio, quar ela obedira e evasira de adhirencia.	 Adjust it so that there is no more or less traction, then it will be released from adhesion.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada, nos ja havem recomtat la curacio am sturnutacio e am medicacio de la ola am erbas.	 If the patient's mouth is swollen, we recommend applying heat and using herbs to help with pain medication.
Mays si no es fora-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recomtadas, lahoras guarda te que no fetigues sobre aquela en iteracio de abstracio, mays empero cove que aquo que es eyssit de lu a la boca de la mayre lies a la coyssa de la femna, e aprop cristeriza aquela am enguent e tetrafarmacon; quar aquel fara poyrir aquela aprop alcus dias e sira dissolvuda e sira fora-getada.	 If any of the recommended causes have been eliminated but there is still a lump in her mouth or throat, then force that to be swallowed with water and swallow it down as much as possible; after swallowing, let it dissolve and disappear on its own.
Mays quan se poyreys, es de lu elevada mala audor al cap, e al estomac, e aquo ledeys la malauta; e adonc cove que sian aministradas sub-fumiguacios e convenientz ad aquo.	 When you urinate, raise the buttocks towards your head, stomach and groin area; after that apply a warming compress to these areas as well
Mays alcus dels Antics ja so esproatz sub-fumigacio de nazitort e de figuas seccas.	 The ancient compresses for cold feet
Forma de instrument am le qual la femna es sub-fumiguada deves la retentio de mestruas e de la segondina:	 Form of an instrument which the woman uses to apply a warming compress over the breasts and second one.
Sia fayta de veyre o de eram.	 What is being tested or experienced?
E sia pausada la extremitat subtil en le conh e la extremitat ampla sobre le foc, e la sub-fumiguacio sia pausada sobre las brazas del foc.	 The subtle extremity was placed on the forehead and a wide extremity over the face, and the warming compress was applied to the arms of the face.
E tengua aquela entro que sia consumida aquela sub-fumiguacio e itera·n autra.	 It is necessary for that warming compress to be placed there and used again or another.
De curacio del cul del enfant no-perforat.	 Do not perforate the anus of a child.
Motz enfantz naysso e les culs de lu no so perforatz, les quals ya ciphac subtil e opilat.	 Do not perforate the buttocks of children or any other area that can be easily damaged and burnt, unless it is only performed subtly and carefully.
Adonc cove a la matrona que perfore am le sieu dit aquel ciphac; e sino, perfora aquel am spatum agut, e guarda se que no toque le lacert.	 And let the midwife pierce through her own finger that way, unless otherwise pierced through his hand quickly and keep it covered.
E aprop pause sobre aquel lana enfusa en vi e oli; e aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia senat.	 Then place a warm compress on each elbow area and gently massage them in order to soothe the pain.
Mays si temes que sia opilat, lahoras pausa en le trauc una canula per motz dias, e osta la quan le enfant voldra degerir.	 If it is necessary to perforate for some reason or another, then apply a needle and perform the procedure when the child wants to get rid of it.
E ja accideys oppilacio del cul per consolidacio de plagua o de apostema; adonc cove que aquela consolidacio sia inscidida, e aprop sia curada am aquo que avem dit de la curacio e del plom.	 The anal sphincter is tightened either by ligature of the perineum or epigastric ligament; when that ligation is successful and not obstructed, it should be cured immediately according to what I have already said about the cure and its application.
De curacio de las fistulas que endeveno dejos.	 The curing of fistulae mentioned earlier.
Las fistulas que endeveno en la partida dejos pus bassa so nodacio e grossetut las quals endeveno prop del cul defora o en l’espazi de la una partida.	 Fistulas that developed through the urethra, which lead to external or internal bleeding in the anus area are being mentioned here.
E es una fistula o motas.	 Is it a fistula or a matter?
E cum aquela nodacio es antiquada e corr de la humiditat aygosa blanca o poyridura subtil, e alcunas veguadas so de aquestas fistulas alcunas penetrantz.	 If the infection is old and associated with excessive white discharge or subtle bleeding, some of these fistulae may penetrate
E aquelas penetrantz so conogudas per aquo que es eyssit de aquelas per la egressio e per ventosetat; e alcunas vetz use le malaute de egressio, e fort leu es eyssit de aquelas verm.	 Those penetrating wounds are recognized for the exit and ventilation of those through; and some veins carry the bad blood back to those exits, making it easy for them to escape.
E so de aquelas fistulas alcunas veguadas en l’espazi penetrantz entro a la vesica, e entro al meat de la vergua; e so de aquelas penetrantz entro la junctura de la coyssa e entro al notz de la coeta.	 Some of these fistulae are located in the space between the urethra and bladder, and also enter into the veins at the base of the bladder. And some penetrating wounds enter into the junction of the scrotum and the testicles.
E aquo en que es conoguda fistula penetrant entro al cul e no-penetrant, es que tu metas le tieu dit endic en le cul, e entrometas tenta subtil de eram o de ferr en la fistula quan no y es turtuositat.	 When you suspect a penetrating fistula in the anus and not-penetrating ones, it means that you should examine closely around the anus area, or try to perform surgery on the fistula if necessary.
Mays si en aquela es turtuositat, lahoras entromet en aquela tenta subtil de plom o de pels de caval entro que tu sentas la tenta o le pel en le tieu dit.	 When one's bowels become entangled in that manner [i.e., when they are twisted], pains occur as if a cat were trying to squeeze through or the hairs of its tail
E si no sentas aquela de tot ni no procezeys del trauc alcuna causa de egestio ni verm ni ventositat, ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras sapias que es no-penetrant, e lahoras coyta te a la curacio.	 And if you do not feel that at all or if there is no cause for obstruction of discharge or constipation, as we have mentioned before, the pains will be understood and the doctor should attend to it
E quan la fistula es penetrant entro a la vesica o entro al meat de la vergua, lahoras la significacio de lu es eyssiment de urina de aquela e prohibicio de lu ad aysso que·l loc am medicina sia consolidat.	 When the fistula penetrates into the bladder or into the vein of the vulva, the meaning will be that it is emitting urine from that area and there is prohibition to leave that location untreated. The medical treatment should be immediate
Mays si es penetrant entro la junctura de la coyssa o entro al os e envencio de dolor en le circuit, lahoras senhal de lu es que la tenta perve entro aqui si en lu no es turtuositat entro al os, e envencio de dolor en le circuit de la partida; e que de lu yeys poyredura tostemps; e que no val en aquela medicacio, ni es consolidada am enguent.	 If it is penetrating into the joint of a finger or into the ear and brings pain in its circuit, then you know that this occurs when there's a twist in the finger or in the ear itself, causing pain in its circuit from the beginning; and which should be treated promptly; and with no medical treatment taken care of.
E en totas aquelas fistulas penetrant no es curacio de tot, e la curacio de aquelas es trebalh e vanetat dels folyls metges sobre·l qual so fermatz.	 In all those cases where there is no cure or the cure for it cannot be found by any of the physicians, then treatment should be sought from those who are expert in that area.
Mays en aquela que no es penetrant e no antiqua, sanacio am ferr es sperada segon que yeu a tu recomtare, e aquo que ja yeu e proat.	 If it is not penetrating and does not cause problems, then healing should be sought after consulting with your doctor as recommended by you, and so already do.
E es que le malaute jagua entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos e eleva las cambas de lu entro sus, las coyssas sian enclinadas al ventre de lu, e aprop entromet tenta de plom, o de eram si es en la fistula turtuositat, entro que sapias le loc on perve la tenta.	 When the patient lies down between his thighs and raises his legs so that they are inside him, let the cushion be placed under them, then incline their thighs towards his belly, and hold the hands as if to cover it up or to prevent it from escaping
E si aquela sent le malaute entorn le cuol, lahora cove que tu entrometas le tieu dit endic en le cuol.	 If that is when the patient lies down on his stomach, then place a cushion at the head of the bed to prevent it from escaping.
E si sentas en le tieu dit la tenta ja per si meteyssa descuberta penetrar, otra aquo que sentas entre le tieu dit e aquela siphac o carn, lahoras sapias certanament que aquela es penetrant; e adonc no trebalhes en aquela, quar no es en aquela sanacio, ayssi cum havem dit.	 If you suspect that the attempt is discovered penetration, then place a cushion between your thighs and the mattress or bed, as it will prevent it from penetrating.
Mays empero diyssero alcus que es sana en alcus homes tart.	 But perhaps these are healthy practices in most people.
E de la medicacio per la qual es sperat juvament en lu es que tu ignes cauteri subtil segon le ample de la fistula, ayssi cum es precedit, e intrometas aquel ignit en la fistula entro que pervengua entorn le cuol; e aprop itera aquel doas o tres vetz entro que sapias que ja son adhustas totas aquelas carns ajustadas fistuladas que so semblantz a cana de pluma de ausel.	 The medical treatment for that is to gently stretch the fistula's opening, as mentioned earlier, and introduce it into the vagina while ensuring it does not come out towards the belly; then insert two or three stitches in place once they are adjusted properly so that they resemble a thread attached to the head of the penis.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder entro que en yescan totas aquelas carns que so adhustas, e aprop cura aquela am medicinas la carn engendrantz e consolidantz, e si es sanada, bo es; e sino, lahoras no es sana en degun temps per autra curacio.	 Once the stitches are in place and adjusted properly, take care to ensure that all of those stitches are well-taken care of, as they should be treated like any other wounds or injuries, ensuring good healing if it is a healthy condition; otherwise not, as the pain will not heal on its own.
E si la tenta intra, e no penetra entro·l tieu dit le qual es en le cul, e entre aquel e la tenta que es velament spes de carn o de ciphac, e vezes la fistula en aquo que siec la superficia de la codena, lahoras secca la codena del comensament de la fistula, e tu ve seccan am la tenta, e sia en la fistula entro que la seccio pervengua al loc en le qual perve la extremitat de la tenta, e per la tenta es liberat e catz.	 "When the attempt to penetrate within reaches a certain point in the rectum and between that and another part which is suspected of being a fistula or hydrocele (sphincter) gland, and times it is necessary to make an incision at that location where there was once a slit on the surface of the sphincter. Afterwards, you should cleanse and remove the opening of the fistula by cutting through it.
E aprop mundifiqua aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so asembladas a canula de pena de ausel e no romangua de aquelas alcuna causa.	 "It is necessary to examine those parts, which are similar in shape to the penis, and remove any cause that might prevent them from being treated with this method.
Mays si flux de sanc vezes que vengua entre tu e la tua opperacio quan ensideysses aquelas carns, lahoras le milh que sia e del pus leugier instrument es cauterizar am foc o am medicina acuta, quar cauteri am foc ajusta bonas doas habitutz: so es adhustio de aquelas carns ajustadas, e abscizio del sanc exseccacio de las humiditatz.	 "If there is a flow of pus between you and your operation when examining those parts, the physician will prepare an instrument to cauterize at heat or apply acute medicine if necessary, which cautery should be applied: this is customarily done by those who have undergone such treatments.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder o en caus trissat entro que·l loc geta brac, e aprop lahoras cura la plagua am enguentz carn dura engendran e consolidan.	 "To cure the wounds that are inflamed in body or external parts where they have become hardened and consolidated.
E so medicinas en las quals so stipticitat e exseccio; quan lahoras es restaurada ja es sanada e no temes iteracio.	 "Medicines in which there is stiffness and dryness, when the sores are restored they have been healed and do not require further treatment.
Mays si la fistula ja perve entro al preon del cul e es elonguada de lu superficia del cos, lahoras entromet le tieu dit en le cul e inquireys am aquel.	 "If the fistula has entered into a fold of the buttocks and extends to the surface of the body part, then examine that.
E donc si centes la tenta e entre tu e ela es velament de ciphac o de carn, e es propda a la penetracio, lahora no es operacio en lu sino segon via di fiducia e de speransa.	 If you are experiencing pain caused by cold phlegm or flesh, and it is penetrating, then the remedy is not to operate on it directly but through trust and hope
La qual causa es aministrar en lu una de tres manieyras: o que cauterize aquela ayssi cum havem dit; o que secces aquela entro que consieguas la conquavitat de lu per que sia a tu possible entrometre las qualcas e la curacio propdana; e no procesiscas mot am seccio per so que no inscidas le lacert contenent le cuol, e que accidisque sobre le malaute eyssiment de la egistio ses voluntat; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit quar fort leu sira sanat; o que elongues aquel velament e mondes aquel pus que seccas aquel entro prop le cul, ayssi cum havem dit, o am tenta o am autre instrument de aguda extremitat, e aprop mondifique aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so en la seccio entro la on podes am percrustacio; e aprop esforsa te a far la restauracio de tota la plagua am seccio, e si le orrifici pus desus no es consolidat, e romangua la fistula uberta en la partida del cul, e sira pus leugier per le malaute.	 There are three possible ways to administer it: either cauterize that part as indicated; or if you want to cure the hernia by making an entrance in order for it to be possible to enter and treat its content; or else elongate and soften that opening so that it can be used as a plug, like what was mentioned earlier.
E alscunas veguadas la fistula es finida segon aquesta manieyra: es quan tu entrometas la tenta en la fistula, e es en le latz del cul entorn la superficia del cos am la codena e en le marge del cul, lahoras pren tenta de perforada extremitat, que es ayssi cum agulha de preparantz les coers segon aquesta forma:	 One possible way to finish off the fistula is by closing it through this method: when you enter into the fistula, at its lower part near the surface of the body and on its edge, the doctor will then make a small cut with a sharp instrument.
e entromet en aquela fiel envolopat de v fiels o entorn aquels; e aprop entromet tenta am fiel en la fistula entro que consiegua la conquavitat de lu.	 To enter into that sealed opening, you must first carefully pass through the fields or surroundings around it; and then enter the finger into the fistula to accomplish the hernia's cure.
Mays si es penetrant en le marge del cul prop dedintz, lahoras tu extratz le fiel de aquel trauc ayssi que tu intrometas le tieu dit en le cul; e extraguas la extremitat del fiel e ajustes las duas extremitatz essemps, e estrenh cascuna, e leyssa aquo per un dia o per dos, e quan mays inscideys le fiel en la carn, estrenh be aquel entro que aquelas carns sian inscididas las quals so entre doas extremitatz del fiel e que cajan.	 "You have already inserted yourself between the patient's buttocks and you will now insert your penis into that part as well; remove any previous support for the legs, adjust both of them in front of you, and maintain this position for one or two days, unless the man ejaculates within these two hours, then it is necessary to insert a glove inside him at once.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia consolidada e sanada.	 "Then apply a poultice that has been solidified and cured.
Mays si le orrifici de la fistula no es penetrant, lahoras fay aquel penetrar, en qualque manieyre sia a tu preparat, sino que sia mot en le preon, quar no es a tu que fassas aquo per que no inscidas le lacert; e aprop fay am aquela entro que sia sanada.	 "If the abscess of the fistula is not penetrable, you should cover it and wait for treatment to be prepared, unless otherwise instructed by your doctor, in which case you must do this to prevent infection.
La forma de spatum spinos am lo qual es fenduda la fistula: la curvitat del qual es mot aguda e l’autra partida es no-aguda, per so que no inscidas aquo que no es necessari, ayssi cum vezes.	 "The shape of the spit is as follows: if it is bent in a way that one side is acute and the other not acute, then do not apply this which is not necessary.
De sutura de emorroydas en las quals corra sanc en la inscizio de aquelas.	 "For cuts on those parts of the body where bleeding occurs in connection with them.
Emorroydas so segon dos manieyras, quar o so entre le cul semblantz aysi que es de carbos, o quays aquelas sian cum a gras de rasim.	 "Secondary hemorrhoids are between two and three degrees; those in the anus resemble those of varicose veins.
E de aquelas so petitas e grans, e que le sanc corr de aquelas tostemps e es una, e so motas, e so fora·l cul, e en las extremitatz de lu.	 "Those are small and large; the bleeding from them is heavy and frequent, and they come out of the anus, and on the extremities.
Mays empero aquelas que so foro le cul so segon las mes de pauca humiditat, de las quals corr aygua citrina o un petit de sanc am cos continuabla, e so segon la color del cos.	 When the moisture of the anus is excessive and causes pain that worsens over time, causing it to become red and inflamed
E la curacio de aquela que es dedintz le cuol es que comandes al malaute que se assela e que se exprema entro que le cuol yesca e las emoroydas apparescan a tu.	 The doctor will command the patient to sit and spread their legs so that they can examine both hemorrhoids simultaneously
Adonc tu te coyte e suspen am uncis o que tenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, e aprop incideys aquelas deves las suas razitz.	 You should cut off your nails or those on your fingers if you have them and make incisions in the parts of your body that need it.
Mays si les uncis no so tengutz en aquelas per la humiditat de lor e mollificacio de aquelas, lahoras pren aquelas am drap aspre o am coto o am flassada de lana, e extratz aquelas am les tieus ditz, e aprop inscideys aquelas e polveriza sobre lor alcunas polveras caudas aprop la inscizio, per que sian ad aquelas en loc de cauteri; o cauteriza aquelas segon que es precedit en le capitol de cauterizar.	 If the nails are not causing any issues with moisture or discomfort, then shave them off gently if you have long ones, or remove them completely and powder them over to prevent itching, since cutting them short will not solve the problem; or burn them after doing as mentioned in the chapter on cauterization.
E aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	 Then apply a cream containing hydrocortisone to treat those hemorrhoids immediately.
E si le cul no obezeys a egressio, lahoras cristerisa le malaute am cristeri en le qual sia mordicacio petita, e sia lavat am aquel aquo que es en le cuol e que obezesca a egressio leugierament quan le malaute s’esprem.	 If the anus is becoming swollen and there is pain due to this, then apply a cream with hydrocortisone in it, directly on the small area where the hemorrhoids occur, so that they will stop swelling when the hemorrhoids are pressed.
Mays si las emorroydas so defora le cul, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiera, e es que tu prenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, o que prenguas aquelas am unci, e inscidas aquelas, e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit entro que sian sanadas.	 If the hemorrhoids are causing pain inside the anus, then you should shave them off or cut them short to remove them immediately and apply a cream containing hydrocortisone to treat them as mentioned above.
E aquel que avoreys inscizio, cove que aministres sutura de lor segon aquesta manieyra: pren fiel envolopat e entromet aquel en agulha e aprop extratz las emorroydas a las partidas dessus, e fay aquel penetrar am la agulha en la razit del autra part, e envolveys las doas extramitatz del fiel en la partida pus dejos de la agulha, e so latitudinalment; e estrenh la emorroyda am strectura fort, e aprop noza le fiel e extratz la agulha.	 "When someone has an incision made by a surgeon and you want to give them a second operation: perform the first procedure with great care, extract it from its place on top of that, and then insert into the other part; wrap your fingers around both sides and pull gently, hold tightly; stretch out the incision firmly.
E fay aquo a totas, e layssa de aquelas una e no la cozes, per so que la superfluitat del sanc corra de aquela.	 "Do everything with them, except for those who are in need of care, to prevent any excess from occurring there.
E aprop pausa sobre le cul drap enfus en oli rozat o en cerot; e pausa aquel sobre·l cuol e comanda al malaute que·s repause.	 "Place a cushion on the buttocks and then place it over the waist, telling them to pause.
E aprop layssa aquela entro que caja; e quan es casuda, cura aquelas am enguentz o am autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	 "Put that in their hand, when they are done, cure what is inside or the other treatment depending on which one suits them.
De curacio de fistulas.	 "Cure fistulae.
Motas veguadas accideys per exseccacio de fenda o per costriccio de natura.	 "The veins become inflamed due to either dryness or narrowing of the vessel.
E cum so antiquadas e no val en aquela medicina, lahoras cove que tu razas aquelas am la puncta de spatum o am la tua ungla entro que sian faytas humidas e sia hostada de aquelas la escorsa pus desus, la qual prohibeys aquelas de consolidacio; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian consolidadas.	 "If they are very old and no longer in that condition of medicine, the doctors will tell you to apply them on the point of the palm or the thumb so that they may become moist and help from those things which cause dryness, which is forbidden; then cure those that have already consolidated.
Lahoras tu osta aquelas am razio pus vehement que la primieyra entro que mot sancno e sian excoriadas; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	 When gout pain occurs, first cleanse it by applying very hot water on the affected part of the body
De curacio de almesamir, so es clau.	 The cure for ulcers is crucial.
Sapias que alamermar, so es clau, e no es si no notz redon segon la color del cors semblant a cap de claviel, e es fayt en tot le cors e majorment en las partidas dejos les pes e als ditz, e endeve per aquels dolor deves le anament.	 You must know how to treat it properly, so it's important, and if you don't apply it correctly on the affected parts of the body like a blister or a scab, do it all over the body especially in the feet areas and most importantly near the toes, end please deal with those pains immediately.
E adonc cove que sia inscidit aquo que es en le circuit del clau, e sia tengut am les forfexs o am unci, e sia eradicat de la sua razit; e aprop cura aquel.	 If it's inside the vein or artery, and if you suspect it in your fingers or thumb, remove that part of the body immediately, and treat that one.
E si vols, cauteriza le segont que es precedit en le sieu capitol.	 If you wish to, cauterize as described previously in its capital.
Mays de veruca es eminencia petita aspre fistulada redonda sobre la superficia del cos, e motas veguadas veno en las mas dels enfantz.	 A pimple is a small eruption on the surface of the body, and itches occur mostly in children.
E curacio de lu es que estendas e inscidas aquela, o que estrenhas aquela am fiel o am pel entro que caja.	 The cure for that one is to stretch and insert something inside or to push out what's inside through a hole.
E si vols, cauteriza aquo, segon que havem dit, am foc o am medicina acuta.	 If you wish, cauterize it as described before at the focus or acute injury.
E ja so eradicadas enversas e no-enversas am le instrument le qual yeu diyre.	 And remove those from both sides of the object that tells you to do so.
Mays formica es eminencia petita feutrada o fistulada grossa sobre la superficia del cos anant mot en le preon, e quan le freg atroba aquela es centit en lu semblant de mordificacio de formigua, e es fayta entorn le cos.	 A flea bite is a small bump or itch on the body surface near the nose, and when it itches severely like an attack of fleas, do it around the body.
E curacio de lu es que prenguas una canula de pena de auca o de pena de voltor, e sia fort, e pausa aquela sobre la formigua entro que la contengua le cercle de la canula de las partidas de lu; e aprop revolveys la tua ma am la canula entro que inscidas aquo que es en le circuit de la formigua, e pauses aquela en le preon de la carn, e que eradiques la formigua de la sua razit.	 When there is a pain in the artery or vein, and it is severe, and pause that over the formigone into which the circle of the needle enters; and return your hand to the needle inside where you insert this thing into the circuit of the formigone, and pause that at the front of the flesh, and fixates the formigone in its place.
E si vols, fay aquo am canula de eram o de ferr segon aquesta forma:	 If you wish, here is another way to do it
Sia la partida desus de la canulha trahent a subtilitat, sorda (so es no-perforada), envolopada per so que sobre le dit la aprencio de lu sia ablaviada e la revolucio de aquela.	 To perforate gently, and not perforated, covered in such a way that over it the opening of the body is closed and the movement of that one is reversed.
E si vols cauteriza la formiga segon que es denant dit en la cauterizacio de atheyl en le capitol de cauteri.	 If you wish to cauterize the artery as mentioned in the cautery chapter, do it according to that one.
De forma dels instrumentz que so aministratz a dar cristeri.	 By means of instruments which are delivered by doctors.
Alcunas veguadas es fayt cristeri de argent o de lato o de eram fondut o malleat; e alcunas veguadas es fayt de aquels instrumentz petit e gran segon aquels als quals so aministratz, quar aquel que es aministrat en la curacio dels petitz enfants sia petit; e de aquel dels quals los culs son freuls o doloyrozes, les cristeris de aquels sian petitz.	 Some instruments are used with silver or iron or lead or mallet; and some instruments are used by those small or large according to those given, such as the one that is used in the care of children who is small; and for those whose handles are cruel or painful, their instruments are also small.
La forma de cristeri gran e pauc:	 The large and few form of instruments:
Le cap de la canula de lu desus en le qual es liada la borsa sia ampla segon aquesta manieyra; e sia a lu distinacio la on la borsa es liada ayssi cum vezes.	 The end of the cannula, which is tied in this way to expand it as much as possible at this moment
E la extremitat de lu pus dejus, la qual es entromesa en le cul, sia sorda (so es no-uberta) mot leon, atrasent a subtilita; e en la un del latz de lu sian dos traucs, e en l’autre costat un trauc, e sia la amplesa del trauc segon la groseza dels rays e pus gros un petit.	 The extremity of the patient's body is inserted into the rectum, which should be smooth (so it shouldn't cause discomfort), with two tubes on one side and another on the other, and a larger tube on one side and a smaller one on the other
E sia la borsa en la qual sian pausadas las medicinas de vesica de bestia o de pel de ovelha, e la razit de lu sia un palm.	 The bladder or kidney medicines are placed in this bag
E sia perforada per motz traucs ayssi cum es revolvuda; e si l’espazi le qual es entre les traucs la grossetut del dit.	 It is perforated by tubes that rotate around it, and the space between them should be filled with gauze of a suitable size.
E aprop entromet en aquels traucs fiel fort de fiel cru le qual sia de detz fiels, o enviro aquels; e ajusta am aquel la borsa; e quan es pausada en lu la borsa, sia streyt en le cap del cristeri entre dos distingentz am fort costriccio, e aprop cristeriza am aquel quascun trauc: Mays la qualitat de cristerizar am aquel es que tu omples la borsa de la medicina, que sia escalfada segon la quantitat de la tolleransa del malaute; e guarda te que no sia trop cauda ni trop freja.	 Adjust the bag so that it is firmly in place between two tubes of suitable width or between them if they are not directly opposite each other. And when the bladder is placed in this way, tighten up to a certain point at which there should be some space for air circulation; do not tighten too much and do not let it slip.
E aprop le malaute sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos, e eleva las suas cambas en sus e pausa dejos lu un cuer sobre le qual ja so les homes o un lansol; e aprop unta la extramitat del cauteri am oli o am album de huou o am mucellage de fenugrec o de semblantz; e aprop entromet aquel en le cul am facilitat, e aprop le ministre prengua la borsa e exprema aquel am doas mas e essemps am vehemencia entro que sia evacuat en le budelh tot aquo que es en le cristeri; e aprop extra le cristeri e le malaute leva las suas cambas a la paret.	 Place the patient on their back, elevate their legs and place something soft under it to prevent any movement in that direction. Put one hand or arm underneath them to support their head if necessary, but do not put both hands at once as this may cause difficulty in evacuating stool from rectum. Remove the tubes and bladder then lift up the legs to remove them from beneath.
E si la medicina forsa aquel a eyssiment, tengua le tant quant poyra; e si dorm am aquel per tota una nueyt, es mays derier en juvament.	 When someone suffers from excessive heat, give them something cool to drink
Mays si tu cristerizas aquel en las malautias de solucio de ventre e l’eyssiment de lu le coyta, lahoras tu itera le cauteri entro que sia sanat.	 If you are piercing the abdominal area or hernia for diagnosis and treatment purposes, then apply a cautery to heal wounds caused by that procedure.
E si en le cul so emorroydas o apostemas ledens, lahoras sia le cristeri mot subtil e leon, dels cristeris am les quals les enfantz so criterisatz.	 If it is necessary to perform a circumcision on the genitals or remove the foreskin of infants, then apply a subtle circumcision cream and follow instructions for that procedure.
De curacio de las plaguas.	 For treatment of wounds.
Yeu ja e dit en la divisio de la curacio de las plaguas aquo que convenia al libre, e yeu dic assi la curacio de aquelas am ma e am medicinas segon le conpliment.	 The decision to perform surgery on the wounds should be made with care and respect for it, and you are asked to proceed with the treatment of the skin as well as medical procedures according to instructions.
Donc dic que las plaguas son diversificadas segon aquo en que son faytas las plaguas e segon le loc sobre le qual cazo las plaquas.	 Wounds vary in their cause and location, so they require different treatments depending on the area where they appear.
E las causas per que motas vetz son faytas las plaguas so ayssi cum getament de peyra, o inscisio d’espaza o de cotel, o percussio am lansa, o am fustz, o am sageta, o semblantz ad aquels de motas causas.	 The causes that cause wounds are varied and can be caused by various things such as burns from fire or hot surfaces, cuts on the skin of the extremities, blows to the head, fall injuries, and more.
Mays las plaguas que so en les locz del cos so ayssi cum plagua la qual catz sobre le cap, o·l col, o·l pietz, o·l ventre, o·l fitge, e semblantz ad aquels dels membres.	 Wounds in the body are also called by their location; burns on the head or face for example, belly button injuries, and more.
E yeu so recomtant la curacio de alcunas plaguas per que pauses aquela ratiocinacio e regla sobre las autras plaguas.	 This text suggests a procedure for addressing joint pain caused by cold humors that have infiltrated different parts of the body, including the feet and possibly other areas as well. The treatment typically involves cauterization points placed on the surface of the affected area to alleviate the pain. If an intestine or hernia needs to be returned to its cavity, this is also mentioned in the text.
E yeu comensare de las plaguas del cap simplas, quar la rememoracio de las compostas vindra al comensament del tertz capitol.	 This sentence suggests that after the procedure has been performed and the areas have been treated with cauterization points, it is important to remember or recall various components of the treatment in order to begin discussing or writing about the third part of the text.
Donc dic que quan accideys en le cap plagua simpla e no es fractura, lahoras considera: si es per getament de peyra o de semblant, e ja ha trinquada la codena tant solament e es gran plagla e temes sobre aquel malaute havinement de apostema caut, lahoras tu te coyta e fleubotoma la cephalica tantost, e no tardas aquo; e extrats ad aquel del sanc segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu si no mes alcuna causa prohibent de fleubotomia, majorment si·l sanc que es eyssit de la plagua es pauc.	 When a simple plague occurs and does not break or tear the skin, doctors consider: whether it is from a scratch or abrasion, and if so, they have cauterized only that small area of the head and are worried about the patient having an apoplexy attack (a type of stroke). They immediately apply a cephalic tourniquet to prevent this. If there was no cause preventing a tracheotomy, but the plague is few in number, then do nothing more than remove it from its location as soon as possible.
E sia la flaubotomia del contrari de la partida plaguada; e guardase le malaute de replecio e de vi e de viandas grossas.	 In the event of a tracheotomy for any type of plague, and if it is necessary to perform one: doctors should keep the patient's head elevated at an angle slightly higher than their body in order to prevent any excessive vomiting or spitting of blood during this procedure.
Mays si de la minuicio prohibeys alcuna causa, lahoras sia aminorat de la vianda e no apropinque a carn ni a vi.	 If there is not enough cause for the tracheotomy but it still needs to be performed: doctors should only remove the gauze and do nothing more than apply pressure on any bleeding wounds or openings in the skin, as this is all that's needed during this procedure.
E pausa sobre la plagua, si a lu accideys apostema caut, coto enfus en oli rozat solet o en vi en le qual es stipticat.	 When it comes to translating from an unknown language into English, I will do my best!
Mays si est segur de apostema caut, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua, si es recent am le sieu sanc e le ayre no ha mudat aquela la polvera la qual yeu recomtare aprop petit.	 Are you sure about the pointed needle? If so, pause over the pad if it is recently sharpened and the area has not moved that part which you want to be treated will not cause pain.
E si le ayre ja ha mudada aquela, lahoras pausa sobre alscus enguentz entro que sia sanada.	 If the area has changed since being treated in this way, then pause when entering so that it can be healed.
Mays si la plagua es gran o es per inscizio d’espaza e de semblantz, e no so ajustadas las labias de lu per puvils, lahoras ajusta aquelas am sutura segon que yeu recomtare de la sutura de lor.	 If the pad is large or too loose and does not fit snugly over the lips tightly enough, then adjust it after you recommend cutting of their lips.
Mays si la plagua ja es discuberta del os e pen, e no es retencio de lu sino un petit suspensori, lahoras inscideys aquela e aprop cura la plagua am medicinas e restaura la carn aprop en loc de codena, e comanda al malaute que sia pescut de viandas en las quals es groceza: caps e formen coyt e semblantz a lor, entro que sia compost.	 If the pad is already detached from its base and does not hold well enough, then remove it and apply another one correctly in place of codena, and instruct the patient to take care with their lips' softness - corners and forms should be soft as before, after being treated.
E si atrobas en la codena putrefaccio e no adhereys al os, lahoras tu inscideys tot aquo poyrit e geta aquo, e aprop cura aquo.	 If the codena deteriorates and does not stick to its base, then remove it immediately and replace it with a new one, carefully apply this one.
Mays si en aquestas plaguas es arteria o vena de la qual fluxs de sanc pot evenir, e no es abscindida per medicinas, lahoras tu inquier sobre la arteria, e si atrobas aquela no-inscidida, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am spatum, o lia aquela; e si necessitat te provoca que aquo que havem dit no comfereys, lahoras tu cauteriza entro que·l sanc sia abscidit.	 If the arteries or veins through which blood flows are damaged and not treated by doctors, then inquire about them, if you find that they were not treated, remove it from the body in its entirety, or ligate that; and if necessary, cauterize to prevent further bleeding.
E si aquestas plaguas son simplas e petitas, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiere; enayssi que tu polverizas sobre aquelas aquesta polvera, quar consolidada aquela denant que l’ayre mude aquelas.	 When simple and small plaguings occur, the cause of them is light; so if you powder on that powder, it will consolidate and move that area away from there.
E la manieyra de la polvera es aquesta: recipe oli de enses partida una, de sanc de drago partida doas, de caus no-extincta partidas tres; sia tot mot trissat e crivellat, e de lu sia la plagua omplida, e sia constrengida per bona constriccio entro que be sobre aquela aderesca, e sia coagulada am le sanc.	 The manner of the powder is as follows: apply one part to two parts of the dragon; cause no extinction in three; be all moist and crumpled, and have it also full, and strained by good strain until it reaches that adhesive, and coagulate from the salt
E aprop strengeys aquela desus am pulvils e leyssa aquela, e no la deslias mentre esta ayssi que no es apostemada, quar no es eredicada de lu la medicina entro que sia sanada.	 Then tighten that with powders and let it be as such that if you don't apply properly, it won't work, for it isn't hereditary from the medicine into which it is healed.
E alcuna vetz fa aquo sola cautz, quan no es a tu en present enses e sanc de drago.	 There should be no need to use it alone when you don't apply both of the dragon parts.
E ja fa aquesta meteyssa operacio en las grans plaguas quan conveneys que sia pausada sobre aquelas e sian streytas, e so plaguas recentz am le lor sanc, las quals le ayre no ha alteradas.	 Then perform that operation on large plaguings when it is settled over those and stretched ones, so the plaguings will get cured from their cause; the intestine won't have been altered.
E si le ayre las ha alteradas, e majorment quan es en temps d’estiu, lahoras no es entencio a la posicio de aquesta polvera, mays adonc cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit, enayssi que tu pauses sobre aquelas alcus enguents degistius, o que pauses sobre aquelas pols de la farina del ordi am aygua e mel entro que getan poyredura; e aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	 If the intestine has been altered and especially when it is summer time, do not apply that powder in its place as we mentioned earlier, instead put it on top of those ears which are moist with water and honey until it gets reduced; also apply them to another cure where they will be healed.
Mays si accideys am la plagua fractura en os, e es petita, lahoras tu extratz aquo am gesti.	 When a fracture occurs in the leg bone, which is small, you should extract it as follows
E yeu diyre la cura de las fracturas del cap en aquo que es envenidor.	 You will apply treatment to fractures of this kind when they occur on the head.
De las plaguas del col.	 Of the thighs.
Mays si la plagua accideys en le col, lahoras no es en lu differencia en medicacio, e entre la plagua del cap quan es simpla.	 If a fracture occurs in the thigh, you should not make a distinction in treatment compared to fractures of the head when they are simple.
Mays si ja le nervi del col es inscis o arteria, lahoras si es nervi, no es en lu engen sino que sia evitada curacio de lu am aquo que fa vehement stipticitat, ayssi cum ziniar e zegi que es vetriol e semblantz a lor quar nozo als nervis e contrazo aquel.	 If the vein of the thigh is blocked or artery, if it is a nerve, you should not perform treatment as if it were an injury to prevent severe swelling, so that cutting and cauterizing are not done on these nerves except for those causing harm and against those who would do them.
E no pauses sobre la plagua alcuna causa de tot freja, quar la sustancia dels nervis es freja e la continuacio de lu es am le cervel, le qual es le pus aut de totz les membres.	 Do not pause on any cause of the vein where the substance of nerves is affected and its continuation is in danger to all members.
E si’ aquo am que es curat de medicinas leugieras, ayssi cum es caus lavada am aygua dousa, alcuna veguada enfusa en oli rozat o no-rozat, e thucia quan es lavada am aygua dousa e las autras peyras minarantz segon aquesta manieyra, e enguentz humitz.	 When treating medical diseases, you should be careful with boiling water or hot oil splashes and burns when the treatment is done in boiling water or other hot substances, so that the hands do not get burned from second hand smoke and humidity.
Mays si la plagua es gran, lahoras aministra sutura, o coarta las labias de lu, e aprop cura aquela am pulvils entro que sia sanada.	 If the vein is large, you should perform a suture or cut through the thighs of that person and apply treatment immediately upon its healing.
Mays si a la plagua es profunditat o accideys en lu a la pus bassa partida poyredura, lahoras perfora aquela en le loc mays depremegut.	 When joints are affected by deep heat or sudden cold, the pain is severe in that part of the body, and doctors treat it accordingly
Mays si en la plagua ja es inscisa arteria e es conseguit flux de sanc, lahoras separa o secca aquela, o lia aquela, o cauteriza aquela si necessitat te provoca ad aquo.	 When there is a blockage in the artery causing blood flow to stop, doctors treat it accordingly
Mays si ja ha insciditz les spondils del golayro o tot, e so salvadas las venas del col, lahoras tu ajusta las labias de la codena am sutura sobre la cana del golayro e no toques aquel; abantz egala aquel e reduzeys aquel sobre la sua figura natural, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent, e leyssa aquela per alcus jorns; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz en les quals es stipticitat e excitacio entro que sia sanat.	 When the veins of the leg are saved from swelling or collapse and the arteries in that area are treated appropriately, then stretch it gently to improve its structure over time, and ensure it is properly placed on the surface of the body so as not to touch other areas.
Mays si la plagua ja en le os a fayta enprecio, lahoras percuireys aquela, e lahoras si en lu ha fragmentz de hos, extratz totz aquels que podes de lor; e aquo que a tu no es apparelhat, leyssa aquo entro que la plagua se poyrisca, e sia separat e la egrecio de lu sia alleujada.	 When the pain in the joint is severe and has become chronic, doctors take measures to relieve it, and if there are fragments of bone or cartilage, they remove all those pieces appropriately; and also if you notice swelling that persists, ensure that the pain decreases accordingly.
E si la plagua es recent lahoras polveriza sobre aquela polvera la qual t’e recomtada.	 If the joint pain is just starting to appear, doctors recommend applying a powder on top of it as treatment.
Mays si en la plagua es fayta fistula, lahoras cura aquela am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra aprop en le sieu capitol.	 When the joint pain is acute and has just started appearing, doctors treat it appropriately according to that of which the memory will come in handy in their capital.
De las plaguas del col o de semblantz quan fayta entre las spallas e es fayta am spaza o am cotel o am lansa o am semblantz.	 When joint pain affects the groin, between the thighs or any other part of the body, doctors treat it accordingly.
Si es percussio de lansa o de cotel, e vezes de lu la profunditat, lahoras considera mays si de la plagua yeys ventositat quan le malaute elena; lahoras sapias que la plagua es mortal.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate the depth of the bones or tendons and occurs in a patient's leg, doctors consider it a gout attack with potentially fatal consequences.
E si en lu no es profunditat e la plagua es recent am le sieu sanc, lahoras tu pauses en lu de la primieyra horo polvera, e no strenhas aquel per que no sia le sanc retengut en la profunditat de lu e que retorne al cor e que aucigua le malaute, mays pausa en lu enguent atractiu, e deslia aquela doas veguadas le dia.	 If the pain is not deep and the attack is recent in the patient's leg, doctors pause on it with a first aid poultice, but do not apply anything to prevent the attack from returning to the heart, as it may cause further harm or complications.
E si l’enguent no es a tu present, lahoras tu pausa en le orrifici de la plagua coto viel per que sucque aquo que yeys de las humiditatz; e fay que le malaute dorma sobre la plagua per que corra aquo que es en lu ajustat.	 If the pain has been there for a long time, doctors apply a poultice over the affected area to prevent it from returning and also place the patient's hand on top of the attack to keep them in position so they don't move around or cause further complications.
Mays si ja de la plagua son passatz tres dias o mays e no accideys al malaute spasme ni tremor de cor mal ni strictura de ale, e vezes las autras dispozicios bonas de lu, lahoras sapias que plagua es salva; e adonc cura aquela am calguas e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanada.	 If the gout has been there for three days or more and does not cause complications such as a heart attack, stroke, chest constriction, or other bad symptoms, doctors will treat it with cooling measures to cure it; after that they will also apply further healing treatments if necessary until it is cured.
Mays si la sanacio de lu es excusada, e ja tot temps es uberta, lahoras sapias que ja es fayta fistula; cura donc aquela per le sieu capitol.	 If the cure has been successful and all symptoms have subsided, doctors will consider that it is a healed attack of gout. They then treat this as such.
E si la plagua es per inscisio de spaza o de cotel, e es simpla en la superficia del pietz o del dos, lahoras cura aquela am aquo que es precedit de sutura, si es gran, o am polvera, si es petita.	 When a plagu arises from a rupture of the spleen or liver, and it is merely on the surface of the chest or abdomen, doctors treat that with cautery when necessary, if large, or poultice if small
Mays si ja ha fayta enprecio en le os, e so ja de lu inscizas pessas, lahoras tu torqua la plagua e coyta ad extrayre aquelas pessas, si so separadas.	 If the abscess has already been incised in the abdomen, and you have taken care of those wounds, doctors would drain that abscess, if they are separate
Mays si no so separadas, lahoras leyssa las entro que se poyresca la plagua, que la extraccio de lor es alleujada.	 If the abscesses are not separated, doctors would perform a drainage of those
E de las autras plaguas accidentz en les autres membres le juvament en curacio es le juvament de aquo que havem dit.	 The abscesses in other members will be treated with the same care as mentioned earlier.
De las plaguas del ventre.	 Of the abscesses in the belly
L’indisposicio la qual accideys en le ventre es o gran, o pauc, o migiera.	 The position of that which happens to the belly is either high or low or middle.
De la gran alcunas veguadas yeys le budel o nervi del budel, per que es fayta intromissio de lor e la sutura de lor esser pus vehement e pus subtil.	 From a great cavity in the bowel or nerve of the bowel, because it is an intrusion from them and sutures from them must be done violently and subtly.
E disrupcio petita es fayta dificil per autra manieyra, e siec se que la reduccio de lor es pus dificil, si no te coytes de la intromissio de lor al sieu loc tantost, quar se ubre e es engrossat per que le intrament de lu es fayt difficil.	 A small disruption is difficult to another way, and if the reduction of them is very difficult, do not force an intrusion from them into their place so much that it becomes painful because the interior of him is already difficult.
E donc la milhor disrupcio es migiera, quar en aquela no es dificil la reduccio del budel, ayssi cum es dificil en las doas specias denant ditas.	 Therefore, if a greater disruption occurs, and in that case the reduction of the bowel is not difficult, as it can be difficult in these two species mentioned earlier.
E sapias que sutura del ventre es segon quatre manieyras, mays doas suturas son comunas que conveneysso en suturas de las autras plaguas del cors.	 The sutures of the belly are second to four incisions, many of which are common in surgeries on other parts of the body.
E duas autras suturas proprias comunican a las autras plaguas, mays empero so mays proprias en la sutura del ventre.	 The two special sutures mentioned above communicate with the corresponding ones, but are they same as in the belly incision?
E yeu recomti a tu quascuna am exposicio e declaracio.	 You recommend to each patient an explanation and declaration.
Donc dic que quan la plagua es petita e es eyssit alcuna causa del budel per aquela, e es fayt dificil a reduzir aquel, lahoras aquo es en una de doas manieyras: o per parvitat de la disrupcio ayssi cum havem dit, o quan al budel es venguda inflacio per la frigiditat de l’ayre.	 When the hernia is small and there is no cause for it in that way, then these are one of two approaches: either through reduction of disruption or when cold air infiltration causes it.
E donc quan aquo es ayssi, lahora cove que tu scalfes aquel enayssi que tu submerges una sponga ho drap humit en aygua tebeza sola, o que coguas en aygua squinant, e cyperum, e spic, e embroques am aquela le budel entro que la imflacio sia resolvuda.	 When that happens then you should either immerse the body in lukewarm water or use lukewarm water and cover it with a damp cloth to prevent further infiltration of cold air into the body.
E alcunas veguadas fa aquo vi en le qual ha stipticitat, e es milhor que la aygua sola en resolucio de la imflacio.	 The best thing to do in such cases is simply immerse them and let the water alone solve it.
E donc cum tu vezes la imflacio esser resolvuda, lahoras tu humecta le budel am aygua en la qual es coyta altea e malvas, quar per aquo es alleujat le intrament de lu am pauca causa.	 When the infiltration of cold air has been resolved then you soak the body in water that is quite hot and salty to prevent any further causes from occurring
Mays si es escusat le intrament de lu aprop aquesta curacio, lahoras scindeys la disrupcio un petit am strument am le qual so inscididas emorroydas.	 If there are no signs of disruption after this course then you should apply a small instrument to the affected area to reduce the pain.
E la curacio primieyra es milhor, quan es propriada que no es seccio, e no sia occupacio a seccar aprop necessitat e defaliment.	 The first doctor's examination was thorough when it was necessary not to be dry, nor occupied with unnecessary tasks, and to prevent the approach from causing harm
Del instrument, sec se la forma de lu:	 Of course
La una partida de lu torta aguda, e l’autra partida no-acuta, e la extremitat subtil, e no sia am la subtilitat de spatum, abantz sia obtusa un pauc.	 The first cut was acute and the second not so; also the subtle extremity that does not touch the skin is the most gentle of all cuts.
E donc cum la plagua es amplificada e yeys fora le budel, lahoras cove que la sua reduccio sia segon la forma de lu natural, en le sieu loc propri, si es possible sobre aquo, quar milhor es.	 Then make sure to amplify the pain with a sharp touch so that its reduction is in the form of nature as much as possible on the same place where it happened, if possible.
Mays quan la disrupcio es ampla, e es en la partida pu bassa del ventre, lahoras cove que tu fassas jazer le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa las suas cambas pus autas que·l sieu cap; e si es en la partida pus desus del ventre, lahoras tu pause le cap de lu e·l pietz pus autz que las partidas dejos.	 If the disruption is severe and in the lowest part of the belly, then do put your hand on both sides at the waist; otherwise, place your hand over its head and chest.
E semblantment si la disrupcio es en una de las doas partz del ventre, lahoras pausa la tua entencio e la tua consideracio tostemps en aysso per que la partida en la qual es la plagua sia pus auta que l’autra.	 And similarly if the disruption is in one of the two parts of the belly, then stop your entrance and consideration as well for that part which has caused it to be stronger than the other.
E ayssi cove que tu aministres aquo en las plaguas grans e en las plaguas migieras.	 And you do this by treating the large ones and small ones separately.
E en las plaguas petitas, pausa aquo que es a tu preparat, e aprop fay que·l ministre sia entre las tuas mas pyatados, le qual tengua la disrupcio tota am la sua ma e ajusta las labias de lu, e aprop descuebre de aquela ad aquel que siec la sutura alcuna causa aprop autra.	 In the small ones, stop it where you find that it is your preparation; place a minister between your most delicate parts to hold everything together with stitches and close lips to prevent any separation or other mishap.
E aquesta es la manieyra de sutura comuna: una que prenguas la agula, o comte de agula segon la cantitat de la amplitut de la plagua; e aprop layssa de la extremitat de la disrupcio del dit anular, e strenh la agula una, otre que tu no metas fiel en las doas extremitatz de la codena, am doas extremitatz del ciphac que es dejos la codena de las partidas dedintz, entro que fassas aquela penetrar de aquela partida; e tu ja has agreguadas doas extremitatz de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, e so faytas quatre ordes.	 "This is the common method of suturing: to sew with a needle or measure its length according to the width of the wound; and if it goes to one side, stretch the stitch along that edge, lest you miss the two sides of the incision, lest both edges of the chest come out.
E aprop strenh am fiel doble en le circuit de la agula, e alcunas veguadas de doas partz ensemps, e aprop agregua las doas labias e la plagua per agreguacio decent; e aprop layssa la grossitut del dit e fiqua una autra agulha en aquela, e aprop lia aquela am fiel ayssi cum fiest am la primieyra agulha; e no cesses far aquo si es necessitat am las agulhas entro que ajas complida tota la contriccio de la plagua.	 "Secure it with a stitch around the needle, making sure both ends are even, and place another needle of suitable size to finish stitching the wound; keep that one steady while you sew this one firmly so they match perfectly when finished; do not stop sewing until all stitches on the wound are complete.
E sian las agulhas migieras entre groceza e subtilitat, quar las agulhas subtils mot leugierament insciden la carn; e las grossas so de dificil intrament en la codena, e donc per aquo cove que sian migieras en subtilitat e grosseza.	 "The needles should be between size and subtlety, avoiding piercing the skin; and the thick ones are difficult to control in a wound, so for this reason they should vary both ways.
E no cove que la agulha sia ficada en doas extremitatz de la codena propdana mot, per so que la carn no sia inscidida leugierament e que la plagua se huebra devant la sua consolidacio.	 "Do not sew the needle through both sides of the chest at once to prevent the skin from being torn and ensure the wound heals well.
E no sian prolonguadas de sutura per que la plagua no sia prohibida de consolidacio.	 When stitches are removed that should prevent a separation from occurring
E aprop inscideys las extremitatz de las agulhas per so que no ledescan le malaute deves le sieu dormier; e pausaras sobre la sutura pulvils expanduts de tota partida, les quals tenguan las extremitatz de las agulhas; e layssa aquelas entro que sapias que la plagua ja es consolidada.	 The surgeon should gently pull the needles from the patient's limbs so that they do not disturb their sleep; and place a soft pillow underneath the stitches to prevent them from being pulled out, having the needle holes close together as much as possible, which will allow for easy cleaning of all wounds on the extremities.
E aquestas specias de sutura am agulhas en cal manieyra es pus convenient en las plaguas petitas, quar habasta en la sutura de lor una agulha o doas o entorn aquelas.	 The type of stitches used for small wounds may vary depending on which is most convenient in the area being stitched, as there could be one or two needles around that location
Mays la segonda sutura es cominal: e es que tu aministres am sutura las quatre extremitatz, de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, en una veguada, am agulha en la qual sia fiel envolopat engual en subtilitat e grosseza.	 The second stitch is as follows: you administer the four stitches around the abdomen, from one and two ribs to the bottom of the sternum in a straight line, using a needle that has been wrapped tightly with fine silk and of moderate thickness.
E aprop quan am la agulha auras penetrat aquestas quatre extremitatz, reduzeys la agulha de aquela meteyssa partida de la qual comensest, per so que le fiel retrayt caja de la pus subirana partida a la plagua, per so que la sutura sia segon sutura de drap am la qual les draps so strengutz.	 When the needle has pierced these four areas, reduce its tension to prevent it from pulling too hard as you sew, in order for this second stitch to be as even and tight as possible, making sure that the layers are as tight as they can be.
E pausa entre quascuna sutura la quantitat del gros del dit mendre.	 Pause between each stitch to count how many threads of the needle you have used.
E aquesta sutura sabo les homes.	 This stitch is called the "catgut" stitch.
E am tal sutura yeu cozegui la plagua la qual era accidida a un home en le sieu ventre le qual era stat plaguat am un cotel, e era la disrrumpcio de la plagua major de un palm, e era eyssit dels budels entorn dos palms del budel del mieg loc e era la disrupcio en le mieg del membre; e adonc yeu reduzegui aquel depus que le budel havia stat foro la plagua per xxiiii horas.	 "There was a severe pain in the abdomen of a man, caused by a hernia that had been opened up for twenty-four hours.
E la plagua fo consolidada en le spazi de xv dias o entorn, e curegui aquel e es sanat; e aprop aquo visquec per motz ans, e es conversat en las suas disposicios.	 The hernia was closed in the space of fifteen days and cured, and the doctor spoke to them from there on
E les autres metges havian jutgat que no fora sanat; e per miracle foc, quar yeu no curegui aquel am enguent, quar era en loc en le qual enguent no era atrobat ni deguna medicina, mays pausegui sobre la plagua coto viel dos veguadas lo dia e ablucio assiduo am aygua de mel entro que foc sanat.	 The other doctors said that it was not cured; and by miracle alone, even though you didn't cure him, because the place where he was found was not accessible or of any medicine, so they placed a cushion over his body from the day after to prevent it from coming out
Mays yeu diyre dos specias de sutura proprias segon narracio de Paraula.	 "The second procedure is to perform an incision with proper words.
E es que tu comenses am sutura de la codena, e entrometas agulha de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz.	 And it is that you come with the incision of the knife, and enter through the opening between the fingers
E donc cum la agulha penetra en la codena e en aquel meteys lacertz segon rectetut e en longetut de tot le cos, e layssa la extremita del ciphac en le qual has entromesa la agulha; e fay penetrar en la autra extremitat la agulha de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo en l’autra extremitat del mihat.	 Then, as the needle enters into the hand and goes through the second joint to the end of the body, it reaches out to the other extremity with the needle from the first joint going towards the opposite extremity of the arm.
E don cum tu auras fayta aquela penetrar, lahoras tu fay aquela penetrar autra veguada en aquela meteyssa extremitat del mihat de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz; e leyssa la extramitat del ciphac que es en aquest latz, e fay penetrar la agulha en l’autra extremitat de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo.	 When you have opened the space between their thighs, they will insert another cushion beneath them, and place one on each of their legs, and another over their chest, holding their hands to prevent any escape from that part of their body
E fay penetrar am aquela la tua penetracio am la qual fas aquela penetrar en le ciphac en la extremitat del mirat la qual es en la partida de lu entro que tot aquel penetre.	 When you have inserted another cushion beneath them, they will insert a dagger into the other part of their body to prevent escape from that area
E aprop comensa de aquest meteys costat e cus aquel am la extremitat que es del ciphac en l’autra latz, e extratz la agulha de la codena la qual penetrec, e aprop redutz aquela en aquela codena e cos la extremitat del ciphac que es en l’autra costat am aquesta extramitat del mirat; e extratz aquela de la codena la qual es de part de lu.	 When you come to the side of this area, and reach the other part that is from the dagger on the opposite side, remove it from there, and place another one in that part of their body; then remove that from where they came, and put another one over there as well, so both sides are covered with a pointed object.
E fay aquo una veguada e autra, e fay aquo una veguada aprop autre veguada entro que tu cozes tot aquo que es deforo segon aquel eysemple.	 When you have done this on the other side as well, and do it again to another side, make sure that everything is covered in a similar way, after having done so on both sides.
E la suma de aquesta manieyra de sutura es que tu cozes am sutura de pellicies am la qual cozo las pels, enayssi que tu cozes le ciphac una veguada de la part de la extremitat de la codena, e que leysses aquela autra veguada entro que la ajas complida.	 The sum of this procedure is that you will cut the flesh on one side near to where you have shaved their legs, and then do it again from the other part of their body towards completing the whole area covered in a similar way
Mays la segonda specia de sutura propria la qual dieys eyssament Gualia , e aquest es de sermo de lu e per lu recomtat, es que tu cozas aquela segon semilitut am la qual alcus medicantz cozo aquela, enayssi que agreguan tota partida a la sua compar partida a lu convenient per natura; e aplican la extremitat de autre de lu e la extremitat del mirat al autra extremitat de lu, e aquo es fayt segon que yeu a tu recomti.	 When the second part is to be sutured, which should come first and this one is recommended by doctors, it's customary that you do so with the second small hole into which medical experts recommend doing as well, adding all parts together in the natural order they fit and applying both ends of the suture to each end of the needle.
Cove que tu fiques la agulha en la extremitat del mirat a tu propdana de la partida deforo, e fassas aquela penetrar a la partida dedintz en aquel sol, e leysses dos extremitatz del ciphac; e aprop revolveys la agulha e fay aquela penetrar de foro a la dedintz en dos extremitatz del ciphac.	 After you place the needle in one end of the hole and pass it through to the other side, then turn around the needle so that it penetrates both sides of the hole at once.
E aprop revolveys aquelas cascunas, e fay penetrar quascunas de la partida dededintz entro a la partida deforo en dos extremitatz del mirat autras que so en le latz contrari.	 After turning around those curtains and passing it through both sides of the hole in one go towards the other side, they should be placed as shown here against each other on the other side.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura es milhor de la sutura comuna leugiera, e es sutura de la qual precedic rememoracio.	 This method of stitching is better than ordinary sewing and it's called for remembrance.
Aquest es le sermo de Gualia	 This is the method of Gualia
E mays le diyssero alcus, sutura del ventre es rectificada am dos agulhas, so es que tu entrometas en aquestas a quascunas un fiel, e comensa am intromiccio de agulha de aquo que es deves tu, e fay aquela penetrar entro al autra latz segon sutura de aquels les quals cozo les cuers engualment.	 When stitching the abdomen is done with two needles, it should be very precise and you must enter them both equally into this hole as recommended by your doctor, after which penetrate through to another side for the second sewing of these stitches.
E sapias que quan disrupcio es en le mieg loc del ventre, lahoras la sutura de lu es pus difficil que dels autres locs del ventre.	 When disruption occurs in the belly's location of the belly, the healing process is much more difficult than that of other belly locations.
Mays le juguament de medicacio de plagua es jutgament de las autras plaguas.	 The judgment on the issue of medical treatment will also include a judgment on all previous complaints
La qual causa es quar quan tu consieguas la plagua recent am le sieu sanc denant que l’ayre altera aquela, e reduses le budel e cozes aquela e aptas aquela decentment, lahoras pausa sobre aquela polvera encarnativa.	 When you notice the new pain after a previous injury has healed and return it to its place in the body, doctors pause on that particular nerve.
E si le ayre ja ha alterada la plagua, lahoras pausa sobre aquela alcus enguentz les quals so a tu presens entro que fassan peyra dura e cajan les fiels, e sian consolidatz ciphac e mirat; e aprop cura aquela ayssi cum es la curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat.	 If the injury has already changed and doctors need to pause on that particular nerve in order for them to perform a difficult and painful procedure, they will consolidate their treatment of all other complaints and consult with a physician; then proceed with treating this ailment as you would any other complaint.
Mays si a tu no so presens las medicinas, lahoras pausa sobre aquela tantost, pus que comensa a getar brac, coto viel, e permuta aquel dos veguadas le dia, ayssi cum a tu e ensenhat, entro que sia sanat, quar tu no indigeysses de autra medicacio en motas disposicios quan las plaguas so simplas.	 If the patient is not currently receiving medical treatment, doctors will pause on that particular nerve and begin gathering information about their condition first before starting any kind of procedure or treatment, as you would expect them to do if their complaints were simple.
Mays si tu temes que la plagua comunique en lesio als membres principals, lahoras cove que tu submergas lana leon en oli de trempada qualiditat, o en oli rozat, e pausa aquela en le circuit dels locs que so entre les angonas e dejos las aysselas.	 If you suspect that the pain is communicating to a major part of the body or an area that has been traumatized, doctors will cover it with cold water and wait for numbness before proceeding further into the area between the bones and tendons.
E si sent dolor o putrefaccio en les sieus budels, quar motas veguadas aquo s’endeve, lahoras cristeriza aquel am vi stiptic negre tebe, e majorment si la poyredura es pervenguda en le budel e es fayta exitura penetrant entro la conquavitat de lu.	 When there is pain or putrefaction in the bowels of a patient, as long as it is not fatal, doctors often prescribe purgative medicines that are rubbed on their belly, and especially if the ulceration is located within the bowel.
E sapias que aquela que es del budel gros es de pus leugiera sanacio que aquela que es en les budels subtils.	 Do you mean to say that when it comes to ulcers in the large intestine, medical treatment is usually preferred over those of the small intestines?
E es de dificil sanacio quar le budel le qual es apelat “gegunu” no recep sanacio de plagua que caja en lu de tot; e aquo es per la gran multitut de venas que so en lu e per la magnitut de lu que so en aquelas, e per subtilitat del cos de aquel, e per propinquitat de aquel a natura de nervis.	 Healing ulcers in the colon (also called diverticulitis) is more difficult than those of the small intestine because there are many veins that surround it and its size makes it different from others; also due to the proximity of this organ to nerves.
Mays si aquo que procezeys de la plagua es la tela, e conseguas aquela recent, redutz aquela segon la tua rectetut am la qual reduzes les budels engualment.	 If you are referring to the treatment of ulcers in the colon and wish to heal it quickly, then follow your doctor's advice as closely as possible regarding its location so that all ulcers will be treated equally.
Mays si es passat a lu spazi e ja es feyt vert o negre, lahoras que tu strenguas aquela am fiel sobre le loc que es denigrat de lu, per so que vengua fluxs de sanc, quar en la tela so venas e arterias.	 If the ulcer is located in a sensitive area of the colon and has been treated with drugs that turn it black or white, then ensure you apply this medicine as closely to the location where the ulcer is located, so that bleeding occurs when veins and arteries are involved.
E aprop inscideys aquo que es otra aquel liament, e pausa dos extremitatz del fiel pendentz de la partida dejos de la plagua foro lu, per que sobre tu sia alleujada la atraccio de lu deves le cazement de la tela e emissio del brac de la plagua.	 If this is another treatment for the ulcer and you want to stop applying it once a day from now on, then place your hand over the location where the ulcer was located so that bleeding stops when veins are involved, and place the pad under the arm of the patient's elbow as well.
Rememoracio de las plaguas quan accideysso en le budel.	 Remorse for when it occurs in the bowels
Quan accideys disrupcio en le budel e es petita, lahoras es possibla que sia resteurada en alcus homes, per aysso quar yeu vi aquel le qual era stat plaguat en le sieu ventre am percussio de lansa et era la plagua de la part dreyta del stomac, e la plagua era antiquada e fayta fistula, e eyssic de lu gestio e ventositat.	 Remorse for when disruption occurs in the bowels and is small, it may be treated with home remedies by those who wish to restore the intestine back into its original position, so that one can relieve the pain from the left side of the stomach, which was an old and healed fistula, and its treatment involves defecation.
Adonc yeu pansegui la curacio de lu ja sia que no era confizat en la sanacio de lu, mays cessegui subtiliar aquel entro que foc sanat e le loc es consolidat.	 When the cause of it is not clear in the treatment process and its location has been established, then you should cease all further treatment as soon as possible.
E yeu pus que vi le loc ja consolidat, timegui sobre le malaute que endevengues sobre lu accident de mal en le sieu ventre; e no endevenc alcu per aquo mal accident e romas en las suas milhos disposicios mangant e bevent, e aprop entrec en banh e es exercitat en sos ditz.	 When you have identified the location and it has been confirmed that this is a case of internal organ injury or hernia, then avoid touching any part of your abdomen with your hand, except for gently massaging your belly to calm down after the accident.
E ja diysero alcus experimentados que quan endeve plagua en le budel, e es petita, lahoras cove que sia liada segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas fromiguas de grans caps; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua e pausa una fromigua de aquelas que aja la boca uberta sobre las doas labias de la plagua; donc quan pren sobre aquelas e strenh la sua boca, abscindeys le cap de lu, quar adhereys e no es dissolvut.	 When you suspect a small fistula in the bowels and follow this procedure, ensure that you use cotton or gauze pads instead of large caps, place two gauze pads on either side of the fistula opening and place one over each labia to cover them, so when you press against those and tighten your mouth, prevent it from coming out by holding back.
E aprop pausa autra formigua prop la primieyra, e no cesses aquo a far am formiguas una aprop autra segon la quantitat de tota la plagua.	 The first sentence suggests that one should carefully prepare and open up space for the patient's legs in preparation for an upcoming procedure or treatment of some sort.
E aprop reduzeys aquela e cos la plagua; e romanguan aquels caps annexces en le budel entro que·l budel sia sanat; e no accideys al malaute degun nocument.	 This part suggests that after opening up space for the patient's legs, you should carefully remove any cushion placed under them to ensure their safety during the procedure or treatment.
E ja es possible que·l budel sia liat am fiel subtil lo qual es fayt del budel de bestia annexs am lu, pus que es mes en agulha; e es que tu prenguas la extremitat de aquestz fiels de budel, e sia mot descarnat, e aprop lia la extremitat de lu am fiel de li, envolopat, e aprop entromet aquel fiel en agulhas e cos am aquel le budel, e areduzeys aquel en la disrupcio.	 The last sentence suggests that after the cushion has been removed and safety precautions taken, you should carefully insert a pointed instrument into their abdomen in order to treat whatever condition it is related to.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura am formiguas no es sino segon via de fiducia e d’esperansa.	 The final sentence suggests that the procedure suggested earlier involves a course of treatment or medication.
Mays si la plagua es gran e ampla, majorment si es en un dels budels subtils, quar lahoras no es engen sino subtiliacio, e no es sanacio de lu de tot.	 If the opening is large and broad, especially in a subtle part of the body such as an intestine or hernia, it may not only be painful but also potentially dangerous for the patient.
De curacio de zuchem e fistula.	 This suggests that you should have medical attention to treat the problem associated with the opening and fistula.
Sapias que tota plagua e apostema quan se envilheseys e se Antiqua, e es fayt ulcus, e no es consolidat e geta braç tot temps e no es abscindit, lahoras, en qualque membre sia, universalment es nompnada fistula e nos la apelam aquela azukem.	 This suggests that when a gap or opening is very small and closed up again quickly, it may develop into an ulcer and cannot be treated effectively; this condition is universally referred to as a fistula in the affected member.
E fistula segon veritat es nodacio feutrada, dura, blanqua am la qual no es dolor e a la qual es conquavitat ayssi cum es conquavitat de pena de ausel; e per aysso nompnat aquela alcus rizatz, id est pena.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors
E es en alcus homes humida, la qual geta brac; e fort leu la humiditat es abscidida en alcunas horas.	 The space between the patient's thighs has been opened up, a cushion placed underneath them, another servant on their legs and chest is holding their hands
E alcunas veguadas aquesta humiditat es mota, e es pauca, e es grossa, e es subtil.	 The humidity in that space is dry, thin, coarse, and subtle.
E yeu ja he denant dit en la divisio, lahoras cum yeu diyssi las plaguas, que tot ulcus que no es sanat ni no es en lu nuda carn, no es aquo sino per una de ix causas: de las quals la una es o per pauquesa de sanc en le cos; o per malicia de lu; o quar entre lu e las labias es carn dura prohibent nativitat de carn; o quar es de mota legesa; o quar aquel ulcus en si meteys es poyrit e la materia que es a lu tramesa es de mala qualitat; o quar la medicina es enconvenient en la curacio de lu; o quan corrupcio catz en la regio, e es pestilencia; o per proprietat de regio ayssi cum endeve a Saragossa , en la qual es fayta difficil degestio de las malautias, e es tardada en aquela sanacio de apostema per natura; o quar en lu es os un, o motz osses.	 There are several possible causes for the ulcer: either due to insufficient strength in the body or malice towards him, or between his skin and the veins is hard and prevents natural healing of the skin, or because he has been weakened by illness, or through the evil influence from a specific region causing it.
Ja e mostrat totas aquelas causas, e·ls senhals de aquelas e la curacio de lor am medicinas en la divisio.	 The causes have already been shown and described in that division of medicine.
E cove assi que yeu fassa a tu saber la curacio de fistula la qual es fayta per via de operacio am ma.	 So you want to know the treatment for the ulcer which has appeared through an operation.
E sapias que fistula accideys en totz les membres del cos; quar de aquelas son fistulas que perveno a las venas grantz e arterias, o als nervis, o al ciphac, o al budel, o a la vesica, o ad alcuna de las costas, o ad alcu dels spondils del dos, o ad alcuna de las juncturas compostas per composicio ayssi quo de la ma e del pe; e de aquelas so que dan a lu propinquitat del membre principal e de semblantz.	 "A fistula occurs in all the members of the body.
E donc aquela de aquestas fistulas que es segon aquesta manieyra es de las malautias de dificil sanacio, e no recep curacio, e occupacio am aquela es trebalh e ignorancia.	 "And those who have that kind of fistula should not be treated or cured because it is extremely difficult and requires great knowledge.
E si es de las fistulas alcuna la profunditat de la qual no perve ad aquestz locs que e dit, e esperas e confizas en la curacio de lu, e vols pervenir a cognicio de lu, lahoras pren tenta de eram o de ferr, e si la fistula va segon rectetut, e perquireys aquela am lu.	 "If it is of that kind of fistula that has spread to the locations mentioned above and you believe in its cure and want to prevent knowledge from spreading, doctors should try all means or take action.
Mays si la fistula es tortuissitat, lahoras investigua aquela am tenta de plom subtil, quar plom am la levitat del sieu cors es alleujat e curvat deves la tortuositat.	 "If the fistula is difficult, doctors should investigate using a subtle probe, as the mildness of their touch is eased and curved due to the difficulty.
E si la fistula es havent motz horrificis, no es a tu possible que signifiques sobre lu am tenta.	 "If the fistula has horrifying features, it would be impossible for you to examine it in order to treat it.
Adonc cristeriza le orrifici per sos orrificis, quar la humiditat per la qual clisterizas aquela va deves las autras orrificis e corr de lor.	 "After having investigated the origins for the origins, as the humidity to which you applied that has spread will reach other orifices and cause harm.
E aprop inquier exquisitament, segon qual manieyra a tu es possible que conoguas si aqui has os o nervi, e es la conquavitat de la fistula longinqua o propdana, o es una fistula a la qual so motz orrificis e esta sobre aquo tot am la suma de la tua fortaleza, am la tua enterroguacio, am la qual enterroguas le malaute, e la invencio de la dolor deves la tua compressio am la ma sobre le loc, e semblantz de las significacios e de las causas accidentz al apostema.	 "After thoroughly investigating, if you discover that it is caused by a nerve or is part of a long chain leading to the nerve, or it's an isolated fistula with orifices over there (on which side?), and considering your strength, endurance, knowledge in medicine as well as your care for the patient, then compress the affected area on your hand.
E cum tu auras stat sobre totas aquelas causas am stacio veraya, lahoras ve a la curacio segon confidencia: e es que tu consideras lahoras si es fistula apparent propinqua o en loc sal, longinqua de junctura, o de nervi, o de arteria, o de vena, o de un dels locs les quals yeu a tu e ditz.	 "When you find yourself in such a situation where pain arises from one of the joints, from nerves, arteries, veins or any other place that you have listed.
Lahoras tu secca la fistula segon que denant es dit de la naracio de lu, e osta aquo que es en aquela filtracio e de carns corrumpudas, e aquo que es nascut en le orrifici de la carn, o de theil e de semblantz, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	 "After you have checked that there is a blockage in the arteries or veins feeding into it and also that this has occurred through a rupture of blood vessels.
Mays si la fistula es de longinqua profunditat, e es segon rectetut, lahoras cove que inscidas aquela en le preon atant quant a tu sira possible, e aprop mondifica aquela de totas las suas carns corrompudas; e aprop administra calguas envolopadas en medicinas acutas, e intromet aquelas entro a la conquavitat de la fistula, la qual has conprenduda am ferr.	 "If it is of deep nature and after checking you conclude that this cannot be treated with the usual methods, then apply cold compresses to all the affected areas; and insert those into the cavity of the fistula as instructed.
E fay aquo am aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la medicina acuta corroda tot aquo que es romas en la conquavitat de la fistula de la corrupcio.	 "And if this is caused by a chronic condition, treat it with acute medicines to break up the blockage that has formed in the cavity of the fistula.
E aprop restaura aquela am enguentz les quals engendran carn sana entro que sia sanada.	 "Then restore those areas which are causing healthy flesh to come out when it is healed.
Mays si no es sanada per aquo, lahoras tu cauteriza aquela segon que havem recomtat.	 "If not treated as recommended, then you burn that off.
Mays si la causa de fistula es os e es deves tu certificat aquo, lahoras tu inquireys aquela e secca aquela segon que havem recomtat, si tu no prohibeys alcuna causa de vena o de nervi o de membre principal ayssi cum havem dit.	 "If the cause of the fistula is unknown and you are advised to check for blockages in veins or nerves then ask about that and cut it off as recommended if any of those blockages are found.
Mays si le os es a tu descubert e es en lu alcuna corrupcio e negror, lahoras tu ratz aquel entro que la corrupcio sia hostada tota; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que lu encarne entro que sia sanat.	 When the tongue becomes inflamed and infected with black bile, you must take that which is suitable for treating it within a certain time, so that when the disease has been contained, then use that which promotes health to treat it.
E si no es sana e gieta brac ayssi cum fazia, lahoras sapias que tu no est pervengut a la eradicacio tota de la corrupcio; e adonc tu descuebre sobre lu segondanament e exquisitament fay la razio de lu e la mundificacio de lu am la deriera fortalasa tieua, e aprop restaura aquel.	 If the arm is inflamed and discolored as well, you know that you haven't completely eradicated it; so after you discover this, and find out its reason for existence and mode of operation, and afterwards strengthen your own body with a remedy which promotes health to restore that part.
E donc si es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras sapias que aquela corrupcio es en la profunditat longinqua del cors, la qual no ha conseguida, e adonc a tu en aquel no es engen sino laysar aquela.	 If it is healthy and so forth, great! But if not, you know that this corruption has deeply infiltrated the body, which hasn't been able to eradicate it, and after finding out about its deep location in the body, then proceed with caution as you should.
E si le os corromput es petit, o es a tu possible atirar aquel, lahora tu le atira am forceps subtils las quals conveno ad aquo.	 If it is corrupted and small enough to be removed by means of subtle forceps, then use those which are suitable for that purpose.
E si so motz osses, lahoras exquisitament fay la extraccio de totz aquels, e de aquels no laysses denguna causa am la tua fortaleza.	 If it is a matter of eliminating everything and not letting anything escape due to your strength, then do that with great care by extracting all of them, and those which you let slip will be nothing but trouble for yourself.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat alcuna causa de las humiditatz, e en lor inscizio no ha temor ni error, lahoras inscideys aquelas liaments o carns si so aqui, e deliura les osses.	 If there is nothing causing any humidity or dampness, and it has neither fear nor error in its place, then cleanse away those parts which are dirty, and heal the bodies.
Mays si a tu no es preparacio de ostar les osses de la tua hora, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua aquo que poyresca la plagua aquela, e layssa aquela entro que aquo es al enviro de aquels osses de carns e de liamentz, e guarda la plagua que no sia consolidada, e sia constrengida la seccio la qual tu has inscidida en la tua operacio.	 When you are not prepared to remove the bones from your body, pause on the cloth that it covers so as to prevent the cloth from slipping off when you release them, and keep the cloth firm but not too tight in order to avoid any friction during the operation.
Habantz, si temes, pausa sobre lu coto submers en sopre trissat am oli, o coto submers en anguent egipciac, o en alcu dels enguentz vertz, quar quan poyriran aquelas liaments, e les osses son de lor seperatz la ablacio, e de aquels atraccio es alleujada.	 If you are afraid of the bones being submerged in boiling oil or any other type of liquid, or if they are entangled and difficult to separate from their attachments, then when these ligaments tear away from their attachment and separation becomes easy.
Mays si es un gran os ayssi cum le os de camba o de coyssa o semblantz ad aquels, e aquo que de lu es corromput es la facia de lu tant solament, lahoras ratz aquela am resio tant solament derriera entro que sia ostada aquela negror e corrupcio, e aprop restaura la plagua.	 Then if it is a great deal of work to cut open the abdomen or thigh or any other part and you need to expose that area only temporarily without contaminating it with dirt or infection, then do so carefully but briefly in order to leave it exposed for only as long as necessary until it has been treated properly and restored.
Mays si aquo que de lu es corrumpyt es gran partida, e la corrupcio ja ha conseguida la medulla del os, lahoras es causa necessaria cerrar aquel e aquel tot inscidir entro al loc on es pervenguda la corrupcio, e lahoras cura aquel entro que sia consolidada.	 Then if what you have to expose is very dirty and the infection has already spread through the body's tissue, it is necessary to close that area completely so as not to allow the infection to spread further, and then cure that affected area once it has been properly sealed up.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc ad un home en la sua coyssa per que pausez aquela a eyssempli e adjutori sobre la tua operacio.	 I recommend that you have someone else perform the procedure on your thigh so that it is done as simply and efficiently as possible during the operation.
Foc un home jove per etat entorn xxx ans, al qual accideys dolor en la sua cueyssa, e de las partidas dedintz mauguda es sobre la materia dedintz le cors entro que la materia es pervenguda a la cueyssa, e es materia de apostema am gran apostema, e no foc a lu causa extrinseca.	 "A young man of about thirty years old experiences pain in his chest, and the cause is an external matter.
E adonc foc extendut le temps am aquela per la error dels metges entro que l’apostema es hubert, e acorrero de lu materias motas, e la sua curacio foc aprop pausada entro que la camba foc fistulada, e faytz son en lu motz orrificis les quals totz getavan poyredura e las humiditatz del cos.	 The doctors waited for the correct matters to be corrected, and the doctor's cure was applied, after which they were put in order, so that all the issues could be resolved and the body recovered
E adonc le curec multitut de metges entorn dos ans, e no foc en aquels savia ma en la art, entro que yeu fu appelat.	 The cure was performed by many doctors over two years without any improvement in knowledge or skill.
E vi la camba de lu e las materias que corrian de lu aquels orrificis per gran cors; e ja le cos de aquel home era tot stabozit e la color de lu era citrina.	 The body of the man was swollen and discolored, indicating that he had been suffering from the condition for a long time.
E adonc yeu intromesi la tenta ad un de aquels orrificis e pervenguec la tenta al os.	 They tried to open one of these ulcers but failed as it was closed up tightly
E aprop yeu e perscrutat tostz les orrificis e trobegui aquels pervenir a lor de totas partidas de la camba.	 After trying and failing, they sought medical advice on how to treat them all the ulcers in turn.
E adonc yeu me coytegui e inscidegui sobre un dels orrificis aquels entro que descrobegui una partida del os, e atrobegui aquel corromput, e ja era terros e corrumput e denigrat; e era ja corrumpuda una partida de la camba entro que havia penetrat entro a la mezola.	 After trying and failing to open one of the ulcers, they discovered that it had become corrupted and was filled with worms, and so were the rest of them as well.
E adon yeu serregui aquo que a mi era discubert e preparat del os descubert.	 When the belly has been opened up for me to examine it from within
E yeu cujegui que no fos en le os sino aquela corrupcio la qual abscidigui e serregui, e yeu ja havia derraziguada.	 I am unable to translate this part of the text as it appears to be a made-up word or phrase that does not exist in any known language.
E aprop pausegui la restauracio de la plagua am medicina consolidativas per lonc temps, e no es consolidada.	 After administering medical treatments for long periods of time and they were not resolved.
E aprop yeu iteregui e descubregui sobre le os segondament sobre le descubriment primier, e atrobegui continua corrupcio am le os.	 It was necessary to examine the second part of the body after having examined the first one, and there continued corruption in the second part as well.
E serregui aquo que a mi apares de aquela corrupcio, e aprop yeu fo perforsat fayre la curacio de lu e restauracio, e no es restaurat.	 I was able to examine that corruption and do healing care for him but could not restore it.
E adonc yeu descubri sobre lu autra veguada e no cessegui inscidir le os petit a petit particuladament e perforsa la restauracio de lu, e no es restaurat entro que inscidigui entorn un palm de lu, e aquel extraxi am la medula sua, e aprop restauregui aquel am medicinas, e es consolidat leugierament e sanat.	 After examining the second part of his body and performing it gradually by piece and working on its restoration but could not restore it entirely until he had removed a palm from him, and that extracted his medulla as well, after which he restored that with medical treatments but was able to heal it permanently and stay healthy.
E no es necessaria iteracio en la operacio de lu e seccio de lu sino per la disposicio de la freulesa de lu e per la paucitat de la tollerancia de lu e paor de lu de mort, quar a lu accidia en totas horas per superfluitat de evacuacio sincopi mala.	 It was not necessary for an additional surgery on him but the arrangement of his bowels and the scarcity of his tolerance to pain and fear of death made it necessary that he should stay in bed constantly because of lack of bowel movement due to constipation.
E donc sanat es per sanacio entiera, e nada es en loc de os carn dura; e es fayta bona la disposicio de lu en le sieu cors e retornec la vertut de lu; e es conversat en las suas disposicios e no fec a lu contrarietat en ambulacio ni nocument en denguna causa.	 And so his health improved in every way, and nothing was found on the hard parts of him; he had good disposal over his body and returned to his former state, and it was spoken about their dispositions and he did not contradict them while being mobile or caused any harm.
Mays si es os eminent en loc del cors ja trauquat, lahoras cove que tu secces aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas liament e strenh aquel en la extremitat de aquel os eminent, e comanda ad alcu que extenda aquel en sus; e pausa aquel liament de lana pus gros del primier liament; e aprop lia aquel sobre la carn que es dejos le os, e exten la extramitat de lu per que atires la carn a las partidas dejos, e tu descuebras la carn sobre le loc le qual voles serrar per que la serra no leda la carn.	 "The patient should lie down on the bed, and then spread out their limbs to the sides.
E pausa fust o taula dejos le os decentment, quar quan tu fas aquo no es prohibida la serra que no secce la carn corrumpuda.	 "And place a cushion under each of their thighs, another on their legs and another on their chest to support them.
E cove que sia la serradura sobre le loc corrumput petit a petit, quar si es en la concavitat del os corrupcio e no appar en la sua apparicio al sentiment, e forssa a serratura de lu autra veguada.	 "Then gently apply pressure to the corrupted area of the abdomen in small increments, as it may be within the hollow of the corrupt intestine and not appear on its surface.
E si le os es corrumput e no-eminent, abantz es la una partida continuada am la autra, e la corrupcio es al mieg loc o en partida de lu, lahoras tu descuebre la carn de totas partz tota; e aprop pausa fust dejos, e aprop serra aquel de la primiera partida la on es la corrupcio entro que sia continuada la serratura del autra partida.	 "If the intestine is corrupted and not prominent, then continuously apply pressure to both sides in turn, and corruption may be at its location or in pieces of it. And then place a cushion under them, prevent the intestines from coming out, and gently press down on the first part where corruption enters to make continuous serration.
E sia la serradura segon le loc de la corrupcio un petit, segon que havem dit.	 "Then apply gentle pressure at the location of the corruption in small increments as you described before.
E si la corrupcio es en la junctura, inscideys aquela junctura corrumpuda, e serra le os la on es continuat del autra part.	 "If corruption is within a joint, then make an incision in the corrupted joint and press down on it where continuous serration should be done.
E si de la corrupcio es en la continuacio de doas juncturas, lahoras no es en lu razio sino engen.	 When two joints are affected by a single cause of pain.
E si la corrupcio es en le pecte de la ma o del pe, es mot dificil; empero cove que tu inquieras la corrupcio en qual manieyra appareys a tu, e que abradas aquela, e mondes aquela segon quascuna disposicio la qual es a tu possibla, e am cascum engen sia rectificat a tu, quan no fa a tu contrarietat vena o nervi.	 If the pain is caused by cold humors in one joint and then spreads to another, it can be difficult; but if you explore this possibility and take steps accordingly, which may include opening that part of your body for examination or performing other tests as appropriate, doctors may be able to correct this issue.
E sapias qual es inscididors e las serras a inscidir aquestz osses son motz segon le situament dels osses, e la preparacio de aquels, e la grosseza de aquels, e la subtilitat e la grandeza e la parvitat de aquels, e la duricia e la lor raritat; per que cove que tu prepares a tota specia de operacio estrument convenient ad aquela opperacio.	 You should know what the symptoms are and how to examine these bones in this situation, as well as their size, subtlety, rarity of occurrence, hardness, and lowness. So you can prepare for any specific surgical instrument needed for that operation.
E sapias que aquela operacio significa a tu sobre la specia del strument del qual indigeysses; quan am tu es gran studi e lonc e conoyssensa de las manieyras de aquesta art, e testimoni de manieyras de malautias, quar lahoras ja tu las avias per tu meteys aquo que es convenient a lu dels sturmentz a tota malautia.	 You should know what that operation means for the specific type of instrument needed and how you can identify it from other instruments used in surgery or treating diseases, such as medical procedures which may also use them.
E yeu so a tu formant en la fi de aquest capitol le nombre dels instrumentz les quals pausaras cum eyssimples am les quals proceziras a la tua prohibicio la qual experimentaras sobre las autras.	 In the end of this chapter, you will list all the instruments that you may use simply or those which you may process in order to accomplish your objective and perform tests on others.
Forma de serra:	 How
Forma de autra serra:	 Other variant
Forma de autra serra:	 To be fair, this appears to be a mixture of different languages without a clear context or subject matter, making it difficult to accurately guess at its meaning.
Forma de autra serra gran:	 This sentence could potentially mean that there is another section following after "Forma de autra serra," but with limited information and the mix of languages used in this text, any guesses as to what comes next are purely speculative.
Forma de ray:	 This appears to be a continuation from the previous sentence or phrase, possibly indicating that there is another related section following after "Forma de autra serra." However, due to the limited information and the mix of languages used in this text, any translations are purely speculative.
Sia le cap de aquest ray segon la forma de cap de clau stellat, e les puntz de lu sian segon la forma dels puntz alstefegi.	 After having translated "Forma de autra serra," the next sentence might continue by stating that the dots in this case should be aligned with those of a different article or piece, possibly indicating another related section to follow after it.
E no conveneys sino que am aquel sian confricadatz les caps de las juncturas quan so corrumpudas, o es la boca gran ampla.	 If this were not convenient, but if the thumbs are cramped up or the mouth is open wide.
Forma de razori major dels autres:	 This sentence could potentially mean that there is another section following after "Forma de autra serra," continuing on from the topic of joints and their cramps or a wider mouth, but with limited information and the mix of languages used in this text, any guesses as to what comes next are purely speculative.
Forma de razori menor:	 This sentence could potentially mean that there is another section following after "Forma de autra serra," continuing on from the topic of joints or a wider mouth, but with limited information and the mix of languages used in this text, any guesses as to what comes next are purely speculative.
Forma de razori lat:	 This sentence could potentially mean that there is another section following after "Forma de autra serra," continuing on from the topic of joints or a wider mouth, but with limited information and the mix of languages used in this text, any guesses as to what comes next are purely speculative.
Forma de serra autra decentment fayta: sia fayt arc de lu pus sobira e la acuitat de lu de ferr, e le membre de lu de boys punhal descentment fayt.	 This sentence could potentially mean that the section following "Forma de autra serra" should address additional topics related to pain in joints, such as arthritis or the sharpness of a person's movements and limbs being affected by pain.
Forma de lu:	 The form of it
Forma de razori en la qual ha concavitat:	 Form of ulcer
Forma de razori autra subtil:	 Another more subtle ulceration
Forma de autra razori de curvada extremitat:	 Another curved extremity ulceration
Forma de rasori petit semblant a tenta:	 Another superficial ulcer
Forma de incisori am le qual so inscidit les osses:	 One that pierces the bones
Forma de inscisori autra minor:	 Another smaller incision
Forma de un autra inscissori; aquest semblant a ray, e la extremitat de lu es cum serra, e es exhibit en motz locs en la razio dels osses:	 Another incision, this one small enough to fit into the extremity, as it were made here and there across the bones.
Forma de ray lo qual conveneys a rasio de aquel que es perforat dels osses:	 The kind of cut that fits the size of one that pierces the bones.
E la extremitat de lu es triangulada e de aguda extremitat.	 The extremity is triangular and acute.
E es fayt de ferr de India , e semblantment cove que totas las causas que havem ditas de rasoris e de inscissoris e de serras.	 It is customary to do as with all the causes of ulcers, incisions, and wounds.
De inscizio extremitatz e de la serratura dels osses.	 Incision of extremities and bone cuts.
Las extremitatz se poyresso o per causa intrinseca o per causa extrinseca, o cum tu auras medicat aquela corrupcio per curacio de aquelas medicinas e la curacio no comfereys, o vezes la corrupcio anar deves le membre la qual no percuteys denguna causa, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel membre entro aquo la hon acossec la corrupcio, per que le malaute evasesca per aquo de mort o de malicia que es major defeliment del membre.	 The extremity can be caused internally or externally by a cause that is not covered here, but if you suspect an external cause and it's causing the member to hurt more significantly than any other cause then doctors recommend cutting off the infected part of the body in order to prevent death from infection, illness, or malice.
E le senhal de aquel al qual accideys, es que·l membre es fayt negre entro que sia cujat que foc la ja comburit, o se poyreys aprop la negror entro que la poyredura aquela ane entro aquel membre que siec lu e que prengua tot le cors; e donc coyta te am inscizio de aquel.	 If it is necessary to cut off that which hurts or burn has already burned, then the member should be removed entirely and all of its tissue should be cleaned thoroughly; as well as any incision made on it.
E semblantment si es causa de la corrupcio percussio de alcunas causas venenosas ayssi cum de scorpio mari o de vupera o de rutela e de semblantz.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
E si la corrupcio o la percussio es en la extremitat del dit, lahoras tu inscideys le dit e no dones spazi a la corrupcio per que ane entro a la ma.	 And if the corruption or impact is in the hand's thumb, the doctors cut off that thumb and do not leave space for it to enter into the mouth.
E semblantment si accedeys a la ma, lahoras tu inscideys aquela de la razit del focil, e no dones spazi a la corrupcio entro que prengua en le focil del bras.	 Similarly if you reach out to the mouth, the doctors cut off that finger from the wrist and do not leave space for it to enter into the arm's elbow.
E si envezeys aquel, lahoras inscideys le bras entro al coyde en la junctura.	 If you remove that, then doctors cut off the arm at the joint.
E si passa otra la corrupcio e la vezes enviro le coyde, lahoras en aquel es la mort del malaute; e aministrar autra causa otra aquo en curacio es quantitat de vertut.	 If another corruption or impact occurs and it comes to the joint, then for that patient death is the result; and to cure another cause of such a kind in curing depends on how much luck you have.
E semblantment fay del pe quan corrupcio envezeys le dit del pe, lahoras tu inscideys aquel entro ad un dels nozes.	 Similarly when corruption strikes the foot's finger, then doctors cut off that finger at one of the nails.
E si pren en la pente del pe, lahoras tu inscideys tot le pe.	 If it enters through the heel of the foot, then doctors cut off the entire foot.
Mays si pueja entro al denol, lahoras tu inscideys la camba entro a la junctura del denol.	 If something enters into the elbow, then doctors cut off that arm at the elbow joint.
E si la corrupcio ja es pervenguda sobre le denol, lahoras en lu no es engen sino dimissio, e layssar le malaute a la mort.	 If corruption has already spread to the elbow, then it is incurable and brings death to the patient.
E la manieyra de inscidir le membre o de serrar lu es que tu strenhas le liament en la partida pus dejos la qual voles inscidir, e strenh autre liament sobre le loc; e extenda le ministre un liament a las partidas dejos, e extenda le ministra autra liament en sus; e tu separa la carn la qual es entre dos liamentz ain spatum lat entro que sia descuberta tota la carn; e aprop sia inscidit o serrat.	 When you want to cut off the limb or sever it, stretch out the cloth as much as possible in front of where you wish to make a cut, and extend another one from your side on that spot; then draw back the cloth between two of them so that all the flesh is revealed completely.
E cove que sia pausat drap de li de totas partidas per so que no toque le loc sa, e que vengua al malaute lesio ajustada e apostema caut.	 And it should be made sure there's a bandage on each part to prevent contact with the incision site and apply appropriate pressure dressing as prescribed by the doctor.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc quan obras, lahoras tu cauteriza le loc coytadament, o pausa sus lu alcunas polveras restrenhentz le sanc; e aprop retorna a la tua medicacio entro que sia complida.	 If blood comes out when you cut, stop immediately and apply pressure to the wound with fine powders or gauze and return to your doctor for further care.
E aprop lia le membre plaguat am liament al u convenient, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	 Stretch out the limb as much as possible using a cloth on that spot before making any cuts there, and make sure it is safe after all operations are complete.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc a un home en le sieu pe, aquest meteys accident le qual yeu e a tu recomtat, le qual es quar accidic a lu negror en le sieu pe am adustio que era asemblada a combustio de foc.	 Recommend to the patient that in case of fire accidents like those recommended by you, which involve injury to the leg at work and are accompanied by heat burns, they should seek immediate medical attention, especially since such incidents were assembled with combustion of fire.
E aquela corrupcio accidic primierament en le sieu dit entro que tendec tot le pe.	 Such corruption was primarily inflicted on the lower part of the body first and foremost.
E adonc aquel home preparec per si meteys pus que vic la curacio anar al membre am la vehemencia de lu que atrobec de dolor e de adustrio de lu, e el inscidic aquel pe entro a la junctura, e foc sanat.	 That person should proceed to the doctor with urgency in order to receive care for the member that has been injured by pain and burns, then make incisions on that limb to release the pain and cure it completely.
Lonc temps accidic a lu aquela meteyssa corrupcio en le dit de la ma indic.	 In long time, acidity has attacked that particular membrane of the body's lining and caused inflammation in it.
E adonc venc a mi, e so me perforsat repercutir aquela superfluitat am aquo que pausegui sobre la ma de las medicinas, aprop la mundificacio del cos de lu; e no es repercussa la superfluitat e comensec anar al autra dit entro que comensec en la ma.	 Furthermore, in order to prevent the overflow and ensure it does not spread into other parts of his body, you should also perform a cleansing of the body with remedies prepared by medical practitioners.
E el apelec me a inscidir la ma de lu, e yeu no volgui far aquo sperant sobre la repercussio de aquela superfluitat, e mays que temegui deves la inscizio de la ma de lu mort, quar la vertut del malaute era sobre cazement.	 I must also apply this remedy to the patient's hand so as not to miss any part of his body that could be affected by it; and if you are aware that some parts of him may become inflamed because of it, then you should perform the incision on his arm instead.
E pus que el se desperec de mi, es retornat en la sua terra e pervenguec a mi que aquel home preparec e inscidic la sua ma tota, e es sanat.	 Also please ensure that they are returned to their resting place and inform me so the person who prepared and applied it may be asked for further details on how to perform this specific incision on each arm, as needed.
E no he adhuzida aquesta narracio sino per que sia adjutori sobre aquo que catz de aquesta malautia, e que sia significacio per la qual sia significada e segon la qual sia obrat.	 I am not sure if this translation is correct or if it was meant to be a hint that the person who prepared and applied this remedy should also explain what these symptoms of gout mean and in which way they are significant, after which something else may follow.
De cura sinuum et qualitate clisterizationis cum medicinis.	 Cure your ailments with medical treatment.
Quan accideys apostema en alcus membres carnozes e·l spazi de l’apostema es prolonguat entro que fa colleccio de sania, e aprop es romput e perforat, e es eyssida de lu la sania, e roman le loc vuoyt quays cum si era vayssel, e la codena que es desobre lu ayssi cum drap subtiliat, e no es pervengut a deriera corrupcio, e no inprimeys en le os o en nervi ni en liament, es apelat sinu, e no es nompnat fistula.	 When the abscess occurs within the fingers or toes and extends into the spaces between them, it is cut through and perforated; its pus is discharged from him as a stream of filth, covering his clothes with slime so that he resembles an animal; the doctor calls out to others about this to warn them not to touch him anywhere near the pus-covered wound, abscess, or nerve, as it leads to infection.
Mays empero si le spazi es prolonguat entro que la corrupcio enprema en alcun membre, lahoras es appelada fistula e no zukem.	 Fistula
E la cura de lu es que inscidas aquela codena tota ayssi cum es revolvut, e majorment quan es subtiliada e es fayta cum drap, e comfizas que no adhereys al loc per la sua corrupcio.	 The cure for this is to insert a tube into the area as soon as it becomes infected and swollen, keeping it wrapped in cloth so that it does not adhere to the location of the infection.
Mays si tu speras que la codena adheresca e que aquela corrupcio no aja conseguit per deriera consecucio, e en la codena ha spassitut de cara, lahoras tu cura aquel am clisteri.	 If you suspect that the tube is becoming infected and has not been able to be removed due to this infection, then treat it as a fistula.
E es que consideras al sinu, e lahoras si es gran, e·l brac que yeys es de fetent odor, lahoras clisteriza aquel am medicament egipciac le qual es de oli e vi agre e ziniar recebent partidas enguals, e sian ajustadas en un vayssel, e sian coytas sobre le foc entro que’l medicament se fassa rog e pervengua a specitut de mel.	 Consider its severity and if it's severe, the arm that you use to administer this Egyptian medication will be your left arm; make sure to apply it in an area where there is enough skin so that the medication can spread well and not be concentrated on one spot of skin.
E aprop tu pren de lu aquo que es necessari e dissolveys lu am aygua e mel; e clisteriza am aquel le sinu, e strenh le orrifici de lu, e layssa la medicina en lu per la quantitat de doas horas.	 Then take it in this way that is necessary and dissolve the mixture of water and honey; apply it to the affected area, spreading it on her body, and let it sit for two hours.
E aprop extratz aquela am sprecio; e fay aquo per tantz dias entro que sia mundificat le sinu e sia remauguda la pudor.	 Then remove that mixture and do this every day until the skin is healed and no longer has odor.
E alcunas veguadas es clisterizat am aygua de cendre, quan no es a tu prezent aquest medicament; e es que tu prenguas la cendra de vitz, e met sobre lu aygua; e aprop cola aquela e clisteriza aquel am ela entro que te confizes que·l sinu lahoras es ostat.	 If you miss applying the medication or if you miss using the bandage, then apply water to the area and place it on top of that and make sure to change them both as needed so that your skin heals properly.
E si le malaute no ha tollerancia sobre le medicament egipciac ni l’aygua de la cendre, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aygua e mel e quays sia mesclat ziniar trissat, e clisteriza aquel am vi e mel mesclat, quar de proprietat de mel es que mondifique e lave, e le vi fa adherir le sinu, e majorment quan en le vi ha superfluitat de stipticitat e de siccitat.	 When the Egyptian medicine or water of the bath does not work to alleviate the pain, then apply that same remedy with vinegar and honey, crushed together, as it is customary for physicians; this causes the liver to adhere to the veins, and also helps prevent excess fatness and dryness in the body.
E cum tu fas aquo alcunas veguadas e te comfizes que·l sinu ja es remaugut, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aquo que fa naysser la carn en lu.	 And when you apply this water that is warm and moistens the body's surface, physicians call for a cautery to make points on it.
E es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e dissolveys aquel am oli rozat e vi stiptic; o que clisterizas aquel am alcunas medicinas e enguentz autres que hajan las proprietatz les quals ja he yeu scritz en le tractat dels enguents.	 It is necessary to use defleshing agents and dissolve the burned fat, as well as apply ointments that have been tested for their effectiveness in healing wounds.
E si le orrifici del sinu es streyt en le qual no es recebuda la canula del clisteri, lahoras tu le amplifique aquel am ferr petit a petit, e pausa en lu calgua envolopada en enguent egipciac o en enguent basilicon entro que sia amplificat.	 If the blood vessels of your body are strained in such a way that they have not received the needle for cautery, then you should apply it gently little by little, and place a bandage soaked with Egyptian medicine or basilicon to prevent further swelling.
E semblantment si le orrifici es ample, lahoras tu agregua las labias de lu am sutura e layssa de lu quantitat en la qual intre le clisteri ses addicio.	 And similarly if the blood vessels are stretched in such a way that they have been greatly dilated by the cautery, then you should apply layers of the ointment and increase its quantity until it adheres to the suture as requested by the physicians.
E si le orrifici de lu del qual corr le brac es elevat a las partidas desus, lahoras secca aquel en le pus bas loc que es en lu per que le brac corra entro dejos, quar quan le brac es coartat en la preondeza de sinu la carn esser en lu engendrada.	 If the arm that is raised above your head becomes swollen due to this injury, then you should quickly cool it down by placing it in a place where the cold air can reach it, because when the arms are stretched tight on the body's surface the skin may become burned.
E si no es a tu possible seccar le sinu entro al enviro del os pus bas segon que voles, lahoras te perforssa que prepares le membre am preparacio per la qual corr de lu le brac leugierament segon que es a tu apparelhat e que no sia en lu retengut alcuna causa del brac.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
E pren medicinas consolidativas que sian pausadas sobre le sinu convenientz ad aquo que vols exxten aquelas sobre drap de li.	 You should apply conservative treatments such as heat compresses to this area if you wish to extend those that have been applied previously on the affected limb.
E le drap sia de tan gran quantitat cum fa la comunicacio de tot le sinu; e aprop inscidey am las forfexs en le dreyt del orrifici del sinu un trauc pus ample un pauc que l’orrifici del sinu; e aprop exten sobre autre drap de li dels enguentz leons segon la quantitat del trauc, e pausa le sobre aquel per posicio longinqua del orrifici del sinu per que sia aleujat le eyssiment del brac de lu e no ostes le drap gran sino aprop alcus dyas una veguada.	 This compresses the entire limb; however, it is also recommended to spread out a thin layer over another compress on the affected area in proportion to its extent, and then place a long strip of gauze above that to prevent slipping off the affected part of the arm or leg from falling off.
Mays aquel que es sobre le orrifici del sinu, le qual remauguas en tota hora per so que yesca aquo que es ajust en lu del brac.	 Make sure you apply it to the affected area in such a way that fits perfectly and stays on for as long as possible until this is adjusted by a doctor.
E per que sapias si aquo que corr de lu del brac es mot o pauc, o es digest, o es no-digest.	 To determine whether what occurs in the limb of your arm or leg is a major, minor, or mixed type of gout.
E am aysso tu considera le loc de aquel sinu, si en lu sent le pacient dolor o no, e si es en lu apostema.	 Consider the location and whether you feel pain in it or not, as well as whether there is swelling present.
E cum la tua medicacio es prolonguada en la tal manieyra, e vesas la matiera que es gitada sobre le orrifici del sinu ja adhereys, o se apropria adherencia, lahoras le mayti tu le deslia o le tertz dia, e quan deslias la plagua, lahoras muda le drap per autre e renova le enguent.	 If your treatment is prolonged and you are already adhering to the guidelines for the affected limb as mentioned above, or if adherence needs improvement, continue applying the heat compress every day at regular intervals throughout the day, removing it when you bathe, replacing it with a new one.
Mays si del sinu aprop lon spazi yeys virus subtil, lahoras no te desperes de la adherencia de li, quar la sanacio de lu se apropria, quar so alcus homes en les quals tarda generacio de carn en las lors plaguas, e de aquels so en les quals es fayt le contrari de lu.	 When the ailment is in a subtle space, avoid disturbing its adherence to it, for its healing approach, as those are the ones that cause the illness you mention and of course against them also.
E si del sinu aprop motz dias es yssit brac indigest, lahoras sapias que·l sinu no adhereys; e si es tardada la adherencia del sinu e es la causa prolonguada, lahoras tu ajusta en exsiccacio de las medicinas, e si las medicinas so humidas en lor substancia e en la sua vertut, son seccas ayssi cum enguent dyafinicon, quan es en lu ajustada superfluitat de addicio de zegi.	 If the ailment is due to a blocked vein in your arm, avoid disturbing its adherence; and if delayed adherence of it has prolonged effects, then you adjust with excipients from medicines as they are dry in their substance and virtue, so as to counteract any excess dryness caused by adding too much medication.
E le mays derier am le qual es curat, es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e sia dissout en oli rozat, e sia sobre lu vojat vi antic engual en la sua substancia, e aprop comfeys aquel am lu, e usa de aquel.	 The key is to find the cure, by preventing dryness and excess oiliness, and keeping it in a stable state of substance, using that as your guide, and applying what you learn from this approach.
E ja fa semblant en aquela accio, quan no y a brac, enguent dyafinicon, mel quan es coyt entro que sia engrossat, e usa de lu; o que prenguas mirra e aloen e enses, e trissa tot e polveriza sobre le mel quan es sus le foc, e aprop lineys aquo sobre drap e strenh aquel sobre le sinu; e lineys aquel am le mel le qual has cuoyt entro que es engrossat, e polveriza sobre drap e strenh aquel.	 In that case, when not touching the arm, prevent dryness and excess oiliness by doing so; or if you want to see it grow larger still, try mirror and lotioning instead, as well as sprinkling powder over your face when you use it, place a bandage on top of it, and hold tightly. And remember that which has grown large, sprinkle powder on cloth and wrap tight.
E alcunas veguadas so administratz am lu aristologia longua e razitz de lili celesti (e es lili celesti) e farina de errs e centaurea, e usa de aquels simples o ajustatz, trissa aquels e cribela e polveriza sobre le mel le qual he recomtat; e husa de lu.	 In that case, administer the simple or adjusted remedies of long-lasting and quick effects from celestial lilies (and also celestial lilies) and centaur's ear powder, using these as your guide; and remember to apply them after you have recommended it.
E si es prolonguat le sinu, e no es sanat per aquesta curacio, lahoras sapias que la corrupcio es en le preon de lu, e ja fa enquisicio en les osses o en les autres membres durs o als liaments; lahoras tu le cura am curacio fistular, ayssi cum desus es dit.	 When the illness is prolonged and not curable through this treatment, you understand that corruption has taken hold of it, and go to inspect the bones or other hard parts or limbs: doctors will do the cure with a needle as well
De curacio de panarici et unguis attritae et incisione digiti additi et sectione.	 This refers to the surgical procedure used for removing tumors from the skin, nails, and fingertips
Panarici es apostema le qual nays dejos la ungla del dit pous de la ma o del pe, e fort leu nays en les autres ditz, e cum es prolonguat e la sua curacio es mens prezada, o es apostemat de apostema caut, o es corrumput, e gieta brac entro que corrodeys la razitz de la ungla, e fort leu corromp aquela tota, e fort leu perve la sua corrupcio al os entro que es a lu odor fetent, e es fayta la extremitat del dit lada, e la color de lu es fayta fusca.	 This procedure is used for removing tumors from the fingertips, fingernails, and toes, when prolonged and its cure becomes prescribed or corrupts, so an incision must be made, and it should be cauterized to prevent the spread of corruption into other parts, and a bandage applied around the affected area, making the nail appear as though it has been burned.
E donc quan tu auras aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas am ferr tota la superfluitat que es romasa de la ungla e aprop cauteriza la plagla aprop aquo, quar cauteri mot es juvatiu en aysso.	 When you have determined that it is necessary to divide and the cure cannot be carried out as directed, doctors will cut away all excess skin around the affected area and cauterize the plaque where appropriate, making sure not to damage any surrounding tissue
Mays si le os es sa e la ungla es sana, e las addicios de la ungla vuoydas ja compremen las carns a las partidas dedintz, e comensan lu punger e ledeysso aquela, lahoras cove que tu pauses ray subtil dejos le angle de la ungla que pungeys la carn, e impelleys aquela sus e inscideys aquela carn am facilitat, e pausa sobre aquo que roman de la carn de las medicinas comburentz corrosivas entro que sia tot remaugut; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	 If the bone and nail are healthy, you must cover up any cuts or punctures in them with a bandage as quickly as possible to prevent infection from setting in. Additionally, it is important to apply curative medicines that counteract corrosive substances if they are completely removed; otherwise, make sure to cure whatever wound there may be.
Mays si la corrupcio ja enprem en le os, lahoras cove que tu inscidas le os aquel e le extraguas, car nul temps no es sanat que sia en lu le os corrumput.	 "When there is a congestion in the nose, it causes pain and itches to occur within that area.
E si vezes la corrozio e la corupcio anar en le dit, lahoras tu inscideys aquel en un dels nozes segons que es premesa la sua rememoracio, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	 "If times of congestion and corruption occur in the same nostril, it is customary to treat that particular nostril first with memory recall.
Mays si a la ungla endeve percussio o atricio, e endeve en aquela dolor vehement, lahoras cove que tu al comensament fleubotomes le malaute, e aprop secca la ungla am spatum agut am seccio transversa desus en jus, e guarda te que la seccio no pervengua entro a la carn que es dejos la ungla, quar tu faras accidir al malaute dolor vehement, e sira causa a nativitat de la carn ajustada superflua en le loc; e aprop cura aquel loc am aquo que ceda dolor.	 "If there is an abscess or inflammation of the eyelid, and if pain occurs suddenly in that area, first do not apply any ointment to the eyelid itself, but rather squeeze it with a transverse incision from side to side across its surface, so as to prevent the abscess from spreading into the surrounding skin. If the incision doesn't heal properly at that location, then you will apply the ointment there instead.
Mays dit ajustat, le qual es nat en las mas de alcus homes, fort leu es carnos tot, e fort leu so en lu osses, o fort leu es en lu ungla.	 "But note that this is not a cure for all ailments; it's milder and more gentle on the body as a whole, or gentler still on the face, eyelids, or hands.
E alcus de lu son natz en la razit de la junctura, o es la nativitat de lu en alcus nozes dels ditz.	 "Its effects are strongest when applied to the joints of a person's body, but can also be used for treating inflammation in the nose.
Mays aquel que es nat en alcus nozes del dit no se mau, e aquest que es nat en las juncturas fort leu es maugut.	 "But note that it is not gentle on those parts of the body where swelling or pain are particularly severe, such as the joints.
E de aquels que son natz carnoses, la seccio es leugiera, e es que tu inscidas aquel deves la sua razitz am spatum lat.	 The first sentence translates to "And for those who have a runny nose, the treatment is as follows: you should cover it with your hand.
Mays de aquel que es nat en la razitz de la junctura, la curacio es dificil; e donc guarda te de la abscizio de lu.	 The second sentence translates to "But for those who are not in the middle of a joint, treatment is difficult; and therefore take care with discretion.
Mays en aquel que es nat en dit deves les nozes, cove que tu inscidas al comensament la carn de lu am inscizio redonda entro al os, e aprop serra am una de aquelas serras convenientz ad aquo, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	 The third sentence translates to "But for those who are not in the middle of a nose, you should cover it with your hand as soon as possible; and if necessary, apply one of these skewers conveniently here.
Mays consolidacio la qual accideys als ditz entre lor motas veguadas o per nativitat del home que nays enayssi, o per consolidacio de plagua o per combustio de foc, o per semblantz, adonc cove que secces aquela consolidacio entro que les ditz retorno a la sua forma natural.	 The fourth sentence translates to "And in those situations where the parts between their legs come out or are born due to nature of the man who does not want this; or by consolidation with glue, fire, or by closing, always do that consolidation so that the parts return to their original shape.
E aprop pausa entre lor draps de li enfuzes en oli rozat per que no sian consolidatz leugierament, e separa entre aquels, o pausa entre aquels una lamina de plom subtil entro que sia consolidat segon que cove.	 The fifth sentence translates to "And if the parts between their legs are inflamed by something hot so that they cannot be consolidated, separate them; or pause between those one thin piece of fabric until it is consolidated after which.
E semblantment si accideys consolidacio en alcus ditz am la palma, lahoras tu secca aquela consolidacio segon que es preparada e conveneys a la figura del membre.	 The sixth sentence translates to "And similarly if consolidation occurs at the palm of the hand, you should remove that consolidation when it is prepared and convenient for the figure of the member.
De inscizio de vices, so son varicas.	 The final sentence translates to "But as soon as possible.
Vices so son varicas, e so venas envolutas grossas plenas de superfluitatz melencolicas las quals veno en motz dels membres del cors, e le major adveniment de lor en las cambas, e majorment en las cambas dels itinerantz e dels laborantz e dels portantz.	 When the veins of the legs become swollen and full of melancholy fluids that enter into the members of the body especially in the calves and also in the limbs and arms
Adonc cove que tu administres purguacio del cors de colera negra alcunas veguadas am expulcio fort, e aprop sangna le pacient de la vena basilica.	 Once you administer purgation of black bile some fresh water to purge it strongly from the patient's vein
Mays la curacio de lor am ferr es segon dos manieyras: la una es que sia inscizas e sia atirat aquel sanc negre, e l’autra manieyra es que sia elevada la vena e sia extrayta tota.	 The cure may be done in two ways: the first is that you should insert a sharp needle and draw out the black bile, and another way to elevate the vein and extract it completely
La seccio de lu es segon aquesta manieyra: embroca al comensament la camba am aygua cauda mot entro que le sanc gros sia resolvut, que es feculent de la camba, e aprop strenh la camba del malaute a la partida pus sobirana de la coyssa entro a la partida dejos del denol am una benda, e aprop secca la vena en un loc, o en dos, o en tres am seccio ampla, e aprop eleva le sanc negra am la tieua ma de la partida dejos de la camba entro en sus, e desus en jus, entro que del sanc sia yssida la quantitat que voles e que vezes habastar, e la qual tollera la vertut del malaute.	 The second method is as follows: first you will immerse the leg in cold water to make the black bile solidify and remove it from the vein by squeezing with a finger or hand; then extract the vein in one place or two places depending on how much you want, and how many times you wish.
E aprop lia aquela, e comanda a lu que abstengua de las viandas colera negra engendrantz.	 And thereafter command him to abstain from taking black bile-producing foods.
E itera la curacio per fleubotomia quan las venas so umplidas e aquo notz al malaute.	 Use phlebotomy when the veins are filled and cause pain to the patient.
Mays la elevacio de lor es segon aquesta manieyra: tu que razas la camba del malaute, si en lu so motz pels, e aprop met le en banh e embroca la camba de lu am aygua cauda entro que s’enrogesesca e las venas sian exuberadas; o que sia exercitat per exercici fort, si banh no es a tu present, entro que·l membre sia scalfat.	 The second method is as follows: you should pierce the vein of the patient if it is visible and draw out the blood and squeeze the vein with water until it becomes inflamed and the veins are bulging; or exercise very hard to harden it if there's no pain at present, so that the limb becomes scaly.
E aprop secsa la codena en le dreyt de la vena per seccio en le lonc o en le derier de lu deves le denol, o en le pus bas de lu deves lo talo.	 "Place a cushion under their thighs to support them and place another servant on their legs to help with movement. And yet another servant should be placed on the bottom of their chest or lower back so they can breathe.
E aprop uobre la codena am uncis e excorja la vena de tota part entro que appara al sentiment, e es deves la appericio de lu que vezes aquela roga declinant a negror.	 "Place the cushion under their buttocks to support them and place another servant on their legs as well for movement.
E donc cum evazeys e de la codena tu vezes aquela blanca quays sia corda.	 "And if it is necessary, you should place a cushion below their buttocks to assist with support while they move around.
E aprop tu met dejos aquela le ray entro que sia elevada e sia gitada de la codena, e sospen aquela am onci orp leon.	 "Place the cushion under their buttock so that it is elevated and moves in a way which supports them while they move around.
E aprop secsa autra seccio aprop aquela seccio per tres ditz, e aprop excorja la codena de la partida desus de la vena entro que apparia.	 "Place the additional cushion above and below to support their movement as well.
E aprop eleva aquela e inscideys aquela en deriera seccio deves le talo, e aprop extratz aquela e eleva aquela entro que sia yssida per la seccio segonda, e aprop extratz aquela de la seccio que es sobre aquela.	 "Place the additional cushion above and below to support their movement as well.
E fay aquo entro que extraguas aquela de la seccio que es pus sobirana o pus auta de totas las seccios, entro que tota es yssida; e lahoras inscideys aquela.	 "Place the additional cushion below to support their movement as well.
E si no obezeys a tu ad extrayre e elevar, lahoras intromet una agulha am fiel fort doble e ligua aquela e extratz la, o intromet dejos lu le ray e revolveys la tua ma a tota part entro qu’en sia getada.	 "If you do not have an additional cushion or cannot elevate it properly, simply place your hand below and move it around to support their movement.
E guarda te que no sia inscidida; quar si es trencada, es fayt a tu dificil elevar aquela mot e es vengut sobre le malaute per aquela nocument.	 When the space between the patient's thighs is opened but not closed properly, it can cause discomfort and difficulty in elevating that part of their body, making it necessary to place another cushion underneath them for support.
E cum aquela tota auras fora-gitada, lahoras pausa sobre le loc de la plagua lana submerssa en vi e oli rozat e oli no-rozat, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	 Once the entire area has been opened and closed properly, then continue to support that part of their body with a pad soaked in oil and water mixture as needed for comfort and lubrication.
E si la vit es contrayta havent tortuositat a la qual sia envolucio a las partidas, e no es segon rectitut segon que havem dit, lahoras cove que tu fendas sobre aquela a tota partida de tortuositat de lu e als locs de envolucio de lu, e aprop suspen aquela am uncis entro que eleves aquela tota.	 If the vagina is constricted and painful to the point that it makes it difficult for the patient to pass urine or defecate normally without causing pain upon opening, then the doctor should gently stretch this area open gradually with gentle pressure, making sure not to cause further discomfort in the process.
E guarda te deves la tua seccio que no inscidas la vena e que no plagues aquela, quar dificil sira a tu elevar aquela; e serva la tua prudencia en aquela.	 Be careful when handling this area as it may not be able to lift that part of their body easily and serve your caution in doing so.
Forma del inscident am le qual es seccada vit:	 This passage is referring to the vaginal opening, which has become constricted due to injury or other reasons.
Forma de unci orp:	 This refers to dilating the vagina (vaginal opening).
No es a lu accuitat ayssi cum als uncis ni es de aguda extremitat per so que no plague la vena; e es de grossa flexibilitat leon, quar si era subtil, inscidira la vena per la sua subtilitat; habantz es en lu superflua grosseza ayssi cum havem dit.	 Do not apply pressure or stretch the vagina (vaginal opening) to such an extent that it damages blood vessels as this could cause discomfort and bleeding if done too softly, so do it gently with a large amount of force for comfort and flexibility.
De extraccio venae cruris.	 This refers to the veins in the legs.
Aquesta vena es engendrada en las cambas en terras caudas ayssi cum al- Ategi en terra de Arabics e en las terras de India caudas e aridas de pauca teneritat e en las quals no nays erba ni aybre.	 This vein is made in the legs on which there are a few thorns, and also in the land of Arabs and Indians with little vegetation and barrenness; where neither grass nor trees exist.
E fort leu es engendrada en autres locs del cors otra las cambas.	 Another vein can be found elsewhere on the body as well
E la gestacio de lu es de putrefaccio que ve dejos la codena ayssi cum venen dedintz le cors serpentz e vermps e scarides e verms engendrantz entre la codena e la carn.	 The action of it is to cause putrefaction, causing the snake and worm to come out through the vein along with the flesh and scabs
E senhal de la suscepcio de l’adveniment de lu es de aquesta vena que accideys en la camba enflammacio vehement; e aprop le loc es vesicat; e aprop comensa la vena yssir del loc de aquela vesicacio quays sembla razit de planta.	 The occurrence of this vein is in a part of the body that has been inflamed very intensely, and as soon as it appears an ulcerous vesicle forms near its site, resembling plantain.
E adonc cum appar de lu la extremitat, lahoras cove que tu envolvas sobre aquela una pessa de plom del qual sia le pes de una drac. entro a ii drac., e noza aquela e layssa le plom suspendut de la camba.	 If you find it on the extremity of an arm, the doctor will wrap their hand around that part and not touch or pull from the limb.
E tantas veguadas cum yeys de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, envolveys aquo em plom e noza aquel.	 If you find it on any of these parts (it is unclear what these are referring to), wrap it in cloth and do not touch or pull from the affected part.
E si mot es prolonguat, lahoras tu inscideys una partida de lu e envolopa le romanent; e no inscidas aquela de razit entro que sia fora yssida, quar si inscideys aquela es contrayta e intra en la carn e fa accidir apostema e poyredura en le loc e ulceracio mala.	 If it persists, the doctor will make an incision into that part and wrap around to remove it; if they suspect it may have gone inside the skin and caused bad ulcers, then they would proceed with more caution.
Per que cove que sia tractada suaument e sia extrayta petit a petit, entro que sia fora-gitada del derier de lu e no remangua de lu alcuna causa en le cors.	 When it is treated very gently and gradually withdrawn, so that the discharge occurs from between the fingers of the hand and does not return to the body in any way.
E de aquesta vena es yssit en alcus homes que es en la sua longitut de v palms e de detz e ja es pervengut a mi que yssic un de xx palms.	 This vein is found within the palm of the hand, its breadth extending to the fingertips and it has entered into my palm as well.
E si es inscidida en la hora de la sua medicacio, lahoras intromet lo ray en le trauc de lu e perfora aquela am lonc trauc am le cors, entro que sia evacuat tot aquo que es en la materia, e administra putrefaccio del loc per alcus dias am medicinas; e aprop cura aquela per la curacio de apostemas.	 If it is injured during the time of its treatment, then remove it from between his fingers and perforate that same area as if it were within the body, so that it may be evacuated completely in the matter at hand, and apply a purgative for a certain number of days to medicines; and provide care with the purpose of healing the wounds.
E aquesta vena alcunas veguadas ha motz ramps, e majorment quan apar a la junctura del pe o en le pe, e veno a lu motz orrificis, e es yssit de quascu orrifici ram.	 This vein has some bumps that move around and are mostly found on the junction of the foot or leg, and when they become infected, it is said to be from which one infection.
E donc cura aquela ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio e am aquo que es desus dit.	 So cure that with doing so in its division and on this matter it is done.
De sectione super vermes generatos sub cute et dicitur aegritudo bovina.	 From the section above worms to below the skin, known as bovine itch.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en alcuna terra deves nos malautia bovina per so quar motas veguadas endeve als bious e es verm pauc un le qual es nat entre la codena e la carn, e va en tot le cos pujan e devalan, e es mostrat al sentiment deves le sieu anament de membre en membre entro que disromp la codena e yeys fora.	 This disease is commonly called bovine itch in any place where it appears to cattle and affects the skin around the hoof and moves throughout the body, and is shown only on one member at a time as it breaks through the skin and goes away.
E la generacio de lu es per putrefaccio de alcunas humors ayssi cum accideysso verms e serpentz e lombrics e ascaridas en le ventre.	 The generation of this illness occurs through the putrefaction of certain humours, which also causes worms and serpents to emerge from the belly
E es temut per la malicia de lu, quar quan el va en le cors e es elevat al cap, e es pervengut al huel, lahoras fort leu uebre en lu e intra e destruzeys le huel, e aquo endeve motas veguadas.	 The fear of the illness is due to its malice, when it enters into the body and is raised towards the head, and penetrates through the heart, causing severe damage to both, ultimately leading to death.
E donc quan tu voles curar aquel e extraire lu, lahoras no se fa si no deves la sieua ambulacio e apparacio de lu al sentiment, e adonc cove que tu strenhas aquo que es sobre lu e aquo que es dejos lu am liament e constriccio fort, e aprop secca sobre lu e extratz aquel.	 Therefore, when you want to cure it and extract it, the doctors do not operate without first preparing its transportation and presentation in the appropriate location, so that they know how strong this is on it and what it brings about.
E si es preondat en la carn e no le atrobes, lahoras tu pausa cauteri am foc sobre le loc entro que mora, e la major causa que es temuda es corrupcio de lu am la qual corrump le loc ayssi cum havem dit.	 If it is introduced into the flesh without causing harm, then the doctors put a pointed cautery over the location where it lies, and the greatest danger that they fear is corruption of this kind which spoils the site as well.
May si tu vezes aquel esser pervengut al cap prop del huel, lahoras strenh sobre le sobrecil am fort strictura, e aprop secsa sobre lu, e extratz aquel; e cove que·l malaute use de mondificacio del sieu cors am medicinas evacuantz humors putridas malas, e guarda se de viandas generantz putrefaccio.	 If it comes to the head first of all, then the doctors tighten around its top tightly and firmly, place it, extract it; and also guard so that the patient uses medicines to eliminate the rotten bad humours from their bowels as well as preventing generation.
De sectione super aegritudinem nafir.	 From the section on coldness (?).
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en nostra terra nafir, e es dolor la qual ve en alcus membres, e aprop es permudada de membre en membre.	 This illness is not common in our land, and it occurs where all the members are, and is spread from member to member.
E yeu ja e vista aquela segon que yeu te recomtare.	 When pain in joints is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
Yeu fu apelat a una femna malauta ad una vila, e descubric le sieu bras e vi una imflacio petita en la vena funis del bras, e pus que fu romas per una hora, vi aquela imflacio anar ayssi cum va verm pujan ad aquest, mays pus leugierament que esser por, ayssi cum si fos argent viu quan corr de loc en loc.	 You put a woman in pain on a couch and noticed a small swelling in her arm vein, you had to hold it for an hour, as the swelling increased until it started running out of that place, many were worried about it being alive when moving from one location to another.
E adonc anet s’en la dolor de aquel loc e fiquet se en le muscle, e aprop aqui stec per una hora.	 After some time in that pain and feeling of the muscles, you applied here a stick for one hour.
E aprop correc en l’autre cors entro que pervenc al autre bras.	 Then apply on the other arm between where it extends to the other breast.
E aprop recomtec a mi que revolvia se per tot le cors sieu segon que yeu vi; e fo trop meravelat de la permutacio de lu e de la velocitat de membre en membre.	 Then tell me that you should rotate it completely through the other side of his body, then change position with another servant on each member at a fast pace.
E yeu ja havia vist denant aquo en les mieus huels segon aquela manieyra, empero yeu he vistz motz les quals atroban dolor esser permutada de membra a membre.	 You had already seen that previously on the second thigh and this one, but you also saw that changing positions from member to member could cause pain.
Mays no vi aquo am les huels ayssi cum en la femna.	 I do not see it in both thighs like with a woman.
E yeu no cogiti esser aquo sino que es per aquo quar la femna era de viela, on so de secs cors e de venas descubertas, e en aquesta apparec al sentiment aquela ventositat permutada.	 You didn't think it was there because it was only in the woman, as both thighs and veins were exposed, making that position change painful.
E es necessari que no apparesca segon aquesta retro-curacio en aquels que son delicioses e am cors humitz de venas ameguadas.	 It is necessary to avoid this retro-motion in those who are delicious and have well-guarded veins as you did for the woman,
E cum tu voles la curacio de lu, e le pacient sent aquela dolor, lahoras no es a tu aparent al huel ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras tu strenh sobre aquel e dejos lu leugierament e secse sobre aquel entro que sia yssida aquela ventositat coartada, e cauterize le loc.	 When you want to cure the patient and they feel pain immediately after, doctors are not supposed to appear as if they have done it quickly, but instead doctors should hold them down and then apply a pointed cautery on that area to try and stop the bleeding.
Mays si tu no la vezes am los tieus huels, alhoras tu cura aquel am excussio del cors e am aquo que expelleys ventositatz, e carmina aquelas am pillulas fetidas e am pillulas de serapi e semblantz.	 If you do not have the correct tools, doctors cure an excess of blood by using pills that are fetid and pills to calm them down (analgesics).
De extraccio de sagetas.	 Extract from veins
Sagetas son diversificadas segon las specias, e segon les locs dels cors en les quals cazo, quar la lor diversitat es que de aquellas so que han grans puntas, e petitas, e concavas, e sordas, so es solidas; e de lor so que han tres angles, e de aquelas a las quals so que han lenguas; e de aquelas a las quals so astelas.	 Joints are diverse depending on the parts of the body they're in and where it hurts, since their diversity is that some have sharp points, small ones, large ones, and quiet ones, while others have three angles, with those having tongues as well.
E aquela que es segon les membres e las pessas en las quals cazo es segon dos manieyras: quar les membres o so membres principals concaus, ayssi cum le cervel, le cor, e·l fitge, e le pulmo, e les ronhos, e les budels, e la vezica, e a lor semblantz; e donc quan catz en alcu de aquestz membres e aparo a tu senhals de mort, la qual causa yeu recomtare aprop, lahoras cove que tu evites extraccio de aquela sageta en aquels quar la mort siec aquel en le qual en las majors disposicios, e quan a tu no appareysso aquestz mals senhals, e la sageta no es amaguada en la profunditat del membre, lahoras tu extratz aquela e cura la plagua.	 The second type of joint is found in the arms and legs where it hurts: when the major joints are affected or when one of them causes death, then doctors recommend removing that joint from within that part to prevent its causing harm; if they do not appear quickly enough at first, and the joint does not disappear into the member's depth, then remove it and cure the swelling.
E dels senhals del servel es quan catz en lu sageta, e trespassa le os, e es yssit del cyphac le qual es sobre le cervel, quar accideys per lu soda vehement, e scotomia, e vertige, e rogor en les huels, e imflamacio e rogor de la lengua, e spasme e permixtio de entendament e vomi de colera, e fort leu es abscindida la paraula e es destruida la votz, e es yssit del loc de la plagua humiditat blanca semblant a pols, e yeys de lu semblant ad aquositat de la carn.	 When the serpent's head is placed on it, and touches the eyes, causing a cephalic convulsion, so that vision becomes blurred, dizziness occurs in the head, redness in the cheeks, inflammation of the tongue, spasms and confusion of mind occur, vomiting from colic occurs, heart lightness is felt due to loss of word and destruction of will, it causes the location of the white plate to become humid like dust, similar to the state of the flesh.
E donc si appareyso a tu aquestz senhals, lahoras tu abste de la curacio e de la extraccio de la sageta, si non es fora.	 And if you find such symptoms, do not rush to cut it off or remove it immediately, unless otherwise advised by your doctor.
Mays les senhals de la sageta quan catz en le cor, so que ela es prop de la mamila senestra, e sent am aquela quays sia ficada en causa dura, e no es causa vueda; e fort leu le movement de la sageta es semblant a movement del pols, e corr de la plagua sanc negra, e siec aquel fregiditat de las extremitatz, e suzor freja, e sincopi; e donc sapias que la mort descen ses tot dopte.	 The snake's head when placed in the heart causes it to be located near the sternum and feels like a hard object, not like soft flesh; also, cold extremities, numbness, and loss of feeling occur; thus you can understand that death is approaching.
E les senhals quan la sageta ha plaglat le pulmo so eyssiment de sanc spumos de la plagua, e les vayssels que so prop del col so apostematz, e es mudada la color del malaute, e expira sperit gran aut, e demanda atraccio de ayre freg.	 The snake's head when placed in the lungs causes frothy sputum to come out of the throat and is accompanied by great pain in the abdomen that makes it difficult to breathe; also the color of the patient changes, a large spirit appears, and the desire to vomit increases.
E si catz la sageta en le velament le qual es en le pietz, e la dolor lahoras es prop de las costas petitas, e es fayt le ale gran am vehement dolor e am sospir, e no so maugutz totz les membres dels muscles.	 When the saddle is placed on a chest where there are small buttocks and pain occurs in the area between them, then it causes great intense pain and breathlessness, but not all of the members of the muscle
E si catz la sageta en le stomac, lahoras fort leu yeys de la plagua vianda alcuna indigesta.	 When the saddle is placed in the stomach, then doctors are very cautious about what to eat next.
E si catz la sageta en le ventre, e es ficada en lu, yeys alcuna fenda de la plagua, o la tela, o budel le qual es disromput, e no es speransa en la curacio de lu extraccio de la sageta.	 When the saddle is placed in the belly and fastened there securely with a strap that seals off all openings to it, or the bowels, then doctors are confident that the passage from the saddle will not occur.
E si la sageta catz en la vesica, e es yssida defora urina, e procesesca de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, e fort leu es dolor sobre le malaute, lahoras sapias que es mortal.	 When the saddle is placed in the bladder and urine flows out of it and there is no opening for its exit, then doctors know that this will cause severe pain to the patient which may lead to death
Mays les autres membres ayssi cum es la cara, le col, e·l golayro, e las spallas e le adjutori, e les spondils del dos, e la furcula, e la coysa, e la camba e a lor semblantz dels membres, son salvatz segon las majors disposicios quan la sageta no atroba vena ni arteria e no es sageta venenosa.	 The other members are placed like the face, the colon, and the groin, the thighs, the ribs, the shoulder, the knee, the buttocks, and the limbs of the body are placed in order to provide support when the saddle does not compress a vein or artery, nor is it venomous.
E yeu recomtare aquo a tu que he vist del esser de aquestas sagetas, per que signifiques per aquo sobre la curacio tieua.	 We would like you to imagine what this means regarding saddle care procedures so that you can understand the significance of this statement.
La qual causa es, quar en un home cazec sageta en le lacrimal del huel de lu en la razitz del nas, e yeu extrayssi aquela a lu del autra partida, dejos le grays de l’aurelha de lu, e es sanat, e no accidic en le huel de lu nocument.	 The reason is that when someone has a saddle in their eye socket and they are unable to remove it from another location such as the nasal cavity, they should wash the ear lobe of them, which will help prevent infection.
E extrayssi autra sageta a un Juzeu la qual cazec en lu en lo grays del sieu huel, dejos la palpebra pus dejos, e la sageta ja era occultada e no so conseguit de aquela sino una petita extremitat am la qual adhereys al sieu fust, e era gran sageta de las sagetas agudas dels Turcs , am ferr leon en la qual no havia aurelhas.	 "The doctor has placed a cushion on the patient's thighs and another one under their legs as well.
E senat es le Juzieu , e no accidic en le sieu huel mal accident.	 And then, when applying to that part of the body, it is not recommended to apply force too hard or risk causing harm to the patient.
E extrayssi una autra sageta a un home Crestia la qual era cazuta en le golayro, e era sageta arabica, e es aquela a la qual so aurelhas; e adonc yeu inscidegui sobre aquela entre doas guidegi, e ja era submersa en le golayro de lu; e adonc yeu so subtiliat am aquela, e aprop extraxi aquela, e es sanat le Crestia .	 Then place a cushion on the chest as well.
E extraxi autra sageta a un home la qual era cazuta en le sieu ventre, e cogitegui que moris per aquela; e donc, pus que foro passatz xxx dias e no es mudat sobre lu alcuna causa de las suas disposicios, inscidegui sobre la sageta e engenagui sobre aquela, e es sanat, e no accidic a lu accident mal.	 Then apply the pointed cautery to that part of the body gently and place your hand over it to prevent its coming out accidentally.
E vi mays un home en le qual cazec una sageta en le dos de lu, e consolidada es la plagua sobre lu, e pus que foc aprop set ans, yssic la sageta en la razitz de la coyssa.	 When you have placed a cushion between the patient's thighs and another one under their legs as well, gently apply the pointed cautery to that part of the body and place your hand over it to prevent its coming out accidentally.
E vi una femna a la qual cazec sageta en le sieu ventre, e la plagua es consolidada dedintz lu, e no es mudada en las suas disposicios en re, e la femna no atrobec nocument en alcunas de las suas opperacios naturals.	 When applying to that part of the body belonging to a female patient, gently apply the pointed cautery and place your hand over it to prevent its coming out accidentally while being careful not to cause any harm in her natural openings as well.
E vi un autre home al qual cazec sageta en la sua cara e consolidada es la plagua e romas la sageta, no atrobant aqui mota dolor, e motz semblantz ad aquestz.	 When another person enters whose face is pale and has a yellowish hue to the complexion, without any pain, they will be seen by you.
E extrayssi la sageta del home dels princeps del rey que era cazuda en le mieg loc del nas sieu e ja havia declinat a la partida dreyta un petit, e occultada era tota la sageta.	 The face of the person who was brought by the prince of the king is pale and has a yellowish hue to the complexion, but they have already declined to go straight away on the right side in a little while ago, and it was hidden entirely.
E yeu fu appelat a la curacio de lu aprop le cazement de la sageta entro a tres dias.	 You were called for consultation within three days of being brought into the chamber where the gout is located.
E adonc yeu atrobegui la plagua de la sageta mot streyta; e adonc yeu inquirigui aquela am tenta subtil, e no sentigui aquela; mays el la sentia puncio dejos la aurelha dreyta, e adonc speregui que aquela punccio era per la extremitat de la sageta.	 When you examined the face of the patient without touching it directly, and inquired about whether there was any attempt to hide or conceal anything, but didn't find out; may be that pain is from their feet.
E amplastregui le loc am emplaustre en le qual es vertut atrectiva e digestiva, confizant de mi que·l loc se apostemes per que appares a mi le loc de la sageta, per que secces sobre aquela.	 You carefully examined the location mentioned above as the one used for treatment and digestion, considering that this area is the same as the location of the gout, to ensure nothing has been moved or hidden away there.
E no accidic en le loc accident significant que la sageta hagues conseguit aquel loc; e yeu continuegui am le emplaustre sobre lu per motz dias e no accidic accident; e consolidada es la plagua entretant, e romas le malaute de la extreccio de lu per spazi de motz dias entro que un jorn sentic la sageta dintz le sieu nas e recontec aquo a mi.	 You did not find any significant changes in the location of the gout as it had already been determined there; and you continued to examine him for another three days without finding anything, maintaining the cushion between them while the patient remained silent for more than a day waiting until he felt his foot and came back to me asking for this.
E adonc yeu pausegui sobre la plagua medicina acuta corrosiva per motz dias entro que foc ubert, e am la tenta yeu assagegui aquel, e atrobegui la extremitat de la sageta subtil, la qual adhereys al fust.	 When a patient has acute and corrosive medicine, place the cushion on the blister until it heals completely and then remove it from around that area of the foot.
E aprop yeu ajustegui en la apersio de la plagua per aquela medicina acuta entro que apparec a mi visiblament la extremitat de la sageta, e passec a mi temps am aquo per le spazi de temps entro quatre meses.	 Place the cushion around the blister area until it becomes clear and visible to you that part of the foot is affected, but keep in mind that it may take up to four months for this to happen.
E aprop pus que la plagua foc amplificada, e foc a mi possible entrometre las forfexs en lu, e remaure aquela, e no obezic ad eyssiment, lahoras yeu no cessegui subtiliar e ingeniar sobre aquela am manieyras de engen, entro que comensegui un dia sobre aquela am manieyras de engens pendre lu am forceps descentment faytas, segon que vindra la forma de aquelas en la fi del capitol, entro que extraxi aquela; e aprop restauregui aquela plagua.	 If the blister becomes inflamed and you need to remove it, use your fingers to gently loosen it while keeping in mind that forceps should not be used for this task due to the risk of infection. Once it is loose enough, try to extract it from around the affected part of the foot, making sure to leave no injury behind as you do so; and if you manage to remove it successfully without causing any harm, then place a cushion back over that area until the blister heals completely.
E alcus metges jutgavan que la cartillage del nas no es restaurada, e yeu restauregui aquela e la plagua es consolidada, e sanat es le malaute per sanetat entiera, e no noguec en lu en deguna causa.	 Doctors recommend that the nasal cartilage is restored and healed properly before attempting to remove the blister, in order to prevent any complications; if you find it necessary to extract the blister after all this has been done, make sure both are consolidated and well-healed so as not to harm either one due to any cause.
E yeu recomti a tu la qualitat de extraccio de alcunas sagetas per que pauses aquo regla e significacio sobre aquo que no he dit, quar las partidas de aquesta art e las difinicios de aquela no so conprehendudas am narracio ni no comprehen aquelas le libre.	 Recommend that you only extract blisters if they are absolutely necessary and have been given a clear explanation of what to do because the rules and definitions related to that procedure may not be fully understood from the context or description provided.
E le artifexs savi compara am pauc sobre mot; e am aquo que es present sobre aquo que es absent; e atroba operacio novela e instrument novel deves le descendement de las causas extranhas del art quan accideysso.	 "The physician's diagnosis, by which means he determines the nature of the disease, and from whence it arises.
E donc yeu dic que sagetas no son fora-gitadas dels membres en les quals son ficadas sino segon dos manieyras: o per atraccio del loc en le qual intrec; o per le contrari de la autra partida.	 "The physician first examines the limbs that are affected and then looks for any swelling or heat in the surrounding area, either directly under the affected limb or on the opposite side.
E aquela que es gitada per le loc don es intrada, o es sageta procedent en loc carnos, e es atirada e fora-gitada.	 "The physician first examines the limb that is involved and then looks for any swelling or heat in an adjacent area, either directly under the affected limb or on the opposite side.
E si no obezeys a eyssiment de la hora en la qual catz, lahoras cove que tu la laysses per alcus dias entro que poyresca la carn que es al enviro de lu, e sia alleujada l‘atraccio de lu e la sua egressio.	 "If no such effusion is present at the time of examination, then you should observe for a few days to see if it develops around the affected area or exits.
E semblantment si es ficada en os e no obezeys a tu a eyssiment, lahoras layssa aquela per alcus dias e itera aquela am atraccio e mocio en quascun dia, e ja es fora-gitada.	 "In the same way if it is found in the ear and there is no effusion present at that time, observe for a few days to see if any swelling or discharge develops around the affected area.
E si no obezeys a tu eyssiment aprop alcus dias, lahoras cove que tu perforas en le circuit de la sageta en aquel os de tota partida am taravel subtil entro que·l loc sia amplificat de la sageta, e aprop extratz aquela.	 "If no such effusion is present after a few days of observation, then the physician should examine further in order to check if there has been any increase in swelling around the affected area.
E si la sageta es ficada en le os del cap e ja ha procezit en un dels ventres del cervel, e apparo en le malaute alcus de aquels accidentz les quals yeu e ditz, lahoras abste de la extraccio de la sageta e layssa aquela entro que·l sieu esser sia equat aprop alcus dias; quar si la sageta perve al ciphac, lahoras la mort no es a lu prolonguada.	 "If the ear is affected on one side of the head and has already started in any of the crevices of the cranium mentioned earlier, then the physician should stop removing it and observe if its swelling decreases over time; but if the sac ruptures into the brain, then the prognosis worsens.
E si la sageta no es ficada sino en le cors del os tant solament e no passa entro al ciphac, e roman le malaute per alcus dias, e no accideys a lu denguna causa de aquels accidentz, lahoras tu engenia en la atraccio de la sageta e en la atraccio de lu.	 When the sack is not completely filled and does not extend to the thighbone, then it occurs in the scrotum through the days that it is caused by those accidents, pains you should attend on the opening of the sack and under the testicles
Mays si es mot ficada e no obezeys a tu a extraccio, lahoras tu aministra taravels en le circuit de la sageta ayssi cum havem recomtat, e aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	 If it is necessary to make it empty and you open the exit, then pain should be attended in the course of the sack as well
Mays si la sageta ja es amaguada en le loc del cors, e es amaguada del sentiment, lahoras tu inquireys aquela am tenta, e si tu sentas aquela, lahoras atira aquela am alcus sturmentz les quals so convenientz a la atraccio de lu.	 If the sack is already closed in the area of the heart and the feeling itself, then you should examine that closely, if you feel it, then attend to its opening as well.
E si no podes sobre lu per la constriccio de la plagua e per la longitut del preon, e aqui no es os ni nervi ni vena, lahoras tu fen sobre la plagua entro que sia amplificada e que sia possible extrayre la sageta.	 If you cannot stretch it due to the constriction of the ligament and the length of the preon, and here there is no nerve or vein, then attend to the pouch opening in order that it may be amplified and may remove the sack.
E si so a lu aurelhas am las quals sia tenguda, lahoras tu deliura la carn en la qual es ficada de tota partida am tot le engen que poyras far; e ingenia sobre aquo, si no podes sobre la evasio de la carn en la fractura de las aurelhas e en torssio de aquelas entro que obezesca.	 If you have already used it for what has been done completely and all the work that you can do, then attend to tearing off of the skin in which it is made entirely from top to bottom of the body; investigate this, if you cannot stretch the skin in the fracture of the ears and the twist of those into where it is compressed.
E quan tu administras la extraccio de la sageta en quascun loc on sia, lahoras tu usa am torcio de la tua ma am forceps a totas partidas entro que fassa aquela obezir; e subtilia am deriera subtilitat que la sageta no sia trencada e que sia fayta a tu dificil atraccio de lu e de aquela extraccio.	 When you administer the removal of the sack in any place where it is, then use all the forceps available to make that compression; and subtlety with which the sack will not be torn and must be placed on your difficult exit from him and that exit.
E si no podes sobre aquela de la tua hora, lahoras tu layssa per alcus dias entro que se poyrescan las partidas que so en le circuit de lu, e aprop itera aquela quar lahoras es alleujada.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat flux de sanc, lahoras tu administra aquo que havem dit de curacio en le sieu capitol.	 If you face such an issue, then do as advised regarding its management in the previous sentence.
E guarda la tua vertut de inscizio de vena o de nervi, o de corda, e aministra engen en tota manieyra a tu possibla de la evasio de la sageta; e fay aquo am facilitat e tranquillitat e tarditat e fermetat ayssi cum yeu e a tu recomtat.	 Ensure that you keep the veins or nerves intact, unless it is necessary to cut them off completely and treat the resulting wound as described in previous sentences.
E donc que fassas contrayre la sageta per so que·l malaute sia segon la figura segon la qual foc deves le cazement de la sageta en lu, quar es mays juvatiu.	 You should then act to ensure the patient remains in the correct position during treatment, as described in previous sentences.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible, lahoras tu aministra aquo que es a tu possible per las figuras.	 If this is not feasible, you may instead administer what was previously advised for similar situations.
Mays las sagetas que son fora-gitadas per le contrari del autra partida, o que ja de lu procezeys alcuna partida a las partidas de fora, o fa gilbositat la extramitat de la sageta per sentiment de la partida pus desus de la codena propdana e vezes aquela eminent; adonc tu secsa sobre aquela; e sia la seccio segon la quantitat en la qual prenguan las forceps; e aprop atira aquela, quar ela es fayta leugiera a eyssiment.	 If the wounds are not caused by any other injury and do not result from a previous injury to that part of the body or if inserting another object into an open wound would cause further harm, then proceed with caution and take great care in applying it gently, ensuring that there is no significant movement, as it should be placed lightly.
Mays si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu tortz lama segon contrarietat entro que la sageta enprema en le os, e amplifique a si meteys, e aprop extratz aquela.	 If the abscess is contained in the nostril, then gently remove it as mentioned previously and amplify if necessary, applying it with great care.
E sino, layssa aquela per alcus dias, e aprop itera aquela entro qu’en yesca.	 When this occurs in days past, then apply that to where it came from
E si le fust de la sageta es en aquela, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am lu.	 If the cause of the gout is found there
Mays si le fust es cazut e voles aministrar inpulsio, lahoras tu intromet e aquela, si es sorda, sturment concau per so que intre la concavitat de lu en la coa de la sageta e aprop impelleys aquela am lu.	 If the cause of the gout is found there
Mays si la sageta es concava, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am sturment fort intrant en aquela, quar la sageta es alleujada per aquela.	 If the cause of the gout is found in a concave area, then apply it to prevent that from being spread further
E si la sageta es entoxiguada, lahoras cove que tu concaves tota la carn en la qual es le vere, si es a tu possible aquo, e aprop cura aquela am aquo que si conveneys.	 If the cause of the gout is found in an inflamed area, then apply it to cover all the skin where it appears, if you find that necessary, and apply the cure there as well.
E si la sageta catz en le pietz, o en le ventre, o en la vesica, o en le costat, e es propinqua per so que tu tocas aquela am la tenta, e es a tu possible secsar sobre aquela, lahoras secsa sobre aquela e guarda te de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e extratz aquela, e aprop cos la plagua si indigeys, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	 If the cause of the gout is found on the chest or belly, or in the bladder area, or on the side, and it's near to where you apply this remedy, then wash over that with a cloth as well, make sure not to touch any veins or nerves, remove what was applied, and cover that with something else once healed.
Forma de forceps am las quals so atiradas las sagetas:	 Use the following forceps for removing sores:
Sian las extremitatz de lor cum a bec de ausel que son faytas cum serra quan prendon sobre la sageta per so que no la layssen.	 Take one or both of their extremities, with a beak-like instrument that is sharp and flexible to remove it gently without leaving any damage on the sore area.
E de aquelas son faytas motas specias, grans, paucas e migieras, segon la quantitat de la grandeza de la sageta e de la sieua pauqueza, e de la amplitud de la plagua, e de la constriccio de lu.	 "The humors are various, large, few and small depending on the size of the vessel or cavity through which they flow, and their breadth, constriction, and the place from where they come.
Forma de impellent concau de aquesta extremitat conquava ayssi cum pena de ausel per so que sia alleujat le intrament de la sageta en lu, e impulcio de aquela sorda:	 "Cause the extremity to be moved like this in order that it may relieve the tightness of the vessel within.
Forma de impellent de sorda extremitat:	 "The movement of the extremity.
ayssi cum ray per so que sia alleujat le intrament de lu en la sageta concava e es impellida am aquel.	 "So that it may relax the vessel within and be moved in order to do this.
De fleubotomia de las venas.	 "Venipuncture.
Las venas de fleubotomia de las quals corr costuma de fleubotomar so xxx, de las quals so en le cap xvi, so es doas venas pulsatils las quals so aprop las aurelhas, dic alhasisain; doas herbas que so en les dos templars apparentz; e doas venas que so en dos lacrimals de dos huels que son appeladas aspicientz; e la vena preparada en le mieg loc del front, e la vena que es en la extremitat del nas; e doas guidegi que so al col; e doas venas que so en la labia desus; e doas venas que so en la labia dejos; e — aquestas so las venas que so appeladas algelic —; e so doas venas que so dejos la lengua.	 "The veins of which are usually used for phlebotomy, such as those in the base of the nose and forehead, two branches appear at the temples, another arises from each tear duct, one is prepared on the eyelid's corner above the eye, a second emerges from the chin, two others from the lower lip, two more from the upper lip. Also, there are the veins that arise for the tongue.
Mays las venas que so fleubotomadas en les brasses so v; quar de aquelas es una cephalica, e es deves le latz silvestre; e le poble appela “la vena del cap”, e sorda, e es vena migiera, e es composta de un ram de la basilica, e de autre ram de la cephalica; e nomna aquela le poble “vena de tot le cors”, e basilica es vena la qual es pausada en le latz domestic, e es nomnada “citillar”, e nompnan aquela les vulguars “vena del ventre”; e funis del bras, e es pausada sobre le focil, e es aquela en la qual es fleubotomat, e es aquela que appar sobre le poutz per apparicio manifesta; e salvatella, e es la vena que es entre lo dit auricular e·l pus petit dit, e so en lu dos ramps.	 "The veins that are used for phlebotomy in the arm are usually: one is a cephalic vein which arises from the basilica and another from the cephalic vein; they are called 'the main vein of the chest' and 'the little main vein', made up of a branch from the basilica and another from the cephalic vein. The veins that pass through the brachial plexus are usually called 'the elbow vein', 'the biceps vein', 'the forearm vein', 'the ulnar vein', 'the basilic vein', 'the facial vein', 'the occipital vein'. And there is also one vein which arises between the two small ear veins, and another in the inner aspect of the hand.
E en le pe e la camba so tres venas; la una de aquelas es que es dejos la curvatura del denolh del latz silvestre; e la segonda es sophena, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz domestic; e la vena sciatica, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz silvestre; e en la camba son autras venas semblantz ad aquelas.	 When the thigh and calf veins open up, one is the sciatic curvature of wild deer, and another is the domestic deer vein curve, and the third one is for the sciatic vein, its location is to be placed on the wild deer vein. And in the calf there are similar veins as well.
Le juvament de las venas que so aprop las aurelhas es a cataris antics e emigranea e sahafati e ulceracios del cap malas antiquas.	 The veins that were once full of vigor and capable have now become stiff, with age-related decline in their efficiency; they are prone to inflammation and ulceration over the years.
E la qualitat de sagnar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: es que sia ras le cap del malaute, e sia freguat le cap del malaute en le occipiti en le loc de amdoas las venas am drap ample am bona fricacio; aprop strenha le malaute le sieu col am una benda entro que apparan las doas e les locs de lor so aprop las aurelhas en dos locs depremegutz del cap; e quereys aquela am le tieu dit, e si tu sentes le pols de aquelas am le dit tieu, aqui senha am tenta.	 The quality of veins weakening is to recommend: that it should be placed at the top of the patient's head and above the occiput in an area where both veins are visible; one on each side of the head just below the ear lobes. And you want this done, if you feel the touch sensation from these two areas, please try it now.
Aprop tu pren la lancea cutellar, e es aquela que es inscident, e aprop tu intromet aquel dejos la vena en la codena entro que·l fleubotomi vengua al os.	 Apply the cutaneous lancet and make a small incision into it to enter the vein in the arm just below the elbow to prevent the bleeding from the venipuncture injury at the same time as performing the treatment.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am la vena e la codena a las partidas desus e inscideys la vena am inscizio inscident.	 Apply your hand above the vein and arm just below the elbow to make small incisions in both places for entering the veins into the incision as well.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio la quantitat de dos ditz ajustatz o entorn de aquo; e fay yssir del sanc atant quant voles.	 The length of the incision should be adjusted or measured to two inches, and you are free to choose when it is ready
E aprop strenh am pulvils e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	 Then tighten the powder gently until that part has healed
E ja e precedit en le comensament del libre la inscizio de aquelas e de lor la cauterizacio.	 Then proceed to make the first incision of those, and perform the cauterization
Mays de las doas venas arterias que so als templars le juvament de la fleubotomia es a emigranea antiqua e sode malvada e obtalmia assidua e cors de superfluitatz acutas effusas als huels.	 The two arteries that are most commonly affected in the early stages of phlebotomy and emphysema, namely bad circulation to the extremities and cuts of fatty tissue, are often found among those afflicted.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: constrengua le malaute le sieu col mot entro que apparan las doas venas al sentiment per appericio manifesta e sia demonstrat le pols de lor dejos le tieu dit; e lahoras tu senha am tenta.	 The quality of phlebotomy is recommended by us as follows: constrict the patient's hand into a fist so that you can clearly see both arteries and demonstrate their pulse points, and hold them tightly until they stop moving.
E aprop tu eleva la codena desobre la vena a las partidas desus am le tieu dit indic, e intromet le fleubotomi inscident dejos, e eleva la vena en sus; e inscidey aquela ayssi cum has fayt en las doas venas autras; e fay correr del sanc segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	 Then, elevate the codena above the affected vein as you indicated, insert the phlebotomy needle in it and elevate the veins afterwards; and if necessary, elevate both simultaneously; and proceed according to your needs.
E aprop deslia la coartacio del malaute, e pausa le tieu dit sobre la vena per una hora, e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto e pulvils e strenh aquela desus am fort constriccio, e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	 Then tighten the powder gently until that part has healed, and pause it over the vein for one hour; and then place a cushion on top of it and powders and strain it tightly with great constriction, so as to be held in place by its own force.
E ja es precedida la rememoracio de lor, e de aquelas la inscizio, e la atraccio en le comensament del libre.	 When the pain from the joints is caused by cold humors that infiltrate into every part of the body
E donc le juvament de fleubotomia de la vena del front es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a las malautias antiquas de la cara e a emigranea e rogor e ulceracios fetidas.	 And in case you encounter the initial procedure, known as phlebotomy of the forehead, it is advisable to perform phlebotomy at the temple region for ancient faces and emigrants, and those with recurring or ulcerative facial lesions
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es segon que yeu recomti a tu; so es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col am una benda entro que apparesca la vena; e aprop pren le insturment le qual es nompnat fossori del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	 The quality of phlebotomy to perform is that the patient should strongly hold their hand on something which conceals the vein, and preferably use an instrument called a tourniquet from which this procedure takes its name
Pausa la puncta eminent la qual es al cap del fossori sobre aquela vena e percuteys sobre lu am penche o am autre causa en la manieyra de lu, e layssa lo sanc correr segon la quantitat la qual voles; e aprop deslia la perforacio del malaute e strenh aquela entro que sia sanada.	 Place the tourniquet at the top of the arm over that vein, and hold tightly on it or another cause in your hand, and let go when you feel a strong constriction, as this will second to measure how much to let out; then apply the puncture wound with strength for healing it.
E alcunas veguadas es uberta am fleubotomi lat, empero no cove que·l fleubotomi sia de acuta extremitat ayssi cum les autres fleubotomis, abantz sia de lada extremitat, e fleubotoma aquela segon le tranvers, quar le os es propda e fort leu trencaria en lu le fleubotomi quan es subtil.	 Some veins are too tough for phlebotomy at all, but not as severe the others, avoiding extremities, and perform it on the transverse, that is most suitable to be made gently and quickly cutting through it with a phlebotomy when it's very subtle.
Mays le juvament de las duas venas que so als lacrimals de dos huels per scabia del huels per rogor e sebol en les huels, e a las malautias de la cara.	 And in case you encounter both tears ducts from the two eyes which cause redness and swelling of the cheeks, as well as those with facial lesions,
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia es que·l malaute strenha le col sieu am una benda, e aprop fleubotoma aquelas, e tu sias stant sobre le cap de lu.	 "The quality of phlebotomy is that the patient strains their arm to hold something, and then there are phlebotomies like this one, and you should stay on top of his head.
E sia fayta la fleubotomia segon le transvers a longitut un pauc am fleubotomi pauc, quar en le loc no es carn; e si le fleubotomi es subtil, fort leu la extremitat de lu es trencada.	 "The phlebotomy is done through the vein at a certain angle, which may cause pain if the phlebotomist is unskilled, and if the phlebotomy is delicate, it can damage the arm.
E aprop fay correr del sanc atant quant es a tu necessari, e pausa sobre aquelas coto, e strenh aquelas per una nueyt, e aprop deslia aquelas.	 "When you need to, stop pressing them gently and hold them back, and pull them with new force, and release them.
Mays le fleubotomi de la vena del nas es conferent a febre acuta e a soda vehement, e a las malautias de la cara e emigranea e rogor que accideys en la cara, e majorment quan es antiqua.	 "The phlebotomy of the nasal vein is usually accompanied by an acute fever and severe chills, as well as with skin rashes on the face or elsewhere, often in children.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col e aprop te le sieu nas am la tua ma sinistra, e pren le fleubotomi subtil lonc e fica aquela en le mieg loc del cap del nas segon rectitut, quar la vena no appar al sentiment aqui, e quar le sanc comensa a fluir tantost.	 "The quality of nasal phlebotomy is that the patient strains their left arm to hold their nose open with their right hand, gently performs the phlebotomy, and places it in the middle of their forehead after straightening out her head, which ensures that the vein does not show at this moment.
Cove que tu ultimes la tua ma am le fleubotomi petit a petit e fassas correr del sanc segon la tua necessitat; e aprop lia aquela per una nuoyt, quar aquela es restaurada leugierament.	 "Finally, gently press the phlebotomy back and let go of it when you need to, as soon as possible, so that it is restored immediately.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de las doas guidegui a constriccio de ale e a comensament de lepra e a motas malautias e inpetige e malas ulceracios corrosivas ayssi cum herpotromeno.	 "The childhood of nasal phlebotomy may cause constriction of the blood vessels and start itching, rashes, ulcers, and corrosive sores on the skin as well.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que el malaute strenha dejos quascuna en le sieu col am liament; e estia le artifexs sobre le cap del malaute, e le malaute sia sezent sobre una sezela.	 "The quality of the phlebotomy on those people is that they are always in their own blood; and there lies an artist over the head of each patient, and a seal over his heart.
E aprop fleubotoma la vena al lonc am fleubotomi ample petit a petit; e aprop extratz de sanc segon temprada quantitat o segon aquo que vezes de necessitat que es ad aquo; e aprop fay semblant del autra vena.	 "And the phlebotomy is performed in small steps, and with great caution, as often necessary to do so, and like that of all other veins.
E aprop deslia le liament e strenh las doas venas am strictura migiera per so que·l malaute no sia prefocat, e laysa entro al mati quar la plagua es sanada.	 "And tighten the two veins in a mild constriction to prevent the patient from being preferred, and place it at the mouth when the wound is healed.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de las venas algerich, comfereys a petitas apostemas e pustulas de la boca e corrupcio de las gengivas e malas ulceracios e fissuras, e a malas ulceracios que so en le nas e en le circuit de lu.	 "The youth of phlebotomy on veins is harsh with small wounds and pustules in the mouth and corruption of the gums and bad ulcers and fissures, and bad ulcers that are in the nose and in the throat.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que fases cezer le malaute denant tu, e strenh le col de lu am una benda, e aprop revolveys las labias de lu e reguarda a doas venas de las quals la una es de la dextra de la labia e la segonda de la senestra; e la demonstracio de quascuna es per la negror de quascuna de amdos, e aquo mays es quar en le circuit de aquelas so venas menudas negras; e adonc inscideys cascuna per inscizio inscident.	 "The quality of phlebotomy on those people is that you must squeeze the patient to death with a band, and tighten the neck of them with something like this, and turn the lips of them inward and guard against both veins from which one is in the right lobe of the lip and the other is in the left lobe; and the demonstration of each one is by darkening each of their faces.
Mays si dubitacio es dejos tu, e no sabes qual es de aquelas, lahoras tu enten a inscisio de la major de aquelas, e de la pus manifesta de aquelas.	 When you are unsure of what something is called or don't know its name from that group, the doctors then explain it to be part of one of these groups: the first, second, or third mentioned above.
E fay le semblant de las doas venas que so en las labias desus.	 And place a servant on their buttocks as well.
Mays costuma corr mays a inscidir las doas venas que so en la labia dejos.	 The customarily practiced method to determine the source of pain is by examining the affected part of the body, and if the foot is painful, it is called gout as mentioned earlier.
Mays de doas venas que so dejos la lengua le juvament es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a prefocacios que so en le guolayro, a la malautia de la uvula, e a malautias de la boca.	 The first servant you place under their tongue is the phlebotomy of the cephalic artery, in front of which veins are located?
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es que segue le malaute entre las tuas mas denant le solel, e eleva la lengua de lu, e reguarda dejos la lengua, de la un latz de lu vena e del autre latz vena, e la color de quascuna es declinant a negror.	 The quality of phlebotomy is that it follows the flow between your veins and elevates the tongue, and guards against the latter two veins, and the color of each decreases in darkness.
E adonc fleubotoma quascuna; e guarda te que no ultimes la tua ma en fleubotoman aquelas, quar dejos aquelas so arterias.	 After phlebotomy of each one, be sure not to go on with your hand to phlebotomize those veins which are arteries.
E las tuas venas que so fleubotomadas en le coyde so en las quals corr costuma en totz les homes, e la fleubotomia de lor es fayta segon dos manieyras, o pongen am le fleubotomi mirtilat o olivar a subtilitat declinant; o secsar am fleubotomi cutellar, e apelha si alnessil, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	 The veins that are phlebotomized in the neck usually occur on both sides of the body and if you do this twice with each hand at first or olive oil for a subtle decline; or if you rub it gently, and it is used like this.
E aquest alnessil es que conveneys a seccio e de aquels so specias latz e subtils segon la amplitut de las venas e segon la strictura de aquelas.	 "These are the veins that stretch and twist as they expand, and follow the veins' width and structure.
Forma de fleubotomi mirti:	 Method for phlebotomy
sia le latz de lu ayssi cum vezes, e conveneys a obrir las venas concavas plenas procedentz apparentz grossas, e ad aquelas que conteno sanc gros torbat.	 The veins of the body are first opened up completely and then narrowed down to those that contain some larger vessels or have blocked smaller ones.
E aquesta es la forma de fleubotomi olivar:	 This is how phlebotomy oil is used.
E aquest fleubotomi es de menor latitut e de pus subtil extremitat, e conveneys a fleubotomia de venas subtils que conteno sanc subtil citri.	 The smaller vein phlebotomy procedure consists of veins that are very narrow and subtle in their extremity, with the purpose of performing venous punctures only on those veins containing small openings.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena basilica la qual es una de tres venas: quar extratz le sanc de las malautias que so dejos le guolayro e·l col, e de aquo que siec le pietz e·l ventre.	 The phlebotomy procedure on the vein known as the basilica is one of three veins: it is located in front and above the toes, behind which you have to pierce your belly button
E conveneys al fleubotomador, quan fleubotomia aquela, que guarde be aquela e sia sobre-temor en aquela, quar dejos lu ha arteria, e si erra e ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi, inscidira aquela arteria e accidira fluxs de sanc, per so que cove que no fleubotomes aquela am fleubotomi pungent, abantz sia sectant cum alnessil.	 The phlebotomist, when performing that phlebotomy procedure on the basilica vein, must hold it gently and steady in order to prevent any arteries from being injured during the phlebotomy puncture; if an artery is hit and pierced, blood flow will be reduced, so as not to perform another phlebotomy until then.
E si no appar la basilica per apparicio manifesta, lahoras cove que tu laysses aquela e que tu mudes a la autre, o que cerques alcun ram sieu; o que fleubotomes en loc de lu finis del bras, quar aquela es manifesta; e secsa aquela am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit.	 If the basilica is not visible due to its location hidden, then you proceed with another vein or look for an alternative; if attempting to phlebotomize on that arm, as it's located at the end of the arm, this technique will also be used accordingly.
Mays si tu voles la fleubotomia de lu meteyssa, lahoras cove denant la strictura del bras que toques le loc entro que conogues le loc dels pols, e aprop senha sobre lu am tencha; e aprop lia le bras e secsa la vena am seccio concava am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit; e guarda te que caja la percussio per alcu spazi del loc de la arteria.	 "You are to open the chest and arm space for applying the phlebotomy needle in order to observe its location of the arms, then apply pressure over that area to stop bleeding from the artery.
E quan tu vezes, cum strenhes le liament, imflacio en le loc que has senhat am tencha, lahoras aquela inflacio es inflacio de la arteria, e donc squiva aquela.	 "When you exhale, as you tighten the ligament, an inflammation occurs at the area where you've applied pressure, and therefore you feel that inflammation.
E si vezes le sanc fluir en la fleubotomia ayssi cum aurina de enfant, e·l sanc es subtil rog, lahoras sapias que es del sanc de la arteria; e lahoras tu coyta e pausa le tieu dit sobre aquel per lonc spazi; e aprop osta le tieu dit, e si lo sanc es abscindit, quar motas veguadas es abscindit, lahoras tu strenh le bras e layssa aquel.	 "If the bleeding is light and subtle, you know it's from the artery, so you put pressure on that area to stop the bleeding; if not, then tighten your arms as well.
E guardes le malaute de la moccio de lu, e sia sobre-temor de lu e no maugua aquel per alcus dias entro que sia sanat.	 "Keep the patient quiet and still to prevent them from moving around for a few days after their injury.
Mays si le sanc no es abscindit, e vezes que deves tu no es present medicina ad aquo, lahoras tu inscideys la arteria, si appar a tu; quar la extremitat de lu es contrayta, e es abscindit le sanc; o que prenguas scorsa de fistic, e fen aquela, e pren la una maytat e strenh aquela sobre le loc de la vena am strictura descent am liament e am pulvils entro al autra dia.	 "If the bleeding is not stopped and you don't apply medicine as suggested, then press down on the artery near their elbow or wrist area to try to stop it; if that doesn't work either, keep applying pressure from above until they bleed through.
E lahoras si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, lahoras cura aquel am aquo del qual es precedit a la rememoracio del loc de las polveras abscindentz flux de sanc.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body and if there are no other causes mentioned previously for the location of the sand (sands), then it may be gout.
E la abscizio del sanc de lu es dificil en motas disposicios per le loc petit de la plagua e la possibilitat del liament del bras.	 It is difficult to remove sand from a small space, and the possibility of damage to the arm should also be considered.
Mays de la vena fusca la fleubotomia es juvament que extratz lo sanc de la partida subirana del cap e a la partida dejos del cors; per aquo quar es composta de ram de la basilica e de ram de cephalica, ayssi cum havem dit.	 The veins that fuse together form what is called the basilica and cephalic vein, which are important structures for blood circulation in the body.
E cove al fleubotomant aquela que sia sobre-temor en la fleubotomia de lu, quar dejos aquela es un nervi; e adonc si ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi e atroba le nervi, accidira a lu stupor, e es difficil la sanacio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot, E aquest nervi motas veguadas apar al sentiment; e si es ocultat ad alcus homes e es subtil e no es monstrat, lahoras cove que tu pauses le fleubotomi am le qual tu fleubotomas am seccio de alnessil, e evita le nervi am la tua fortalesa.	 The vein that has an over-swelling in the vein thrombosis may be a nerve; and when it is cut or trapped, it can cause paralysis, which makes recovery difficult, if left untreated, and may lead to severe complications, as this nerve supplies sensation to some parts of the body. If you suspect there might be one, do not perform any vein thrombectomies without first checking for its location with a skilled professional.
E si la vena es entre dos nervis, lahoras tu fen la vena en la longitut.	 If the vein is between two nerves, make sure to cut it in its length.
Le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena cephalica es que atratz le sanc del cap e comfereys a las malautias dels huels.	 The importance of performing the cephalic vein thrombosis is that you treat the sand in the head and prevents any bleeding from the ears.
E cove en aquest propriament, si vols que la fleubotomes pungen am fleubotomi olivar o am fleubotomi mirti; quar es la pus salva de totas las venas, quar no es dejos lu arteria ni nervi.	 "When you want to make the joints bleed or cut into them with a sharp instrument, which is fatal because it severs all veins and arteries.
Mays empero conveneys a tu deves la fleubotomia que guardes que am le fleubotomi no punguas le cap del lacert tant solament, e cerques le loc pus leugier, e no notz a lu, si no es atrobat am la percussio primieyra que sia sobre aquela am fleubotomia alcunas veguadas.	 "You must also remember to avoid making the cut near the brain, and seek medical assistance if you do not succeed in stopping it.
Mays empero fort leu es apostemat en alcus homes, quan no es fleubotomat en la primieyra percussio, mays no notz en re aquel apostema.	 "Even though the incision may be superficial and not reach the brain, you must avoid making it in or near these areas.
Mays la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquela e les accidentz de lu so motz, en les quals te cove cogitar en lor rectificacio.	 "The quality of the treatment and its potential complications should be considered when deciding how to correct it.
Le primier de lu es del qual cove que sapias que fleubotomia no es aministrada sino en conservacio de sanetat e per speransa de lu e cautela de aveniment de malautias, e que sia fayta fleubotomia en la una de las venas que so en le coyde, so es: cephalica, fusca e basilica; e que sia fayta fleubotomia al comensament de primaveyra, sobre dejun en primaviera e autunppne, e en invern aprop la comestio, quan apparo significacios de replecio.	 "The first one of which it is important to be aware that the treatment must not involve damage or injury to any veins in its course, such as the cephalica, fusca and basilica; and also that the procedure should begin with a superficial incision, over the forehead, temple or ear, depending on where it appears.
E sia fayta fleubotomia e le tertz dia o al primier pus que del jorn siran passadas tres horas.	 "And after three days at the earliest.
Mays fleubotomia que es aministrada, mays quan provoca convenencia e necessitat ad aquo, o de nuoyt o de dia, en tota hora e en tot temps.	 "The treatment must be performed when necessary and convenient to do so at any hour or time.
E cove que efant no sia fleubotomat entro que aja xiiii ans, e femna que sia prenhs no sia fleubotomada sino del quart mes entro al sete, e les viels no sian fleubotomatz les quals ja han passatz lx ans.	 When the patient is about to have a bloodletting procedure on day seven, and if it has not been done before the sixth time, then do
E cum alcu vol esser fleubotomat per qualque manieyra sia, cove que mondifique les sieus budels denant la fleubotomia am clisteri leon, si en aquels ha mota fenda retenguda, per so que las venas no atiro las superfluitatz en la fleubotomia dels budels, que son puridas, e que no noguan als membres principals.	 When making a bloodletting procedure by any vein in the arm or hand of the patient, if it is the first time that this has been done within six months, then ensure that only pure veins are used for bleeding and do not use any impure ones on the main limbs
E no sian fleubotomatz les pascientz naucea sacertiva e crapula, ni evasent de malautia ni de ebretat entro que aquo sia remaugut aquo de lor, ni malaute de ydropici, e mays que fleubotomia sia temuda aprop colica passio e aprop vomit, e aprop cos de ventre, e aprop multiplicacio de coyt e de trebal e de exercici de dejunis o de vigilias e de tota causa que dissolveys la vertut, o sia corpore28 o animal.	 When the patient is convulsed or vomiting from an illness of any kind (even a physical ailment), and if there are no symptoms suggesting bleeding in this area but there may be vomiting due to it, ensure that bloodletting should not be performed on the abdomen, and do not make cuts or incisions elsewhere.
E aprop considera en subtiliacio de humos denant aquo si le sanc es gros, am viandas e beures, e am medicinas si aquo es a lu possible ad aquo.	 When considering the subtleties of the humors in this area if it seems to cause swelling or drinking and eating, consider whether it is possible that there may be bleeding due to this.
E aprop intre en banh si alcuna causa no prohibeys, o sia excersitat per alcun exercici per so que·l sanc sia subtiliat.	 When considering between the two causes, do not prohibit any exercise as long as it is a subtle matter.
E pausa la fleubotomia de lu en le pietz del dia, so es enviro la hora de tercia, ayssi cum havem dit.	 Wait for third time to perform the bloodletting on that day, similarly as mentioned before.
E perforsa te que·l pietz de aquel sia guardat en aquel dia de totz mals accidentz animals, ayssi cum es angustia, ira, temor, e de totz accidentz corporals, ayssi cum es trebal e pena superflua e coyt e semblantz a lor.	 When the chest is filled with those ailments of beasts and injuries to the body as well as anguish, anger, terror, all bodily accidents, thus there are weakness, useless pain, faintness, and they become worse
E a la sua sezelha fassa esser presentz las causas en le us de la qual corr costuma dels homes am aromaticitat e odorament e am bals e semblantz ad aquels segon la cantitat de possibilitat.	 And the reason for its presence is in the use to which it usually occurs among men, that of flavor and smell and also as balsam and appearance according to the amount of possibility.
E segua le fleubotomador sobre un coyssi que sia pus aut que·l coyssi de aquel que deu esser fleubotomat.	 Then follow the phlebotomist about a cushion that is puffed or the cushion from which it was phlebotomized.
E aprop extragua le sieu bras, e fregue aquel am la sua ma le fleubotomador doas o tres veguadas; e aprop strenha le liament am correia e involva aquel doas veguadas.	 Then stretch out the elbow and apply it to their hand as they phlebotomize or three times, then straighten up their arm afterwards.
E sia la strictura temprada, quar la strictura quant no es engual, o la strictura es am superfluitat, lahoras prohibeys de fluxs del sanc; o es am mollificacio, e lahoras prohibeys le cors del sanc eyssament.	 The temporary tightening if the tightness is not equal or excessive, pain is caused by it, and loosening of the chest is prohibited to prevent further harm.
E aprop la strictura, cove que aquel que deu esser fleubotomat fregue las suas mas ensemps entre lor entro que las venas sian imfladas, e sian declaradas al sentiment.	 Then stretch it out so that the vein which was phlebotomized becomes swollen between their legs and is declared by sensation.
E aprop le fleubotomador unte le sieu fleubotomi am un pauc de oli antic propriament; e aprop pausa le sieu di indic de la ma senestra sobre aquela vena, dejos le loc del qual vol la fleubotomia, per que la vena fuja un pauc, e la percussio sia sessada quar de las venas es la qual atrobas ayssi cum corda fugent deves la fleubotomia, e de aquelas es que es plena de ventositat e quan pauses le fleubotomi sobre aquela es contrayta deves le fleubotomi, e es desceubut le fleubotomador; e le fleubotomi no uobre la vena, e si uobre, aquela es streyta.	 Then apply the phlebotomist to their chest with a little bit of cold oil gently, and place their hand over that vein for which they want phlebotomy so that it only moves slightly, and in case it breaks free, the phlebotomist will be applied instead; then loosen the phlebotomist. And if you remove the phlebotomist, do not reapply the phlebotomist again, but the phlebotomist must be reapplied.
E donc, per aquo cove que·l fleubotomador sia fermat e sia sollicit en totas aquestas causas.	 Therefore, by this means that a phlebotomist should be firm and solicit all of these reasons
E aprop depause le fleubotomi, mays si la vena es huberta en una veguada, lahoras bo es; e sino, tu itera aquo autra vaguada dejos aquel loc un pauc, o sobre lu am festinacio, si le loc no es apostemat.	 After placing a phlebotomist's hand on the vein, if it is blocked in a small place or over the chest, then repeat this other bandage to that location, unless the location is covered
Et si le loc es apostemat, o le malaute se spauresca, lahoras tu le layssa per un dia o per dos, e no strenha le liament, quar fort leu atirara apostema caut, ni no intre en banh.	 If the location is uncovered or if a hernia occurs, do so for one day or two days and avoid straining excessively as it may result in an emergency cautery.
E aprop itera la fleubotomia si la ama.	 After phlebotomy,
E si la apercio es petita e corr sanc subtilment, e temes que non yesca sanc la cantitat que voles, lahoras tu itera le fleubotomi en aquel trauc segon rectitut e ajusta en la appercio un pauc, e fay aquo am festinacio denant que·l loc sia apostemat, quar le loc es apostemat en motz homes deves pauca apercio.	 If the opening is small and may cause discomfort, you should repeat phlebotomy in that area for a few more attempts adjusting the aperture slightly, but if it remains uncovered despite this care, do not open any further, as people can get hurt during phlebotomy
Mays si vezes aquel ja apostemat, lahoras no iteres sobre lu, quar no escusa a tu alcuna causa; e pausa sobre aquel alcuna partida de la fenda de oli, quar alleuja le cors del sanc.	 If that has already been uncovered, do not repeat phlebotomy unless there is an additional cause, and stop over any area of the body where it may be causing harm.
E es milhor en aquest loc que oli e que les autres olis.	 It is preferable in this location compared to others
E semblantment aministra fenda de oli en tota fleubotomia am la qual fleubotomes las venas deves la prohibicio de cors de sanc, e fan aquo tyriaca alfadoc e sagzenea quan es pausat de la una de aquelas sobre le loc, quar le sanc es subtiliat e es revolvut quan es gros.	 The phlebotomist will be careful when removing blood from the body's veins and should avoid causing pain to the area, which may become sensitive or swollen if it is removed too quickly
E si en le loc de la fleubotomia es engendrat gran apostema, quar motas veguadas accideys, e majorment ad aquel que no es stat sangnat sino aquela veguada, o en la apercio de la vena pauca, e lahoras tu coyta, e pausa sobre le loc sponja infuza en aygua e sal, un pauc scalfada, e strenh aquela per una hora, quar es dissolvut.	 When a fistula in the thigh is caused by great pressure, and it causes damage to the veins as well, and mainly affects those who do not bleed but instead have an abscess on their leg, or at the point of the small vein, then pause over that location until pus comes out from it.
E cove que fassa aquo aprop le yssiment del sanc de aquela vena am compliment de lu o de autra vena.	 You should apply this remedy to the part of the artery affected by the abscess in question, or any other vein as well.
E si roman en le loc per alcus dias alcuna negror o viriditat, no notz aquo; e si voles, pausa sobre aquel alcuna causa de aloen e de mirra dissolvut, o alcuna causa de suc de mentastre o de calament o semblant de lu.	 If you find any blackness or redness in the area where it is necessary to apply this remedy, do not apply that; and if you want to, pause over the cause of something else and dissolve it first, or any other reason for a calm state or similar to it.
E motas veguadas accideysso apostemas e eminencias deves fleubotomia de la basilica.	 The abscesses in the thigh have been cured; therefore, there is no longer need for this remedy related to the fistula of the basilica.
E donc pausa la tua ma sobre aquela, e si lahoras tu atrobas mollicia deves la tua compressio sobre aquela, lahoras aquela eminencia es malvada e mala; e adonc guarda te que pauses sobre aquela alcuna causa de aquo que havem dit, quar fort leu fluira de la arteria sanc.	 Therefore pause your hand over that, and if you need to use the compression again on that area, make sure it is good; also remember that any other cause of this should be paused over because a strong flow from the affected artery will occur.
E fay emplaustre am aquo en que es stipticitat, per que le loc sia endurat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	 You should apply it to where there is stiffness, so that the area becomes firm and appropriate treatment may be done on the other part as well if need arises for healing.
E cove que extraguas del sanc a tot hom segon la quantitat de la sua vertut e segon la color vencent sobrc le sanc segon que appar.	 When one of the bowels has been extracted from a person in proportion to their quantity, then it is necessary to extract another bowel which is similar in color and extent
Quar si le sanc es negre, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia rog; e semblantment si tu le vezes gros, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia subtiliat; e semblantment si es agut, entro que sia ostada la acuitat de lu.	 If the bowel is black, then you should extract it as soon as possible because of its harshness; and similarly if it is large, then you should extract it quickly due to its subtlety; and similarly if it is sharp, then you should be quick in extracting it for fear of its sharpness.
E cove ad aquel que es ple e fort e ha necessitat de extraccio de sanc en una veguada, que sia amplificada la fleubotomia de la vena e le fleubotomi sia lat.	 If the bowel is swollen and thick and there is a need to extract it in one sitting, then the phlebotomy of the vein should be enlarged and the phlebotomy should also be done later on.
E en aquel que es freul, sia fayt le contrari de aquel, e cove que extragua aquel en tropas veguadas, e que le trauc sia streyt.	 If it is hollow, then do just the opposite of what was mentioned earlier; and if you extract it in multiple sittings, then make sure to leave a trace.
E le milhor que es administrat en fleubotomia de vena es que sia la seccio transversa, no punctura.	 The best way to administer phlebotomy is by making a transverse incision, not puncture.
E aquesta manieyra de fleubotomia es salva de flux de sanc e de inscizio de nervi, e es pus lausabla e pus salva que fleubotomia segon latitut e longitut.	 This method of phlebotomy saves the flow of bowel and nerve incisions, it is also used to prevent the phlebotomy from being done at a distance or for too much or too little extent.
E a la qual es acostumat sobrevenir sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e cove que tu cures aquel denant la fleubotomia am un petit de pa infus en vi de milgranas o de oximel simple scalfat; e extratz a l u del sanc en tres veguadas o quatre.	 If you are accustomed to perform phlebotomies without complication, then in the case of an extraction from the bowel, when it comes to administering phlebotomy before extracting the bowel, if only one drop of blood is taken by milgrans or simple scalphat (a thin lancet), extract out the bowel within three sittings or four.
E si es enfregiditat de compleccio, lahoras prengua denant la fleubotomia pa infus en eyssarop de mirra o en eyssarop de mel aromatizat am specias ayssi cum am pebre, canela, gingiebre e semblantz, o en eyssarop aromatizat e mot odorant.	 When there is a burning sensation in the chest, put into it some ointment of myrrh or cinnamon and other spices as well to extinguish the fire
E si accideys sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e es causa de lu issiment de mot sanc, lahoras cove que prengua en beure aygua de carn e eyssarop mot odorant subtil; e use de aromaticitat am algualea, e sia linit le sieu pietz am aquela.	 If you have sudden pain in the chest and it is caused by a burning sensation, put water from flesh into it with an ointment of subtle smell; use its own property to cool it down.
E usa de las autras causas que havem ditas en la divisio en le capitol de sincopi per evacuacio.	 Use the other causes that were mentioned in division and chapter on sudden pain for evacuation.
E qui vol eventar le sieu bras e dissolver le sieu sanc segonda veguada, cove a lu del qual la fleubotomia es per mota evacuacio, e la vertut de lu es freol, que evacue le sanc petit a petit, so es segon la quantitat de la vertut en les dias continuables.	 If you want to start the treatment and dissolve its second day's pain according to the method of evacuation for which there is a cure for pain, let it dissolve little by little as long as the amount of heat remains consistent over continuous days.
Mays qui vol eventar le sieu bras, e gitar lo sieu sanc segonda vetz, e le sieu cors es fort, lahoras fassa aquo aprop vii horas o ix de la primieyra fleubotomia.	 If you want to start the treatment and its second day's pain is very intense, put in some ointment of myrrh or cinnamon for the first time.
Mays qui vol atirar le sanc del cors sieu al contrari de la partida a la qual declina, cove que sia eventat en le segon dia o le tertz.	 If you want to take away the pain from its chest against what it resists, put in some ointment of myrrh or cinnamon for the second day or third time.
Mays aquel cors en le qual es mot sanc ja scalfat e es acuit e fa accidir febre, cove que sia gitat de lu sanc en una veguada e sia de lu gitada gran cantitat e sia amplificada la apercio entro que accidesca sincopi, pus que tu auras conservadas totas las condicios de fleubotomia; e que pauses la tua ma sobre le pols de lu deves le cors del sanc, per que no endevengua mort en loc de sincopi, quar motas veguadas endeve aquo quan le fleubotomador es ignorant e negligent.	 If the chest's pain has already been burned and is sharp and causes fever; if you are to use this method on a large amount or amplified intensity that makes it difficult to endure when sudden pains occur, then all conditions of gout should be considered; place your hand over its pulse points on the chest so as not to die from sudden pain, for if the physician is ignorant or negligent.
E no cove quan tu voles desliar le bras e evacua le sanc segonda veguada, cum ja sia claus le orrifici de la vena e sia fayt difficil issiment del sanc, que tu premas subre aquel am vehemencia e encurvat sia extendut leugierament, quar aquo es trop mal.	 When you want to remove the second arm and vein, first seal off both upper arms with ligatures of veins, making it difficult for them to move, and then place a cushion under their body so that they can't get out of position; this is very painful
Habantz le layssa entro que sia fleubotomat segondament; o remau aquo am la acuitat del fleubotomi que es coagulat del sanc en le orrifici de la vena; o pausa sobre aquel de tyriaca alfarach, o de sagzenea, e comprem aquel am compressio leugiera entro que·l sanc sia fora yssit.	 After the second vein has been opened and ligatured, let it coagulate in the veins of the arm; or place a cushion under that part to prevent its escape from being too painful.
E si la vena es apostemada, lahoras layssa aquela e no la toques entro que·l apostema sia sedat.	 If the vein is already open, then remove it immediately so that the opening does not cause pain.
E si necessitat te provoca a evacuar le sanc segondament, e no es excusacio, lahoras tu sagna aquel sobre aquel loc o en l’autre bras en autra vena.	 If you need to remove the second vein and it is not an option, then tell the doctor to close that one or another vein on a different limb.
E la vena apelada “funis del bras” es fleubotomada en loc de la fusca o de la basilica, quan no so atrobadas o so amaguadas, quar es composta de aquelas.	 The appealed vein in the arm is ligatured at the elbow or armpit instead of a more complex procedure like an anastomosis (a connection between two veins to create a new route), because it requires fewer steps and has better results.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intrometa la sua ma en aygua cauda entro que·l focil se enrogezesca e que la vena apparia manifestament.	 The quality of a phlebotomy is that the patient feels a pinching pain in their calf, making it difficult to walk and causing the vein to become visible.
E aprop sia strengut sobre aquel am liament am strictura migana; e aprop fleubotoma segon le tranvers petit, no latitudinalment ni segon la longitut.	 Then apply a small closure by itself with no stitches or sutures, and the phlebotomy should be done longitudinally (along its length).
E sia la apercio ampla e sia la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas aquela sobre la junctura de la ma un petit.	 The first sentence to translate means that the patient's legs should be spread apart, so that access can be gained to their groin area.
E si es prohibit le fluxs del sanc, lahoras tu itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e layssa le sanc correr en la aygua entro que consieguas la tua necessitat.	 If you want to prevent blood flow from a wound, the doctors will place their hand in water and let the bleeding run into the water so that they can fulfill their need.
Mays si tu eras en les dias d’estiu, lahoras tu yest excusat de la iteracio de la ma en l’aygua cauda, e le mes es pausat le cors del sanc en aygua cauda en temps de yvern.	 If you are in the summer days and it is too hot to perform a cautery on the foot, they will place their hand in water and try to stop bleeding into the water as much as possible while cooling down the patient's heart during the heat of the day.
E la fleubotomia de aquesta vena es pus salva que de totas las autras venas, quar dejos lu no ha vena pulsatil, ni nervi.	 The cautery on this vein should be careful not to damage all the other veins around it, as there may not be a pulse or nerve present in one of them.
E la fleubotomia de la savatella de la ma dreyta es conferent a las malautias del fetge.	 The cautery on the lower right leg is important to the patient's health.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que tu strenguas la ma am liament o am la tua ma, pus que tu l’as mesa en ayga cauda, entro que la vena sia imflada e sia be demostrada al vezement; e aprop fleubotoma aquela transversan; e si inscidas aquela de tot no nozera aquo en re.	 The quality of the cautery is that you should gently touch the arm or hand, preferably while holding your other hand over water so that the vein becomes swollen and visible immediately; then perform a transverse incision; if this cannot be done in one go then do it in two parts separately.
E conserve que no ultimes la tua ma am la fleubotomi, quar dejos lu so les nervis dels ditz denudatz de carn.	 Remember that you should never apply the cautery to the last finger or toes as this may damage the nerves of the fingers and toes.
E aprop itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e laysse correr le sanc en aquela, quar si tu no iteras aquela en l’aygua cauda, le sanc sira coagulat en lo orrifici de la vena, e es prohibit de flux.	 When you have opened the space between their thighs with a cushion and they begin to urinate into that, if you do not drain that urine from the water cushion, then urine will clot in the orifice of the vein, which is prohibited from flowing
E cum es extrayt le sanc segon la quantitat de necessitat, lahoras tu pausa sobre la vena oli e sal, per que no sia consolidada coytadament; e semblantment cove que tu fassas en tot ram streyt.	 When you have drained the urine to a sufficient amount of necessity, then pause over their bladder and salt it, so that it is not consolidated immediately; similarly do everything in all straight
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de aquela de la ma senestra, es que es conferent a las malautias de la melsa.	 The symptoms of the flu-like illness mentioned are to be considered those related to menstruation
E fay semblantment en la fleubotomia de lu ayssi cum has fayt en l’autra.	 Similarly, in the case of gout as you have done with that one.
E le juvament de la vena sephena de la fleubotomia es a las malautias que so en la partida dejos del cos, ayssi cum so malautias de la mayre, e a retencio de mestruas, et a las malautias dels ronhos e ulceracios de coyssas e de cambas antiquas, e a lor semblantz de las malautias.	 The symptoms of the venereal illness mentioned are those related to menstruation and those of varicose veins or ulcers in the legs, similarly with those of endometriosis, and other old-style ailments of women's thighs and old-fashioned varicose veins or leg ulcers.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute entrometa lo sieu pe en aygua cauda e fassa sobre aquel fricacio entro que be apparen las venas; e lia sobre la junctura del pe am correia; e le loc de la vena le talo apparent deves le dit pous, e de aquela so ramificatz en la facia del pe motz ramps.	 The quality of the venereal illness mentioned is that the patient has urine flowing into their urethra and over an orifice to which it seems as if veins are being filled; and a hand on the joint of the foot is moving around, in order for this fluid to spread out over the surface of the foot.
E donc fleubotoma le pus ample ram o dejos la camba deves le talo deves la agreguacio de lu, quar es milhor e pus sal.	 The first sentence translates to "And you remove the excess fat from between their thighs.
E si fleubotomas aquela en la facia del pe, lahoras tu te guarda dels nervis que so dejos aquela sobre la facia del pe, e pausa la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas per le travers, quays cum si tu la volias inscidir.	 If you are to perform a thigh flap procedure on the foot area, then make sure you protect nerves that may be located there and cover up the flap opening with gauze or another material as needed for closure, ensuring it is sutured properly when desired.
E sia le fleubotomi vosil.	 It's done
Mays si es prohibit le issiment del sanc; lahoras tu itera le pe de lu en l’aygua cauda e layssa correr le sanc en aquela entro que sia evacuat.	 If it is prohibited to perform the incision, then you will retract the skin of the body part and allow the wound to drain fluid out through that area as needed for evacuation.
E si le fleubotomador erra en la primieyra veguada, lahoras itera am le fleubotomi en sus un pauc, quar le loc es sal; e no temes de lu malician, mays que te guardes dels nervis ayssi cum havem dit.	 If the thigh flap is being harvested for the first time and you are performing a small excision, then place it in saline solution as needed to keep the area sterile while still making sure not to nick any nerves
E semblantment fay de la sophena del autre pe engualment.	 Similarly prepare for the other thigh, if applicable.
E de la vena sciatica, le loc ayssi cum havem dit es deves le talo dejos la cavilha de la partida silvestra.	 The sciatic nerve is removed in this manner as needed from the dorsal cavity of the free flap or in the case of a pedicled flap.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de lu es a dolo de anca quan es per sanc caut.	 The procedure begins with the incision and is performed cautiously to avoid damaging nerves and other structures.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intre en banh, e festine e strenha la cueyssa de lu del latz de la ancha entro desus le talo desus quatre ditz an una benda longua subtil, quar no appar sino per aquo.	 The quality of the thigh flap is that it will blend in with the surrounding tissues and be integrated into the four vessels along its length as needed to prevent it from being noticeable.
E donc quan appar, lahoras tu fleubotoma aquela segon cascun engen que es a tu possible e segon le tranvers, e es milhor; o inscidas aquela per inscizio o secces aquela per seccio, quar le loc de lu es sal.	 When you see it, the pain will immediately come to that part of your body and spread across it quickly
E ela es en motz homes mot ameguada; e si atrobas aquela, e no appar al sentiment de tot, lahoras fleubotoma alcun ram de lu, e es aquel que appar en le dos del pe enves le dit auricular e le anular.	 It is in the nature of gout that it attacks all at once; and if you crush or break it, there will be no pain from it, but rather a certain type of pain called an "auricular" and "anular," which appears on both sides of the ear
E guarda te dels nervis, e fay correr del sanc la quantitat que voles.	 Be careful with your nerves; do not allow yourself to be overwhelmed by how much you want
E aprop deslia la strictura e pausa sobre le loc de la fleubotomia coto e strenh le loc, quar leugierament es sanat.	 Then place a tight bandage and hold it, so that the pain will stop, as long as it is applied properly
De ventozacio e de las qualitatz de uzar de aquelas.	 With great care in using these things.
Ventozas so de corns, o de eram, o de veyre.	 It may be a corn, or an inflammation of the veins, or a swelling
E ventozacio es fayta segon doas manieyras: la una de lor es am scarificacio e extracio de sanc, e l’autra es ventozacio ses scarificacio.	 The first one is an incision and extraction of the pain; the other is an incision made to relieve the pain.
E aquesta ventozacio que es ses scarificacio es segon doas manieyras, quar o es am foc o ses foc.	 This incision that relieves the pain can be done in two ways: by fire or by cutting through it.
E a las ventozas que so administradas am scarificacio e extraccio de sanc son xiiii locs del cors, dels quals la un en lo qual so pausadas ventozas es alnocrati, e es la deriera partida del cap; e le mieg loc d’el de doas partz del col ensemp; e ventozas del mento dejos la mandibula pus dejos de la boca; e ventozas de doas spatulas; e ventozas de alohoster, e es sobre la fi de la coeta; e ventozas de dos focils, e so de dos brasses; e ventozas de doas cavilhas; e ventozas de doas cuoyssas.	 The places where the gout attacks are in four parts: one of them is on the forehead and that part will be cauterized or cut through it, another on the back of the neck, a third on both sides of the collar bone, and a fourth on each side of the chest, above the nipple, below the breastbone, over the shoulders, across two knuckles, below the elbows, and at the bottom of the thigh.
E ventozacio no extratz le sanc sino de las venas menudas sparssas en la carn, e per aquo no catz la vertut per aquelas, ayssi cum es cazement per fleubotomia; ni no cove que ventozacio sia fayta am foc o ses foc en alcuna malautia fayta per replecio entro que le cors tot sia evacuat.	 When the blood vessels in the small skin of the body are closed off, and as a result of this, the circulation is interrupted; hence, it leads to numbness on those parts through which the heat escapes from the body.
Mays si necessitat provoca a ventozacio per malautia o per continua, aministrem aquela en tota hora al comensament del mes e en la fi de lu, e en le mieg loc de lu e en qualque temps sia.	 If it is necessary to cause closure of blood vessels or continuously, then we will perform this at the beginning and end of every month, in addition to other times as needed.
La qual causa es quar dels homes es en les quals es sanc multiplicat entro que indigeys de extraccio de lu per ventozacio e atroba en le sieu cap graveza e soda; e de aquels es que atroba replecio e rogor en la sua cara e en le sieu cap, e en le sieu col; e de aquels es que atroba pruziment en la sua cara e en le sieu front e tenebrositat e hebetut en les sieus huels; e de aquels que gieta le loc de la sua ventozacio; e de aquels es que le lor ris es multiplicat; e de aquels es que atroba gustament de sanc en la sua boca, o que la lengua es apostemada e escup sanc; e de aquels es que lor dormir es multiplicat, e de aquels que vetz sanc en lo dormir rogor e antics e plaguas e autras causas a lor semblantz.	 The causes are the ones where the pain is multiplied inside and outside of one's body, causing severe pain in that part; those who cause pain to spread across their face, or to the chest; others who cause pain while sleeping due to restless legs syndrome.
E donc quan vezes en alcuna causa de aquelas, e propriament si es en le tertz o miga del mes, lahoras comandam ventozacio esser fayta pus que so passadas del dia dos o tres horas.	 And when there is a cause of that sort or specifically at the third and midway through each month, it's customary to perform closure within three hours after or before passing urine.
E juvament de ventozacio de la nuca es que quan aquela confereys a gravitat en le cap e ad aquo que es efondit als huels; mays cove que aquo sia aprop evacuacio de tot le cors.	 The immediate cause of closing the nose is when that weight falls on it and causes the head to be bent forward, causing pain in the ears. May you do this at your earliest convenience if necessary.
E aquesta ventoza es en le loc de fleubotomia de la cephalica.	 This is the location of a facial vein cut
E no es legut que use de lu aquel que es de frega complecio, o en le qual es catarr, quar dona ad aquel gran nocument.	 And it is not necessary to use that which causes complications, or in the part where there is a catarrh, unless one wants to treat an important ailment
E per aquo no cove que uso de aquela les vielhs, e en les caps dels quals so malautias frejas.	 And through this it shall not be used that which causes swelling, and in the parts where these ailments flare.
Mays ad aquel que sobre aquela es continuant sobre lu es fayta oblivio; e per aquo cove que tu comandes al ventozador que depause la sua ma un petit am la ventosa a las partidas dejos, temen de la generacio de oblivio.	 Then place the poultice over that which continues to be troublesome, and through this it shall be ordered that the poultice may be applied to the patient with one small piece of cotton, at regular intervals, in order to prevent the generation of oblivion.
Mays ventozacio de alkehel es en loc de fleubotomia de la vena fusca e de la basilica: e per aquo confereys a asma, e a la constriccio de ale e a la scissura del sturment de ale, e a tos, e a replecio.	 And may the poultice of the facial vein and of the basilica be applied in this location: and through this it is ordered to tighten up, and to control the flow of blood and veins, and to prevent the rupture or tear of the organ of the patient, and to the rest
E cove que sia enpellida la ventoza alkehel un petit, quar si es pausada dejos, engendra debilitat en le cors e en le stomac.	 And it is necessary to apply the poultice gently on each of them separately, so that if it is stopped it causes weakness in the body and in the stomach.
E la ventozacio de alhagdahan confereys a las dolors accident en le cap e a obtalmia, e emigranea, e prefocacio, e a dolors en las razitz de las dentz; e es en loc de fleubotomia de la basiliqua.	 And the poultice of the occipital nerve is to order pain in the head and dizziness, emigration, and blinding, and pain in the teeth, and it is at the location of the facial vein.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que no prema la sua ma am scarificacio per que no inscida la arteria e accida fluxs de sanc.	 The surgeon commands the phlebotomist to prevent his hand from touching the artery so that it does not block blood flow.
E ventozacio dejos le mento comfereys a alcola en la boca, e a corrupcio de la gingiva, e a semblantz a lor de las malautias que so en la boca, e stan en loc de fleubotomia de aliheric que so en las doas labias.	 The surgeon instructs the phlebotomist to perform mouth care, including cleaning of the tongue and gums, and also to examine for any ulcers or sores in the mouth that may be related to phlebitis
Mays la ventozacio que es fayta sobre las doas spatulas confereys a caphatan, le qual es fayt per replecio de caliditat.	 The surgeon commands the phlebotomist to apply ice packs on both shoulders as an alternative to heat application for relief of coldness.
E la ventosacio de las doas partidas dedintz dels focils confereys juvament de la fleubotomia de tres venas, so es de la basilica, fusca e cephalica, quar aquela atratz le sanc de totas aquelas venas pus manudas que so en la carn, e aquelas venas menudas de las autras venas pus grossas entro que pervengua la atraccio a las tres venas.	 The surgeon orders the phlebotomist to apply ice packs on both shoulders when treating phlebitis of three veins, including the basilic, femoral, and cephalic veins. If these veins are located in the limbs, they must be gently covered with ice packs so that they do not obstruct blood flow through the arteries into the three veins.
E comanda al ventozador que trop no procezesca en scarificacio, quar le loc es denudat de carn, e dejos lu so nervis e arterias.	 The surgeon orders the phlebotomist not to perform any incisions because it would be difficult in the area and may damage nerves or arteries.
E es una ventoza am la qual es ventozat sobre alshosses e confereys a las emorroydas del cul e a las ulceracios pus dejos.	 The surgeon orders the phlebotomist to treat hemorrhoids in the anus and ulcers in the affected areas of the body.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que sia gran ventoza, e que sia de eram, quar le loc indigeys de fort seccio; e fort leu so traucadas ventozas subtils e sia scarificat am scarificacio.	 The surgeon commands the phlebotomist to perform a large incision and also a smaller one for fine detail work, as excessive bleeding may occur in that region, where delicate veins must be handled with careful surgery.
Mays ventozas de las cambas minueysso per minuicio manifesta, quar atiran le sanc de tot le cors, e comfereysso a dolors antiquas dels ronhos e de la mayre, e de la vesica; e provocan las mestruas, e comfereysso a bothor e ademil; e stan en loc de fleubotomia de doas sophenas, e alahorcoben, e de doas cavilhas.	 When the bladder and kidney pains arise from cold humors that have infiltrated the whole body, causing ancient pains in the thighs and abdomen, provoking menstrual cramps, and causing both pain and fatigue; they are located near the phlebotomia, which is a disease of the veins.
Enpero mot debelitan tot le cors e fan accidir sincopi en motz homes.	 They cause no harm in sudden attacks but may be felt throughout the body.
E de las ventozas alahorcoben le juvament es propda al juvament a las ventozas de doas cambas.	 The bladder and kidney pains often precede to those of the legs at their onset.
E la qualitat de la posicio de las ventozas es que pauses la ventoza al comensament vueda e sucguas per succio temprada, e no prolongues la posicio de las ventozas, mays pausa aquelas leugierament, e reman aquelas coytadament, e que las humors venguan al loc per adveniment engual.	 The quality of the position of bladder and kidney pains is that they come to an end when first noticed and do not prolong their duration, causing inconvenience, remaining momentarily, and allowing for the release of accumulated humor.
E no cesses iterar aquo e continuar entro que veja le loc ja enrojezir e inflar e que appara la rogor del sanc.	 Do not cease repeating it until you see that the sign has become inflamed or enlarged, indicating progress in healing.
E lahoras tu scarifiqua e itera la succio pauc a pauc, e aprop considera en la dispozicio dels cors.	 The pain gradually decreases and is repeated frequently, and attention should be given to the state of one's health.
Quar aquel home que es de tendra carn de rars pors, cove que tu le scarifiques una veguada e no pus, per que le loc no sia ulcerat.	 For someone with a weak stomach who is recommended not to eat spicy food for fear that the location will be ulcerated.
E comanda al ventozador que amplifique la scarificacio e pronde un pauc, e atempre la succio am facilitat.	 The bladder pain specialist instructs them to perform frequent short sessions and make it as easy as possible to pass urine.
E si en le sanc es grossitut, lahoras cove que scarifiques doas veguadas, quar en la primieyra veguada es uberta la via de subtiliacio al sanc e a la aquositat de lu.	 "When the patient is in labor and there are contractions causing pain, it's customary for doctors to put their hand on her abdomen, trying to guide it towards calming down, and onto its place.
Mays en la segunda a la perscrutacio aquisida de la extraccio del sanc gros.	 "Then examine the second part of guiding out of the patient's stomach.
E si le sanc es mot feculent, lahoras sia fayta scarificacio la tersa veguada per que consiegua le derier.	 "If the patient has a foul smell, it is customary for doctors to perform an examination of their stool in order to diagnose the cause.
E derierament, quan volem extrayre le sanc pauc a pauc o un petit, abasta a nos una scarificacio.	 "When you want to take out the patient's stomach partially or just a bit at a time, use this examination.
E si volem extraccio de mot sanc, scarificam am mota scarificacio; e si nos conoyssem que·l sanc es gros, lahoras cove que scarifiquem per scarificacio preonda.	 "If you want to take out a small amount of stomach content or just a bit at a time, perform this examination.
E le terme de scarificacio en la qual es la profunditat de la codena tant solament.	 "The depth of the incision should be as little as possible.
E si aquel del qual la codena es grossa, dura, fusca, e les sieus pors so streytz, cove que les locs de las ventosas sian untatz lenitius, apertius resolutius; si es en temps d’estiu, ayssi cum es oli de aloen o oli de violat, o oli de amellas dossas, o oli de cemensa de coja; e si es en temps ivern, lahoras oli narci, o oli de liri, o oli de camamilla, o de sanc, e ad aquels semblantz.	 "If the incision is deep and painful, open wide the nostrils of the patient as much as possible.
E si la superfluitat es grossa, freja, lahoras le oli sia amaranti, o oli de balsamita, o oli de aloen, o oli aneti, e a lor semblantz.	 "If excess fluid is thick and frothy, the doctor should try to calm it down with aromatic oils such as those made from balm or aloes.
Mays si le ventozador es de amples pors de tendra carn, lahoras cove que sia prohibit de oli, e cove que ad aquest les locs de ventozas de lor aprop la ventozacio sian lavatz am ayguaros o am aygua freja de solatrum, o am aygua de coja, o am aygua de bordolaguas, e semblantz ad aquelas.	 When a hernia is caused by cold winds that tighten the flesh, pain occurs when it enters one of the legs or arms, and it is customary to place bandages around them.
E aquel del qual le sanc es de mota humiditat, lava las suas ventozas am vi agre, o am aygua de mirt e sumac e semblant ad aquels.	 When a hernia is caused by excessive moisture, wash the affected areas gently with warm water or cool air and apply bandages as needed.
E de aquel del qual las superfluitatz son grossas, lava las suas ventozas am vi antic, o am aygua de sansuc, que es majorana, o de decoccio de anet, o de camamilla, e a lor semblantz.	 When the hernia is caused by excessive fluids or swelling, gently wash the affected areas with cold water or cool air and apply bandages if necessary, as needed.
E cove que la ventozacio sia guardada denant de banh; habantz cove que sia aministrada aprop issiment del banh per una hora o per doas, e cove que dorma aprop la ventozacio.	 If the hernia is to be treated with bandages, ensure it stays in place for one or two hours and take appropriate rest after applying the bandage.
Quid est quo oportet ut regatur ventosandus aus phlebotomatus ante ventosationem.	 What should be done before using a tourniquet to control bleeding?
Cove que consideras al comensament: lahoras si le ventozador o aquel que·s deu fleubotomar es coleric e ventz sobre lu sanc agut e imflamacio, lahoras cove que prengua causas infrigidantz, ayssi cum milgranas acetosas, e endivia an vi agre e laytuguas, e secanabin, e julep, e a lor semblantz.	 Before using tourniquets for hemostasis or controlling bleeding: ensure the area is clean and dry, apply ice packs to reduce swelling, use sterile gauze pads as needed, and follow any other recommended precautions.
E pausa a lor viandas ayssi cum poletz, e carns de auzels serbiges, e viandas conditas am agras, e a lu semblantz.	 After using tourniquets for hemostasis or controlling bleeding: apply pressure over the wound to stop any further bleeding, clean and dry your hands as needed, and follow any other recommended aftercare procedures.
E de aquel del qual la compleccio es freja, cove que prengua en beure eyssarop almiva, o eyssarop de alsecanabin de semensas, e sumac, e vi mot odorant migier entre viel et noel; e que a lu sia comendat que use de paucitat de beure e de mangar, e pausa las viandas de lu poletz e canabir e pissers e petitz auzels e colombat.	 When someone has a feverish complication, he must drink lukewarm water oftenly and eat light foods such as broth made from almonds, raisins or dates soaked in honey, vinegar and sage mixed together; it is recommended that they should be drunk sparingly with eating less food than usual, fasting the intestines of worms and lice, and avoiding meat, eggs, dairy products.
E cove que en lo dia de ventozacio e de fleubotomia le beure sia major que la vianda.	 The doctor recommends drinking more water on days of vomiting and diarrhea compared to normal eating times.
E cove que sia donat en beure en alcunas horas ad alcus homes tyriaca alpharac, o medicamentz de musc, so es muscada, o alcelita denant la ventozacio o denant fleubotomia o aprop, per so que·ls membres principals sian confortatz e que·l sanc sia subtiliat; e no cove que prenguan aquela scalfatz.	 The doctor suggests that on days of vomiting and diarrhea you should drink more water throughout the day to keep the main members well hydrated, but not over-saturate them with too much liquid as they can cause discomfort or even harm if overused.
Mays las ventozas que so ses scarificacio sian ventozas que so pausadas sus le fetge, e sobre la melsa e podagra, e sobre le umbelic, en les locs dels jonolhs, e la pixida del ancha, quar aquestz membres no suffertan scarificacio sobre si.	 The doctor suggests that during vomiting spells where the flow is rapid and interrupted by pauses, in the lower limbs, and the ulcer of the heel may require further attention to prevent scarring if they are not adequately protected.
E no es querit per aquelas sino atraccio de sanc de membre, ayssi cum pausam ventosa sobre mamilha en malautia de flux de sanc del sanc de las nars; e usam de aquela per que sia dissolvuda ventositat freja inviscade del membre, ayssi cum pausam sobre le ventre e l’umbelic; quar aquela rarifique le membre e scalfa lu e ramau la dolor quar resolveys ventositat.	 The doctor suggests that when you pause the flow of a member to relieve pain caused by a feverish complication and then resume it, so as to dissolve the cold humors in the body part affected while holding off on the abdomen or ulcer; for this reason the member may be swollen and cause discomfort resolving the fever.
E ja es pausada sobre les ronhos quan accideys en lor opilacio o poyra, quar per vertut de atraccio fort leu huobre opilacio e erradica le poyra de son loc.	 When joints become inflamed or gouty due to cold humors, it is customary for doctors to cauterize them with a pointed instrument.
E semblantment fa quan es pausada sobre le fetge e la melsa deves ventositat en aquels enclausa.	 And similarly when you are cauterizing the legs and feet in these enclosed spaces, be careful to prevent any injury or harm to them.
E aquestas ventozas so administradas vuedas amb succio tant solament; e alcunas veguadas so administradas am foc.	 These wounds are treated with both suction and fire.
E alcunas veguadas so administradas plenas de aygua tebeza en las malautias de la melsa.	 Some of the wounds are treated by pouring water into the hollows in the patient's legs.
E aquo es per que la ventoza sia umplida e sia pus gran, so es aygua cauda sola o aygua en la qual sian cuytas herbas ad aquo convenientz.	 This is to ensure that both the cavity and pressure are high enough, either with water alone or a mixture of water and herbs as suited by this circumstance.
Forma de ventoza aministrada am foc: sia la amplitud del orrifici de dos ditz, segon que nos la havem formada; e la quantitat del preon sia la maytat de un palm; e sia en lo latz de lu, en le loc que es en le circuit, la maytat de lu, le trauc sia petit segon la quantitat que intre en lu una agulha.	 The cauterization done by fire: the width of the flame is two fingers wide, after it has been formed; and the amount of preon should be equal to one palm; and in its limit, where it is in a circuit, the amount of it, the trough shall be smaller than the amount that enters into an arrow.
Sia fayta de eram rog o citri, de grosses marges, leon, enguals e terses per so que no leda le membre deves la sua posicio sobre lu.	 The cautery should not lead to damaging of the member's position on it.
E sia al mieg de lu vergua transversa de eram o de ferr, on es pausada candela am lo foc.	 And the vein that goes transverse across it may be cauterized or burned through when necessary.
E ja sia aquesta ventoza gran major de aquela la qual havem recomtat; e la pauca mendre de aquela segon las malautias e la etat de aquel que usa de aquela.	 When we say "here is the translation", you will reply with your guessed translation, nothing else
E las ventosas dels efantz e extenuatz so autres que las ventozas dels joves e de grosses corssas.	 The fingers and toes of the extremities are different from those of young people or large ones.
E la qualitat de pausar aquesta ventoza am foc sobre le membre es que extenda la meca am foc de lenha decentment denant una pauca candela de cera, e pausa aquela sobre le mieg de la vergua transversa en le mieg loc de la ventoza, per que le foc sia accendut enviro la partida dejos per que no sia comburit le cors del malaute.	 The quality of this cautery is to apply it to the affected part with a small amount of wax while applying gentle heat from a candle flame in order to prevent any burning of the patient's body parts.
E aprop sia pausada sobre le membre del malaute, e le dit sia sobre le trauc que havem dit, entro que quan tenem las ventozas e non indigem que osten le dit e que yesca la vapor sobre aquel trauc, lahoras la ventoza sira tantost dissolvuda.	 Place the cautery on the patient's body part and inform them that this is how they should apply it, between when you have applied the venturazzi and do not instruct them to come any closer or interfere with their application of the venturazzi as well as to ensure that vapor does not cause the tissue to dissolve.
E prop igneys la meca segon la sua manieyra, e itera aquela si indigeyssas de aquela.	 Place your hand second in line after you've placed their other hand.
Mays en ventosa que es aministrada en la malautia de plauressi, am aygua, en la qual no ha vergua transversa ni trauc, e no es aministrada sino que sia umplida de aygua, e es pausada sobre le membre tant solament.	 The venturazzi should be administered in the patient's foot pain as mentioned earlier without any transverse scar or ulcer and only applied to a small portion of their body part.
E aquesta es la forma de lu: E aquesta ventoza quant plus es gran, tant es milhor, per que puya recebre gran quantitat de aygua.	 This is how it goes; the larger the venturazzi, the more beneficial as you will receive a greater amount of water to apply with caution.
Capitol .xcvii.	 When joints are painful due to cold humors that infiltrate every part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is traditionally called gout by doctors
Sanguissuguas no so administradas en motz membres sino en les membres en les quals non es possible posicio de ventosas, per la parvitat de aquels, ayssi cum le pot e gingiva e semblantz a lor; o en membre denudat de carn, ayssi cum le dit e·l nas e lors semblantz.	 The veins of the members are not administered in every member, except those that cannot be positioned for ventilation's sake due to their proximity, so they should do this with the mouth and tongue as well; or on the other hand if it is applied to a member of flesh, then also by saying 'it' and 'there',
E la qualitat de usar de aquelas que si has trobadas sanguisugas que so en las ayguas dossas de poyredura mundas.	 The quality of using those that have found veins which are located in the arteries of the heart.
E aprop sian layssadas le dia e la nueyt en aygua dossa entro que sian famolentas, e que no romangua alcuna causa en le ventre de aquelas; e aprop sia evacuat le cors en le comensament am fleubotomia e am ventozas; e aprop fregua le membre del malaute entro que s’enrojezesca; e aprop sian pausadas sobre lu.	 Then the cause of vomiting and spitting out water from the mouth, except that there is no reason for vomiting in the belly of those; then do vomit and spit water through the nose with a cold; and place their hand over them.
E cum son umplidas e caso.	 And when they are filled up enough.
E si es possible succio del loc am ventoza, es mays derier en juvament.	 If it is possible to open the chest, you will be more skilled in youth.
E sino, lahoras lava le loc am vi agre e aprop am mota aygua; e sia freguat e expremut.	 And if not, then pain occurs on the area and it is applied with water, and it is rubbed
E si es prolonguat le cors del sanc aprop le cazement de las sanguissuguas, e es aquo resudan, lahoras tu enfon un drap de li en aygua freja, e pausa aquel de sobre entro que sia abdida la resudacio.	 And if the chest pain continues, they apply a cloth soaked in water and place it over them to relieve the pain.
E si le sanc es multiplicat, lahoras polveriza sobre lu vitriol trissat, o guallas e semblantz a lor de las causas stipticas, entro que·l sanc sia abscidit; o sian pausadas sobre le loc las maytatz de favas excocicadas, e sian layssadas entro que las favas aderescan al loc, e es le sanc abscidit.	 When the pain is multiplied, it causes powder to be spread around by vinegar drippings or other similar substances onto the afflicted part of the body; if such a substance has been removed from its location and no other powder remains, then the affliction has subsided
E cove, si es necessaria, iteracio de sanguissuguas, quan es possible mudar aquelas.	 And further, when it is necessary to perform bloodletting in order to make changes; however, if it is not possible or advisable to do so.
E si las sanguissuguas son prohibidas de suspenssio, lahoras sia freguat le loc am sanc recent o fique una agulha en les locs entro que yesca sanc; e aprop sian pausadas, quar aquelas quan sento alcun sanc tantost adarysso.	 If bloodletting is prohibited from suspension, the affliction will be eased or a needle may be inserted into its location to prevent it from reappearing; and if they have been removed, then when any pain appears suddenly, so too they are at fault.
E quan voles que cajan, polveriza sobre aquelas un pauc de aloen trissat, o sal, o cendre, e cazo tantost.	 When you want to give it a drop of vinegar or salt, or anything similar; and so forth.
Ayssi comensa lo prolec de la tersa partida: de restauracio.	 Starting with the first step towards the cure: the restoration.
Aquest capitol es motas veguadas necessari en la art de medicina; e es restauracio de fractura e de dislocacio accident en les osses.	 This capital is most useful in the field of medicine, and it includes the restoration of fractures and dislocations in the bones.
O, filh, sapiatz que jactan se de aquest capitol les fols metges e les vulguars e aquels que degun temps no reguardero les libres dels Antics ni legiro de aquels una letra.	 Oh son, know that these doctors and men are the worst kind of people; those who do not respect ancient laws or follow the rules of behavior dictated by them.
E per aquesta causa es fayt que aquesta manieyra dels scients in terra nostra es privat; e yeu no ho e obliat en aquo degun temps be de tot; e no he adhibit aquo que apres, sino per longitut de lectio dels libres dels Antics e studi sobre le entendement de aquels, entro que extrayssi la sciencia de aquels.	 For this reason, it is necessary that our doctors' madness in the land of ours remain private; and you should not oblige them to do so today; and I forbid you to do so, but only by reading ancient books and studying their meaning, until the science of those who have done great things.
E aprop adirigui a experiment e studi en la longitut de la mieua vida.	 The first servant should measure from your navel downwards towards your waist
E yeu ja he de aquo descrit en aquest capitol tot aquo que conte la mieua sciencia e sobre le qual es passat lo mieu experiment; pus que agui abreujat aquo a vos autres e deliuregui aquo de occupacio de elonguacio; e abreujegui aquo en la fi de abreujacio; et e monstrat aquo en la fi de declaracio; e formegui en aquo motas formas dels sturmentz que so administratz en aquel, cum es fayt per addicio de declaracio, ayssi cum he fayt en dos capitols precedentz.	 The servant should describe in this chapter all that is related to your science and on which it has passed the most recent experiment; place a cushion underneath you and make you lie still there for stretching; show you at the end of stretching, and present what was shown during the presentation stage; and perform the actions described in these chapters as they are done by addition of declaration, just like they were done in two previous chapters.
Capitol primier.	 The first chapter
Summae et collectiones ex esse fracturae ossium, ex eis quarum praemissio necessaria est, antequam incipiamus rememorationem membrorum fraftorum et diversorum si uniuscuiusque.	 Summary and collections from such broken bones, necessary before we begin the remembrance of the limbs' fractures and various other ailments of any one person.
Cove donc que diguam en le prohemi de aquest capitol las summas del sermo; e les capitols al entendament dels quals en le comensament es forsat le artifexs e a stacio sobre la veritat de aquels; so es vos e aquels que so promptz que sapian o aprenguan aquesta art nobla autres de vos.	 Then tell us in the second half of this chapter all the summaries from the sermon, and the chapters about what was explained at the beginning, which were necessary for their understanding; here are those who understand or learn this noble art others may use as well.
E donc dic que quan accideys a alcu fractura o dislocacio o torcio o cazement, lahoras cove que tu te coytes al comensament am fleubotomia o aleyar aquel, o quascu ensemps, si no prohibeys alcuna causa, ayssi cum debelitat de vertut, o es aquel al qual accideys effant, o viel en decrepitat, o es temps de vehement calor, o de vehement freg.	 Then tell us that when any fracture or dislocation or sprain occurs, the doctor should immediately cauterize it, lay it open if necessary, whichever one occurs; and so long as there is no prohibition against such a cause, let it be done by evil nature, or whatever happened to whoever it affected, was sickly, old, in heat or cold.
E aprop sia content en vianda sieua de erbas frejas e de carns de auzels e de crabotz; e prohibem carns grossas e umplir si de viandas e de tota vianda que umple las venas de sanc, entro que siras segurat de apostema caut, e si no temes efusio de materia al membre.	 When joints are inflamed by cold and phlegm, it is customary to call it gout among doctors. And if necessary, make points on the surface of the foot with a pointed cautery. Then return the intestine or hernia back into its cavity, place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out. You have already opened up space between the patient's thighs and placed cushions under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest holding their hands.
E lahoras retorne le malaute al sieu regiment primier am le qual corr costuma de lu.	 The pain caused by gout is typically treated with the first regimen of treatment for that patient.
E donc cum le os trencat comensa esser restaurat, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia pascut de viandas nutritivas de nutriment mot e gros e greu en les quals sia viscositat, ayssi cum so viandas faytas de froment cueyt am aygua, e ris, e caps, e pes, e ventres de vacas, e huous, e peys fresc, e vi gros e semblants ad aquels, e am aquest regiment es fayta coagulacio de fractura pus leugierament e miels.	 When the bone is broken and begins to heal, the pain caused by gout will cease if the patient consumes nutritious foods such as water, rice, chicken, pork, vegetables, fruits, beans, cheese, eggs, beef, and other similar foods, along with the first regimen of treating fractures in this manner.
E sapias que les osses trinquatz quan so en les homes que so en la primiera vilura e en los decrepitz, no es possible que sian continuatz e sian consolidatz segon lur natura per la exsiccacio dels membres de lor.	 The bones heal best when they are kept moist and in their first rest period after a break or sprain, it is not possible for them to continue healing properly as the body dehydrates due to nature's design.
E son consolidatz e continuatz segon lor natura tot temps per la exsiccacio de aquels membres, e so continuatz e consolidatz aquels que so de lor en la fi de la lenitat, ayssi cum les osses dels petitz effantz.	 They continue to heal and consolidate properly according to their nature throughout the period of recovery from dehydration until the end of treatment for those bones or pets.
Mays empero natura ajusta e amnecteys sobre le os trencat de tota partida alcuna causa semblant a glut en le qual es grossitut que adhereys e strenh aquel entro que so ensemps conglutinatz e liatz ensemps, entro que venen la fi de fortitut e de fermesa, ayssi cum foc al comensament, entro que denguna causa no prohibeys aquel de las suas obres.	 "When the body is injured in any way and causes a lack of strength to hold the bowels or intestines tightly together, then it's called 'intestinal fistula'.
E per aquesta causa es necessari que pauses las viandas del malaute, viandas en las quals so gravitat e viscozitat e grosseza, ayssi cum havem dit.	 "For this reason, the veins of the patient are needed, which have a tendency to expand and contract vigorously, as mentioned earlier.
Mota diversitat de fractura segon diversitat del membre.	 "There is another kind of fracture depending on the member.
E sapias que las specias de fractura son diversas segon la diversitat dels membres, quar fractura del os de la camba es diversa de la fractura del os del cap; e la fractura del os del pietz es divers de la fractura del os del dos; e semblantment totz les autres membres son diverses entre lor.	 "You know that the types of fracture vary depending on the member, for example a leg bone is different from a headbone and so on.
E yeu venc am rememoracio de tota specia de fractura, expausada en le sieu capitol distincta del autre.	 "I remember all types of fracture mentioned in its separate capital at the end of this chapter.
Mota diversitat de fractura en si meteyssa.	 "The number of fractures is diverse as well.
E son diversificadas las specias de fractura del os en lor meteyssas; quar es fayta fractura arcuada otra aquo que accidan en lu stellas; e alcunas veguadas es fayta fractura segon la longitut del os: e so las fracturas de lu satagia e astelhas e addicios procedentz e no-procedentz, ayssi cum es fayt en la pena quan es preparada a escriure, e es fractura am plagua e disrupcio en le cap, e es fractura fissura petita.	 "The types of fracture from the bone are diverse as well. For example, curved fractures occur when bones break into stars; some broken bones are called comminuted fractures because they disrupt and tear the head; and finally small fractures.
E a tota specia es engen o turment propri en restauracio de lu segon que vindra rememoracio de lu distincta en les sieus locs.	 The first sentence translates to "The task, unique in its kind, is the restoration of memory.
Mota senhal de fractura del os.	 The next sentence translates to: "In case of fracture of the bone.
E per aquo es conoguda fractura del os: es tortuositat de lu, e de aquel eminencia e appericio de lu al sentiment, e so de lu quan compremes aquel am la tua ma.	 The sentence continues by saying that the pain caused by this fracture is severe and includes stiffness of the limb as well as loss of function and sensation in it when you touch it with your hand.
E donc quan no es en le loc tortuositat apparent ni so no es feyt deves le tieu tocament quan toques le os am agitacio e le malaute no atroba gran dolor, lahoras no es aqui fractura.	 The next sentence translates to: "But if there is not a visible fracture or pain when you touch the bone and it does not feel broken, then the pain is not due to a fracture.
Habantz es possible que sia tortuositat o petita fissura, adon no cove que tu mauguas aquel am la tua ma e am compressio de tot; habantz pausa sobre lu de las medicinas de las quals ve rememoracio aprop aquel moment le qual conveneys al loc; e aprop sia streyt per strictura subtil.	 The sentence continues by saying that if there is a possibility of either a small crack or a tear, then touching it with your hand and compressing the area can make pain worse. In this case you should stay calm and seek medical advice as soon as possible to remember when such an incident occurred in that location, and apply strict compression using a bandage tightly wrapped around the affected area.
E sapias que·l loc quan es arcuat e no es scindit en dos o otra aquo que no accidan en lu satagie, cum es remauguda tota partida de la sua compar, lahoras cove que comenses de la tua hora a rectificacio de lu habantz que a lu accida apostema caut.	 The sentence continues by saying that if the bone is curved and does not seem to be divided in two or more pieces but instead seems to have completely separated from its part, then doctors will tell you that you should start looking for an orthopedic specialist as soon as possible.
E si a lu accida apostema caut, lahoras layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que cesse le apostema; e aprop engualha aquel segon quascuna manieyra que podes de levitat e de engen.	 If the break is clean and will close up in a couple of days, then doctors recommend letting it heal on its own with rest, ice, and compression.
E sapias que restauracio de lu e agulacio de lu es pus leugiera que del os en le qual accideysso sathagie.	 The first sentence translates to: "The restoration of it [the patient] and its elevation are what must be done in order for that treatment to succeed.
E aprop strenh aquel segon que vindra la rememoracio de lu.	 The second sentence translates to: "And then you should remember the previous instructions.
Mays si en le os so satagias, lahoras es necessaria extencio de aquest membre trencat de doas partz, si es la ma o le pe; o am la tua ma si le membre es petit; o am doas cordas o am una corda e la ma.	 If the member is broken in two parts, if it's the hand or foot; or if your hands are small, you should take both hands and tie them together tightly with a cord to support the body from falling over.
E sia la tua posicio am la qual pauses le membre loc engual segon la sua figura natural, mentre que las partidas so extandudas del membre trenquat, lahoras te perforsa que fassas retornar aquelas addicios am engen e segon quascuna manieyra que poyras en lor locs.	 If your position is such that you must hold the member still as much as possible within its natural shape while extending both hands around it to support, then make sure each hand is positioned in those locations.
E guarda te segon la tua forssa que no accida sobre le malaute per la tua operacio delor ni lesio; e perforsa te segon le tieu poder que tu appliques la un os am l’autre son companho segon lors milhors formas.	 And ensure that you do not apply force to the patient in any way during your operation, nor cause injury; and make sure that when applying pressure with one hand on the other, it is done gently without causing harm.
E cove que en aquela hora aprofitablament tu toques am la tua ma aquel, e si vezes aqui alcuna causa diversa, rectifiqua aquel e enguala aquel per la quantitat de la tua vertut.	 And when you're in a position to do so, apply your hand gently to that part of the body if there is no other cause for difference; rectify it and adjust it with the amount of your own size.
E exquiva vehement extenssio e compressio, ayssi cum fan mots fols metges que motas veguadas fan accidir apostema caut per la sua operacio, o fan accidir contraccio en le membre ayssi cum havem vist aquo per la operacio de lor motas veguadas.	 And apply severe extension and compression as well as strong blows to the feet of doctors who use such methods in their practice, or make them apply constriction on the member along with stretching as they do for the treatment of their patients.
E aprop annecteys, aprop equacio e decent operacio e strictura de aquel membre, e repaus e tranquilitat; amoneste le malaute sobre aquo e fay le squivar que no maugua aquel en la hora de las suas vigilias e del sieu dormir, e ves la sua revolucio e agitacio, e deves la sua egestio, e deves totz les sieus movementz am tota la sua vertut; e aguarda se que la posicio del membre sia posicio am la qual sia asegurada la dolor, la qual causa es quar quan sent en la disposicio de la posicio del membre delor o lesio; lahoras cove que permutes aquel ad autra disposicio de aquela am la qual non senta dolor; e guarda am aquo que la posicio de lu aquela sia dreyta e engual, per so que al membre non accida tortuositat quan es restaurat.	 "He has opened up the space between the patient's thighs and placed a cushion under them. Another servant is positioned on their legs as well. And another one on their chest to hold their hands.
E la qualitat de la strictura del membre tranquat es aquela que yeu recomti; per que sapias que·ls membres trencatz so diversificatz en lor parvitat e en lor grandeza e en la forma de aquels.	 "The quality of the member's fixation must be such that you know how different members are in their size, shape, and form.
E de aquels que son petits ayssi cum le bras e·l dit e·l focil e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras cove que la envolucio sia de drap mol subtil.	 "For those who are small, like the hand or the eye socket and alike them, the bandage should be of very fine cloth.
Mays aquels que so grosses ayssi cum la cuoyssa o la camba, cove que en aquels sia envolucio lada e dura, quar la liadura lada connecteys le membre gran e strenh aquel de tota part am strictura engual, enayssi que en lu no intre macula.	 "For those who are large like the thigh or the calf, if in these there is a bandage that is firm and rigid, holding it tight will connect the limb from all sides to the body, except for the small gap.
E aprop comensa, aprop la tua evacuacio de equacio, pausar liament convenient ad aquo, sobre le loc de aquela fractura am tres envolucios o quatre segon que·l membre mereys; e strenh la tua ma un petit am le liament.	 "Begin with the evacuation of your hand on each side, pause for a while at this point and tighten it slightly in the area where the fracture has three or four wraps.
E aprop ve am aquel a la partida pus sobirana del loc de la fractura, e strenh mens que no foc la tua strictura am la qual has strengut le loc de la fractura.	 When you have placed a cushion beneath their thighs, another one under them, and anther on their chest, holding their hands, it is customary for the servant to gently but firmly press upon the site of the fracture in order to hold tight to its location
E aprop elongua te am envolucio del loc de la fractura un pauc, e mollifiqua la strictura petit a petit, entro que prenguas del loc sa una gran partida.	 The servant is instructed to gently but firmly apply pressure on the site of the fracture for some time, gradually tightening it until the location becomes fixed (i.e., the patient's hand stops moving).
E aprop pren una autra benda e envolveys aquela autra veguada sobre le loc trenquat am envolucio, e aprop ve am las envolucios a la partida pus dejos de la fractura; e sia la tua operacio en la strictura de la envolucio e en mollificacio de aquela segon que havem dit en la envolucio primieyra desus.	 The servant is to then take another object and wrap it around the fractured limb, placing the other one above where they were previously applied, and remove those that are from the fracture; finally, perform a tightening of the bandage and further loosening as requested in the previous step.
E aprop pausa entre las volucios de stopa leon o drap am le qual sia engualada la tortuositat de la fractura, si en lu es tortuositat; e sino, no pauses en lu alcuna causa.	 The servant is to pause between the wraps for a moment or remove if there are any loops that complicate the fracture's shape (tortuousness), unless otherwise indicated by another source.
E aprop pausa sobre lu autra benda, e aprop enguala sobre aquestas envolucios stelhas decentment faytas tantost, si en le loc no es imflacio o apostema caut, e lahoras pausa sobre lu aquo que sede le apostema aquel e que oste la imflacio; e layssa aquela per alcus jorns; e lahoras tu strenh sobre lu las stelhas.	 The servant is to pause on the other object and gently wrap them around as tightly as possible, making sure that there are no loose folds or pressure points in the area (unless indicated otherwise), pausing over any loops they make, and placing their hand over it so it can be held tight by the previous servant.
E sian las stelhas de la maytat de canna lada raza, e be formada saviament; o sian de fust de pi; o de ramps de palma ; e sia le ample de quascuna stelha segon aquesta forma e aquesta figura:	 The bandaging should be as wide and as thin as necessary for the shape of each wrap, with variations such as strips or rolls (depending on the situation); and each bandage's width relative to its size and form.
Empero cove que la astelha que es pausada sobre aquela fractura sia pus grossa e pus lada un petit que las autras astelhas, e la longitut de la stela segon qu’es legut al membre en magnitut e parvitat; e aprop strenh sobre las astelhas am autra benda segon la tua primieyra strictura; e aprop lia desus am fiel decentment segon que havem dit de strictura, e es que sia la tua strictura segon le loc de la fractura mes, e quant mes es alonguat de la fractura, es mendre la strictura.	 "However, on the other hand, when there is a fracture that has been closed with plaster and it is left uncovered for some time, then as you tighten the plaster more tightly to make sure it holds well in place, this will cause an injury.
E cove que les fils sian migiers en grossesa e subtilitat, e sian de li mol; e si les fils so grosses, ayssi cum yeu he vist per la operacio de alcus fols pausantz les lors fils de cordas de li tort, e es error gran, quan catz la strictura fora equalitat.	 "The stitches should be gradually reduced in size and subtlety, as they become harder to remove; if the stitches are too large it can cause an injury when they pull on the cords of your body.
E eyssament fils subtils no so convenientz, quar tu no consaguiras per strictura am aquels aquo que voles, e no cove que entre astela e astela haja mens de un dit.	 "Very small stitches can be inconvenient because you may not be able to tighten them enough to hold things in place and there must always be some room between the two.
E si le malaute es ledit per las extremitatz de las stelas aprop la strictura en les locs sas, lahoras pausa dejos aquelas de stopa leon o lana carmenada entro que aquo no li fassa lesio.	 "If the patient is lying on their side with the stitches in place of their legs and chest, then make sure not to let them cause injury.
Alcunas veguadas fractura es am plagua, e accideys disrupcio en la codena, e yeu vindre am rememoracio en aquela en le capitol segon singularitat.	 "A few broken bones can be healed by plastering over them, and healing will come in the form of a scar that is distinct from others.
E sapias que ges tot membre trencat no es streyt am stelhas al primier dia; la qual causa es quar le membre, quan es gran, no cove que pauses sobre lu stelhas sino aprop v dias o vii o mays, segon la tua seguratat de adveniment de apostema caut.	 "When a member is broken but not immediately fatal, it should be wrapped with bandages instead of stitches until the swelling subsides and you are able to apply a plaster.
E aquesta es la manieyra dels emplaustres am les quals les Antics restauravan, les quals so pausatz sobre fractura e dislocacio e torcio.	 The first sentence translates to: "This is the nature of the wounds that the ancients restored, which are placed over fractures and dislocations and sprains.
Manieyra de emplaustra comu abruejat de restaurament de fractura, convenient a motas compleccios e majorment a las femnas e als efantz, quar es de aquo sobre le qual no ventz calor ni freg: e es que prenguas de polvera de moli, e es la medula de la farina que pen deves le movement de la mola en las paretz del moli.	 The second sentence translates to: "Nature of the wounds that the ancients restored from fractures, which are placed over complications and especially on the legs and feet, as it is about a certain thing where there is no warmth or effusion; this means you should use a sponge made of straw, and it's the marrow of the flour which prevents movement in the middle of the mole.
E comfeys aquel ayssi cum es, sino que cribelles aquel am album de huou, e pausa la comfeccio de lu no-spessa ni subtil; e aprop usa de aquela.	 The third sentence translates to: "And as it is customary then, do not cover that with the blanket of the fool, and place a towel over its smooth or delicate part; use this one.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre restaurant fractura e dislocacio e torcio: recipe de assafetida, de lapdanum, de acacia, de enula, e migrach, que es razit de milgraner salvage, de totz ana drac. x; de mirra e aloen ana drac. v; alochil ana drac. xx; totz sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian mesclatz am aygua alichil o am album de huou si la compleccio del malaute es scalfada; e aprop usa de aquest emplaustre, quar es de bona composicio e restaura les osses trencatz leugierament, e confereys a motz homes.	 The fourth sentence translates to: "Another nature of the wounds that the ancients restored from fractures and dislocations and sprains; recipe for the ointment with saffron, laudanum, acacia, enna, and migrac, which is beneficial in many ways, even among dragons. Mix them together gently or put them on a clean towel if the complication of the patient is slight; use this plaster, as it has good composition and can heal broken bones.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre le qual comfereys a fractura e torcio: recipe migrach e met de altea blanca ana drac. x; de mirra e de aloen ana drac v; de acacia drac. vi; de bol armenic drac. .xx.	 The fifth sentence translates to: "Another nature of the wounds that the ancients restored from fractures and sprains; mix together with Migrac, Met, Alt, and Alb [the last two are not specified in this text].
Totz sian trissatz en mortier am mota contricio, e sian cribellatz, e sian comfitz am aygua o am album de huou e sia administrat.	 The first sentence translates to "The sick man is lying on a mat covered in excrement.
Manieyra de emplaustre a juncturas e osses separatz de lors locs, e seda dolor accident en aquels e a fissuras e fractaduras: sia presa lana sutza e sia submersa en vi agre e oli cuyt e sia pausat sobre le loc.	 The sentence translates to "Remove the swelling of joints and bones from these parts, and prevent pain in those areas with splints or bandages, placing them over the location.
Mays en aquest emplastre no es vertut de restauracio, de apostema caut e expelleys dolors propriament.	 In this area there is not to be an attempt at restoration, rather, remove the pain with a sharp application and expel it immediately.
Autra manieyra de emplastre que restaura os trancat: pren fuelas de figuier sort e fuelas de papaver salvatge; contereys tot e fay emplastre de lor.	 Another remedy for this area to be applied is the use of fig leaves and wild poppy leaves, tearing them up thoroughly and apply it to the affected area.
Manieyra de emplastre abreujat aministrat deves la restauracio de fractura de os e quan tu voles resolucio del romanent de apostema: recipe razitz de altea, de camamilla e flors de violes, de farina de ers, de totz ana partida i; sian totz trissatz e sian cofitz am vi, si·l membre no es scalfat.	 Another remedy for an open fracture area that needs restoration and when you want to resolve the swelling: apply a mixture of marigold flowers, chamomile flowers, violet flowers, flour from oats, all finely chopped; cover it with water or a damp cloth, so that the affected part is not burned.
Mays si es scalfat, lahoras comfeys aquel am aygua de coliandre humit o am aygua e usa de lu.	 If you are burned, apply cold water mixed with a compress or a damp cloth and use it to cool down.
Autra manieyra de emplastra pus fort en resolucio que aquest primier, quan accideys apostema dur deves la restauracio del membre: recipe de razitz de altea e de semensa de li, e de balaustia, e mellilot, majorana, flors de viol, de camamilla, de totz ana partida i engual; totz sian trissatz e sian cofitz am aygua de sauze o am aygua dousa o am vi, tot aquo segon la qualitat del membre e le repaus de la color de lu.	 Another remedy for a serious resolution that comes after the first one when you encounter severe pain that needs to restore the member: apply a mixture of elderflowers and senna leaves, balm leaf, marigold flowers, chamomile flowers, fine chopped, cover it with water or a damp cloth; take care not to burn the affected part and use lukewarm water depending on the quality of the member's skin.
Mays Ypocras no diyssec en le sieu libre que sia pausat sobre le membre trenquat deves la restauracio de lu sino cerot fayt de cera e de oli e no autre causa; e recomtec que sia migier entre grossitut e subtilitat.	 "When the pain is severe in joints, it is necessary to make a slit on the surface of each part of the body and hold a point with a cautery so that the pain stops.
Mays a Gualia es vist que sian pausatz sobre le membre trencat deves la restauracio de lu e las causas en las quals es exsiccacio am petit de caliditat so ayssi cum mirra, enses e semblantz a lor de aquelas causas que havem recomtadas.	 It is important to remember that when making the slit on the surface of the injured member, it's crucial to find and treat the causes of such as excess heat or coldness mentioned earlier.
Manieyra de emplastre que comfereys a lesio e dolor: recipe migat, de cezes, de pels de home inscizes o pena de auzel, e de altea, e sal, partidas enguals; sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian cofitz, e sia fayt emplastre.	 Remember that when you are dealing with the injury and pain: first, make sure to clean it gently or gently pat it, depending on the severity of the condition. Second, apply a compress soaked in salt water, warm water, cold water, etc., making sure all wounds have been covered.
Mays la quantitat segon la qual cove que romangua la liadura e aprop sia disliada, es que consideres si no es accidit dolor ni pruziment ni le os es trencat no es maugut de son loc, lahoras tu no deslies de motz jorns.	 If you notice the pain is increasing or spreading to other areas of the body and there are no signs of injury in those parts, it may be advisable not to apply any further heat, as this could indicate a more serious condition.
E si accideys al loc dolor vehement o prusiment o imflacio, lahoras tu te coyte o deslie aquel en la hora, e osta le emplastre de lu.	 If severe pain or swelling occurs in the affected area, it is advisable to remove any further heat application and seek medical attention immediately.
E pren drap de li e spongia marina leon humida, e submergeys aquela en aygua tebeza, e am aquela lava le loc entro que cesse aquel pruziment e la dolor sia sedada; e aprop layssa repausar le membre per una hora; e aprop pausa sobre lu lana sutza submersa en vi agre e oli o oli rozat, e lia sobre lu per una nuoyt entro que sias segur de apostema caut, e que repause la imflacio del membre, e sia remauguda la dolor de lu.	 Dip a damp cloth in seawater or lukewarm water and apply it to the area until the pain subsides; then leave it soaked for an hour, ensuring that there is no further swelling of the limb.
E aprop itera aquela strictura subtil e emplastre petit e no·l strenhas per la tua constriccio primieyra, e subtilia am aquel entro que sia sanat.	 And return the first suture small and narrow to prevent constriction of your first vein, and gently apply that one into where there is pain.
E si vezes que le apostema e la rogor e la dolor e la imflacio e tots les accidentz ja so remaugutz de tot, e indigeysses de emplastre e de strictura, lahoras tu itera aquel ayssi cum has fayt al comensant engualment.	 And if times that the physician and the surgeon and the pain and inflammation have all been resolved completely, then they are required to apply sutures and incisions as you would normally do.
E si no accideys al membre alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no deslies aquel sino aprop tres dias o quatre o v o vii; e alcunas veguadas tot aquo es layssat per xx dias segon que a tu appar per la desliadura del membre, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que la fractura adhereys, e se acosta a la coagulacio de la carn sobre aquel.	 And if no matter what the cause may be of those that we have mentioned, then you are not to do so unless three days or four days or seven days pass; and it is customary for these things to take place over 20 days until a healing takes place at the injury site as well.
E lahoras ajusta en la strictura mays que en la tua strictura primieyra tota, e ayusta en la engrossacio de la vianda del malaute, segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu.	 And then you adjust the incision size that on your first vein is all done, and stretch out the bandaging of the patient following this procedure.
Mays si tu vezes le loc de la fractura ja desiccar e extenuar mays que no cove, lahoras sapias que·l nutriment es prohibit pervenir ad aquel; e donc embroca aquel am aygua tebeza deves tota veguada que delias aquel; e sia aquo en totz tres dias; e alleuja la strictura un petit, e per aquesta operacio corr al membre le nutriment, e es sanat leugierament.	 And if you have already cleaned and stretched the area where the fracture occurs, then know that nutrition is prohibited from occurring there; therefore, bandage it up tightly with tape as well, and keep this for three days; loosen the incision a bit during this operation so that circulation can return to normal in the member.
Mays aquo que fan les fols restauradors de la fractura del membre autra veguada quan no es restaurat al comensament, segon que cove, e es restaurat segon tortuositat, es error segon la operacio de lor, e temor gran, e si fos dreyturier aquo agrandit les Antics en lors libres e agueran am aquo obrat.	 And afterwards the restorers of the fracture member will bandage it again when restoration does not start immediately after surgery, and if restoration occurs gradually, there is a mistake during surgery or fear great, and if correct this wrong it can make the ancient ones free and strong as they were before.
E yeu no he vist ad alcu de lor aquo far, per que es pus razonable que aquo no fassa.	 When you have opened up that space between the patient's thighs and placed a cushion under them, another servant should be on their legs, and another on their chest holding onto their hands.
Capitol segon: De fractura quan accideys en le cap.	 If there is a fracture in the head
Las specias de fracturas son motas, e las figuras de lor son diversas, e las causas son distinctas, quar de fracturas alcuna es fayta per percussio de spaza, e la percussio osta tot le os entro al ciphac, le qual es dejos le os, ayssi cum fay ayssa en le fust, e per aquo aquesta specia es nompnada ascial; o la spaza inscideys alcuna partida del os, e inscideys la carn de lu e no passa la inscizio entro al derier de lu; e aquesta specia de fractura es nompnada levatio absoluta.	 There are two types of fractures: those that occur due to the impact on a part of the body, and those that do not have an impact site. The first type is called contusion, which comes from the blow itself or from another part of the body hitting it; while the second one is absolute fracture, without any impact site
E la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca, e de fractura que es contricio o atricio; e causa de lu es percussio am poyra o cazement sobre peyra, e a lor semblantz.	 The severity of these two types of fractures can be great or small, and the type that is caused by impact or not: it's either contusion (contusion) or absolute fracture (fracture).
E aquesta fractura o es penetrant que ja apropinqua al pannicol le qual es dejos le os; o es en la facia del os, e la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca.	 This fracture is either a penetrating one that comes very close to the area where it damages the bone (bone) or occurs on its surface and the severity of these two types of fractures can be great or small.
E de fractura es que es ameguada en le os, en la subtilitat del cabel petita, e per aquo es nompnada aquesta specia fractura capillar.	 This fracture is called capillary due to its occurrence in the bone's small surface and its subtlety, making it extremely hard to treat.
E es fractura que es fayta o per cazement o per percussio de peyra e a lu semblantz, que fa intrar alcuna lamina del os a las partidas dedintz, e es fayta en le loc concavitat ayssi cum accideys als payroles de eram quan accideys a lor percussio e es partida de lor intrada a las partidas dedintz.	 This fracture is caused by impact or pressure and the similar types that occur when they strike one another, causing injury to parts of the bone and being caused by their intrusion into these areas.
E majorment es fayt aquo en les cors de osses humitz, ayssi cum so caps de efantz.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, it customarily called gout in doctors
E so a totas aquestas specias fracturas satagias, so son pessas ayssi cum stelhas separadas.	 And if necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery
E yeu vindre am reremoracio de tot aquo en son loc.	 You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
E conoyssem totas aquestas specias de fractura per deteccio sobre aquelas e per inquisicio de lor am tentas e ostament de carn corrumpuda que es sobre lor.	 And with these different fractures to detect them and inquire about their state of health, the servant is also responsible for checking for any signs of corruption on them
E specia capillar es conoguda per aysso que es descubert sobre le os, e es abstergit, e linit sobre lu am tentha, quar la fractura appar negra.	 The special capillary detects that it has been found about the bone, and is withdrawn from, and lined up to check for its condition, which is in black
Mays en la curacio de fractura considera al comensament les accidentz del malaute, e lahoras si tu vezes per los accidentz que signifique per significacio manifesta sobre paor, ayssi cum es vomit de colera, e extencio, e perdement de entendament, e abscizio de votz, e sincopi, e febre acuta, e eyssiment dels huels e rogor de aquels, e semblantz a lor dels accidentz en las majors disposicios, ses dopte no es sanat.	 In the investigation of fractures, initially consider all accidents in the patient, and if vomiting occurs with diarrhea, separation, loss of understanding, absence of speech, numbness, fever, and symptoms of the hands and feet are also observed; as well as the appearance of injuries in large areas, do not hesitate to consult a doctor.
E si vezes accidentz no-correntz tu speras salut, lahoras tu comensa la curacio de lu.	 If times current accidents you consider your health, start investigating it.
La qual causa es quar si es vengut a tu le plaguat en le comensament cum es plaguat e aquo es en les dias de ivern, lahoras cove que tu studias en le ostament del os denant le dia xiiii segon tota disposicio.	 The cause of the pain that has come to you in recent days as it comes and goes on the day after for a long time is customarily called gout by doctors.
E si es en les dias d’estiu, lahoras cove que te coytes ostar le os denant le vii dia, habantz que aquo que es dejos le os sia corromput del pannicol, e que accidescan les accidentz que havem recomtatz.	 When the days of summer come, if you feel a lump in your throat on an empty stomach and it feels like it's from heartburn, then make sure to drink something acidic because that helps remove any excess acid buildup in the stomach
E si la fractura ja es pervenguda al pannicol cubrent le cervel, e es am partidas menudas e atricio, lahoras cove que inscidas la partida conminuta e atrita, segon que yeu recomtare a tu.	 If the fracture is already present in the esophagus and causes pain and itching, doctors recommend treating it promptly with an antifungal cream or ointment.
E es que tu razas le cap del malaute plaguat, e descuebres sobre le os segon costuma e manieyra a tu possible segon la figura de la plagua, e que sia leugier sobre le malaute.	 If the back of your throat is painful and you suspect it might be from heartburn or acid reflux, then it's recommended to lie down with your head elevated slightly higher than your feet as soon as possible.
E si accideys a tu deves la deteccio del os, fluxs de sanc o apostema caut, lahora tu te oppausa a lu am aquo que cove, e es que huemplas le loc de draps infuzes en vi e oli rozat, e fassa repausar la plagua entro que sia sedat le apostema, e sies segur de fluxs del sanc; e aprop comensa en la circuicio del os e en la ablatio de lu.	 If you suspect acid reflux or heartburn symptoms like bloating and a sour taste in your mouth, then lie down with damp cloths placed on the lower part of your face and throat to help neutralize any excess stomach acids and prevent further damage as well as preventing spitting up any food or liquid that may have refluxed.
E aquo sia segon una de dos manieyras de operacio.	 This is a type of surgical procedure.
E la una manieyra es que tu inscidas le os am inscisori de streyt tal, e aquesta es la forma de lu: E aprop administra un autre inscissori aquest, un pauc pus lat que aquel; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	 One way is to administer an antacid medication like Tums or Maalox and the other is to eat bland foods such as toast, crackers, bananas, rice, applesauce, and gelatin.
E aprop administra mays le inscissori pus lat que·l segon.	 When you have opened up space between the patient's thighs by placing cushions under them,
E cove que sia deves tu nombre de inscissoris diverses, dels quals alcus so pus latz que alcus autres; e alcus de lor so pus breus que·ls autres e sian en le derier de acuitat de las suas extremitatz, e sian de ferr indi o felod.	 The servants must have different names from the cushions you mentioned earlier, which they hold in their hands and are placed closer to the patient's extremities, as if there is a temperature difference between them and the skin of the patient's extremities.
E usa de lor am facilitat en percussio sobre le inscissori per so que no concutesca le cap e leda aquel.	 Use this method to prevent hitting one side or the other, as you do not want to damage that part of their body.
E si le os es fort, dur, lahoras cove que perfores en le circuit de lu denant que tu administres los inscissoris am les taravels, les quals so nomnatz taravels no-profundantz.	 If the patient is very stiff or difficult to move, then make sure that you administer them on a flat surface in front of where they will be placed, as these cushions are not deep enough.
E no so nomnatz ayssi sino quar aquels no pausan le terme de l’os del test ad aquo que es aprop lu, per so quar al taravel es redonda extremitat o marge sobre aquel que es dejos le cap de lu agut semblant a marge o a cercle petit, le qual prohibeys esser submergit e passar la spissitut del os.	 Unless otherwise specified, the cushions should be placed on one side or the other of the patient's body as to prevent touching their head or extremities with them when they are placed in such a way that they surround the part where you want to place them close to it, so that the cushion does not touch the skin and cannot cover the opening.
E es convenient que tu prenguas de aquestz taravels gran nombre dels quals quascu convenesca a la spicitut de quascun os, entro que sia a tu present en tottz testz del cervel la extremitat del qual sia aguda, la quantitat en longitut e brevitat sia segon la quantitat de spicitut de aquest test.	 It is advisable to have many cushions of different sizes that will suit the specific requirements of each part, as you can see in your own tests with sharp and acute extremities having longer and narrower dimensions compared to others that are more focused on general treatment.
E aquesta es la forma de tres specias de teravels: La qualitat de perforar en le circuit del os trencat es que pauses le teravel sobre le os e revolvas aquel am les tieus ditz entro que sapias que l’os ja es penetrat; e aprop permuda le terevel ad autre loc, e pausa aquo que es entre tot trauc la quantitat de la grosseza del ray o enviro aquo.	 When a vein is torn open, it's customary to place the tourniquet over that vein and roll it tightly as you know the vein has been opened; then release it at another location, and hold this one between the two ends of the strip in order to equalize its thickness from end-to-end.
E aprop inscideys am inscissoris aquo que es entre quascun trauc del os, e fay aquel pus subtil que podes sobre aquo en fi de levitat, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que erradiques le os, o am la tua ma, o am alcuna autra causa per alcus sturmentz les quals auras apparelhatz ad aquo, ayssi cum tanalhas e forceps subtils.	 Then apply gentle traction as you may gently pull on that vein until the bleeding stops, or with a pair of fine-tipped tweezers
E cove que tu guardes am tota cautela que l’inscissori no toque alcuna causa del ciphac.	 Be careful not to cause any harm by handling this instrument.
E donc cum auras circuit le os perforan, e sira separat del ciphac si es continuat am lu, e auras aquel extrayt, cove que razas e enguales aquel en la asperitat de lu de aquo que es en le os am autra sturment semblant a inscissori, mays empero cove que sia pus teon e pus subtil que les autres inscissoris.	 Once the vein has been opened and bleeding continues then separate that instrument from this one, making sure to roll it tightly as you know which one is open; but be careful to use a second tourniquet or fine-tipped tweezers similar in size to avoid injury.
E si roman alcuna partida dels osses petitz e satagias, lahoras pren aquela am facilitat am aquo que es deves tu dels sturmentz; e aprop aquo cura la plagua am lichinis e enguentz les quals havem ditz.	 If any blood vessels are torn and you still see bleeding then apply a tourniquet or fine-tipped tweezers to stop the bleeding, being careful not to cause any further injury.
E l’autra manieyra de operacio es leugiera, longinqua de paor, la qual diyssec Gualia e la lauzec per gran lausor; e aquest es le sermo de lu: necessari es a tu en le comensament que comenses descobrir la partida del os del loc en le qual es la fractura pus vehement e pus manifesta, entro que quan auras descubert aquela partida e auras pausat dejos lu la extremitat de aquest inscissori lent e alegre del qual aquesta es la forma:	 The other kind of operation is easier and less frightening. It consists in beginning by discovering the rupture location at which it is very violent and obvious, until you discover that rupture and have stopped bleeding from this instrument gently and joyfully as they are part of what follows.
E es que la partida lenticular es leon e no inscideys alcuna causa, e la partida aguda es de lu en dos latz avantz en longitut, ayssi cum vezes; que la partida lenticular sia ajustada al ciphac am la facia de lu inscident aguda en le os.	 When the bladder is about to empty and does not find any cause, acute urinary retention occurs in two days before the expiration of urine, but the bladder retention should be adjusted when there is no sudden urinary retention
E aprop percuteys sobre le inscissori de una partida am un petit malhet entro que inscidas tot le os am facilitat ayssi cum es revolvut, e tu sias segur del pannicol que no accida en lu accident que temas en denguna manieyra, e si le medicant14 era le pus fol de totz les homes e le mays ignorant de lor; certament, e si era dorment.	 And afterwards, you should gently massage the kidneys with a small cloth to facilitate urine flow, and ensure that there is no accident in which it causes fear or injury, if the medical practitioner knows all about this matter
Lahoras si romania alcuna causa annexa al os del pannicol en alcus locs de os, inscidira aquel de lu am la extremitat del inscissori aquel lenticular, e deliuraria aquel de lu am facilitat, quar es deliurat de lu ses nocument e ses paor.	 And afterwards, you should gently massage the kidneys with a small cloth to facilitate urine flow, and avoid any additional cause of kidney pain in that area, insert it into the lower part of the kidney, deliver it from there and its fear
E si fractura del os no penetra entro al pannicol, e aquo que es abscidit o es ostat del os es la facia de lu, e roman en lu asperitat e satagias subtils, lahoras cove que razas aquela asperitat e erradiques aquelas satagias am razoris subtils per les quals tu has preparat le nombre, de diversas quantitatz per que sia a tu possible administrar de aquels en tot loc les pus convenientz de lor e le pus dreyt de aquels segon aquo en que te perduzeys la tua operacio aquel os trencat e la figura de lu.	 And if the kidney breaks through to the bladder and that is what happens, you should massage gently and carefully, avoiding any pain or damage in those sensitive areas prepared with a small cloth for various quantities, so that it may be possible to administer them at different locations according to their convenience, as well as the benefits they bring after surgery.
E cove que administres en la tua razio am la qual razes le os al comensament le pus lat de aquels razoris, e aprop usa aprop lu del pus subtil de lu, e no cesses far aquo segon continuitat entro que pervenguas ad aministrar le pus teon e·l pus subtil de totz aquels.	 And when you administer the medication to your kidneys as prescribed by the doctor from that moment onwards until all of them have been administered.
Mays en quascuna de las autras fracturas petitas capillars e fractura subtil, cove que administres cura segon aquo que perduseys ad rectificacio de lu.	 When small capillaries in each of the toes break or a subtle fracture occurs, then you should administer treatment after that to correct it.
E es causa que no es ameguada sobre totz les quals han studi en aquela art.	 It is customary for all those who have studied this art
E stec sobre aquo que nos scriut havem mostrat en grans fracturas.	 This is what we see in major fractures
E si le pannicol es retangut quan tu erradiques le os, lahoras cove que prenguas drap de li segon la quantitat de la plagua, e submergeys aquel en oli rozat, e pausa aquel sobre le orrifici de la plagua; e aprop pren autre drap doblat o triplicat e submergeys lu en vi e oli rozat e pausa aquel sobre drap prim e fay aquo al pus leugierament que podes sobre aquel, que no graves le ciphac; e aprop administra sobre aquel liament lat, e no strenhas aquel sino per quantitat que tengua la plagua tant solament.	 If the panniculum is torn when you remove it, the doctors usually perform another incision and submerge them in hot oil to stop the bleeding, placing a bandage on top of the first one to prevent further bleeding; apply another bandage doubled or tripled and submerge them with fresh oil and place a bandage over the first one so that the bleeding can be controlled without causing serious harm.
E layssa aquel am aquesta cura per un dia o per dos entro que sias segur de apostema caut; e aprop deslia aquel e aprop aministra medicinas am las quals es superflua siccitat, ayssi cum razitz de lin e farina de errs, e polvera de enses e de aristologia, e de semblantz ad aquels.	 This cure should be used for one or two days until you are sure of stopping the bleeding; then remove it and administer medicines as needed to control any bleeding that may arise from this procedure.
E es que tu fassas de aquestas medicinas polvera que sia pulverizada sobre la plagua, ayssi cum son secas; e universalment, administra en aquel tota medicina de proprietat de la qual es que abstergesca e no mordique.	 These medicines should be powdered and sprinkled onto the wound as needed, just like you do with creams; universally, administer to that all medicines of property from which it is necessary to abstain and not harm.
E guarda te segon la tua vertut que la plagua en la tua curacio sia neta; e no sia en lu surdicia de enguent ni autra; ni no layssas agreguar virulencia en lu; quar quan es ajustada sobre le pannicol del cervel, corromp aquel e poyreys aquel, e accideys sobre le malaute aprop aquo malicia maligna.	 Ensure that the wound in your care is clean and not infected with any germs or other contamination; do not add anything viral to it; when you are done treating the panniculum of the hernia, remove it and dispose of it appropriately so as to avoid any harmful malignancy.
E accideys en le ciphac del cap, cum de lu es mondificat le os e majorment quan es menspresada la cura de lu, e es negror en la superficia de lu; e donc considera lahoras si accideys al malaute les accidentz que havem ditz, sapias que es parnicios ses tot dopte.	 When the first symptoms of a patient's illness appear on his forehead and worsen when the cure is administered, it becomes black in color and therefore should be considered serious.
E si no accideys negror sino de la medicina que es pausada desus, e es en vertut de aquela medicina que fassa aquela negror, lahoras cove que tu prenguas de mel una partida e de oli rozat partidas iii, e am aquels linieys un drap, e aprop pausa aquel sobre le ciphac; e aprop cura aquel am las specias de curacio que conveneys entro que sia sanat.	 If the blackening does not occur due to a stopped medication or is caused by an alternative treatment that causes it, then examine closely for any rash on the skin and apply a poultice over the forehead; and if you find lines there as well, place a bandage over those areas of care.
Capitol .iii.	 III
De restauracio del nas quan es trincat.	 Treatment for broken nose
Sapias que no es trencat del nas sino doas partidas ensemps pus sobiranas, o una de aquelas alcunas veguadas, per so quar en lu has dos osses, quar la partida dejos es cartillaginosa, e no es trencada e no accideys a lu sino atricio e tortuositat e sinuitat.	 If the nose is not broken but rather filled with pus due to an infection inside it, or if one of its cartilages has been damaged and cannot be removed without causing damage itself, then there are two possible solutions: either cauterize the affected part (a treatment where a pointed instrument heats up and burns off the infected material) or remove the infected cartilage.
Mays si es trencada la una de las doas partidas de lu, lahoras cove que tu intrometas le dit petit en le sieu nas, e que engualhas aquela fractura dedintz am le tieu dit indic, e am le dit pous defora, entro que retorne le nas segon la sua figura natural.	 If one of the two cartilages is broken and has to be removed because it can no longer support its shape or function, then you should introduce a small opening in the nose through which air will pass back into the nasal cavity after surgery, allowing for proper healing and restoration of its normal form.
E sia fayt aquo per tu am facilitat, e guarda te que no caja per aquela tua operacio sobre le malaute delor.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors
E si la fractura es en la pus sobirana partida del nas, e le dit no perve ad aquela, lahoras cove que sia equat am la extremitat del ray en le qual sia petita grossitut.	 If a fracture occurs in the nasal cavity and it cannot be pulled out with one's fingers, then doctors advise to apply pressure at that point on the extremity of the hand where it is small
E si la fractura es en doas partidas, lahoras tu fay le semblant de aquo.	 If there are two fractures, then apply pressure in a similar manner
E coyta te am restauracio de lu en le primier dia de la fractura, si es possible; e sino, lahoras aprop le vii o·l x deves le repaus del apostema caut.	 You should perform the restoration of it on the first day after the fracture if possible; otherwise, you should apply cold compresses and hot applications alternately
E aprop entromet en la extremitat del nas una meca de drap de li, si la fractura es en una partida, o metz doas calguas, si la fractura es en doas partidas, e sia en la calgua grossitut de tanta quantitat que umpla le trauc del nas.	 Apply a cloth soaked in water to the nasal cavity if there is only one fracture, or apply two cold cloths and one hot cloth if there are two fractures, making sure that it covers as much of the nose as possible.
E diysso alcus dels antics restauradors que las calguas sian enfundudas en boder, e sian permudadas en tot dia, mays no es vist a mi; habantz cove que la meca sia enfunduda en album de huou comfit am polvera de moli; e aprop layssa la qualgua entro que l’os sia fermat e sia endurazida la cartillage.	 So that the old restorers' cloths are soaked in water, and they are changed every day, so as to not be seen by anyone. Also make sure that the cloth is filled with a mixture of flour and salt, and place it inside where the eye can no longer see it, and keep the eyes closed tightly and firmly until the swelling has subsided.
E alcunas veguadas sia entromes en le nas, en loc de calgua, pena de auca pus que es envolopada de drap de li leon; e sia que ja te la fractura del nas pus vehement e que le malaute no sia prohibit de inspiracio.	 You should insert the gauze into the nose, in place of a cloth, so as to prevent any cloth that has become wet from falling down his face; and make sure that he already has a fracture in the nasal cavity and cannot take deep breaths.
E aquesta causa no es a tu necessaria; e si voles, fay aquo, e si voles, fay calguas.	 When joints are affected by cold humors, it is customary to call this gout.
E si accideys autra veguada apostema caut, emplastra le nas am cerot o am coto enfus en vi agre e oli rozat, o am diaquilon.	 And if a bleeding ulcer occurs at the point of incision, it should be cauterized with a pointed cautery or a cotton swab soaked in vinegar and oil.
Mays si no accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que emplaustres aquel defora am farina de sizami e am polvera de enses cofitz am album de huou; e aprop pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e no lies le nas am alcuna causa.	 If an ulcer does not respond to cauterization with the mixture of alum and pearl ash from the abovementioned book, then place a bandage over the wound without any other cause.
Mays si so trencats les osses del nas am fractura petita o so conminuitz, lahoras cove que scindas sobre aquels, e extraguas aquels am insturmentz que conveno ad aquels; e aprop cos la scissura, e cura aquela am aquo que encarna e consolida, e am emplastres ad aquo convenientz.	 If the bones of the nose are broken or contorted, then do cut them away and extract those with the instruments that fit for such purposes; when cutting through it, care must be taken to make sure that what is carved out solidifies and adheres well to where it should go.
E si accideys plagua dedintz le nas, lahoras cove que cures aquela am calguas e administra canulas de plom entro que sia de tot sanat.	 If a plague occurs in the nose, then treat that with hot water and administer tubes of lead to ensure its complete healing.
Capitol .iiii.	 This sentence is not making sense or it may have a typo/error due to which no translation could be found.
De restauracio de la mandibula quan es trincada.	 When the jaw is fractured,
Quan la mandibula dejos es rompuda e la fractura de lu no es am plagua, reguarda lahoras si la fractura es deforas tant solament, e no es trencada en dos e es curvada a las partidas dedintz, lahoras la sua cognicio es leugiera.	 When the mandible is broken and the fracture does not extend beyond it, guard against the possibility that the fracture has been split in two and curved at the points of impact.
E cove donc, si la fractura es en la part dreyta, que tu intrometas le tieu indic senestre en la boca del malaute; e semblantment si la fractura es an la mandibula senestra, lahoras intromet le dit indic de la ma dreyta; e impelleys am aquel la gilbositat de la fractura dedintz am facilitat a las partidas defora, am la tua autra ma de la partida defora del os; am aquel decentment equa aquelam.	 "If the fracture is in the right jaw, you should introduce the sign of the tongue into the patient's mouth; and similarly if the fracture is in the lower jaw, put your finger there to indicate it.
E si la fractura de la mandibula ja es separada en doas, lahoras cove que administres extensio de doas partz segon rectitut entro que sia possibla la equacio de lu.	 "If the lower jaw fracture is separated into two parts, you should administer extension of both sides separately to ensure proper healing.
E si accideys conmocio de dentz a disrupcio, lahoras strenh aquelas de las quals speras que romandran am fil de aur o de argent o de ceda; e aprop pausa sobre la mandibula trencada cerot, e aprop pausa sobre lu drap duplicat, e pausa sobre le drap gran stelha decentment fayta, o una pessa de sola engual a la longitut de la mandibula; e aprop lia aquela desus segon que a tu es apparelhada la liadura de lu e que conveneys la applicacio, entro que no es destruida.	 "If the tooth movement is disrupted due to injury or fracture, the doctor should strengthen those muscles that support the teeth and gums as much as possible; place a cushion over the broken jaw bone, another over the duplicated flap of skin, and one more on the large flap, which will help if it's torn off. Make sure you apply pressure evenly across the length of the mandible to prevent tearing.
E comanda al malaute que use de repaus e tranquilitat, e pausa la vianda de lu sorbicios leons.	 "Communicate with the patient and provide them with rest and relaxation; stop the bleeding if necessary.
E si extimas que ja es alterada la figura en alcuna manieyra, lahoras tu te coyta e deslia aquel al tertz dia; e aprop rectifica aquo que ja es alterat de lu e emplaustra aquel am polvera de moli, am album de huou, o am farina de cisami, pus que tu auras ostat le cerot de lu, e pausa sobre le emplastra lana leon.	 "If you notice that the shape is distorted in any way, have them lie on their back and straighten it out by putting a rolled towel under its center.
E adonc cum sta annex e ajustat aquel emplastre sobre lu, e la disposicio del os no es alterada, layssa aquel, que no le deslies entro que sia sanat e strenh la fractura; quar motas veguadas aquesta fractura es streyta en tres sempmanas.	 "When the plaster is placed and adjusted as such, if nothing has been changed in the patient's condition, then let that be known, do not allow it to happen that the fracture worsens or is aggravated; for when fractures occur they are healed within three days.
E si autra veguada accida apostema caut, lahoras administra aquo que havem dit motas veguadas en la sedacio de lu entro que sia sanat, e sia remaugut aquel apostema.	 "If any other gout attack occurs after the administration of this medicine, do not hesitate to call for a doctor and let it be known that there is pain, so that healing may occur.
E si la fractura es am plagua, lahoras considera si es pessa del os separada o satagias, lahoras tu te subtilia que ostes aquelas satagias am aquo que conveneys ad aquo en la remocio de aquelas dels sturmentz.	 "If a fracture is present and separated or displaced, then consider whether it needs further treatment as well. Do not hesitate to apply remedies on those parts that are associated with the healing of these areas.
E si le orrifici de la plagua es streyt, lahoras tu le amplifique am le fleubotomi segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	 "If the pain from a fracture is severe, then you should increase the frequency of the phlebotomies based on your need.
E aprop quan tu auras ostat aquelas satagias, e de aquelas no sira remaugut re, lahoras tu cos le orrifici de la plagua si es ampla; e sino, pausa sobre aquela un dels emplaustres que conveneysso ad aquo e encarnan aquela, entro que sia sanada.	 "Then once you have applied those pads and they do not relieve the pain, consider increasing the intensity of the fracture treatment if it is severe; otherwise, pause on one or more remedies that will provide relief in that manner within healing.
Capitol .v.	 "That completes this text. May I help you with anything else?
De restauracio de la furcula quan es trinquada.	 "When the furcula is broken.
Motas veguadas es trencada la furcula de la partida denant deves le muscle, e aquela fractura es fayta en una de tres manieyras.	 "The gout attack has occurred and you need to cut open the muscles; the fracture will be healed within three days.
Quar o es trencada, o seperada, o es seperada en doas partz otra que no accidan satagias; e es leugier a la restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que accideysso en lu satagias, e es dificil a restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que la fractura es am plagua.	 When one of the thighs is torn or separated and then divided into two parts that do not agree with each other, it is necessary to restore its separation; otherwise this occurs in the veins, which makes it difficult to restore.
E la operacio en aquela, quan la fractura es ses plagua, es que tu fassas esser present dos ministres, per so que la un tengua le adjutori e siegua la furcula trencada, e l’autre extenda le col ves aquela partida.	 The operation in that case is when the separation is caused by a tear or incision, it is necessary to have two attendants who will guide and support one another as they cut open the torn part of the thigh, while the other widens the wound on the affected side.
E aprop enguala la fractura am les tieus ditz entro que sia fayta la forma de lu segon que cove, e no sia en lu eminencia pauca ni concavitat.	 The fracture should be made in a way that causes it to heal quickly and naturally, without the need for much prominence or depression of the area.
E si indigeysses mes de extencio, lahoras cove que pauses dejos le titillic del malaute spera de drap o de lana, e sia la grandesa de lu segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat; e exten e eleva la furcula e coarta la spera am la tua ma entro que enguales la frectura segon que cove.	 If you need to extend the operation time, it is necessary to stretch or expand the patient's chest wall if there is enough space for doing so; and then stretch and lift the diaphragm in a way that aligns with the incision as well.
E si no podes atirar la extremitat de la furcula a las partidas defora, per so quar es pervenguda al preon, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e pauses sobre le muscle de lu un coyssi migier en grandeza.	 If the patient's arm cannot be placed over their chest during the surgery, it is necessary for them to place a cushion underneath their head and rest on one side of their body in order to perform the operation safely.
E le ministre prema le muscle de lu a las partidas dejos entro que l’os de la furcula sia elevat que es en le preon en sus, e lahoras tu rectifique la fractura e enguala aquela am les tieus ditz.	 The minister should place their hand on the patient's side during the operation to guide and align the incision with the top of the ribcage so that it is directly above the sternum in order for them to correct any fractures.
Mays si sentes satagias de la furcula e so maugudas, lahoras cove que fendes sobre aquela e extraguas aquelas satagias am facilitat.	 When you feel heartburns in the stomach, hold them gently and squeeze them from that place to eliminate those heartburns easily.
E si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu ingenia inscisio de lu am un dels inscissoris les quals has apparelhatz ad aquo, pus que havias pausat dejos la furcula le sturment que serve le ciphac; e es sturment de fust o de ferr del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	 If the pain is still persistent and you have already done as instructed above, put a finger in your mouth to stimulate one of the nerves that has been affected by this process, which will help alleviate the pain.
E es semblant a culier del qual aquesta es la concavitat; e sia la sua latitut segon aquo que has necessitat de lu, segon la grandeza del os o la pauqueza de lu.	 It is similar to licking it [the finger], and if you need to do so for the second time due to its small size or weakness of your mouth.
Mays la longitut de lu sia segon que es a tu possible a la operacio; que haja doas extremitatz ayssi cum vezes, e la una extremitat sia ample e l’autre streyta.	 The length of it may be second in order to perform the operation, and there should be two fingers used each time, one having an ample extremity and the other thin.
E si la disrupcio de la plagua la qual has inscidida quan has extraytas la satagia del os es ampla, e yest segur de apostema caut, lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura.	 If the disruption of the flap that you have incised when removing the stomach acid is wide and you are sure to press it gently down, then hold both flaps in place with sutures.
E si la disrupcio es pauca, o temes apostema caut, lahoras tu uemple la plagua am draps e pulvils segon la quantitat de la scissura de la plagua.	 If the disruption is small or you are afraid of pressing it down gently, then hold one flap and apply pressure with powders on the width of the flap incision.
E si accideys apostema caut, lahoras infon drap en vi agre e oli rozat e vi, e pausa sobre aquel.	 If you press too hard, let go of it gently and put oil or fat soaked in vinegar on top of that.
Mays la strictura del os quan es ses plagua e ses seccio, es que pauses emplastre fayt de farina de moli am album de huou, e pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e aprop pausa la spera dejos le titillic de lu, si indigeyssas de aquela, e aprop pren humemate, so es torca la qual teno les Sarrazis , que sia mot longua, e sia latitut de lu de un palm o entorn aquel; e aprop pausa pulvils duplicatz sobre la stopa e l’emplastre; e aprop pren una stela de taula subtil de la qual la latitut d’ela sia de tres ditz e en longitut semblantment; e aprop envolopa aquela en drap, e aprop envolopa aquel drap am la stela en lo loc sobre le loc de la fractura; e aprop pausa humemati ayssi cum es revout, e revol aquela sobre le col de lu e dejos le titillic de lu sa e dejos le titillic de lu malaute, e reduzeys aquela sobre tota partida, e quan vezes que la strictura de la fractura am strictura descent, e es aquo que no es occultat sobre tu.	 When the joint is swollen and stiff from heat or swelling of its sheath, place a cushion under them, another on their legs, and one more on their chest holding their hands to prevent it from coming out.
E tot, que no sia mauguda la stelha desobre le os trencat; e per so cove que tu vejas le malaute quascun dia, que quan le liament es mollificat o vezas la stela ja esser remauguda, lahoras tu rectifica aquo e strenh la liadura.	 And in that case if you see the hernia slip out, then correct it immediately and tighten its aperture.
E aprop pausa le dormir del malaute sobre le col de lu, e pausa dejos le titillic de lu deves le dormir de lu en la nueyt un petit coyssi; per so que am aquel sia elevat le adjutori de lu del latz de aquel, e donc es elevada la la fractura de la furcula a elevacio del muscle; o sia le bras de lu liat al col de aquel.	 And then place the cushion under the patient's back near their ribcage, and put another one underneath to support its head slightly elevated so that the assistant from beneath can lift it up out of bed gently without causing injury to the patient.
E no deslies le liament si no accideys en le loc prusiment o apostema, entro a xii dias.	 If you do not see improvement within 12 days then proceed with surgery.
E aprop renovelha le emplastre si has vista la facia de lu ad aquo, e ajusta en la strictura e restaura aquel e layssa entro que sia restaurat e sia coagulat la fractura de la furcula.	 And if you have seen the hernia slip out like that, tighten it again and restore the aperture, making sure to restore this and coagulate the hernia incision.
E es strenguda e comfortada segon le mes en xxviii dias, e alcunas veguadas en alcus homes es fayt en mens de temps de aquel.	 "After 28 days, some people felt relief during these warm baths.
Capitol .vi.	 "Capitol" is a proper noun that refers to the United States' capital city.
De restauracio de fractura de la spalla.	 Restoration of a fractured shoulder.
Spatula tart es trencada en le loc lat de lu e no so trencatz de lu sino les marges.	 The spatula was broken in the area near it and not at its edge.
E donc quan es trencat le loc de lu — e es trencat en le mieg loc de lu — e no es conogut sino per tocament, lahoras segon que es la figura de la fractura sforsa te la preparacio de lu e reduzir aquela segon la figura natural en tota manieyra de engen la qual es a tu possible.	 When the location of it - and in the middle part of it - is broken and not at its edge, then doctors use to prepare for it, reduce that area back to normal shape using whatever method you prefer.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc polvera de moli am album de huou e stopa leon; e aprop pausa pulvil de drap duplicat; e aprop pausa sobre lu stela lada de taula subtil segon la quantitat de la spatula tota o mays un pauc.	 Then place a gentle pause on the edge of the wooden board, and a soft one over the extra piece of cloth, and then over its small table as per quantity you prefer.
Mays si dejos la stela es concavitat en alcu dels locs de la spatula, lahoras tu enguala aquela concavitat am stopa leon, e aprop pueja la stela segon equalitat.	 If the spatula's edge is concave, then the pause on that part should be gentle and over there only, and adjust to make it level if necessary.
E aprop strenh desus am humemati longua ab constriccio decent e am fermesa de la stela entro que no sia remauguda del sieu loc.	 Adjust the firmness of the pause so that it does not slip off from its place, and make sure it is level with nothing on top of it to keep it in position.
E considera le liament en quascun dia; e totas veguadas que sia mollificat, lia autra veguada e stren le e equa la stela si es remauguda del sieu loc.	 Consider the binding on a daily basis, and any soft one if needed, tighten it as well to keep the spatula in position.
E jagua le malaute sobre le sieu latz sa.	 The patient lies down
E la spatula es restaurada en xx dias o en .xxv.	 If necessary, it should be restored within ten or twenty days
E donc quan es complit aquest nombre, lahoras tu dissolveys le liament, e que tu scias ensegurat quar aquela es dels osses dels quals la cominicio no es temuda ni lor dissolucio.	 Then when you have completed the number of days mentioned above, you must dissolve the cord and ensure that it is not made from bones which would begin to dissolve
E si procezeys del loc del os pessa e pongeys dejos la codena, lahoras tu scindeys sobre lu, e osta le, e fay segon que havem dit en la fractura de la furcula de sadacio de apostema caut si accideys aqui.	 If a bone of the arm is broken and you remove it from its socket, then you should check if there are any fractures in the areas around the joint or near the elbow, as this could also be fractured.
Capitol .vii.	 The seventh
De restauracio de la fractura del pietz.	 Restoration of a fracture of the leg.
Le pietz alcunas veguadas es romput en le mieg loc de lu e aquo tart endeve; mays las extremitatz de lu mot endeve que so ciccadas e comminuidas.	 If any of the joints in the foot or leg become swollen, it is advisable to move them and apply cold compresses.
E dels accidentz de lu quan es trencat le mieg de lu es que declina a las partidas dedintz e accideys a lu gran dolor, e dificultat en lo hale, e tos, e fort leu e vomeys sanc; e es declarada en lu cavitat en le os trencat e no es occulta al sentiment.	 The reason for the pain and difficulty in movement is when one of the bones breaks through skin or muscle, causing a large amount of pain, discomfort, weakness, and sometimes severe bleeding from vessels; it is declared at the cavity where the bone has broken but not hidden by sensation.
E la restauracio de lu es que sia resupinat le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa entre las spallas de lu un coyssi; e aprop prem als muscles de lu, e ajusta las costas de lu am las mas de dos costatz, e subtilia te en la operacio de lu e en la equacio segon tota manieyra que es ad aquo possibla e que conveneys ad aquo, entro que retorne la figura del os segon que cove.	 The restoration is to place the patient on their back with a cushion beneath them and raise one leg at a time onto a cushion; hold the muscles of the leg tightly while adjusting your arms around the shoulders of both sides, then gently apply pressure in the operation procedure as much as possible and continue until the figure of the bone returns.
E aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e estopa e pausa desobre astela de taula subtil de sauze o de caligi e de a lor semblantz en levitat, pus que tu envolopas aquela en drap; e aprop subtilia te en lian aquela sobre le os trencat que no sia maugut; e vay am liadura segon retonditat al dors alcunas veguadas, e strenh aquel am strictura decent; e aprop considera la liadura en tota hora, e quan es mollificada strenh aquela.	 When you have prepared the surface and removed all the sheets from it, put a cushion underneath them, another on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
E si necessitat provoca a desliament de aquela deves corrossio o pruziment, o dolor, o apostema que accideysso en le loc, lahoras tu coyta e deslia aquela e erradica le emplastre e rectifique aquo que accideys per aquo am manieyra de curacio de lu; e aprop reduzeys le emplastre, si vezes ad aquo la facia; e ajusta a lu strictura entro que sia sanat.	 If the pain arises from the surface or crust of the body, or comes suddenly in that place, then apply the cloth and remove it, correct it so that the cause is removed through careful care for healing. And adjust the crust tightly to ensure its healthiness.
Capitol .viii.	 The Eighth Capital
De restauracio de las costas quan son trincadas.	 Restoration of the thighs when they are torn apart
Sapias que fractura de las costas no catz sino en locs grosses que siegon le dos; e de las extremitatz de lor de la partida denant no accideys ad aquelas contricio sino per aquo quar so cartillaginosas.	 You know that fractures of the thighs do not occur everywhere but in large areas, and to the extent of their injury they should be treated separately from those who are at risk for those injuries.
E cognicio de lu no es amaguada al sentiment deves la inquisicio de lu am les ditz.	 Be aware that it cannot be hidden by hiding its cause, and the investigation of its causes is necessary.
E la restauracio sia ayssi que enguales la fractura am les ditz segon la manieyra possibla, entro que sia engulhat segon que cove, e aprop emplastre e strenh le os trencat am stela, si indigeys de aquel.	 The restoration should be done as similarly to the fracture in relation to its severity, so that it is held firmly while it heals completely and adjust it tightly if necessary
E si la fractura de las costas es declinant a las partidas dedintz, lahoras accideys al malaute dolor vehement e punctura, ayssi cum punctura que accideys ad aquel que ha pleureci, e per aquo quar le os ponh le velament; e accideys a lu difficultat de hanelit, e tos, e vomit de mot sanc; e aquesta es de dificil curacio.	 When the fracture of the ribs is declining in terms, the gouty pain and punctures occur very acutely, as with that who has pleurisy, and for this reason put on a garment; and you will have difficulty breathing, vomiting from motion sickness; and it's difficult to cure.
E ja les Antixs so engeniatz en aquela am motz engientz.	 The assistants are working hard in that direction.
E de lor so que diso: cove que pauses viandas del malaute que engendro imflacio e ventositat, per que le ventre sia imflat e sia extendut, e la fractura sia impellida a las partidas defora.	 They say that for making the patient's belly swell and extended, so that the intestine protrudes through the rupture,
Mays nos avoreyssem aquo per so que no sia causa leugiera a generar apostema caut, si no accideys; e si ja accideys, lahoras ja ajuda ad aquo.	 To avoid causing any bleeding to generate a cauterization if not, and if it does, the doctor will help with that.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia pausada desus ventoza e aprop que sucque am fortitut; e es semblant a ratiocinacio, mays empero es temut que la ventoza atire las superfluitatz al loc per la debilitat.	 The assistants would suggest that the cushions should be placed under their feet and held tightly to prevent any superfluous gases from escaping through weakness.
E diyssero alcus de lor: cove que·l loc sia cubert am lana que ja es submersa en oli caut, e sian pausatz pulvils entre las costas entro que sia umplida, que sia la liadura engual quan envolopas aquela segon retonditat; e aprop sia curat le malaute am curacio de pleuresi de vianda e de medicina.	 The assistants would suggest that the cushion should be placed over their chest which has been immersed in hot oil to prevent powder from falling into it, and they should place pillows between their legs to prevent being filled with fluid when trying to get up due to weakness; and they should assist in healing injuries of wounds and medicine.
E si causa vehement constrenh le malaute la qual no sufferta, e le os punh le velament am punctura ledent, temem sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que fendam sobre le loc, descubram de la costa trencada, e aprop pausem desobre aquela instrument que conserve le ciphac, la rememoracio del qual es precedida, e que inscidam le os am facilitat, e extraguam aquel.	 If the constriction is so severe that it causes suffocation and the veins are pierced by a sharp object, we must place our hand over their chest to prevent them from suffocating; we should open up the cut artery and remove it
E aprop que ajustem las doas labias de la plagua, si es gran, am cozidura, e curem aquela am emplastres entro que sia sanada.	 We must tighten their two thighs to prevent blood flow in and out of the wound if they are wide
E si accideys dedintz apostema, lahoras tu coyta e enfon pulvils en oli rozat e pausa sobre le loc, e que sia curat le malaute am aquo que cove a la apostema dedintz.	 If a dust particle enters the wound and you place your hand over it to prevent further contamination and treat the patient with antibiotics accordingly.
E sia ressupinat sobre le latz sobre le qual dorm, entro que sia sanat.	 We must raise the head of the bed to ensure proper drainage through the wounds if they are not healing properly.
Capitol .ix.	 Thank you
De restauracio de fractura del spondil del dos e del col.	 To restore the fractured spine at L2 and L3 levels.
Alcunas veguadas endeve fractura als osses del col, e tart endeve a lor atricio, e semblantment als spondils del dos.	 Bone fractures of the pelvis can cause other problems such as pelvic organ injuries, so it is important to treat them appropriately and stabilize the spine also.
E cum aquo accideys ad alcu e voles saber si sara sanat o no, lahoras considera, quar si vezes las sieuas mas ja mollificadas e stupefaytas e mortas e no pot maure aquelas ni extendre ni strenher aquelas e quan constrenges aquelas am les tieus ditz o punges aquelas am agulha e no sent en aquelas dolor, lahoras sapias que no es sanat, e en las mes de disposicios es mortal.	 If you suspect that the bone may not be healing or is causing pain and prevents movement of the leg, then it's important to consider other possibilities such as multiple fractures, dislocations, dislocations with fractures, or even avulsion of the limb which could lead to death if left untreated.
E si mau aquelas e sent en aquelas constriccio am les ditz e punctura, lahoras sapias que la nucha de l’os es salva e que le malaute guereys am curacio.	 When the pain is located in the joints and itches there as a result of constriction caused by cold humors, then doctors know that such a condition is called gout
E si ve als spondils del col le semblant ad aquo e voles saber si sira sanat o no, lahoras considera als pes de lu.	 When the abdomen feels like this and you want to know if it's safe or not, doctors consider your feet.
Lahoras si tu vezes que so ja mollificatz, accideys ad aquels aquo que es accidit en las mas, e aprop quan jatz sobre le sieu dos, yeys ventozitat e egestio ses la sua volontat, e alcunas veguadas es resupinat sobre le sieu dos e vol urinar e no pot, lahoras sapias que es mortal, e adonc no trebales en la curacio de lu.	 If you have already taken medicines and this happens on both sides as well, do not worry too much because you know that it is dangerous to consume urine or excrete in a certain way while holding the hand of another person. It is necessary to consult with doctors immediately.
Mays si no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, la causa es milhor e pus leugiera.	 If there is not any other cause for those pains, then they are more serious and may be a result of inflammation.
E la curacio de lu es que te perforses a la sedacio del apostema caut que pauses sobre le spondil atrissat oli rozat sol, o am mugols de huous asatz; pausa sobre aquela aquel alcunas veguadas le dia entro que sia sedat le apostema caut.	 The cure is to apply pressure with the pointed cautery over the inflamed and painful spot, or press on the points of the fingers that are swollen if it hurts a lot when touching them; place your hand over it for a short time to make sure you do not burn yourself with the cautery.
E lahoras pausa un dels emplastres confortantz e exsitans, e strenh sobre aquel am liament; e comanda al malaute que use de repaus e de tranquillitat e que no dorme sobre la partida am la qual atroba dolor entro que sia sanat.	 After doing this the doctor will tell you to take rest and stay calm, and command the patient not to sleep on the part where it hurts until it becomes better and safe.
E si accideys deves la atricio del os satagias o alcuna causa que ja es seperada de lu, lahoras cove que secces sobre la codena e que ostes aquel os; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua, am sutura si es gran; e aprop cura aquela am alcu encarnatiu dels enguentz, entro que sia sanat.	 If there is a problem with the intestine or any other cause that has been separated from it already, then doctors tell you to go away and rest that part of your body; and if necessary, cut through both layers of skin on the abdomen, be careful not to cut deeply; apply ice compress over it to prevent injury.
Mays si es trencat le derier del os alhoses, e es la fi de la coeta, lahoras cove que tu entrometas le dit pous de la ma senestra en le cul, e que enguales le os trencat am l’autra ma segon que es possible per equacio segonda; e aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e astelha, si indigeysses de aquels, e aprop strenh aquel.	 If the first rib is torn away from that place, and it's at the end of the meal, then you should insert a finger into her anus to push out the other one as well; and apply pressure on its surface so that they both come out together, if possible.
E si sentes satagias trencadas en lu, lahoras tu fen sobre aquela, e osta aquel, e cura la plagua am la curacio que es precedida entro que sia sanada.	 If you feel a tear in the intestine, put pressure on it and also apply cold to it as a remedy before seeking medical attention for the tear.
Capitol .x.	 "The capital of such-and-such" (I cannot determine which country or city is being referred to).
De restauracio de la ancha.	 Restoration of the intestines.
Les osses de las anchas tart so trencats, e si trencan, lahoras la fractura de lor no es sino communicio en las extremitatz de aquelas e son inscidas en la longitut e declinan a las partidas dedintz; e accideys al malaute dolor en le loc e punctura, e la camba es stupefacta quan es fractura.	 If the bones of the intestines are torn apart and they do tear, then the rupture is nothing but communication between the extremities thereof and enters into the length and decline on the parts thereof; and when it tears come pain to that place and puncture, and the intestine itself is stupefacted when it is ruptured.
E la restauracio de lu es que tu extendas la tua ma sobre aquel entro que sia sobre la fractura qual es la figura de lu.	 The restoration of it is to stretch your hand over that area where there was a fracture, which is the shape of it.
E si fractura es en la extremitat de lu tant solament, lahoras tu enguala aquela segon que a tu es apparelhat per equacio engual entro que sia asemblat a la sua figura natural.	 If the fracture occurs in only one extremity of it, then stretch your hand over that second where you apply pressure to bring it back into its natural shape.
Mays si la fractura es en le lonc o que ja declina a las partidas dejos, lahoras tu fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu ventre entro que sia preparada a tu la restauracio de aquela fractura.	 If the fracture occurs in its length or declines to the sides of it, then apply pressure on his belly towards where the restoration of that fracture is necessary.
E donc quan auras engualada aquela, pausa sobre lu emplastre, e aprop pausa sobre aquel astela de fust o de codena, e strenh per strictura sobre la qual no temas punctacio de fractura ni remocio de la stelha.	 When you have opened that area, pause over the bed platform and another over the cover of the mattress, and hold the edge tightly so as not to fear any breakage or damage from the bed.
E enguala la concavitat am aquo que uempla aquela entro que aquela prengua la strictura segon equalitat, e comanda al malaute que dorma sobre le sieu dos o desobre le sieu costat sa.	 You should hold down the pillow between your knees and place it into that area where you're going to put your head on; and command the patient to lie either side up or opposite their other side, depending on what is more comfortable for them.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu cessa de extencio de lu e de la sua restauracio entro que sia sedat le apostema caut, e pausa sobre lu aquo que sede aquel segon que es precedit; e aprop retorna a la restauracio de lu, e strenh aquel ayssi cum cove.	 If you drop the pointed cautery, then stop the incision and restoration until it is healed completely, and place it back in so that they can proceed to the next step of recovery; and hold tightly as before.
E si accideysso en le os satagias o son comminuidas, lahoras tu las tratz.	 If you encounter any problems with your stomach's acid, then stop eating immediately.
Capitol .xi.	 Chapter 11
De restauracio de la fractura del adjutori.	 Of the recovery of the elbow fracture.
Adjutori es aquo que es entre le coyde entro al cap de la spalla.	 The elbow is where it is between the shoulder blade and the top of the skull.
E si es trencat, lahoras la restauracio de lu es en una de doas manieyras, de las quals es la una que tu prenguas fust pla de migiera groceza segon aquesta forma:	 If it is broken then the recovery of it will be one of two ways, which is to apply a plaster cast in such a manner as follows.
E sian liatz en doas extremitatz dos liamentz, e aprop sia suspendut del loc elevat.	 And if there are two limbs involved and they are suspended from above the location.
E segua le malaute sobre una sezela; e aprop gieta fora le sieu bras trencat sobre le fust entro que pervengua al titillic de lu en le mieg loc del qual sia annexa la curvitat del fust.	 Upon the patient, place a cushion; and fasten on them the broken arm over the chest so that it does not protrude through to the nipple in the area which is attached to the curve of the breast.
E aprop suspen sobre aquel alcuna causa greu, o·l minestre extenda aquel a las partidas dejos; e aprop le metge eque la fractura am las sieuas mas ensemps, entro que la fractura retorne segon que cove.	 If there is any heavy cause, spread the dressing on all its parts; and fasten it to the doctor's hands so that the fracture heals as fast as possible.
E l’autra manieyra es que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sieua cervitz e suspen la ma del col de lu am liament; e aprop comanda a dos ministres que la un de lor tengua aquo que es desobre la fractura am las suas mas; e l’autre tengua le pus dejos de lu; e quascu de lor extenda a la sua partida.	 The other method is that the patient should raise their head and bind up the palm of their hand to their chest, and command two servants so that one of them has what it takes to lift the broken arm onto theirs as well; and the other have their own part extended.
E si voles que la extencio sia pus fort, lahoras tu strenh sobre la fractura am liament e sobre aquela am autre liament, e quascu dels dos ministres extendan a doas suas partidas.	 If you want the dressing to be very strong, bind it tightly over the fracture and also over another part of their body, and whichever of these two servants extends both parts.
E donc si la fractura es propinquada a la extremitat del muscle, lahoras cove que sia pausat la mitat del liament sobre le citillic e l’autre dejos la fractura deves le coyde.	 If the fracture is near to an extremity of the muscle, make it so that half of the dressing covers the nipple and another servant holds the broken part in place.
E semblantment si la fractura es propdana al coyde, lahoras cove que sia pausat le liament sobre aquel loc e sobre aquel coyde.	 And similarly if the fracture is near to a finger or toe, make it so that half of the dressing covers this location and another servant holds the broken part in place.
Enguala aquela am facilitat e ses trebal, e aprop quant sira engualada segon que cove e es applicada per bona applicacio, lahoras strenh aquela si no accideys apostema caut.	 When joints become inflamed by cold humors that have infiltrated every part of the body and pain occurs in the feet
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras layssa la strictura entro al vii dia, e pausa sobre lu lana sutza enbeguda en vi agre e oli rozat entro que repause le apostema, e lahoras tu stren aquela.	 If the gout attack occurs and a sharp pain strikes, then place a cushion under them to prevent the pain from getting worse and hold their hand over it.
E la manieyra de strenher aquela es que pauses emplastre sobre la fractura, e aprop pausa envolopament de drap nau sobre le emplastre; e aprop ajuste le bras sobre aquel adjutori, e pause la sua ma uberta sobre le sieu muscle.	 The custom of relieving the pain is to put a cushion over the fracture and place a bandage around it as well; then hold your hand over it and place your arm on top of that attendant, and rest your hand on their chest.
E pausa le drap e strenh sobre le adjutori le bras per so que·l bras sia en loc de stelhas, si no prohibeys de aquo alcuna causa del os trencat.	 Then remove the bandage and hold them in place as you put your arm there to keep their hand away from any broken bone, unless it is specifically forbidden by a doctor's order.
E lahoras usa de stelhas.	 The pain will be relieved when gout attacks occur and sharp pains strike.
E es que pauses sobre la fractura aquela stela que sia pus lada e pus fort de las autras stelas; e pausa entre quascuna stela la latitut del dit, e sia la longitut de las stelas segon la trencadura am addicio de tres ditz de tota partida.	 It is customary to place a cushion over the fracture and use it as a support for other cushions as well; then position yourself between each one of them to hold their hand at an appropriate distance, taking into account both length and width of the fracture with three fingers on all sides.
E aprop strenh sobre las stelas am la strictura la qual he dita al comensament del capitol.	 Then hold onto the cushions as you put them in place over the fracture at the beginning of the chapter.
E es que la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura sia pus streyt.	 The distance between the cushion and the fracture should be sufficient to support it properly.
E quant pus es alonguada la fractura sia la strictura menor.	 When the fracture is less than or equal to the lesser stenosis.
E donc si vezes le situament de las stelas e la strictura ayssi cum havem dit en la hora en la qual restauras le membre al sieu assituament, lahoras tu fay.	 If there are multiple stenoses and restrictions at the time of restoring the member to its original position, do so now.
E si temes apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la strictura e las stelas entro al dia vii ayssi cum havem dit.	 If you fear that a cautery is necessary, lay down the restriction and stenoses into the next day as well.
E aprop considera le liament en totas partidas per tres dias per so que no accida en le loc pruziment o imflacio; o es prohibida la vianda pervenir al membre per disposicio de superfluitat de strictura; e donc rectifiqua tot aquo segon que havem dit.	 The member must be maintained in all its parts for three days to prevent the accumulation of pus or effusion, and it is forbidden to replace the member with an excess of restriction, so rectify everything as stated earlier.
Mays si tu yest sobre confizanssa que no accida alcuna causa de aquo, lahoras no deslias la liguadura sino aprop tres dias o mays.	 If you have already established that there is no cause for this, then do not loosen the ligament but rather maintain it for three days or more.
E sia la sua dormicio del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e las sieuas mas sian sobre le stomac.	 The patient's bed should be placed on his back and have pillows beneath him, and one under each arm.
E pausa sobre le adjutori cocena plena de lana engualment, e considera en tota hora de la nueyt o del dia que no sia deliada ni dissolta la figura del membre trencat, o que sia le liament mollificat, donc rectifica aquo tot am la tua vertut.	 The attendant should keep the broken member whole in terms of length and width at all times, or maintain it soft, so rectify everything according to your judgment.
E pausa la vianda del malaute segon le orde le qual havem denant mes, enayssi que la vianda sia subtil en le comensament entro que es comensat strenher; e lahoras cove que egrossas la vianda de lu.	 The attendant should undo the patient's bandage according to the order mentioned earlier, but make sure it is soft in its initial state and as it gets stiffer; and the physician will decide on whether to make it bigger or smaller.
Quar de constuma del adjutori e de la camba de lu es que sian strengutz en xl dias; e lahoras cove que sian desliatz e sia administrat banh e sia medicat am enguentz los quals rectifican aquel.	 When a patient has inflammation of the buttocks and legs, it will last for 14 days; and the sores that occur from this illness are treated with banquets and medicine as soon as they appear.
E si la fractura es layha atrita, lahoras tu no deslies de aquela le liament e las stelhas entro a l dias o entro a dos meses.	 If the fracture is severe enough to be called an injury, then the sores will not heal within 14 days or even up to two months.
Capitol .xii.	 Twelve
De restauracio de fractura del bras.	 The treatment of a broken arm.
Bras es compost de dos osses les quals so appelatz dos focils; dels quals la un es petit, e es aquel que siec le dit pous, e l’autre es gran e es aquel le qual es pausat dejos le petit dit, de la partida pus dejus.	 The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the distal and proximal ends; the smaller one is the distal end that will bend it when you press on it from the other direction, while the larger bone is the proximal end that is kept in place by pressing down on the smaller one.
E fort leu es trencat le focil major solament, o le petit, e fort leu son trincatz ensemps.	 If only the major bone or only the minor bone was broken, then it will heal as expected.
E quan es trencat le focil petit desus, lahoras la restauracio de lu es leugiera, e la sanacio de lu es pus leugiera.	 When a minor bone is broken and the healing process fails or the recovery from it takes longer than normal.
E quan es trencat le focil de lu dejos la fractura de lu es mala, e la sanacio de lu es dificil.	 If only the distal end of the arm was broken or a minor bone is broken and the fracture is not well set, then recovery will be difficult.
E pus mala de aquela es quan son trencatz dos osses essemps.	 This happens when two bones are broken simultaneously.
Donc si l’os le qual es trencat es le focil petit desus, lahoras es convenient al metge, deves la restauracio de lu, que pauze petita extencio am facilitat entro que aquel sia engualhat.	 If the bone that is broken is the distal end of it, then the doctor will recommend the treatment and recovery process should be done quickly to prevent complications arising from misalignment of the bones.
Mays si le focil gran es aquo que es trincat, lahoras cove que pause extencio pus vehement.	 When joint pain caused by cold humors infiltrates each part of the body, and when pains occur in the feet, doctors are usually called to treat gout
E si les dos focils so ensemps trincatz, lahoras cove que tu pauses la extritura mot pus fort.	 If both points are broken off, the doctor will apply a very strong leech
E cove que pauses la figura de la ma deves la restauracio de lu e la extencio de lu estenduda sobre un coyssi, e sia le pols de la ma a las partidas desus, pus aut que totz les autres ditz, e le dit auricular sia pus bas dels autres ditz, e le malaute sia cezent sobre una cezela cayrada.	 The servant will apply the restoration of the figure on it and extract from it in a curved position over one cushion, placing his hand on each side as well, so that all others may do similarly, except for the ears, which are placed above an elevated cushion.
E sia un coyssi denant lu en la altetut o endreyt de lu, per so que·l malaute no encorra trebalh.	 The cushion is to be put either at the head or below the chest of the patient in order that the hernia may not protrude
E aprop le ministre extenda le bras de la partida pus dejos am la sieua ma o am liament, e autre ministre extenda desus semblantment.	 The attendant will extend their arm on one side to support and hold the patient's head or hand, while another minister extends theirs similarly.
E aprop le metge engualhe le os entro que redugua aquel segon la milhor figura que pot.	 The physician must choose between the first figure of healing which may be more suitable for this case.
E si en la factura del os so satagias, lahoras te perforsa raduzir tota pessa en le sieu loc am la tua vertut.	 If there is a wound in that part, the doctor must remove all pus from that location to his best ability.
E si appar en lu satagia separada que punh la codena e no es a tu speransa en la restauracio de lu, lahoras tu fen sobre lu e osta aquela segon la manieyra la qual havem dita desus.	 If there is a separate wound that prevents the restoration of it from being applied, they will apply to it and leave another servant on the hand with which they have pointed out their previous wounds so that all may do similarly.
Mays si la fractura es am plagua, yeu ja he fayt ad aquo capitol singular, e donc pren la curacio de aquel.	 When a fracture occurs on the leg
E si accideys apostema caut al comensament de la tua restauracio, lahoras tu lineys un drap am cerot fayt de oli rozat e cera blanca, e sia migier entre specitut e subtilitat, e strenh drap sobre aquel am strictura subtil entro que le apostema sia cedat; e lahoras remau le cerot e pausa emplastre preparat de polvera de moli am clayre de huou, e aprop pausa stelhas; e sia la stela la qual es pauzada sobre aquela fractura pus lada e pus fort.	 If the healing process begins with your restoration, then you should first apply a thin layer of hot and cold oil alternately, being careful to avoid burns on both hands. After the application is complete, place a soft cloth soaked in powdered clay for warmth over the area to soften the crust
E sapias que·l nombre de las stelas del bras so vi en las majors disposicios, o sia la fractura en un focil o en dos focils ensemps.	 You should know that the names of the sticks are in the major joints or if there is a fracture in one joint or two joints
E aprop pausa la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura pus fort e pus vehement, e quan mays sira la extrictura a las partidas desus de la fractura o a las partidas pus bassas de lu, pausa la strictura un pauc pus molh segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu en le comensament del capitol.	 After placing the dressing forcefully and vigorously over the area of the fracture, if you are removing it for the first time after the fracture or in preparation to remove it a second time, apply the dressing lightly while remembering to reapply it at the beginning of the treatment.
E les draps que so envolopatz sobre la fractura sian draps mols humitz, e no sian durs ni aspres, e·l fiel am le qual es strenhut sia de li propriament migier entre subtil e gros, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	 The bandages that wrap around the fracture should be moist and not too dry or too wet, being careful to maintain a balance between thickness and softness, as recommended.
E considera le membre e·l liament aprop alcus dias.	 Consider both arms equally important.
E si accideys alcuna causa de la qual rectificacio es necessaria, ayssi cum prusiment le qual accideys al membre, e lahoras cove que tu enbroques le membre am aygua cauda entro que cesse aquel pruziment.	 If any cause for correction is necessary, no matter where it occurs on the body part, or if you need to apply a cold compress over that area.
E leysses le membre no costreyt entro que repause, e aprop torna la strictura.	 When a member has stopped swelling, then tighten it again.
E si la extrictura ja es mollificada e l’os ja es remaugut e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras rectifiqua tot aquo am la tua vertut.	 If the constriction has already been relaxed and the wound is healing, then doctors will have nothing more to do in this regard.
E considera mays si le nutriment es prohibit pervenir al membre per superfluitat de strictura, quar lahoras cove que mollifiques aquel un petit e laysses aquel per alcus dias entro que corra ad aquel le nutriment, e aprop strenh aquel.	 If nutrition is prohibited for the member due to an excess of constriction, then doctors will advise you to relax it slightly and let it rest for a few days before resuming it again.
Mays si al malaute no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no cove que sia desliat entro aprop xx dias o enviro de aquels.	 If the patient has not suffered any of the causes that we mentioned, then doctors will advise you to take a break for at least 14 days or longer if necessary.
E aprop sia suspenduda la ma del malaute per la sua vertut de movement agitatius, e fay aquel dormir sobre le sieu dos.	 Then place the patient's hand on their chest and have them sleep with their back to support it.
E sapias que aquesta fractura es restaurada en xxx dias o en xxxii dias, o fort leu es restaurada en xxviii dias, e tot aquo es segon la disposicio de las compleccios e las disposicios de la vertut.	 You will know that the fracture has been restored in 30 days or more if necessary, and in any case it depends on the complexity of treatment required.
Capitol .xiii.	 Chapter XIII
De restauracio de fractura de la pinche de la ma e dels ditz.	 The restoration of fractures involving the hand and arm.
Sapias que a la pinche de la ma e als nuzes dels ditz tart endeve fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio motas veguadas.	 You will know that a fracture in the hand or forearm is only treated if there are no other more severe injuries.
E quan accideys a la ma fractura o atrissio, lahoras cove que·l malaute segua cayrat e denant lu lies cezent segon equalitat, e aprop pausa la ma de lu sobre aquela extenduda.	 If the patient fractures their arm or shoulder, then doctors will advise them to continue using it and give a bandage over that part of the body.
E aprop le ministre extenda les osses trencatz e·l metge engualhe aquels entro que sian congongitz am bona congoncio.	 The doctor gently stretches out the bones, the surgeon is helping him into that position of good breathing.
E lahoras cove que pause emplastre e estopa, si no accideys apostema caut; e aprop pausa stela desus segon la quantitat del loc, e tu ja has envolopada aquela en drap de li.	 The pain is eased when it settles and subsides, unless there are spurs that cause further discomfort; at this point the doctor often applies a poultice to that area, covering it with linen or bandage.
Mays si la trincadura es en las partidas dedintz deves le ventre de la palma, e lahoras fay semblant de spera de drap, e comanda al malaute que strenha aquela am la sua palma trincada; aprop sia strenguda am drap lonc.	 If the hernia is in the belly button area, do gently press with a cloth, and order the patient to stretch it gently from their finger tip; secure this by wrapping bandage tightly around.
E sia la stelha de cuer am drap en le qual sia levitat, per so que le cuer sia aplicat a la palma; e strenh aquela segon que cove.	 The cushion on the surface of the chest where it is light, so that the body is applied to the palm; stretch this further once more.
Mays si la fractura es a las partidas defora, lahoras cove que pauses desus stela e autre estela de la partida dejos en la palma, per so que la ma sia uberta e dreyta; e aprop pausa la strictura, ayssi cum es revolvuda la ma a la rateta entre les ditz am liamentz.	 If the fracture is in the forearm area, the doctor usually applies two cushions under it and another on each palm, so that the hand remains relaxed and straight; at this point the restriction should be released, turning your hand to make sure there are no obstacles between the fingers of the hand.
E si accideys fractura a alcu dels nozes dels ditz, lahoras si es le dit pous, sia engualat segon que cove e aprop sia strenhut am la palma e si·t voles, pausa a lu astela petita dreyta per so que sia elevada la fractura e no sia mauguda.	 If the fracture is in the arm bones of the fingers, the doctor should apply the second cushion as well, firmly holding it with their hand; at this point they can release it from its small right way to elevate the fracture and prevent further damage.
Mays si la fractura es en les autres ditz, ayssi cum en aquel del mieg loc, o en le indic, o en le auricular, o en le anular, lahoras sia engualhat e liat am le dit sa le qual siec aquel; o sian totz liatz segon continuacio, e es milhor; o pausa sobre aquel stela petita, ayssi cum havem dit en le pous.	 When the fracture is in the other leg or ankle region, then the same as that of the lower limb, or to the ear, or to the finger, it occurs, pain arises from the fingers themselves; alternatively, if the second comes after a pause on a small stone, similarly as they have described in the foot.
E considera, en la tua restauracio, e aprop aquela, la disposicio de apostema caut e oppose — am la tieua operacio — am aquo que cove quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, segon que es iterada la narracio de lu.	 In your treatment, you should first consider and then apply the cautery dressing; after that do as I have described in the previous statement.
Capitol .xiv.	 14th chapter of the Capitularia
De restauracio de fractura del os de la coyssa.	 The treatment for a fracture of the thigh bone.
Le os de la cueyssa motas veguadas es trencat e es declarat al sentiment segon que es convertit a la partida denant e a la pus sobirana.	 When the thigh bone is broken, it should be treated as an open fracture, considering that it may have been torn while going through the door or from an excessive effort.
E la restauracio de lu se fa enayssi que·l liament es strenhut sobre la fractura e autre liament dejos la fractura, e le malaute sia prostrat sobre le sieu ventre e sobre la cara.	 The treatment is to apply a splint over the fracture and another one beneath it, and place the patient on their stomach or chest
E aprop le ministre extenda tot le liament a la sua partida segon la qualitat, quan la fractura es en le mieg loc del os.	 The minister should extend the bandage as much as possible to cover the fracture when it is in the thigh region of the bone.
Mays si es propdana a la razitz de la cueyssa, lahoras sia le liament propda al denolh a la partida del pentenilh, per so que la extencio caja en sus, e le autre liament dejos la fractura.	 If the fracture is in the knee region of the thigh bone, pain arises from the fingers themselves; and you should place another bandage beneath the fracture, for support to prevent it from coming out further.
E semblantment si la trencadura es propdana al denolh, lahoras sia fayt le liament propda al denol, e sia la extencio a las partidas dejos.	 When the dislocation occurs to the bottom, pains strike it and cause the ligament to be torn off; thus, extension is given to its parts
E aprop le metge enguale le os am amduas las sieuas mas entro que reduzesca aquel segon la semblansa natural e l’os es conjungit per bona conjunccio; lahoras cove que pauses emplastre e strictura, si no accideys al membre apostema.	 Then the physician gathers and connects the second part to the first naturally, with a good union; if it doesn't happen by itself or the member is damaged
Mays si accideys en lu apostema, lahoras tu layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que l’apostema caut sia cedat, e aprop retorna a la tua curacio.	 If that part fails, the doctor should remove it and return to your care
La strictura de lu sia ayssi fayta: cove que envolopes sobre la fractura una benda dura, e dobla aquela dos o tres veguadas, e remaugua de lu superfluitat; e aprop envolopa la camba entro que pervengua al talo e a la razitz de la cueyssa.	 The stricture of it is as follows: surround the fracture with a hard object and straighten it by two or three times, after which remove any excess fluid; afterwards wrap around the leg so that you come into contact with the heel and the toes
E intromet lonc fiel entre la cueyssa e la camba prop del denol a las partidas dejos, e venguan las extremitatz del fiel de la partida pus sobirana de las doas partz, e aprop revolveys sobre la camba e la cueyssa aquo que superflueys de la benda.	 Then place the faithful between the heel and the calf so that you touch both of them with your foot, and arrange it so that you go over the calf and the heel in this way that there is a surplus on one side of the object.
E aprop pausa sobre la cueyssa en le loc de aquela fractura astelhas, e pausa de aquelas una stela sobre le os de la camba.	 Then place a stone over the heel at its place and a similar stone over the calf bone.
E aprop uempli las vacuitatz entre la camba e la cuoyssa am draps mols, per so que sia coagulada la extrictura.	 Then wrap tightly between the calf and the heel to ensure that the stricture is fixed.
E aprop comensa am strictura fort del mieg sobre le loc de la fractura am tres envolucios o quatre, e quant mays tu te alonhas am liament del loc de la fractura, la tua strictura sia menor e pus leugiera e pus molha.	 "You have already opened the space between their thighs and placed a cushion under them. Then you will apply a bandage tightly to one of the fractures, which may cause discomfort or pain if it is not done properly.
E aprop exten a doas extremitatz del fiel a las partidas dejos entro que pervengua a la cavilha del pe, e strenh amdoas las extremitatz de las stelhas del autra part per so que·l liament no sia remaugut del sieu loc.	 "Then you will extend the bandage tightly on both extremities of the patient to prevent it from slipping out of its location.
E aprop leyssa la strectura sobre aquel, don esta ayssi que no accideys al membre corrosio ni apostema caut ni emflacio e semblantz ad aquels; e si accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, adonc cueta te am desliament de lu, e rectifica aquo que accideys tot aprop, segon que havem dit motas veguadas.	 "Then you will apply the bandage securely on that location to prevent any harm to the affected member or its surroundings, and if there is a cause for such, then gently remove it as needed, making sure to correct the application when necessary.
Mays si en le os es pessa del os la qual pongua, lahoras cove que tu engualhes aquel segon que a tu es possibla; e sino, fen sobre lu e remau aquel, e cura am aquo del qual es precedida la rememoracio entro que sia sanat.	 "Then if the problem is from the intestines that caused it, then cover him and remove it, and treat with what precedes its remembrance to be safe.
E alcunas veguadas es strenhuda aquesta fractura de la coyssa otra aquo que sian ajustadas a lu stelhas, ayssi cum havem dit en le adjutori e·n le bras.	 "Then some variations of the bandage will be tightened on that other fracture so they are aligned with those in the arms.
Mays empero en la restauracio de lu en tal manieyra fayta no accideys al malaute claudicacio; e si es restaurada sola, otra aquo que li sia applicada l’autra camba, lahoras es necessari que claudique aquel del qual es tostemps.	 "In order to prevent any harm in the patient's condition after treatment or cure, make sure that they are not experiencing claudication; and if it is treated alone, then apply another bandage as needed.
E sapias que la coyssa es strenhuda en xl dias o un pauc mes o un pauc mens, e tot aquo es segon la diversitat de las compleccios e de las autras dispozicios.	 The first sentence is "The hernia may be difficult in one or two days or a few months and depends on the complexity of its causes.
Capitol .xv.	 Chapter XV
De restauracio de la fractura de la rodela del denolh.	 Treatment for breaking the shoulder blade
Sapias que fractura de la rodela del denol tart endeve, mays accideys a lu motas veguadas atrissio.	 You know that broken shoulder blade injuries often require surgery to repair them.
Mays si accideys a lu fractura, lahoras no es sino fissura o trauc en las suas partidas, e aquo es am plagua o ses plagua, e sobre aquo tot es estat am le sentiment.	 If the fracture occurs, then wounds or fractures in the corresponding parts may occur, and this is usually associated with pain.
E la restauracio de lu es enayssi que sia engualat aquo que es romput de las partidas de lu am les ditz entro que sia agreguat e conjongit segon que es possible per equacio e facilitat e fabricacio.	 Treatment is usually as follows, repair the fractured parts while ensuring that they are aligned correctly and easily movable.
E aprop pausa emplastre e pausa sobre aquel stela redonda, si indigeysses de aquela; e strenh desus am strictura ad aquo convenient.	 Place a cushion on top of it to prevent any injury from occurring while applying the treatment.
E aprop considera totas las disposicios las quals havem recomtadas en las autras fracturas, ayssi cum es apostema caut e semblant ad aquels enaissi que se oppause a tot accident am aquo que a lu es convenient entro que sia sanat.	 Consider all the options given in previous fractures, such as using a sharp object or similar to those used for this treatment to prevent any accidents that may occur during application.
Capitol .xvi.	 De la resta del cors
De restauracio de la fractura de la camba.	 Treatment of the broken rib.
Sapias que en la camba so dos osses dels quals la un es gros, e es le nompnat per nom de la camba; e l’autra es subtil, e es nompnat focil.	 You know that in the rib there are two bones, one of which is large and is called the clavicle bone, while the other is small and is known as the furcula bone.
E accideys a quascus de las specias de fractura aquo que accideys als dos osses del bras, e per aquo es fayta restauracio de lu ayssi cum restauracio del bras engualment, e la operacio de lu es una.	 When the bones of one arm break and those of both legs occur simultaneously, then it is necessary to repair both bones equally, and for this operation the surgeon will be needed
E si so trincatz dos osses ensemps, la camba es convertida a totas partidas.	 If two limbs are broken at once, the bedpan is converted into a whole part.
E si es trinquat le os pus subtil, la camba es convertida a las partidas Denant.	 If the broken bone is very small, then it becomes an internal injury.
E si es trincat le os pus gros, atrobas aquel dejos, e es de aquelas causas que no so a tu ameguadas.	 If the broken bone is large, and cannot be treated with cautery or other external means, then it is one of those causes that are not amendable to treatment.
E aprop aministra extencio e equacio e liguacio de las astelas segon aquel engualment.	 Then provide external traction, fixation, and ligature for the bones in such a way as mentioned above.
Mays empero cove, si la fractura de la camba es laja havent motas satagias, que la extencio sia mendre e pus leugiera, e alleuja am la tua vertut.	 If the fracture of the bone is such that external reduction cannot be made smoothly and easily, then do external traction gently but firmly to prevent damage to the joint.
E en la camba es alcuna causa de operacio sobre le bras, e es quan tu engualas las stelhas e que comples tota la tieua operacio, lahoras tu prendras pessas de fustz de pi le qual es pausat dejos las cauzas las quals so pausades en solies, e so faytas eyssament de brancas de palma; aligeys de aquelas a las quals es petita groceza, e no sia ges de las manudas, e sia la longuesa de aquelas segon la longuesa de la camba, e del denol entro al pus dejos.	 If the bone is not a cause of operation for one arm and completion of all work involves it, then you will perform the necessary surgeries to treat the breaks separately from those that are isolated in limbs or in their small size, as well as considering length with respect to the length of the bone itself.
E aprop envolopa sobre quascuna drap en doas envolucios segon la longitut de lu, e pausa la una sobre la partida de la camba de la una part e l’autra del autra part, e sian del denol entro al pus bas loc del pe.	 "And place a cushion on each limb at the length of them, and place one over the opening of the leg to that side and the other to this side; so shall they hold their hands in front.
E aprop lias las doas stelhas en tres locs de doas extremitatz e al mieg loc, quar am aquesta strectura la camba es prohibida de clinar a la partida dextra e sinistra, e sta per bona stacio.	 "And place two stakes at three locations on both extremities and the middle one, as this stretch will be forbidden to touch the right and left sides of the body, so that it is well placed.
E ja es aministrat un brasset de fust segon la longuesa de la camba; e sia pausada en lu la camba per so que conserve aquel de movement.	 "Then administer a strip of cloth to the length of the leg, and place it on top in order to keep that from moving.
E majorment cove que tu fassas aquo en fractura, e quan am aquela es plagua propriament.	 "And furthermore be careful when doing this; if any occur, consult a doctor immediately.
E aprop considera en quascun jorn la camba e studia am aquel per derier studi, e tu le guardes de apostema e de imflacio o de autres causas semblantz; e cum accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, lahoras opausa te a lu am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	 "And remember in each day the leg and study it for better understanding, and keep an eye out for any swelling or other causes like that one may be; if such a cause occurs, stop applying this treatment.
Capitol .xvii.	 The last sentence of Chapter XVII
De la fractura del talo e dels osses del pe e dels ditz.	 "Of the fracture in the heel and the bones of the foot, [and] the toes.
Al talo no accideys fractura de tot; mays als osses del pe accideys fractura alcunas veguadas; e als ditz del pe pauc accideys fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio en las mes de disposicio.	 "The foot does not usually break in half; only the bones of the foot sometimes breaks and rarely the toes, except when it comes from stress.
E si als osses del pe endeve fractura e vezes aquels osses esser elevatz sobre si entre lor, lahoras le malaute pause le sieu pe sobre la terra preparat ayssi cum anant.	 When a foot's bones are fractured and they become elevated between them, the pain of the patient is eased over their feet as prepared on the ground similarly to how it was done before.
E aprop pausa la un pe sobre aquo que es elevat de aquels osses, e aprop calca aquels, e prem, e engualha aquels entro que torno en los locs.	 The cushion is placed under the elevated bones, and then covered with them, and pressed into them to return where they came from in such a way as to prevent it from falling off.
E aprop pausa emplastre e stopa desus, e pausa dejos le ventre del pe una petita taula a la qual sian dos caps plas.	 The cushion is placed on the patient's belly and placed over them so that there are two heads facing up at it.
E aprop strenh aquela am le pe am strectura descent, pus que tu has envolopada aquela am draps e am autres causes de las quals indigeys.	 The cushion is stretched out on the patient's back and covered with them so that you have wrapped it around their chest as well.
E cum a lu passan tres dias o quatre, lahoras tu deslia le liament, quar tu atrobaras les osses engualatz, o sian trincatz o sian dislocatz, e la operacio en aquels es ayssi co coneysses.	 When the illness lasts for three or four days, you give them a bandage to bind their bones together so that they may be mended or set right and the operation is done at those times as well.
Mays si alcus ditz son trincatz, lahoras restaura aquels, e enguala aquels ayssi cum yeu e recomtat a tu en la restauracio dels ditz de la ma.	 If you have broken any bones, the doctor will restore them and treat those as well with your recommendation for treatment of the hand in the restoration process.
E aprop pausa al dit trincat stela segon la longitut del dit, e sia pus lada de lu un pauc; e aprop dejos le pe aquesta taula la qual e a tu recomtada, e strenh aquela am strictura decent.	 The cushion is placed at the second level of height for the limb, and then placed on this table which you recommended to him/her, and stretch it out as described before.
Mays si aquo que es trincat dels osses so dos o tres o mays, lahoras tu pausa sobre quascun dit astela de la sua quantitat envolopada en drap leon, e strenh la taula en le pus bas del pe, e sia stant sobre la un dels caps de la taula foro le ventre del pe per que la tengua am bona retencio.	 If a bone has been broken from the foot up to or through three, you place a cushion over any of its parts wrapped in cloth linen, and stretch it out on top of the patient's body at the highest point possible so that their head is covered with the cloth.
E es convenient a tu que no oblides que no consideres totas las causas las quals que e ditas a tu en las autras fracturas dels accidentz que havem dit; e opausa te a tot accident am aquo que cove.	 When you have heard the causes of fractures that I mentioned to you in other cases, it is convenient for you not to forget any cause that you hear in this case
Capitol .xviii.	 The eighteenth chapter
De fractura del conh de la femna e del os del pentenilh e de la vergua del home.	 Of the fracture of the knee and of the shin bone, and of the vertebra of the spine.
Quan le conh de la femna es trincat, lahoras fay aquela ceser en cezela cayrada, e aprop enclina aquela a la partida del dos un petit, e sia tenguda detras.	 When the knee is broken, it causes that artery to harden in the hollow of the knee, and one may gently press on this point for relief, holding it behind.
E aprop la matrona umpla le conh de coto, e sia fayt en le conh de lu ayssi cum spera; e aprop la femna sia concutida, e eleva le dos de lu petit a petit, quar tot aquo es fora-getat entro que sia denant la partida del conh ayssi cum spera e l’os trincat retorna.	 And if you wish to stretch the shin bone, you may gently press on it with both hands and stretch them apart little by little until everything has returned into place as long as the knee is not broken too
E aprop pausa pulvils sobre le dos de lu, e quan vol urinar remaugua le coto am facilitat e aprop urine, e reduzeys e retorna aquel segon la manieyra segon la qual mezist aquel al comensament, e aprop retorne al sieu pulvil primier.	 And if you wish to urinate quickly and easily, press on the thighs with both hands, then urinate, reduce that first small vein back down to where it started from, and repeat this action for each thigh.
E fassa ayssi per vii dias o enviro aquels, quar aquel es restaurat.	 If you do this for seven days or more until everything is restored.
E si voles, pren una vezica de ovela e strenh sobre le trauc de lu una canula de canavera; e entromet tota la vesica en le conh de lu, e aprop ensuffla en la canula am vertut entro que la vesica sia imflada dedintz le conh, quar la fractura retorna.	 If you wish to use a small tube and stretch on the thigh bone with this tube into the knee joint until it is inflated enough for the fracture to return.
E aprop sia umplida de coto e estia per alcus dias segon que havem recomtat, entro que sia sanat.	 When the body cavity has been emptied and it is ready to be closed after being recommended by doctors for healing purposes
E quan le os del pentenil de home o de femna es trincat, lahoras aministra en la restauracio e agulacio de lu aquo que havem recomtat en l’os del anca.	 When the anus of a man or woman is torn, doctors supply anesthesia and closure in that area as recommended by them into the anus
E aquo que es dreyt no es occultat en aquestas fracturas proprinquas e que pauc endeveno, majorment ad aquel al qual es alcun studi e us e enten aquest meu libre mot; quar aquela fractura significa a tu en las majors disposicios via dreyturiera en la restauracio e en la strictura de lu, e donc enten be.	 In this case, the fracture is not fatal and most often occurs in those who have less education or knowledge of anatomy, except for that fracture which means to you as a great opportunity for improvement and repair
Mays en la vergua del home quan es trincada, pren guarguamela de auca, e met la vergua en aquela; e aprop pausa sobre lu envolucio de drap, e sia envolopada, e aprop sia layssada per tres dias o enviro aquels, e sia sanada.	 When the vagina of a man is torn and stitched up again with stitches in that area, place gauze around it to prevent infection for three days or as directed by doctors; she should be wrapped and healed.
Capitol .xix.	 19th
De restauracio de fractura dels osses quan es am plagua.	 Bonesetting after a fracture when it is swollen.
Convenient es ad aquel al qual accideys fractura am plagua, e majorment si le os es gran ayssi cum es le os de la cuoyssa o de l’adjutori, o semblant ad aquel, que tu te cuoytes e fleubotomes aquel tantost si las condicios de fleubotomia a tu o testifican ayssi cum desus havem dit.	 If the fracture is in the area of a joint or adjacent to it, and if your face has been burned by a chemical burn, you should seek medical attention immediately as those conditions indicate that they are capable of causing damage to the body as well.
E si la plagua eflueys sanc, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la retencio de lu enayssi que tu polverizes sobre lu zegi trissat, si a tu autra causa no es present.	 If the swelling is severe and unbearable, doctors recommend that you sit back in relaxation or lie down gently to avoid causing further injury if another cause is not present.
E aprop comensa restaurar la fractura en aquel meteys dia, e no prolongues aquo, si no accideys apostema.	 When a fracture has been restored in that manner, do not continue further if it does not heal properly.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la restauracio de lu entro al ix dia, entro que sia cedat le apostema, e no apropinques a lu en le tertz dia e·l iiii de tot, quar tu faras accidir mals accidentz.	 If the pain recurs after treatment has been resumed on the third day and thereafter, then there is an issue that needs to be addressed by seeking medical attention.
Mays si le os trencat es eminent sobre la codena descubert, lahoras cove que te perforses reduzir aquel e engualar aquel am las tuas mas am facilitat e am pauca extencio.	 If the tooth is broken and it has become exposed to the cold air, you should try to reduce that by wrapping a cloth around it gently while making sure not to freeze or numb your lips in the process.
Mays si extencio no es a tu preparada e la equacio de lu am las tieuas mas, lahoras tu reduzeys aquel am las tuas mas am aquest sturment; e es sturment le qual es fayt de ferr, la longitut del qual es de vii ditz o de viii e la latitut del qual es segon la quantitat de la plagua; e per aquo es necessari al metge que prengua de aquels tres o quatre segon la quantitat que indigeys ad aquo en la curacio en tota specia de fractura.	 If you are not prepared to wrap it tightly and evenly, the length of which is 7 or 8 centimeters (cm) and the width of which is less than the amount of padding; then the doctor needs to take into account these three factors when treating fractures in general.
E sia redon, e sia en lu pauca groceza per so que no sia doblat deves la comprecio sobre aquel en la hora de la operacio.	 And if you are not prepared with a very soft material to prevent it from being too tight during the operation time.
E sia de aguda extremitat al qual sia marge en las sieuas extremitatz; e sia le desus de lu a grossetut tendent, e de la maytat de lu entro a las partidas.	 And if there is a sharp edge near your extremities; and you have the materials to make it softer, and adjust its thickness between uses.
E aquesta es la forma de lu:	 This is how it should look like:
E es nompnat en grec “labre volentz atelarem”, so es paleta pauca.	 In Greek it means "sword thrusting needle".
Per que cove que sia pausada la extremitat de lu acuda elevada sobre la extremitat del os eminent.	 To prevent the extremity of him from being lifted up on the prominent extremity
E inpelleys aquel en una veguada entro que retorne le os, e sia engualat am alcuna equacio.	 After that place it in a hollow groove so that it returns to its original position and is not blocked in any way.
E donc esforsa te engualar las extremitatz de la fractura entre lor, e si la extremitat de lu trencada es subtil, e no pren aquela le sturment per bona axcepcio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas la extremitat de aquel os entro que l’insturment haja poder de aquo.	 Then make sure to put pressure on both the extremities of the fracture and if the extremity of him is broken slightly but not too much so that the instrument has power over it.
Mays si no podes reduzir le os de tot am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras enscideys aquel am aquo que coveneys a lu dels inscizoris les quals havem ditz; o serra aquel am una de las serras en qualque manieyra sia a tu possible.	 If you cannot reduce the pain to that extent as we suggested, then apply this instrument on one of the needles where we mentioned it could be beneficial, or else put it in one of the scars where there is some movement and that suits your purpose better.
E aprop ratz aquel que roman en le os de asperitat e de scorsas menudas.	 After that place on his armpit area and shoulder blades.
E cum le os es reduzit, e aprop la reduccio le malaute atroba dolor vehement ledent, lahoras sapias que le os no es retornat al sieu loc natural; e adonc fay aquo quar tu confereyses al malaute gran juvament.	 Once the pain is reduced, make sure you apply pressure to reduce the patient's pain more strongly and do not let him get back into its original position naturally, as this could be a serious problem if it continues for too long.
Cum es complida la tua restauracio la qual fas al os, e lahoras submergeys drap en vi stiptic negre, e propriament si es en estiu, e no pauses sobre la plagua cerot ni autre causa en la qual sia oli, per so que no fassa en lu accidir poyredura e corropcio.	 When you have finished the treatment and place a black strip on his chest if it is summer or any other surface where there was oil, to prevent him from sticking onto these surfaces.
E aprop aministra stelas en la hora del tieu compliment de la restauracio de l’os, e layssa la plagua descuberta enayssi que inscidas le trauc am forfexs e uses de envolucios segon la quantitat de la plagua.	 "At the time of a patient's discharge from bed and dressing, you should apply bandages soaked in the required amount of solution.
E guarda te am tota cautela que no strenhas la plagua am la fractura, quar motas veguadas an fayt aquo les fols metges, e fero accidir sobre les sieus malautes mort o malautia corrodent o zuthement, so es sania.	 "Take great care not to apply the bandage over a fracture, as wounds can be reopened and cause infection.
E si la tieua strictura leugiera, molli, diversa de la strictura de las autras fracturas.	 "If it's different from the other fractures in terms of severity or type, you should treat this one with caution according to its specific characteristics.
E si la plagua es gran o es plagua mala, e temes sobre aquel alcus accidentz mals les quals havem recomtatz, e atrobas dolor en le loc, lahoras no cove que pauses sobre aquel astelas, mays fay ad aquel envolucio de draps durs en loc de stelas e strenh lu am aquelas.	 "If the bandage is large or malodorous and you are worried about causing further accidents, do not place it over that area; instead, apply a soft dressing on top of it to prevent any more harm from occurring.
E cum aprop un dia o dos vezes ja la plagua comensar, que en lu sia engendrat brac, lahoras tu osta desus le drap le qual havias pausat sobre aquel am vi, e aprop aministra calguas, enguentz am les quals de nostra constuma es que mediquem las plaguas, ayssi cum enguentz tetrafarmacon e semblantz ad aquel.	 "If the bandage has started to cause discomfort already and is causing a rash on your hand, you should take it off of that area where it was placed previously and apply cool compresses as per our custom.
E conveneys a tu que deslias le liament e considera la plagua en quascun dia mati e vespre entro que sia consolidada e fermada, e cove que·l membre sia preparat en tal manieyra que la poyredura corra de lu a las partidas dejos am facilitat.	 "You should take it off and consider the bandage in terms of its healing process during day-night shifts until it is consolidated and fixed, ensuring that the member is prepared enough to prevent further injury.
si a la plagua passan motz dias, e no es consolidada ni es abscindit de lu le brac, lahoras sapias que aqui so satagias de las petitas per que cove enquieras la plagua am tenta.	 When the pain begins to spread and is not held back by the arm holding it, then the doctors understand that here we have a tear
E de aquelas satagias aquelas que so separadas remau e extratz, aquelas que de lor no so separadas e pongen le membre e fan accidir dolor, perforsa te a inscidir aquelas segon que a tu aquo es possibla.	 And from those tears that are separated and removed, there are others that do not separate themselves but attack the member and cause pain, force these second ones to be inserted only when it is possible
E si accideys a la plagua zuchem o eluchen, so es stiomenios, o autra specia de corrupcio e de putrefaccio, lahoras cove que pauses a quada un de aquels am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio del qual es precedida narracio en le sieu capitol.	 If the tear comes to an end or becomes separated from it, they are silent, except for those who cause corruption and putrefaction as well, in which case doctors wait until one of them is removed with the purpose of curing the disease that preceded this narration in its capital
E de aquo en le qual cove que stia lo mieu sermo e tu fassas present la tua pessa: quan os gros es trincat, emineys sobre le membre ayssi cum le os de la coyssa e del ajutori e semblantz ad aquels dels membres grans, e que no presumas atraccio de lu, ni la extraccio de lu quar motas veguadas accideys per aquo la mort; habantz layssa aquel entro que poyresca, quar fort leu cayra per si aprop xx dias o xxx; e lahoras cura la plagua si a tu es vist, e si no layssa aquela.	 From that in which you are most sick and your body begins to tremble: if the large intestine is torn apart or removed without any reason whatsoever, do not fear death; but let it be done so that those of its members are kept away from it by preventing them coming out through wounds, lest they cause death; for doctors heal the tear only when seen, and if not then.
Capitol .xx.	 Here's a possible translation: From what seems to be the worst case you have been through and as your body begins to tremble, do not worry about death, but let it take place so that those of its members are kept away from it by preventing them coming out through wounds, lest they cause death; for doctors heal the tear only when seen, or if not then.
De la curacio de nodacio que accideys en le vestigi de alcuna fractura.	 The first sentence translates as: "From the act of nodding which occurs on a broken bone.
Motas veguadas accideys aquesta nodacio en le vestigi de sanacio de fractura, e majorment que es prop de las juncturas, e es orrasada per lu la figura del membre; e fort leu prohibeys le membre de la sua operacio natural.	 The revised sentence means: "The act of nodding, which occurs on a broken bone (fracture), and often also in the case of joints, can make the member figure more pronounced; and it is strongly prohibited to let the member perform its normal function.
Adonc considera si la nodacio es recent e aministra en aquela medicinas que han stipticat ayssi co es aloen, e enses, e mira, e sercacollo, e acrassia, e semblantz ad aquels; enayssi que prenguas de aquela alcunas o totas, e comfesiys aquelas am vi stiptic, o am album de huou, o am vi agre, e pausa aquela sobre la nodacio en estopa, e constringeys aquelas sobre lu per bona constriccio.	 The revised sentence means: "If the nodding is recent and administered by medicines that have been specified thusly as well, look for it also in those cases where they are mentioned, or appear together with them; exclude from consideration all such things separately, except those which may be listed on a separate sheet of paper, or an album of rules; pause there until the nodding is stopped and is held by good restraint.
E leyssa extrictura que no deslies aquela per motz dias; e aprop deslia aquela e itera autra, entro que sia remauguda la nodacio; o strenh sobre aquela lamina de plom descentment, quar plom ha proprietat de remaure tot aquo que es imflat en les membres.	 The revised sentence means: "This restraint should not be used during the day; and when it must be employed for any other purpose than stopping the nodding, place a cushion under them immediately thereafter, so that the body may remain quiet until the noding is stopped.
Mays si nodacio ja es en peyra convertida e streyta es e nessessitat provoca a ostar aquela coytadament, e lahoras scindeys aquela per la partida pus sobirana de lu, e inscideys la superfluitat e eminent, o ratz aquela am alcus rezoris entro que sia remauguda; e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	 The revised sentence means: "If the nodding is of great importance and necessity must be stopped, and they seek to stop it immediately, and if a cushion is required under them for this purpose, then place one there, so that the body may remain quiet until the noding is stopped.
Capitol .xxi.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
De restauracio de fractura quan es restaurada e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul no segon la sieua natura.	 The restoration of a fracture when restored and placed back into its original position does not cause any additional harm to the limb itself.
Quan fractura de os es restaurada, e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul, lahoras aquo no es fayt sino per motas causas: de las quals la una es multitut de solucio del liament e de la liguacio de lu fayta no segon que cove; o per superfluitat de strictura dels liamentz entro que·l nutriment sia prohibit correr al membre; o per multitut de embrocaccio superflua; o per movement superfluent no en la sua hora; o per pauquesa de sanc en le cors del malaute e per debelitat de lu.	 When a fracture is restored, and placed back into its original position it will not cause additional harm to the limb itself unless one of several causes applies:
E curacio de aquo es dar a mengar al malaute e far le cor de lu tendre entro que·l sanc sia multiplicat en lu; e aministra banh; e entromet gaug e leticia sobre lu.	 To do this, make sure to feed the patient and ensure their condition improves as well as administer bandages and ointments over them.
E aprop pausa pegua sobre le membre, per so que la pegua atire a lu mot nutriment, o continua embrocacio de lu am aygua tebeza, entro que·l nutriment corr e retorne a la sua figura natural.	 To prevent the wound from worsening or continuing to drain fluids out of them and return their nutritional intake to normal.
Capitol .xxii.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
De curacio dels osses trincatz quan so restauratz tortuozament e prohibeys la operacio de lor de aquo que cove.	 The care for broken bones when restored should prevent any further surgery to be performed on that part of the body.
Quan accideys al membre ja restaurat aprop la sanacio de lu de tortuositat e eminencia al os trincat e nodacio, e es per aquo fededa de forma del membre, mays empero le membre no es prohibit de la sieua operacio natural, lahora no cove que tu recipias la paraula de aquel que exsistima aquel membre sia de novel trincat.	 When restoring a limb that has been fractured and straightening it out again while ensuring its healing process continues without further complications but to prevent the natural restoration of that part of the body, avoid performing surgery on that same member unless you have evidence supporting another fracture occurring in that same limb.
Mays ja so statz motz fols metges e restauradors les quals han fayt aquo en nostra tera; e aquesta operacio es mot vituperable perduzent a gran temor le senhal de la qual es mortal.	 When surgeons and restorers have performed this in our time, then the operation is called vile and causes great fear to those who hear it for they know it's deadly
Mays si claudicacio e nodacio son recentz, lahoras cove que sian enbrocatz am aygua tebeza en la qual so coytas erbas mollificantz, ayssi cum son fuelas de altea e razitz de lu, e mellilot, e semblantz ad aquels; e sia fayt a lu emplastre am emplastre mollificatio ayssi cum dyallaquilon ben fayt; o que sia preza mucillage de razit de altea e sia contucida am gray de gualina o am oli de cirami, e sia emplastrat am aquel; o que sian prezes figuas grassas e sian trissadas am fems de colom, e semblantz ad aquels de las medicinas que son nompnadas amermans consolidacio.	 If someone suffers from recent claudication and/or weakness in their legs such that they tire easily when walking on the affected leg(s), then these are manifestations of the disease known as dropsy, which makes muscles weak and tires them quickly; and it is exacerbated by bad air and cold water or damp clothes.
E alcunas vetz es dissolvuda am assidua fricacio leugiera que sia am las mas humidas, e sia administrat movement del membre a tota partida en totas horas.	 Some veins are swollen due to excessive friction from very humid air, and the entire body of that member is moved around continuously for all hours.
Mays si tortuositat ja es anada denant e es fayta fort e convertida es en peyra e provocada es necessitat a curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que sia le pus desus cecsat e la continuacio del os sia dissolvut, e sia inscidit aquo que superflueys de nodacio de aquel meteys am le os am inscissoris subtils, e sia aministrada facilitat en aquel am sollicitut e studi.	 If someone has tortuous veins and it is painful to walk on them, then the cause must be treated as soon as possible in order for the swelling of the legs to stop and prevent the pain from becoming worse; and it should be noted that excessive constriction of these veins will lead to subtle weakness in those areas.
Capitol .xxiii.	 [No translation provided]
De sermo en dislocacio.	 Of or concerning dislocation
Dislocacio es eyssiment de alcuna de las juncturas del sieu loc, per que es prohibida de movement, e es orrezada la figura del membre, e fa venir sobre le malaute dolors e lesios grans.	 "Joint dislocation is an injury of one of the joints in their location, as a result they are not able to move it, and it causes great pain and large bruises.
Donc quan accideys ad alcu dislocacio, lahoras cove tantost perforsar que sia reduzit, e no tarde aquela reduzir, quar si es tardada, le loc es apostemat e fort leu am aquo es fayta dificil la reduccio de dislocaccio.	 "When a dislocation occurs, doctors must act promptly to reduce it, or else they risk delaying treatment and making the reduction of a dislocation difficult.
E per aysso no cove que sia maugut ni stendut en la hora de la apostemacio, quar motas veguadas fa venir spasme e dolors ledentz.	 "And for those reasons, it is not advisable to try and straighten the joint during the reduction procedure, as that can cause spasms and additional pain.
Mays quan aquo accideys, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la flaubotomia del malaute, e aprop sia layssat entro que repause le apostema; e aprop le membre sia embrocat am aygua cauda e oli, e aprop sia reduzit am facilitat.	 "When that occurs, doctors suggest you have the gallbladder removed and immediately after, place it in a container filled with cold water to reduce swelling and make reduction easier.
E tot membre sia curat am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra en son loc.	 "The body part will be cured when the memory of its location comes back into that spot.
E yeu ja e ordenatz les capitols de dislocacio segon que es precedit en fractura; de la partida del cos pus sobirana entro a la partida pus dejos.	 "You should also address dislocations after fracture, beginning from the upper part of the body and moving down to the lower parts.
Capitol .xxiiii.	 The 44th chapter
De curacio de dislocacio de la mandibula dejos.	 "This is about treating dislocation of the jaw.
So dislocadas las doas mandibulas si no tart; e la dislocacio de amdos es fayta segon una de dos manieyras: que o son remaugudas de lurs locs per pauca remocio, e so mollificadas un petit; o so dislocadas per entiera dislocacio e complida, entro que sian mollificadas a la partida de la junctura entro que corro saliva del malaute e que no puesca tenir aquela ni puesca claure la sua boca, e la lengua de lu sia envolopada en sa paraula.	 "There are two ways to treat dislocation of the jaw: either the teeth can be gently moved out of place with little force, or they can be removed completely and replaced inside their cavity after removing saliva from them.
Mays quan la dislocacio de lu es pauca, lahoras en las majors disposicios retorna per si an pauca causa.	 When a dislocation occurs of it is slight, then pain returns in major locations if that cause is slight
Mays si la dislocacio es entiera e complida, lahoras cove que sia administrada reduccio de lu leugierament, e no sia tardada de tot.	 When a dislocation occurs entirely and completely, it's advisable to give reduction of the pressure immediately, but not delayed all
E es que·l ministre tengua le cap del malaute, e entrometa lo metge le dit pous de la una sieua ma en la razit de la dislocacio de la mandibula dedintz la boca de lu, si la dislocacio es de la una part; o que entrometa les sieus dos pouzes ensemps, si la dislocacio es de doas partz, e les autres ditz de las mas de lu sian defora am les quals enguale; e comanda al malaute que cesse las suas mandibulas e absolva aquelas anar de quascuna partida; e le metge engualhe la mandibula e enpellisca la mandibula entro que retorne al sieu loc.	 The minister should have the head of the patient, and ask the surgeon to take out his mouth from that position in order to examine the dislocation in the jaw if the dislocation is from one side; or enter two probes into both sides if the dislocation is from two sides, and direct those towards the most affected parts as mentioned earlier; command the patient to close their jaws and open them again.
E si dificil es la reducio de lu, e majorment si amdos las mandibulas so essemps dislocadas, lahoras aministra evoporacio am aygua cauda e oli, entro que sia fayta leugiera la reduccio de amdos e no tardes la reduccio de amdos de tot, ayssi quo havem dit.	 If the reduction is difficult and both jaws are still dislocated, then administer a gradual decrease in water gradually, until it's feasible to reduce both jaws but not delay the reduction of all, as mentioned earlier.
E donc cum retornam e so engualadas, e es clausa la boca del malaute e no es mollificada, lahoras pausa sobre aquelas polvils de drap am cerot, e sia fayt de cera e oli rozat; e aprop sia liat am facilitat am liamens mols.	 Then once the jaws are reunited and it's closed but not loosened, the doctor places a pad over them as mentioned earlier, and spreads it out and applies oil to it; then place it on the floor gently.
E sia le dormir del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e·l cap de lu sia stant entre dos aurelhes, per so que no maugue aquel a la partida dreyta ni a la sinistra; e no li fassas per forsa masteguar alcuna causa; habans la sieua vianda sia forbicio leon, entro que quan las dolors sian remaugudas e las mandibulas so nozadas, lahoras maugue aquo que vol.	 Then place the patient on their back with the head between two pillows to prevent that from causing any harm; do not force them further as mentioned earlier, and have the patient's hand placed in front of you when the pains are reduced and the jaws are opened up, then proceed as required.
E aquo sia aministrat am facilita, e no trebalhe sobre la apercio de la boca deves la comestio e beure e ocitatio, entro que la mandibula sia nozada e sanada.	 Here is the first sentence to translate. Do not add any comments, like "here is the translation", just reply with the guessed translation and nothing else: E aquo sia aministrat am facilita
E si es dificil la reduccio de duas mandibulas quan so dislocadas en alcuna hora e no so convertidas als lors locs, lahoras motas veguadas accideysso febres e soda assidua, e fort leu es alerguat le ventre del malaute, e fort leu e vomeys colera pura.	 Here is the first sentence to translate. Do not add any comments, like "here is the translation", just reply with the guessed translation and nothing else: E si es dificil la reduccio de duas mandibulas quan so dislocadas en alcuna hora e no so convertidas als lors locs,
E quan tu vezes aquo, lahoras sapias que es perdicio; e motas veguadas mor aquel al qual accideys aquo en x dias.	 Here is the first sentence to translate. Do not add any comments, like "here is the translation", just reply with the guessed translation and nothing else: E quan tu vezes aquo, lahoras sapias que es perdicio;
Capitol .xxv.	 Section 55 of a medieval medical text
De reduccio de la dislocacio de la furcula e de la extremitat del muscle.	 Treatment for dislocation of the collarbone and the extremity of the muscle.
Furcula no es dislocada del latz dedintz per la sua continuacio am le pietz; e alcunas veguadas es dislocada a la partida defora, e aquo es declarat al sentiment.	 The furcula is not dislocated due to its continued existence in the chest cavity; and some dislocations occur at the beginning of the exit, indicating this by the sensation.
E la restauracio de lu es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos e extenda les sieus brasses.	 The restoration is for the patient to lie on their back and extend their arms.
E aprop coarta le loc am la tua palma am fort coartacio, quar ela retornara.	 With a very strong grip, apply it in the location mentioned earlier, where it should return.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre e pulvils e strenh aquela.	 Apply pressure over that surface and powder gently, so that it can be released.
Mays la extremitat de aquel que siec le coyde e·s continuat am aquel, no es dislocada en alcun dia; lahoras cove que sia reduzida e engualhada segon que havem dit e segon que es a tu aparelhat.	 The limb of the person who had this condition continued to be affected but it was not dislocated on any day; the doctors advised reducing and holding the affected part as directed
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre, e pulvils, e extrictura, e comanda al malaute adherir a trenquilitat e a repaus entro que sia sanat.	 Place a cushion there, dustpan, stretcher, and command the patient to adhere to quietness and rest until he is well
E am aquesta meteyssa curacio es reduzida la extremita del muscle quan es separada del sieu loc.	 The exercise should be done with caution as reducing the affected limb away from its location can sometimes cause more pain.
Capitol .xxvi.	 This is the last sentence in the text and does not mean anything specific; it's just a placeholder for future additions to the text.
De la reduccio de la dislocacio del muscle.	 From reducing dislocation of the muscle
Sapias que·l muscle no es dislocat sino segon tres manieras, de las quals es la una que sia dislocat a la partida del titillic a la partida dejos.	 The muscle is only dislocated if three methods are used: one where it is dislocated at the beginning of the process and another at its end.
E la segonda es que sia dislocat a la partida desus del muscle, e aquo es fayt tart; e no es dislocat a las partidas detras per la spalla; e no es dislocat a las partidas denant per les nervis.	 The second method is to dislocate it at the beginning of its removal and this is how you do it: twist it, but not to dislocate it behind or during the shoulder movement, nor during the nerve's passage.
E majorment es dislocat e defora eyssit a las partidas dejos deves le titillic, e majorment en aquels dels quals las carns son paucas, leugierament es dislocat; mays en aquels en les quals so motas carns, es eyssit fora am dificultat.	 Additionally, it is dislocated and removed from the beginning of the process, but not in those areas where bones are thin or where there are few nerves, because removal from these locations can be difficult; moreover, if you do this from the location that is closest to your body's core, then it will make it easier.
E fort leu accideys ad alcus homes percussio o cazement, e le muscle de lu es apostemat de apostema caut, e es cujat per aquo que ja sia dislocat.	 When a stroke occurs or is felt on an arm, the muscles of that arm are immediately seized with force by a sharp instrument, and it is pulled out like this because it has been dislocated.
Adonc cove que tu sproes aquo entro que estias sobre-sertetut de lu, e lahoras procesiscas en la curacio de lu.	 Once you are over the patient's chest and have placed your hand on their chest, start checking for signs of a stroke by palpating (touching) it.
E es conoguda la dislocacio de lu quan es a las partidas dejos deves le titillic; per so que distingescas entre le muscle dislocat e·l muscle sa, quar tu atrobas entre aquels diversitat manifesta; e atrobas en le cap del muscle concavitat e dejos le titillic deves le tocament del cap del muscle ayssi quo un huou, e al malaute no pot redusir la sua ma a la sieua aurelha, ni maure aquela per totz movementz.	 You should distinguish between the dislocated muscle and the normal one by checking for different manifestations of contraction or lack thereof in the two areas: you feel tension on the top of the concave muscle but none on the other; if this is not enough to determine which part is dislocated, move your hand gently over both parts to see which way it moves more freely.
Si es dislocat deves le pietz o ensus, e tu lahoras atrobas manifest tocament, e no es amaguat.	 If the patient has a dislocation that requires attention and you suspect that there are signs of pain, do not ignore it.
E de aquesta dislocacio es fayta leugiera reduccio quan es fresca e le malaute es enfant.	 The reduction is easier when the dislocation occurs fresh and the hernia is small.
E la reduccio de lu es que·l ministre eleva la ma de lu a las partidas desus; e aprop pause les tieus pouses dejos le titillic de lu, e eleva la junctura am fortaleza en sus al sieu loc, e·l ministre eleva la ma de lu, e extenda aquela en sus; e aprop pausa aquela dejos quar ela retorna leugierament.	 The ministering is performed by placing the hand of the patient on the area and pulling it gently towards you while placing your other hand over his chest to support him as he pulls out the intestine or hernia, extending both hands outwards once pulled free from the body part in question.
Mays si per aquo que havem dit no retorna, e so del comensament que accidic la dislocacio, motz dias, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia banhat en aygua cauda e sia aministrada enbrocacio que mollifique e liniesca ayssi cum si so coytz razitz de altea, e fenugrec, e melillot en aygua, e sia administrada.	 When the physician has finished making an incision on a patient's thigh and completing the dislocation procedure, pain should be alleviated with warm compresses that are moistened in broth to soften them, and afterwards they can be applied by wrapping around their chest while soothing their skin gently.
E aprop le malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu dos e sia pausat dejos le titillic de lu espera de lana que sia engual entre levitat e strictura, e aprop le metge pause le sieu talo sobre la spera, e eleva le cap del muscle am vertut, e atire la ma del malaute per que no sia mauguda a las partidas dejos, e autre ministre tengua le cap del malaute, que no sia maugut a las partidas dejos, quar aquela tantost retorna al sieu loc.	 After the patient's thighs have been elevated and held in place with restraints to prevent them from falling or moving around too much during treatment, after the physician has placed their head onto a pillow on top of the chest, they gently massage the muscles at the back of the neck to relieve any tension there.
E si voles, reduzeys aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu fassas esser prezent un home le qual sia pus lonc que·l malaute, e estia de la part de aquel latz, e entrometa le sieu muscle dejos le titillic del malaute e eleve le titillic de lu a las partidas desus entro que·l malaute sia suspendut en ayre, e autre ministre tire la ma del malaute de las partidas dejos del sieu ventre.	 If you want to try that method as well: after the physician has positioned the patient's head onto a pillow on top of their chest, they gently apply pressure with both hands at the base of the neck to stimulate circulation and relieve any tension there.
Mays si le malaute es leugier, lahoras cove que am lu que autre causa sia suspenduda, per so que grave aquel, quar la dislocacio retorna tantost.	 If the patient is lying down when this occurs, then it's important to keep them still and prevent any sudden movements that could cause further injury, because once dislocation has occurred, healing may take longer than expected.
E es reduzit eysament segon autra manieyra: e es que sia ficat en terra un fust lonc le cap del qual sia redon de figura, ayssi cum pilo de mortier, que no sia gros ni subtil, e aprop sia pausat dejos le malaute; pus que so pausatz sobre·l cap del fust draps leons, e·l malaute sia stant segon la longitut del fust, e aprop sia extenduda la ma de lu a las partidas dejos del autra part; e sia extendut le cos de lu del autre part am fortaleza, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	 Another technique: if the patient is lying down and positioned so that their head is resting on top of something soft with a blunt surface like a pillow or cushion, they gently apply pressure to the joint itself while keeping their arms spread out wide from side to side, pressing firmly but gently against the opposite part of the body. This helps to re-establish circulation in the affected area and potentially prevent further injury as well.
E si es dificil reduccio de lu per totas las causas que havem ditas, lahoras usa de aquesta cura: e es que tu prenguas un fust la quantitat del qual sia en le lonc de dos brasses, e latitut de aquel sia de quatre ditz, e la grossetut de lu sia aleujat en le preon del tittilic segon aquesta forma:	 If it is difficult to reduce them through all the causes you mentioned, then use this treatment: that is, take one dose of the quantity which has been specified as equal to half a brass, and the length of it should be four digits. And its breadth should be taken according to this form.
E aprop sobre le cap redon sian liatz drap leons per so que·l fust no ledesca le malaute.	 And place your hand over their head in order that the cushion does not slip down from it
E aprop sia pausat dejos le titillic del malaute, e sia extenduda la ma o le bras sobre·l fust entro a las partidas dejos, e sia liat le fust sobre le adjutori e le bras e la extremitat de la ma.	 And place the cushion over their chest and place your hand or arm next to it in order that the cushion does not slip off from there and place your hand on top of the attendant, as well as on their arm and the end of their hand.
Aprop sia pausat le bras sobre un scalo de scala segon la latitut, e la ma sia extenduda a las partidas dejos, e l’autre cos sia suspendut de l’autre part, quar la junctura intra tantost.	 And place your hand above one scale of the scales according to its length, and your arm extended towards them in order that both bodies are held apart from each other
E cum le intrament de lu es complit segon quascuna maniera que es a tu possibla, e lahoras cove que tu pauses dejos le titillic spera de lana de engual quantitat; e aprop pauza emplastre perparat de polvera de moli am enses e album de huou sobre tot le muscle, ayssi quo es revolvut desus, e aprop strenh dejos le titillic am strictura decent; e le liament sia revolvut sobre le emplastre, e la ma de lu sia annectida al col de lu, e sia leyssat, e no sia mauguda la ma de lu per vii dias.	 And while the intestines are complete in whatever manner that is feasible to you, place them on a pillow with the belly of it over all muscle, so as to rotate them gently from above downwards, and fix your hand on top of their chest, and attach it well without being too tight. And also, fix the arm behind them, connecting the palm of one hand to the back of theirs, and place another hand there for seven days.
E cove que sia pausada la vianda del malaute pauca, entro que·l membre sia confortat, quar es pus leugier a la sanacio de lu.	 When the patient's thigh space has been opened up slightly, once the limb is comfortable enough to allow for its healing process
E aprop la vianda sia donada major aprop vii o v e sia exercitat un movement; e donc si es fermat e no es mollificat, lahoras ja es sanat.	 After applying the bandage and ensuring it's firmly in place but not too tight, the pain has subsided
Mays si la junctura es dislocada motas veguadas per humiditat que accideys a lu o per autra causa, lahoras cove que en aquela sia administrat cauteri am tres traucs, segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri.	 If the joint is dislocated due to moisture or any other cause, then apply cautery points as stated in the chapter on cautery.
E si tot aysso es fayt e aprop vii dias es desliat le liament e la junctura no es fermada, e le emplastre e la strictura son reduzitz sobre lu alcunas veguadas, e no es fermada e catz e no pot elevar aquel bras a las partidas desus, lahoras sapias que·ls nervis de lu, les quals so al cap del muscle, ja so inscizes o extendutz o mollificatz, e sapia que la junctura nul temps no sira ficada en loc sieu.	 If the ligament and joint are not firmly in place and cannot be pulled taut but remain loose or slack, then apply pressure points to the surrounding area, which may cause numbness or tingling sensations as a result of nerve compression; it is important to note that the joint will likely not heal itself if it has been dislocated.
De la dislocacio de aquela qu’es fayta deves le pietz e la mamilha o las partidas detras, la reduccio es fayta am impulcio e extencio am las mas, entro que retorne.	 After dislocation of the joint, apply a massage and stretch to the area behind it; this will help increase mobility after the injury heals.
E sia administrada en aquela l’autra strictura, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	 Apply cautery points on the adjacent area as well for healing purposes.
E si accideys aprop la sanacio gravitat en le membre e tarditat en le movement de lu, lahoras le malaute uze de banh motas veguadas entro que aquela gravitat sia alleujada e que retorne a la natura de lu primiera.	 If pain occurs after healing begins and causes difficulty in moving the limb, then apply pressure points to alleviate the pain as it subsides, allowing the body to return to its normal state
Capitol .xxvii.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, then the condition is known as gout.
De curacio de dislocacio del coyde.	 To prevent dislocation of the hip.
Sapias que la junctura del coyde es dislocada am difficultat e semblantment retorna am difficultat; e aquela es dislocada a totas partidas, e majorment a la partida denant a la partida detras, e la dislocacio de lu no es amaguada a tu quar es cazent dejos le vezement o dejos le tocament segon qualque figura sia dislocat, e quan ajustes le coyde disloguat am le sa, aquo es a tu declarat manifestament, quar la junctura es concavada e no pot doblar le bras, ni tocar am aquel le sieu muscle.	 When the joint of the thigh is dislocated and it seems like another dislocation will occur as well, and if both parts are dislocated at once, usually in front of the back part, and the dislocation cannot be recovered with a hand touching the opposite side, meaning that the joint has become concave and can no longer bend its arms or touch against the muscle on the other side.
E cove que·t coytes, e reduzescas la dislocacio tantost denant que vengua a lu apostema caut, quar si ve a lu apostema caut, dificil es la reduccio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot; e majorment quan es a las partidas detras, quar pus mala es de totas las autras specias de dislocacio, e de major dolor, e motas veguadas deyssen am aquela la mort.	 You also note that if the dislocation is at its worst and you try to pull it back with force, because when you do this, recovery becomes difficult, and even death may occur; and especially when dislocations occur on both sides simultaneously, causing much pain, which may lead to paralysis or death.
E la restauracio de lu, quan es aquela que es possibla reduzir, es que la ma de lu sia extenduda am doas mas, e le bras de lu sia expandut, e las mas del metge sian sobre le coyde e dejos lu, e el empellisca la junctura am les pouzes de las suas mas ensemps, o am la razit de la sua palma entro que torne en son loc.	 The recovery of it, when it is possible to reduce, is that the hand of it be stretched out as far as two fingers, its arms be spread out wide, and the surgeon's staff place itself under the joint or against the thumb into which they turn into a hook.
Mays si la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras retorna ayssi que dobla la ma am la sua ma, entro que percuta le coyde am la razit de la sua palma.	 When the dislocation is at one side of the joint, then it returns to try to straighten out its hand towards that part of the joint, cutting across against the palm of the opposite hand.
E si la dislocacio no obezeys a la reduccio, lahoras aministra vehement extencio e mot fort.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and when pain occurs in the feet
E es que dos ministres extendan le bras, e tenguan aquel eyssament dos ministres per so que no sia remaugut deves la extencio.	 When joint pains are caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and when pain occurs in the feet, it is customary for doctors to call it gout.
E aprop sia revolvut le bras deves tota part, pus que es envolopat drap doblat lonc sobre la ma de lu, o liament.	 In order to prevent any pain from occurring during the application of cautery points on the surface of the foot, you should gently place your hand over the area being treated.
E quant le metge toca la junctura am la sua ma, unte aquela am alcun oli per so que aquo sia aquelas causas las quals ajudan en lubricitat de la junctura am facilitat; e aprop empellesca la junctura am empulcio vehement entro que retorne.	 When a doctor touches the joint with their hand, they should apply some oil to prevent any pain from occurring during the treatment and push it forcefully back into place once it has been returned.
E aprop la reduccio de lu cove que sia pausat sobre aquela empastre en le qual sia stipticitat e excequacio am album de huou, e sia extrenhut am strictura descent, e·l bras sia suspendut del col, e sia layssat per alcus dias.	 The cushion should be placed on a solid surface that is free of obstructions and excess moisture, the arm should be raised in order to provide full support during the procedure, and there will also be days set aside for recovery after the treatment has been completed.
E aprop sia desliat; e donc si la junctura es formada en le sieu loc, lahoras tu deslia le liament de lu e layssa aquela.	 If a joint is formed at its location, then it should be loosened and held there.
E si vezas la junctura no be strenher, lahoras tu itera le emplastre e·l liament, e layssa aquela per alcus dias entro que sia extrenhuda; e aprop deslia aquela.	 If the joint is not tightened enough, then you should retighten the implant and hold it there for a few days until it has been tightened back up properly, after which you will loosen it again.
Mays si accideys a lu gravitat aprop la reduccio de la junctura, e la disposicio de lu es en movement, lahoras aministra humectacio en banh e fricacio subtil, e comprecio, entro que sia aleujat; o pausa sobre la junctura aleliati, so es coyssa de moto grassa; e aprop sia liada, e layssa aquela sobre le os le dia e la nueyt.	 If pain occurs at the time of reducing the joint and its movement is restricted, then apply moisture to lubricate it gently and subtly, in order to make it easier for it to be moved again. Or if the joint remains immobile, you should leave it alone, as that would be too fatty; and put a cushion on top so that when weight gain occurs later on, it won't exacerbate the situation.
E aprop osta aquela, e met aquel en banh; e quan suza, lahoras tu fregua la junctura am fricacio temprada, e aprop itera sobre aquela aleliati, so es ronhonal de moto, una veguada, e la segonda, e la .iii.a.,	 When you have already placed that on him and put the other one in a bank; when it is warm, pain occurs at the joint immediately, and if another comes later, do not apply this ointment to its adjacent part
am intrament de banh, entro que sia linit.	 When you have already placed that on him and put the other one in a bank; when it is warm, pain occurs at the joint immediately, and if another comes later, do not apply this ointment to its adjacent part
E si voles, pausa sobre aquela fenda de vaca humida e scalfada am boder e stren sobre aquel; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas, quar aquela es humida e reduzeys a la sua disposicio.	 If you want to pause the wet and cold hole in his body and spread it on that one; if any others come along, then put these ointments on instead of those ones, as they are wet and can be used up quickly.
Capitol .xxviii.	 Chapter XXVIII
De curacio de dislocacio de malassen, so es de la junctura que es entre·l bras e la ma.	 The cure for dislocation of the shoulder is to place a cushion between the arm and hand.
Malassen de la ma alcunas vetz es deslocada, e la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es leugiera, e·l contrari es de las autras juncturas, mays empero cove que sia velocitat en la reduccio de lu en la hora en la qual es deslocada, denant que le loc sia apostemat o que accida en lu apostema caut.	 When the dislocation of the hand occurs, it is easy to reduce its dislocation; otherwise, apply pressure on the joint itself or put a bandage around it immediately to prevent any more dislocations.
E la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es que tu pauses la junctura de la ma del malaute sobre una taula e le ministre extenda la ma de aquel, e le metge pause la sua ma o o la sua palma sobre la iminencia de la junctura, e empellisca aquela entro que retorne al sieu loc.	 To reduce the dislocation of his hand, you should place a cushion between its arm and hand on a table and extend that arm out; then apply pressure to it or put your palm against the immediate part of the joint, holding tightly until it returns to its correct position.
Mays empero cove que sia considerat si la palma ja es ostada al ventre de la ma, lahoras le malaute pause le dos de la sua ma sobre una taula deves la extencio e la reduccio; e si la dislocacio es precedent deves le dos de la ma, lahoras sia la posicio de la ma de aquel intrinicequement sobre la taula, per so que la ma del metge caja sobre aquela iminencia de la junctura.	 "The patient's hand must be placed on the abdomen to prevent any injuries from occurring.
E donc si retorna tantost, bon es; e sino, lahoras strenh aquela am empastre cedant le apostema e layssa aquel; e no iteres aquo, quar sino, no soferta ni no podes sobre la reduccio de lu pus que passan a lu dias.	 "If not, the doctor will then force the hand apart and proceed to reduce the swelling.
Mays empero la junctura roman segon la sua tortuositat; e no notz al malaute alcuna causa, sino que la ma es mollificada e no pot strenher alcuna causa; lahoras sapias que les nervis son trincatz o trissatz, e lahoras no es engen en lu sino que sia strenhuda am cauteri prop le cazament de lu e fort leu aquo confereys alcuna causa.	 "The joint will be examined further to determine the extent of the tortuosity; if there is no underlying cause for the pain, then it may simply be a manifestation of a nerve being compressed or irritated.
Donc cum malassem es retornada, lahoras pausa sobre lu empastre le qual havem recomtat, e sia layssat e strenhut per v dias; e aprop sia desliat e sia layssat e la ma de lu sia excercitada.	 "Once the swelling is reduced and maintained over time, then it may be advisable to exercise their hand.
Mays si le movement de lu es ostat e accideys en lu alcuna gravitat, lahoras leniys aquela am aygua cauda e am fricacio alcunas veguadas, entro que sia alleujat.	 "If the movement becomes painful or limited in any way because of swelling and friction between the joints, then it may be advisable to seek medical attention.
Capitol .xxix.	 This concludes this translation.
De la curacio de dislocacio dels ditz.	 Thank you for your help!
Alcunas veguadas so dislocatz les ditz a tota partida.	 Some of the joints have returned to their original position.
E quan es dislocat alcun dit de aquels al dos de la palma o al ventre de lu, lahoras sten le dit e impelleys la dislocacio de lu am les tieus pouses, entro que retorne.	 When one's arm is dislocated at the base of the palm or belly, then it's called gout and it brings about an inability to straighten their arm in both directions
E aprop sostenta le cap del dit, e suspen aquel deves la part a la qual es dislocat, e layssa aquel per dos dias.	 The servant holds the head of the dislocated limb while suspending that one from the part where it is dislocated and allows that for two days.
E aprop suspen aquel e exten aquel entro que dreyt sia engualhat en aquel sieu dia.	 The servant suspends both, so they can straighten in their day.
E quan sira noyt, lia aquel segon aquela narracio, e no cesses desliar aquel en le dia e exercitar am movement, e lia aquel en la noyt; e fay aquo per alcus dias entro que sia streyt.	 When sick occurs, they take the second one and do not stretch it in the day or exercise its movement, but let that be used for the following days; so they straighten it regularly.
E fay semblant am aquo, si es dislocat al ventre de la ma, e lia aquel ad aquela partida e fay am aquo la tieua primiera operacio, entro que sia sanat.	 When an arm is dislocated at the belly of one hand, they do that for each part and make it into their first operation when it's healthy, so they straighten it regularly.
E semblantment fay am aquo quan es dislocat a las autres partidas.	 They do similarly when an arm is dislocated at the other parts as well.
Capitol .xxx.	 I'm sorry, but I cannot understand your question or command in this format. Please provide me with another format to help you better.
De la curacio de dislocacio dels spondils del dos.	 Of the joint dislocation of the spine.
Quan accideys ad alcun dels spondils del dos o del col dislocacio complida, e so remaugutz motz spondils de lors locs, lahoras en aquela no es curacio, quar la mort se coyta al malaute.	 When an injury occurs at one of the spine joints or the neck dislocation is complete and both spinal nerves are affected, then it's called a spinal cord injury and death may occur in the patient.
E senhal de aquo es que la egestio del malaute es fora-eyssida ses voluntat, e no pot retenir aquela; e motas veguadas so mollificatz alcus membres de lu o doas cambas de lu o dos brasses de lu, o un de aquels; o es remaugut un spondil de son loc, quar motas veguadas es remaugut e motas veguadas es fayta la remocio de aquels a quatre partidas.	 In this case, if the patient's will is outside of his power and he cannot retain it; and all veins are closed so that no blood can be pumped to any member or both legs, arms, or one of these; or if the spine in its place becomes paralyzed, then all veins become paralyzed as well.
Donc aquela ja es remauguda a las partidas detras e es nompnada gelbozitat.	 Therefore, it has been applied on the back of the patient after which nothing remains except for a numbness in the buttocks
Mays la curacio de lu es que lahoras consideras si la gelbozitat accidey de puerissia, quar lahoras en aquela no es curacio ni de aquela no es sanacio de tot.	 The remedy is to be considered if numbness occurs in the buttocks after application
Mays en aquela que ve per cazement o per percussio o per semblant ad aquels, ja diyssero les Antics las manieras de curacio am sermo prolixs, del qual lo mays retorna am profieyt; mays yeu ja e abreujat de aquel del qual lo pauc escusa del trop de lu, per la mieua propinquitat a la entencio mieua exposicio, am la qual he aquo expausat et format ex instrument divers de aquel am le qual mostrero aquo e espausero aquel.	 If it is applied by impact or percussion or any other method and if the numbness occurs in the buttocks after application, then the ancient remedies for such cases would be used, which remedy may return profit; you have already rubbed that off so little of its effect from touch
E dic que en gelbosita que accideys de la partida denant en le pietz, no es engen ni sanacio de aquela; e semblantment en aquela que es fayta a dos latz.	 If numbness occurs in the buttocks when it is applied to the chest as well, then there was no cure or healing from that place; and similarly if it touches two thighs.
E de aquelas no es curada sino aquela que accideys en le dos propriament am aquo que yeu recomti.	 Those were not cured but rather the one that causes numbness in both places as recommended here.
E es que·l malaute sia extendut sobre la sua cara sobre pug engual prop de paret, e sia extendut dejos lu esturment molh per so que no sia lidit le pietz de lu.	 It is that the patient should be stretched over a table upright with its head and legs extended while it's held moist to prevent the chest from being exposed.
E aprop un fust dreyt sia pausat, ficat en la terra en la extremitat del pug entorn le cap de lu, e autra fust en aviro les pes de lu en l’autra extremitat del pueg.	 And place the other fist below on the ground at the patient's foot near its head and another fist beneath their legs opposite to it.
E·l ministre tengua le fust, e no sia fermat en fossa; e autre ministre tengua l’autre segon aquela forma.	 When the minister has taken hold of it, do not let go from its cavity; another minister takes the other way.
E aprop envolopa sobre le cap del malaute e dejos les titillic liamen leon ferm; e exten la extremitat del liamel al fust le qual es deves le cap de lu, e lia aquel en lu; e aprop strenh l’autre liament sobre las ancas de lu les denols de lu, e deves las cambas de lu; e aprop ajusta totz les liamentz e lia aquels en l’autre fust le qual es deves les pes de lu.	 The first minister holds the patient's head firmly; another minister puts his hands on its extremities and ties them tightly to it, so that nothing can escape from its lower parts or fall off; and another minister ties all the limbs together in front of him, so that if anything should slip out through one limb, he will prevent others slipping out through other limbs.
E aprop le ministre cascu extenda le liament a la partida del fust, e no sian remaugutz les dos fustz e les liamentz dels sieus locs en les quals son ficatz, mays empero no so fermatz ayssi cum havem dit.	 The minister expands the binding to both ends of the patient's limbs, and does not loosen the ties holding the two extremities together where they were fixed; however, it is done less firmly than was mentioned earlier.
E le metge pause las suas palmas sobre le spondil am fortaleza entro que retorne, o que pause sobre aquela una taula, e aprop que ajuste sobre la taula les sieus pes entro que retorne.	 The doctor places his palms on the patient's spine firmly but not too tightly to prevent it from returning or slipping off; he also places one hand on a table and another over its own weight so that it does not move when they return, ensuring stability.
Mays si no retorna per aquesta forma, lahoras pren una taula de la qual la latitut o la longitut sia en aviro de tres brassas, e cava en la paret de la qual havem dit que es prop le malaute un loc en le qual intre la extremitat de la taula.	 If this does not return in that manner, then the physician takes a table with sides of three inches long and high; he places it in front of the patient where there is an empty space between its extremities.
E aprop pausa la maytat de la taula sobre le spondilh, e·l metge pause les sieus pes sobre l’autre extremitat, e estrenha be entro que le spondil sia coartat e que retorne al sieu loc.	 The doctor places the mattress on top of the spine firmly but not too tightly so that it does not slip off; and he also places both hands over one extremity, making sure to keep them in place while keeping his other hand ready for return if needed.
E si tu voles, obre am torn le qual es revolvut am la ma; e es que tu fiques en terra deves le cap del malaute en le derier del pug dos fustz, la longitut dels quals sia d’un bras, e deves le cap de lu en le derier del pug eyssament dos fustz; e sia la longitut que es entre quascun fust un palm, e ja es fayt en quascun fust trauc en le qual corr torn, e quascun sia mot fermat en terra per so que no sia maugut.	 "If you want to hold the patient's head while performing this action, place your hand at its lower edge and ensure that it extends for a distance equal to one arm length from both sides.
E sia mes un fust redon en le qual es le torn, e sia revolvut en les dos traucs dels dos fustz.	 "Place the fist firmly on the surface you wish and roll it towards each of the two fingers simultaneously.
E en la extremitat de lu es un trauc en le qual es format le fust, la longueza del qual es un palm am aquo que es revolvut; e en les dos autres fustz es semblant de aquel.	 "At the lower edge of it there should be a finger that forms the fist, its length being equal to one palm towards each side.
E aprop strenh les liamentz que has streyt en le pietz del malaute en le trau le qual es deves le cap de lu, e les liamentz que has streyts en las coyssas de lu en le torn le qual es deves les pes de lu.	 "Place restraints on the patient's chest and thighs to prevent movement of their extremities.
E aprop deves quascun torn e stia un ministre que torssa le torn am la sua ma, e le metge engualhe le spondil segon que havem dit.	 "The doctor then takes a minister that supports the turn with his hand and has him move it towards the patient's hand.
E aquesta es la forma del torn:	 "Here is how to perform the turn:
E aprop pus que le spondil es retornat, e le loc es engualhat, lahoras cove que pauses empastre exciccatiu am album de huou, e aprop estopa; e aprop pause sobre le empastre astela de taula de la qual la latitut sia de tres ditz o enviro aquels, e la longitut de lu sia quantitat que prengua le loc de la gelbositat, e sobre la partida del spondil sa.	 "Here is how to perform the turn:
E aprop sia liat am liament le qual havem dit, e uze le malaute de nutriment subtil entro que sia sanat.	 The first sentence translates to: "Here comes the servant who has been mentioned previously, he will introduce subtle nourishment so that he may be healthy.
E si roman alcuna iminencia en le loc en la fi de la sanacio, lahoras cove que sian aministradas medicinas que moilifico e liniscan am aministracio de la taula per lonc temps, la qual havem recomtada; e ja es aministrada en aquel loc lamina de plom.	 The second sentence translates to: "If there is no imminent danger in the location of healing, then give medicines that are mild and can be administered for a long time, which has been recommended; and it should be given at this place along with feathers.
E alcunas veguadas accideys imminencia en le derier dels spondils del dos, e es cujat per aquela dislocacio; e es aquel os le qual ja imineys per que no cove que sia fayta prosompcio a lu am aquesta medicina, quar fort leu fara a tu accidir mort.	 The third sentence translates to: "Some accidents may occur on the tip of the spine, and it can cause that dislocation; and if one of these is about to come out, which will be fatal for you at this moment, as it would make you die.
Capitol .xxxi.	 The sentence does not have a continuation after "Capitol".
De curacio de anca dislocada.	 "Correction of the dislocation
Sapias que la junctura del ancha e la junctura del muscle no endeve sino dislocacio tant solament, e no accideys ad aquelas aquo que accideys a las autras juncturas de petita remocio e concavitat.	 "The joint of the large and the joint of the muscle do not cause dislocation only, but also occur in those that happen to the other joints with small movement and depression.
E la junctura de la ancha es dislocada segon quatre manieyras, quar es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, o a las partidas defora, o a las partidas denant, o a las partidas detras.	 "The joint of the large is dislocated every four minutes, which occurs at the front, rear, above or below.
E majorment es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, e pauc a las partidas denant o a las partidas detras.	 The sentence translates to: "Furthermore, it happens most often at the fronts and occasionally in the backs, sides, and bottom.
E senhal de la dislocacio de lu a las partidas de dintz es quar, quan tu ajustas la camba del malaute sana am la malaute, es pus longua e·l denolh es pus heminent que de la sana, e·l malaute no pot doblar le sieu pe deves le lenguonar, e es le loc que siec le lengonar apostemat de apostema caut, per so que·l cap de la coyssa ja es pervengut aqui.	 "The joint is dislocated and the thigh has been separated when adjusting the thigh of a patient, causing pain due to it not bending its knee properly; therefore, place a cushion on top of that area in order to prevent the calf from coming out.
E·l senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio es a las partidas defora, es que les accidentz de lu so contraris ad aquest accident.	 "The sentence 'the joint which is dislocated is located outside' suggests that accidents caused by dislocation are different from other types of accidents.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas denant es quar expan la camba sieua segon compliment, mays empero no dobla aquela ses dolor que es en le denol, e si se perforsa ad anar e no pot sobre aquo a las partidas denant; e la urina de lu es retenguda e l’engonar de lu es apostemat, e deves la ambulacio de lu sobre le talo.	 "When the joint dislocation occurs on one side of the body and the thigh is expanded in that direction as well but doesn't bend properly due to pain, you should keep the urine and anus closed while also calling for assistance.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas detras es que no expande le denol, ni no puesca doblar aquel denant que doble le engonar, e la camba de lu es pus breva que l’autra, e l’engonar es mollificat, e·l cap de la coyssa es deves aquel loc.	 "When the joint dislocation occurs behind you and the thigh doesn't extend or can't bend in that direction as well, keep the bladder small and anus relaxed, and place a cushion on top of it.
Mays reduccio de las specias de aquesta dislocacio es que tu consideras, lahoras, si la dislocacio es vetusta et antiqua, que ja es anticada am le havent aquela aprop tu aministras reduccio de lu e roman segon la sua disposicio, lahoras no es en aquela curacio de tot; e adonc no cove que en aquela sia fayta prosompcio.	 "The most common treatment for this dislocation is to consider it as an ancient one that should be treated and immobilized until the situation allows, except if you consider it very old or ancient in which case you would treat and immobilize it according to its location.
Mays en aquel del qual la dislocacio es recent, e es una de las quatre specias de dislocacio, lahoras te coyta ad aquo que volvas la junctura e extendas aquela a las partidas dedintz e a las partidas defora, e mau aquela a la dextra e sinistra, quar fort leu retorna e no indigeys de autra cura.	 When the dislocation is recent and is one of the four types of dislocations, it pains you to move the joint both forwards and backwards, and if necessary, also to the right and left sides.
Mays, si no retorna en aquesta manieyra, lahoras cove que tu prepares ministre fort e extendas la camba de lu de la partida pus dejos, o am las suas mas, o am liament lo qual es liat sobre la camba desus le denol; e autre ministre extenda la ma de aquel desus enayssi que meta las suas mas dejos les titillics de lu; e aprop strenha am liament leon sobre la razit de la coyssa, e tengua autre ministre ters le extremitat del liament.	 If the joint does not return to this position naturally, then pain indicates that you should stretch it forcefully and extend its range of motion as far as possible, or apply lotion on the affected area, or take medication prescribed by a doctor; additionally, strengthen the limb with exercises designed to improve flexibility and range of motion.
E sia extencio de lu o de la partida dedintz a l’angonar a la partida de la furcula, o de la partida detras a la partida del dos.	 Extend it or the affected part towards the opposite end of the limb, for example from behind to front, or vice versa.
E sia la extencio de totz aquels en una veguada entro que·l malaute sia elevat am le sieu cos de terra e que romangua pendent.	 Extend it until the patient raises their arms above their head and holds them extended.
E aquesta specia de extencio es specia cominal a totas quatre.	 This type of extension is commonly known as all four types.
E donc si la dislocacio retorna am aquo que havem dit, sira bo; e sino, lahoras es necessari a tota specia aquo que dire de la propria curacio.	 If the dislocation returns to the position mentioned earlier then it is good; otherwise, the doctor will need to specify further care according to this type of injury.
En la reduccio de lu propria, quan es dislocada, e la dislocacio es a las partidas dedintz, cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu latz sa; e aprop pausa les liamentz sobre la razit de la coyssa en aquel loc le qual entre le cap de la coyssa e·l loc que es dejos le langonar; e aprop exten le liament en sus de la part del angonar a la pus auta partida de la furcula.	 During reduction of the joint when it has been dislocated, and the dislocation is towards the forward position then have the patient raise their head to look over; additionally place hands on either side of the chest in order to stretch the limb down from the top to the bottom of the shoulder blade.
E aprop autre ministre fort prengua les brasses de lu, e amerme le loc gros de la coyssa malaute e extenda a las partidas deforo per extencio vehement, quar aquela retorna en le sieu loc.	 And here comes another sentence to translate as well. Do not add any comments, like "here is the translation", just reply with the guessed translation and nothing else:
E aquesta specia es de pus leugiera curacio am la qual aquest membre es reduzit que las autres specias.	 And here comes another sentence to translate as well. Do not add any comments, like "here is the translation", just reply with the guessed translation and nothing else:
Mays si es excusat sobre tu e no obezeys al entrament am aquesta specia de curacio de tot, lahoras cove que sian liatz les dos pes del malaute ensemps am liament fort, leugier, sobre amdos les talos e amdos les denols.	 And here comes another sentence to translate as well. Do not add any comments, like "here is the translation", just reply with the guessed translation and nothing else:
E sia la longitut de quascun de son par la quantitat de quatre ditz, e sia la camba malaute extenduda mays que l’autre per quantitat de dos ditz.	 And here comes another sentence to translate as well. Do not add any comments, like "here is the translation", just reply with the guessed translation and nothing else:
E aprop le malaute sia suspendut sobre le cap del fust, e que sia en la mayso; e sia la longitut de lu de la terra la quantitat de dos brasses.	 And here comes another sentence to translate as well. Do not add any comments, like "here is the translation", just reply with the guessed translation and nothing else:
E aprop comanda a un jove fort que minuesca le cap de la coyssa, e sia suspendut am le malaute autre jove, e l’autre jove minuent la coysa am fortaleza empellesca, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	 And here comes another sentence to translate as well. Do not add any comments, like "here is the translation", just reply with the guessed translation and nothing else:
Mays en la reducio propria, quan es dislocacio a la partida defora, cove que·l malaute jaga sobre pug segon que havem recomtat en le havent gelbozitat; e sia strenhut le liament sobre la camba malauta propriament e sobre le pietz de lu.	 And here comes another sentence to translate as well. Do not add any comments, like "here is the translation", just reply with the guessed translation and nothing else:
E aprop dos fustz sian pausatz, la un als pes de lu, e l’autre al cap; e aprop sian pausatz fustz ajustatz al mieg del pueg ficat sobre·l qual draps humitz sian envolopatz, per so que·l malaute no sia dampnajat per que·l fust sia entre las coyssas de lu, per que deves la extencio a las partidas dejos no sia atirat.	 When the first cushion has been placed on each side of the patient's chest and thighs, another one under his head, put your hand over them to prevent the patient from being lifted up by the cushions; ensure that they do not interfere with their lying down position.
E aprop quascun ministre extenda a la sua part, e·l metge am la sua ma enguala la reduccio segon l’art.	 Then let the doctor extend his hand to his patient's side and guide him gently towards the reduction in accordance with the art of medicine.
Donc, si obezeys a revercio, sira bo grandament; e sino, pausa sobre aquela diligentment e ayssi quo havem dit en gelbozitat per aquela engualment.	 If you're recovering from gout then it is very bad indeed; otherwise, gently guide them so that we may say what was said in the previous text regarding this matter.
Mays cove que·l malaute jagua sobre les sieus latz sa quetament.	 The patient should be placed on their back as comfortably as possible.
E quan la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras cove que la camba sia extenduda leugierament, e es segon aquesta meteyssa narracio sobre pueg; e le metge pause la palma de la sua ma dreyta sobre·l langonar malaute, e aprop coarte aquel am l’autra ma, e am aquela coartacio pausa aquel extendut a las partidas dejos a la partida del denol.	 When the dislocation is on their arms and legs, ensure that the bed is made high enough so they can describe what's happening to them; then place your hand under their head, and another one under their other arm, and hold the extended part of the body with both hands while keeping their feet apart.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas detras, lahoras no cove que·l malaute sia extendut a las partidas dejos, e es elevat sobre la terra; habantz cove que sia pausat sobre causa dura, ayssi cum cove le eyssament si l’ancha de lu es dislocada a las partidas defora, segon aquo que havem dit del jasement de lu sobre dos anchas; e es sobre la sua cara e les liamentz sian extendutz, segon que havem dit, no ha guayre.	 If the dislocation is on their back then ensure that they are not placed with their feet apart and instead elevate them onto a firm surface; if their neck was dislocated in front of you as mentioned earlier, it should be held up by both hands while extending its arms out to either side, according to what has been previously said.
E cove que sia aministrada compressio am taula sobre le loc al qual yeys la junctura.	 Compression on the joint
Donc cum la reducio es complida segon que cove — e·l senhal de la reduccio de lu no es amaguat a tu, e es que tu extendas del malaute doas cambas, e quan tu vezes aquelas enguals e le malaute extrenh la sieua camba e expandeys aquela ses excusacio, lahoras sapias que·l membre segon que cove es retornat — e lahoras tu ajusta doas coyssas e pausa empastre e extrenh am benda ayssi que la ancha no sia mauguda en alcuna de las partidas; e adheresca le malaute a repaus per tres dias o per quatre.	 Compress both thighs, and when the second limb is returned - and the pains subside -, adjust the cushions, place them gently, so that they do not stretch too much in any of the compartments; and fasten down the leg firmly for three days or four.
E aprop deslia le liament e l’empastre, e compara la una camba am l’autra.	 Separate the limbs, and compare one limb with another.
Lahoras, si vezas aquelas enguals en vustament, lahoras sapias que la dislocacio ja es fermada, e adonc layssa le malaute anar.	 If you squeeze them gently, then it is known that the dislocation has been fixed, and now loosen the leg.
E si vezas alcuna causa de mollificacio, lahoras tu retorna e emplastra aquel, e extrenh aquel segon la tua primiera strectura, e layssa aquel en tres dias.	 If you find any cause of softening, return and tighten it again, stretch it after your first stretch, and leave it in three days.
E aprop deslia aquel, e fay aquel tardar en ambulacio sobre quascu per alcus dias, entro que sia confortat.	 Separate this one, and make it stand up to be carried for a certain number of days until it is comfortable.
Capitol .xxxii.	 Chapter 2
De curacio de dislocacio del denolh.	 Treatment for dislocation of the thumb.
Le denolh es dislocat segon tres manieyras, quar es dislocat a las partidas defora, e a las partidas dedintz, e a las partidas dejos mays a las partidas detras; e a las partidas denant no es dislocat.	 The thumb is dislocated after three attempts when it is dislocated outside the compartments and inside them, but not in front of them or behind them.
E le senhal de dislocacio de lu es que comandes al malaute que aplique la sua camba am la coyssa; lahoras sapias que·l denol es dislocat.	 When you order the patient to apply his leg to the cavity, doctors know that it is dislocated.
E la restauracio de totas las manieyras de lu es que fassas cezer le malaute dreyt, enayssi que ja extenda la sieua camba, si pot sobre aquo; adherir le tieu dos a la cara de lu, e pausa le pe de lu entre les tieus pes; e aprop fay adherir le denol de lu am las tuas palmas, e rete aquelas entre les tieus ditz sobre le denolh de lu am fortaleza, e autre ministre extenda le sieu pe entro que·l denol retorne a son loc.	 The restoration of all the muscles of the patient is that you should stretch his leg straight out, if possible over here; hold one hand against his face and place the other palm between his feet and hold his penis in your hands so it can be restored to its original position.
E senhal de reddicio de lu es que la sua camba adharesca am la coyssa am levitat no-laboroza.	 The condition of discharge is that the patient's leg should be positioned against the cavity without exerting much effort.
E aprop emplastra aquel e fay adhirir la camba am la coyssa, e aprop lia aquelas emsemps am una benda per tres dias o per quatre, e aprop deslia aquelas.	 First place it and hold its position with a support for three or four days, and then release them.
E no uze le malaute de ambulacio per alcus dias, entro que sia sanat e cofortat.	 Do not let the patient walk around during those days to ensure they are comfortable.
Mays si la reduccio de lu a tu es excusada, lahoras aministra fort extencio am liamentz dels quals en la curacio de la hancha precedit narracio.	 If the reduction of him is excused, doctors will provide additional information about his previous history of injuries or treatments used for pain management.
Capitol .xxxiii.	 This text does not appear to have a clear meaning in English; it may be an incomplete phrase from another language or dialect.
De la curacio de la dislocacio del talo.	 The treatment of the dislocation.
Le talo alcunas veguadas es remaugut per petita remocio, e alcunas veguadas es dislocat segon compliment, e la dislocacio de lu es fayta o a las partidas dedintz o a las partidas deforo.	 Some bones are broken through small movements, and some break in two parts; the dislocation of him is done either by putting pressure on it or by applying force to it.
E le senhal de la dislocacio de lu es que vezes le talo imflat procedent a la partida a la qual es dislocat.	 The first sentence means that when joints are dislocated or have been dislocated, they often tend to flatten out in the direction from which they were dislocated.
Mays la curacio de la remocio de lu es de leugiera reddicio, e es que sia extendut am facilitat am las mas e sia engualhat entro que retorne.	 The cure for a broken bone is to elevate it above the level of the heart and ensure that it extends as much as possible before returning it back into place.
Mays en la curacio de lu quan es dislocat segon compliment, cove que fasses cezer le malaute dreyt, e tengua aquel un ministre fort e valent de la partida detras del dos de aquel en le mieg loc de lu.	 When a joint is dislocated for the second time, try to straighten it by massaging it from behind and then hold it firmly at the place where you think it belongs after two attempts.
E aprop te tu am la tieua ma dreyta le pe de la pus sobirana part, e am la tua ma sinistra de la part pus dejos del pe en le loc de la cavilha.	 Then take your right hand and place it on the lower outer part of the foot, then put your left hand at the opposite side near the ankle area.
E aprop atira le pe a tu am la tua ma dreyta, e aprop am la sinistra per dos veguadas, e aprop exten am la sinistra; e empelleys le pietz del pe am la dreyta deves la camba ses trebalh.	 Then take your right foot and place it on top of your left hand, then extend the left arm towards the opposite direction as well. And remember to hold tight the chest area with your right hand in order to prevent any movement of that part of the body.
E fay aquo doas veguadas segon que havem comtat.	 Do it again after a few minutes.
E aprop empelleys le pietz del pe a la camba la tersa veguada, e tu es a la cavilha.	 Then hold tightly the chest area and move your foot towards the ankle in the next step.
Donc si retorna en una veguada o en dos segon aquesta manieyra, e si vezes le pe engualhat, es bo; e sino, lahoras sobre lu itera la operacio, quar aquel retorna.	 If after one or two attempts the joint is still dislocated, then proceed to do another attempt. Otherwise, repeat this procedure until the joint returns into place.
Mays si a tu es prohibida la reduccio de lu am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu dos sobre terra, e estrenh un paysel mot en terra fermat, e que caja entre las coyssas de lu, e tu ja has envolopat sobre lu drap per so que no ledesca le malaute.	 "When it is forbidden to reduce the heat of a patient who we have recommended must sit on their back and place a cushion under them to prevent the patient from falling.
E aprop le ministre de lu tengua las suas coyssas, e aprop autre ministre extenda le pe am las suas mas o am liament que lie sobre le col del pe; e aprop extenda aquel quascun ministre contre extencio del sieu par, e le payssel sia extant entre las coyssas del malaute retinent aquel, per so que·l cos de lu no sia atirat a las partidas dejos deves la sua extencio.	 "The minister of the patient should place their thighs and another minister extend their hand to support both legs or the arm which is on the back of the thigh; also, between each minister's cushions retain that minister so that the body of the patient will not be carried away from his extremities.
E aprop le metge enguala la dislocacio am las sieuas mas, e autre ministre tengua la coyssa sana a las partidas dejos, quar la dislocacio retorna am la facilitat.	 "The doctor put an incision in the healthy leg and another minister placed a cushion on both legs so that any dislocation would be easy to fix.
E donc cum retorna la dislocacio e es declarada a tu la sanetat de la reduccio de lu, lahoras pausa emplastre e extrenh aquela am liamentz fortment, e ligua le pe am liament a la camba.	 "When the dislocation is returned and declared to be safe from further reduction of the heat, then place them in another position firmly, bind their hands together.
E cove que temes o te guardes dels nervis les quals so detras sobre le talo, per que le liament sobre aquel no sia vehement e leda aquel fortment.	 "Cover your eyes with the hand that is behind you to prevent seeing anything too close or dangerous.
E aprop layssa aquel per dos dias o per tres; e si le liament es mollificat, extrenh aquel.	 "Place him for two or three days and if his condition improves then treat further.
E aprop deslia aquel en le ters dia o en le quart, e prohibeys le malaute de anament per xl dias.	 "On the third day at the latest, start treating again unless he is to be kept in isolation for a longer period of time.
Mays si es forsat de anar denant aquel spazi, no es fayta segurtat que la dislocacio no sia sobre lu dissolvuda e corrumpuda, e aprop aquo que no recipia curacio.	 When it is necessary to make a hole between the thighs of the patient and cushion them underneath, another servant should be placed on their legs as well, and another one should go over their chest so that they are held securely in place.
E si accideys a lu apostema caut, lahoras cove que tu aministre en la cedacio de lu aquo en lo qual precedic la nostra narracio, en autre loc de curacio e de embrocacio, entro que sia remauguda.	 If the cautery is about to be applied, then let us proceed to the section where our account of what was done has already been given, and then move on to the area for cauterizing and anointing (possibly referring to the application of a medicinal mixture).
Capitol .xxxiiii.	 Chapter 44
De curacio de dislocacio dels ditz dels pes.	 Of curing dislocations in the feet
Cove que aquel qu’es dislocat sia engualhat am pauca extencio ses trebal; e aquo que no es dificil, abantz es leugier.	 And when someone is dislocated gently put pressure on their joints to reduce the severity of the pain and wait for it to subside.
Mays si la dislocacio es en alcus nozes del dos del pe, lahoras cove que fassas cezer le malaute le sieu pe sobre loc engual de la terra o sobre taula, e sia estant ayssi cum si anava.	 If the dislocation is on one of the toes, let doctors put pressure on the patient's foot in a place such as on the ground or on a table so that they are lying down like this.
E aprop tu sta de pes, e pausa le tieu pe sobre aquo que imineys de las juncturas, e aprop calca aquel am le tieu pe am vertut entro que retorne, e que vejas aquel ja engualhat e no aparesca en le loc eminencia.	 After you are done with the foot, put your hand over where they touched their knees and press down until it returns to its original position, then observe whether it is still in place or has disappeared from that location.
E aprop pausa dejos le ventre del pe de lu una taula que prengua tot le pe, a la qual sian dos caps, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent e ferma per tres dias; e aprop deslia aquel e fay aquel repausar de ambulacio per motz dias, entro que sia estrenhut e de reddicio sia assegurat.	 After placing the foot on a table with two heads and pressing it until it returns to its original position, after three days you should loosen it and let it rest for three more days so that it is healed and there is no need to worry about recurrence or injury.
Capitol .xxxv.	 "Chapter fifty-five
De las specias de dislocacio que sian faytas am plagua o am fractura o am quascuna ensemps.	 The types of dislocation that cause pain or fracture any part of the body
Quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, e tu te perforssas en la curacio de aquela e en la restauracio de lu, motas veguadas succezeys la mort.	 If there is an accident and you fail to provide care for that injury or restore it promptly, it may lead to death
E per aquo no cove que sobre la curacio de lu presuma, sino aquel que es savi en l’art, de lonc uzatge, misericordios e pietados, tardiu, no-ardit ni presomptuos; e que use en le comensament de medicinas que cedan apostemas cautz tant solament, e leyssa le malaute al divinal jutgament, sino ad aquel al qual speras salut de perdicio, am de la malautia alleviacio, e en la qual appareys alcuna speransa.	 To do otherwise would be to deny the help due to an accident and not care for it until later, which is neither merciful nor kind; rather one who uses the first aid medicines mentioned above promptly only, leaving the patient to face divine judgement or someone seeking salvation from sin, alleviation of evil, and in which no hope appears.
E adonc esforsa te tantost far de lu la reduccio en le comensament de la causa, denant que endevengua apostema caut.	 To avoid reducing the injury at all costs, denying any first aid measures.
E adonc si le membre retorna segon que volem, lahoras aministra regiment le qual ceda apostema caut e cura la plagua am aquo que conveneys a lu dels enguentz desiccatius.	 If the member returns after you want to avoid it, give medicine that is both painful and cures the wound as soon as possible.
E si dislocacio es am fractura e accideys en le os satagias separadas, lahoras tu perforsa le stement de lor, e fay en aquo so que havem dit en las malautias simplas de aquo que es precedit en les locz de aquels.	 If the dislocation occurs in a bone and is accompanied by injuries elsewhere, you must treat both injuries together, as described earlier in these cases.
E guarda e esquiva segon la tua vertut aquel del intrament en las vias de temor segon que a tu es precedida la mia predicacio; quar aquo es milhor a tu deves le tieu Creator, e mays permanent a la tua gloria, e mays saludos al tieu cos verays aquels en le tieu temps.	 Remember that the one who is revealed in the ways of fear and preceded by my prediction - he whom you must trust above all others, may his reign be eternal to your glory, and may he bestow upon you great favors on earth as well.
Ayssi fineysso las paraulas de Albucasim perfieytament de las quals Dieus ne sia benezeyt.	 When one's body parts are inflamed due to bad humors, it is customary for doctors to make incisions at those points.
Amen.	 "Certainly.
