O you, most dear sons, I have completed this book which is behind the science of medicine, having accomplished it, through his explanations and by his declarations. And it was given to me in vision that I would complete this treatise with this work, which is part of the book of hands, namely "surgery".
And because the book of hands is distorted in our region and is strange throughout, so that it is lost knowledge and forgotten, and there remains from them only a few small descriptions in books of the ancients who had moved their hands. And from this arose errors and vanities, and the intentions were closed, and the knowledge was withdrawn.
It seems to me that I can revive her by observing the order of this treatment according to the way of exposure and declaration and abridgment; And I will assemble the forms of the cautery tools and other instruments of the work with the adjustment of the declaration and preparation for them, just as is necessary.
And because no good masters of hands are found in our time, the art of medicine is extended. And it is fitting for one who enters into this that to surpass in anatomy, as Galen says, so that he knows the joint of the limbs, and their forms and conjunctions and separations, and has knowledge of bones and nerves and marrow and the number of joints, and the departure and movement of the veins, and their rest, and so that he know the source from which they issue.
And because Hippocrates said that the knife with the blunt edge is much better, and with the work it's poor; and in the art of hand itself.
Let us say in the introduction of this book that whoever is not aware of what has been said, will be careful to avoid making an error and not offend others;
After that I've had to endure many more of those who contradict this knowledge, and abandon it in favor of their own ignorance and foolishness.
But I saw a madman who cut the apostoem of scrofuls or the neck of a woman, and cut the arteries at the neck; and for this reason, so much blood came out that the woman died between his hands.
And I saw another madman who treated a stone from an old man's foot, and the stone was large; so he took out a piece of the bladder with it, and died within three days of his illness.
And I have seen that this is called for the treatment, and I see the state of the patient and the size of the wound, and I know well whether the patient will die.
And I saw another madman who took in the treatment of a duke of our land who had broken his leg, and with the breakage got wounds;
and the mismanaged plain of ignorance holds back the breach on the wound with great force, and does not allow it to heal at all, and leaves it so that I will finish.
and instruct him not to touch it again;
and held back so that the leg was completely exposed and the feet came to destruction.
I am summoned to come to him, but I delayed coming to release the leg; and when I saw it dislocated he was at peace and did not feel any pain.
But all the corruption had already been confirmed in that limb, and it could not be healed;
And do not stop the corruption of the limb until all the limbs have perished.
And there are other signs that can cause an abscess to form and then inflame, due to the malice of its lordship.
Because a chancre, when it is pure of melancholic humors, does not suit to touch it with iron unless there is some relief so that one can remove what is corrupted.
And therefore, dear son, it is necessary that you know that the work of hands is divided into two parts: which is to say, how it has perils in various conditions;
and I will show in each one of this book where there is fear and danger.
So that you will keep it safe, so that the foolish might not speak ill of you.
If you take your arms in consideration, and undertake your patients lightly but firmly, and use the best way, so that through God's grace you come to safety and are praised;
Let loose the fearful diseases of the body's health.
And take back your arms from that which makes you doubt, and hold fast in them so that you may come to this world from the other of glory.
The Galen's writings say in some of his admonitions: Don't take treatment for a bad disease unless you are called mad.
I have devised this treatise according to three chapters.
The first chapters are of fire cautery and of cauterization with aqua medicina, and the chapters are ordered from the head to the feet.
and of forms of discharges, and of cauterization instruments, and of all that is necessary in the work.
The second chapter is about cutting and piercing, and wounds, and extractions of arrows, and similar things.
and are the chapters arranged and the forms of instruments.
The third chapter is about restoring dislocations and twisting, and similar things.
and it is arranged with the size of each instrument just as with pieces, and the forms of instruments.
Also that we remember the work, it is fitting to say which quality of aid and how much pain each condition causes.
I say that the qualities of help and of harm are the longest word and subtle science and the secrets of response.
and this is what many wise men spoke about, and agreed upon;
and let them spare him from my words, for I have a great longing.
I say that cauterization helps universally with all kinds of matter, whether it is flesh or skin. that I mean, hot complexion by matter and dry complexion by matter.
In a hot and dry mixture of matter, some have investigated and said that cauterization is great aid. and the others said the opposite: that cauterization is of no help to disease that comes from heat and dryness. Because the nature of fire is hot, and should not be cured by heat when it is from dryness, nor from cold.
and it is said by those who speak against cautery that it provides great aid to diseases hot and dry, which come into the body of men. Because when you buy the body of a man and its moisture is in the condition of fire, you find the body frozen.
And I agree with this word. For I have found it to be true by experience.
And all veins, do not enter fire except for those who have tested it, and who know by long use of the cautery scalpel, and the diversity of human complexion, and the disposition and the causes of their diseases, and remedies, and the space required for each.
For other complexion types we have little fear, especially in cold and moist diseases. And all the physicians agree with it.
And know, children, that cutting is a fire composed of cures, and has greater benefit than burning with hot medicine.
For the fire cautery, it is simple, and does not come from fire to other limbs except when applied to the limb that is burned, and does no harm to another limb if its name is known.
Medicines that come from one part of the body to another by separating, and bring illness and pain to the healthy parts. And in case it stops the sick person.
The fire does not do this for its height and for the gentleness of its substance; if it has a surplus.
And this I have found by experimentation and through the length of service and study that I have put into the art, and this is in the words of things.
And for this reason I excuse the length of my words, because it does not please me to take away from you the secret that is revealed by fire, and the quality of the work, as to how it cures diseases of the body, just as the philosopher says in demonstrating. Or (it) is received in your thoughts.
And know, son, that they agree on when the cauteries should be made, and take oaths.
And I say that cauterization is effective in all times, because the enduring evils are overcome by the aid of cauterization; and himself, when the cautery is done, for necessary pains and suffering that cannot wait until greater harm comes to the member.
And do not think at all, dear boy, if how a foolish man falls. because the disease which is cured by cautery has no return. and he says so;
and he says so; but it's not so as they think, because cautery is not just a medicine that moves the complexion, and dries out the humors which are the cause of pain, but it's valued less than medicine for its haste, and for the virtue of its work and its authority.
And another thing is that disease may arise at any time according to the complexion of the sick person and the nature of the disease and its virtue.
And the superfluities are assembled in him through the acquisition of meat and similar things, unless you administer cauterization to him when he has little superfluity and moisture, just as cauteries for dens for pain, and similar things, because no more pain returns. But this happens little by little.
And many do not understand why cauterization is called the "back" of medicine, because it's seen.
But they do not believe that cauterization is worth after medicine, but their understanding is false, and it is cauterization the "back" of medicine because when we administer ways of cures in no disease and they are useless, then we must administer to them the cauterization, and it is valuable.
And then open the fire cautery carefully, because it is on the back of medicine, not contrary to the understanding of the mad doctors.
The ancient people said that cautery with an instrument of gold is more effective than one made of iron, and they did not say that fires were used only for the quality of gold and because of its high substance;
And they said that the wounds from cautery do not cause decay, but it is not truly so because I have proven it, and have found that it happens in some people;
Cautery with gold is more valuable than iron, as they said. And you do not know when you heat an instrument of gold, whether it has cooled down because of the color of the gold, and if so.
and if you heat it too much; If they prick at their base; and thus it is a sufficient hindrance.
Or we have ordered this chapter of the lower limbs to be written first because it is easier to find.
This cautery is good for moisture and cold on the head, and in it there are two remedies: one made because of a disease called 'soda', and another because of many humors that come out from the head to the eyes, ears, and nose, and for many headaches and pain in the teeth and throat, and likewise for all diseases that come from cold, such as paralysis, soda, apoplexy, and similar illnesses.
The form of this cautery is that the patient be purged by medicinal solution to cleanse and clarify the head or three parts, as each virtue and medicine and the custom of the sick can endure. and then put back the patient's head.
And then make him sit, cross one leg over the other with your hands, and put his hands on either side of him.
Then place the root of your palm above the root of his nose between his two eyes. and where your two fingers meet, if it bleeds then exhale the cautery called "olive", because of this it is. And put the signet of the seal on the left shoulder; and do this by descending and extracting your hand a little at a time while turning it around. Then lift your hand insensibly, and reward the left shoulder if you see a small bone. And if you do not see it, then repeat the cautery until you see the bone as I have told you.
After taking a little rest, and applying a poultice made of wool and moist cotton within, put it on the shoulder, and let it be for three days.
After putting a wet cloth in butter on top. and let it be until the scab is fallen off. After a treatment for the wound of the tendon, which is called "tetrafarmacoñ", so long as it is healthy.
And the ancients say that when the wound remains open for a longer time, it becomes purged. and therefore use ointments.
And they say that one must cut the cautery so much that a part of the bone is burned, and then replace what was burned with the bone, and then be cured.
And the others say that one should cut the wound so much the longer it is exposed, and pound it so hard as you press down on the bone just as wide as a spindle used by women for sewing because this causes the humors to come out loose.
and one must expose the wound for a longer time. After that, one must cure and soothe.
And these two kinds of cauterizations do not seem to me to be good for everything, fire that in some men has a voice of fear;
and I think I should leave it.
because the joints are weakened by continuous exposure to natural remedies, as we have seen in other parts of the body.
and myself consider that the joints of a patient are weak by nature, and the first appearance of cauterization is more salutary and healing for me, therefore I make use of this method accordingly.
When in all the head comes chronic pain that lasts for a long time, then the patient must use the "cough" medicine and pills called so, and purgatives of the head, ointments, and plasters; and if you make the fire cautery as we have previously described, and it is worthless. Be careful that if the head of the sick person is of great strength and not too cold; and therefore apply the cautery below that which we have previously described above. After making the fire cautery on each corner of the head just above the bone, as we have previously described, and make the cautery on the part called "vassez"; and it is this where one puts vases; and hold your hand so that you do not see the bone; the patient feels greater pain in this cautery than in others, and I will speak of it later;
and it is fitting that the fire cauterys of the horns are more subtle than those of the middle of the head, and this is the form:
Fire cautery of the head When in the middle of the head there is sudden pain and the illness is extended up to the joint, and the joints are purged with medicines made from onions, and other treatments have been done as I have said in the division of diseases, and none of these things help. and therefore the fire cautery is done in two ways, that is to say with sharp medicine and with heat.
The cautery with sharp medicine is that you prick with a small needle and remove the skin and then expose two joints, and then make an incision on the temple where the pain holds in this manner so that you can replace the small needle underneath the skin;
And when it is reset, if the limb and its joint are properly set and left for twelve hours; and then loosen the limb and apply fire to the wound, leaving it so for two or three days. then put a cloth soaked in butter over the wound so that the infection may cease.
After treatment with ointment until it is healed;
and if you see so, do as I have written or ordered for treating the purging medicines.
The iron cauterization is according to this manner. Burn the cauterization of how it is the form:
And it is called "clous" because the head is made in the shape of a nail or has little meat and some gore, and has a small appearance;
and put on the patient’s shoulder a bandage of pain, and hold your hand and cut off slightly the fever that has come, until the moisture of the spice is dry.
and lift your hand so that the arteries are not scorched, which is beforehand, and there is abundance of blood.
After placing cotton in the wound area, and putting on a bandage on the patient for three days; then place wet cotton in butter, and then treat the patient with ointment until he is cured.
and if you want to cauterize this headache with the cautery called "cultellare", at the tip, and keep the artery covered in this headache which is not ancient.
of the head or skull (emigraine in Old French refers to a severe headache)
When you cure an migraine as we have said in the divisions of diseases, and do not take advantage, and see that those who had cautery before told about medicine and iron, did not suffer from it, then it is reasonable to scald the cautery which is called "cultellare" until it is white;
And so mark on the bone a line with half an inch of length, and put your hand once, and strain that you do not cover the artery and that it does not become just above the bone;
and beware of the mandible that mutes when you jaw, and do not let the nerve have sight except for the mute and that spasms do not come to the sick, and be careful of the corruption of the artery when it is cut, or if cutting causes great fear and itself to that who does not know it, and who has not studied and experienced; and let the work remain in its proper place;
but I will tell you how to stop the bleeding when an artery is struck, and I will show you to them in this book.
And if you see that the cautery does not suffocate at the illness, and the patient is suffering, cauterize it in the head as we have said, and treat the wound until it is healed.
and if you see, administer the cauterization that we have said or the chapter of extracting the artery, with the cauterization that has two wounds. and this cauterization is better than that and more helpful.
of ear pain from cold weather
When ear pain comes from cold, and we have used soluble medicines and other treatments that we have mentioned in the division, and the pains do not cease, then apply this cautery which is called "poins", because it has this form:
After pricking all around the sick ear, or on both sides where the pain holds, and you move a little distance towards the root of the ear then mark it with a pin. And tie X points around each ear;
After the treatment, let it be so that he is sound.
Of the torment of the mouth
Torture that must be cured by cauterization is not done except for those that are caused by inflammation, as we have said in the division of diseases;
and do not perform cauterization on appearances that come from drying and phlegm of old men.
When you cure this appearance of torture that is caused by inflammation of the head and neck and gargareism, and that one is not worth it, then it is necessary to cauterize the patient with three cauters: one in the root of the ear, and another a little before the temple, and the third at the junction of the two lips;
and put the cautery on the part that opens up clean, and they make a cautery directly on the ear above one pore of the forehead and another on the temple as long as an inch. and leave the cautery there until the moisture of the wound is dried.
And this is the form of the cautery:
And it is the resemblance of the knife that we have placed in front, but it is a bit more subtle and they should be the larger knives.
After the treatment let him be as I have said, until he is clean.
When apoplexy is ancient and you treat it as we have said, but if he does not benefit, and the patients do not have fever, then they make four cauteries: On the second joints of the head, and one in the neck, and that which is called "vassels" as we have previously said, and the cautery on the mouth of the stomach;
and treat it as we have instructed before.
of lethargy
And to this sickness, it is fitting to give the patient large and flat pills for the brain;
after taking the head of the patient, and placing the plaster of sainfoin on the occipital region, which is written in treating plasters;
and this is the way of the cautery: as I have said.
If he is so, good is; and if it is not, do III cuts of emollient on the head when you go down to the neck, and give a space between each cut two inches.
and the treatment as for the others, and if you see a jointer (arrow) in the patient's body, then give one cautery in the middle. and if necessary, two cuts on the other two horns, and treat until he is healthy.
and be the cauteries which are called "olive oil" as I have previously said.
It is fitting that the head be purified with years and what we have previously stated;
After the examination of the patient, then apply fire cautery to the head and on each corner, and later and thirdly above the spine of the neck;
And if you need more, and the body is moist, and the patient suffers greatly, and the disease is severe, then apply four fire cauteries above the spine of the back; and let him wait until the wound is dry, and lift your hand; After the treatment until he is cured, and apply the "olivare" which we have mentioned before.
of an epilempsy
The epilempsy doctors should use fire cautery only on those who are flaccid, and it is first necessary to soften the brain by years and other treatments that we have mentioned in the division, when the patient has great pain and suffers from a harsh remedy.
And if it is an infant who cannot suffer, apply gargling and mastication with the brain-stimulating bone marrow often with raw meat;
After the king's head has been cut off and it is placed in a basin, and we do the fire cautery as we have told before, and do the fire cautery on the neck, and on each horn; And if the patient is strong and suffers, let him do the fire cautery as I have told to one who has paralysis and softening of flesh, on the spine at the back and neck, and let him do the olive cautery according to the manner that I have said.
If the patient is sick, then they must do fire cautery with subtlety according to this manner:
When due to melancholy there are excessive flow or corrupted moisture and a large fever, then cut off the cauterized parts as we have said for one who has paralysis.
And if due to melancholy the superfluities decline into melancholy and the body of the sick person is moist, then let them drink something because their cerebrum may be purified, according to what it is before in the division.
After the king's head on the patient; After make a linen band well made, like a circle, if you put it on the head;
and bind them so that they do not cross, and keep them well tied from all parts.
After presenting the bandage, take some melted butter of an old sheep. and let the heated wood be tempered so that it is not too hot to pour into. after emptying the circle from within the head, and let it cool down;
and make this treatment for the patient each week once with another good governance until they are healed.
If you see someone being cauterized while making many pinches all over the cautery.
This manner of cautery is more beneficial to the brain.
and then put on a moistened cotton cloth in butter and fatty pig's flesh.
of the eye When the eye comes first through division as I have said, then begin and give the patient a medicinal drink, cleansing the head, and warding off all moisture, and let him sweat or take a bath several times a day.
After he commands him to reapply the bandage, and then make cautery around the head, and make a second cautery on the two temples since there is no aversion in both ears together, or if one has an aversion in one;
And treat with all the fire cautery all the veins and arteries that are under the skin, and apply the cautery long according to the size of the temple;
And beware of infection, and if you see a lot of blood coming out, if it is stained with poor quality as you have.
And I will teach you in the extraction of arteries and incising how to do it carefully.
and there is no case where a cautery or hatereil is applied under the two bones behind.
And we see that this is due to superfluities of cold and moist humors, therefore the fire cautery which I mentioned at the beginning must be done in descending from the eyelids: The cautery is applied to the head, and it is cauterized on both the two temples, and on the two bones below. And if it has more sores, then the cautery is made sharp above the eyelid at all small cauteries.
As you take the medicine according to what we have said in the division, and it does not benefit him, then give three bad poisons to the sick man. After cutting off the head, and doing cauterization on the middle of the olive-shaped cautery; and do the second cautery on the cautery which is called "clavilis" above the two shoulders, a little below.
and watch that the artery you don't cover.
And this is the form of the cautery which is called "clavilis":
When the paper of oil is softened by sickness and moisture, then make the cautery which is called "olivare". This part of the body
And if you see, do the second cautery on the two shoulders as long as the shoulder is.
and do not leave my hand except until the third part of the paper is burnt, as I have said.
one hair that sticks out There is never a case where the hairs of the ointment are converted to pigments, and prick at the ointment, and do a cautery as in two ways: that is to say of fire, or of burning medicine.
Instruct the patient to let his hair grow long and even; And if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
When they grow and are even, then put the patient in your own way; After putting his eyes on a piece of paper like the shape of the fuel of myrrh, and like the beginning of the sign of the hairs;
Then I put cotton soaked in oil and myrrh from Persile on the wound, then take the cautery of that form:
After drawing on the figure a little at a time, and gradually a bit more times, so that the wound is sealed to its place;
and the signs of health of the work are that you see the paper drawn back, and the hairs raised at the tip of the nail.
and therefore lift your hand, and let it remain for three days, then put cotton soaked in fat until the swelling is gone. after the treatment of ointment until he is healed.
And if the hairs come back, and the paper is softened then reapply the cautery to the same place, just as you did first.
and if the hairs are lost, then cautery until the paper is raised to its natural place, and even, and do not prick at the hair with the nail.
The cautery of the medicines burning is that you instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even, then make a parchment of the form of the leaf of myrtle;
Then take French soap and live charcoal, one of each. And make it fast, if it does not cool, then cover with the form you have made like the leaf of myrtle, and place on paper eyes; And if the illness holds only in the oil, then it must be applied with both. and soak the cotton cloth in oil.
And the patient's joint should be put in its own place and your dough showing on the medicine, press it for a little every time the patient feels numbness of the medicine, as he feels numbness like fire.
When you have done this for a long time, so hold tight to your health. When the morsication is not passed, so lift the leg up and reward yourself if you see the paper lifted as it was lifted by constraint of fire or by incision; and if it is so, then it is well.
If it is not so, then put again the medicine on the leg or if the medicine has not worked, until your works are even and your eyes be set straight.
Then put on moist cotton in butter until the wounds are closed, after dressing the leg that is called "dyaflenis" and other things, until it is healed.
And if it is necessary for you to guard your work with great care, so that the wound does not come loose from its place.
And if the paper becomes moist after, and the hair pricks in the oil, then resume the medicine on that leg which has been moistened by its own paper, just as you have done before; After the treatment until they are healthy.
and this is the form of the poultice of myrtle:
And know that the eyes of men are different in size and shape, and according to these differences your constraints.
and do not be answered the straight path with him who has knowledge of this art.
On the treatment of a fistula by fire cautery
When you cure a fistula just as we have said in the divisions of diseases, and your cures are not beneficial, then it is necessary that you make it cautery according to this manner.
Instruct the patient to put his head in a clean cloth; And bind the patient's head between your hands in such a way that it does not move or twitch.
After putting a damp cloth on the head in olive oil or apple juice.
After the fire cautery which is thus:
and it is cut into the cheek so that it resembles the shape of a feather quill, assembled so that the cautery;
so that if you see it, is cut from one cheek to the other, and so it resembles a tent;
but this one is not cut worthily for your work.
After pressing the abscess it splits open, and pulling out the pus, and drying; and if it opens again, then cut the vein.
After putting on the hot cautery in the shape of a cone, and holding your hand to the cautery at the part of no navel, lest your hands make madness; And put the cautery in the grease of oil, and it will corrupt.
If you come to the beginning of the cautery procedure just before the bone, it would be good. If this does not work, repeat the cautery once more, and if you still need to do it, then leave it for three days;
After this, put it on moist cotton wool in butter, and apply the cure of the antiseptic ointment until it is healed, and if forty days pass without being cured, then apply a medicine that is acid and corrosive until the bones are uncovered; and he should follow what comes in his chapter.
And there is a way of cautery for fistulas that none of the ancients said. Treat an abscess and drain the vein; After, put in the wound a camphor powder of fine quality because this is the form: and they put to the amount of a three-year-old child. and tie your hand firmly, so that the patient's limb does not move at all, unless the blood flows and flows.
and it is fitting to put some cotton soaked in wine or oil on the wound.
the blood, if it is free from fistula, heals by marvelous health.
But if the fistula is healed by the cautery that we have mentioned, it is good. If this is not the case, then it is necessary to administer purgatives to the belly, and bring the fistula back into the body as much as seems proper to him in his own house.
of fissures in the lips. Often cavities occur in lips called "poil", and even more often in the lips of children.
When you treat these cavities of those which we have mentioned in the division, and if the cure does not profit, then apply a small cautery surgical instrument according to this shape:
and puts it immediately in those crevices until it comes out from the same place.
after a cure with cerote, so that it may be healthy.
When an abscess comes in the root of the throat or in the eye, or in the palate, or at the roots of the teeth, after being softened and putrid and becoming a fistula. And you cure him just as we have said in divisions, and it does not benefit him. Therefore it is necessary that you cut the cautery according to the size of the fistula; After the bandage or perforation of the fistula, hold your hand until the iron stays in its place, and pull it out from there;
and do this again once or twice, after the treatment of what we have said in treatments, until he is healthy.
and if he is cured thus, that's good; and if this is not so, it's necessary to discover the wound and remove the corrupted bone, according to what you will find in his chapter.
When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you cure it with medicines and this does not work, then put the head of the patient on a clean surface. After taking the cautery, which will take shape afterwards in this way, that you put a chain on the tooth;
and put the cautery hot in that spot, tightly, and keep your hand there so the patient feels the heat coming to the root of the tooth;
After lifting your hand and resume the cautery according to your will.
After filling the patient's mouth with a salt solution, and then let him lie on his side for an hour and rich fires.
And in that manner the teeth that were moving are compressed again, and the gums are restrained, and the moisture is corrupted and dried.
of the pain of the teeth
When pain of teeth comes from coldness, or there is coldness in the eye, and the medicines have no value, then it is necessary to do cautery according to two methods: and cauterizing with butter and cauterizing with fire.
Cauterizing with butter if it is done so that you press butter from a vein, and the end in a iron or iron rod; after pressing cotton and covering it with a cloth over the tip of a tent, and letting the ulcer in butter boil, and applying it to the painful tooth tightly, until it cools;
and so do frequently until its virtue comes to the root of the tooth, and when you see that there is pus cotton and wool in butter burnt, and apply it to the painful tooth, and put on hot iron so that the fire reaches the top of the tooth.
Inassemble the fire cautery so it is made like this that you grasp with one iron chain or twine, and make it thick so that the heat does not reach the mouth of the patient.
After the fire is applied to the cautery, it will change shape after a while, and then place it on the tooth and hold your hand until the cautery cools down.
Do it often, for the pain will be felt on the same day or the next.
It is fitting that the patient fills his mouth with good butter in the haste of applying this cautery, and then takes it out afterwards.
and that is the shape of the cautery:
And make a cautery on your head whatever you want, and according to the power that you have.
And this is the form of the knife:
dead sores When scrophules (boils) are caused by humidity and cold moisture, and do not respond to digestion by medicine, then use the fire cautery on the hair of which this comes after, and have two openings for the humors to come out from the other side.
and apply the fire cautery on the abscess once or twice, until it comes to a head of the abscess;
and if the abscess is small, apply the fire cautery according to its quantity, and let it be thus for three days; and put a moistened cloth in butter on top of the wound until it is healed;
After a cure, let the limb rest from pains and discomfort until it is healed.
When moisture overpowers the veins of the arm and similarly when it comes from a cold temperament, then it is fitting that the sick person be relieved first with medicinal solutions.
After performing fire cautery at the root of the neck, and being careful not to come too close to the throat, and not burn the wound but only a little.
After performing the second fire cautery at the joint of the neck at the head of the spine, and applying the cautery which is called "clavicle" because we have the shape in front.
And heal the limb as we have said, until it is healed.
When all and illness of the bone are from moist colds, and the patient has no fever nor sweat, and is the sickness old, then you must II cauters on the knuckle in his joints; and another cautery to the bone between the two kneecaps;
and let these be called "clavicle" according to the form that is said in front.
And if you see, do cauter by pricking at the entire cauterized area that is called "pins" because of its form in the sickness of the ears;
and the pins are exactly thirty or more.
After the treatment as previously said, and be the cauterys at three joints according to this form:
And because they are easier to cut, because you do three at a time.
of the shoulder joint
When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation. Then stand the patient on his back and his side; After the knife is removed from the twitching, it is necessary to take it out with your left hand.
and if the joint is dislocated within it, then cut the cautery with two needles in this form:
and cauterize the wound so that it pierces just this side, and the figure of the cautery comes together with four cauteries;
and for this reason the cautery is made with the cautery that has three needles, because the figures of the cauterization are so four cauteries;
and they are the nerves according to the subtlety of a tent, and this is the form of the cautery that has three needles:
And sometimes they press on this nerve because it has eight cauteries.
After placing the cautery on the flesh with thread; After resting the patient, do not keep the limbs still for a long time until they are well comforted.
And if the dislocation occurs above, then the case is poor, so make cauterization on the thick part with a cauterized needle or many cauterizations in a point.
Because the joint is closed, and the moist part is healed, and the patient's sickness is alleviated.
When colds and many moistors come to the stomach, and they extract them from his complexion, and multiply the catharres in him, and do all sorts of accustomed cures which he does not benefit from, then it is fitting that the sick person be laid on their back, and stretch out their legs and hands. After that, you will perform the third cautery I under the earlobe with a spoon, of the amount of two, all over the cautery nail, and the second cautery on both sides so that the cautery figures are at three angles, and there is the same space between one and another as they will be joined together when they rot.
and when the cautery is applied in such a way that it inflames the two parts of the heart, and the figures of the cauteries are in this form next to each other:
And if you see a large cautery being applied inside the stomach in this form;
And he who fears this cautery should be cauterized by pricking and pointing to the stomach at the same time as its quantity is seen. and then let him undergo the whole cautery, which is called "points".
After the treatment of the treatment we had previously, until it is healed.
when the liver comes with pain from frost and moisture and great ventosity, to the point that it is forced out of its natural state through superfluities; and the patients are cured of what we have said in divisions, and it does them no good, unless they are covered over with their own bile. and a third point according to this form and shape and quantity on the liver, excluding the ypocondriac region, where the cost of the spleen comes.
And let there be space between each cautery the size of a doe; and let the cauteries be long from head to body, and do not press too hard on your hand throughout the cautery;
and let only the moist places be burned, and let the patient stand upright on his feet;
and if he cannot, then let him sit, and stretch out his legs, and raise his arms;
And if you have your wish, then cauterize these cauteries on the cutellarie, being subtle and wise in this art, and beware lest you burn too much skin, for you will dry out the entire body; and let him not come to boil, for the cuts are very subtle at that place, and one must know how to see.
When there is an abscess on the liver, and you see whether it is in the flesh of the liver or in the net. if it is in the flesh, he feels the patient great pain but not very severe.
and if it is in the net, he feels great pain extremely.
And when this treatment needs to take the fever down, it is advisable that the patient should be shaved above his head;
and then apply the poultice where the abscess is, and then heat the cautery which resembles an arrow, because this is the form: Instruct to cauterize as long as the keys are hot, until they come forth with pus, so that the infection is completely burned.
After the treatment as described, until he is well.
And it is not suitable for this cauterization to be used on anyone except one who has studied for a long time in the art of medicine, and whose hands have been able to cure these diseases at least once.
So it can be done with great courage, and I must say that it seems to me to be worth leaving.
How to cut the pericardium
The old ones said to make the cauterization of the spleen with the roots of the aristolchic herb, in this way: Take a long root of aristolchic herb, as large as you can find, and make it dry, just as large and as long as your two fingers. and the mold in oil, and grasp it with fire, and cauterize between the flesh and the neck, and two points are cauterized a little in descending to the area that is under the beard;
and two cauterize between the fifth rib and the sixth, at an angle a little after; one cauterize between the belly and the pubic bone, and one above the stomach, and two between the shoulders, and between the two ribs where the cauterization is between the shoulders;
and do not press my hand, but rather make an aperture so as to smell.
And an old man said that no one uses the fire cautery similar to this razor, and they put it between the ribs, until it comes to that abscess; and let him burn with fire, as we have said in the passage of the liver.
But in this work there is fear for the sick now, or a fistula appears that cannot be cured.
of the mouse.
When you treat the sickness of the mouse, as we have said about divisions of cures, and it does not profit, then they say there are three ways of cauterization that all are good.
From which some say that you should do three cauterizations, or four, binding as the length of the mouse, according to the figure of the liver cautery that we have said before.
and do not hurry your hand with the cautery, and let the patient sit on his back;
and another manner of cautery is that you should heat the cautery to two points, as we have shown in the dislocation of the shoulder;
and lift the wound that is directed to the mouse, or when the cut on the malady comes towards the left side, and let the elevations be lifted according to the wound, according to the length of the body, and the cautery should be according to the width of the body.
After they have applied the second ointment, you should burn the fire cautery until it is perceived by the other side, and then take out the fire, and so in this manner there will be four.
But if you see, if all the cautery has burned with two ointments.
After the wound has gotten putrid due to long time, and this is an excuse that the other treatments before mentioned.
Cautery does not apply to dropsy, except when done in the way called "asclytes".
When you cure according to the manners we have told in divisions, and your treatment does not benefit, then it is necessary that you make four cauteries inside the wound, and one on the stomach, one on the liver, and one on the spleen, and two behind the back on the spine, and one towards the belly. and let the cauteries be very close to the spine of the cut.
After let the cautery to close for a long time, and do not leave the patient's cure after the cautery; and healing would come quickly, and both wounds will unite with God's aid.
the form of the cautery for the abdomen is as we have shown before; and that for the back should be olive oil, according to what it is put there previously.
When the feet are swollen in one who is dropical and filled with a yellow pus, it is necessary to cauterize on the back of the foot between the little toe and the ring finger; and lift your hand with the cautery as it turns.
And do not enter too deeply, for so would the fire burn the citrine, and thus the cautery should be done in this form:
After do this, make two cauterizations on each foot at the tip of the cutlass. And so let the fire cautery be performed on the long one, with one below the knee in front and the other behind it, on the leg;
and let the cautery be left open for a long time to cure what is inside;
after the other treatments that we have mentioned.
When a stomach ailment comes from cold and moisture, such that the virtues retained and digestives which are in the stomach and intestines are thrown off, and cannot be cured with any other treatments; and you see the patient suffering greatly and with great virtue, so do on him the cautery of the stomach as he has spoken about it before or the stomach cautery which we have mentioned before, the cautery that circles; And the fourth cautery is performed on the subtle veins under all cauteries with a needle very fine, and two cauteries are done above the haunches.
If you see moistures abundant and the patient suffering, then make fire cautery on the navel, and fire cautery on each joint, and twice make fire cautery on the stomach near the great one, because the cure is beneficial when it has good help.
Of the treatment of hemorrhoids.
When the hemorrhoids are located at the base, or one, and more, and are old and consist of large cold and moist humors corrupted, and are treated as we have said in sections, but it does not benefit, perform cauteries: Three above the spine on the back, those who are behind the almeda to and fro in a triangular manner, and one cautery below the vein two.
and if you think that his stomach is cold, and the meat does not cook, and it swells in the face, then give one cautery on the stomach, as has been said, and one above the liver, and one above the spleen with all fine needles. and let the fire cautery remain for a long time. After the treatment the limb must be allowed to recover.
When you cut with the knife, if it seems to be frozen like a scythe, and then sets everything on fire that was cut. and let it rest as long as the cautery comes to life at the opening of the vein, so that there is no wound.
do this once or twice, and if there is much of the cut, cauterize each one as we have said. after applying ointments for a profit as long as they are healing.
and if you cauterize with a great fire on the affected area, it will have more aid.
When the patient cannot endure torture or opening, we will tell him in his own words, if he comes to this illness that cannot be healed except by cautery.
When there is an ulcer, and it is old and covered with putrid pus and corrupted moisture, if you press to see whether the entire wound is tender, observe that you know how deep the wound is.
After the cauterization which seems like a razor, and pour it into the fistula according to the quantity that is entered, and resume the cauterization until the flesh burns and corrupts once or twice, or three times, according to how much there is need.
and guard the strong nerves that are strained, and the large veins.
if the fistula goes to the body of the bladder and intestines, guard them well, and do not perform this fire on them unless they are in a walnut shell, and think they are not human.
after treating the patient until they are healthy, and if the humors are imbalanced, and the materials are long-lying, then you should know that the patient is entirely healthy.
And if the materials are not bones, know that the lead is heavy, and corrupts the bone. and so as one of these which we will speak of in its place.
When pain from a blow comes with great swelling and does not take effect in a woman, then it is fitting that you apply cautery on the swollen parts of one side and the other, as we have said about the cautery claw.
and if our cauteries touch an artery, then have three more cauteries in a line, and they will give greater aid.
From the vessel When the bladder is mole and weak from blows and moisture, if the patient retains urine, then make cautery in the part behind the bladder, where the hair of the nipple begins, on both the right and left side, each one making cauteries as long as they can with one stroke.
and he makes fire cautery on his back, or if he needs to do it there.
and let the fire cautery be cut like that.
When the marrow is cold and moist, and does not conceive again, and the flesh is corrupted and its ends are late. and when they come, it causes great pain: therefore it is fitting that one makes fire cautery around the mouth, as we have said, and fire cautery on his back;
and let him make fire cautery of the shoulder, as we have said.
When the swollen viscous substances flow from the boil of the gallbladder, and because of this he moves out of his place, and the signs are that the knee is longer than the other when measured together;
and when it is found that the joints are separated by this movement, so it is fitting to cauterize the patient over the thorn of the groin, in a cautery similar to a circle, and signifying before the joint as it turns, so that the thorn may be inside the circle;
and if the cauterizations are like those of the stomach that one has cauterized.
And if this cauterization is not present, make three cauterizations of the olive tree oil, and apply them as thick as all the scars.
and treat the patient until he is healed.
Of the pain of the groin When pain comes to the groin of the groin, and it is caused by cold and moisture, and the patient has been treated with what we have said in the section on division, but the treatment does not work, and the disease is old. Then it is necessary to purge the patient of great humors of old pills or other hard pills that resemble them. After cutting (the hair)
and the manner of cautery is according to two ways: which are to be assembled with medicines hot, and fire cautery.
Fire cautery is according to many ways, of which some are such that:
that you cauterize on the flesh of the cheek three fire cauteries according to this shape, and make a strong and deep wound, and put between each cautery the space equal to the thickness of two doves, so that the cauteries are olive-shaped.
Never is cautery performed in the middle of the cheek bone because there are four corresponding wounds according to this form:
And if you see, when the cut is made by the cautery of a circle as we have described in the dislocation of the cheek bone;
but make it in such a way that the circle contains all of the cheek bone, and all the thick parts of the wound are seared.
And this is the way it is done in sciatique, when the pain holds in the gout, and does not come to just below the knee or just below the leg.
And if it comes just to the thigh and knee, then make two cauteries there, where the patient says that the pain lies, and four cauteries above the ankle, to the left side by one thumb.
and let the cauteries be made with a cutting instrument, and sear the thick parts of the wound.
and if the patient feels that the pain spreads to two or three feet from the spot where it is felt in the cautery, and he is pricked at the place where the pain is felt for three points or four points, which is called "points". And if it is thus, that he makes more.
and if it is so that the pain is below the knee towards the thigh, then he cuts at the cutlery or circular cautery; and take good care in all your cauteries that you do not cauterize too much, lest you burn the nerves and great arteries, and cause more annoyance and contraction to the patient.
And I myself have seen others who had fire cautery on the ankle of the foot, and let them burn so that the leg was completely severed, and also the toes, and they became recognized and corrupted all the toes. After a belly solution that killed him.
And if the pain is in both parts together, perform fire cautery on one and the other, according to this manner.
And the wise men say in the cautery of the hawthorn, for this is the manner: make a cut thus, with a blade one size smaller than a nail, or one point less; and cut alternately between two points, spaced apart like the length of a coin.
and the fingers intertwined of two parts, and are also like those we have, and there is one iron band very well made;
and this is the form:
And then it is heated until it is completely red and sends out smell, and then put it on the patient's groin, and turn it over to his healthy side;
and after the cautery once is performed, and he lets the patient remain for three days; and then make plaster of butter, and let the wound be covered for long time; after the treatment with binding until it is healed.
Alboçsim says that we should use little of this cautery because of the fear of its sting, and few people do so.
and it is good to apply this, which he can endure, and at which place he will suffer.
The cautery of medicine burns if you make an instrument between the cheeks, in which it lies on the edge of the mouth, and is made of iron or wood, for a long time, with two hooks, and has two parts, one between each. And are joined together and on top, and assemble according to this form:
After putting the hawthorn bandage on the patient lying on his side, and press your hand very hard on the hawthorn bandage; After putting between the two circles of hot wax which is heated in a pot, and letting it sit for one hour with ten, and suffer the patient the heat and the inflammation.
It is found to have a bite like of fire;
and when the mordication has passed, lift your hand with the instrument and raise the heel of a sweet herb, and let it be so for three days, and put on butter until what is black from the ash falls out; and let him sit for three days that fermentation may be extracted;
And what would be the rear part aid after the treatment of wounds, until he is healed.
And if the pain has extended just to the thigh or just to the leg, make the same instrument that you have made before in a larger way;
and this is the manner of the sweet herb, and I have written it in the treatment of medical correction. Take quicklime and live sulfur, equal amounts of each, grind them together, and put them in a new pot. If there is a small opening, do not open it so that the point of an arrow can enter.
If there is a small opening, do not open it so that the point of an arrow can enter. And put the other pot into a good place, and fill it with plumb, and place ash and chalk on top, and pour honey over them, until there are two powder residues left; thus you will have taken it well in your hand.
And let it remain in that state until the powder comes down ash and cinder or into the pot with plumb, then take all of that, and place it on chalk and ash as before.
And when it is very hot and has been administered in the manner of overages of medicine and by cauterys of other members.
For it makes all other works like fire, and so also with other medicines; because when you cauterize well the navel as such, honey and acacia and almonds with lye, all these things mingled together make a mixture.
And the Greeks tell us of a cure that one man was cured of the pain of his vein and sciatic nerve, and he spoke highly of it, and said that no other cure is needed, and he became sane for only once when this cure was performed, and he took a bath as he taught later on.
And instruct him in this manner to press with the lard green and fresh and dry, and grind it much with a little fat, and put on the groin and on the thigh and on the leg where the pain lies, and tie;
and let him leave for three hours and by the quantity that the patient feels no more pain.
And then put him into the bath so that his body may be slightly loosened, and put him to bed, and the pain will go away completely and he will be cured.
And know that no one should use fire cautery of such medicines, unless they are after the evacuation of the body.
And Dioscorides says that when the sciatic vein is cauterized with horse's tendon, if it does help;
and must be done in this manner. Take linen and anoint it with old oil, and put it on the fossa that is between the little toe and the other one called the foscile.
After taking dried horse's tendon, and applying it to the fire until it is carbonized, then putting it on wool and letting it soak in that.
And redo again thus, and do not cease to do so until you think with your mind that it will come just to the shoulder joint, and that the pain will be ceased;
and this manner of cautery is called "cautery of cheese".
of the pain of the back
When pain comes to the back, whether by falling or by percussion, or by excessive evacuation, or because of swelling of cold matter, none of these things is worth cautery, except for those who come from an infusion of cold matter.
it is fitting that after this, the patient should be void of fetid pills or other similar things; and on his back, in such place as where the pain lies, three signs made of fire, one for each line, and in each line cautery or more according to virtue and quantity that the patient can bear;
and it shall be made the cautery according to the cautery which is called "pains";
and if you see, make three cauteries or four at the jointed claw cauterizing according to this form:
This illness comes many times to small children, and the signs of its beginning are that they have a crooked arm when it starts to move, and fear. And you will find in the lower spine of the back and in the appearance that comes with the other spines.
When you see this and observe how to cure it, cut off the affected area according to this form. If you prick with cauterization each part of the spine increasingly.
And if you see, if you cut into the spine at a point just behind the second vertebra, or the third, and the points are close together.
After the cure, keep the patient until he is healthy as we have said, and be careful not to apply cauterization to areas of swellings or inflammation which are in the grasp of a nerve.
Of the pain of joints
When pain is in joints due to moisture that are spread out in each body member, and when pain comes in the feet, which they call "podagre" properly, and when it is caused by cold reasons and medicines cannot cure it, even then are cured by cautery in this manner:
make a fire of cautery around the joint in the foot, and use olive oil according to this form:
And if there is pain where you press on the face of the foot, do cautery to the entire point that we claim. And if the pains come to both knees and other joints, and this happens often, for each knee or four of each part, the fire cautery is applied on each joint three times or four on each part, all over the olive treatment.
and if you have a task of more weight, then do more, but keep your hand warm only until the fat part is frozen.
And if the pains descend just to the groin and the back, instruct the patient to apply the fire cautery that we have discussed in his chapter.
And if pains are in the hands, so apply pain into the fold two lines.
and if there is still no pain after, then apply pain to each joint and to the hair of the hand.
and if pains come to both shoulders or both elbows, then apply fire cautery to each part, and do good governance for the patient, and administer remedies.
But if you make good governance and purge the swelling, he will be made whole by God's help.
When rupture comes to flesh, and the swellings descend into wounds and it's new, then it is fitting that while you are treating the wound, do not let it be wounded again. and that they use things that clear the stomach, so that the pus descends from its belly;
after which you seat him on his back between your hands, and he commands that he tightens his leg as long as the swellings are healing, and you pull it to your hands, and he signs for you to cut over the rupture onto the bone of the elbow, and so make a mark like half of a circle above the body.
then you inflate the cautery with what is its form:
Until he is white and his senses are clear. Let them remove the bowels to their place. and hold the fingers of the hands against which they do not return.
and sew well the knees of the patient, and put a gauze over the wound in the flesh, and another one over the hand that holds the fingers.
then put the cautery on the sign of the wrist until you reach the bone; and if you do not reach it at once, if it recurs again another time until you reach the bone. and beware carefully that the bile does not escape when you do the cautery. so as not to burn it. and so let the patients not die from this.
And instructs you to know that when you do not come close enough to the bone with the cautery, your work is worthless.
And it is necessary that the cauterization of children be subtle according to their measure, and of adults also great according to their measure;
after three days' treatment, take away the cauterized wound with butter until it is healed.
after the patient has recovered from other treatments until he is fully healed, and lay the sick person on their back for forty days, so that the wound may be well-healed.
and it is necessary that their menstrual periods be slow to dry up, so that the bowels do not burst when they are going to move in the chambers.
And after forty days, when he wishes to rise, dress him in a well-made bandage and bind it for another forty days;
And give a good rest, so he works little and guards himself from excessive drinking and eating, and from drinking too high.
and when he follows this teaching so is made completely whole.
And I will say this after his treatment in his chapter.
When wounds come back in other places and are recognized, and you see that they do not grow again, if you apply cauterization according to its size, then take out one-third of the cure. after the treatment as we have said;
and none of the ancients has said that you should cauterize with the fire at three angles according to this shape:
but first mark the left side of the wound and make a line for its width, and another one afterwards, and tie your thumb tightly around the entire cauterization.
But the first cauterizations are lighter and more gentle.
Of olden pain in any member When pain comes to any member, whether from a fall or from injuring it, and the pain lasts for a long time, and medicine cures are not effective, then it is necessary to be cauterized with the cautery called "poins", and to be cauterized according to the length of the member and its smallness and weakness and its virtue and its location of twisting and of its pain.
if he is well after the first cauterization, it is good.
When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation. Dislocations occur when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
The trouble is treated with no success by cauterization for great help, and the same illness that comes from the rotting of pus and melancholy.
You can view cauterizer, take care that if the patient is at the beginning, and if he is cured according to what we have said in the division, and do not cut or stop moving, and you doubt that corruption seeps into the entire patient, then make cauterizers on the head: i have removed the hair from the head, and on the other side of the forehead to the end of the eyebrows; and one above the two horns, and one behind on the heel;
and I leave your hand in such a way that the cautery comes to life just before the bone, and so much so that the scales come out strongly, so that the vapors of the large humors can come out.
and cut on the mouse according to what it is in front.
And if there is a separation everywhere; and it is clearly visible, so it is wise to use one of the cauterization techniques that we have mentioned earlier, and 1 cauters on the neck, and 2 in the throat area, and 6 on the spine at the back, and 1 on the groin and the other 1 on the lower back, and 2 on the shoulder blades. and 2 on the sides, and 2 on the tendons of the leg, and 1 on each joint of the hands and feet, and on the depressions of the hands;
and beware of the nails that are on top of the dead man's thigh, lest you burn them.
and at no time should the cautery be made on the bone of the finger joint, and another on the bone of the stomach, and another on the liver.
And know that when you do more cautery, the patient will gain more aid and benefit.
and know that the sick do not feel pain from cautery at all, just as they feel it when they are healthy, because the body is already completely corrupted.
And it is fitting that the fire cautery should be large or small depending on the member and joints, as you will find in various iron tools.
After treatment, wash the patient with flour and honey several times until they are healthy.
When an inflammation comes to any member and is cured with medicines, oils, and plasters, but the patient does not recover, then you should do cautery on the member according to its size and shape.
and so let the cauterizers take a little of the flesh where it is red. then the treatment for pains such as this until they are cured.
And no one is cauterized by hand and foot and back until the nerve is muted and the limb becomes stiff.
and no one interferes with this if it is not known by one who understands the members and the movements of the nerves.
When the illness called "albaras" is old and worn out, and medicine does not help, then cauterize with a cautery, taking a little of the flesh to the depth of the redness, so much that the blanching comes out, and the color fades.
then the doctor gives them a mixture of flour from wheat and lentils with rose oil and leaves of plantain, and blood from a colt and blood from an alder tree, one part from each; and let everything be mixed together, and tie it with a cloth, and apply to the patient until they are healed.
the cure of cancrer by cautery
When cancrer comes at the beginning, and you look to stop it, then cut with cautery on the cautery that seems to be around the entire circle of the cancrer.
And all the wise men say that one should also apply fire cautery to the middle of a wound.
and all the wise men do not seem good to me, because I fear that it will cause ulceration and corruption, and I have never been able to bring this about.
and the most troublesome thing is that they are cauterized inwards, with the cauterization called "circle", just as we have said of other cauterizations.
When some have a disease called "adubelati", and it delays dying because of its overflow or the old age of the sick man when he is very weak, and he has little blood, or because his time. and to see it hasten to die: and therefore the cautery should be cut off with many small cauteries in pricking. after which he is left so. It will soon die.
And if you see it pierced all with the cautery, so that the cauterization is of this form:
And put your hand in the middle of that disease which is called "adubelati" until the cauterization has pierced the vein, and so that the cauterization is made with such precision that the patient feels pain before it happens in this manner, so that the course of the infection may be delayed.
After the treatment until he is perfectly recovered.
Another type of disease that is called "corrodens", and it is nothing other than a gangrene of the limb, because it corrupts the limbs in the same way as fire corrupts dry wood.
If you see this disease in a person who can suffer fire cautery together, then take small and large nails, as much as is needed to the person or according to the disease.
after the cautery of all parts until you eradicate all the corruption, and nothing remains except that all that is corrupted be destroyed.
And then let him lie for three days, and put on the patient's cauterized wounds with a cloth soaked in oil until the scalds from the fire are destroyed, and all the corruption.
After this remedy is done with generated splinters.
And if you see after three days that a healthy child does not come out, it's good;
and if this does not happen, then resume the cautery on the one who has been left in a state of corruption.
And this remedy has never been cured with medicinal water instead of the cautery of fire.
but that all cauteries of fire are of greater aid, and I have already said the remedy of medicinal water in division. take what you need.
of worms that come to the bones. Often it happens that at the bones due to weakness a disease is born which is called "closed" according to our intention, and it is a big thing that wounds the bone.
And the fire cauteries of this disease are according to two manners. That is to say, cauterizing with fire, and cauterizing with hot water.
Cautery of fire is that you heat the cautery hair like a goose feather, and let it be made of good iron to the measure that it can penetrate the nail in all parts, and have subtle margins;
After the he made it all hot on the nail, and turned your hand around the nail so that it comes to its proper place; and then lets him sit for three days until he begins to sweat out the pus; then he makes an poultice of fresh raspberries crushed with thread, and lets the poultice on the entire wound all night, and the splinter will fall out and be loosened from its roots.
Then treat the joint with application of heat until it is healthy.
And if they have converted to fever, and it often happens in the hands and feet, then you should apply cauterization with hot water. and is done in this way: take a thorn or iron nail, or a feather from a quail, and put it on the splinter and the flesh, that is to say, to press out warts; Instruct the patient to put the tourniquet on so that it pricks all around; and then put a little of hot water on it, and hold your hand well, and press your hand as you turn so that the margin of the tourniquet comes to the root of the nail, and can find its way through deep into the root.
and let the patient suffer a little from the heat of the water for an hour; then let him go so that he will all bleed out to its roots.
Instruct a doctor to do this after that one, until you have checked all those who are in the body, then cure the limbs that bind tightly.
When some are trembling from cold or from fever of the fourth kind, or from another disease, it is fitting that you make four cauteries or four on the spine of the back, and one cauterization between each spine. and take care of the foot, and apply the olive oil cautery to the stomach.
if he will relax, and quickly recover from the disease of cold fever.
Never appear in its natural state the chest's boils or painless boils, which come from corrupted large matters.
if it is wise to cut first, when they appear that one does cauterize each head of the pustule: a subtle cauterization with a fustel of myrtle wood, so that the point is gripped by fire, or with an aristoletum root, or with the lenticular cauterization.
And at no time do cauterize it in the beginning when they appear this way, for according to this method, and they cannot increase or worsen beforehand, but the superfluities which come from it are ruptured, and healed.
But it is necessary to do this after the evacuation of blood.
Often happens great bleeding of the artery which is cut at the wound that comes to the surface, or in the incision of the abscess, or by fire cautery on the member, and similar things; and is very pitiful to clean.
And everyone sees that when this happens on anyone, if you hasten to put your two fingers on the wound of the vein, and press much so that there is no more blood, and the pain is not felt.
then puts the olive oil cauteries, small and large, into the fire until they are all red.
Instruct the patient to put on the cautery first, or a small one according to the wound and its location, and place the cautery on that vein where you hold your thumb, and keep it there until the bleeding is stopped.
And if the fire jumps up when you lift your two fingers over the vein, and the cautery is extinguished, take haste and take another cautery that is on fire.
And do not stop doing this one after another, until the bleeding is stopped.
And beware that you do not burn the nerve near it, and that no other harm comes upon the patient.
And know that when the artery is not cut during the procedure, it cannot be properly closed itself because of the large artery. If so, this should be done by one of the four ways we have mentioned previously. or by cautery, or by extracting it when it is not treated, or by tying it tightly with thread, or by applying medicines that have the power to close the wound. And if bound and strained occurs.
Who will provide restening of a tightly bound member by covering it with bandages or putting hot things on top of it, or other similar things, unless there is no benefit.
And if this happens when he has no remedy or medicine present, then he must put his two fingers on the wound vein as we have said, and stretch it well so that it remains behind the wound and the vein. and he must not move it, but let the moisture of the frosty cold water soak in, so that it becomes very cold, until it is frozen and thickened and remains behind.
and face the wound forward for those who need cauterization and medicine.
As we have said in the first chapter, for every disease whether it requires cauterization with fire or with hot medicine, and the symptoms, causes, discharges, and forms of the cauterizations;
and I have placed that chapter of the surgery on the forehead just above the bone, and I will go into this same chapter by the same path because what is found there is more easily found than what we see.
And so that I begin this work, it is necessary, dear son, that you learn that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than with the first cautery, and therefore it must be approached with greater caution.
For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; or it is doubt and fear, and many die. where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
And I warn you not to be foolish. For many kinds of people come in for treatment. if they come from those who have been so affected by their illness that they die easily because of the strength of their suffering, and the great power of their malady; and of these things one must have fear.
And as to what is said to you by this physician, and says: Wait, I am cured. and the sickness is stubborn.
It is not fitting for you to only take advice from those who come to visit you in this manner, but rather put more consideration into your honor than into your covetousness, and do not be weak-hearted but wise about what you are certain of, and what you have acquired.
and use prognosis and indication in the treatment of your sick patients to what end the salus (good health) is converted.
And this will help you gain a better reputation, and glory, and memory of praise.
Three most precious sons, our Lord gives you good understanding and right judgment, and if you wish to aspire to the holy inspiration of his hand, Amen.
I shall translate the text line by line into English.
It is observed that this disease comes often in children when the child strains too hard at the head.
And sometimes it comes from a return that is not known.
And I have never seen this disease occur in adults, and all those that I have seen have had the mouth closed. And for this reason, I think it is worth wasting some time on treating the joint in several ways.
And I see that the child's knee was swollen with water, and every day its head would swell so much that it could no longer sustain.
and he believed so much about moisture that it killed him, and this moisture is assembled beneath the bone above the spleen, between the kidney and the bone.
and the wounds are such that if moisture is between the kidney and the bone, and the abscess is small, you should make a wide incision in his chest.
and be as long as ours, so that the moisture runs out;
and cut it there in the shape of a spatula:
If the moisture is more deep, and the abscess is bigger, then you should make two incisions in the shape of a cross, according to this form:
and if the moisture is under the bone, and you see signs in that place, such as the commissures of the chest opening on each side, and the blood spurts out when you press it with your hand inside, but does not return: If you must cut open his head three times according to this method:
And after the incision, take out all the moisture that is flowing. After binding the incisions with strips and powder, and applying wine and oil, let it so until the fifth day;
Then cut away the wound, and treat it with poultices and ointments, and let the head be strained out to greater size, and then give the patient dried meat in small portions until the limb is comforted and healed.
And another way of incision is that you look at or open the depth of the abscess and the assembled fluid;
for she never occurs before. never after. Never at any time and never on the left side.
Length then in either the opening of the abscess or the filling of the water, and do what you are able.
and guard so that you do not cover the artery. And be careful that the vein is not cut off, so that the patient may die from the progression of the blood and the evacuation of moisture.
When it has happened to any disease that is called "cough" and affects the eyes or the worst, and the disease is old and does not benefit from medicinal treatment, then the last remedy is to cauterize with what one covers the two arteries.
It is therefore necessary, when you cover their eyes, that the patient should make his face to his head. After rubbing the forehead with a rough cloth until the arteries open, then strip the patient's neck of all that cloth. Then look where the vein breaks, and the veins of one and the other are after the ears, and they are not returned.
Then mark the veins of an artery, then cut one and the other with a well-made spoon (or two-part instrument), until the vein reaches the bone, so that it be according to the size of the head.
And if you see, pour out the spatumile under the artery and cut it above, in cutting as much as two parts to pass through.
And when the vein is cut, make it stop without any further bleeding continuously.
And if the artery does not open to feeling, it is fitting that you measure the space of three digits, then mark and cut until the bone.
and what is fitting to put fire into the wound if it is six pints (of blood), and by chance a little more or less, according to what the patient can bear, and the replenishment of the artery.
Then look at the wound: If the bone remains at that spot after cutting, so that there is no discharge from the wound, then strain the wound and bind it, and provide care with ointments until it is healed.
is coming from When the old inflammation comes, and a catarrh is good, because of the moisture of the tears and the heat in the temples and the ancient sore, and similar things, and it is treated with various kinds of medicines and cure medicines, and all this does not benefit him, if we cut out the arteries from the temples and the cauterized parts, as we have told.
And the manner of their extraction when it is so that the patient makes his hair on his temples fall out and listens to the artery that opens in the temple, because it opens well with pounding, and is not replenished quickly like in most men who are too cold;
and if it is replenished, then straining the neck of the patient with certain cloths, then rubbing him with any rough cloth, and raising him in hot water until the artery appears clearly; Then take the spatula of what is this form: Then scrape the skin lightly until you reach the artery, then pull it up high with pins, and remove well the threads that are beneath each part.
and if the artery is thin, then turn [the bone] with the point of the needle, and cut from that part according to the quantity of the two shoulder blades. But if it will not be severed, do not leave it attached without any pain or discomfort at all.
And pull out six times the thickness of the veins, five just beneath them;
and if the artery is great, it is suitable that you tie it with two levers of a double strong thread of silk, that no infection appears before the sound of the wound, and comes after the blood.
Then bind the swelling that is between the two joints in this hour itself, and then, if you see, if he cuts with the cautery of the cutting knife just at the bone until the joint is cut;
and it is the work of breaking, if the patient does not have fever and he has a hot constitution. For the cautery is an aid to finish drying swells: because it is of greater help in drying swells.
Where it is necessary to extract the arteries, you should fill him with warm linen and put them on top of well-made tents;
and when you remove them, treat him with dry medicines that make charcoal, and tents, until he is cured;
And if you do not take care of the artery so that it is torn apart as you work, then hasten to cover yourself with cautery, or apply lead to your hand so that the blood does not stain. And if you do not have it in stock, then put on the lead as soon as possible, and let it freeze with cold water until it is frozen solid, and bind it as is needed.
And you must have a pound of large iron between the two strikes, and then when you've applied the sealants to the two parts, place your hot iron on top so that it comes into contact with the bone, and strike the vein in two. and let them separate between the two shoulders because there is no soldering of this fire cautery with all in all;
and this is the form of the cautery:
And this that is sharper and more delicate in the extraction of the artery should be cauterized with a vein of this cautery, striking two parts, but let the strikes be well spaced to keep its heat longer. When the urine is too dark, it holds less heat.
from tears. When the tears of the eyes are flowing from the veins on top of the forehead and there is no benefit from the medicine we apply, and you see the face of the sick person turning red, and feel a sense of pain in the front, like when one is faint. And the wounds are kept moist and wet so that the hairs of the papillae are burned, and the papillae are scorched by the heat of the tears, if it is necessary for this cure. And they called it the "cure contuse", and so you should instruct the patient who has this sickness to trim their hairs on the forehead, then make three incisions or cuts on the forehead equally according to the length of the forehead;
And they called it the "cure contuse", and so you should instruct the patient who has this sickness to trim their hairs on the forehead, then make three incisions or cuts on the forehead equally according to the length of the forehead; And so it is one of the cuts like this as two fingers touch the front, and they go inside just as they were when they came out, and the other two are as two fingers touching above the paper, and be careful not to make an incision on the arteries which are located above the papers.
And move your hand away from the continuation of the two mandibles, and cut each wound three fingers deep through.
and apply a piece of sponge and a lot of bandages to absorb the blood, then pour the spatula good with two parts of it which is the shape:
of the incision that is just above the temple, to the second incision; and scorch all the wound that is between the two cuts to the whole length above the bone, then make another incision from the first one up to the other second, and then pull out this spatula. If you cut into the fire with command of the physician let him let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
And put the scalpel cutting towards the raw flesh at the point, and the back of the scalpel soft towards the bone, and let it cut until it reaches the middle wound.
And cut the veins that go down from the head to the eyes until the incision is continuous, just as long as the vein opens at the heart, and then make another cut in the middle split until it reaches the other door.
and then extract the vein evenly, and press out the blood for the wound taken.
then put a tent of white linen in each cut, and place wet cloths soaked in wine and oil and salt, and keep them away from the abscesses.
and on the third day loosen the bandage, and anoint it with plantain water, then the treatment of ointment basilicon with rose oil, and other remedies used to treat wounds until it is healed.
When some come with swollen eyes, accustomed to this, and you see the eyelids closed tightly, and the vision weakens, and the papers burn; and the hairs swell up, and at the forehead it causes great pain, and the patient is upset; Therefore, by these occurrences you know that those materials and this swelling come from many veins, and the mother who is, if she is, then this.
And instruct the patient to cover his forehead, then make a great incision in front of the forehead, and another small one behind. And from the wound of the left temple to the right temple, and make the incision just beyond the bone; and withdraw your hand from between the temples that move to the lower side;
and when the bone is uncovered, if you suck out all the blood from an sponge, and then put cotton wool between the two lips of the wound; Then tie the patient up with wet cloths in wine and oil, and keep them away from the wound.
when it is an ulcer, if you wish, then rub the bone until it starts to come out, and treat with remedies that are cooling, which make it dry.
In this way: Take two parts of wheat flower, and four parts of willow bark, and make it infused. and apply the mixture to these wounds to cool down by all means.
of the rupture of the ears
All that comes out of your ears is one of four things: or gravel, or ore of iron, or a stone like metal. If the seed dies, as if you were to eat it, fever, boils; or defluent (blood flow) as if with fever and coldness and similar things.
When it falls into the ear stone or another kind of thing that does not adhere to the ear, nor grows in the ear, if one puts the ear in the sun.
If you see a stone, if any small amount of purple oil or oil of sement is distilled from it, then perform extraction; and make it (the stone) vomit, and let the nose be plugged as vomiting comes, and put a piece of cloth or wool into the ear; and place the ear on top.
often it comes by this cure;
and if she does not come (by the cure), perform extraction with subtle pins, for this is her form:
If they fall onto pinches, this is good;
if that's not the case, then administer extraction to the tumor under a small, fine incision;
and if they do not fall onto pinches, then make a chain of thorns and pour the chief into the chain or ear canal very tightly, so that what's stuck in the chain with molten wax cannot enter again. and then let it form a scab, because it often comes as we have said;
and if it does not come with blood in that manner, take glue of what caught the hairs, and grab the surrounding tissue, and put in some instrument having a pointed end to do this, and put a little cotton around; Then press the gluteus muscle above the bone or whatever is present, and pull.
And if it does not pull from all these things that we have said, then hasten to pierce the cartilage and vein so that spasms occur.
And the manner of the incision is that you first make the patient healthy of the cephalic region, and extract blood according to its virtue; then place the patient between your hands, and turn the ear upwards, and make a small incision in the root of the ear at the fat or where it depends. And make the incision as thin as a crescent moon, until you reach the bone; then extract the bone according to your power, and suck it hastily into your mouth.
and the healing will take place.
And if this is swollen with pus, extract it;
and if it cannot come out, then apply a small poultice on the spot according to this form: and make an incision of that sort.
But do not do this when you think the pus is moist due to the moisture of the ear, until you have made many pieces.
then pull it out with subtle force and to the surgeon, just as we have said, so that the extraction may be easy.
In the water therefore what is cast into the ear should be used by the sick of mustard and comfits first, and fill the ear with fine cotton. And it can also be placed above that same ear or in the water itself. if it falls down because of this, it is good.
if this does not work, then insert many needles according to the length of your treatment and gentle ones, and let it lie on fire for a little. And put the patients on one side with a perforated ear, and let it fall off from the other part of their feet, and be afraid of another pierce in the pierce that is in the ear. and do not cease to make pierce in pierce until the wound is completely healed, and then let it heal completely.
and if you see, if the joint is pressed, and pour one of the ashes into the ear, and the other part presses with fire until the hottest joint is burned;
then again do other joints until the wound is completely healed, just as we have said in the pierce.
In the extraction of the best, if it is a small bone, just like a thorn and similar things, treat it as we have said in the division;
But if she is of great body, then you can feel it, so perform an extraction of pinches. and this is the lighter thing to remove which is in the ear.
When extracting worms you should treat the ears, just as we have said in dividing and treating dilutions, but if the cure does not profit, it is wise to look at the ear by sunlight: if there are no worms, if the wound has subtle pinches, and if they do not appear, then you take a piece of string because it is this form:
And it may be narrow below and wide above. And pour out the most subtle poultice into the ear according to the quantity of the patient's suffering, then form a whole string: Do this as often as they (the doctors) wish because all the people will see it.
And if they do not obey to cut, then tie the pipe of cotton inside as I said in the stone.
And if they do not swell as we have said, administer dilutions just as the ancient ones have proven in the operation of worms, and you will find them or treat with dilutions.
And if you pour your oils and medicines into the ear with this instrument, because it is the form as you see. And whether made of silver or lead, take away from the smallest openings and above the overhangs to dilute.
And to press within the dilution in the lead instrument well made for this, and if you see take the rasp and wrap it around the tip of the cotton. Then take your oil or juice, and that which you see of your medicine in the cage, and let it be on the ear;
Then pour into the ear canister all the cotton, and press your hand gently until the oil is distilled or comes out near the ear; and the patient feels it inside, and then the distillation is heated more so that, as we have distilled in the ear; and beware it does not get too cold, for the medicine would not be so good.
of the rupture of the ears
No child is born without any defects in their ears;
and this same thing happens at home because of a stopped-up wound, or of an arrow shot into the ear, and these stoppings come to be in the ear sometimes from within, if one cannot see them;
And sometimes happens that the poor man is bereft of sight, and his eye sees ill.
Therefore, when it comes to the point where he cannot see it, if it is due to a sickness of more than one disposition, and in that case you should put the ear of the sick person towards the sun. and look inside. If you see the opalescence appearing, if the work has the entire spectrum of color because this is the form:
And whether it shines and glows in front of and behind all equally, if the ear does not bleed;
if the opalescence is of color or bone of the ear, if you have subtle points and pierce lightly so that the color is completely gone.
If the inflammation is deep in the ear, then take a subtle razor and shave it lightly with hot ashes, then put on the body of the ear.
If you feel the throbbing of what the patient feels is grief in the ear, carefully perceive it, and do not press on the nerves of the ear;
then put into the ear a tent according to the size and size of the perforation, and the poultice in the Egyptian manner. Do this on no day until the wound is closed, or you take a poultice and apply the poultice in rose water, and powder with vitriol broken.
and if you see the ear swollen, apply the poultice and move another moist poultice made of olive oil and wax, until the swelling is removed; then heal him until he is fully recovered.
If there is bleeding from the nose, plunge a sponge and wrap it in cold water, and place it on the ear, and use other treatments that take away the swelling of the nose which are used to treat nasal bleed.
This ailment that comes on when the eyelids are moist and dry, you should stretch them with tongs and tweezers, and cut off one root of a plant, from its root. Then put on the eye vitriol and break it.
And if you do not remove it, then the cautery of the lens subtlety will be cut, and cutting after the incision will be afoot.
And often repair, for no part remains of its roots; and when they are cautered with fire, the roots are burned and do not return.
of the flesh Often come in the form of eyelids some things that resemble wart in shape and hardness, and for this disease is called "grandine", and it is a mass of moisture thick on the paper above and below; The injuries are thus:
The injuries are thus: If one is wounded on both sides and it's a light thing to know;
So then he cuts to the bone on both sides, scours it lightly from each part, picks out the stitches, and copes.
If you cannot cover it with a covering of skin, piercing the paper so that nothing harms the patient;
And if the cut is great, so he sews it up with a stitch, and treats until it heals;
And if it's small, then don't make a fuss, because the ointments restore it immediately and irritate the skin.
And if the pus is descending into the ear towards the upper part, then you must press and squeeze it, and pick off grains with tweezers, and strike one side and the other.
and if the paper is pulled away by the incision, it causes no pain.
and when the grains are picked off, wash away the salted oil from the wound, and treat the patient with a salve until they become healthy.
From the fat of the eyes Then this is a fat that is gathered in the threads of paper above, and it has happened to many children who are born with no one to care for them, and they suffer greatly from their eyes, and they come to have diarrhea in the mornings, and cannot see the light of the sun because their tears obscure their eyes.
and because of this they lie on their faces afterwards, and sleep on them, and their papers below their eyelids are moist that the swelling and appearance have covered from the recent incision which has opened in the oil. And when you press on the liver with your fingers and feel the exinach within it.
and he will sit on a clean one;
and then he will take a linen cloth, and fashion a tent in the shape of a circle according to the quantity contained within each part, then puts it on. and press with your two hands from one side and the other, so that the incision is gathered in the middle of the circle;
then make in the middle of the moist area a cut to the spot with a sharp point, not larger than the wound you made on the vein;
And let the skin be stretched over the fontanelle until you see it open. And from other openings of the wound come the exit of the flesh, according to the form of a piece of white fat.
Take then at once a whole piece of linen cloth between your two hands, and turn your hand to right and left until it is even.
And take care that you do not put anything into the wound, until you come to the entire surface of it, without burning it.
And if the opening does not come at the beginning of the wound, then carefully cut a little wider the wound lightly until it appears.
Now take the head of the shoulder and tie it with bandages in silence and water, and put on the patient, and stretch of bending.
And if some of these men who cut up silks and put them on to corrupt that moisture which remains.
Then the cure should be safe.
If it comes to a joint abscess, then the cure of emplastrumes applying so long as he is sanitized.
of hairs from paper When the hairs are born on someone other than their nature, and they are grown weak, if you prick them, it brings about various kinds of maladies such as excessive tearing and swellings of the skin, and albugen (a condition characterized by a whitish coating), until it is the cause of destroying the eyes.
and there are four kinds of cures according to or by fire cautery in assembly, or with water according to what is before the chapter of cautery, and it is made either by incising and suturing, or by cauterization, according to what I will say.
It is necessary that you put the head of the sick person on your healthy one; then turn the paper of oil to your left hand.
if it is turned, that is good; if this is not so, then insert an awl into the whole of the upper limb. and whoever is on the margin of the paper or where the hair grows from these hairs, and take out the filament to above all the paper, and turn it by the razor;
then make in the part below the paper, below the hairs near them, all along the spatulum, copying from the great line to the little.
then take out the filament, and put under the paper a small tent of linen and drapery, then draw up on the paper an image of an incision, like the spindle of myrtle, so that it is fitting according to the quantity you see extract the paper which is drawn all over.
And if to one who has need, we put together great quantity of the paper according to how soft the paper is.
then make it all over the spectrum of paper on both lines that you signed and begin with great care just a little. and let one of the cuts be near the natural hairline in the growth of a root, then pour on it in one of the two corners marked with the letter, then scorch it entirely.
then sew the two lips together with an arrow of an awl to all the fine thread of wool, and let out the blood, and make dry the surplus of hairs on both eyelids at all sticky things, if you see this being done;
And if this is not the case, if you do not have treatment, then leave the wound and hairs for three days or four.
Then treat the wound with sutures of dried and tied things, for the paper comes alive at the moment of the wound and its assembly, but the thread is worn out (as they say the old ones), and it's work that causes fear. and if in another way:
and if in another way: and so that you mark the paper of a figure like the root of myrtle, as we have said, three inches in thickness according to the shape which is here:
Then cut off the thing that is surmounting them equally according to their form.
And if you do not have the power to hold the pliers and things are not even, then prick with a needle or take one thread, and bind the paper around the figure: and cut I another strand of hair from the great temple, and the second strand from the small one, and join them together equally between your two hairs.
then raise your hand equally, and raise all the skin where you have stitched, just as we have described, then assemble both lips of the wound by suture, and treat until it is healed.
and if an abscess comes to your incision, then soothe it with cerote and similar salve healing.
and at no time has the hair of the paper been converted.
so it is fitting to use what we have said about the incision;
but the stitching in one and the other is more artificial.
The healer of the wounds does so according to this form: and then convert the paper and the flesh into flesh according to what you said, and then do two wounds by art, and two subtle ligatures also as long as the paper and the width of the span of a finger are; and strike at two joints, on each side where you hold the thread;
then join both together subtely above what overhangs from the paper of the oil, and strain the two wounds from each side forming; and let him be thus for some days, and the skin that is strained will wither and turn red and become dry, just as it does by itself.
If late, if the patient has some strength, then treat them until they are well.
And when the wound is healed and the paper (wound covering) is lifted, and no longer will they hurt.
And that is the shape of two channels which you will make according to this figure and according to this length and width:
the openings are such that you take a sharp needle and insert a fine thread of silk into it; then assemble the channels and do not insert one or both of them sharply, but so that the lengths of the threads are about a palm's length.
then put another fine thread of silk in the chase briefly, and no the thicker threads.
Then put the patient's head on your healthy one;
and let it be clear by the sun, for this is a subtle and small wound, then plunge the needle into the entire field on the root of the attached hair, and pierce through the paper hastily until you bring it out above the natural hair.
Then pull out the hair until you reach the needle, and pour from the needle that hair, if there are one or two or three or more of them;
Then pull out your hand until the hairs have reached the entire length with the needle in the paper along with the natural hair.
And if the needle is treated and the hairs do not come out with it, then pull the needle downward to the end of the thread that you have ordered, until the needle reaches through the holes above and you see it by the sight of the oil.
Then therefore take out the arrow and the thread, and pour on the oil and let it be left for two or three days until the hair grows in its place and the arrow comes up.
and if the hairs are small, then take along one long hair from each knee, and lift it up with that which you leave, until they grow out and then lift them.
of the oil's rot When this illness is called "aleacrati" or putrefaction comes into the oil, there are two kinds of it.
one natural, and the other unnatural.
And happens suddenly by a wound, or incision, or cauterization, and by similar things.
And the treatment for it is that you break the adhesion, and dress the lips, and put in linen tents, and keep them until they are healed.
and therefore it is not suitable to use only this method when treating sick things that contract and constrict. For if you do this, the disease will return worse than before.
but works of things that soften, as fenugreek; and when rose water or ale and seed of flax are cooked, and ointments made from melted diyaquilon in any of the oils, and a tent is covered with it, this cure.
And the treasures of your cure are that you should guard yourself not to corrupt them in any way according to their former form;
and these works that we have said are not fire but rather a mere description of this disease, which will not return according to its former form.
This disease which is under that name "axacrati", and is truly called "accident" by nature.
The accident comes from a wound and a cut, and a cautery, and similar things.
And the vein of the work is that you pierce an awl, with a thread double in it, and strike it into the flesh, and you make it pierce from the left shoulder joint as far as the right, so that the thread runs through two joints of the arm;
then stretch the flesh above all the way to the top of the awl, and strike with the broad blade. And if the mark on the paper returns as it should be, that's good.
if that doesn't happen, take the razor and put it into the cut, and turn the paper, and make two cuts on one side inside the paper;
And let the ends of the two incisions be tied to the two corners of the cut you have made, and make one angle so that when they are assembled, the figure will be just like the figure of the letter 'I' from which "I griesche" is derived.
then cover the wound with cartilage, according to the quantity of its ribs that are above the skin, as if it were a paper, and then add the two parts of what is needed, and tie the ends with a thread of linen.
then apply the treatment of those that we have said about medicinal powders, and poultices, until he is healed.
And if the disease comes from a cut or a seam or a cauterization, then it is fitting that you make a clean cut below the hair of the skin on the paper, and according to what was said before; Then cut through between the second and third fingers of a tent, as I have said;
Then cut through between the second and third fingers of a tent, as I have said; And one must make the work according to the form of the disease, for it is very diverse in shape, and the wise masters will take out from any kind of poor power how he can restore the figure to its natural form;
And the patients themselves, according to those things that they need of work and treatments for more numerous conditions.
When this wound has occurred in the fingers in such a way that the paper above is sewn with the white of oil, and cannot move or do its natural works, then you must if necessary, put the point of a rasp over the paper and lift it up.
And let the extent be pinched, as long as you copy what is astringent on the subtle spoon, which should not be too harsh or too thin, so that the patient cannot suffer from the spoon being too harsh or causing the oil to congeal;
And let your incision be, so that you do not scorch the assembled flesh lightly, according to its natural form;
And let it heal completely the assembled flesh, and there be no occurrence of pus in the oil, and let it be raised with a mild broth, and vinegar.
Then put a linen cloth between the paper and the oil, and place on it the oiled woolen linen soaked in plenty of wine; And after three days, apply with vinegar and other urgent remedies until it is healed.
The joint has two kinds: It is either nervous and seems to have the color of dried mud, or it is not nervous but seems frozen with dampness, so that when touched with iron and handled like a splinter, it will not yield.
And both of them seem to be advancing towards the great veins, and grow little by little until they cover the whole eye and all the light, and the movement of the oil.
And there is the way of incising it that when a patient places his head on a healthy one, then he opens his eyes. And lift the paper to his hand, then pinch the joint with small stitches of double-needle and spread it upward. Now take a needle, and put it into the hair of a horse, or an ass, or a bull, and pull it tight. and double the point of the needle slightly and push it into the hair of the body, and pierce all the way through the nail, and tie off the nail with a thread and stretch it up high, and scrape down to the entire length of the hair where the prickly hairs meet the smooth hairs just above the head, then cut the remaining part from the root of the armpit to the base of the neck, using subtle movements and small forces, and leave the natural color of the arm, so that by the incision there is no bleeding from the eyes as is commonly accustomed;
and at times they stretch only the nail and the thread, as we have said. Then the scrape is applied to the entire surface of the scab, as this is the form:
And beware that the scab does not touch the raw skin and break it, and the wound is not perceived.
and after the incision, put a little powder of flaxseed in oil on it, and apply a poultice to the neck, and let it remain until the next day. and then take care of him so that he may be healed.
And if the ingrown nail is not sensitive, and you cannot push the nail, and the nail cannot be inserted, then this appearance of an ingrown nail can often be cured with medicine.
and they grow so that I have told them in the division, and if you see it covered, let oil be applied to the patient, and take the spoon with gentle touch according to this shape: And remove the ingrown from beneath subtly, and if you see that it is not reducing at all and the reason is pressed, let distill from your mouth into the oil mixture made of litargire and red collander and heat the oil just as yesterday;
If nothing opposes you in the oil, like an abscess on your foot, then let the pus, and cure the abscess first so it is healed, and then resume the work as before, until it is healed.
then resume the other work according to this same procedure, until it is all bony.
And if the appearance of the fatty tissue with the scab in the oil causes great suffering, and they suspend it to the tumor, and cut off a part not too much, so that no blood from the wounds comes;
Then distill in oil of collier's red, which is made from litarge.
Are some men born with no red color, and covered by a mole, restrained in the papers and torn under the protection, and seem like a rose of balaste.
and if the wounds are thus that the patient puts his head on your healthy one, then he opens the eyes, and cools all that char has useful needles for it, and supports with strength.
then cuts the first char, and goes copating to the rasping tool just until the end, and keeps you so that you do not bleed on the wound.
and if the incision of the spatulum is such that we have said in the incision of the ungula and with little force because one oeste himself so soon as the form after this chapter demonstrates;
And when the incision is completed and all of the flesh has been removed, apply oil of silk or distill cordial red wine and similar corrosive medicines, and put on the oil with a clean cotton cloth wrapped around it;
But if it does not take effect, and the flesh is bare and you suspect a severe infection, then leave the oil and treat the infection with soothing medicines.
Then return to your work once you are certain that it is healed, and then tie the char ( likely referring to a type of bandage or wrapping ) in oil by this appearance.
But it is necessary that you lighten the treatment of each person, as the weak oil has been found to follow the natural way. And from an accidental vein, as a result of iron.
and do not put your hand on any of these wounds until you see that this limb is suffering as a result of the wound.
These veins are red and covered on the eye's surface, and they tolerate their injury and weaken the eye every day.
It is thus in the first instance that you must look to see if the skin is inflamed, whether it is red, swollen, and there are no other diseases but inflammation. and then cut the flesh in this manner:
command the patient to put his head on your sound cheek, then suspend those veins all over the skin according to his wisdom, and let the subtle ones be doubled in this form:
And let them be two on each side according to this form:
then cut with force those subtle veins, and sew the wound an hour after another, until you see remove those fiery veins from the flesh.
And keep in mind that the hairs at their base are not to be pinched until they grow long.
and when you have done this, if you mix the oil with green and red colicerver to destroy what is left in the wound.
and if you do not have the power to cleanse all of this in that hour, then apply a plaster on the oil with soothing things to alleviate the pain of the eyes, and let it remain for some days until the pains are alleviated and there is no more swelling, then resume according to this manner till you become healed.
and this is the form of the forces:
The mire is called "arissati" fistula:
How you cure her by cautery and with medicine burning hot according to what I have previously said, and she is not healed, if there is an infection in it that you cut open above the abscess, where it must die, and extract all the moisture that is in it, until the bones are exposed.
And when the bones are exposed and you see the corruption and blackening, if there is the form of that which is now
and it is called "aspère chief", and it should be made of fire into the chief region, and pointed as sharp as a nail just as if it were in this present form:
And put the sharp instrument on the bone that has corrupted, then turn it between your two hands, and press your hand firmly enough so that you know that this corruption is healed:
and do this every time, then restore the limb with medicinal extracts.
if the limb is swollen, and it festers, and the bowels are swollen, and remain so for 40 days, and do not heal or swell, and no great accidents come to pass, then you know that they are healed.
but if this does not happen, then there is no other treatment than to return the fistula to its natural position according to this form: and that you uncover the bone the second time with iron, and with sharp medicines, and when it heals, uncover it so that it is as it should be, and fix the iron pin in three angles, and thin out the fistula just until the head of the chest.
After the fire cautery, instruct the patient to put on the plaster over the wound, and then remove your hand from it for a little while, then turn all around until you find the bone and feel the malady because he holds his hand under his chin;
and then restore the patient's life with dry medicines as I have taught you, and when the head and flesh have hardened like that, he will eat the material under his chin; if it is a lighter thing for the patient.
When the eye is open all the time, and it does not come to disturb or ease the pain, then you must tie the patient down;
then dress it, then put ventouses or haters on to harm because of the bleeding, then put oil made of ice and aloe and incense and sarcocolle, and then strain the oil, and apply plaster to wounds with bandages and cloth;
And the manner of dressing wounds is that you take soft cloths and wrap them around each other in four folds, and then place one on top of the other according to how many the limbs have need.
then tie with a hard bandage under and reapply the ventooses to suck out since injuring.
then remove the ventooses and let the oil stay tightened day and night, and if you tie him in a bowstring, then it is convenient to tighten him much.
then untie the bowstring after day and night, and if you see the oil repaired, it is good.
if not; if so, then reapply the plaster and the cloths and tie the bowstring and the ventooses until he is healed.
A drop of blood from a vein. When discharges come into the eye, then open, and there comes out of the papers as when grains of resin, and it is unbelievable to see;
And therefore if you cover the eye, the operations are such that you insert a needle into the root of the part from which the hairs come down to that point above; and then you insert another needle where there is a double thread at the corner of the tear. and pierce it, and leave the first needle according to its position;
then cut the thread with the double fiber and tie a part of the eye shut, and hold it well, then pull out the needle and put oil on linen moistened in abundance of water;
and let it remain until the fibers stick to the eye, then apply the oil to comforting things until the wound is healed;
and sometimes the wound is restrained by the urine from each part of a circular cloth, until it is healed.
And if the eyes have great appearance, then cut with a sharp instrument at the corner of the spur that emerges from the puncture made in the oil-filled canal and flowing along the white pus and descending into the eye, and enter immediately.
and then extract it until it is healed.
This illness called "alcanatti" is not from fire only when the bowel is filled with oil, resembling cold water flowing down, but it's not truly cold water.
and the manner of its appearance is that you should make the patient lie on an specially prepared chair and straight, then take the head in your hands two parts, and pull it until you see the bowel coming up to your eyes; Then let it settle, and do not remove or draw out and be scattered the light, so that you can see the patient's condition as usual.
and if they do not come out at the right time, know that it is an infection, and when there are bleeding from the mouth without being prepared as we said.
so sit the patient between your hands, then take the fine spoon and make it up to the thin membrane above by continuing the connection of the membrane with the membrane and the crown, until the mouth opens.
and when it is drawn out, if it is taken and distilled in hot oil mixed with honey or in hot or fenugreek broth and honey, then the patient is treated again until they are cured.
of the oil's water. We have the same signs as water in the division, and this is what you need to pierce. if it is according to health.
It is necessary that you sit the patient between your hands and cross them with fires of light from the sun, and bind the good oil tightly.
then put the paper of oil on your left hand if his eyes are to the left, or on your right hand if they are to the right.
then take in your right hand if his eyes are to the left, the instrument called "almagda", or in your left hand if they are to the right.
Instruct the patient to put the point of the instrument into the crown by the size of a finger in that bald place on the head where oil is placed near the smaller arm, then pour the instrument called 'almagda' into it wisely, and turn your hand until it pierces into the oil-filled bald place, and feel as almagda comes to the empty thing;
and it is fitting that the measure of the instrument almagda be the full width of the space from the prunella leaf to the end of the neck; and this is the oil crown;
if you see the bone in that paper by the clarity of the eye cornea, and then put the instrument next to it where there is water, and press out from one side after another.
If the pain of this affliction has now descended upon him, then let him see the patient in front of him and the instrument in his hand.
After resting for a little while, and if the pain returns, place the force with the instrument, and when it is fixed and does not rise again, gently pull out as much of the pus as possible by turning your hand little by little.
and then put in water a small amount of the powdered gemstone, and rinse out that oil within. Then put the oil out by spilling or pouring a clean cloth soaked in olive oil and plenty of lye, and bind with the pure oil.
So too, and those of our age, let us put on a common balm with plenty of lye.
If the magenta cannot enter into the oil by its hardness, because it has two people who have too hard eyes, so you should take the instrument called "alberit", of which there is this form:
And then pierce the conjunctiva only, and do not go too deep, but make it subtle, and then pour out pus, as we have said;
and when the work is completed, the doctor attends to it, in case the patient falls asleep on his back in the dark room;
and let him be without any movements, and give him light food, and do not turn his head or arm to the left or right, and tie according to his disposition as if it were three days.
Then let him put it back in the same dark place where he found it, and look at his eyes, and show him some things, and then tie up the wound for seven days.
and it is not for you to do this in the surgeon's office or after the incision now, but rather to alleviate that, because the pain rises quickly.
if an abscess has come upon the wound, that you put it back into place on the seventh day, and follow the advice of one who knows how to treat abscesses.
and when it is allayed, you put back his eyes and apply some oil to cover his face for one day, and place him in that same dark room.
And then he goes to visit her little by little, and she converts herself for her case;
and knows that no disciples should intervene in this case. And there came one of us who was from the Irrach, who told us that in some distant land someone made a magical piercing to cure the water, but I have never seen it or known about it in our country, nor did I find any mention of it in ancient books. and by chance it is a new thing.
And this are the appearances of magical forms, because they who do not know them see them.
and seem to be of pure matter: And the heads of the same subtlety, and the backs in threefold angle.
No times are born or occur without some joint being dislocated, of which there are many that seem like scorpions at the end.
and if there is one where it has a scorpion-like joint with red flesh and another with yellowish bone. Therefore when that one scorpion is soft and not swollen, it is necessary to sit the patient between your hands facing the sun.
Therefore when that one scorpion is soft and not swollen, it is necessary to sit the patient between your hands facing the sun. and cover their nostrils, and let the pus run from those scorpions. then take hold of it with a small spoon so fine that it can be held firmly on one side until you know that the scorpion is completely dried.
If there is no remaining part that can be covered, if you apply all the subtle treatments lightly, so that nothing remains. But if it does not swell or form an abscess, if you cut as it seems.
And if it's malignant abscesses, cut hastily and cauterize as long as the flesh is not stained and are all charred bones, then pour vinegar or wine. If the vomit comes and moisture enters just to the face, it is a sign that he is cured.
And if moisture does not penetrate as it should, notice that there is bone marrow left in the bones above, because the humors do not come to cut.
And thus it is convenient to put a small thread of flax in the wound, with needles made of wood, and let no space be left between each one, for it must be at least. and put the head of the patient with the thread in his nose for a little while, and treat with an odorant until it comes out through the nostrils.
and often this is done to children at school, and it's a light thing for the one who does it;
then hold the head that comes through the nose with one hand, and the other head that comes through the mouth with the other hand, and examine each in turn by smelling as we are near the thread.
Do this until you know that the flesh is not corrupted by it, then pull out the thread, clean the wound, and anoint the thread with Egyptian ointment, and place it back in its original position as before.
Do this for three days or more, until the ligaments have completely rotted away whatever is left of the flesh.
And then apply a poultice of poultice made from onions for some days until it is healed, and if he needs dried remedies, he should use them.
And this is the form of the instrument to purify the head, because one distills the oils and the medicines or poultices:
And it should be of silver or lead, resembling a lamp with an opening, like a poultice, and the application should be similar:
and if it is a poultice, then make one closed and apply the instruments to purify the head.
and have the maiden hold the head by the hair so it does not touch when one is pouring hot oil or any liquid.
Of the flesh at the neck
Often there is a disease in the head that is called "telul", and it grows and becomes great boils, until one sees something to behold;
and for this reason it is fitting to apply the treatment at first and destroy all the bone, then put on him the cautery or burning medicine;
and if one delays applying the treatment until it becomes large, then take care to prevent its hardness, of red color, poor sense:
if one does not touch it with iron because it is an enchanted abscess, for when one cuts it, there comes great mischief to the patient.
and if the abscess is of a painful touch, not red from blood, and you see what it can be covered, then void the patient and look at the wound with fear, and treat him with dry things and restrain.
It is known that when a solution of continued continuity comes from one of these old cartilages, it profits little, whether in some men.
it is therefore necessary to look if this happens to anyone, if you examine whether the wound is fresh with all its blood. and then add two stitches to the lip, and treat him until he is healed.
and if the lips are separated on both sides, it is necessary that you burn all the parts of their wound until they heal, then assemble the two lips with a stitch, and tie, and powder above powder of dragon's blood and bruised incense. and place the powders on a piece of plaster or another kind of plastering material sealing it up, and leave it until it sticks to him, then treat with plasters until he is healed.
The way of suturing if you have to assemble: or with needles, as we said in the suturing of the belly. or by thread, as I have told you before.
of swellings of the lips
Inside the mouth there is an abscess, resembling grains of rice, sometimes small and sometimes large.
so therefore you must return the lips and cut each one out, and take it with forceps and pierce into each part.
Then apply the liquid to the wound after the vitreolite incision breaks, until it is stained.
and then the astringent of asphodel, and cure the wound with drying things until it is healed.
Often swelling occurs on the gum after the procedure called "albulus".
if it is fitting to hold the swelling with tongs, and cut at its root, and allow the flow or the blood;
then put on the wound the broken vitreolite, or other restraining and drying powders;
and if that one returns after the incision, and often happens, when you cut it again, and cauterize. If it does not return to its original place after the fire cautery;
Never are assembled at the head of the teeth within the mouth between the gums, rough and painful scales; And sometimes the teeth are black and yellow and wormy, until the corruption comes to the gum, and the teeth rot.
If it is fitting to make the patient sit between your hands, and their flesh be in your holy place, and if you remove the teeth or scales appear, as long as nothing remains there; And do thus for the blackness and green, and yellow and other stains, until they are cleansed;
And if one knows that there is at the first reason, it is good; If this does not work, continue to repeat the second day and the second time, until you have gained all back;
and learn that the teeth have need of different forms of instruments to clean, according to what the work shows, because the raspers who have shaved the front teeth have other forms than those who have shaved between the teeth; And these forms and others are provided for you.
It is necessary to cure the tooth when it is in pain as long as you delay treatment, as much as you can, because this must not be done at all; It is a very high substance, so we have no excuse for the fault.
Therefore when the patient is forced to have treatment, it is necessary that you be certain about the tooth's quality. Often does the pain trouble the patient, and consider it to be of a saintly nature, and treat the good tooth. and every remedy will not dispel the pain, as long as the foul discharge is present, because we have already wanted to do those remedies with these physicians;
and when you are certain of the tooth that is infected, it is advisable to scorch around the entire tooth with a small, strong instrument to prevent the gum from spreading in all parts;
then the tooth will be cut with your two fingers or small tongs at first to clean them well, and then firmly hold the tongs; And so let the joints of the patient rest between your own bones, and his body well if it does not move.
After extracting the right tooth directly into the fracture, and if it does not shoot through, take any of these instruments and pour them inside each part lightly, and move it as you have done first.
And if the teeth are perceived and broken, it is fitting that you fill them with fabric, in or where they are broken. and if you tie tightly with nails, so that it does not break while being tied.
and it is fitting to apply a great deal of care over the gum for cutting the tooth.
And take care well that you do not break it, and leave a part of it, and return to the patient by the pain in the root, for greater pains than before.
And beware that you do not do thus as the ignorant masters who by their haste and by their recklessness break the chain, and bring forth nothing but what we have told.
but sometimes bring forth nothing but through the stench of this great disease because of the roots that remain, or by breaking the chain, as we have often wished.
And when the teeth are thrashed, so wash the tooth with wine or apple cider and salt.
and if the wound closes with blood coming from it, which often happens, then apply vinegar to cut it.
and if this does not work, so cauterize.
The forms of ulcers are such that when you first treat the teeth with them, they have long pointed tips and large claws, which do not spread when pulling out the tooth.
and these are: And they should have large limbs if they do not bend when pulled out, and they should be made of iron well-made, and have teeth to hold.
from the root of the tooth When the root stays at the operation site, it is advisable to put some cotton soaked in butter on the wound one day or two, until it becomes moist; and you take hold of the tongs which are called "algefri", because the joint seems like a mouth for care.
and they are cut out in this way, as if by a file and it's the shape:
And if the roots do not want to emerge at all these ties, so it is fitting that you uncover the whole root under which is the tie, and put the instrument which is called "althali", namely plain lance, in order that it is this form:
And so if it's rough and large if it doesn't break, and if the root jumps at this point, that is good;
if these do not work, then take aid with all the tools, so that the forms come afterwards:
And if you help with this instrument which has two roots, that's the form: and other instruments which are in front on the reason of the teeth, and of this instrument which resembles large pincers, that's the form:
And if this tool is so strong that it cannot break, and you see that much of the bone remains; and also of other symptoms, which are not described;
and the wise masters of subtle arts treat themselves with their own instrument, according to what their works and illnesses show, because there are some diseases for which they do not teach any instrument, in case of breaking or other bones, or if it splits, since I told you so, and showed you how to seek symptoms, where is the form:
And let them be large and well-fitting to hold the bone, which will not slip, but can hold and remove;
and then restore the healing medicine suitable to each one, and if there is rot in the bone, even if it is small, if you have all this instrument;
When the teeth appear not in their natural place and the form is ugly, and even in young girls, it is necessary to know if the teeth are new after the tooth, and are not in their proper position, and you cannot put them there.
so that the edge can be made straight. and if it is hard with the tooth, take this instrument that has the same shape as the small beak, and is made of good iron.
And the file touches and touches in every jaw for the hardness of the tooth, and because you do not move the other teeth, and if it appears as if it can be sorted, take a piece of file as is its shape:
and is just like the flint with which one makes nails;
and in flint, the tooth breaks and breaks with small blows until it doesn't move anymore.
then the surface is smooth at the end, and if the teeth are too sharp and it bites the tongue, in order to equalize them so that they don't bite the tongue anymore or corrupt the speech.
When the teeth are in the lock, or by percussion or falling, and the patient cannot press on that which he bites down with so much pain, and you have treated them with medicine-restraining, and this does not work;
if they are restrained with a thread of gold, because the silver threads rot and decay, but the gold does not move at all;
and let the thread be neither too thick nor too thin, in proportion to the space between the teeth;
and if you see the teeth, take the thread and double it between two healthy teeth, then tie the knots between the injured teeth, as many as there are, until you reach with precision to the sound tooth on the other side; Then resume the covering from just where you started, and strain your hand carefully and gently, until it does not move.
and let your limb be tied to the root of the tooth if he cannot escape.
Then cut the flesh of the thread with pliers, and assemble them, and put them between the healthy tooth, and set it so that it does not hit the tongue.
and then let it set as tight as it can endure, and if he dislodges, or the threads come out, if they are strained with another thread;
if it remains and serves as such for all its duration, and this is the form of the teeth and the shape of the address of two healthy teeth, and two missing ones, if you observe:
And when a tooth falls out, so he puts it back in its place, fresh as fresh, just like we said;
and do not let anyone interfere who is not wise and knowledgeable, for at no time was the shape of a tooth made from raw bone, rather he puts it back in its place where the deficiency is, and strains it as we have said, and leaves it there until it heals.
Never is a swelling that comes from under the tongue or by nature, as one is born. or by accident of a burned wound;
and the wounds are such that you open the mouth of the sick person, and lift their head onto a healthy one, and lift the tongue;
After the cautery, instruct the patient to tie the nerves tightly around the big joint, until the tongue is loosened from its place, and if there are hard swellings or wounds, and it causes sudden pain, then pour oil and strike at the big joint.
and be careful that the cut is not too deep in the middle part, for the artery which is below.
and when you have done that, lift the limb into warm rose water and oil, or cold water, then place the tongue on a linen bandage.
and let the patient with each night lie still in his bed so that he cannot get up.
and if there is bleeding from the wound, then put on the limb vitriol, which is a burn. and if they do not take their medicine, then the cautery burns gradually, which is good for those who. then the doctor prescribes another treatment until they are cured.
and if you see a black or red color or hardness, so that the patient does not feel it, and do not touch it at all, because it is a chancre;
and if it is leaning towards pus and there is moisture, then take the lump out, and make a cut with a small spatula, and deliver it from one side and the other; and if they do not take their medicine at the right place, then put vinegar drops on it until it is stained, and return to the right place until you treat them thoroughly;
Then lift up the limb from the ailment and the disease, and let the healer do other treatments until it is healed.
Evacuation of abscesses from the throat There is no occasion for a throat pouch called "goddath", and properly calling it the two tonsils, and when treating them, as we have said in sectioning, if they are not healed, be cautious:
If it is hard abscesses of small sense and fusel color, do not touch it with iron.
And if it is red and the root is big, do not touch it with iron, for the same reason as avoiding blood loss. but let it be left to wither until it dies, and then you will cut it, for if you do not, it will burst on its own.
and if it is of white color and the root is subtle, and you have prepared the instrument to cover, but first examine whether the apertures are closed and smoothed.
Therefore place the patient in front of the sun, and let his joints be in order, and he opens his mouth, and presses the surgeon's finger between his hands, so that this is the form.
and it should be of silver or subtle gold, as we use cutlery;
Press the tongue against all this instrument, and you see the abscess, if you pick it on with a needle and the lancet into the almond, and pull out further than you can.
And take no cloth with you, then cut with the instrument, for this is the form, which seems like force; And all the nails are bent, and one at a time, and they are very good, and made of iron or of bronze;
And if you do not have this instrument, cut with shears, so that it is the shape: And it is cut in one way from one side, and another way from the other side.
And when you have cut one of the apothecary's nails, cut the other in the same manner, and after incision, gargle the patient with hot and cold water, and with sweet vinegar, and with dried pomegranate rinds or myrtle leaves, and similar things, until the wound is cleansed; Then the cure must be completed until they are healthy.
And sometimes new abscesses are born in the throat other than those on the two mandrakes, if they tie them up then just like the two mandrakes tied.
And I treated a woman with an abscess that was present in the throat, namely the small abscess.
And I had tightly closed the whole throat, so that the woman could not breathe through the canal that was blocked, and she could neither eat nor drink, and she died if she stayed like that for one or two days.
And the abscesses were so high that they had been put in two wounds on either side of the navel.
I then had it removed, and inserted one onion, then put in the fire, and a great portion of bowel;
Then fix another part in the other perforated vein, and let the work proceed on the neck, and pressure is applied to the tongue.
After injecting one into the abscesses, and cutting a part of it, only a little blood is drawn out. And after thus, the conduct of the throat was cut out in the woman, and now she began to drink cool water and then wine, and did not cease cutting at that abscess for a long time.
And the abscesses would recur later, and filled up the space that I had emptied, until it became very large;
So then I placed it and cauterized inside the throat; The body retains its shape longer;
And separate from these parts, and do not know but that God has made them for me.
Of the ulcer
When it comes down to the vein, and it is folded back and it is long, then it is called "perpendicular".
and if she is too large and rounded, then it is called "vein".
When it is cut just as we have said in the division, and the cure does not profit from it, and you see that the pus has been appeased, and it is subtle, then it is fitting to copy it;
and that which is rounded together and not long. And she is bloody or of a foul color or black, so it is best to remove the incision. For there is great risk on the patient.
It is therefore necessary, when you see it, according to the manner that I have said, of its size and length, to sit the patient in front of the sun, and press his tongue against the instrument with which we made the reminder before. Then insert the needle into the vein, and draw it out, and strike at the second and third points that I have said in the incision of the two almonds.
And it is best that you do not strike further than the surface that is beyond the natural limit;
for if you strike too far, it will cause pain to the voice and speech.
And after the incision, make use of what we have said about the incising of two almonds, and treat the patient until they are healed.
And if the patient has fear of cutting, it is fitting that you use an engine at the cautery of their fearful senses.
The manner of the cautery is like water. And thus the patient puts their head on the healthy one, and then presses the tongue against the instrument which we have said about in this cautery, and compresses it with warm vinegar cloth, so that it is neither too thick nor too thin. and in using the head of this instrument, because there is the shape:
And they put one of their hairs or on the head, and apply the medicine, like the hairs of a spoon, and place the instrument over all the medicine on the eye.
and the patient is lying on their side, so that the saliva and mucus run from his mouth into the medicine within it, without descending to the throat or the spleen;
Instruct the patient to keep their hand in all of the medicine and press upon the eye, the quantity of a quarter of an hour, until you see it congealed and the bites of the medicine are appeased.
And if you see (it congeal), take cotton and spread it upon any instrument, and moisten the cotton in the medicine, and pour the instrument into the cotton canal, until the cotton adheres to the eye.
and do this frequently, until the cauterization is complete, then leave it to dry, and cast it after 4 days or 5.
And if you have need to reapply the cauterization of the medicine, if it recurs, and after applying the cauterization wipe under the eye with cotton soaked in butter, and cleanse what is around the medicine;
and let them arise from cold water, and let them be cured of gargarems until they are sane.
This cure is more safe than the incision, although it is cauterization.
for when she is cured by fumigation according to this manner, take calamint and hyssop and origanum and rue and camomile and avrune and similar herbs, and gather them all or any of them in one pot, and add them easily, and boil.
and the pots should be well-glued with strong earth, and in each pot there is an instrument of head according to this manner: And be it of silver or of tin, and one of the fingers be plunged into the mouth of the patient until the vapour mounts to the eye through the nostril, until the eye is suffocated;
After the thing is reattached, it often happens again and again until the wound dries out, and you must be careful not to do this at the beginning of a new abscess, because many things happen there. and do not do this unless at the decline of an acute abscess.
And if this instrument is not present, take a needle and insert it into the patient's mouth with an arrow of fire, so that the tongue does not become too inflamed; because the arrow of fire does not give too much grease to the mouth, and this is a good remedy for salvation.
Sometimes it affects the throat as if it were pierced with an arrow or a fish spine, or with nothing.
So it is fitting that you treat what you can see, and press the tongue against the sun to all the instruments, so that you may see how things move.
And what cannot be seen and is returned to the throat, it is fitting that you make the patient vomit so that the meat is cooked in the stomach. In case the thing becomes dry through vomiting;
or the patient swallows a piece of sponge, or a piece of cake, or a root of lettuce, or dry bread. and tie the string to the sponge, and then fasten it. and when she comes to the right place, if you see blood, and then pierce her.
and if it does not come from what we have said, take an instrument of a plug according to this form:
And if the curved instruments are in the head so that they can more easily enter into the throat, and hold the head high. and beware that you do not touch the epiglottis, lest all the blood come out, or push the bone inside.
and make sure that the patient pushes the instrument in, because he must see if it is moist or if the thing is rough. if she pushes it out, or tries to push it for the length of the entire instrument, equal in all.
from the cauterizing of the throat
never is medicine given without some medicine, as I said in the division, by the cure of medicines; When it does not profit at all, then look into the throat of the patient to the sun, then press the tongue against the instrument that I told you.
And if you see the wound open, then if it has just one small thread or has very fine nails.
But if that does not work, then take a candle hair, and pour it into the patient's throat, and pour or burn the length of the iron hot, and do this often. And if the patient is poisoned with water every day.
then take full measure of cold water, and open the mouth, and let the liquid move to the tongue with frequent movements. and if it is quick for the patient who feels the cold, then vomit.
and if she does not vomit as we have said, then perfume the patient with asafoetida at the instrument I told you about in the fumigation of the nose;
do this many times, because she will vomit with tar.
And the method of fumigation is that you hold a pot in which there are charcoal sticks, and place it covered with a sieve pierced in the middle, and in that hole, tie the handles of the instrument;
Instruct the patient to perform his own treatment; and let the head of the cane be placed in his mouth, and close the mouth, so that he does not inhale any smoke, but comes from just outside the nose.
and now the smoke will come out again, and if it does not come out, then repeat the fumigation many times.
and the patient suffers from thirst, and eats bitter, salty things, and does not drink any water.
and therefore the treatment is that it should be endured for this government.
And the shape of the instrument used to treat the abscess, which is, when it can be seen, similar to curved tongs with pointed fingers that enter the throat. And take the shape of the beak of the patient, and it has roughness like a knife, so that whatever is taken, it cannot be released;
Many forms of abscesses are found, according to those who have seen them both here and there in this book, and they vary in perforation and size;
and this is in two ways, one of which is the same as itself, and due to moisture.
And the second kind is for when they are inside or in the body.
Because the abscesses of the head are different from those in the lower body, and the abscesses in the thigh bone are different from those that come into joints, and each has its own judgment in the work.
And if there is no need to pierce an abscess until the bowel is completely dead according to its completion;
And if some of them require piercing while they are believed to be dead, and do not die according to their completion, like abscesses that occur between joints.
For when an abscess comes from the joint, and it is left until it is putrid in that place, by chance if the ligament and nerve of the joint are corrupted, because this is the cause of contraction in that limb.
Where the abscess is located near the main limb, and if you delay the perforation until it dies, it will harm the main limb.
where the ground is weakened so that if you cut into it now it will die.
and it is not fitting to cut an abscess where the ground has already been weakened for digestion, but rather when you are sure that the ground will collapse, because if you cut into it now it will burst open and a fistula will form. and cannot be cured in great time.
and it is necessary to know the nature of the perforation of the abscess which dies according to its fulfillment, and this is when the pain is relieved, and the discharge of fever, and the diminishment of pain and redness, and the softening and sharpness of the chief of the abscess, and other signs.
and it is necessary to situate the puncture or further down from the abscess, and where it opens wounds;
and the puncture is long in the body, and if the abscesses are near the hands or feet, or joints, or nerves, or arteries, so that they do not have a vein. When this part is swollen, according to that member.
And when an abscess is in the groin, so that you value (value to leave) the perforation until it is confirmed to be completed digestion accomplished, as we have said.
For if you pierce in front of that, the body will swell with the venom from it, and is full of much filth. and in case they harden the lips and the innermost part of it.
And if an abscess is perforated according to the size of the body, according to that which the limbs have need.
and it is necessary to tie off small abscesses, small fistulas. and in large abscesses, large fistulas, and many fissures according to the size of the abscess.
And if there are such abscesses or it is necessary to cover the wound, and bind. when it has become so swollen that one cannot wrap it, and is deflated, then it is necessary to do the same way as for the boils.
and if some are cut into three parts, and some are cut as the wood of myrtle, just like abscesses from arrows.
and if some are treated with a round cut, and other cuts, and similar cutting.
Those without a head, like superficial abscesses, it is necessary to let them drain purely.
and it is necessary when the abscess is large and has collected a great quantity of pus, to let it drain, but not to extract all of it in one hour, but rather take only part of it. And then I have stopped up the abscess just yesterday, and then there was no discharge afterwards. Do this gradually step by step, as much as necessary, until the bowel is whole.
Similarly, if the patient has weak virtue, or a woman in childbed, or small children, or elderly men who are decrepit. But the expectation is that it will not occur again at all with the outcome of the bowel, lest by chance the patient dies, and you do not take consolation.
Then avoid this chapter with great care, and when you have pierced the abscess, if it is a wound, and examine whether the wound of the abscess is small. and if it's a flat suture, then insert tapes of linen or old cotton. and if it's big abscesses and there is much pus, then it is convenient that you put one tape in each so that they come together.
And if you have struck a part of the abscess with your finger, and pulled it out, then it is advisable to fill it with old cotton or flannel cloth soaked in moisture, and tie it up just the next day;
and then the bones and the healer of wounds until he is sound.
And if blood comes out of the incision, sew it up with a moistened cloth and linen, and tie on over it repeatedly.
And if the veins persist in bleeding, then he must attend to governance and care, and the powders that I have said are in your hands in this book, and if it is winter, and the veins or abscesses are very nervous, then it is advisable to put on tourniquets and moist cloths soaked in wine and hot oil;
and if it is in this state, and the abscess is charred, then it is advisable to put on moist cloths soaked in water and oil, or wine and oil cold, just the next day, as we have said;
and then cut the abscess and clean it up and treat it, as needed, until it is healed.
And therefore it is necessary to investigate universally in the treatment of abscesses:
Or, I said that you must look before treating an abscess, and here is the chapter.
Where small abscesses come from on the head, and are of various kinds, like in cloth, just as those from a piece of cloth, or similar to those from a mouse's skin, and there are many such.
There are fatty areas and swellings where there is moisture just like in pus;
And there are swellings that are hard and stony to cut, and there is no doubt if the artery does not cause harm.
And the injuries of the groin are such that if you have found in all the instruments called "entremisoire", of which the shape comes after, what thing it contains.
Because if it contains moisture, they cut through with the long ones.
And when the moisture is empty, if it scorches and there is nothing left to spare the skin that contains the moisture, because it returns when you leave something.
After plunging cotton into Egyptian ointment if it is present. If not, then in water and in wool, apply the wound, and leave it until the next day. And those who are left after the night.
And then renew the cotton, as before, on the second day, and the wool, until you know that it will not stay for the night.
Then treat the wound with ointment suitable to it, until it is healed.
And if the abscesses do not burst out quickly, according to this form for a long time; And I pull out your nails, and I scrape off all the skin, and put all your treatment for drawing blood to relieve the chest where it is.
And if the arteries cause you harm, do what I have told you after.
And thus also do with the abscess if it is pained, and as you cut and cure as I have told you.
And the cutting on the painful abscess and the moisture, if it is lighter, because there is little blood. And if some of these abscesses or swellings have not been moistened and from those that I copied or swelled the head of an old woman;
and I found the abscess in the same way as a stone hard, rough and white, which cannot be broken; and if one of them has been burned, it is also as well done a wound as from a stone.
In other abscesses coming or swellings that come on the head of children and the roots of the ears, cut them so thoroughly for as long as possible before they reach a certain point, lest they burst.
and let the treatment proceed as it should.
often happen abscesses at the throat, and under the armpits, and in the groin, and sometimes appear elsewhere on the body, and are very painful, and join one with another.
And every abscess is located within its own place, just as the wound and the abscess on the head, just as we have said. and there are many similar abscesses.
and there are many similar abscesses. There are some that contain moisture, and some that are malignant and will not obey health.
in that one that you see has good disposition at the shoulder, and is similar to the color of the flesh, silent in all parts and not inflamed at any part or at the artery or vein, nor deeply penetrated.
if it suits to copy it from above, and scrape off each part, and make the two lips pale like veins, if you have need of that, just as we said in incising on the head.
And then the nail is pulled out little by little, and be sure that you do not touch the nerve or vein, and do not scrape the scab or scratch with needles, lest your hands falter, and see too far ahead, that you may cover more than you should.
And if you touch the vein or artery, and that does not stop, then put vinegar on the wound to break it, or some powder that congeals blood, and bind the wound. and let it be so long until the abscess is calmed down and the wound is muffled, and begins to form pus.
And when the bleeding has stopped, return to your work, until you complete it.
Now you wish to know if it will stay there without any small boils or sores, whether it will stop or continue.
And if it has a large vein at the root of the boil, so that you will not want to only cut off that boil in its root, but bind with a strong double thread and let it fall down without any trouble;
Then apply a dressing made of wool cloth soaked in Egyptian ointment and then treat the wound.
If you strike the scrofula, it is necessary to assemble the two lips of the wound, and sew them now, for there will be no more swelling because of the great size of the scrofula. if it is necessary that you understand to cut at the root of the thing, and apply force, and sew as we have said.
if it is necessary that you understand to cut at the root of the thing, and apply force, and sew as we have said. Those boils that have a tendency to burst open, cut into one where it is swollen.
and cut into it as was previously said, depending on the place, and then dress with linen cloth and similar things, so that it does not spread any further decay of what remains. And when the wound is well cleaned, then the treatment of binding with cloth until it heals.
They also told and spoke about cutting the throat. but I have never seen anyone in our land who did it, and that is the writing of their words.
For those who have strangulated, it is advisable that the cut of the throat called "epiglottis" be avoided. And do not provide help to those who have cut themselves in the mouth, or in the throat, or in both.
When the patient is in a state of purging, it is necessary to cover the epiglottis to escape the destruction that comes from strangulation.
Therefore, when we want to cut the epiglottis, we must cut it below three circles or four, one small cut through the middle, between the two circles or according to the size of the cut from the surface, not in the cartilage.
and those who are so sick are very convenient for the section of the epiglottis that there is no flesh, and the vessels are long in length.
And if the masters are fearful, it is advisable to extend the skin of the throat to the entire neck, then make a cut in the flesh until it comes to the cartilage. and avoid the vessels of blood, if you see anything, and then cut into the sac, just as we have said.
and it is shown by the section of the throat of the cartilage which comes out through the neck where the law has been broken, and by the failure of the voice;
and leave a scar over the wound.
And when the hour is past because of which we doubt strangulation, assemble both lips of the wounded place with a thread that is whole and soul to the cartilage;
Then administer medicines that make flesh swell until it becomes healthy.
But do not perform this operation until the throat is entirely stuffed and the patient is judged to be on the verge of death and has begun to fail. And thus you must tie the epiglottis because the patient cannot breathe, and he breathes through the wound, and so it is kept from death.
And because the ancients ordered to leave the wound open until the illness has passed, and it passes in three days or four, then they commanded to sew up the wound and treat it, until it was cured.
And I will tell you what I have seen. I saw that a young girl took out a knife, and stuck it in her throat, and cut off part of the neck hairs.
And I was called to cure her, and found her also dead.
I discovered the wound, and found out that blood had come out of it, and I knew well that she hadn’t cut into a vein or carried it to her neck, but that the veins had burst out through the wound.
I regretted it, and sewed the wound, and cured her until she was healed;
and it happened to the girl that her voice became hoarse, and she returned to her normal state;
because of which I thought that there was no fear in the opening of the epiglottis.
This abscess is called a "gallstones hernia" and it's a large abscess in the color of blackberry, and it's more common in women;
And occurs in two manners: Natural and accidental.
or natural has no engine.
And the accidental is according to two manners: for one is similar to swelling and the other similar to an abscess that comes from an artery; and there is fear, and it is not suitable to apply fire over the fever for one who is small, and he proves and searches at all the interior; if you find it as similar to swelling, and there is no pain, if you strike it, just like we strike the nail, and take out its entire core, if there is none. and thoroughly search for all, and let the doctor do it as he knows how, until he is completely well.
There are many ways of suffering that I will list all the similarities;
and one must know whether to tell everything, what is the difference between death and discharge.
I say that discharge is when the fever and boils persist, until the fever has passed and the purulence is complete. then follows the fever and the cold.
But with death, there is no cold or fever, nor pain, and it contains its own gallbladder, which is its own sack, and according to the color of the body, and begins like a jelly, and becomes large.
And there are so many appearances, or swellings, or moisture, and much of a color as I said in the division.
It is necessary, when you come to the cure of one not known, that you examine and inquire first at all the instrument which is called "entromissoire", according as its form comes or to chapter who follows.
And the manner of inquiring about abscesses is to take a piece of damp tissue that you find in the abscess, and turn your two fingers one by one, until you know when the humors have pierced the vein, then only according to the size of the abscess.
then remove the middle part, and be careful that it will not burst.
If the abscess bursts in the groin area, cut it according to its color as I said for other abscesses.
and if there is no moisture after the middle part, see if it is greasy, then cut with a cross, and take out with pincers, and lightly scrape it from each part, and cover the spot where you are treating it so that it heals sound with the wound.
And if you cannot treat it properly, then cut it by pieces so it does not stay there.
But if it stays there, it will come back many times.
But if it stays for a little while and causes no harm, apply the wound with some corrosive powders, hold it tight, and put on soothing ointments and other remedies until it is healed.
But if the wound is large, cut off both sides of the wound, and treat the person who has suffered a stroke.
And if the veins are swollen against this remedy or another, quickly apply the new vitriol splinter, and let it be left for two days or three, until the wound is clean, and allows the blood to settle. Now the head of the shoulder returns to its place when it has been left for a while without anything.
Now consider the forms of internal swellings, and they are of three kinds: large and small, and little.
and in it there are three quarters, which are called "albares", and one that is called "breb", and they are of three kinds: large, small, and little, to enclose the sinuses of a fistula.
and are just like the nails used to cut splinters, and are made of citron wood, iron, or silver, and they are very useful for those who are yellow, and are more advisable for putting stop to the black pus that fills a fistula;
And there are three kinds: big, medium, and small, according to the size of the wounds.
The shapes of ulcers are very similar, just as you see here:
and if ulcers have two lobes of the three kinds also.
and if ulcers have three lobes, and are each of the three kinds.
and if ulcers have two lobes, one lobe only, and are each of the three kinds.
And all these are necessary in their own place.
The head of these cuts is made, and it is such that from one side only you cut, so that you burn the nose, because of that one does not pierce the vein or the nerve;
And of these intestinal issues are the symptoms returned in handkerchiefs, so that the patient does not experience anything at the opening of the abscesses;
and they come from three kinds: great, small, and medium, as you see;
and you should not cut in only one place, but rather like the joints, such as knees, arms, and breast, and similar places;
and sometimes you make another small instrument, resembling burnt fistulas, according to this shape, because it stains blood; and put him on no occasion by the healthy person who has coped with veins, and arteries, and never again in that great form:
Never are the nipples of any man swollen when they begin to rot, until they look like a woman's.
and keep them swollen and inflamed, and whoever wishes to treat them, if it is believed that the treatment should follow this shape along this line from b to g: then scrapes the fat, and applies the wound with medicine coated in charcoal, then brings together the two lips of the wound at the seam, and cures until it is healed.
and if the nipple turns inward and is swollen as in women, so that it forms two swellings above, then makes two cuts. so that one is held to the other at its end, so that the larger line contains the smaller according to this shape, from line b until line g. After the cautery, instruct the patient to scorch the skin between the two lips, and extract the fat, and apply what we have said about costume and powder, and what is necessary in the treatment, until he is healed.
and if he is not healed, or the incision has not been fully made, because the patient does not want to rest, or due to the drying of blood, then it is advisable to fill the wound with wet cotton cloth in a corrosive ointment; and let him sit so that the remaining part and the fat are drawn out, then treat him until he is healed.
Abscesses that come from under the joints are hard swellings or have ribs, and if there is moisture in them.
Therefore those that contain moisture must be closed according to this shape, from the line .b. up to the line .g.: And when all the bowel that is in the abscess is empty, apply the wound with old cotton, and let it rest until the next day, then remove all the cotton, and treat with ointment suitable for that until it is healed.
And if the abscesses are like swellings of scrofula, do it as we have said in cutting open scrofula wounds, and if the wound has a bowel, apply cautery as we have said before.
When the veins are cut, and the skin is sewn over it, which often brings forth abscesses, and just as it happens with the vein exposed and an abscess.
and if it is swollen in the same way as when it is through an artery, because the abscesses are long within; and if you feel it with your two hands, you will find strangulation;
and when it is due to the vein, it appears as if there are red scars;
and it is madness to cover up this abscess, and itself when it is under the bones and joints and near the chest, and it is very large. It is therefore necessary to abandon the iron treatment, and those with a head injury should also abandon it, and in those who swell from an artery, let them cut through the skin long.
Then cover the armpit area with linen, and cut off beautifully the artery of the arm, until it is discovered.
Then take off the linen and pierce with a needle at just that spot on the other side, and constrict the artery with a thread twice as thick as two fingers, as I have taught you in the extraction of both arteries found in the temples.
Then tie the patient who is between the two threads of a ligature so that there is no gap, and remove the abscess.
Then apply pressure to stop the bleeding, until the wound stops. Then treat these wounds so that they heal completely;
And if the abscess is for the size of the vein, then it's fitting that you dye your hand with the color of the wound so that you can apply the stain to all the skin, then pour the needle under the part you hold in your hand, and pierce it, and make a double thread, so that you draw it from the other side. then tie the stain, just as I told you, or tying of one part of two threads of the thread.
and if you doubt that the threads won't set in, then pour another needle over all the thread under the entire stain at the incision of the first needle, and tie the threads in four places.
then cut the abscess until it stops bleeding, then cut off the excess skin and leave what's tied.
Then put it on my drapery moistened with wine and oil, then apply treatments of poultices and bandages until he is cured.
When an abscess comes from the artery and vein, it comes to the nerves when they are dried up, or due to excessive work, and similar things.
And this happens more often in the joints and in the bones where there are wounds, and it's like an abscess, and its color resembles the color of the flesh, and there is more disposition to die from pain.
and when one is stretched to the point of pain, the patient feels pain, and it's not just in the wound, but under the skin.
and he is mute from all parts, and cannot go forward or backward, neither above nor below, and one who has dislocations should not cover them with iron. perhaps he will experience contractions; and they who are on the head or on the forehead, do the skin at the spatulate.
and they who are on the head or on the forehead, do the skin at the spatulate. If there is an abscess that is small, if you have nail clippers, and cut at its root;
and if it is large, if the surgeon takes out the tumor and scrapes it, then he fixes the wound to the ribcage, and continues the treatment until the patient is healed.
Never does it happen in the belly and not in any other place, for it is a disease that is called "fungus" because of its resemblance to fungus, with subtle roots, and large thorns;
and in it are both small and large ones;
In the house where there was one woman who had two swellings in her belly which were more like fungus than any other thing, and she didn't have a difference between them, they were white, and had small roots, and had split open, and decayed with moist air.
I copied them and found that one weighed 18 ounces, and the other 6 ounces, and the work in the incision is such that you look to see if the patient has moist wounds, and the color of the armpit is white and moist, with a fine root. If you cut it with a large spoon or spatula, and it is in your sight, the fire cautery.
If you cut it with a large spoon or spatula, and it is in your sight, the fire cautery. For when cutting comes the many great hemorrhages of blood, and if you do not watch yourself, then hasten therefore to the cautery.
And if you see the patient with fear and anxiety at the incision of iron, if you take a long and well-made thread, and bind the arm so as we have said, and let him rest for two days;
and then restrain it tightly, and do not cease to tighten the long thread until the arm stops hurting and feels better by touch;
and if the roots are thick, and there's fear of cutting into the same place on the abdomen, but you must cut half of it, then cauterize so it does not return;
then treat the wound, and keep in mind that you should not cut into the red tissue which is of fresh color and has poor sensation and runs with milk.
This is an enchantment of an abscess, and I have come to this cure for the chancre after.
when the boil exists. If the appearance of a wound comes from cautery of a cut or incision on the scalp, and is in the abdomen with some swellings as in other cases, or from blood that cuts through veins or arteries according to what is in front, or from windiness;
and if it is by scalp incision and from the intestine's issue, since the color of the abscess resembles the color of the body, and it is a light thing with pain, and opens to various exits. And if it is by the outcome of the intestine, then it is more diverse, and when you press on both sides so that it returns, and then comes back, and by chance it gets scarred, and becomes much larger at the entrance to the bath and for great work.
And if it's because of moisture, it is a light thing, and opens well when you press it with your hand, do not constrain it.
and if it's because of blood, it opens by these signs the big and hard abscesses, and are stuck in a quantity; and if it's due to weakness, then it's soft at the elbow, and if the wound is examined to see if its appearance is due to the blood of the artery, or the vein, or weakness.
and if it's due to weakness, then it's soft at the elbow, and if the wound is examined to see if its appearance is due to the blood of the artery, or the vein, or weakness. If it suits you to leave the treatment. For there is doubt and fear, as I told you in the chapter of abscesses, for the artery and for the vein.
And if the appearance is due to the intestine or the gallbladder, it is advisable that you instruct the patient to tie his groin and be stretched out straight, then stitch everything around the wound. Then instruct to sit sovereignly between your hands, then go around the patient that you have stitched all over the stomach area, and then stitch half of the abscess on top with great care. then tie around with a strong thread or a cord of very strong silk tightly, and make sure it is fastened well on both ends.
Then open up half of the abscess and extend it on the ligature, and pour into your wound the intestines; If you find it caught on the ligature, pull it loose, and pour the intestines into the outside of the abdomen;
and if you find the bowel, pull it out on the onechene and cut off its surplus.
and if the arteries cause counteraction, or the vein, then go smoothly into them, and return to your work and take two needles, and pour two thick threads, and pour the two needles back in the place where you made the puncture.
then strain the abscess in four fingers above the needles, and if you see it, pull out the needles, and leave it to him as long as he suffers, and cut the dead flesh by itself; When you strike at it when it is subtle and bloody, then the surgeon does what is required, and he cuts open the abscess as we have said;
When you strike at it when it is subtle and bloody, then the surgeon does what is required, and he cuts open the abscess as we have said; And extract the blood or moisture you find, then treat the patient with what is needed, and bind the limb.
dough chancere We have said in the division regarding the symptoms of a chancre, and how to treat it with medicine, and how to avoid using iron treatment;
And the chancre spreads to the groin, and great care must be taken in its treatment, and the ancients said that when a chancre appears on the person or can be removed like one in the testicles, or in the groin, or in similar places, and it should be completely removed as soon as it appears at the beginning;
I have never seen anyone cured before me.
And the abscesses, when it is in its place or can be removed, as we have said, are that you never purify the sick person of black bile.
then make him healthy if he has shown signs of excess, then cut the abscess.
then throw away your ulcers or cankers, and cut off the head from all parts, and remove the bone from all parts with nothing left.
and let the blood flow out completely, and hope well with your hand or with something, but if they begin to bleed again from the incision of the artery or vein, then cauterize so that the skin is not washed. Then the patient of another treatment until he becomes sound.
From dropsy, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow. As we have said in the division, the signs of dropsy and how the assembly of water is made, and the signs of each one, and the cure that is done with medicine, and also that which is cured by iron.
and iron should not be touched in these two similarities: that is to say, tympanites and yperochia, because it is a mortal thing;
Therefore when you give medicine for this similarity of dropsy called "blistering" and the cure does not work, then look at if the patient is weak or if he has another disease than dropsy, such as stomach troubles and similar things; If it has not been touched with iron, because there is doubt;
and if you see a patient of great virtue, and he has only dropsy, but is not too thin or too tall, then so treat him: lift the patient upright over your hands, and have the attendants press his belly down to the lowest part of his stomach, then take the thorny spatula in that form: And so are the rules of two parts. with a point, and make sure it's not too deeply inserted so that it can come out at the intestine when you throw it in, and do not squeeze.
then look to see if the dropsy is tied down towards the intestines: If you must break open (open) in such a place, since it is a third tooth, you must cut downwards from under the jaw. and if the dropiness is due to liver disease, then if you cut to the left of the third tooth;
and if it is due to mucous, then if you cut to the right, and do not allow the patient's blood to flow onto the wound that superfluous humors run towards the weak part of him;
then pierce the entire skin with the instrument, and the point, and lift your hand to all the spatumile between the skin and the sac as if you were scraping it out with the quantity of an fingernail or two.
then pierce the sac until the spatumile comes to its natural place, and that is the liver, then take out the point, and use this instrument which has this form: And it is like a silver chain, so fine and subtle, and made of iron or anvil light, and in the lower part there are small holes. and on the other side, three holes. And two on one side, and one on the other.
And the knives are cut like a pen, and it is the shape of the incision that scribes write on the pen:
At the top of which is the hinge, so that when the instrument comes to the water, it now turns upwards on the instrument;
then it is cleared half or two-thirds, for if you clear more than it is fitting in that hour, by chance the patient may die from the solution of his spirit with the arm, or he will let out hands, or he draws near to death;
but when it is clear according to the amount of his virtue, and according to what the disposition of the virtue tells us about the patient's feet;
then take the instrument and hold the water, and now it is held in place by the dressing which stops up the puncture that is on the sac, of which I have spoken, that you pierce according to this manner;
then take up the instrument another day, if you see the patient suffering from it, and take a small quantity of water;
do this on another day, and be careful not to fool around until it doesn't last but a little water.
and if you doubt the patient, and take a lot of water, if the treatment is to the dust or cold stone, and by much sweating or bath and in the sun, and they drink a lot. and instruct the healer to dry out the patient with medicinal desiccatives until they are healthy, and cautery on the stomach and liver and spleen after extracting the water, as I have said before.
There is never an infant born without any swelling in the penis, or if there is swelling, it is small, or it is not in its place.
If it seems that soon they will pierce at all the sensitive places, very subtle and according to this form:
then put or pierce with a subtil (small) bone of a plonc ( probably a type of fish), and tie it up thus for three days or four, when he wants to make urine, if the stitches are made loose, then make urine again, and then put them back.
and in case it does not come out at all, because the urine that comes is not the one he left closed.
If the opening is in his foot, then put on a tunic made of thin cloth, as we have said, and it will expand.
Those who do not have the piercing in their own place are sick, because no one is born with a piercing at the head of the penis, so that they cannot urinate before they lift their penis up. and they cannot move for this reason because the material cannot come to that place, and it is a bad sickness.
And the manner of the work is that the patient lies on his back, put there is a point from the head of the rod and it strikes just as long as the space of a grain of millet, so that the puncture occurs in the middle, as it should.
and keep away from the consequence of blood that comes often, and if it has happened, so that the stain that causes the bleeding stops, and treat the wound until it is clean.
from pimple of the prick Often come cysts on the rod, and it is a bad appearance.
and there are malignant and non-malignant ones.
If it is necessary that you grasp them at the base one by one, and strike and crush all, then put on cotton moistened in Egyptian balm. Then apply the ointment again and again until it is made pure.
And if the bath is malignant, of a foul odor and stench, it is fitting that you should apply cautery.
When you strike them and the fat is in the wound, if it has both inside the skin and outside, if necessary, you should remove the fat that is within first. And when it is soldered, remove it.
Because when you treat the whole area together, if you don't take care to secure the joint of the vein so it is not perceived, and pus and corruption come into the vein and on the spot.
if it is necessary to shave all that which is black and rotten, then tie up the emplaster of honey and flour which shall be made from the rind of greengage plums and walnuts, then cure other cures until he is healed.
And if they bleed from the wound comes, so apply lunar cautery according to this form:
The fire cautery is beneficial in both the assembly of limbs. this means, at the decomposition and corruption;
and if the joints of the finger are corrupted and contracted, if it is necessary to put or apply a bandage around the finger made from wood, and let the patient urinate among them;
and when the hair grows again to the head of the finger where it has become infected or for an abscess, if it is necessary then that you burn it with a scalp instrument until the ties are loosened, and deliver the joints of the finger from all parts;
And if this is a grievous thing to consider, then it is proper that you burn at the spot on the head of the spine with a thorny staff and some poultice.
Then serve it well between the second and first joint, with some linen thread moistened with cold water, so that it adheres to the bone.
Circumcision is no less of a concern for continued bleeding as other wounds; It is good to take care when we perform this work of our own will, and especially in children, for it is proper that the one who makes them should do the best and most gentle work for their health.
They did not say that circumcision was done for their children, because they did not use it in their law, and we have only what we have acquired by experience.
Because I have sought the greatest part of the masters and physicians who performed circumcisions around the umbilicus, and with force, and for all those who are weak.
If it is swollen because of the knife because he has two boils, and by chance if one pricks those above and doesn't move until they grow. Or the wound covers again, and there is double pain, and with the rubbing that does not remove the doubt about the sharpness of the point of the member;
and with the rubbing of the ulcer by chance the iron escapes, and it runs over, and many times this happens as if they need further rubbing and I have tried it.
Of the purification which is made with force, all along the whole tendon of thread I have found the good fortune of the experiment, because the forces cut exactly as well above as below.
For when you press your hand, the fingers become equal in length in all things; but that the hair is well straightened inside the skin;
and if the manner of the first operation is that you make think the child, if it understands, to do only tie the thread around the stick so only, and then make joy in all the ways that you can;
Then make it straight with your hands, and set back the strength between your hands or below your feet so that the child does not see them, nor any of the limbs.
Then dip your hand in the horn and breathe upon it, and hold it up so that the joints of the horn are uncovered; Then clean it well of the dirt that is assembled upon it, then tie it with a new linen strip doubled twice, and tie it under one thread to another thread;
Then clean it well of the dirt that is assembled upon it, then tie it with a new linen strip doubled twice, and tie it under one thread to another thread; And tie it tightly with two threads on the second hand to the bag and the tube, then sew between the two threads, and lift the wound hastily and take off the head of the horn; Then let the blood flow slowly, for it is the mother. and put powder on it and above the powder I made glue from a half-moon of fat cooked until it is still warm with rose water, congealed with good olive oil and fresh, and let him lie on it for another day, and the doctor will treat him again till he is healed.
The form of forces at mortification if it is this:
The two shoulders shall be joined together and tied up tight; and the shoulders should be as large as the right arm.
the fault in the cleansing of the wound occurs when the knees within are pierced by the incision.
then you should extend it to your angle, so that the wound is opened.
and cut it evenly, and if you cannot hold to your angle, take the nail and then cut.
and if they stay for three days and that which is under the girdle is swollen, let it be left until the wound is cauterized lightly.
if you cut as you move, and keep away from the girdle part, it will do no harm.
Cure then the joints of those who have sudden pains from powder, as we have said when treating powders, and if they strike too much beyond measure, and it goes up, so it does not harm anything.
Then cure him, as we have said, until he is healthy.
When retention of urine occurs
The retention of urine is due to the stone, or blood clotting, or phlegm, or gall, or similar things that we have discussed in the division.
And if the urine is not flowing, and you see that there is retention due to a stone that is lodged near the neck of the bladder, then it is convenient for the patient to sit on his heels; and place the stone on his back, and extend his belly from above his back, and restrain the patient as much as he can; And therefore it is constrained to pull the joints of the bladder towards the expression of the stone above, because the urine is loosened.
and if she does not come as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, so it is necessary to administer an extraction for all the instrument called 'siringue', because of which there is a swelling:
and it should be made of fine and light silver wire, like a bird's feather; and the size of half a palm and half an inch, and be fine at the head.
And the way to extract urine if you take a single thread, and tie a small piece of wool or cotton at the head, and pour the head into the siringue;
Let the excess moisture of the linen be coped and the balm applied to the head of the siringue, then oint the siringue with oil or butter and with mallow and wine, and sit the patient on the chair, and make him lie down the belly and the verge of oil moist and oil of olive and water tede;
then lay the siringue slightly in the verge, until it comes to the root of the verge, then double the verge upward over the wound;
then pour a balm on the siringue before it reaches the belly, and the patient feels it coming up to the empty place, for that is not done according to this order because of the direction in which it is going is twisted;
Then let it stand for a little while, and the thread will come out to every strand of hair, and the urine will follow the urine, then pull it forth, and make the urine run.
and begin again with the syringe as long as the bladder is empty, and set right the patient.
When scorching or pus is in the bladder, or when putridness is assembled there, and you see blood and medicines distilling out, do this to all the equipment called "clepsedre", and it's the form:
This one is closed, and if it's three perforations, Two on one side, and one on the other, as you see.
and the leaden pins because the medication is cold, so that it may warm up well in the penis, if we can put an application on the moisture, and push when necessary.
and when you see that your medicine is in the bladder, put on the head of caustic in the moisture, and pull out as far as it will go.
If you touch the moisture to the healer, and then tightly close the wound; If the moisture enters in, and comes to the bladder now, so that the patient will feel it;
and this is the form of a subtle cyst, which is what we call a bladder stone:
And if it is made of silver or lead, and the joints are higher;
and below at the spot where the ligaments burst;
Then take a sheep bladder and put the moisture that you see used to treat the bladder, then tie it between the two breasts forming a good double thread, and heat the bladder with this warm moisture on the fire;
Now the head of the shoulder into the fistula, then strain your hand on the bladder until all moisture has arrived at the bladder.
and if you do not have the bladder, take a piece of parchment and make a circle around it and pierce it all around. then tie the thread tightly through these perforations, then assemble the circle as you would the nail and put within it what you see of oil and moisture and water, and attach to the instrument.
and do it in the same way as you did with the bladder of your hand until the moisture comes to the bladder.
From the stone
We have already discussed in the division the methods of stones and the extraction of assemblies of medicines;
And I said the difference between a stone in its socket with water, and all signs, is that one which should be cut. and in the bladder, and in the phallus;
And I will tell you about it explicitly and briefly.
I say that the stone stuck in the bladder often occurs in children, and it is a sign that the water has escaped from the bladder like water escaping into its subtlety.
and I have shown them, and the ailing ones complain about their phallus, and they often pierce it many times, and then inflame. and because of these frequent attacks the foundations are worn out;
and it is light in children until they are four years old, and is very much grieved in the elderly, and is at a middle stage between youth and old age;
and it is the easier cure for those who have large stones, than for those who have small ones.
And when we come to treatment, it is necessary first to purify the patient with catheter, in order to clean all the filth which is inside the intestines. But there is no use when it comes to cutting the stone.
Then take the patient by the hands and stretch and move down below, so that the stone descends into the bladder to the bottom, and does not fall back up into him.
then make him sit between your hands prepared, and his hands be below his knees, so that the bladder is entirely sloping downwards.
and then touch it inside.
If you feel a stone in space, then get up now to cut on the stone.
And if it doesn't come out at the toucher (the spot where you cut), so that all is moist with the oil of your left hand, then let the patient be ill, or to his right side, if he is an old man. And set the bow in its foundation, and choose the stone, and when you feel it on your left side, if it is thin at the base of the bladder;
then press on to your left side, and set the bow at the door where you will be cutting.
And instruct the servant to press the bladder with his hand, and he orders him to stretch out his right hand to the top of the fingers, and his left hand to remove the leather below the fingers in the place where one makes the cut;
Then I pour the salt mixture onto him, because this is the form: And they put it between the joints and the foundation, not in the middle but on the side of the left knee;
and it should be straight above the stone, and its two ends at the foundation, and if the passage is too wide due to its size, and inside it is narrow, according to the quantity of the stone, not too large.
in case the pressure from the two ends that are at the foundation causes it to break or shatter.
and search where there is part of the stone with angles and margins; if it is stuck to come out.
And if there is an ulcer at its root, appearing like a splinter, and resonating, from which comes light.
Therefore if it has angles and borders, make the incision larger;
And if it does not heal, if it is fitting that you strain the nails which are like a file on the head, to press and squeeze the stone so it will not escape; or you pour in a small instrument curved at the head;
and if you cannot put it in that way, expand the puncture so that the pus comes out, and if the nerves are not cut open, squeeze it with vinegar.
and if there are more stones, pour in the largest one into the neck of the bladder first, then cut it up, and the small ones afterwards if there are more.
And if it is very large, make a larger wound. For two things happen to the patient: or he dies, or his urine comes back through because of that which his bowels cannot hold.
but one should exert oneself to treat, or to debilitate with nails, until you treat it by pieces.
and when you have completed your work, apply the wound with frankincense and aloe and dragon's blood and strain it, and bind with wet cloth in oil and wine, or in oil and red rose water and cold water to cool down the swelling. then revive the patient on his neck, and do not unbind the bandage until at least three days have passed.
And when you release it, so that the joints are freed from their pain and evil, apply a great amount of oil and water to the healing place, then apply the ointment of infallible and the ointment of basilicon until he is healed.
And when an abscessed foot comes to the wound and corrosion, and freezing of blood in the bladder, and it is retained by this, the urine, which is known in a certain manner without falling with the urine: But therefore cut the vein in the wound, and extract the blood, for if it remains, the bladder will corrupt, and it will rot.
Then lift the wound with water and bandages and cloth, and help him in all the ways you know, until he is healed.
It is convenient that all the remedies you cure him with, you tie the two knees and assemble the medicines on his body.
And if the stone is small and it is embedded in the bone, and the urine cannot come out; If the cure of what I say is so that you cut your tail, then you are excused from cutting for this treatment. I have already tried this way.
Take iron according to this shape and fix three nails into the one bone.
Then take a thread and tie around the vein next to the stone, so that it cannot come back into the bladder.
Then pour in the forest (blood) gently into the vein, until it comes to the stone. And turn the forest (blood) in your hand towards the stone little by little, until you can pierce the stone from the other side.
If blood comes forth soon, then press your hand upon the thing that is left behind of the stone which is inside the vein. If it breaks forth soon and comes out with the urine, and is healed, then the patient will be cured.
And if you cannot do that for any reason which prevents it, then tie the foot below the knee and the other above, then make the stick straight between the two joints, then pull forward, and release the joint, and clean the wound with ice that is in the injury; And let him remain as long as he is cured.
of the stone in women
There is little chance that a stone will be embedded in a woman, and if it has happened once, the treatment is painful and is forbidden for three reasons:
one is that perhaps the woman is a virgin;
and the second is that one cannot find a woman knowledgeable about how to remove stones, especially when she is cast away.
And the third manner is that by chance one cannot find a woman well-versed in this art with her hands;
And the fourth manner is that the femur of a woman is deeper than that of a man, because it can be made to have a deeper shape, and great fear there is. And if necessary, you should seek out a midwife well-versed in this art; at any cost, find one true, and if you do not find her, then use some subtle trick.
and presents a well-known woman skilled in the life of women, or a woman who knows part of this art, and commands that she do what you command regarding the cutting of the femur. and examine her very well to see if she is a virgin;
and examine her very well to see if she is a virgin; And then he must put his hand on something firm, and look for the stone.
And if it is true, then he must press the arm with his left hand against the belly wall.
And if it is true, then he should move it from hard to hard, starting at the entrance of the bladder until it reaches the root of the thigh.
Then strike on the stone at the root of the thigh, against the midpoint of the bone, where it has been moved and feels the stone in that part. And do not move his hand above or below the stone, and let it be fixed at the first small mark.
And do not move his hand above or below the stone, and let it be fixed at the first small mark. Now put the bone in its place in the belly, if you feel a stone very close to the wound so that the stone can come out fully, and find out what many kinds of stones are:
This is to know that there are small and great stones, sharp and blunt, long and round, and those with holes.
If you know the similarities to determine the outcome.
And if they do not contain poison, then apply vinegar to the wound and hold it for an hour until it is stained.
Then return to your work until the stone comes out, and have the purulent substances which I told you in the extraction of stones to help you in your work.
And if they do not contain poison, and it is the artery that has been cut, apply powder on the wound and put the purulent substance of lentils and bendels, and do not start again with this, and leave the stone alone, lest the patient die by chance. Then treat the wound.
And when the heat of the wound is calmed and the pain is overcome, so that you return to your work, until the joint is restored.
The rince water is nothing other than the assembly of moisture or white phlegm, which is below the level of the joints, that contains the blood.
and is called "phlegm", and it is never properly in the blood itself, if one thinks that this is another blood. and it's the skin of the joint between the white phlegm that we have said.
This does not happen. And the generation of this mucus is weak that it comes to the joints, and spreads out that material.
And at times if comes by percussion on the joints, and this moisture has many colors: or it's yellowish decline, or without red, or black, or white waters, and this happens more;
For it is the sign of knowing this assembly, for when it is white and swollen as we have said, if there are abscesses that form, it looks like an egg, and does not open because of moisture all around.
And if it has moisture in its own skin, there are abscesses that form with a part of the egg, and because of this one thinks it's another egg.
and if the moisture is between the skin of the joint and the swollen part, it feels warm.
then when you see the color of the moisture, it confirms that the swelling is at the inner quarter circle, and so the form is as expected. Then according to what comes after the surrounding area, judge what is inside.
And when we cut with iron, it is fitting that the patient be made healthy according to our skill and the fullness of their body.
Then let the swine lie on his back, on a thing one foot high, and put many folds of cloth on him;
Then have him lie on his left side, and instruct the minister to have him lie on his right, and stretch the stick towards one of the two ribs near the breast;
Then take the spatula and cut the skin of the breast from his long line to the joint, and make a straight cut through, dividing the skin just so it is white as snow, and scrape off thinly according to one's power;
Then pierce the white spot flat with water from the great puncture, and extract all the water, and then put on your bandages, and stretch the white spot upwards;
And do not touch the heart of the joints, but only the surface alone. Cut or cut him entirely as well as you can himself, for if you do not cut it correctly, he will return to the illness.
And if the ulcer bursts forth at your work, then remove it to its place when you have completed the operation on the surface.
Then join the two joints at the heart of the joints with a bandage, and treat it like other wounds until it is healed.
And if you find the ulcer corrupted by another disease, it is wise to tie up those suspensory bands, doubting the progression of the bleeding.
Then cut the crown at all the surrounding skin, and extract the blood, and cure it as we have said.
And if an abscess is assembled in two parts together, saying that these are two foci; if cut the other part just like you did on the first one equally, then clean the blood and put linen moistened in rose oil on the wound.
if cut the other part just like you did on the first one equally, then clean the blood and put linen moistened in rose oil on the wound. and put another linen moistened in wine and oil over it, and on top of the two wounds, and cover them with double clothed dresses, and tie it up above all according to this form:
Then take the two cloths and fill them with wool fluff according to this resemblance and assemble them by sewing in the neckline of the braies, and one of the shoulders takes hold on the foundation just as high as the back, and the other at the part of the nail;
And the other two joints on either side of the heart, are all tightened together in a knot of the arm.
And at no time is medicine applied with the cautery of fire in place of iron, and then you must grasp a subtle cauterizing instrument, and strike the skin of the joints, and it should be heated as we have said, so that the white sac which contains the liquid is exposed.
if you take the cautery in this form, and pierce that sac at the joints, and scorch it with this subtle cauterizing heat:
And strike him in all the ways you can, until you have scorched him thoroughly;
and keep so that the fire does not touch the eye;
And therefore knows that this work is more safe; and must keep watch against the occurrence of bleeding, and women must be careful with the work of amputation;
and if no other thing contradicts you, or an abscess occurs, or bleeding or any other thing, then cure what is contrary according to what has been said before.
And if the patient is fearful and will not endure this work because of its horror, then perforate him as I have said, and when you are certain by the meanings we have explained that water is laid into a wound, then place the patient on the raised seat. then pierce the abscess at the lower part and as far in as the entire surface of the limb is wide, and make the perforation all along the long length of the body;
And if they are large wounds, so that all of the fluid flows out;
then put cotton over the wound, tie it tight, and let the remaining fluid drain off, then cure until the wound is healed;
and if the white linen cloth does not allow the fluid to escape from the wound in the mouth of the wound, then it is wise to insert a quill or the instrument used to treat the swelling, for this form should be as before;
and enlarge the wound, and see that the fluid returns, and is assembled again after six months or more, in which time it will be as before, and so the patient's days will pass;
see that in the cutting of this branch there is great fear of more deaths, because it seems to me that one should not cut;
and I will tell you about the wound and its symptoms.
Therefore, most wounds come from the body, and similarly have veins. and it's because of a lot of cases.
which is known to be through excessive acidity and sharpness, which spreads in the veins, or by percussion.
and is the color of the wound according to the color of the body. does not bring pain, and is a painful wound.
and sometimes is a painful wound with purulent and bloody color, and at no time comes from another artery, or swelling of the vein.
When it is through no artery, so is seen by the shape of the abscess, when you press on your two fingers; and do not touch anything else.
That which is swollen with blood is known by its shape at the expression of gentle pressure on the two fingers, and it can be easily felt above this appearance, and above other swellings; And so you hit the thinnest part of the vein, then pierce the top, and pull forward the flesh, and deliver the suspension from all parts of the vein.
If the vein is already swollen with these swellings, then it is necessary that you treat the vein and hit it;
and if it is in the sac or inside the vessels, so that you can deliver all that place and return smoothly.
And if the hair of the arm is at their backside, it is fitting that you copy it all and extract the pus, as we have said.
And when your operations are completed, apply the wound of woolen cloth in oil rose and wine, then cure with other cures until it is healed.
This is an abscess that has been enveloped and wrapped around like a calf's udder, with the softening of the tissues, and the patient suffers greatly when it ruptures.
and the treatment for this disease is just as painful as that which was before, and we will tell you about it, according to what the ancient ones did.
You must place the patient on the raised table, then pour the liquid of the vessels down to your knees, and all the surrounding flesh you will stretch out, and spread it apart.
Then cut with the scalpel deeply through both sides of the wound, until they are exposed, and then clean each side, as we have said in the extraction of arteries that are in the temples;
Then prick an arrow or place a double thread at the place where the vein has come out, and tie it to the first limb above, and tie it closely under the other limb; Then cut in the middle straight on, according to the length of the body, and pull out the corrupted moistures;
Then treat the wound just as with others, or burn with arrows, so that no vein comes to flow;
because through this no harm comes, and the veins come to all of them, so it is fitting to treat the vessels for all of them; If the blood does not stop flowing because of the incision on the vessels, and dries up and cannot be helped.
The venous distention of this type occurs by the cutting that comes out through the suture, or the extension on the abdomen in the region of the kidneys, because the intestines descend from that incision to one of the veins.
and this incision is either on the suture, or from the extension of it, and these two manners come about from many causes:
or from percussion, or a fall, or a burn, or the lifting of pain, and by similar things;
and the signs when it is an extension of the suture, are that there are little by little, in long time, and do not come suddenly; and it is the abscesses equal to its place up to the point where the syphilitic advances the intestine.
And the signs are when it's from the scalp section, that it brings sudden pain at its beginning, and the abscesses appear differently, under the skin close to the bone, and this is because of the intestine's movement and the body's avoidance of the scalp incision.
And sometimes he ties the intestines around it, and is retained in that place, causing great suffering to the patient, especially when it is pressed.
And for iron cautery, because of fear, he would rather shun it.
And the way of opening the abscess is that you instruct the patient to insert his hand into the intestine at the wound, if it can be returned. then sit upon your navel between my hands and lift up the testicles;
then press the heart upward, and cut through all the skin of the joints until long. then pour into the belly of the navel a string according to what you have need for to open the wound, and so that they can be pulled out;
then scorch the syphilis that is under the skin of the joints until the white syphilis becomes visible from all parts;
Then pour your thumb index into that place which indicates the joint, in that place which is between the white shoulder blade and under the skin of the elbow, and between the second shoulder blade, and from that which is behind the elbow, and between the second shoulder blade;
And then move your right hand inside the joint, and let the white shoulder blade be above your left hand, lift the elbow to all the shoulder blades towards the chest; And instruct the minister to extend the elbow upwards, and release that which is above behind the knot;
And ask your two to see if there is any intestine protruding or white shoulder blade inside, and if you find nothing, then blow into the belly under;
Then take a needle or one with a big thread made of X threads, and the bottle in the back part near the flesh. After the incision, then cut the hairs that appear with threads, until there are IV threads. Then gather them together in a cross shape, and bind the flesh where we have said is underneath the skin of the joints with a strong cord of two parts. Then wrap the hairs with threads, and tie them in two parts, so that not even a single servant or person who is fed on them can enter inside, lest there be an abscess. and put the tying in that place according to the first tie long two parts of that one, and then after these two ties leave some flesh underneath the skin of the joints large as two fingers. and after all the rest according to the circular path that the blood carries;
then strike in the part that is beneath the skin of the joints, as we have said before;
then apply moist linen in oil, and put it on the wound, and apply the bandage as we have said. And sometimes cauterize the white flesh sac that we have said to be done after incising, by doubt of the slowing down of blood. For this happens many times, and let the bandage stay on him;
and if it lingers at the chamber, then arise from hot water and put on as we have said, until he is cured;
then treat the wound with another remedy until it is completely healed.
of a hernia in the groin.
In this chapter I have never seen anyone who dared to do the cure with iron.
And they say it is done in the manner of a twig which is gathered with the nail, in this way that you tie up the straps, after the head above less loosely on the lower part;
and then cut inside the wound, and cleanse the abscess until the straps cry;
and treat him as we have said, until he is healed.
But sometimes comes rupture of an artery, as we have said, and opens the vessels;
and does not draw out anything from the intestines to the arteries, and if he draws something out, it is little, and repeats every hour;
and if it remains too long in that point, so he believes the wound or a spleen, until the intestines draw it out;
And this happens by the extension of the flesh through the anger, just as we have said, because it is stretched, then softened, and inflamed the veins and open.
and the cure is by cautery, just as we have said before;
and there is a cure in this way with iron. and the patient swells under his back between your hands, then cut the inflamed area with a sharp knife according to the quantity of three dollars;
and then extract the flesh that is under the skin, and take it (the wound) and put it on the visible flesh.
and press it to the bottom of the belly, then sew the two visible wounds on the flesh under the wound above the head with a needle and sew both.
Now take out the head of the right (shoulder) and do not cover the wound or extend the arm or anything else, as I have told you in the treatment for the removal of hair from the intestines. Then the cure by the cure of wounds.
Then the cure by the cure of wounds. And when you strike the hairs, if they bleed and heal the wound, so long as it is healthy.
The syphilitic is constrained, and has no appearance in the routine, and the cautery is more moist in this location, and closer to safety.
of the softening of the skin on the joints.
Sometimes the hair of the groin in some men is made soft because those hairs are softened, and it can be seen.
and it is best when you want to cure him, that you have the patient lie on his back, and he strikes the soft hair on the natural hair.
Then bring the two lips together to a suture, and if you see it, sew first the surface of the soft hair three times or four firmly.
When the cuts between the ribs are opened, and the treatment is done as with other wounds, until he is cured, and the wound is closed with thread.
doubtful pain
Since certain armor is prohibited by law, and that is why I do not wish to discuss it in this book;
and are necessary for only two purposes:
one is that the mirror will be able to tell us how to answer when one is asked, and in order to know the cure;
and the other is because we have often had to do armoring of certain beasts in order to help ourselves, as with oxen and sheep and cattle and others.
I say therefore that armor is done according to two ways: Out of attraction, or out of cutting.
In the one we make by attraction, we sit them in hot water best, until the joints are softened and for as long as. Then press them with your hand, until they are set and you no longer feel them.
On the operation of amputation: it is fitting that you tie the best bandage, and press the skin of the joints with your left hand, then secure the suspension, and cut off each one as you have well washed.
and leave no small space on the surface that is under the vessels;
and this manner of cauterization is more painful than that which is done by attraction, because at the attraction sometimes something from the wounds remains, because of which the beast desires luxury;
then treat the wound until it is healed.
regarding those with both sexes
there are two kinds of hermaphroditism, according to two types of bodies: one is that between the two sexes are open like the figure of a woman's nature, or it has hair, and sometimes its urine.
And another manner is in women, and it has on the nail as if a finger, and two wounds.
And the treatment of the male and female conditions is that you copy the joined limbs in all, and the treatment as if it were other wounds;
in the second manner, of men whose urine leaps out from the skin, there is no cure.
The part of the tenticle is stuck to the natural place, so long as it is too ugly to see; and some women have it too much with one hand, and that's the cure.
It is necessary to dye the surplus of the tenticle with your hand or on one side, and cut lightly;
and do not go too far in the wound, lest blood comes and stains it, then the cure will need another cure until they are sane.
and to another charm that is born at the mouth of the mare's womb, and the navel, and by chance it will come forth, and they call it according to its resemblance like a cow, and for this they called it "the cow disease". If it must be copied, as we have said about the testicle, and the treatment until it is healthy.
Misjudgment occurs when the nature of a woman is not recognized, or the loss is sought. And it comes from her natural birth or accident by illness that has happened to her.
And it comes from her natural birth or accident by illness that has happened to her. Or it comes from a collision of bone, or by subtle or deep dislocation, and is made inside the marrow, on the ribs, on the side, or in any other place;
and prevents conception and childbirth, and by chance may also prevent flowers from growing.
And knowledge of this is acquired through the reflection of a fall.
If there are recent symptoms that appear, then either in your right side or left side.
If it is a subtle dislocation and the joint is near the two fingers, make haste to treat it accordingly.
Put your two hands together, and let the woman lie on her back, with her legs spread out.
Then let the two fingers form a circle, until the subtleties are rinsed and the sponges are saturated.
Then take wool and the mucus in oil, and put it on the wound, and have the woman rest at home every day, so that it will not heal.
And if the syfach is hard and dense, it is fitting that you cut with the spatula like a leaf of myrtle.
If the sponges are made of charcoal, then remove them after an hour and again after a day.
And apply the medicinal salves, if you like, such as saffron blood, dragon's blood, incense, and many other unguents.
After a cauldron of fire is brought to a boil, so that the wound cannot be closed;
and then they let it dry for a long time, and they place a linen tent on it.
Then treat other remedies until he is healed.
And when in the marsh comes a hare, then they should cover it according to this manner, if it is not an enchanted spell. For the apostles that are in the marsh are not to be touched with fire.
wounds from hemorrhoids. Emorrhoids are openings of veins that occur without any condition, and when old hemorrhoids form, they become tumors.
And as we have previously discussed in the division the symptoms of oars and signs, I will tell here those that receive a cure.
I said that hemorrhoids and ulcers when they are completely filled in the marsh and do not appear to the touch, unless it is with fire.
Those who are at the mouth of the mare can be cured.
It is therefore necessary to put the woman in a cold house, then wait for the ulcer to appear again, and cut it out with tweezers, and dig at its roots, then powder on medicines restraining blood, as does ace and saffron and incense, and similar things.
Then put his feet in cold water for an hour, then put him in cold water.
And if bleeding occurs again, so that he falls, then make him sit in a decoction of sumac and apple peels and gall, and then give him flour of rye, mix it with honey and easily, and then apply it to his back.
And if she stops bleeding, that's good. If this does not work, if you make him hang (or breathe hot air) on the back and to the nipples so they will hurt.
Then take linen, and apply the poultice in juice of plantain or aglet (or elder) with wine vinegar, and make him breathe on it.
And when the abscess rests, then treat the wound of ointment until he is healed.
And she who is called "albathir" is red, and resembles a harsh head, so they cover it like I have said. and then the cure until he is sound.
Many kinds of abscesses come in the marrow, such as chancre and abscess of the bone, herpes, eczema, fistulas, hemorrhoids, and hot abscess, and other diseases that I have mentioned in this division.
It is necessary that I write in this treatment the abscesses which come on the marrow, which are not like other abscesses that are made by a bow.
and if you see the work of iron, look to see whether the abscesses are thick in its beginning, full of heat and fever, and if it becomes red then you will know. Therefore do not hasten to pierce it, but let it be treated until the pain is eased;
And then sit the patient on the bed, and have two stools or chairs where he leans, and support his back and assemble his feet so that they are away from the leg;
and spread his thighs apart, and put his arms below his knees, and tie them well with a good ligature;
then draw the bowstring over his right side, and insert the instrument used to cut open the mouth of a mare, because that's what will come next.
and it is necessary that when you insert this instrument, you fasten the string first to know the depth of the mare's mouth, so that what enters through the instrument does not go deeper than it should, and does not hurt the patient; and if the swelling is greater, so it is advisable to cover with a deep layer of drapery, so that the swelling does not trouble.
and it is advisable to put the horn of the instrument on top, and to sharpen the instrument.
And when the abscess is opened and one strokes it with the thumb of the hand, they consider covering the forehead, and the spatumile (a type of spoon or ladle) with water.
and when the arrow is empty, it is advisable to put moist swabs in the wound in olive rosed oil or dry olive oil.
and put the moist cloth of the wound on top of the deep layer of drapery, and cover it with the surface without drapery, and over that, place a linen band clean and moistened in water or honey (soaked).
After two days of applying treatment, it happens to him.
and no time is lost to apply poultices and wounds by a compress of water and honey, and then boiled herbs like myrrh are long cooked. and then reapply the treatment.
And if the wound is covered with linen, so it is fitting that you should be careful not to apply hot iron, but treat it as we have said in the division.
of childbirth The first thing is to look at the belly that she knows the shape of the child, and the signs if you see the woman press her nails, and desires to sniff the air:
so then one hastens for the infant to be born. so then you know that this child is according to the natural shape, and is born from his head, and the second comes with him.
And when you see these signs, it is advisable to press lightly on his belly, so that the fever passes quickly.
because when he descends to his head, he brings with him the second joint, and the sinews of his superfluities are cleansed by good cleansing.
and this which comes in another way does not come naturally.
Because it comes sometimes to his feet, and comes forth from the body or the shoulder, and the hands, or it comes to his belly, or else, and is changed by chance upon his neck, and by other evil figures.
so it is necessary to the physician that they be wise and subtle in these things, and avoid error and deception, and I will show you all the figures by which one must assist them.
If the patient comes down with a fever due to natural cause, and the woman in labor groans, and the virtues of her are weak, then she should be placed on a horseback, or the women hold her;
and let her oil or fenugreek be cooked until it is done, and then pour the bile between her two nostrils with the small spatula which is this shape: and cut the tendon, and strike at her joint until the moistures that are within it dry up;
and press the belly of the woman until the fever subsides, and if it does not subside, then it is fitting to bind the woman with muskillaige (or fenugreek) salve and olive oil.
then let her press and vomit in condensies, and tie up her mouth and nose for an hour; If it is now, the child.
And if both hands come out freely, then it is fitting to let them settle gradually one by one. and if they cannot enter again, then put the woman on the bed, and lift up her feet. then throw the bed onto the ground, and secure the woman, so she does not fall when standing.
and if the hands cannot enter again, and the child dies, then cut off the hands with the knife which is there before mentioned, and extract the child, and set it aside in a proper manner.
from the issue of the child on its feet. When the child stands up on its feet, then they are fitting to push upwards. and then turn the wound a little by little, until it is even.
then press against the pain and extend it a little by little.
Can he avoid the pain as soon as possible, if he commands so, and make him vomit with condensation; if he survives, God will be merciful.
And if it is not so as we have said, if the blood flows little by little, day by day, until it reaches its natural form. For then it will be easy.
And if he does not come back as we have seen, said so take muscilynge of alum, and oil of chamomile, and gum pounded, and crush all in a mortar; and put the ointment on the belly of the woman inside and cover that ointment, then make her sit in water until just below the ribs;
And when she is softened because of it, he will make a girdle of iron around her, and put her down, and let one hour pass; Then he will set her on the bed, then he will open her and restrain her mouth and nose, and lightly press on her abdomen, because she now gasps.
of the child after its birth on its knees When the patient comes in this state, he will then put the bile on her hands little by little; Then she will turn to her back on the bed, and let her feet hang down, and then lie still. and then he will gently pull her hands up little by little, and then press on her hands above the belly, and take off the couch below, so that she is properly arranged. And if the fever does not burst, take his feet and hold him firm, then move his feet up to his belly, then give him water. and pull the child little by little; and instruct the woman to apply herself to the child until it breaks.
of the child that comes out wide with one hand only it is advisable to engineer to return the hand; if it cannot be returned, have the woman lift herself up and go.
if she cannot walk, place her on the bed and make her feet move.
then administer the medicinal herbs that I have mentioned;
And if it is pregnant, then make her sit on the bed; then study how to bring back the hand. and bring forth the child according to its natural shape; and make it cut out, and instruct her to bind herself until the swelling subsides.
of the child from his neck down to his arms, and had spread out his hands, and his face turned towards his back towards his mother. It is suitable that the surgeon hold his hand tight, then turn it slowly and slowly, and set her lightly.
and when it is evened out, then put on the natural muscle oil of flesh and fat, as we have said; and instruct her to move slowly.
and when you have done this, make her sit on the bed; and instruct her to bind herself. And cut off. of the same manner to all the rest.
of the same manner to all the rest. When it comes to this manner on the second joint, if you strike the second joint until the moistures are cleared;
and if there is a fever on its face and on its neck, if you strike the throat, so that it does not stop, and the child dies;
then pour the child into the basin, until you have put it in as it is fit, and instruct the woman not to give it any medicine.
From the issue of twins Know that many times it will be born with a head, and sometimes without one. and this is no strange thing, and it has happened often. They are strange things, and they do not live if it is named.
They are strange things, and they do not live if it is named. I know that they are multiplied, and they are caused to flourish by the flesh which devises them, which is connected to the blood;
and there is no time when they are not present naturally like all of us have said.
And if they are severe, then the cure is as we have said, and it is a subtle bile, and quickly and lightly what she does; and so quickly that they are worth more than usual to the health. Many children
Never are they formed in the first or second, third, fourth, fifth, sixth, seventh, or more than fifteen, and all take on the shape of an infant by the measure of its size, glorious juice, because it is possible that such a thing may have happened; If it happens as they advise.
Of the dead child
When treating a woman with child who has died or miscarried, as I have said in the previous division, and there is no fever, you must perform surgical work with your hands. if it is fitting that you know whether the woman has good health, and has not had an accident or has fear of death.
if it is fitting that the woman lies on her back with her knees bent and her legs raised.
and the minister applies the ligature of the second part, or ties her to the bed so that she is not treated with the descent of the child.
then rub the mouth of the woman with moist oils using musk and fenugreek and sesame seeds, and then apply the balm to her hands with these oils and musk.
Now let the wounds heal lightly; then you should pour wine into the marrow lightly, and later pour vinegar onto what is suitable for this, and take care that the fever does not appear upon his head.
if he strikes the glands in his eyes or on his neck or in his mouth or under his tongue or behind his beard or under his chin or near the ribs, and if the ulcers are on his feet, strike them or prick them and cut the middle of the bones.
and it is necessary that the ulcer appears on his right hand, and place a poultice between the two fingers of his left hand, and pour wine all over his right hand, and strike the ulcer in any of those places that we have mentioned, until it comes to a clean opening.
then strike into another onion, or if you need it, so that the extraction is even.
and then stretch it evenly by moving from one side and the other, so that they come out, and so that the onions are cut to make them hold, as this is the shape:
And if some part remains, then take some of its juice from one of its two sides, and pour it into that part, and treat the other part.
and if it does not remain at all, then put this onion a little higher, and do that until it is full of fire.
And if one hand comes in front of the other, and it cannot be returned by stretching, then you must wrap above the bandage, until it is all tight. Then take the axe in the joint of the foot or on the thigh, and do it in the other hand, and make it twice.
And if the head of the child is swollen and it has a large bone in the discharge or if he has a high fever with an assembled head, then you should pour the spindle-like brush between your two fingers, make the head and extract the fever. or you put it on the instrument called "almaid", because the form comes with the instruments or scalpel which is after this.
and do the same if the child has great natural fever;
and then treat the bones with tongs, and if the joints burst, hold the joint with forceps, until the moisture which is or in the discharge is dried.
And if she cannot come out, then cut her by pieces at the root where you can.
And if it is swollen in the belly or under the ribs, then you should pierce it as long as the moistors come out.
And if the patient is sitting on his feet, so that there is less pressure on the legs, and the direction of the stomach towards the mouth is lighter.
And if it is swollen in the stomach or intestines, then you must extract it above the groin on the leg. and pull out the stomach or intestines, until they run out.
and if other members are swollen and the joint is fixed, then pour the bile into his mouth by pouring from the navel. then pour one or two ounces, and bring forth.
and if the mouth of the nose is compressed by an abscess cold that has come to it, so it should not be strained again, but rather administer soft and wet things. and they must apply poultices, and slice in moist fleshy things and moisten.
And if the child lies on its chest, and you can place it even, then administer those things that we have said for a living child.
and if one does not have power, then tie the wound to pieces, and leave nothing of the second line.
And when you have done this, administer those things that we have said regarding abscesses in the nose that come into it.
and if they bleed excessively comes, so whether it is put into water, restrain, and apply other treatments.
And I saw a woman in whom an infant was dead, and she sought another one above it, and then the other died. After many times the thing happened in the mouth, and it swelled so much that it burst, and great pain came.
I was deceived; there is no translation to provide. The text appears to be incomplete or contains formatting issues. Please provide the rest of the text for me to translate.
I placed a splint of great attraction, and from it an os came out, after some other days. I was amazed a great deal, because this has no bone in the belly.
So I thought it was the bones of a dead child.
I wanted to know the wound, and by probing with my hands, until the woman was in a better state; and the woman long time remained thus, and afterwards she died a little while later with pain in her bowels.
and I have only recorded this chapter because whenever the masters find an unusual thing, they seek assistance.
Now comes the form of the pressure, for which we use books;
and to both joints apply to both bones. Everywhere, the nails should be more subtle in the restraint, and made of ivory or boxwood.
And so the mouth of the fist is made very wide, and the margin of the tree is cut, and from long one palm and a half. And in the two limbs are two adjacent fist-like shapes, which are firmly fixed on one and the other, of a palm and half an inch or slightly more.
And these two adjacent shapes are bound in the mouth of the marrow to open when one turns the two horns.
Another form is made to resemble it even more subtly and lightly, of a beech or box wood fist, according to the likeness of the nails. And has both two fists two adjacent shapes, so as you see, of a palm and half an inch, and both twice as wide.
And when you see to open a vein with all the instruments, then seat the woman upon a litter, and place her feet on both sides of it, and then pour two instruments together into the vein, and hold the head of the instrument between its handles. Then operate your hand over all the instruments, so that you have closed both jaws equally, according to the quantity that you see opening the vein of the arm, until it is made as tight as she wants.
This instrument is on top of them, and they are all multiplied in their appearances; And when the instruments have been prepared for them, it is even faster to operate, and they are higher in number according to their quantity.
If you don’t see the instrument that is prepared in front of you, for it is not unnecessary.
When the shoulder joint is retained in the child, it is necessary that you instruct the patient to grip his arm, and then have him exert himself on his back, and tie your hands to his mouth and nose; And if she should fall through this, that is well.
If this does not work, then cut the flesh, and make a puncture or wound, and put herbs that can open the mouth of the mare, such as camphor, anise, chamomile, safflower, and centaury; all these herbs, or none of them, be boiled or put in water on the fire.
then put a caustic or burnt pot on one head and the other in the mouth of the mare, and tie it tight until the vapors come out from within the mare.
Then remove the flesh, as we have said. If he has a broken bone immediately.
And if it remains after this treatment, and does not improve as much, instruct the physician to pour oil of sesame or musk into his left hand, and then drink from its source, and want the second treatment. and when it is found, grasp it and stretch it little by little straight away, so that the hairs do not break at the extraction;
but it is necessary to move it lightly from right to left and then treat. if it comes and falls apart.
And if the hair of the marrow is tightly closed, we have already said the treatment of removing and fumigating with herbs;
And if it is not what we have said, so beware that you do not go mad while treating.
but it is true that what is at the mouth of the mare, which you tie to the chest of the woman, then bind with linen thread. so that if the poultice is applied and it comes, and arrives.
but beware, when you apply it, because if she vomits so that the bad smell comes to her stomach and head, and sickens the patient. so then it is necessary to apply fumigation, which is a common remedy for this:
no one of the ancients has tried fumigation with crescent and dried figs.
The form of the instrument with which to fumigate a woman, when it is held by the flowers and second joint if it is this:
And it is to look like an ape, and put the head subtle in its place, and bind the arms wide over the fire;
and let there be fumigation over the embers, and the itch till it is spent, and begin again.
Most children are born without any solid foundation, whereas the head is inflated by some subtle humors. so it is necessary to balance when the humors are inflating because of its swelling, and not pour a bad quality into it, but rather tighten the bandage so that it does not touch.
then put a wet linen on it in wine and oil, and apply the dressing until he is healed.
If you doubt whether it will stop bleeding, then tie off a vein with a tourniquet and let the hands rest for a while, and put on an ostomy when the child gets up to go to bed in the room.
And sometimes comes this sudden collapse of a wound or an abscess; then it is necessary to cover that wound. if you have been cured, as we have said about the sharp iron cut.
Ulcers that come from under the foundation are nodulations, and swelling that comes from over the foundation or in the space between the two parts, if there is an ulcer or more.
and when that nodulation is old, it becomes inflamed, and moistens the whitish or subtle bowel, and sometimes these ulcers are painful.
and are considered to be caused by what is ejected or ventousity because the patient ejects, and sometimes in an attempt at it.
If there are fistulas that have perforated the bladder, and just above the middle of the penis; and come to just above the hip joint and just outside of the knee.
And so finds one that persists to the foundation, and not persisting: and it is that you pour your dirty index or foundation, and pour a subtle needle of iron or thread into the fistula when there is no twistiness.
And if there is twistiness, then you pour a subtle tentacle or the horsehair, until you feel the tentacle or the hair at your mouth.
and if you do not feel it, and there comes a purging of stool or vomiting or fever, as we have said: She does not prick. If you hurry to cure.
And when the fistula is passed just to the bladder or just to the channel of the urine, then it falls into the urine, and cannot be fixed by medicine.
But if she pricks right at the joint of the elbow, if the pain comes again to the left. but if there is no twisting and the hurt cannot be removed by treatment or with ointment.
and in these Persian fistulas, there is no cure but hard work and the vanity of foolish people who get involved.
In that which is neither Persian nor ancient, there is hope of health by iron, as I have proved, and if the sick patient lies between your hands on his back.
And lift the legs up to their knees, and let the knees be inclined towards his belly; Then pour out some tar or pitch into the wound, or if it has tortuosity, until you see where the opening comes from.
If the patient feels pain in the bottom part, if so then pour out your two indices, since then you see if the opening has pierced.
And whether it is discovered or you feel between your thumb the sinus or the cartilage, then know that it is a puncture. If it cannot be pulled out, neither can it be saved.
But there is one who is able to heal all cases, but this happens rarely;
And so instruct the assistant to make it happen, for when it is done as was said before, if you shave the cauterized area according to its size, just like he said; and pourge the whole inside of the fistula, till it comes from the foundation; and do this twice or three times, till you know that these burns should be applied, which are resembling to a feather of a bird;
and then apply a moist poultice in butter, till the burns are healed, and then apply a dressing of lint and stitching.
If he has such a sickness, this is good.
For if this, there is no other way to be cured;
and if they pierce between them, and not exactly at the point where it is on the foundation, and between your thumb and the tent, there is a thick covering of fat or flesh, and you see the fistula heal with this covering soft as wool; If they prick at the beginning of the ulcer, and drink blood afterwards before the tenting, and then apply the cautery, until it comes to a head in the tent. and the head of the ulcer will be discharged and will fall out;
and then make a demonstration of those charred things that seem like a goose feather, and there will be nothing left.
And if he does not want you to cut between yourself and the wound, but cuts in place of you, whether with fire or with a cooling medicine.
For the fire cautery has two effects: which is to say, the inflammation of those charred things, and the contraction of blood and the drying of moisture;
and then the cure for moist tents in butter or in hoarfrost, until it is dried out and the head of the charred thing falls into the bowel.
Now cure the wound of quick-healing bandages which are tied tight with a harsh thread, and these drying medicines.
Because when it is restored, it is healed and does not come back again.
And if an abscess comes just to the bottom of its foundation and is distant from the body, then put two or three pounds into its center and inquire.
If you feel the pain and enter through two openings where it is like piercing, or if there is only fire on the way of hope and expectation, through the administration of one of three kinds.
or you cautersize as we have said, or you cut just to the root, or if you can, take out needles and treat as first.
and do not go too far into the root, lest you cover the foundation that holds it in place, and the excretions come out in an unintended direction. then treat it as we have said;
then treat it as we have said; In case of good health, or if you should lose the covering and the wound then when it is struck at the foundation, or by attempt or by another instrument pointed out; and then you must define that free thing which is in the wound, as much as you can; and then study to restore the wound, and to keep the fistula in the opposite part from the foundation;
and then study to restore the wound, and to keep the fistula in the opposite part from the foundation; if you give a lighter thing to the patient.
and no fistulas occur in this way; and when you put the tent in the fistula, and it is coming out near the foundation of the skin above, if you take a tent which looks like this at the head; And I cut the thread on one side and put a tent all along the thread in the fistula until it reaches the head.
She is pierced on the margin of the foundation within, then extract the finger from that puncture, as you pour your dough or foundation;
And tie the head of the finger together, and assemble both joints together, and hold one to the other, and let it rest for one day or two;
And hold him tight at all times, until the fingers have closed up these spaces that are between them;
Then treat the wound till it is sound and healed.
If they have a fistula or abscess, so pierce it in every manner that you can, if it's not too deeply penetrated. For it is not right to tie with a cover if it's too deeply penetrated, and then treat it, as we have said, until it's safe.
The form of the spiny staff which we make a fistula from is very rough with one and a half fingers and sharp points; And on the other hand not, because of that one does not strike what they should not strike, as you see here:
Bloodletting can be done in two ways: Where they are in the foundation, like a grain of resin, and if there are small and large ones, cut to open the wound, and if there is one or more, remove them from the foundation and the head of the foundation.
but those that are removed do not have much moisture, and cut to open one or a little of the juice of citron or blood, and they have a red color of flesh.
and the treatment of those who have them in the foundation, so that you instruct the patient to cough towards the chambers, until the foundations become firm, and they appear the threads. if it comes to hand, and you pierce with nails, or hold it with your finger, then cut in its roots.
And if they cannot hold their wound shut by its moisture, then take it to the linen cloth or cotton, or from a piece of camel skin; and cut it open on both sides, then cut, and powder over it with some hot powders that will replace the cautery; or you will cauterize as it is said in the chapter of cautery, for the cures of other cures until they are healed;
and if the fundament cannot come out, then bandage the patient with a strong and bitter cloth to cleanse what is in the fundament, if it can come out openly; when the patient is in pain, and if the child has a hard fundament, then the treatment is light.
when the patient is in pain, and if the child has a hard fundament, then the treatment is light. and so you must grasp at your joint or with tongs, and strike, then heal as we have said, until it is sound, and that the fear of incision by iron. if it seems fitting to dress the wound in this way:
if it seems fitting to dress the wound in this way: take a thread of the right kind, and put it in an awl, and then draw the thread above and pierce the awl on the other side, and twist the two threads with the awl below, and if so, make them tight.
and tighten the thread firmly, then take it away, and extract the awl, and do so for all the others, and leave one for draining out the superfluity of the wound;
then put on the foundation a moist cloth in rose oil or in ceruse, and put it on the wound, and instruct the patient to rest.
And then let him stand for a while, so that he passes, and when he is cut, so that the treatment of ointment and other treatments are performed until he becomes whole.
when cutting firmly with a knife or fundament It happens frequently when there is a sharp pain in the intestine, and by the force of nature, and because the illness is old and medicine is useless. If it is fitting to reset him at the point of a spatula or with your nail to remove the scab above, which does not allow it to moisten; then treat him until he is whole, as he should.
and if he cannot be healed, then reapply the rasping more forcefully than before, until he becomes whole and is scabbed. then treat him until he is whole.
do the trembling A rash is an unintended appearance on the body, and it will go through its full course;
And sometimes the blood freezes, and it feels like death is coming, and it comes to all parts of the body, and more in the hands than elsewhere.
And the cure is that you take a cane of a goose quill or a strong vulture's feather, and put that cane on the freezing blood, until the purple circles appear all over it. Then turn your hand to the entire cane until you cut all over the freezing blood, and put it into its very roots.
And if it is a thorn of thistle or iron, do so with a thorn from the same material and in that shape, being subtle under and above. Don't pierce, for this will hold them together, and press.
And if you see, cauterize the freezing blood, just as it is in front of or near the cautery.
Nothing is done with gold or lead, or melted tin, or cloth.
And never is anything done with these small and large instruments, according to what they are suitable for. These are therefore the instruments used in the treatment of children and those who are weak and painful, are small.
These are therefore the instruments used in the treatment of children and those who are weak and painful, are small. The shape of the needle small and large when it is used large, or if the belly is tied in this manner:
And if there is a defecation or the belly is tied, as you see, and the head is inside perceived.
And if it has a hollow on one side and an opening on the other;
And if the belly or an animal (is treated) with medicines from a cow's bladder or parchment; and if there is perceived all of those small holes, and between each hole there must be space, then fill in one of them with thread very tightly wound around X (or whatever), and sew up the belly like a sow. And when the medicine is present, so hold it in front of an instrument made of a strong thread, then bind.
and this is the form of a circle:
And let the medicine neither be too hot nor too cold, and oil the head with a binding of oil or lard or beeswax, or something similar, then pour it lightly. then the physician makes his fingers bind him with both hands together, until he is completely still, then remove the binding, and lift up the patient's legs to show, and if the medicine comes out, tie him as much as possible. and if he sleeps a whole night in this manner, it is more great aid.
And if you bind the boils in a disease of decayed belly, and the medicine comes out quickly, so that it recurs when he is healthy.
And if they bleed out from their root or abscess, whether it is a cyst as subtle as for an infant;
and this is the form of the subtle cyst where the skin is constricted:
We have already discussed in dividing how to treat wounds;
or you will say the remedies for hands and medicine, according to completion.
I say that wounds are diverse according to what they are made of, and according to which part or place the wounds are located, and why they are made.
Things are made so that wounds are caused by a blow of stone, cutting with a sword and knife, or lance, or stick, or similar things;
or that they are made according to the laws of the body, as a wound that falls on the neck, or head, or flesh, or belly, or liver, and similar members;
and I will tell you the cure for each wound, and start with simple head wounds, because they remember coming in this chapter.
When a simple wound comes to the head and the bone is not broken, be careful if it is due to stone or similar things, and the skin is completely torn apart and the wound is great, and you are slightly afraid of an abscess. if you treat the head wound immediately, if it comes from bleeding of the wound, and treat one side against the other side of the belly.
and the patients should be replenished with wine and thick foods.
And if it does not recover, if he is weakened by thin food, and does not drink wine, and does not eat meat.
and put salve on the wound, if an abscess forms there, cotton wool soaked in rose oil alone, or vinegar suppository.
and if it is not an abscess there, then put on the wound, if it is fresh with all its blood, and does not move from the air, powder, I will say one of these below.
and if the blood has moved it, then put on some ointments until it is clean.
And if the wound is great like a sword cut and similar, and the lips cannot be assembled by stitches, then assemble them by suturing, as I will say about wounds in the belly, of the seam.
If the wound is exposed to bone and skin, and sticks only at one point, cut. then treat the wound with medicine, and restore the flesh by replacing it with leather, and instruct the patient to eat large quantities of food, such as meat, cooked eggs, and poultry, as well as similar things.
If you find rot or putrefaction, and it has not reached the bone, cut it through completely, and throw away, then take care.
If there is an artery in the wound or vein, without applying a tourniquet, and it cannot be stopped by medicine, choose to release the artery, and if you find the artery is loosened, tie it with a thread. If this does not benefit, then cauterize.
And if these wounds are small and simple, then the cure is light. and that you apply this powder which causes the pain to move.
And the manner of the powder is: Take some embers (fire) part from them; blood of the dragon two parts; Mix three parts of vivifying powder and subtle powder, apply to the wound, bind and fasten so that it bleeds well and unites with its blood;
and then tie well, and let loose when it does not swell; for you do not remove the medicine until she is healed.
And at no time is this made alone with calcined vivae, when you do not have cense or blood of dragon, but the artery has been moved by the wound.
and if the artery moves the wound itself, at that very moment, do not put on this powder;
but put some digestive ointments or powder made from barley flour mixed with water and honey until it sets well; the healer of other remedies until he is cured.
and if the bone fracture comes with the wound and it is small, so that the strait is pinched finely;
and I will tell you about this later after the head fractures.
of the neck wound
If the wound is on the neck and it is simple, if there is no difference between the one on the head and the other, but if the nerves of the neck or the artery are cut.
if it is the neck, if there is no other remedy to leave the treatment and put nothing restraining, for he heals slowly and makes them retreat; and do not put anything on the wound, for the substance of the nerves is cold, and the continuation of the sickness is with the brain, which is in the higher members;
but if medicine is needed, such as calcining in sweet water and mixing with rose oil, and cooling the solution also in sweet water, and other minerals like this, and moist ointments.
And if the wound is large, so that the skin and tendons are cut and bound with bandages, then the treatment continues until it is healed.
And if the wounds are deep and he has a head full of blood, then cut to the lower part.
and if the arteries are cut open and bleeding comes, then take out the artery, and apply ointment, and cautery to cauterize it.
and if the spines of the throat are cut open or the nerves, and the vessels are bound up because the flesh is going, then cut the vein on the chain of the neck, but do not touch the throat itself, rather apply it according to its natural shape. and then bind him at once, and let him stay for some days, then the treatment of ointments and poultices until he is made whole.
and if the wound has caused impression in the bone; and if he has broken bones, so that the limbs are completely frozen and unable to move, and whatever you can't see, leave until the wound is closed and the limb is set straight again.
and if the wound is fresh, so powder on top of the powder that I said. And if there is bone in the wound and it has an abscess, then the treatment will be as I have said in this chapter.
If it's an arrowhead or a knife cut, and the wound is deep, then look at how many arrows have gone through to see if the patient will live. so you know that the wound is mortal.
and if it's not deep, and the wound is fresh all over with its blood, then don't put powder on it for the first hour, nor tie it to prevent the bleeding as much as possible, revive him in your arms, and give medicine to the patient. But I apply an attractive dressing twice a day;
And if you do not have dressing, put cotton in the wound to absorb the moisture, and make the patient sleep on the wound for three days, or four days, or more; But if there is no spasm, nor trembling of the heart, due to an evil spirit. And when you see the healthy disposition, know that the wound is saved. Treat it then with poultices and other remedies, until it is fully healed;
And if it cannot heal and close, then know that there is an abscess;
If the cure is as we must. And if the wound is an incision with a sword or a knife, and it's shallow, or deep, or on the back, then do the cure of what is in front. since she is great, stitch it up.
and if it's small, cover it with powder; and if it's pierced into the bone, and has cut off pieces, as it pleases, and if they are exposed wounds. and if there aren't exposed wounds, then leave the wound to dry out, for it will ease the extractions.
and for other wounds that affect other members, consider the judgment as we have said.
a rupture of the belly
The internal rupture of the intestines is great and painful;
when there is a large wound in which no intestine can pass, or the intestines themselves are torn apart, because of the infection.
and the stitches are more painful, and sometimes a small wound is worse than a large one, because of this we put in more stitches to close the intestines, when not putting them back inside their original position.
because the intestine swells so quickly that it feels the pain, if it is put back in stitches again, and because of this small wounds are more painful, so that one must clean these internal injuries like others.
And says that the intestinal rupture is in four kinds:
The common stitches that occur on the belly, and the stitches for other wounds of the body, are also common with other wounds.
and all those stitches are more proper with the belly stitch, and I will tell you each one.
I said that when the wound is small, and no intestine has been ruptured, and there is little to put back together, it is one of the two methods: or because of the smallness of the wound, as we said, or because the intestine is swollen from the blow.
And when it is cold, burn him in this manner: Molest him with an onion soaked in hot water or with a handful of cloth dipped in cold water, until the swelling is gone.
and sometimes this wine is made to restrain, and it causes the soul to shrink.
And when you see the swelling depart, if you moisten the intestine with water or make it high and boil, because by this is cleared the entry into little things;
and if it cannot enter, then they make the wound slightly larger with that tool on which the hemorrhoids are struck;
and the first treatment is that they shrink it to its size, so that none of us should cut it unless there is great need.
and this is the way to break it;
so they cut inside the hornet's nest and do not retreat, and see how the form is. And when the wound is enlarged and the intestines spring out, if you put it back in its own natural form according to its own place, if you have the power, because this is necessary.
When the wound is wide, and it is in the lower part of the abdomen, it is fitting that you make the patient lie on his back, and put his legs higher than his head; and if it is in the lower part of the abdomen, you put his head and belly higher than the lower parts, and also if there is a rupture of the belly in one of its two parts, so that the navel is higher than the other.
and accordingly it is fitting to do as I said in large and medium wounds.
For small wounds put on what is suitable, and then hold in your hands the minister who holds all the wound in his hand, and assemble the lips;
And this is the common method of stitches, and it is that you prick an arrow or more, according to the quantity of the wound's width; then let one inch from the top of the wound, and poke in with a needle or strong thread. And pierce the two sinew tendons with two needle tendons, which are inside the skin, until you pierce from that part; then assemble the two head of needles four together.
then thread the end of a double thread around the needle in two parts; then assemble the two head of stitches on the wound together, and let one inch from that point, and poke in with another needle.
then tie the thread in the same way you made the first needle, and do not stop doing that until all the wound is held tight;
And let the needles be medium in size, between fine and coarse, for the fine needles pierce all of the flesh, and the too large ones cannot enter very well. for this is why they must be medium in size.
and it is not wise to push the needles too far into the flesh and the skin, lest they pierce and open up the wound before the suturing.
and then cut the needles to stop the bleeding of the patient while they sleep, and put tourniquets or bandages around the points of the needles to keep them from pulsing, and let them stay there until the wound is sutured.
and this method of suturing with needles is more convenient for small wounds, because it uses either one needle.
The second operation is common, and it is that you assemble the two head of the skin and the two joints of the flesh together with an awl or with one strong thread.
and when you have assembled the two heads of the skin four times, then take out the awl from where you started, in the way one cuts threads;
and put space between each seam the thickness of a small penny;
This costure takes seven hours, and I sewed a wound on one man who had an arrow wound in his belly, which was pierced by a knife, and the wound was more than one palm of flesh, and it was the intestines well two palms of flesh, and the wound was inside the belly.
I let my intestine alone for 24 hours then it stopped bleeding after 15 days, and the cure, and was healed.
And they had taken him to judgment that he would die, and this was a miracle;
and did not treat him with medicine, because I was in the left place where there is no remedy or medicine to be found; and put more wool on the wound twice a day, and washed it with water of honey until he was healed.
or I will tell you two proper ways to sew:
take the needle and thread from that same place inside.
when she has pierced the correct mark from straight to straight, whether it is on the skin of a siphon or on a cut or wherever you have sewn the needle, and then pierce her from that same place inside.
For the ears of this costume, so that you sew as the barber does the hair, and you leave once the incision is made on one side, and the other covers it, until the costume is completed.
The second manner of costume, which the Galens call properly, is this: they put together both parts in one piece naturally, and join one part of the skin to another part of the skin, like so:
Stick a needle or a small pin close to the wound, and pierce it alone, and leave both joints of the skin. Then turn the needle, and pierce it from the opposite side inside, through both joints of the skin.
Then pierce one of each from the back part which was previously hidden in that place, in two other joints on the opposite side.
and this is the most common method of sewing and stitching.
People who are not familiar with this phrase, and none of them testify to it, we must sew the belly with two needles, each having thread in one.
and you must put one needle from one side and the other from the opposite side, in the manner of those who sew open wounds.
and it is known that when a rupture occurs in the belly, the stitching is more grievous than for other wounds on the belly.
The judgment of the wound is like the judgment of other wounds:
and is that when you find the fresh wound with all its blood, in such a way that the arrow has moved it, then you put back the intestine and the cost.
then put on the powder mixed with charcoal, and if the arrow has moved it, put on any dressing that is available, until the wound closes. and cut off the thread, and sew the sinew, and the mirror; then cure the wound as you do with others, until it is healed.
and if you do not have medicine, put on, immediately until it comes out to the surface, cotton wool, and move it two times a day until it heals.
You have no need for any other medicine apart from simple cases.
and if you doubt that the wound will not cause commonality to the principal members, then it is recommended that you make a lighter application of oil on olive tree warm, or rose oil, and put it between the angles, and under the awnings;
and if he feels pain or putrefaction in the bowels, and it often happens, if you give him black vinegar clisters, and most of the time the putrefaction comes just to the intestine;
and drill inside, and see that when it's the large intestine, it's easier to cure than the small ones.
The intestine that is called "youth" cannot heal when it is diseased, and this is because of the coldness of the veins, and for the subtlety of the whole body, and the approach of its nature towards death.
And if the zirb jumps out of the wound, then set it back as the intestine, while it is fresh;
And if it has grown old and become black like that, then it is proper to cut the limb which has turned black, lest blood does not come out of it again, for there are veins and arteries.
then tie what is between the ligature, and hang the two heads down from the lower part of the wound to relieve the extraction of the serpents that come out, and the wounds.
of the burn from a hot iron.
When the intestines are swollen, and the wound is small, it can be restored in some people, because I have seen that one man was crippled or had his belly torn by a lance.
and this was the wound in the right side of the stomach, and it became inflamed and turned into an abscess, and from that came the expulsion and the vomiting.
I will translate the text line by line into English.
And when I saw him heal, I doubted that the patient had a bad condition in his stomach. and he had no illness, but remained in better conditions, eating and drinking.
and some experimented that when he had a small wound in the intestine, he should be bound in such a manner: wrap the gauze around great testicles, then assemble the lips of the wound, and when the gauze has closed over the mouth, place it on both lips, so that it chokes his mouth.
and then he strikes the testicles, and this holds so that he cannot loosen it, then puts another gauze on in the same manner as before, until the wound is entirely closed. and cut the wound.
When the intestines are bound with a thread in the intestine of an animal, in this manner:
Take the head of this thread from the intestine that is very clean, and then tie to the head of the other fine thread twisted with linen, and push the thread into the needle, and sew the intestine, and pull it through the route.
And this method of sewing is not effective except according to the way of promise and expectation;
And if the wound is great and wide, especially when it is in one of the intestinal channels, then there will be no gain or healing except by subtlety.
of a fistula or however it may be That which has grown long, when it begins to wither, is called a fistula; and even when it is swollen and has turned into an abscess.
And a fistula is according to the shape of the node that is not free and hard and white, or one does not feel pain, and is also like the beak of a bird's feather;
and sometimes clear, and sometimes thick; none of the above, or somewhat.
and I have spoken about the division of wounds in my previous writings, that any wound which is not healed, and does not have ulcers, is only caused by one of the seven reasons: that is to say, from the smallness of the wound or flesh; or because of its malevolence; or because it has hard flesh inside and on the lips, which prevents ulcers from forming; There is too much blood; where the meat is spoiled and of poor quality; or if the medicine is not good in the treatment; or because of that, corruption is a kind of plague; or because in the region's property, digestion is late, health is also late, and escapes by nature; where there are veins or bones;
and I have shown all these causes, and signs, and treatments of medicine in the cutting.
It is fitting that I inform you about the treatment of fistulas, which are created by hands.
Observing that a fistula has occurred in every member of the body; For in the fistulas that come from great veins, and from arteries, and from nerves, or to the scrotum, or to the intestines, or to the bladder, or on some of the ribs, or to the spine of the back, or to any joint of the hands or feet; and if it comes to damage of the principal member, and like this.
And all the fistulas of this manner are a hindrance to healing, and there is nothing but labor, and ignorance.
and if there is no fistula that has not come to you just like I said, and you have taken it for a cure, and it seems to be working, then take a tent of iron or wire, whether the fistula is straight, or crooked.
and if the abscess is twisted, then search for a subtle attempt to insert it deeper, because the points bend and move into the twisting.
and if the abscess has broken through and you cannot see it well by searching with attempts, then try to isolate it by one of the breaks, because the moisture is short from one break and contaminates;
and then ask for a careful examination of your poor body, so you know if it has bones or nerves, and see whether the bone is exposed to the fullest, and ask the patient well where he feels the pain when I press with my hand;
and when you truly know where it is, and if it is near a joint, or a nerve, or an artery, or a vein, or any of the places that I have told you, then cut according to what I have told you, and extract the worst part and the rotten flesh that are inside;
And then the treatment as long as it is safe, and if the fistula is well set in straight, so that you can copy them by depth, as long as you are able, then put wet towels on medicine cold, and pour juice into the head of the fistula, until the medicine corrodes the remaining surplus at the bottom;
and then put salve in equal proportions to keep it healthy;
and if it is not kept healthy by this, then the cautery as we have said, and if the bone is corrupted by the fistula, then make a copy.
If you wish or nurse them do not trouble or main members, as we have said;
and if the bone is uncovered, and there is corruption and blackness, then keep it until the corruption is completely gone, then do treatment in equal proportions as long as it is healthy;
and if it is not well, and the bow breaks like before, know that you are not far from death.
if it is discovered and you want to be at the bottom, and remove all the corruption, then restore life;
and if it is so well, that's good. But if not, know that the corruption is too far gone, and you cannot recover; unless there's no other remedy but to put your life in nature;
and if there's only a small corrupted bone, and you can treat it with tongs, if the instrument is suitable for it, and if it has many bones, then do not leave one behind.
and if moisture causes it to turn against him, and there is no mistake or fear, then he will be struck by both moisture and cold, and deliver the bones.
And if you cannot remove it in an hour, place the wound covered with a poultice to prevent putrefaction, and let them remain until the flesh is decayed between the bones, then they will have less difficulty with the bones.
and if it is a large bone, such as the thigh or knee, then only repair the decay until all the marrow has gone, and then restore the wound.
and if there is a great part of the corruption, and it brings just to the bone. then it is best to cover and cover all just until the point of the corruption, and then treat the patient until they are well.
And I will tell you of a fistula that happened to someone at home in their leg, so that you may take an example and help with your work.
There was a young man in his XXX years who had pain in his leg due to something that came from within the body, until the matter came out through his leg, and a large abscess broke open, and he could not get rid of it.
But the physician by his folly operated above so that the abscesses opened up and a lot of matter came out, and it became a fistula, and it was very painful to everyone who felt it in their body.
And many physicians had operated on him for two years without any success in the art of hands, until I was called and came to see his leg and the remedies that were being used to cure it, and what was coming out through the boils was causing great pain. And it would become red the body of the young man, and had a yellowish color.
I applied a poultice to one of the boils, and then I searched for all the boils, and found that some came together from different parts of the leg.
I failed then, and cut into one of the wounds so that I discovered a part of the bone, and found it rotten and pierced, with corruption inside the bone.
I recognized what appeared to be the rotten bone, and thought that there could be no other corruption, except for the one I had taken.
and began to restore the wound with medicinal salts over a long period of time and could not heal.
and then resumed, and discovered the bone in its original form, and found that the corruption was still present in the bone, and I thought about sewing it back together. But I could not bear to cut into one palm of bone, and the wound became all swollen, then I restored it with medicine. and it was healed and the swelling went away quickly, and I did not want to reopen the wound further except for the weakness of the patient, who could not endure, and because of my fear of his death. For the evacuation of blood so often occurs, but it has healed completely, and in its place an hard char came out of the bone, and was of good disposition and had no harm or counter-evil in all things, neither at the bedside nor coming.
And if the bone is broken in any part of the body, then it must be set in this manner: bind it tight, and stretch the ligature to the top of the bone that is open. and I put another stronger rope around the first one, and bind it above the joint that has opened the bone, and stretch it there, if you treat the corrupt part downwards, uncover the healthy part above, where it is visible, until the sinew does not bleed the healthy part.
And let him tie it to a stick or a table below the bone so he covers the corrupted flesh.
and it is necessary to cover it as often as one can see and feel the corruption, and cover again afterwards.
But if the bone is corrupted and does not open up, and the corruption is in the middle or in a part, then he must cut away the flesh entirely.
then let him tie sticks underneath, and then cover the corruption with one part over another; cover it so that the upper part is close to but not on top of the corruption as we have said.
and if the corruption is in the joint, then he must cut the corrupted joint, and cover the bone where it contains corruption on the other side;
And if the corruption is at the continuation of both joints, there is no other source than from the covering;
And if the corruption is in a finger of the hand, or in a finger of the foot, it is very severe in that case, but nonetheless you must inquire about the source of that corruption, how it arose; and purify it in all the ways you can, but so that the vein or the nerve does not prevent you from doing so;
and know that the incisors and the hairs around these bones are many, according to the base of the bone and its appearance, and their thickness and subtlety, and their size and fragility, and their hardness; and for this reason it is necessary to prepare each similar form with its own instrument;
And you will know from the work that it will show you the instrument which you have need of, according to your knowledge of this art, and the testimony of the ways in which the diseases are treated; if you think the instrument that you have need of according to what it is suited for.
the joints are supposed to be moved either due to something being inside, or due to something being lacking;
and when you have medicine to heal the corruption by the treatment of medicines, and it does not help, if it is necessary to cover that limb up to its root where the corrosion comes from, so that the patient escapes either by death or by the evil of the member;
and the signs are that the limbs become black, as if they were burnt with fire, and afterward pus forms, which goes to each limb in succession, and spreads throughout the body;
If you have haste to cover yourself, and if it is by the percussion of certain venomous beasts, such as scorpions from the sea and wyrms and similar ones, if the wound is on the head with two cuts, if they strike, and give no space between coming just to your hand.
And if it comes just to the hand, if it strikes the joint, so that the wound does not come to the arm;
and if it comes to the arm, if it strikes the bone;
and if it passes the bone, it is death, and there are no medicinal fires worth anything except the quantity of its virtue;
and thus you must do so whenever the wound comes to the bone: If it comes to the first joint, then she must strike after the second joint.
and if it comes upon a bone, then cut the entire bone. and if she rises on the leg, then strike at the joint of the knee.
and if she comes above the knee, then there is no other action but to strangle the patient to death.
and the manner of cutting or sewing the member if it is that you tie it above and below, and stretch out one strap below and another above, and serve the flesh between the two straps to a width of one span, until the bone is exposed.
then cut or sew, and put a strip of linen on each side, so that the seam does not touch the healthy part, and it comes to the patient another wound and abscess.
If blood comes out when you cut, then cauterize the wound immediately, or apply some powders that restrain it;
Then return to your medicine until it is complete, and bind the injured limb with a strong bandage, and cure it until it is healed.
and I will tell you how it happened in the house when it was under siege;
there happened a blackness that seemed like fire, and this corruption came first to his two feet, until it consumed the entire foot;
and when he saw the corruption, he hastened to cover his foot, and was healed.
and long after that, the corruption returned to his two hands, and he came to me, and I put certain remedies on him after purifying his body, but it could not be stopped.
And I command you to cut open my hand, and I do not wish that I have hope of feeling the matter. and I also fear that if my hand is cut open, he will die, for the virtues of the flesh are weak.
and he was desperate and returned to his land, and sought to cover his hand, and was healed.
and I have this story told only because of the fact that someone needs to do it.
No time ever comes when an abscess appears on the jaw, and lingers for so long that it causes a great swelling of the face. and then it rots and infects, and the swelling goes away, just like in our own bodies. And the skin that is above is as subtle as I weave, and it does not run against the bone, or against the nerve, and such a disease is called "healthy", and it is not called "furuncle";
but if it is so long that it comes against the bone to its full extent, then it is called "furuncle";
and the skin is that you cut through the entire skin, and at the same time when it is subtle, as we weave; and does not heal because of its corruption.
And if you have taken a vow that the skin heals, and there is no corruption in its entirety, and the skin is thick with fat, then the surgeon should make an incision like this:
Look to see if the breasts are large, and the bowels which are in them are of foul odor, then apply the Egyptian medicine that is made thus: Take onyx, and oil, and lard, equally, and put them to boil in one vessel over the fire, until the medicine becomes red, and as thick as honey;
And then take as much of this according to your need, and mix it with water and honey, and make a plaster for the breast, and tie up the hernia; and leave the medicine on for two hours, then extract it by squeezing;
do this many times until the breasts are well done, and come out loose.
And sometimes it clisters over water of ashes, when this medicine is not present, and you take ashes from the vine's stock, and pour water above, then it flows out, and clisters, until you know that the breasts are well healed.
But if the patient cannot endure it, neither the Egyptian medicine nor the water of ashes, then if you mix water and honey, so that there is a little lead in it. or you mix it with honey and wine mead, so that the honey has the property of purifying and washing, and the wine is made to warm the healthy.
and when you have done this, and you are certain that the breasts are well purified, if the clisterization of what is born from the chyme in them, and if you make emplasture diaphanite, and do it with rose oil and wine;
If you prick at your base with these cautery tools, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
And if the hole in the breast is small, and the needle of the cautery cannot enter, cut through with a small iron bar and apply an Egyptian bandage or basilicon cloth until it is enlarged.
And if the wound is too large, so that only the cut or the cautery can enter it, and if a perforated bowels are above, cut through below.
And if you cannot cover the breast beneath as it is seen, so that the bowel moves to its lowest passage, for when the bowel reaches its deepest point, do not let it be released, and if you cannot cover the breast beneath as it is seen, do so in this manner: The bowel moves lighter than expected and does not stop anything of the bowel.
The bowel moves lighter than expected and does not stop anything of the bowel. And take conservative medicines to place on the healthy part, and cover it with linen cloth that covers the entire body. Then tie the force to the broken breastbone in a way that is larger than the first one, for they apply ointment on the other covering according to the quantity of the break, and put it over the healthy part to alleviate the bowel, and do not hold back the large cloth with fire until after many days once.
And he who is on the broken breastbone often opens the bowel, and knows whether it is poisoned or not, how much blood comes out, whether it is venomous or not, or if it is being digested.
And take care if the patient feels pain or distress, and if there is an abscess or not, and when your medicine has reached this degree of spread and you see the nature that lies above the hurt flesh, then learn that the limbs are ailing.
And then release the bandage in the morning or on the third day, and when you open the wound, change another dressing, and renew the wrapping.
And if the fine veins are cut after long time, do not despair of your health, for good health approaches.
For there are some who delay treating their wounds with charcoal, and those who do the opposite.
And if he has an indigestion that causes pain in the breast after many days, learn that the breasts are not healing.
And if the breasts are late to heal and are swollen, then add dry medicines with moisture and dry ones in virtue, just as bandaging is defined, because there is a great part of vitriol, and that's the last medicine.
Prepare the wound with a defined shape, and do it with olive oil rose, and apply the rose from old wine equal in substance;
then the dressing is applied afterwards;
and the same thing is done as a confection, when it is not present at the wound, or you take a mirror and oil and incense, and break them, and grind the powder on the honey when it is on the fire;
and then in glue you tie and wrap, and stretch it on the chest, and at no time do you administer an aromatologist long as, and the roots of the celestial lily, which is also like fine flour twice a hundred; and using simple or compound remedies: Break the bone, and make a powder, and put on the honey that I said, and apply it;
and if the patient is long-lived and has not been cured by this treatment, then know that corruption has gone to the very bone, or is causing hardness in the bones, or swelling. as for the treatment of a fistula, as we have said before.
Panarice is an abscess that forms in the space between the thumb and the palm of the hand, or in the toe, or sometimes elsewhere.
and when it is old and no one takes care of it, the abscess can come to the toe, and it spreads and fills with pus as much as possible, until it reaches the root of the ulcer, and sometimes even further.
and comes the corrosion just to the bone, until it comes with painful odor, and the joints become swollen, and the color flees.
If you treat it as we said in the division, and the cure does not work at all, then it is necessary to copy on it; that is, to make a piece of the flesh around the abscess until its remaining part is closed up, and then cauterize the wound afterwards. The cautery is much great aid if the bone is sound and the joint is healthy;
and if the joint presses on the cartilage and begins to pierce it, and the flesh bleeds, so that you must put on the right under the joint, pointing towards the cartilage, and the nail in above, and strike that subtle and light blow, and put on the rest of the cartilage with medicines burning and corrosive to remove. then the cure shall be applied until it is sound.
And if the corruption is in the bone, then strike it, and pull out, for as long as the bone is corrupted, so will not heal;
And if you see the wounds corrupting, then treat them in the way as it has been said, until they are cured.
and if he is frozen and swollen, and feels great pain, it is best that you cure him first.
then cut the swollen area with a sharp instrument, cutting across it, and be careful that the incision does not go too close to the flesh beneath the swelling, because the patient will feel great pain.
and if there is anything put on it that soothes.
The swollen joints of those who have been injured by the blows of others' hands sometimes burst, and sometimes there are bones, and at times a single joint, and never does any birth occur in the roots of the joints, or they do not come out from some bone.
Those who are born with no sign of the wound do not move at all, and those who are born at the joint of the wound may or may not move.
The height of him who is fat is lighter, in this way: height measured from the root of a broad spatumile.
He who is born at the root of a joint is injured to be cured: if he holds himself tight.
In him who is born or must be at the rear end, if it is fitting that you copy the circular movement just over the bone, then cut the bone with an appropriate needle to its suitable length, and cure until he is well.
The sudden sounds that come from within the joint occur by birth, or by a sudden wound, or by fire's burning, or by similar things.
If one covers that wound, so the broken part must be repaired according to their natural forms; then puts between two towels or cloths moistened in rose oil, so they will not stick. or you put between two thin strips of ponce (a type of fabric), until they stick, if it is fitting.
If the sound comes to one of his two joints with the palm, cut the wound as it seems fitting.
These are heavy veins swollen with a foul pus, full of melancholy humors, which come out in more severe members of the body.
And it happens most to those who walk on feet and work hard and carry burdens.
It is therefore necessary to give them no stomach medicine and then cleanse with basil.
There are two ways of treating with iron. one is to cut them open and treat the black wound; and the other way is to tie off the vein and drain its force.
The cutting is according to this method; the first is the ankle of a hot water vessel very strong, until the thick flesh is broken down, then strain the swollen leg of the sick person from above to below at the level of the knee.
Now cut the vein at the joint, whether it's in the left or right hand, of a large size, then raise and pull out the black blood to your hand, from one end to the other, as much as possible without causing harm to the patient.
and then tie it, and instruct him to fasten his diet eating black meat.
and resume the evacuation and bleeding when veins are empty, and harm the patient.
The bloodletting is done in this manner: raise the leg of the patient, if it has much hair, then put it in hot water, and let the leg be immersed in warm water until it becomes red, and the veins swell.
and if you do not have pain, then apply the heat of fire, and then strike it directly into the vein at the long distance to the head at the side of the knee; or in the lower part near the ankle;
then cover the wound with linen, and burn the vein from each side until it stops bleeding when felt;
and then you see the vein red and black, and when it enters the linen so that it seems like a white cord.
then pour out the blood below, until it is lifted up by the linen, and then put it on a lighter linen, then strike again into the other place, at the three-dozen.
then burn the skin above the vein until it stops bleeding, then lift it up by the blood, just as you have done, and put it on another linen, just as you did before.
Now I have to move another joint, or if you don't need more, then lift it and strike at the same height twice with two feet;
Then pull out the joint by joint until it moves entirely, then strike.
And if you cannot pull and lift it, then prick with a needle into the strong thread tightly fastened, strike, and turn your hand on both sides until it moves. and hold that it will not strike again, because if it strikes, then it cannot be pulled or lifted, and it will cause harm to the patient.
and when you have entirely pulled it out, put a linen cloth moistened in wine and oil on the wound. And let the healer so that he may be healthy.
And if the body is broken and twisted and turned around together, and it is not straight, as we have said, then you must break it severely, but do not cover it. and cut it as we have previously instructed.
the form of the bone from which one cuts the skull should be curved, and do not pierce it, lest you cut the vein.
and it is of large curvature, because if it were subtle, you would cut the vein, but it should be large as we have said, and this is the form:
This vein is located in the lower limbs, in hot parts where there are no herbs or trees, and in earth that has no moisture.
and perhaps it appears in another place than in the joints, and this happens due to putrefaction that comes from beneath the skin, as when it comes within the body like a snake and towards the flesh, you must press between the skin and the bone.
If the inflammation of the vein is such that it comes to the leg a great swelling, then change the fluid, and begin the venesection forthwith, as one would take root of a plant.
When the joint is opened, it is advisable that you wrap around a piece of linen, one and a half fingers' breadth from the wrist to two and a half fingers' breadth, and the knee, and let the linen remain on the leg, and every time when it is not in front, wrap around the skin.
and if it is too long, cut off a part of it, and wrap the remaining part around, and do not cover its root, until all of it has been used up. for if you cut it off, it may return into the bone, and cause an abscess and putrefaction at that place, and a worse illness.
For this small thing it is necessary to treat her little by little until the head, and there remains nothing in the body.
And there is no time when this vein is treated with the length of one palm, or X, and someone comes to me who has come from X palms in length, and when you copy it, if it brings forth blood or is lost, and the arrow goes straight to the bone, so that all falls.
And if the material is empty inside, and nourishes with medicine for a day, then the cure does as the abscess.
And there is no time when this vein bursts in the joint of the foot, or of the foot, and it comes out much blood, and from it come clots.
Cure the wound as we have said before.
of worms that are born between the leather and the cartilage. This disease is called "bovine malady" in our land, because it often affects those who have eaten beef, and it is a small worm that grows between the skin and flesh, and moves up and down the entire body, causing pain from member to member, until the skin bursts or it jumps out.
and is associated with the accumulation of some humors, such as worms, lice, and parasites that live in the belly.
and one doubts its malevolence, because when it moves through the body, and goes up to the head, and comes to the eye, by chance it enters and destroys the eye. And this happens many times.
When you see it being treated and cured, if it does not burn then, only.
So it is necessary that you tie the patient above and below with a strong band tightly bound, then strike above and cure it, and if they fall to the bone completely in the chest, do not touch them, when burning with fire on top, until death occurs;
and the greatest harm it does is that they run on oil, as we have said;
and if you see it coming or near the oil, then bind under it the cord tightly formed, then strike above and cure.
and it is necessary to treat the patient with mundification of the body, using soluble medicines for corrupting humors, and if they are sick of spoiled or rotting flesh.
Of pain which comes from inflammation This disease is called "vakirir" in our land, and it is a pain that comes to some members, and moves from member to member;
and I saw what I told you. I went to see a sick woman, and she showed me one of her arms, and saw a small swelling on the vein of the arm.
and after that, I saw it growing even faster like a worm on the shoulder, much sooner than anything else, like living silver when it cuts through its flesh at another place.
The pain left the arm and went to the shoulder, and then it spread throughout the body for a little while, until it reached the other arm.
The patient told me that they are turning inside out, just as I saw.
I was amazed greatly how she moved from one member to another, because I had never seen this disease in that way. All the time I have heard that people who have had an operation like this are in great pain afterward, but I myself was not, just as I saw it in the woman.
and I thought that this was why the woman had a pale complexion and swelling of the veins, and because she appeared so constrained.
And they do not appear like this because of that reason in those who are lean and have pale complexions and swollen veins.
And when you see someone treating this illness, and the patient feels that pain, just as we have said, if they lift up and lower down hastily, and then strike them severely so that the swelling in the limb increases. and cauterize the joint;
and if you do not see it in your eyes, the physician of those who suffer from wind colic, as it is said to be caused by foul pills and serpent pills, and similar things.
Arrows are various, according to their shapes and according to the sizes of their bodies or where they pierce.
For the diversity of them is that there are those with great points, and small ones, and spines, and sutures; and those with two points, and those with tongues, and those with pieces;
and those that shed into any member according to its two manners: or in the principal member it sheds like cerebrum, liver, spleen, lungs, intestines, bladder, and similar members. When it falls down then in any limb of these members, and the signs of death, which I will tell you afterwards, appear to you: if it is necessary that you separate from the extraction of this arrow, because death comes afterwards in various conditions; and when that bad sign does not appear to you and the arrow is not driven straight into it, then you must take up a knife and cure the wound.
And the sign of the brain when the arrow pierces the bone and passes through the brain, where scotoma and pain are felt, with redness on the eye, inflammation and redness of the tongue, spasms and mixture of understanding, and vomiting blood. And if by chance he does not have fever of the nose, or of the ears; and if by chance it affects his speech and voice; and falls out of the moist white wound like pus, and also as if it were burnt charcoal;
and if this sign appears to you, then take away the wound if it is not bound.
The sign of the wound when it bleeds or pus, is that it is near the left breast, and feels like if it were pierced in something hard, not empty; and if the wound goes mute like pus, and in a black poultice, it comes with coldness and sweat, and fainting; When they are old enough to sense doubt, then death comes.
And the sign of the arrow that never bears pain beyond a smooth discharge from the wound, and the throat swells, and the patient's color changes, sighs high and breathes cold air.
And if an arrow shatters in the cover of the thigh, so that it is loose from the small bones. and causes great pain and great sighing; and all the limbs of the shoulders move.
And if an arrow is shot into or through the stomach, by chance, it may jump out of the wound without removing any indigestible matter.
And if the arrow shoots into or through the intestines and does not break up against the gallbladder, nor goes into any other part of the intestine, there is no hope for a good cure or the extraction of the arrow.
And if an arrow shatters in the bladder, and the urine bursts forth and comes out, and the patient feels great pain: Therefore he knows that the wound is mortal.
The other members, such as the arm and shoulder and neck and elbow and shoulder joint and shoulder blade and spine of the back and fist and chest and arms and legs, are safe in proportion to other dispositions. When the arrow is in the nerve or artery, and it's not venomous, just as I told you, because of this that you will do likewise.
It has happened in one’s home where an arrow pierced or cut the root of the nose; I tried it, and I pulled out from the other side the fat of the ear, and he was made whole in a short while.
And he pulled out a arrow from the fat of his ear under the parchment, and the arrow was returned, and you could only reach as far as the point towards his fist, and it was a large Turkish bow with all its iron near the ears.
The wound healed, and no other bad accident happened.
And he pulled out an arrow from the throat of a Christian, and it was an Arabic bow.
I shaved the beard, and worked on it very subtly until I pulled it out, and the Christian was made whole.
And carry a sash to the house where he was laid or on his belly, and thought he was dying;
and then after he had passed XXX days, if his condition did not improve. I cut open the sash and tied it in place, and applied it, and there was no bad outcome.
And if I saw a man who had cut or bruised himself on his back.
and the sash remained inside him for a while, and his natural disposition did not worsen, nor did he find any pain in any of his natural works.
And saw another man who had cut an artery on his face, and the wounds were opened. and he suffers thus with great pain;
And many other similar things.
And one arrow was stuck in the body of the king's son who had fallen from his horse, and he was slightly leaning to the right side; And the arrow was completely lodged.
I was summoned to the physician after three days. If I found the wound very narrow.
I sought her out with great subtlety, and did not find her; and he could feel a prickling and pain beneath his right ear.
I thought it might be the point of the arrow, I put up his left shoulder blade and stomach lining, because he was swelling. and I found the arrows of the arrowhead.
and I found the arrows of the arrowhead. I applied the ointment to my hands every day, and healed the wound directly, and so kept the patient for a long time, until he felt the arrow was inside his nose.
and it told me. I placed above the wound a medicinal mixture of acid and corrosive by hand every day, until it had dried up, and I tried it, and felt that the head of the arrow was drying in the place.
then I closed up the opening of the wound with that acid mixture, until the head of the arrow appeared visibly.
and after four months had passed well, I saw if the wound could be closed by cutting open my flesh to both sides of it, and it would not come out;
Now cease not from subtilizing and devising of means, until I took one day the tongs well made, according to what their form will come in the end of this chapter, as long as I do it, and restore the wound.
And they judge that the cartilage of the nose cannot be restored. I restore it then, and the wounds were soldered, and the patients were completely cured.
Or I have told you the quality of extracting arrows, so that you put your care on what I do not say, because books cannot learn everything.
But wise masters have done little beyond a small thing, and on what is present but failing, they find new work and nine instruments, by the discovery of strange things that happen in this art.
I say that arrows do not come out of limbs where they are stuck, except according to two manners: or because they enter from the left or otherwise.
and that which jumps over because it enters is an arrow entering into the inner limbs, and now it never happens again.
And if she does not jump anymore, then let it remain as long as the inner limbs are putrid and infected, and let the issue come out.
and also if she is stuck in the bone and cannot come out, let it remain so for some days, and move with every day.
and then she jumps, and if she does not jump, if there is a puncture in every part of the forehead, until the inner limbs are enlarged, and then take it out.
And if the arrow is put back in the body of man if we cannot see it, if it has filled the entire cavity. And if you feel it, then if there is no suitable instrument available;
And if you cannot cut through the tightness of the wound and the depth of the arrow wound, and there is no bone or nerve exposed, then try to cut as long as the wound will allow.
And pull out the arrow if you can, and if there are nails in the arrow with which it clings to your ear, if one of two parts is stuck in the flesh that you can reach, then break or bend the nails so that you can pull the arrow.
And carefully, so as not to break the arrow, pull it out more gently.
And if you cannot do it once, even if the pain persists until the wound has closed, then treat it, for the extraction is an agony. And if the blood causes a counteraction, then follow what we have said about the treatment in this chapter;
And beware of the incision on the nerve and vein, and put in place as you wish to move the arrow quickly, or soon or firmly.
And put the patient according to the shape he is in when cutting into the arrow wound, because this is the greatest aid that can be, and if you cannot do it, then put him according to what the signs show.
The arrow wound that comes from the other side, or if it is blocked with something, or if the skin is inflamed in that place which can be seen or felt afterwards:
cutting down therefore on it, as long as the tongs can take hold, and then pulling out; if it is stuck now.
And if it is retained in the bone, turn your hand around it, until it enters into the bone, and widens the bone, then pull.
And if it cannot come out, so let it go again, and then continue extracting until it comes out.
and if an arrow is stuck in the wound, pour out the entire arrow.
and if the arrow comes out, and you see pouring medicine, then pour the medicinal instrument into the wound so that the points of the arrow enter the hair of the instrument.
and then pour out, and if the arrow is stuck in the hair, then pour the medicinal instrument with points entering into it, to help extract.
And if the arrow is touched down, it is best to copy the whole shaft to where the venom is or is supposed to be, if possible, then treat the wound as it seems.
And if the arrow sticks out or pierces or to the belly or bladder or chest, and it is near a vein, then you can cover up, if you must.
and protect the vein and nerve, and then pull them out, and then cut the wound, because it is necessary. and the treatment until it is cured.
The form of the tongs used to treat arrows is like a bird's beak, and thus it looks:
And there are many ways: large, medium, and small, according to the size of the arrow.
The form that has hair on the end is like a bird's feather, to press against the tip of the arrow, just as it is:
Of veins from which one can cure oneself are thirty-one, because there is an opening for sixteen (this means that) two branches which are after the ears, called "the two 'herbs'. and the two arteries that are in the two temples appearing. and two veins that are in the two armpits of the two eyes, called "aspire". and the vein which is swollen at the forehead; and the vein that is in the head of the nose; and the two guidebones which are on the collarbone; and the two veins which are in the upper lips of the mouth, and these are called "augerich" or veins. and the two veins below the tongue;
the veins of which one is commonly found in each arm,
one is the cerebral vein, and it is on the left side of the chest, and they call it "vein of the head" among the people. And the moine is called "faste", and it is composed of the cerebral and basilic, and they call it the people of the village "vein of the heart". And the basilic is located at the right side of the shoulder, and they call it the people of the village "vein of the stomach", and it is above the flesh, and it is that from which one heals, who manifestsly opens up above the pouch.
And the radial vein is the one that is between the auricular and the ulnar vein.
and in the leg, where it is at the foot are three veins. one is beneath the wing of the pocket on the left side of the shoulder, and the second one is at the ankle on the right side. and the vein which is called "nesse", is located at the ankle of the other side;
and in the other leg there are three veins under those.
The vein that is located behind the ears if aided by ancient remedies for catarrhs and migraine;
and the qualities of the vein, just as I tell you, and is that by raising the patient's head, and stroking the cloth or veins with a rough fabric; then the patient's neck is tightened with a strap, until the two veins are visible behind the ears at two levels of the head: because then one must press down on it, and where you feel the pulse beneath your thumb.
Take the lancet, and the braid down through the vein just beneath the bone; then lift your hand up to the entire vein head, and strike and cut and let the vein go well. II must now penetrate into the wound as far as you see;
Then tighten it up so that it is healed;
and I have already said incision and cautery in the first book.
The sickness of the two arteries that are in the two temples, if there is old inflammation and soreness, and accustomed ophthalmia, and at the place of the tears drops into the eyes;
and the qualities of the sicker are as I said: and thus the patient must tie his neck so tightly that both veins appear open. and they feel pain beneath their throat and then let go.
then lift the vein up high towards your throat index finger, and pull out the lancet underneath, and lift the vein up high again, and strike it, just as you did in two other veins, and do bleed according to your necessity.
then put the patient down, and place your index finger on the vein for an hour, then cover with cotton. and then tie it off, and let it be until it is healed.
and this is what we have discussed and treated in their application and extraction, at the beginning of the book.
The sickness of the vein on the forehead is worth as much as the sickness of the head with ancient diseases such as emigration and redness.
and the quality is that patients who strain their neck in twisting will be aware. then take the instrument which is called "surgical saw", whose form is:
And put the point on the vein, and press upwards from your hand, or from another thing, and let the wound bleed according to how much you see; then deliver to the patient the neck, and tie the vein so that it is clean and there is no bleeding whatsoever.
All things considered, it is not necessary to make them too big. And the strong one goes awry, for the bone is near, and by chance, breaks the sharp thing when it is subtle.
The injury of the two veins that are in two arteries if you hold fast to the eyes, and to the sinew, and to the redness, and to the swelling in the ear, and of the diseases of the face;
And the qualities of their injury are such that the patient is straining his neck by twisting any ligament, as before.
then the wound, and if there is a strong wound through it, a little long with a sharp flame, a little wide, for there is no chance of being caught. And if the flame (cautery) is subtle, perhaps it will break;
then do a stitch in the wound, so much as you have need, and then tie it up tightly, and tie it well.
The affliction of the gallbladder with bile, so much as it causes fever and soreness, and diseases of the face, such as emigration and redness that comes upon the face, and especially when it is old.
and if the patient contracts an ulcer so much as his collarbone is contracted, then strain his nose to your left hand, and take out the subtle flame, and strike it in the space between the two nostrils, because the vein does not open well in that place, and he will begin to bleed now.
And do not cut too deeply, and make a clean cut according to your necessity, then bind it for one night, because it is quickly restored.
The disease of the two joints often leads to tightening of the sinew, and at its beginning, it brings on ulceration, and much sickness, and boils, and corrosions, and itching, and ulcers, and lesions.
and the qualities of the disease are that if the patient strains his neck away from one and both sides, as we have said;
and if the master is standing over the patient's head and the patient pricks the vein in a long way just below it, then treats the wound seasonably, or as much as is necessary;
Then remake it again in the other vein, then cut off the ligature, and tie on the veins moderately, so that the patient does not choke. and let it stay just until morning, so that the wound is healed.
About the disease of the liver. The sick of the veins of the lips help themselves to coal in the mouth, and to the corruption of gums, and fissures of lips, and do not heal.
And if the wound has been healing, then sit down in front of him, and tie his neck as I have said; Then turn the hand, and look at both veins, one of which is in the right palm and the other in the left, recognizing them by their black color, and also because there are small black veins around them:
so that both of them are cut, and if you do not recognize one or the other, and you are in doubt, then cut the larger one from each part, and just like this for all four veins, since it is a same manner.
of the sickness in the lower regions of the tongue The diseased veins that are below the tongue aid after the head is cut open, and it is at the constriction of the neck, and with illnesses of the eye, and with illnesses of the mouth;
and if the patient is skilled enough that he sees the disease take place between your hands in front of the sun, and he lifts the tongue, and looks under each corner at a vein black;
Healers then both should be called, and do not go too deep in, for these are the arteries.
The veins of the throat which we commonly heal are healed in two ways:
or they are pricked with a sharp millet seed, or an olive seed subtle like needles, and it is called "anesil"; and are long and subtle according to the size and narrowing of veins. The form of flame mint is very famous and is as wide as you see.
It is necessary to open the vein cheeks that contain flat blood with large visible wounds, and that contain large wounds and trouble. and this is the shape of a flame olive.
And is more subtle and pointed, and it is for healing the small veins subtly, or there are subtle clots like citrus.
The basilica stain, which is one of these veins, helps with illnesses that are in the throat, and around the neck, and on the chest, and in the stomach.
and it is suitable for the lord that he applies the application, and that he warms himself from the artery that is under. And if he cuts the artery, and fresh blood comes out, then it is considered to apply stitches, as I have said. and let him not prick at the flame, but cut it off as one does with a needle.
And if the gallbladder is not opening visibly, it is advisable to remove it and change another. or you want only some of it, or you heal the vein with the same medicine in the arm. it opens visibly; and cuts at the flame with a needle, as we have said.
And if you see the skin on the vein, it is also advisable to remove the arm, until you know the pulse. then mark the vein of the entrails, and then bind the arm, and cut the vein with a needle. And beware that you do not strike the artery when you see the swollen limb, for it is of the artery: Choose then.
And if you see swelling above as in the urine of a child, and there are no redness or subtlety, know that it is not of the artery: Hurry up then, and put on your surgical knife lengthwise, then cut open the vein if it is not inflamed, for this happens often; if his arm sticks, and leaves it so, and does not move the limb.
and let there be fear, and do not move him until he is healed.
And if it is not bound by bandages and he swells up, and you wait for him, and the medicine is not present to him, then strike the artery as soon as it opens, because the head of the joint will retract. And if he becomes bound by bandages.
And take a scrape from the fistula, and cut it, and take one of the halves and tie it well onto the other half.
if he is not bound by bandages, that is good. if it is not so, then he must cure him as we have said, with the powders that bind wounds.
And the bindings do not cause more harm on those who are subject to small wounds and the swelling of the joint in the arm.
The afflicted vein in the middle is relieved so that it treats wounds of the head above, and wounds below the body, because it is composed of the basilic and cephalic veins, as we have said.
and it is fitting for the master that he warms himself in the vein below, and if he cuts too deeply, and he injures the nerve, and it swells, and the wounds become infected, and by chance he cannot heal.
and this nerve is often opened many times, and if it does not open in any man for its subtlety, it is fitting to sanitize the instrument afterwards. and spare the nerve from your power.
And if there is a vein between the two nerves, cut it with length.
The afflicted cerebral vein is relieved, so that it treats wounds of the head, and relieves the eyes.
and it is prudent to heal by pressing on the flame of olive oil or the flame of myrtle, for this is the most safe of all veins, because it has neither nerve nor artery. But it is wise to seek the lighter route first, and do not grieve about it if you must try it for the first time, and start again. and by chance they swell in some men, but you should not grieve about it the first time.
The quality of the wound is according to your opinion.
The first thing you must know is that healing comes only if it serves to preserve health, and to ward off diseases from coming.
and let the healing be done in one of the three veins that are or cost: It's a type of head cold, fever, basil. and it is prudent to be cautious at the beginning of prayers in June, and in autumn and winter after fasting, when the signs of replenishment appear;
and one must be cautious on the first day or third day after two hours or three days.
The cure which is administered for various diseases has no fixed time determined, but it is taken when needed at any hour or in all times.
and it is not advisable to cure children just before the age of XIII or women who are pregnant only up to the seventh month. It does not suit to heal those who have passed LX years (60 years).
And when anyone wishes to be cured by whatever means, it is advisable that he should take a light purgative enema if he has much phlegm retained, so that the veins may carry away the superfluities of pus which are harmful to the principal members.
No one will recover if they are too spoiled by meat, or who is drunk, until they become such.
and if war has weakened the person after colic, vomiting, and decrease of belly wind, and frequenting woman, traveling, watching, and journeying, and that which weakens all the body, either by something of the arm or through the flesh;
then subtly remove the humors, without excess, by meat and drinks and medicines, if you have one such poison.
then take a bath, if no thing is forbidden, in order to remove the wound, and you will recover from the pain of the vein on the third day, as we have said.
And keep that day of work free from toil, pain, and luxury, and similar things;
And be careful and cautious, and let the healthy ones be given precedence over those who are sick, and rub the arm two times or three, then pull out the bandage halfway, because when it is too tight or too loose, it cannot correct itself without.
And then rub the affected area with your hands, until the veins swell and you can feel them;
Then anoint the healthy ones with a small amount of heated oil, then place your left hand on that vein below the affected area, just enough to stop the blood from flowing and prevent injury.
For there are veins that are as empty as strings to the seller, and so are those that are full of windiness, so that when one puts flame upon it, it retreats to flame, and cannot open the vein, and thus is like these; and if the vein opens up, then it is because the wound is too narrow, for this reason they must be advised on these matters.
And if the vein opens up the first time, it is good; but if not, then it must be repeated again on the spot or above that point, as soon as possible, unless it inflames.
And if the wound is inflamed and the patient hopes for it, if they let it rest for one or two days, and do not bind the arm: By chance I will come across abscesses.
Do not enter the bath, then resume treatment if it pleases;
and if the wound is small or if it has no subtle treatment, and you doubt that it will not spill much blood as you see, then trust in the same wound itself directly.
and if it happens quickly, so that the flesh is inflamed; because this happens many times when the wound is small.
If you see the flesh inflamed, do not resume treatment again, and put a little of lard on it, because it lightens the body with pain, and is soft in this liver that the lard.
and thus serve the ligament of oil in each wound to heal the veins, so as to stop the flow of blood.
and thus makes a triangle and bowstring from it, when placed on the limb; if so subtly applied as to be without splinter or when it is too thick.
And if there comes a large abscess that has happened many times, namely when the vein is only open at those times or the opening of the vein is small, then you hasten and place on the limb a moist sponge soaked in water and in wool, and restrain it for an hour;
and it is necessary that you do this after the issue of the vein's blood, and if it remains on the limb for some days without any inflammation or greenish color, then it will not be harmful; And if you see it, put on no powder of aloes or myrrh made from camphor, monstrous thing, or similar.
And many times, an abscess and appearance occur in the cavity of the basilica:
Put then your hand on it, and if you find the left joint swollen under the pressure of the hand, so is that appearance bad. Avoid then that you do not put on any of that which we have said, for in some cases without cutting the artery;
but apply a plaster of plaster to dry the joint, then heal with another treatment, until it is safe.
And deal with each according to the quantity of their virtue, and the color of the wound.
For if it is not black, let it be left out for as long as it turns red; And if you see a large wound, let him so it is subtle. and if it is too swollen, let it cool down.
It is best for one who is thin and weak, and needs extraction of blood, to make a larger wound, and apply more ointment.
and for one who is weak, do the opposite, and it is best to make him sick less often, and he must be made healthier by cutting across, not pricking.
This method of healing is safe from bleeding and clotting of nerves, and it's better than the long healing of a small wound or the short healing of a large one.
And for one whose fever must be treated with healing, it is best to give them warm milk in the juice of green apples. In case of a high fever, apply to the pulse three times or four; if it is of cold complexion, apply a poultice made with warm milk in honey syrup, or in aromatic honey syrup with spices such as pepper, canel, ginger, and cloves, and a well-smelling syrup.
If the patient has a wound on his palm, after a great amount of bleeding, it is advisable that he drink a broth of char and a subtle-smelling syrup, and use other things as we have said in the division or chapter of syncope, for the evacuation of blood.
If he is to cut off one arm and heal it again, if this is allowed, when the patient is weakened by great bleeding, it heals little by little, according to the continued power of the virtue.
If he who is to cut off one arm after the first bleeding has strong flesh, it heals in seven hours after the first bleeding, or after the eleventh hour.
And whoever is to be healed in another part, if it must be healed the next day or the third.
For it has much blood within the body which is causing a high fever. if it is necessary to apply a large quantity and enlarge the wound so that it fills with blood. then you must reward all the healing conditions and put your hand above some fingers so that death does not come through the wound, for this often happens when a nurse is careless.
and it is not necessary when you see someone releasing their arm, and making the wound bleed again, and if the limb is lost then it must be closed by pressing on the place. but if it's bent, then extend the arm immediately, for this would be bad.
but let it stay as long as it heals again; or point at the tip of the flame, until the vein that was cut has stopped bleeding and you place a poultice made from silk soaked in water, and press gently.
And if the vein is sprouted, so let it be and do not strangle it any more, until the abscess is appeased.
And if it is necessary to treat the wound a second time, then in the same vein as before, or in another vein, or in the other arm.
The vein in the arm is healed in place of the vein on the head because it is composed.
And the manner of the treatment is that the patient puts their hand in hot water, until the pulse is red.
Now let my be linked moderately, so that the vein appears well, then let it be healed now through and through, neither too small nor too large.
And let the large ones be cut and let it be healed well near the joint of the hand, so that without any issue, if you put the hand in warm water, and let the wound seep into the water, until you have enough.
and if it's in the suppurating state, do not put the hand back in warm water again, because you will make it worse by putting it there.
and the health of this vein is more saved from all other veins, than there is no artery or nerve.
The health of the little finger of the right hand is worth more than all other diseases of the liver, and it is this way:
Strain the hand, and pour it into hot water, until the vein is cleansed, if you see. and if it turns to blood, and if you cut it the whole length, so that nothing hurts.
and do not cut too deeply, for the nerves are now exposed and have no covering, and then put the hand back in hot water, if it is not frozen in the wound, and will not come out.
And when you have treated the wound as much as necessary, then put oil and sinew on the vein to solder it hastily, and do this for each place.
The sickness of the sinew in the left hand is worth the disease of the mouse, and do this just as I told you for the right.
The sickness of the spine is worth as much as all other diseases that are in the body, since they are such as those of the mare's, and retention of flowers, and disease of the rains, and of the joints and the legs old, and similar diseases.
And cleanse the wound if it is bleeding, and that the patient puts some powder in hot water, and rubs on the vein until it stops, and binds above the joint of the foot. and if the vein is at the ankle and goes up quite far on top of the foot.
Let the inflammation rise then or if it becomes more swollen at the knee, what does it do?
And if you cut on the flesh above the bone, guard well the nails that are beneath, and cut the wound to cross like cutting.
and let it be still in its place.
And if it cannot come out by itself, he puts the foot in the water, and lets well empty the vein.
And if the salve is needed for the first time, if it recurs a second time above a little spot, because the liver is salty;
do not doubt the nerve, as we have said, and do it similarly with the sponge of the other foot evenly.
The liver of the saddle vein is in the heel of the foot and its wound is worth the pain of the groin, when it is cut.
And if the quality of its salve is such that it enters a vein, and strangles above the knee four times by twisting, because otherwise the vein will not open;
and if she opens, so the healthy one in all kinds of ways that you can do it, and through crossing; and copy its muscles because the limb is swollen, and it is very tight in all directions.
and copy its muscles because the limb is swollen, and it is very tight in all directions. And if you do not find it, the healthy one will burst through anywhere near an opening or under a foot, and towards the little toe, and beware of the fingers;
and make as much cut at the vein that you see, and then loosen the ligature, and put on cotton and bind it; it is now healed.
ventooses are made of horns, or of nails, or of glass;
and evacuation is done in two manners: or by pricking and attracting blood, or by pricking.
And this evacuation which is done by pricking also has two manners: or it is to all fire, or to fire.
and evacuation made by pricking and the extraction of blood is done in twelve leagues of the body, so that one may be entirely without flesh on the head. and the others are covered with the neck. and two more on each side of the neck; and those beneath the chin. and the winded of the two shoulders; and the wound above the groin; and the wounds in both arms; and the wounds in both legs; and the wounds on both heels;
and wounds from the stings of small veins that are scattered throughout the flesh, and for this reason they do not become inflamed, unless as is done with venous bleeding; and it is not necessary that they be drained, unless by fire or the heat of the senses, in no disease that comes from overfilling, until all the body is empty.
And if necessity of illness calls for it, or due to custom, then bring each one an hour at the beginning of the month, or at the end, and every time;
because there are some who, when they need to venesection, have heavy heads;
and to those who experience repletion and redness in their face, and head, and neck, and darkening of the eyes;
and to those who experience a drop of blood in their mouth, and have swollen tongue, and are bleeding. and to those who are dreaming, and seeing blood and nausea and death-like things.
And when we see these signs, and even when it is in its third month, we command to be ventilated after three hours of the day.
The sick of the moisture so much hurts the ear ... that comes to the eyes, and it is not good if only this happens after the evacuation of all the body;
And this ventilation is in place of the head pain, and it is not good for those who have a cold complexion, or who have diarrhea, because it causes great harm to them;
And therefore, it is not good for the old man to use it, or those who have head cold diseases.
And those who recover from it often become blind, and for this reason they must put the ventilation instrument a little further down by the doubt of blindness.
The ventilation on the neck is in place of the head pain and the gallbladder, and because of this, it brings tightness to the breast, tearing of the channel of the stomach, and thirst, and bloating.
And it is considered necessary to give more space, because if she holds too tightly, so the bowels become obstructed or the stomach and liver.
The swelling of the lungs when it cost on both sides of the chest causes severe head pain, eyelid swelling and migraine, and strangulation, and pain in the roots of the teeth, and is a sign of the sickness of the basilisk;
and it is necessary that you command the lord to press his hand on it when it comes, so he does not cut the artery, and does not be present during the bleeding.
The swelling under the chin if it is severe causes illness of the mouth, and corrosion of the gums, and similar illnesses that are in the mouth; and it is in place of the wounds on both sides.
The windings of the shoulders are worth the disease that comes from heat and overcharging.
The lacerations of the cutes (groin area) are valued as much as three veins on the arm, because they cause blood loss from those large veins;
and instruct the master to not cut too deeply, for the flesh is thin and he knows beneath (the surface) nerves and arteries.
The abscess on the buttock is valued in terms of the hemorrhoids at its foundation, and with diseases (diseases) beneath, it is fitting that the abscess be large and filled with mucus, so as to have need of being properly treated; and in case it is subtle, it would break. and if I do great wounds.
When the swellings on the legs heal completely, because they attract blood from all the body, and are relieved of old pains in the joints, and the inflammation, and the swelling of the bladder, and they bring down the flowers;
and are replaced by the two kneecaps, and the two calf bones, because they weaken the body after long use, and make it come to a more severe condition.
The way to apply the swelling is that you put it in first empty, and then as soon as possible, and place it quickly, and move it equally, and do not cease doing so until you see the new redness and inflammation of the wound.
Then make it hot, and apply dressings, and take precautions in the arrangement of the bodies, because there are those who have turned to charcoal, and some can bear it better. if you must cut only once, and if you must make large wounds, and deep ones. and suck more gently.
And if they are not very large, then you must cut twice: the first time to open the way of the great blood.
and if they are very thick, then you must cut a third time;
and when we wish to treat the little blood drops one by one, if we suffer from a single cut. And if we want much blood, then let's continue frequently;
And if the clot is thick, then cut into it with great force, and when you reach the edge, it's clear that the wounds will be perceived suddenly, and treat those who have thick skin and hard; and who have pores that are easily open, that you anoint them with oil, ventouses ( probably "sponges" or something like a poultice, but I don't know what "ventouses" is supposed to mean), and dissolving. if it's in the violet oil, or in sweet almond oil, or in cucumber seed oil;
and if it's in yew oil, or in cassia oil, or chamomile oil, or anything similar.
If the flow is large and cold, you must take turmeric oil, or balm oil, or anet oil, and similar things.
If those whom you have healed with a tender touch and large pores, do not put any oil on them, but rather wash them after the application of rose water, or cold water, or mulberry water, or cucumber water, or porcelain melon water, or other similar things.
And those who have much moisture, so they lift themselves from the air, or from water of myrtle, and sumac, and similar things.
And those who have great swellings rise from the old wine, or from fresh water, or from decoctions of anise or camomile, or other similar remedies.
and they should not be cured with suction in front of the bath or in the bath, but after the bath for an hour or two.
and they should not sleep after the suction, and it is necessary to make them warry when they are to be suctioned and when they are swollen.
And beware those who are sick with colic, and if they are not too swollen and inflamed. if they should take cold things, such as apples, grapes, and lettuce at ease, and similar things. and let them eat children, and broth of chestnut, and moist meat.
and let them eat children, and broth of chestnut, and moist meat. And those who have a cold complexion, should drink syrup of honey, and sweet-smelling wine in moderation, eat little, and eat children's flesh, and small birds' meat, and pease.
and the day he will be vented, should drink more than eat.
and it is convenient to give some food such as tripe or mutton at some houses before the venting, or after, to comfort the main members. and they should be taken in small amounts, but it is not suitable for those who are hot to drink.
The ventouses that are applied to cause pain are those placed on the liver, and on the mice, and podagra, and on the stomach, and the bowels, and the joints, and the groin, because these members do not bear to be pierced, unless it is done for a painful symptom in one member, if as we apply the poultice to the breasts when they heal.
Because of the viscosity that is at the member, as we put ventouses on the belly and on the mouth to reduce the member;
and cut off the pain, when there is inflammation or stone, so that by its attractive power at random the inflammation goes away, or the stone falls out of place;
and so it is done when one places him on the liver and on the gallbladder when there is retained viscosity, and these venthouses are empty only to suck out; and sometimes they are administered with fire, and sometimes only with cold water, as in cases of pleurisy, and in such manner that one fills the ventouse with hot water or with it has cooked herbs suitable for this.
The form of the suction to be administered with fire is thus:
And the surgeon takes two fingers of breadth and half a palm deep from top to bottom, and puts one on the costal region toward the middle of an inch, so that he can push a needle in, like placing an arrow, and it should be soft so as not to bleed the patient when putting on the limb;
and it has an inch of a crossbar of iron or wood to put a bandage on, and there are large and small ones, as needed for the sickness and age of those who take them;
because the ventouse wounds in children are different from those in old people, and in thin ones than in fat ones;
And you must then put this ventouse on the limb:
wrap the bandage of wax or linen around the limb and put it inside the ventouse through the crossbar so that the light will be at the bottom of the ventouse, so that it does not burn the patient;
and then put it on the member, and place your thumb above the gap where we have said so, so that when you want to pull, if it goes in vapor, and take out the vacuum;
and bind it along the same line as before, and rebind often, if you have need.
In the vacuum, which is used for treating diseases of the pleurisy, is given to all that are inflamed, with no thumb or gap, and is applied only when it is filled with inflammation, and placed on the member alone;
and this is the form:
No dressings are applied except in the limbs where one cannot put a vacuum due to smallness, like lips and gums, and similar things; And when you clean out the chest with charcoal, as two or neither, and similar things;
And the qualities of the patient are such that when you find ulcers in waters that are sweet and free from poison, take them;
And put them in sweet water until they are recognizable and have nothing in their intestines; And then wash with vinegar and antiseptic, then rub the affected area until it is red, and put on ulcers;
And when they are flat and have healed, if it can be done to put a tourniquet, do it, because this is very effective.
If not, lift the limb high, and then put it in water, much better, and then warm it;
And if the limbs are healthy too soon after the operation, then put on a linen cloth soaked in cold water, and put it on him, until his breathing is stopped.
And if his breathing is multiplied, then put on a solution of crushed glass, or vinegar, and similar things, until he stops breathing.
Or apply to him moist flesh peeled of snow, and let it sit on the limb until it dries up, if it will stop now.
And if you have more of this matter, take other openings.
And if the openings do not want to take place, then rub the limb with fresh blood, or prick it with a needle until they occur, and then put them on, and immediately when you feel the opening, let it dry.
and when you see that they bleed, so sprinkle some powder on a little distance and with the broken thread or ash, they will now stop bleeding.
The book of fractures begins. This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine, and it deals with the restoration of fractures and dislocations.
Know this, young book, that the leeches from this chapter have never been seen by any of the ancient books, nor do they read any letters.
and for this reason is strange the knowledge in our land, because I have never found a good one.
and I know nothing, except by the knowledge of ancient books, for which I have studied so much and treated the science, and through experiment, and from my accustomed life.
and I have described in this chapter what is contained here and condensed it at the end, and clearly shown the forms of the instruments that must be brought, as I did in these two preceding chapters.
It is therefore necessary that we speak in this prologue of the book about the sums of the word and the chapters where the wise man puts his understanding, and keeps it on the virtuous, so that those who have experienced this art noble learn and acquire it, and teach others.
I say that when a break or dislocation or torsion or any other occurs to anyone, it is fitting to hasten and heal the patient from one part and from another, if no remedy applies, as weak of body, or sick, or old; or if their joints are too stiff, or too cold;
and if they apply cold remedies, which are cold poultices, and charon of bird and of celery, and do not drink wine, nor eat any fatty meats, and do not stuff themselves too much with viands that fill the veins with blood, until you have doubt about a hot abscess or swelling of the member;
if the patient returns to their former good governance, which they have used.
And when the broken bones begin to restore themselves, it is fitting that you nourish the patient with foods that cause great swelling, such as those which have a lot of viscosity, like bread cooked in water, and risotto, and testicles, and pork fat, and oysters, and fresh fish, and large wine, and similar things. Because the swelling causes more sprains and sooner the break.
And know that broken bones of old and aged do not heal well again nor can they be soldered according to their nature due to the dryness of the limbs, neither those which are too tender, just as the bones of young children.
but there is no cure, if you apply the broken bone to a large tendon that holds together and joins the limb in one piece, until it heals as it was before. and not to its full strength, and for this reason they must be nourished with large foods, just as we have said.
And finds that fractures are diverse in many ways.
For the fracture of the head is different from the fracture of the foot or leg, and I will tell you in this chapter all sorts of fractures. For there are fractures that grow inward, and others that grow outward, just like the thickness of a hairpin to write with.
For there are fractures that grow inward, and others that grow outward, just like the thickness of a hairpin to write with. And if there is a fracture with an open wound, and a fracture with just a small split.
And each method has its own instrument and proper equipment for the restoration, according to what is remembered in its place.
and it is known that bone fractures are recognized by the fact that the limb is twisted and open badly due to lack of use, and it feels painful on the presser of the hand.
and when there is no tortuosity or lump at the joint, and the patient feels no great pain, if there is not even a break.
but it can still have some degree of tortuosity, or a small crack. If it is not suitable for you to move your hand, but apply medicines that come after this, and then restrain now with subtlety.
And knows that the break that occurs in the arm, and are the two parts of the joint, he must now put them on an equal basis, so that the abscesses do not come.
and if the cauls come, he must leave one day, until the abscesses are laid to rest;
then he puts him on the muscle where you can easily and carefully fix it, and knows that the restoration of this is lighter than the restorations of those in which there are pieces;
When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation.
And if in the bone there are broken pieces, if you separate them into two parts, whether it's between the hands or fingers, or on the palm of the hand, or at the wrist, or one cord and on the hand.
and put the member according to its natural shape, so that when the broken parts of the limb are reduced, you reattach by all means possible in their proper place, and avoid that through your work the patient comes to have an additional injury or pain.
and put the two bones together in the best forms possible.
And he feels well with his hand if you think he is not feeling well:
If the dressing is made well, and he is not strained too much, nor pressed so as they who do this work make his blood hot and contraction to the member, just as we have seen many times.
And when the member is set to right, instruct the patient well that he does not move, nor watching nor sleeping, nor turning, nor in any other way. And take care that the limb is so fixed that he does not feel any pain. For when he feels no pain, it is not yet in its proper place, and therefore you should put him into this certain condition that he does not feel any pain.
And take care that the limb is so fixed that he does not feel any pain. For when he feels no pain, it is not yet in its proper place, and therefore you should put him into this certain condition that he does not feel any pain. And keep him straight so he is set correctly, lest twisted movements occur when it is restored again;
and the quality of the broken limb will be as I tell you.
Things which the member is broken are various in size and form.
For there are small limbs, such as arms and fingers. so it is convenient to wrap bandages of linen soft and subtle; and those which are large, such as thigh and leg:
so it is convenient to wrap with a strong and thick rope, for the large ropes embrace the entire limb, and tighten it equally in all parts, so that there is no gap.
then bind with light straps, three turns or four according to the limb, and tighten with one hand all around the rope, then go up to the break and tighten it less than the break so that the break will soon move a little.
and soften the joint little by little, until you press a great part of the healthy limb, then take another ligament, and turn it inward toward the broken limb.
then go back to the lower part of the break, and hold it firmly but not too hard or too soft, as we have said before;
then put linen rags or bandages between the ligatures until they are all even, then tie everything with an upper band, and then put your well-made stitches on top, if there is an abscess or inflammation.
And if it has inflammation or an abscess, put on soothing ointment to the affected area, and what removes the inflammation, let it stay for some days.
Pursue a tight grasp upon your joints, and let them be of the size of a wide cane resounding, or of wood from which pliers are made, or palm tree shavings, and let them conform to this form:
but it is fitting that the joint placed on the break be slightly larger and wider than the others;
and so large as it should be, for the length of the small or great limb; then tie the joints in such manner as you did on the first incision, then tie above with an arrow-shaped thread, as you did on the first incision over the break; the narrower it is, the worse.
and it is fitting that the thread be fine, neither too thick nor too thin, and made of soft linen;
For the big nails, as I have seen in works of fools who make their clothes with twisted threads of linen, and it is a great error, because the nail can not be even if it is too subtle, and it should not be more than two fingers' breadth between each nail.
If the patient is wounded by arrows after an injury, then tie off those places with linen or woolen strips so that they do not bleed.
When the wound is with a break and the joints are fractured, I will say this treatment after.
And know that it is not necessary to tighten the arrows on all members, even the first day. For when the limbs are large, it is not advisable to put nails forward less than five days or seven, or more according to your safety after the incision that follows.
and thus here is the way of ancient embalmers to restore breaks, dislocations, and twisting.
and thus you take flour that remains on the walls of the mill, and mix it with a great amount of water, and put this mixture, not too clear nor too thick, into use, for it is the common way of the embalmers to restore breaks in many situations, and especially in women and small children, because it is neither too hot nor too cold.
Another method of plastering restores the break and the dislocation and the twisting: Take a mixture of resin, linseed oil, and gum arabic and apply it to an area X. Glass and aloes, applied to area V. Alechil (likely a type of plant) for the seventh day. and make powder from flaxseed and mix it with honey. If the complexion of the humours is hot, apply this plaster, because it is of good composition, and restores broken bones quickly, but at the risk of many deaths.
Another method of plaster that is valuable for twisting. Take care of and examine; for the child is Z. Mercury and aloes, for seven times nine. Asa six. Onice Arabic ten Z., and brews well, and confits with water or honey, and administers.
Another way to splint is when you use sticks and set the bones straight, and ease the following pain, and cut with the bone, and fracture. Apply linen cloth, and poultice of mold in oil cooked, and put on the limb.
These plasters do not heal, but they are good for soothing abscesses and properly placing bones, the pains.
Another way to splint that restores broken bones: Burn the leaves of dried figs and earth leaves, and crush them together, and make paste.
Another way to treat a plaster for the healing of a bone fracture and to relieve swelling from an abscess. Take root of violets, chamomile, flowers of violetts, wheat flour, from each one a part.
And crush it and mix with wine, and apply to the limbs that are heated; or mix with moist coriander water, or water, and use.
Another way to treat is stronger than the first, when an abscess comes back to restore the limb. Take root of violets, and sesame seed, balsamum, meletemne, and without succa, and flowers of violets and chamomile from each one a part. And crush it and mix with salt water, or sweet water, or with wine, according to the heat of the limb and its rest.
Iporas writes in his book that you should not put broken bone on the limb to restore it, rather, one should use a mixture of cerote made from wax and oil, and nothing else, and he says it should be between too hard and too soft.
And it seems that one must place the broken limb on high in order to restore, using dry things moistened with hot stuffs, such as myrrh and aloes and incense, just like we have said.
Another way of treating an abscess is worth its pain and suffering: Take mutton or horse flesh, or nails of birds, and vermilion, and cut them evenly, and pound them, and make it into an ointment, and apply to the wound.
And then lay the wound open a little later, and take care that the patient does not feel any pain, or has his bones in their proper place; if you do not lay it open by skilled hands. And if pain comes to the wound, or it pricks, with rest or swells, then hurry and lay it open, and apply the ointment now;
and take a lighter cloth, and a sponge moistened with seawater, and plunge into the water, and lift up the wound until the itching ceases, and the pain is alleviated; Instruct the patient to leave the limb rest for an hour, then place it under a dry cloth, moistened in water or oil rose, and tie it up with a bandage until you are sure of the wound's size.
And let the inflammation rest on the limb, and try to remove the pain, then resume gentle cutting, a little emplastre, and do not strain it too hard as before; and very gently until it is healed.
And if you see that an abscess swells and is red and painful and inflamed, I have already treated it by draining and stitching, just like I did before when the pain came on.
And if the limb does not come to anything of what we have said, do not untie it unless after 3 days or 4 or 5 or 7. and at no time let it stay for 20 days, as one sees, until the fracture is set, and approaches the healing of the bone above.
And therefore you must restrain it more than once, and swell the meat around it, as I have said before.
and if you see the liver drying more than it should, know that it will not come to pass. then it arises from a hot cold fever, every time you dissect, and this be the case for all alike, one day after another.
therefore cut the nerves in the limb, and immediately stop what is done by the foolish surgeon, lest they return the limb twisted.
this is bad, and if it's due to fear, and I see no other thing but that one should loosen and straighten it directly.
There are many kinds of fractures, and various shapes, and the causes are predetermined.
there are fractures that are caused by the blow of a sword, and the collarbone ossifies all the bone below the fractured surface, just as it is compressed or shattered. and for this reason it is called a "haicheure" fracture.
when the sword strikes the bone from underneath in order to pierce it, and this is called an "absolute" fracture.
and there are two kinds of wounds for these fractures, great or small.
And if there is impact into a hollow space, or tearing, or fracture of the bones by stone, or through the bone on stone, or similar things.
And if it has an open fracture which is near to the bone under the bone, or above the bone, and this wound is either great or small.
and if the wound is closed in the bone as subtly as we cut hair, and there is a small split, then this fracture is called "capillary".
If the wound is made or by hitting with a stone, or by falling, or by some similar thing, and it causes a piece of bone to fall into the wound, and the hairs are as they were when the cauterist was firing the cauldron over the cauldrons; If a stone enters inside.
And this happens more often in those who have moist bones under their head, like children's skulls;
and occurs in all such fractures where small pieces are separated like stones. and I will speak on his behalf.
And know all kinds of fractures by the removal from them, and the inquiry has been tried, and by the corrupt flesh that is above.
The similarity of the hair is known by this: that when one discovers the bone and strokes on top of it, if the fracture opens.
In the treatment of a fracture, be careful for all accidents in the patient, and if you see no bad accident, such as vomiting of bile, loss of understanding, extension, paleness, fever, eyes turning red and swollen, and other similar signs, then it cannot be cured without doubt.
And if you see no extraordinary accident and you expect a good outcome, then begin the treatment.
And when the sickness comes to you first, and it is in winter, then it is fitting to take out the bone before the fourteenth day at night when you can.
But if it is in this state, then hastening to take out the bone before the seventh day, will only make the skin below the bone corrupted, and accidents that we have described will come.
And if the bone fracture comes just to the skin covering the brain, then you must break the fractured part like this:
And take the head of the sick person, and cut open on the bone in all ways that you can, and on the shape of the wound as well as you can, because if there is a discharge of blood, it comes when uncovering the bone or abscess; and as much as possible aid with what is needed, and fill the hole with moist cloths in oil. and let the wound rest until the abscess is calmed, and make sure there is no discharge of blood. then begin to remove the bone, and this is done in two different ways.
one way is that you copy the narrow cutting before, and this is the form:
And then after this treatment, a more severe amputation is performed than the first one.
And the second manner is that you have many kinds of knives, some are thin and others are wide, and they should be pointed and made of iron.
And when you cut lightly, so that you do not hit the head.
And if the bone is hard and thick, it is necessary that you pierce through it, so that with knives you administer them carefully, not piercing too deep, lest the blade go beyond the bone into the flesh, and should have a margin or a circle around the point, so that the point does not pass beyond the bone.
and it is necessary to have many of them, so that each one comes into its own place at the spine of the bone, so that you should have knives for every part.
and this is the form of the three kinds of trephines:
Those that pierce through the broken bone should place one trephine on the bone and turn to both sides until you see that the bone is pierced.
Then put the trephine on another part after a little while, and do this all around, then make cuts in the bone's space between the perforations, and do it more subtly than you can, gently, just like we said, until you pull the bone to your hand or one of the instruments you have, such as pliers, pincers.
and be careful not to touch the brain or the skull.
And when you have pierced the bone and made cuts, if there is something left on the bone that remains from another instrument similar to an incision, but it is necessary that it be more delicate and subtle than those other incisions.
and if it does not heal after a few days of small bones or scales, if the bone is lightly damaged in the joint. then treat the wound with stitches and bandages as we have said.
And other ways of work are those that the Galenians say are more accurate; and this is their strong word, and it is their saying. It is first necessary to uncover a part of the bone, in that place where the break opens up, so that when you have uncovered that part, you put under the head of this incision a lens-like shape, because it is this form:
And do not cut it from one side, and if the affected part is two sides, so that the cutting is against the bone.
then use a small hammer above, so that you strike the bone lightly all around, and be well guarded with the cloth underneath;
She should be burned at the bone, very lightly, because feeling the pain well, and fearing.
If the bone is not pierced through the cloth until now and only the top part of it is struck so that small pieces form, then cover with the roughness again and remove the scales at the razor-thin sharpener which you must have in various amounts to provide for each person what seems most convenient according to their work and figure of the break.
If you have before many rough razors, and after subtler ones, and do not cease to do this until it is well done.
In each of the other types of hair cuts and subtle breaks, it is necessary to apply care according to its nature;
and this is something that has no answer for him who put his study in this art.
And if the wound is uncovered, it is necessary to pour oil of roses on it according to its quantity, and moisten it with linen cloth; then take another cloth doubled in two or three and moisten it with wine and oil of roses, and put it on the first cloth; and do what is easier than you can, so that you don't strain the liver, then serve it again under another link, and do not stretch it further except when the wound heals by itself;
and let it remain like that on the first or second day, until the swollen part is alleviated, then remove it, and administer medicines such as wild garlic, flour of bees, powder of incense, and herbs, and similar things;
and make a powder of these things, and put it on the wound, and administer medicines to heal by bleeding.
and make sure the wound is thoroughly cleaned, so that you don't leave any discharge, and don't leave it with a bow (a protective covering), for when the bow comes together over the scalp cloth, it can cause blood to run and bring great harm to the patient.
For when you put above something sharp, he will pierce through. Take care then, if no bad accident happens to the patient, as we have said, it is doubtful whether they will doubt.
And if it does not come from the fire that we have placed on it, so that its virtue has effect, you must press a part of honey, and three parts of rose oil and in vinegar made into a cloth, and put it on the sharp thing. then the treatment of this kind should be done to him, until he is healed.
Know that the two bones above are never broken, or one alone, for they are two bones;
and that below is cartilaginous, and does not break, unless it bends or twists, and then heals.
And if one of the two parts is broken, so it is fitting that you poke your little finger or puncture into the wound, and put equal that break inside your thumb, and in a pouch as needed, until the blood returns according to its natural shape. and do it gently, and beware that the patient does not feel pain from your work.
And if the break is in the upper part of the bone and it cannot be returned to its place, so that you put a small peg into the head of a nail.
And if the break is of two parts, so do it again, and hasten to restore the first day, if you can;
if not, after the seventh or tenth day, when the abscess is appeased, then poke with a needle into the wound, and cover the head with linen drapes, if the break is in one part.
When you put something else in its place, if it is broken. And let the tents be so thick that they fill in the holes of the nose.
And doctors said that you should moisten the swellings in butter, and move each one every day. It does not seem to be the best thing to me, but it is advisable that they are moist in the making of auburn and powder of flour; then let the tent stay until the bone is hard and the cartilage hardened.
And never put in or nose plugs made of goose fat in its place, and if the wound is deep and wrapped tight, and it holds the dislocation, and blows into the patient. if you see.
If the abscessed joint comes near while you are working, then put some cold or moist cloth in oil or rosewater, or apply a poultice of dung.
And if there is no abscess, then apply plaster by omission, made from flour of suture, and powder of incense, mixed with wine vinegar, and put on light spoons, and do not bind the nails.
And if the fracture of the nail is small, and it is fractured into small pieces, then take out the splinters that are convenient to do so, and sew the wound, and apply plasters and ointments that are suitable for this.
And if it has no wound within the nail, then treat the nail, and apply poultices of onion, until he is cured.
When the lower jaw is fractured without any open wound, and there is only a bruise inside, without breakage in two, but only a slight separation of the cheekbone, if one weighs lightly.
It is fitting, if the fracture is in the right hand, that you put your index finger into the mouth of the patient; In case of the broken jaw on the left side, put your right thumb into the break and gently push it inside, and press with the other hand without force, and tie an even knot.
And if the fracture of the lower jaw is displaced in two parts, it is necessary to manage the extension of two parts until they are even.
If the movement of the teeth happens or a fracture occurs, where there's a strain from a thread of gold or silver or silk, then apply to the broken jaw a layer of ceramic and a double cloth. And put on the double cloth an even-sized big nail well-made or a piece of leather equal, long and wide according to the jaw, and bind it above where you can, and instruct the patient to rest, and serve light food.
And if you see that the swelling changes, and he lays on it for three days, then puts it back to what is changed. And apply plaster on it, with powder from the mill, mixed with a lot of water or flour of sement, after you have cut out the wound;
and apply a lighter layer of plaster, and if the plaster hardens, and the patient's condition does not change, let him remain until he is cured; Many times they are healed in three weeks.
If an abscess comes to a head, then follow what we have said many times.
and if it has a fracture and a wound together, remove as much of the bone as is exposed; if the removal of the bone is subtle and conveys no dangerous consequences.
If the wound is narrow, then enlarge it according to your need.
When you have removed all these bone pieces, and it does not stay in place, apply the wound dressing, if it is large, and put on suitable poultices according to that, in order to heal the wound.
The fractured bone is forced further multiple times in the shoulder region, and the fracture occurs according to three kinds:
When it is broken and split in two, and has pieces, and is lighter to restore;
when there is a break with an injury.
And the injuries are when the break is with an injury, that you have two ministers, one of whom will hold the arm because of the bruised break; and the other extends the neck towards the part;
then puts equal the break on both, so that the form becomes as it should be, and there is no appearance or swelling.
And if you have to extend further, then put under the shoulder of the patient a rounded spear of cloth, or linen, and so thick as your necessity requires; and let it heal, and strain the bowstring to your hand, so that you tie the break in equal parts, as is fitting.
If you cannot treat the head of the pain in front because it comes from within, so that the patient lies on his back, and put a pillow under the shoulder, and pour the medicine down the throat, until the bones of the pain are lifted.
And then direct the break to your two sides, and if you find a suitable splint, tie it up as much as possible;
and bring the lighter pieces together, and if the bone cannot be joined in any way, then cut at one of the joints you have made; but so that you put on beneath this instrument a safeguard to protect it;
and it resembles a spoon, and is not made of wood, and be as long as you need, according to the size of the bone and the work.
And if two heads are broken, so that you see them, and one is large and the other is narrow, as is the way of the wound that you have made when treating the bones;
And when you are sure of a bone being broken, if the wound cuts, and if the rupture is small, or if you doubt that the bone is broken, then apply the wound with strips and tents, according to its quantity.
And if an abscess forms on your flesh, then apply rose oil, asbestos, and vinegar to it, and put it on.
The straining of the bone, when it is near to wounds and swelling, is that you place on the bone powdered flour from the mill, and aloe ash, and put lightweight cloths over it, and put a spear underneath, if you have need. Then take a very thick bandage of palm leaf width, and put one double drap over it, and the poultice; Then take a thin needle of three inches long and broad, and pass it through the bend of the bone, so that the head of the bone is still there. and put the needle on the fracture, and turn the bend of the bone up towards the neck, and below the healthy part, and below the diseased part; and tie off from each part, and when you see that the ligament is holding the fracture in place, and you see clearly that the needle does not move over the fractured bone, then repeatedly reward it each day, and when the ligaments are tightened, restrain them;
and make the patient lie on his back, and put a small pillow under the broken place, to lift the joint upwards; If the arm is made to heal by stretching the shoulder, or you tie the arms to the neck, and do not untie yourself in case of a bad accident, it will be sound after twenty days.
Then resume the plaster, if you see that it needs it, bind it and leave it in that way until it is restored.
And it will be restored by the thirty-eighth day, and less than a few men.
Of the shoulder break
But it often happens that the shoulder breaks or is twisted in some way, and does not heal unless through its own movement.
so arrange the limb according to its own shape and form, and reset it in all ways that you can.
Then put powder of the mill on the wound with a large amount of oil, and light blows, and place above it an adhesive bandage. Then puts on a large and subtle needle, slightly larger than the shoulder, and sews under the skin of the shoulder in any part, so that the needle cuts evenly.
And then tightens it to a great band firmly, so that the needle does not move from its place, and examines the stitch every day.
And every time it is applied, so tighten the band, and place the needle as if it were in its proper place, and put the patient on their chest.
And the shoulder is restored in twenty or twenty-five days.
And when this number is fulfilled, release the dislocation, and be sure, for it's not that the bone will move lightly.
And if one piece of bone is pushed forward and does not adhere to the wound below, then raise it up, and the bone, and do as we have said in soothing an abscess with great heat.
of the break of the foot.
The flesh is broken at no time in its middle, but it happens occasionally; but it breaks often without warning.
And when it is broken in the middle, so that it inclines downwards, and the patient feels great pain, and lack of feeling, and swelling, and sometimes vomiting blood, and in order to open up the marrow in the broken bone, and the sensation is much worse.
And the restoration is that when the patient rises from his bed on both sides, and he puts this cloth between his shoulders, then presses the shoulders, and brings together the two breastbones with your hands, and skillfully places equal between all the ways you can, until the figure of the bone becomes as it should.
then puts over the joints and the fragments of bone on a subtle layer of salt, or of another lighter material, and wraps it up in one piece, and ties it to the bone so that it doesn't move; And turn the round link to the back, and bind it immediately, and reward each hour the limb, and if she relaxes, then bind.
But if he wishes to release it, because of corrosion or itching that comes on the limb, or pain or abscess, if one hastens, and releases it, and scrapes away the pus, and addresses those who have come from various treatments;
then scrapes away the pus, and binds it so that he becomes whole.
of the fracture of the ribs
Know that the fracture of the ribs comes only after a large amount is taken away from the back, and towards the head inside, because they are brittle. and this feeling is good for an investigation as should be.
And the remedies are such that you must put the fracture back, as it seems fitting. And then apply plaster, and tie with a splint, if you need to.
And if the break of the ribs is slanted inward, he feels the patient great pain and point, just like from pleurisy, because the bone pierces the cloth; and he is filled with pain and pus, and swollen and vomiting great plant of blood, and it is from bad health, and the old men have put great effort.
And if those who claim it is suitable to administer foods that swell the belly in order to push the fracture into its place.
We do not do this unless an abscess has come from a burnt flesh. And if it has come, then cut it out.
And said none of us that you should put vinegar on the flesh, because it will cause wounds, and it is like reason; but doubt remains that the vinegar will not attract the exudates to the flesh because of the weakness of its constitution.
And they said that one must cover the limb with a moist linen in hot oil, and place tentes ( probably a type of bandage) between the ribs to make the wound even, then treat with the cure of pleurisy, meat, and medicine.
And if the patient feels great pain that he cannot suffer from the bone which pierces the cloth, and there is doubt in the patient, then it is fitting to split open the ribbed part of the broken costal, and it is fitting to put certain instruments to ward off the wound.
and then one must pierce the bone, and treat lightly, and then sew the two lips of the wound, if they are large, and heal with poultices, until it is cured.
And if an abscess comes to a head, put moist cloths in olive oil on it, and apply heat.
and treat until the abscess is gone from the area where it occurs, and if there are ulcers on the surface of the wound or wherever it must be cut into, until it is cured.
and also at the spine of the back.
And when it happens that he cannot tell if he will be sane or not, take care and see if you notice these signs: when his hands are soft and swollen and lifeless, and cannot move nor stretch, and when you poke them with a needle, if they do not feel.
Know that he is mortal in these other dispositions, and if he is mute and feels well when you restrain and press him, know that the joint of the bone is saved, and that the patient will recover, if you put them on treatment.
And if such a thing comes to the spine of the back, and you see whether it will heal or not, take care if the vertebrae are softened, and if the wound is in hands, and on the back there may be a great falling out, and an emptying with a violent want.
And when one has soiled it under his belly, he vomits without voluntary will. And when he becomes aware of it on his back and tries to relieve himself, he cannot. Know that they are fatal. unless it is treated with special care.
And if such an accident does not happen to him, then it is a lighter thing.
And the cure is that if there is an abscess hot, you put oil of roses or oil of mustard seed on it, until it becomes calm.
then puts on one of the plasters comfortable and drying, and ties it with a bandage, and instructs the patient to rest. and does not lie on that part where he feels pain, until he is healed.
And if some bone has been broken, it is advisable to cover the wound; And then take out the bone, then assemble the two lips of the wound, if they are large, with a seam, then apply the dressing and tighten bandages tightly, until it is healed.
And if the bone of the bone is broken, which we call "chiese of la kowe", then pour some wine from your left hand into a pouch, and place it equal to the other hand on your palm, then apply plaster and stake above, if you have need.
Then tie it up, and if it has bone exposed, make it above, and the bone, and treat the wound until it is healed.
of the fracture of the femur
It rarely happens that the bone of the hindleg is broken, and if it has, then there would not have been for a little bit of relief to the head. and let it grow long, and draw back to the paraders, and comes to the patient pain in the shoulder, and joint, and swells what is broken.
And if you are restored to health, then stretch out your hand above, until you reach the break. and sees which is the break and the form of it;
and if the break is only in the head, then straighten that broken limb, until it has returned to its natural form.
And if the fracture is long or declines inward, so that it points to the inside, have the patient lie on his stomach, until the restoration of that fracture becomes apparent. And when you have straightened it, then apply plaster, and put on a splint of wood or horn, and bind the break so that it does not move.
and apply the plaster under the ribs, until the limb is straightened. Instruct the patient to sleep on his healthy side or on his back.
If an abscess comes to a head it must be touched gently until the abscess is allayed, and apply what we have said previously. And then return to restoration, and bind as necessary, if there is no further injury.
of the shoulder fracture
The joint is that which is between the sleeve and the head of the shoulder, and if it is broken, it must be restored according to one of the two manners:
whose one is that you take a flat piece of bone, according to this form:
And hold both joints in place with two ties, and set them above the patient on a seat;
Now the joint is broken in the shoulder, so let it lie still until it comes to an assembly, and take out a piece of bone from the shoulder, then put upon any weighty thing or let the minister extend it below.
Then put the splints in the breakage equal to its joints, so that the breakage returns when it is suitable.
And the other manner is that you must put the patient above his head, and tie his neck, then command to two ministers who one holds the thing that is on the breakage in their hands, and the other holds below all the ligature, and each of them extends it to his part.
And if you see that the extraction is more forceful, then tie the ligature below the breakage, and above the breakage, and extend each of the ministers to his part.
And if the breakage is close to the head of the shoulder, so it is fitting that you put one linen under the assembly, and the other towards the joint, under the breakage;
and if the breakage is towards the joint, so it is fitting to put one linen lightly, with ease, until the breakage becomes even on its place and on its joint;
the fire cautery instructs the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
And if the abscesses come, do not strain them again for seven days, and put on a linen bandage soaked in oil rose, until the abscesses are eased.
Then strap it, and the way to strap it so that you put plaster on the break, then assemble the arm onto the shoulder, and place your hand on the shoulder or on the side.
and put the bandage on, and strap it onto the shoulder, and onto the arm, so that the arm is in its place, if no other thing prevents it, or if the bone has moved.
And if you doubt that the bone does not move, then use stakes, and place one larger and stronger stake on each break, and set them apart by two spaces, and so that each stake is as large as it can pass through the break at three points of each side;
then pull out the stakes, in the same way as I said at the beginning of this chapter on the break, stronger and less constricting.
And if you see the position of the stakes and the constriction, just as we have said, in the place where you restore the broken limb, and you doubt the abscess there, leave it tied for seven days, just as we have said;
then look at each one of them three days after the tie, to see if it prurites or swells up, and there is no discharge in the limb, or a pus forms that cannot come out because it is too constricted. If it is true, as we have said.
And if no such accidents happen to him, then do not free his limbs until after three days or more, and the patient should lie on his back, and have his hands above his stomach.
And place this cushion under the injured arm so that it is smooth and even, and watch each hour of the day or night whether the figure of the broken limb moves, or if the ties are loosened.
if it appears by the virtue of medicine, and give him the meat which we have placed in front of you, in such a manner that the meat is at room temperature. and when he begins to regain his appetite, if it is large.
And it is customary that the arm and the leg are to be put back in place after forty days of treatment. and then so he must be untied and given a bath and administered medicine for the wound to heal.
And if the stricture is tight and swollen, so it stays tied for three days or two months.
of a broken arm
The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the "scapula", one small and that is where the pocket.
and the other is large, and that is under, towards the small shoulder;
Sometimes it breaks only the large scapula or only the small one, and sometimes both join together.
When the small scapulas are broken, restoration is light and healing;
and when the large scapulas are broken, healing is poor, and more grievous than when both are fractured together.
If it is only the small fossicle that is broken alone, then it must be extended lightly and put back in place.
And if it's a large swelling, then they must strain it more strongly;
and stretch it out to the extent of its swelling, and pull up the pouch of his hand higher than others, and lower his fingers more below those of others, so that he crosses himself on him himself, and stretches out above it even more, so that the patient suffers no pain at all;
then stretch the minister's other arm to the part below his hand, or near his joint, and another minister on the other side above.
And then put him on equal ground, in his best form.
And if it is broken into pieces, put each one in its place, and if there is no matching piece that can be held close to the joint, and you cannot restore it to its proper place, then fix it with bone as we have said before.
And if it's with a break and an injury, I have spoken to the singular surgeon; so take the treatment.
And if in the beginning of the restoration, a piece of flesh falls away from bone, then apply to it a plaster made of cerote, oil rose, and white wax so that it is neither too hard nor too soft. And let the surgeon take care of it gently from above, so that the abscesses are calmed.
And then take the bone and apply plaster made from powder of wheat flour mixed with a great deal of water; put the splint on it, so that the splinter of the fracture is straighter and slightly more forward than the others.
and he knows that he must have six splints or an increased number of arrangements: or if the fracture is in one of the bones, or in two.
and bind more tightly above the fracture than elsewhere, and always less when applying it, as I said at the beginning of this chapter; and that the dressings above the fracture be soft and moist, not hard or harsh;
and that the dressings above the fracture be soft and moist, not hard or harsh; and let it be the children, from which it is strained, of linen, neither too fine nor too coarse, as we have said.
And reward the limb and the joint after some days. And if some bad accident happens to the limb, such as itching that comes to the limb, it is suitable to raise the limb in cold water until the itching is soothed.
and let the limb not be tightly pressed down to rest.
And then resume the tightening, and if the joint is loosened and the bone is separated, and it seems like a similar thing, then address it.
And if the numbness persists and cannot come to the limb because it is too tight, then it is fitting that you loosen it a little, and let it stay like this for some days, until the numbness goes away, and then tighten it.
And if any of these things do not happen to the patient, so that they are freed after twenty days.
until, then put the hands on his neck, and so that his necks are even, and guard against movement and trembling, and sleep on his back.
and know that this fracture is restored in thirty days or thirty-five, and by chance in twenty days, according to the composition and the constitution of the virtues.
of the hand break
You know that on the back of the hand there is a small amount of breakage, and it comes but pain many times.
And when the finger of the hand is broken or bent, it is wise for the patient to tie a cross on it, and sit straight in front of it equally;
then places his hand on the broken joint, and stretches out the limbs of the broken bones, and sets them even and square until they are well set;
and applies plaster and bandages, if there is no abscess, then he puts in a stake according to the quantity of the wound; and should be wrapped with an i-draped linen cloth.
And if the fracture is at the tendons near the belly of the finger, he makes a bandage-stick, and instructs the patient to tie it around his broken finger; and then strain of a long thread, and if the limb is bound tightly as big as the thumb of the hand, and the binding, just like it should.
If the breakage is in the fingers, it is advisable to place an arrow above and another below on the foot, so that the fingers are covered and straightened; then tie all around the hand, and bind the ligament between the two.
and if the fracture comes to any of us, then that is bound tightly, if it is done well so as to be equal, just like it should. and the binding with the palm, and if you see that it binds a small pin straight to lift the fracture, and does not move.
and if the fracture is on other joints, just like it is in the index or one of the others, so that it is done well and he binds with the healthy joint which is after. or you bind them all at once in a single tie, what value is it, or you put on a pin, just like if they were bound.
And be wary in the restoration and arrangement of an abscessed place, and heal those who come to it, as I have said.
The bone of the collarbone is often broken, and one can see it when they turn in front and behind.
And the restoration is done by linking the above to the broken bone, and the other below. And the patients lie on their face, then stretch out each of these limbs equally.
and it is when the bone is mended into place.
And if the break is close to the joint of the bone, then it's one of the bands to the point of the finger, and the others below the break.
And also if it is proximate to the groin, and then there should be the ligaments of the groin, and the extension below.
The patient should put the mirror on the equal bone to its two hands, so that it is according to his natural figure; and then apply plaster, and tie, so that the abscess does not come again.
And if it has an abscess on the same place, let him allow it to be soothed and then return to its original state and treatment. The bandage is made in this way.
It is necessary to wrap above the break with a bandage that is twice or three times wrapped around, and then let the swelling stay for a while, then turn the leg so that the toes reach the root of the nail, and tie a long thread between the thigh and leg, under the knee, and tie the calf tight with a thread from below, and wrap the top with thread.
Then turn on the knee and on the thigh the bandage, then put a bandage on the bruised place, and put an arrow on the bone of the knee;
Then apply the knee bandage eight times between the thigh and the fold of soft cloth to secure equal tension, then begin to tie a bow figure III or IV on the bruised place; and the more you pull up on the bruised place, and less the bandage will be tight.
then hold both two joints of the thread that you have tied between the knee and thigh, then tie three more arrows above, before going back down to the head of the thread until you reach the foot;
and if it does not move from its place, then leave it as is, because there will be no abscess or swelling or other similar signs. And if this happens, if it dislocates, and addresses itself as we said before, just as we have explained many times;
and if there are pieces of bone that hold it, then you must fix them, if possible; and if you cannot, then it is necessary to break the limb and treat it. and the treatment as we have said, until he becomes healthy.
And there is no time when the cartilage is broken as we have inserted needles, just like in the shoulder and arm.
because all the restorations done will not close the wounds of the patients.
And the bone is restored in three days, or a little less or more, according to the diversity of the complexion.
The body of a child has no fracture, but it often bends.
And if it breaks, but is only a crack or split, and has pain to the wound and the flesh, and it hurts very.
And the restoration is done as we put equal what was rough on its surface, until they are assembled what can be.
Now put the plaster on it, and put a round stake in it, if you need to, and bind it as it should be, then reward all the arrangements that we have said about other breaks, just like an abscess is hot and another similar thing. if you put it on each individual case that he thinks so, until they are healed.
of the leg fracture
Knowing that in the leg there are two bones, so one is called "mustelz" and the other "foscile";
and it happens that all other breakages are as when it comes to the arm, and for this reason is the restoration like the same arm, and the work is all in one. And if both bones are broken together, then turn the leg of every part.
And if the small bones are broken, so turn it before.
And if the large bone is broken, it feels great pain, and he sees it well; and turns around.
And therefore straighten the extension, and put it equal, and tie the strings equally;
but it is necessary that the broken piece be small and lighter than the extension; and align it according to its virtue.
And when you have completed all your work, take two strips of cloth that are red and purple which stain the leg from one side to the other, and be long enough from the knee down to the bottom;
then wrap in two strips of cloth one on top and one on bottom, and tie them in the middle so that the leg cannot incline to the right or left, and thus it is good;
And none of them have taken care to treat the long swelling of the leg, and if it has burst open, and they put the leg in a binding garment to prevent movement, and doing this properly is done in the break where it has injured.
And move each person every day the leg, to see if there is an abscess or another accident. So that the patient becomes sane.
of the bone fracture of the foot
The ankle does not come to a break, but sometimes the bone of the foot breaks and sometimes it is bruised, and there is no force required except for shock at other dislocations.
And if he has a broken bone in his foot, and you see the bones protruding one over the other, then put the patient's foot on the ground, as if he were walking, and then place your own foot upon his, so that the bones are raised, and press hard until they realign themselves in their proper place.
Instruct the patient to apply plaster and bandages on that area; and place on the lower belly of the foot a small plate with two holes for the fingers, then bind the foot at the ankle, then when you have wrapped the strips around, and other things necessary.
And when three days or four have passed, if you release the bandage, because you will find that the bones are even, whether they are broken, or dislocated.
And if they are any broken bones that need to be reset, just like we said the bones of the hand. then put the broken bone in a splint according to the length of the two bones, and make it slightly larger; then bind with the foot that plate I mentioned earlier.
and if there are two or three, or more, broken bones, put one splint on each bone according to its size, wrapped in the first strip of linen, and bind with that plate over the foot. and when standing on the top of the head of the table so that his belly is exposed under the foot.
and it is also necessary to remember all the other things I have said about other fractures. and treat each case as it may seem appropriate.
Of the fracture of a bone at the finger
When the woman’s bones are broken, so that she becomes enlarged, then incline her to the part of her back, and hold her behind.
then fill the wound with the nature of the patient’s cloth, and put also a large amount as in the stitch.
then bind the woman, and lift her back little by little, and then sew the cotton until it comes to the entrance of the nature, and brings its bone with the stitch.
And when she wants to pee, so loosen the cotton, and when she has peed, put it back again, and do this seven days or more: If the break is restored, and you see, take a vessel of wool, and tie it to the puncture with a string, and pour all the vessel into nature: then blow through the string that forms, until the vessel is sucked inside: nature will restore the break;
then be filled with cotton, and let it so for some days, until it is healed.
And when the bone at the shoulder joint of a man or woman is broken, or the bone of the hare, restore it in the same way as we have said about the bone of the hare:
and are not hidden from those who apply their study and use, and they heed my book.
For the fractures mean more suffering in the right path of restoration: and therefore.
In the vagina, when it is fractured, take an owl's beak and insert it into the vagina. Then wrap linen bands around, and let it remain for three days or more, and it will be healed quickly.
Of breaks with wounds.
It is necessary for him who has a break with a wound, especially if it's great, so that the bone of the shoulder or arm joint, or similar, is set now, if what we have said testify to this.
If the wound is clean, then apply the vinegar again, if you have nothing else, then restart the healing process in that same hour or the following day, unless an abscess comes.
If an abscess comes, then wait until the next day to restart the healing process, up until the abscess is calmed down, and do not touch it again on the third or fourth day, for you will bring about a bad accident.
If the broken bone appears near the joint discovered, it is to be put at a gentle point on your fingers, with slight extension.
And if the splint is not provided for placing equal to your hands, since this instrument made of iron with seven or eight fingers, and its width is according to the quantity of the wound; and for this reason it is a master's work that must be done by three or four, as needed in each type of fracture;
and it should be small and thin enough, so that when compressed against the limb at its location, it does not bend;
And is called "palanche", because the curved metal is placed on top of the visible bone; and after one turn, so that they are even with each other. But if the break is subtle and the splints cannot grasp the bone properly, it is advisable to copy the skull bone, so that the splints have hold of it.
But if you cannot put the bone back in its place, as we have said, then make the cut with an instrument suitable for it, whether sharp or dull.
Then take what is remaining in the bone, of sharpness and of small scratches.
And when the bone is set and the patient feels great pain afterwards, know that he is not in his natural place.
So that it is in its place, then make a hole in the tied rope in vinegar black and proper, as this is what it should be. And do not put any cream or other thing on the wound with oil, lest it bring rot and corruption.
Then administer ointments as you have restored the bone, and leave the wound uncovered, and cover the covering all over, according to the quantity of the wound, and be sure well that the wound is not bound with the break.
And many times have these fools done this, and brought the patient to death or corruption at least once; And let the strainings be more gentle and softer than other breaks.
And if the wound is bad or large, and you doubt that more accidents will happen as we have said, and you find pain in the limb, do not put up with this, instead. but wrap it tightly, in place of the splint, with hard bandages and tie.
And when you see after the first day or second day that the bow has healed to the wound, so know what you have put on top of it all wine, and apply the ointment healing wounds, just as ointment of four parts and similar things.
And it is fitting that you dislocate the limb a second time every day, morning and evening, until it is softened and healed.
And it is fitting that the limbs be dressed in a certain way so that the bow heals along the leg more lightly.
And if the wound opens again every day and it cannot heal but falls apart bow, see how small pieces of bone there are, for that's why you should cover the wound with a poultice, and remove all those pieces which cause that pain.
If an abscess comes to the leg or in another manner of corruption, then it is fitting that you cure it, according to what he advises in his chapter before.
But if the bone is broken and protrudes through the limb, as it does with the arm or shoulder, and other large limbs, do not treat it yourself, for many times one dies, but allow it to heal by itself.
by chance you will die after twenty or thirty days from the wound, then treat the wound if you can.
and if you cannot, then let her go.
we come many times after the health of the fracture, especially when it's near the joint, and behold what a thing to see is the form of the limb. and by chance may not be able to do the limbs their natural work.
Be cautious therefore if it is fresh. if he administers medicinal drugs such as aloes, incense, and mirrors, and saffron, and myrrh, and similar things, insofar as you have none of these things, or all together, and confound them with a mixture of vinegar or wine, or oil. and put it on the nose in poultices, and strain well, and do not loosen it with your hands for a day.
and put it on the nose in poultices, and strain well, and do not loosen it with your hands for a day. And then dislocate again, and repeat it so often until the knots are removed;
or you strain on a flat bone that is well done; because the property of the flat bone is that it removes all swellings over the limbs;
and if the knot is turned into hardness like stone, and it is necessary to remove it, so that the wound above, and the apparent superficiality. or you return to it without rasp, until it is removed, and the cure until it is healed.
A limb that is weak after childbirth.
When the bone break is restored and stays after the weak and subtle limbs, if it happens for many reasons; For why one is so bound, because he was too tightly tied, and not so tightly bound as it should be. or because he had too many ties, and the swollen part cannot come to the member. or for too many swellings; or because of too great movements, neither in its hour. or because he has little blood in his body, if it is weak.
And the cure is to make the patient eat less and make his body soft, until there are multiplied in him. and administer a bath, and do to the patient joy and amusement;
Then put powder on the limb, so that the powder attracts the great swelling, and the joint rises frequently from the painful water, until the swelling subsides. and returns to its natural form.
One de la main after the health When the limb is twisted after restoration, and the bones are broken open, and the form of the member is ugly all over, then do not try to restore its natural shape.
if you do not believe the foolish people who say that one must break a limb all new every time, and many fools have done this in our land.
and this kind of work is blamed, and great harm comes, and by chance one dies.
If the nodulations and tortures are fresh, then it is advisable to let them arise from hot water, or to cook herbs like violets, roots, and malloloth, as if they were of wormwood, and similar things.
And make the flesh softening like aqua fortis, as it is done, and take the wormwood mucilage, and confection with honey or sesame oil, and make it soft again;
or take grease figs, and grind them with wheat flour, and similar medicines that reduce the swelling.
And no joint is straightened by constant and prolonged friction with wet hands. And make the joint move every hour.
And if the tortuousness is hardened and hardened, like stones, and needs treatment with hot oil, if you choose to apply it to the bone, at the subtle incision. and put a bandage and study the treatment.
Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
When dislocation occurs for no apparent reason, if you think now is the time to restore it properly.
But if delayed, the swelling increases, and by chance it is put back in place at pains.
because one should not move the swollen part until it subsides: many times brought on inflammation and other pains.
whenever it happens, if you treat the patient to make him whole, then set him free, until the swelling subsides.
then warm the affected limb with hot water and oil, then reset it lightly, and treat each member as its own treatment comes to pass.
And I have ordered the chapters of the treatment for dislocation of the shoulder joint, since it is a painful injury.
Sometimes the jawbones are dislocated and outwardly, and the dislocations of both jaws occur in two manners: They are a little bone of their own, and soften a little; or they are completely dislocated, and hang down to the elbow, and cut the saliva from his mouth so he cannot hold it, nor close his mouth, and with speech is overcome by his tongue.
When the dislocation is small, it recurs more often in various positions.
And if it is complete and finished, then you must reset it quickly, and do not wait.
and in this manner that the ministers hold his head back, and pour a small quantity of the mixture from one of his hands into the root of the dislocated jawbone within the mouth, if the dislocation is two parts; and the other hand be covered, for it should equal.
And instruct the patient to soften his jaws, and move them from all sides. And put the mirror on him equal, so he regains his place.
But if the jaw returns swollen, especially when both jaws are affected, apply warm water and oil until it softens lightly.
Do not force it to return to its normal state, as we have said.
And when they are returned to their normal state, and the mouth of the patient is swollen slightly while softening, apply moist cloths soaked in rose oil made from melted oil and beeswax, then bind it lightly with lint.
and let the patient sleep on his back, with their heads between two pillows, so that he does not move either to the right or to the left, and do not force anything else, but rather give him gentle meat until the pains are gone, and the jaws are numb.
and then take what he wants lightly, and do not work on opening his mouth to mend and drink, until the jawbone is well closed and sound.
And if the two mandibles cannot be reset to their point in one hour, and are not converted back to their places, then fever and sickness are set in, and by chance, belly pain occurs, and by chance, vomiting of clear blood.
and when you see this, then know that it's deception; and many have died from this in seven days.
The forearm cannot move across the bone inside the joint and against the flesh, and it is dislocated every time without fail, and one feels it well.
And the restoration is that the patient lies on his back, and extends his arms; and then press the limb against the palm of your hand, and it will return.
then put on the plaster and the bandage, and bind it;
and the joint that is towards the shoulder cannot dislocate; He will not recover, and if he is dislocated at all, so that it is reset to its proper place, as we have said;
then applies the plaster and bandage, and ties it, instructing the patient to rest until they are healed;
and so again is brought back the head of the spine, when it is dislocated from its place.
About the dislocation of the shoulder
Which know that the shoulder joint is dislocated in three kinds:
because it dislocates at the lower end of the humerus below; and the second is at the joint of the elbow; and sometimes dislocates above, and this happens rarely;
And do not let it dislocate behind the shoulder, and do not let it dislocate within the chest area.
And dislocations often occur below the collarbone, especially in those who have little strength, because they are suddenly exhausted.
But for those who have enough strength, the pain is intense and it goes to unbearable levels, and then they become unbearable.
And sometimes it happens to some people that they are struck or crushed, and an abscess forms on the shoulder hot with inflammation, and they think they have a dislocation.
Therefore, one should examine it carefully, until you are certain. And then begin the treatment.
And this is known about dislocations when they occur below the collarbone, and you will find a difference between the diseased shoulder and the healthy one, and you will discover differences in their diversity. And you will find a hollow at the shoulder, and beneath the shoulder there is an asselle, also like the one we have seen; and the patient cannot return his hand to its normal place, nor can he move it in any way.
and also if she is dislocated above, and it's not hidden, because you will find it clearly at the shoulder.
and this kind of dislocation is not very serious to treat when it's new, or if the patient is sick.
And the method is that the minister lifts the hand of the patient up high, then puts his fingers beneath the asselle, and lifts the joint to strength in the normal place. And let the minister relieve the hand, and extend it upwards, because he puts it below; if it is to be cut.
And if it does not come as we have said before in our hands each day, then it is fitting that the patient be bathed in hot water; and he gives him an arsenic and fenugreek and meliloton concoction in water, just as is given;
then let the patient be placed upon his back, and put an assel on his shoulder with a linen cloth that is not too soft nor too hard; then place your finger on the joint of the talon, and lift the head of the shoulder very gently, and treat the hand of the patient.
And other servants take your head from the patient, so that it does not move again. That shoulder returns to its place now, and if you see it move according to this manner:
and that there be a person standing in the room who is greater than the patient; and standing on the opposite side of the patient's back, and tapping his shoulder below the incision, and lifting the incision upwards so that the patient hangs from the arm; And another servant treats the patient's hand downwards towards the belly. And if the patient is too light, then they must put with them any heavy thing, and the dislocation returns now.
And again, one returns in another manner:
And let it be so that you pull the long bone into the earth, where the joint is also in its proper place, as if it were being pushed, and not too big or too small. and then it is placed below the patient, but if he has a soft covering above, and the patient lies on the long wooden staff;
and then his hand is stretched out below the other side of the joint, and the joint returns to its place as soon as possible;
and if it does not return for all these things that we have said, then do this cure: take a long bone of two forearms and four thick ones, which have their head right in front to enter into the hollow of the femur, according to this form:
Then tie up on top of the head with a cloth so that the flesh does not bleed, then put under the bone of the sick person;
and take one arm out over the length of the bone, and tie the assistant to the bone, and the arm on top of the shoulder, then put the arm over the pin of an eschele with a wide diameter, and stretch out both hands below, and let the body hang down from another part; the joint is put back now.
And when it is so, in any manner whatsoever, it is suitable that you put below the abscess a spear of wool equal, then place the plaster made from pumice powder on it with incense and onions of oil, over the entire shoulder and around, then strain from beneath the abscess immediately, and turn the bandage back onto the plaster, and encircle the hand around its neck, so that the hands remain thus.
and it is fitting that he should not move at all, until the limbs are comfortable, for he will heal faster;
and then move more after five days or seven, and move him. and if it is firm and it cannot be softened, then it is healthy.
And if the joint is swollen from moisture or from some other reason, then it is advisable to apply cauterization at three punctures, as he is placed in front of or beside the cautery container.
And if you do this and after seven days it becomes loose again and the joint will not hold, and he cannot lift either arm above, then know that the nerves at the head of the shoulder have been struck or stretched or softened. and know that the joint is never put back in its place.
The dislocation that occurs near the elbow and knees or at the back, is done by impulse and stretching of hands, and it requires another joint.
and cure until he is healthy.
And if after the healing comes pain in the member, and slow movement, then use the patient baths many times, until that pain is alleviated, and returns to its original state.
of the shoulder cut
Know that the shoulder joint that becomes dislocated at a point, and again returns to its place.
And it has come loose from all parts, and itself at front and back, and the dislocation is not corrected, for one sees well and feels well; And it loosens according to each shape. And when you join the diseased limb with the healthy one, so the wound can be seen clearly. Because the joint is swollen, and cannot bend the arm, or reach one's shoulder at all.
And it is fitting that you also reset it so that the abscess comes to a head, because if the abscess comes to a head, then it will be painful to put it back.
And perhaps it cannot be reset entirely, especially when it is at the back; and if so, it's better than other dislocations, and is accompanied by greater pain, and perhaps death.
And restoration is done, when it's such that you can put her back together again, then extend your two hands to hold her. And let the arms be spread out, and the hands straighten according to the cost of the forearm, desor and desoz, and push the joint onto its place, or at the root of his palm, until it comes back to its proper position.
And if there is a dislocation, so that it returns when he doubles his hand to his hand, and very strong on the root of the palm where the finger is dislocated.
And if it does not return to its proper place, apply strong extension;
and let the two men extend the arm, and straighten the elbow with both hands, so it does not move at the extension;
then turn the arm on each side, after having wrapped a double cloth, long and wide.
and when the fingers grip the joint at his hand, if he cannot apply oil to soften the joint, then push the joint together until it returns.
and when she is at rest, if you put on plaster with egg white, and stretch the strain, and bend the arm towards the shoulder of the patient, and leave it for some days, then release.
And if the joint is firm in its place, release the ligament and leave it.
And if you see that the joint does not hold well, renew the plaster and ligament, and leave it for some days, until it is firmly fixed. Then release.
And if he feels great pain after the return of the joint, and it is quiet, then bathe him and rub him well, and press until it be soothed. To put on the joint a lamb's fat, then leave it there for a day and night, then take out the bone, and let the flesh enter the bath. and when it heals, rub the joint temperately, then put back the lamb's fat, and let the flesh enter the bath. and do it twice or three times until he is healed.
and if you see, put on a poultice of fried fat with moist ashes and draw it off.
if it returns to its place.
Dislocation of the hand
The shoulder joint of the hand dislocates, and when it returns is lighter than other joints. Everywhere, it is necessary to bring it back to the same place immediately, in its own house where it has been displaced, so that the joints are swollen, or an abscess forms.
And if you bring it back so that you place the patient's hand on a table, and stretch out your hands, and you put your fingers equal, so that you place your palm on the appearance of the joint, press down until it returns.
Everywhere, it is necessary to look whether he is well afterwards; then put the patient's left hand on a table with extension and return. And if the dislocation is at the back of the hand, so instructs the patient to put his back on his hand above the table, and he places his hand above this appearance of the joint.
If it returns now, that is good. If this is not so, then the strain of apothecaries calms abscesses on the chariot and he lets it go so that it starts again.
And if he cannot bear it, and you cannot put him in his bed after some days, the joint will be twisted.
and the patient should not be moved at all until his hands are fully numb and he cannot feel anything. so they know that the nerves have been struck or cut off;
if there is no other remedy but to strangle with the cautery in this case, and by chance it may be worth something.
When the hands are at rest, so put on the bandage that we have said, then tighten and let it be for four days, then take it off and leave it like this.
But if it cannot be made to move and there is no pain, apply the poultice of hot water and rub it until it heals.
of a dislocation in both hands
never are the two fingers of the hand misplaced in any direction, never on the back of the palm or on the belly;
And so the doctor should bind the wound with cloth as long as it is fresh, and then support the head of the dog, and push it towards the place where it was dislocated;
and leaves it there for two days, and then fixes it on that day;
and fastens it as we have said, and the dressing of the day, and moves it, and binds it to the joint;
and do this often, until it is tight, and do the same if it has become dislocated in the palm of the hand, and do it just as you have done before, until it becomes sound;
and do the same if it has become dislocated in another place.
From the wound of the dislocated shoulder of the back
When the shoulder or neck is dislocated, and there are other dislocations, if there is no remedy, because the disease hastens the patient's death.
And the signs are that the limbs will fall off unless they are voluntarily held in place, or they cannot be retained, and many members are softened, or one of the two legs or both arms.
And many times the shin is broken in four parts;
That which breaks at the back is called "gilbosiez":
The treatment is that you should repair if the gilbosiez has come from childhood; If there is no cure or healing at all.
And that which comes from a fall or impact, or similar things, the ancient people used to treat with great words, but it brought no great benefit.
But I have shortened it according to my intention, and formed instruments in various ways.
There is no healing in the swelling that comes to the front of the leg;
and also the one that comes directly to both sides, and no heat can cure it unless the proper one comes from behind, as I said;
and that the patient is stretched out face up in the same way as his back, and has a strain under him, lest he will bleed;
Then place a strip of cloth under the head on the ground, and another under the feet, and tie a rope behind the legs of the patient, and another around the joints, and knees.
and two ministers see the ties, one to the head and the other to the joints, among the two fists;
and let them be well closed, the fist as we have said, and the nails put their palms on the spine, until it returns.
And if it does not return by this cure, take a board of three cubits long, and shave the skin over the wound, and let the patient lie on his side, and pour water from the head of the board over the wound, then put the middle of the board on the spine; and put the nails on their joints above the other head of the board, and press well, until it returns to its place;
and if you see, perform it on the turnip that turns in the hand. And you place two thorns on the head of the patient with a large arm, and towards their feet, and between each thorn, a span of an inch.
and in each thorn there is a puncture, or the tendon runs through, and the thorns are firmly planted in the ground, so that they do not move.
and between each two thorns there is a second thorn, in the place where the tendon turns, and there are two smaller thorns, an inch long, to turn the tendon.
and then tie the tendon that is between the flesh and the head's tendon to one thorn, and the other tendon to another thorn, each of the attendants turning their own tendon onto the tendon, and the masters placing a straight needle as we have said.
When it is even, put on plaster desiccating with a lot of water, and then the poultices, and then the estele of a tablet of three dollars long, which is reddened by the left of the gilbosicity and the healthy part of the spina sainne, then tie it with a ligature, as we have said, and use the subtlety of nursing until he is sane.
And if no remedy comes in the end of his health, it is fitting to administer medicines that soften and disperse, with the estele which we have said previously. And at times when one administers a poultice and at times the appearance comes in the lower spina dorsa of the back, and we think that it is a dislocation; and this is the bone which opens, for we must not have any suspicion: on will come by chance death.
Know that the joints of the shoulder and the joints of the elbow only come to fires through dislocations alone, not like other joints;
and the elbow joint is displaced according to four parts: within and without, and in front of and behind;
and more within the joint, and less dislocated in front and behind.
And the knowledge of dislocations within it is that when one joins the sick limb to the healthy one, if it is longer, and the patient's knees are opened more than those of the healthy person, and cannot double their knee flexion in the fire; And it is the joints that are swollen with pus because of a foul abscess arises from it.
And the sign of that which comes to the outside is that these accidents are against what is before.
And the signs of one who has it in front of him are that he is standing well with his leg according to its completion. All the way down, do not make a big deal about his knees in pain, and if he is made to walk, it cannot be done before, and he retains his urine, and swells his groin, and when he urinates, it passes above the heel.
And the signs of that person who suffers from this (afterwards), are that they cannot spread their knees, nor double bend them, and the leg is more twisted than the other, and the ankle has been softened, and there is the swelling of the groin at the level below the ribs.
The remedies for this resemblance of dislocation are if you return the joint when there is an old dislocation, and it stays according to its disposition, if there is no cure. And it is not wise that he should have suspicion.
And in this one where the dislocation is fresh, and it's four kinds of dislocations, if you hurry to turn the joint, and put it inside and out, and move it with your right and left hand; if it comes back, and there is no other need for another treatment.
and if it does not come back in this way, then it is best that you apply a strong remedy, and fasten the leg strongly with two hands, or with one bandage above the knee; and another strong remedy is to extend his hand in this way that he pours out his hands beneath his armpits, and then tightly ties a soft bandage around the chest; and another one binds the head with the bandage.
And stretch upwards and downwards all at once, until the patient is lifted up from the earth once, and stays.
This method of extension is common in four forms, and if the dislocation has returned, as we have said, it's quite true.
If this does not happen, it is advisable to give treatment for their likeness.
When the dislocation is in the pardaens, it is advisable to lift the patient up on their healthy side, then put a bandage above the root of the elbow, and let it be in that position below the angle, and towards the flesh.
then put others to hold the patient's arms, and encircle the large arm of the sick person, and stretch it outwards from. if it returns to its place now;
And this way of dislocation is lighter than the others.
And if you cannot do it in this way that we have said, then it is advisable to tie the two feet and one leg of the sick man together with a strong soft cord on both ankles and knees, so that the sick leg is extended twice as much as the other legs.
then let it be suspended on the head of a stick, and above the ground two arms long.
Then command the minister to wrap his arms around the belly of the sick man, and let other ministers hang beside him who wrap their arms around the patient, as now the joints are healing rapidly.
And when dislocation is absent, let the patient heal as we have said in the case of those with gout, and pull the bandage tightly over the sick leg itself, and on the flesh as well;
Then put two thorns, one on the head and another on the other joint, then stick a thorn between the joints at the patient's foot. and attach wet cloths around it so that the patient will not bleed, then extend each of these ministers towards him, and let the fingers meet equal to his hand at the dislocation.
If it returns, that's good.
If it doesn't return, put the leg on a surface, and press it as we have said in the chapter about gout, and cure the patient on the healthy side.
And if a dislocation is in front of it, so as to extend the patient's leg quickly, and according to what I have said; and let the fingers press against the patient's pain above the angle of the joint, then press with the other hand, and extend them to the groin.
And if the dislocation is to the outside, so as not to extend the patient downward, nor lift him up from the ground, but rather that he be in such a state as if his shoulder had been displaced outward, just like we said when lying on both shoulders. And so it is on its face, and the ligament is stretched as we have said before, and must press upon the joint at the table. And so it will be when the patient extends their legs, and they are even. And then add the nails, and apply plaster, and tie with a bandage, so that the hunch does not move. and then rests for three days or four, and afterwards lifts the plaster.
and if you see that they are even, as before, and the bandage, then leave them for three days.
and afterwards lift it, and let the thing go on well, until the limb is comforted.
Of the shoulder joint dislocation
The joints are dislocated three times according to: this means the joint is dislocated inward and outward, and at the back.
and not to the front.
And the signs are that you command the patient to bend his leg to his groin, and if he does not straighten up at his groin, know that the joint is dislocated.
and the restoration of all is that you make the patient sit upright, and extend his leg if he can, and put your back against his face, and place his foot on your feet.
then take hold of his groin with your palms, and press between your two hands, then bend the two sides of his groin that form. and some other servants stretch out their foot, until the knee returns to its place, and the signs are that he is well, his foot on his thigh in light ease;
and he puts on the plaster, and he makes his foot dry in the thigh, and the joint is brought together very tightly for three days or four, then he lifts it;
and the sick do not have to be moved again until the limb is made comfortable.
If the limbs are not at all, then treatment is extended greatly, as we have said in the cure of the gout, until they become whole again.
of the foot dislocation
The feet are sometimes swollen and sometimes completely inflamed, and within and without.
And the signs are that the ankle is swollen, and tightened before the part where it has been dislocated.
The remedy is lighter, and it must be stretched lightly with his hands only when he is in great pain.
And when it is dislocated entirely, so it is fitting that you make the patient sit upright, and the tendon ministered to by the foot, above the ankle;
then take the stone to your right hand, and then to your left hand twice, then stretch it up high, and pour it into the upper part thoroughly;
and do this twice, as we have said, pouring and taking the stone out;
if it returns, then it is good;
but if not, since it returns.
and if it cannot return thus, make the patient lie on his back on the ground, and fix a cord firmly in the earth between his thighs, binding them tightly, so that he does not bleed.
Afterwards, give you the minister of the flesh, and one other minister extends the foot to his hands or to its ligament, he ties it up above the neck of the foot. Then each of these ministers extends it equally, and the straps are tied up between the flesh of the patient to hold the patient in place while stretching.
Then puts the splints equal to the dislocation on his hands, and one other minister ties the sound leg below, and the dislocation will return quickly.
And when it returns to its point, he puts on the plaster and bandages above, and the pressure forms, and ties the foot to the leg, and watches out for the nerves that are above the ankle, so that the ligaments are not too tight.
Then let him stay for two or three days, and if he holds fast, release it;
Then take him out on the third day or on the fourth day, and set him free after four days; And if he goes beyond that time, it is not surety that he will not relapse.
And if an abscess forms on the foot comes up, it is advisable to make him calm, as we have said elsewhere, until he is cured.
of the two When the two are dislocated, they are advisable to be extended with work, and it's a light matter.
And if the dislocation is in any part of the back of the bone or on the foot, it is best to sit him upright on that side either on a plain bench or on the table straight up, and place your foot over that which appears of those joints, then press with your foot firmly, until he revives;
and when he is level and there is nothing opening, put under the sole of the foot a wooden board with two knees, then release him firmly, and let him stay for three days, then take him out; and let him rest, so he may recover.
of wound and dislocation together
When a wound occurs with the dislocation, and one attempts to restore it, many patients die.
If you are not presumptuous in the treatment, but are not skilled in the art and have not practiced it for a long time, and if you are not kind and merciful and delayed in your treatment, do not be harsh.
and at the beginning of all things, use soothing remedies for abscesses and cuts, and let the patient be in the hand of God, if you do not see a chance of recovery. and if you see a chance of recovery, then now reset the limb to its proper place, as soon as possible, in order that the abscesses may heal.
and when the limb is at rest, administer soothing measures to incise an abscess, and treat the wound if necessary, with dried ointments;
and if with the dislocation there is a break and small bones shattered, you will set the bone, and do what we have said in simple diseases;
and beware of entering a path of fear, for I have said so, because this is what is worthy of you according to your Creator, and for the wisdom that armors you and your body.
