Oh sons of great fame, I have completed this book which lies behind the science of medicine in assembly, and have finished it for its explanations and by my statements. And it came to me in vision that I would complete this book for you, which is part of the work from hands, namely "surgery".
And for this reason that the work of hands is pressed in our region and is strange all around everywhere, it has been lost through science and decay, and nothing remains from the fires except small descriptions in books of the ancient ones who have moved their hands. And from this arose the errors and vices, and are closed the intentions, and alienated the science.
It seems to me that I can revive life according to the order of this treatise following the way of exposure, declaration and abbreviation; and I will assemble the forms of the cautery tools and other instruments in the work with the adjustment of the declaration and preparation as it is necessary.
And because no good masters of hands are found in our time, the art of medicine is extended. And it is necessary for him who enters this that to study anatomy, as Galen says, until he knows the measure of bones, and their forms and connections and separations, and has knowledge of the marrow, nerves, and bones, and the number of joints, and the movement and rest of veins, and with his new understanding.
And thus Hippocrates said that the art with the hand is most, and with the work is least; and it is the same in the art of hand.
Let us say in the introduction of this book that whoever is not knowledgeable of the things said here will, if he guards himself, avoid falling into error and will know those who are wise.
Once I have wanted to try many of these who refuse to learn this science, and abandon themselves without knowledge and experience.
For I saw a foolish doctor who cut the abscess of a scrofulous woman or her neck, and cut the arteries in the neck; because so much blood flowed out that the woman died between his hands.
And I saw another doctor who treated a stone of an old man, and the stone was large; so he carried off a piece of the bladder with it, and died of the wound inside three days.
And I have seen it happen many times that they call for treatment, and see the condition of the patient and the size of the wound, and know well whether they will die from it.
And I saw another doctor who took in the treatment of a duke from our land who had broken his leg, and with the break caused an injury;
and let the skilled hands bind the wound with strong ties, and do not leave it until it heals.
and command that he does not release it (from its position).
and thus left the leg completely exposed, and the feet came to destruction.
I was summoned to come to him, and I hastened to come to release the leg; and when I saw that it was dislocated, he was in a peaceful state and felt no pain.
But all the corruption had been confirmed in that member, and it could not be cured;
and the corruption did not cease until the member was completely lost.
And there was another cure that destroyed the abscess, enchanted it, and then inflamed through the evil of its power.
For a boil, when it is purified of melancholic humor, does not suit that one touches it with iron unless there is some way to remove what is corrupted.
And because of this, dear son, you must know that work done by hands is divided into two parts: which means, having or carrying the risk of occurring in various conditions;
and I will show in each one of these books where there is fear and danger.
So that you may guard yourselves, so that no one who knows will be able to speak evil of you.
If you take your arms in consideration, and undertake your sick people gently but firmly, and use the best way, so that by God's grace you will be saved and praised.
and leave the dreadful diseases to cause sickness.
And put your armor on this that makes you doubt, for sometimes it is in your hands so that you can come from this world to the other of glory.
The Greeks are mentioned in some of his writings: Do not treat yourself with medicine for a bad illness, lest you be called a fool.
I have devised this book according to three chapters.
The first chapters are on fire cauterization and cold medicine cauterization, and the chapters are ordered from head to toe.
and the forms of excretions, and instruments for cauterization, and all that is necessary in this work.
The second chapters are on cutting and piercing, and on ventouses and wounds, and extractions of arrows, and similar things;
and so are the chapters arranged and the forms of the humors.
The third chapter is about restoring dislocations and twists, and similar things;
and is ordered like the chief joints just as pieces, and forms of humors.
Also, as we remember the work, it is fitting to tell which quality of aid and which kind of nuisance each condition has.
I say that the qualities of aid and of harm is the longest speech and subtle science and the secret responses;
and this is what the more learned ones spoke about, and agreed upon;
and they soften a little on their words, because I am weary of length.
I say that cauterization helps universally in every complexion where there is matter, whatever the complexion may be: It is to know the nature of hot complexion with matter, and dry complexion with matter.
In a hot and dry complexion combined with matter, some have discussed and said that cautery is great aid. And the others said the opposite: That cautery is worth nothing for disease that comes from heat and dryness. Because the nature of fire is hot, and should not be treated with cold medicine for heat or dryness.
And this one who says the opposite, that cautery is great help to diseases hot and dry that come into the body of men. Because when you buy the body of a man and its moisture is in accordance with the hot complexions, you find that the body freezes.
And I agree with this word. Because I have found it one time through experience.
And all ways, do not enter fire unless the one who has proven it, and knows by long usage the cautery chapter, and the diversity of human complexions, and their dispositions and causes of their diseases, and remedies and space of time.
We have no fear of other types of complexion, especially of cold and moist diseases. And all physicians assembled and agreed on the cautery.
And know, sons, that cautery is made from fire, and contains more healing power than cauterizing with burning medicine.
The fire is simple, and does not come from fire to other limbs except those which are burned.
The hot medicines come from member to member by removal, and bring about the illness of the diseased in the place of healing. And perhaps it will cure the patient.
The fire does not act for its height and for the goodness of its substance, unless it has a surplus or excess.
And this I have found through experiment and by the length of my service and study, and it is well known among things.
And for this reason I excuse myself from the length of speech, because it does not please me to take away from you the secret that is revealed by fire, and the quality of the work, how it cures diseases of the body, as the philosopher said in demonstrating. Instruct the patient to think about this.
And know, son, when it will be decided to perform the cauteries, and when you should pray.
And I say that cautery is beneficial in all times, because the remaining nuisances are removed by the aid of cautery. And even more so, when the cuts are for painful purposes and necessary wounds that cannot be endured until greater misfortune comes to the member.
And do not think ever, dear son, how they made those fools. because the disease that is cured by cautery has no return. and he says this;
and he says this; but it is not so as they claim, because cautery is not just a medicine that changes the complexion and dries out the humors that cause pain; rather it is a medicine of great value and virtue, done quickly by its power and operation.
And certainly, it is possible for the disease to come upon someone at any time according to their bodily constitution and the temperament of the illness and its virtues.
and the superfluities are assembled in him with the acquisition of food and similar things; but if you do not administer cauterization to him when he has little superfluity and moisture, as is done for cauterizing dens because of pain, and similar things, and the same pain does not return. but this happens rarely.
and many people do not understand why cauterization is called the "backside of medicine", and it's seeing.
but they don't believe that cauterization is worth after medicine, but their understanding is false, and it's cauterization being the "backside of medicine" because whenever we administer different kinds of cures for no malady, and they are useless, then we administer the cautery, and it is valuable.
Then open well that cauterization is for those with fever, not according to the foolish opinions of madmen.
The ancient people said that cauterization with an instrument of gold is more effective than iron, and they say that fires only for the quality of the gold and because of the height of its substance;
and they said that the cutting of cauterization does not cause putrefaction, but it is not true for me because I have tried it, and found that it's true in some people;
And cauterization with gold is more valuable than iron, as they said. And whenever you heat an instrument of gold, you don't know when it will be cooled by the color of the gold.
and if it is heated too much; so they are made in the fire; And thus there is much hindrance.
Or you have ordered this chapter on the head to be followed with great care, because the vein is more delicate to find.
This cautery is applied to moist and cold surfaces on the head, and there's one we do by the cause of a disease called "soda", and because of many humors that descend onto the head and ears, and into the eyes, and for many pains and discomfort from teeth, ears, and throat, as well as all diseases that come from cold, such as paralysis, soda, apoplexy, and similar illnesses.
The form of this cautery is that the patients should be purged by medicine, dissolving the humors in the head three or four, according to what the virtues and properties and the custom of the patient can bear; and then tie up the patient's head.
And then make him sit cross-legged between your hands, and put his hands in a certain position.
After placing the root of your palm on the root of his neck between his two eyes; and when it comes to your two thumbs, if it bleeds from the wound then heat the cautery which is called "olivare", because this is the form: And put on the patient's hand a signet ring of ink, and do it by lowering and pulling apart your hand little by little while twisting. Then lift the patient's arm without any resistance, and check if you see the bone a little. And if you do not see the bone, then repeat the cautery as I told you until you see the bone like I told you.
After applying a small amount of silk, and putting on woolen cloth inside, put it on the patient, and let them remain for three days.
After put on cotton moist in butter; and let it remain until the swelling is drained. After a treatment of the wound on the elbow called "tetrafarmacón", so that it is cured.
And if the old ones say that when the wound remains longer, it purges more. and therefore aid is added.
And any of those said that one must cauterize the wound so much that part of the bone is burnt, and then resettle what has been burned by the bone, and treat it.
And the others say that one must cauterize as long as they can pull off, and pound so hard as you lower on the bone just as wide as the spindle that women use in their sewing, for this reason that the humors come out moved out.
and one must pull off the wound longer. afterwards it must be cured and applied to.
And these two methods of cauterization do not seem good to everyone, fire or no fire.
and I think that he should let him lie;
because the joints are weakened by continued solutions of nature, just as we have observed in other members;
and also when the joints of the sick person are weak by nature, and the first treatment of cautery is more salubrious and more soothing for me, and from that comes this same remedy;
When in all cases the head comes with chronic pain that lasts a long time, he must use the patient's herbs and pills called "couchie", and purge of the head, ointments, and emplasters; and if one makes the cautery that we have previously mentioned, and it does not help. Prepare yourself if the head of the sick person is of strong nature, and it is not too cold; Therefore perform cauterization on the same place as we have already said about. After performing cauterization on each corner of the head just where the bone is, as we have said before, and perform cauterization to the one that is called "vessel". and it is often done in which place they put ventilators; and tie your hand so that you do not hear anything just where the bone is; the patients feel too much more severe pain in this cauterization than in the others, and I will speak about it later;
and it is fitting that cauterizing of horns are more subtle than those who cauterize the middle of the head, and this is the form:
Fire cautery of the head When in one part of the head comes sudden pain and the disease spreads up to the oil, and the joints are purged with medicinal powders, and other treatments that I have said in dividing the diseases, do not benefit. and so it is necessary to perform cauterization in two manners, that is to say, according to the method of cold medicine and fire.
The cauterization of cold medicine is that you take a dose of alum, and remove the scab and scrape it up with two fingers, and then make an incision at the temple where the pain resides in such a way that you can replace the dose of alum under the skin.
And when she is reset, if the ligaments are tied tightly and left so for 12 hours; and then the dressing is made with hot wood ash and vinegar, and leaves the wound for 2 days or 3. then puts a cotton plug in butter until it stops the discharge.
After the treatment of ointment, until he is safe.
and if you see, do as I have written or prescribed for any medicinal substances that burn.
The iron cautery is done according to this method. Heating the cautery of this kind is thus the form:
And it is called "closet" because the head is shaped like a hole or has a little bit of bird (feathers), and in the middle, there is a small appearance;
And put it on its proper place of pain, and hold your hand and turn the fever a little lighter, until the moisture of the passion that kills is burned.
Hold your hand so that the arteries do not burn, which is in front, and there is an abundance of blood.
Put cotton on it to dress a wound, and put it back on its proper place for three days; then put moist cotton with butter on it, and then treat the wound of ointment until it is healed.
and if you want to cauterize this migraine with the cautery called "cultellare", at its entire tip, and keep the artery covered in this migraine which is not ancient.
of a headache
When you treat a migraine in the manner we have stated in our divisions of diseases, and do not benefit from it, and see that the fire cautery was previously mentioned by physicians regarding medicine and iron did not suffer, then it is necessary to cool the cautery called "cultellare" until it is white;
And thus, on the left, strike a line of half an inch deep with steel, and hold your hand tight once, and strain that you do not cover the artery and will not be born to the bone;
And guard the jawbone so that it is mute when one chews, and the nerves have no sensation but pain and spasm will come to the patient, and guard the corruption of the artery when it is cut, or if cutting has great fear and also harm to oneself, who is not a student or an expert; and let the wound heal in its proper place;
but I will tell you how to bind blood when the artery is cut, and I will show you in this book where it occurs.
But if you see that this cautery does not suffice for the disease, and the patient suffers much, cauterize them also on the head as we have said, and treat the wound until it is healed.
and if you see, administer the cautery that we have said or the chapter of the extraction of the artery, with the cautery which has two cuts; and this cautery is better than that one and more helpful.
of ear pain from cold.
When ear pain comes from cold, and you have tried medicines that dissolve and other treatments that we have said in the section on division, and the pains do not subside, then apply this cautery which is called "pins", because it is the form:
After pricking all around the diseased ear, or near both if pain remains in both, and you move a little towards the root of the ear after marking it with ink; And have 10 points for each ear;
After the treatment, let him be sane.
of the mouth's torture
Tortures that must be cured by cauterization, except those caused by swelling, as we have said in the divisions of diseases;
and do not perform cauterization on those that come from swelling and pus of the skin.
When you treat this swelling of a torture that swells from inflammation and purging of the head and gargarete, and since these are not considered, then it is necessary to cauterize the patient with three cauteries: one in the root of the ear, and another near the temple, and the third at the junction of the two lips;
and place the cautery in the healthy part that is opened up, and let them apply cautery directly to the forehead above a little below the eyebrow, and another one on the temple as long as an inch. and let it burn so that the moles on his face are burned;
and this is the form of cautery:
And it is like the form of a knife that we have shown before, but it is slightly more subtle and must be that the knives be slightly thicker;
after healing as I have said, until he is whole.
When apoplexy is ancient and you cure it as we have said, and he does not recover, and the patient has no fever, then let him do four cauteries: In the second part of the head, and in the first ear, and on the one that is called "wazel" as we have said before, apply cautery to the mouth of the stomach;
and treat it as we have said before.
of lassitude.
To this illness, it is fitting to give the patient large and pill-like medicines for the brain;
After applying the head of the patient to all of them, and putting on the ointment of fennel in the back of the neck, which is written in treating ointments;
and this is the manner of cautery: as I have said.
If he is thus healthy, then good is; And if he is not so, then do three cauteries on the head near the neck, and space one thumb's breadth between each cautery two of great size.
And the treatment as the others; and if you see a lump, then do one cautery in the middle. And if it's wise, two others above the two horns, and the treatment until he is healthy.
And let it be the cauteries which are called "olivary", as I have said before.
It is fitting that the head be purified with years and what we have previously said;
After the illness the head of the patient, then cauterize in the middle of the head and on each horn, and on the third from behind and above the spine of the neck.
And if you wish to do more, and the body is moist, and the patient suffers greatly, and the disease is severe, then cauterize four times on the spine of the back. and let it be left until the greatest wound is cooled, and lift your hand; after the cure until he is healed, and apply what is called "olivare" which we have previously mentioned.
From the epilepsy
The epileptics should only use fire cautery on those who are flaky, and it is fitting to first soften the brain with years and other remedies that we have mentioned in the division when the patient is great and suffers from many of the medicines.
And if it is an infant who cannot suffer, then make gargarism and mastication of a poultice that moistens the brain often with raw meat.
After the king's head is removed, and he undergoes the fire cautery according to what we have said before, and undergoes the cautery on his neck, and on each horn; and if the patient is very strong and suffers, he undergoes fire cautery in the same way as I have said to him who has paralysis and softening of the body, on the spine of his back and throat, and should be cauterized olive according to the manner that I have said.
If the patient is sick, if he does fire cautery subtle according to this manner:
When because of melancholy there are superfluities or corrupted moistures and a great flux, then the fire cautery on tender parts as we have said to him who had paralysis.
And if the superfluities decline due to melancholy and the body of the sick person is moist, then let him drink something so that the intellects be clarified, according as it is beforehand in the division.
After the king's head is given to the patient; After make a cloth of linen well made, like a circle, put it on the head;
and let them be tied in such a way that they are well crossed, and held in all parts;
After presenting the thread, take up a bandage of wool grease. and let it be heated by fire temperately, so that the wounds may bear it. after draining the circle from within the head, let it cool down;
and do this for the patient each week once with good governance, until they are healed.
If you see someone being cautered while making many pricks all over the cautery.
This method of cautery is more suitable for the brain;
and then put on a wet cotton cloth in lard and fatty meat.
of the eyes. When the eye comes first in this way by the signs I have said in division, then begin and do give the patient something that cleanses the head, and guards against all moistures, and make it sweat or take a bath several times daily.
After he is commanded to put his head back, and he does cautery from the inside of the head, and does two cauteries on each temple if there is a falling out with both eyes together, or if one is affected alone.
And take care of all the cautery on every vein and artery that is under the cheek, and be careful to cut them long according to the size of the temple.
And be careful of the decomposition of blood, and if you see too much blood coming out, then stain it with a little strength just like how you did.
And I will teach you in the extraction of arteries and incising, how to carefully do it;
And never perform a cautery or haterel (likely "hatterel", an old word for "copper knife") under the two bones at the back.
and then we see that it is the swelling of cold phlegm, therefore, let the fire cautery be done which I have said at the beginning, descending to the eyes: Cut cautery on the head, and cut on both sides of the two temples, and cut under the two bones; and if it is a more serious condition, then the cautery should be done in the same way above the eyebrow to all the little cuts.
When you give medicine according to what we have said in the division, and it does not help at all, then let the patient drink three poisonous substances; After the king has been done for the head, and let there be a cut in the middle of the fire olive cautery; And do the second fire cautery on the two wounds called "clavilis" under the two shoulders, a little below.
and watch out for the artery that you do not cover.
And this is the form of the cautery called "clavilis":
When the paper of oil is softened by disease and moisture, then apply the cautery called "olivare". Because of this there is
And if you see, do the second fire cautery on the two wounds as long as the wounds are.
and do not leave off the hand, except until the third part of the paper is burned, as I have said.
One hair which touches the oil There is never a case where the hairs of the ointment are converted into pardaens, and they prick, and then one does fire cautery according to two ways: which is to say of fire, or of burning medicine.
Instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
and when they are long and even, then put the patient in a safe place; and then mark the paper around the eyes with a figure such as that of the flame of myrrh, and just like the beginning of the sign of the hair.
then put cotton soaked in beeswax and musk of pyrethrum on the oil, and then apply the cauterization with this shape:
After cauterizing on the figure that you have marked, slowly apply heat a little at a time, so that the color is fixed in the right place.
and when the signs of health of the eye are that you see the parchment withdrawn, and the hairs raised at the tip of the nail;
and therefore lift your hand, and let it be thus for three days, then apply cotton moistened in butter until the swelling is drawn. after treatment of ointment until he is cured.
And if after this the hairs come back and the parchment is softened, then resume the cautery on that very same place, just as you did first;
and if the hairs are fallen out, then cuterize until the parchment is raised to its natural place, and even, and does not prick at the hair anymore.
The fire cautery is that you instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; then make a parchment shape of the form of myrtle leaf.
then take some French soap and live charcoal, one of each, Z., and grind them together well. and make it hastily, if it does not cool down, then place it on the form as you have made like a myrtle leaf, and put paper over the eyes; and if the illness is held in only one kind of oil, so it must be applied to both. and put the oil-soaked cotton cloth in an earthen vessel;
And the head of the patient should be in a healthy state, and show its pain above the medicine, and press it firmly on the muscle every time the patient feels sharp pains from the medicine, for he feels sharp pains just as from fire.
When you have done this for a long time, if the medicine has come to your death. And when the sharp pains have passed, if you lift the limb, and make sure it is warmed up as if it had been warmed up by constraint of fire or incision. and so he will be well.
If not so, then put back the medicine on the limb or if it has not worked yet, until your work is equal and your eyes are at their right place.
Then put on cotton soaked in fat until the wounds have closed, after curing the limb with a dressing called "diaphenis" and others, until it is completely healed.
And if necessity requires that you guard yourself well on your work by great care, so that the wound does not occur again.
And if the paper becomes wet after that, and they prick at the hair in the oil, then resume the medicine on that person who has been softened by the paper properly, as you have done before; after the cure until he is healed.
and this is the form of the mercury mixture:
And so one must know that the eyes of men are different in size and proportion, and according to this one's complaints;
and do not be replied that the correct way is for him who has studied this art.
Of the cauterization treatment of a fistula.
When you cure a fistula as we have said in the divisions of diseases, and your treatments do not benefit him, then it is necessary to cauterize him according to this manner.
Instruct the patient to put his head on a clean cloth; and let the barber tie his head between your hands in such a way that it does not move.
After the application of a moist cloth or persil juice on oil.
After applying heat to the cauterization which is divided:
and it is shaped like a bird's beak as it resembles the cauterization;
if it is pointed from the top to the bottom, and if it is so as a tent;
but all of this is worthless for your work.
After pressing the abscess until it bursts and pulls out its pus, and dries; and if it is closed, then the operation is performed, and fire is applied to the bowels;
After the fire cautery is applied to the skin, hold the cautery hot on the area that needs healing, and keep your hand over the cautery at the place of the wound, so as not to cause madness. and put the cautery in the grease of the oil, and corrupt it.
If you come to the beginning of cauterization just after the bone, it would be well. If this does not work, repeat the cautery once more, and if it is necessary again, leave it for three days.
After that, put a wet cloth in butter on the wound, and apply a drying ointment until it is healed, and after forty days if it has not been healed, put on medicine to dissolve the bone. and he will do according to what comes in his chapter.
And there is a way of cauterization for an abscess that none of the ancients mentioned. Let an ulcer, and cut off the finger; After putting in the incision of a small hook so that it is the form: and make to the quantity of one and half fingers' breadth; And hold your hand firmly on the hook so that it does not move at all, until the poultice is fused and does not run to its own blood;
and it is fitting that one puts on the poultice moistened with water or oil on the patient's skin in linen.
the poultice if made on the finger of an ulcer, and makes the patient sound in marvelous health.
And if the fistula is healed by the cautery that we have said, it is good. If this is not the case, it is necessary to administer pus into the wound and return the fistula to its proper place in the body as is suitable for each individual.
of fissures in lips Often fissures occur in the lips that are called "poils", and likewise in children's lips.
When you treat these crevices of what we have said in divisions, and the cure does not benefit, then apply a small cautery surgical according to this form:
And then puts it immediately into those crevices until it comes out at the same place;
After cure the shoulder joint is stable again.
When an abscess comes to the root of the neck or in the cheek or at the roots of the teeth, after being putrid and rotten and dried up and becomes a fistula. and you cure it as we have said in previous divisions, and it does not benefit at all. therefore it is necessary to cauterize according to the size of the fistula. after the dressing or removal of the fistula, and hold your hand until the iron comes alive at its tip, and draw the pus out.
and do so once or twice, after the treatment as we have said for cures, until it is stable again.
And if he is thus treated, this is good; And if this is not so, then it is necessary to discover the limb and remove the corrupted bone, according to what you will find in that chapter.
When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you cure him with medicines, but this is useless, then place the healthy head of the patient on your own. after applying cauterization, from the shape of which will come later in this way, that you place a chain on the tooth;
and put within the cauterization hot starch, and hold it with your hand so that the patient feels the heat coming to the root of the tooth;
After your hand is lifted, resume the cautery according to your will.
After filling the patient's mouth with a foul-smelling concoction, let it sit for an hour and burn hot fires.
And in some way, the teeth which were moving are fixed, and the gums are restrained, and the moistures corrupted are dried.
Of pain of teeth
When pain of the teeth comes from coldness, or if there is coldness in the ear, and medicines do not help, then it must be necessary to cautery according to two ways: and cautery with butter and cautery with fire.
Cautery with butter if is done thus that you press butter from a vinegar-soaked cloth, and the end into a metal spoon or iron rod. After picking cotton and covering it with a cloth of gauze, let the paste of butter boil, and put on the painful tooth hastily and hold until it cools down;
Instruct the patient to let their hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
The instrument for cauterization is made of iron or charcoal and must be large enough so that the flames do not reach the mouth of the patient;
After cooling the cauterization instrument, because then it will take shape again, and you place it on the tooth and hold your hand until the instrument is cooled.
Do this often, because the pain will be felt on the same day or the next day.
And it is necessary that the patient fills his mouth with good butter in the haste of the cauterization, and then he rushes to cure him.
and this is the form of the cauterization:
And make cauterize where you wish, and according to what power you have;
And thus is the form of the bone:
Des scrophules When the scrophules are swollen with fever and cold moistors, and do not yield to digestion by medicines, then heat the cauterizing knife of such skin after which comes the form, and cut open two openings for the fumes to come out from the other side;
and place the cauterizing knife on the abscess once or twice, as long as it is not drained from the abscess;
and if the abscess is small, apply cauterizing according to its size, and let it be so for three days; and put on a moist cotton wool in butter until the wound is healed;
After a cure, let the limb rest for a while until it is healthy.
When moisture prevails over the channels of the body, and especially when it comes from a cold temperament, then it is suitable for patients to be emptied first by medicinal solutions.
After applying fire cautery to the root of the throat, and keep in mind that you should not come near the throat again, but only let a small amount of heat.
After applying the second fire cautery to the joint of the neck at the head of the spine, and consider the cauterized part which is called "clavicle" because we have the shape in front.
and treat the limb as we have said, until it is healthy.
When all and malady of winter are from cold moisture, and the patient has neither fever nor sweating, and is a long-standing illness, then apply two cauteries on the pulse in their veins; and another cautery on the flesh between the two nipples;
and so it is called "clavicle" according to the shape that is described.
And if you see, apply cautery by pricking in the point where the cautery is called "points" because of its shape in the illness of the ears;
and are one thirty-third, or two thirds.
After the treatment according to what has been said, and if the cautery is applied at three points according to this form:
And because that way the cautery is lighter, because you do three of them at once.
of the shoulder joint.
When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation. After apply to the patient on their back and on their side; After the head of the shoulder, instruct the patient to lift the curvature which is inside the joint with your left hand.
and if the joint is dislocated within, so inflame the cautery which has two nerves in it, this form:
and cauterize the curvature so that it perforates just on its side, and comes together with the four cauterized nerves;
and for this reason the cautery is made with the cautery that has three nerves, because the figures of the cauterization are these four.
and they are nerves according to the subtlety of an awning and this is the form of the cautery that has three nerves:
And sometimes, you press against this nerve because it is with eight cauterizations.
After set on the cautery for pearl-like bruises with thread; After resting the patient, do not keep the limbs still for a long time until they are well comforted.
And if they dislocate again, little things happen then; afterwards, make cauterization on the thick cauterizing knife, or many cauterizations in a point.
For the joints are closed up, and the moisture is removed and the patients are made healthy.
When there is frost in the stomach and much moisture so that they extract it to its condition, and many cathartics are multiplied upon him, and all the usual treatments do not benefit him, then it is necessary that the patient be put on his back, and extend his legs and hands. For this, after the third cautery I is done beneath the skin of the leg for the amount of two drachmas, all over the cautery clavicle, and the second cautery is done outside on both sides so that there are three angles in total, and each space between one and the other is such that they will not be joined together when they rot.
and the cauteries are performed to the point that they inflame both parts of the vein, and the figure of the cauteries is according to this form near the junction:
And if you see a great cautery in the stomach according to this form;
And he who has fear of this cautery, cauterize by pricking and mark on the stomach at that point according to the quantity you see of the wound; and then cauterize all the cautery which is called "point".
After the treatment of the treatment we have had before, until it is cured.
When the liver comes with pain from heat and moisture and great swelling, so that it is much removed from its natural condition because of excess. and the patients are cured of what we have said in divisions, and they do not benefit from it, unless it is brought to be applied on its own heat. and a mark of the third cauterization according to this form and figure and this quantity on the liver, except for the hypochonders, where the cost is of the belly comes.
And hold a space of about an inch between each cautery mark on the size of a dog. And let the cauteries be long on the body, and do not press too hard with your hand all over.
And let it be burned only on the moist parts of the wound, and let the patient lie straight on their limbs.
And if he cannot, so let him lie on his side, and stretch out his legs, and lift up his limbs.
And if your will is, to cauterize these cauteries on the tibia, so that you are subtle and wise in this art, and beware lest you burn all of the wound, for you would be drying out the entire body. and he shall not suffer from fever because the heat is very subtle to that place, and his senses are able to see.
When he has an abscess on the liver, and you see if it is in the flesh of the liver or on the membrane. if it is in the flesh, he feels a great pain but not extremely strong;
and if it is on the membrane, he feels extreme pain.
And when this treatment needs to be applied to the patient's head, it is convenient that he should lie on his side.
and then mark the location where the abscess is, and then apply the cautery that resembles the form. And burn the cautery so long as the wounds are red, and it comes forth just like pus, until the infection is completely gone;
After the healing according to the remedy for the wounds so that it is safe.
And it is not to be used of this cautery on anyone who has not thoroughly studied the art of medicine, for by which hands these diseases have been cured no one.
And so it can be done with great courage, and I think it's more valuable to leave it.
How to treat peritonitis
The old men said that we should make purgative cauteries with the roots of Aristogeon, and in this way: Take a root of Aristogeon as long as you can find one, dry it, and make it just as big and just as long as your thumbs. and pour the fat in oil, and press it to fire, and cauterize between the warts and the neck, and make cuts one by one while descending towards the area below the chin;
and cut between the fifth rib and the sixth, in a downward slant after a little. and cut on the foot, and one above the stomach, between the two shoulders, and between the two ribs, where the cut is between the two shoulders;
and do not press with your hand, but make an incision so tightly as in an odorant.
And old men said that no one uses the fire cauterization similar to shaving, and the flint and put it between the ribs, until it reaches the abscess; and he will burn with fire, as we have said in the word of the liver.
But in this work there is fear or the patients die now, or a fistula comes that cannot be healed.
of the abscess.
When you treat the disease of the abscess as we have said about the divisions of the treatments, and it does not profit at all, then they mention three kinds of cautery that are all good.
From which one is a certain way so that you make three cauteries, or four, binding according to the length of the mouse, according to the figure of the liver cautery that we have said before.
and do not press with your hand at all the cautery, and let the sick man lie on his back;
and another way of cautery is that you draw the cautery with two nails, as we have shown in the dislocation of the shoulder;
and lift the wound which is towards the mouse, or if the cuts of the sick person come to the left side, and so that the elevations you lift according to the wound, according to the length of the body, and the cautery are as wide as the breadth of the body.
After the two fingers are burned, they should be flamed until the pain is perceived from the other side, and then take fire to apply cauterization, and thus it will have four effects.
And if you see that all the cauterization is with three fingers.
After the treatment when it has been exposed to rot for long times, and this applies to those who have already received other treatments said before.
Cautery is not effective for dropsy, except when applied in the manner known as "asclytes".
As you cure according to the manners that we have said in divisions, and if your treatment does not benefit, then it is necessary to make four cauterizations between the nostrils, and one above the stomach, and one above the liver, and one below the mice, and two behind on the spine on the spine, and one on the opposite side of the foot. and if the cauterizations are well near the spot of the wound.
After leave the cauterization to be open for a long time, and do not leave the patient's cure after the cauterization. and healing would hasten, and there will be two intentions with God's aid.
The form of the cautery for the belly is the claw which we have shown previously; and that for the back is olive oil, as has been shown previously.
When the feet are swollen in one who is dropsical and filled with dewy citron juice, it is necessary to cauterize on the back of the foot between the auricle and the ankle; and lift your hand with the cautery towards turning.
And do not enter too deeply in this method, lest they suffer like the one who was burned by fire, and so should you use cauterization according to this form:
After, make two cauterizations in each knee, one in the toe of the cutlass-shaped knife. and let them cut open to the long one, on both sides of the knee.
and leaves the cuts open for a long time to be treated, until they heal.
after treating other treatments that we have said.
When a belly disorder comes from cold and moisture, so that the retained virtues and digestion that is in the stomach and intestines are deficient, and cannot be cured by other treatments. and you see the patient suffering much and having great weakness, so do a cautery on the stomach according to what he said before, or stomach cautery, in circular motion. and four fire cauteries are to be applied near the subtle nerves, and two fire cauteries are to be applied on the veins.
If you see the moistors abundant and the patient suffering, make fire cautery on the nail, and do fire cautery on each joint, and two cauteries on the stomach with the great one, because the cure is beneficial when it has good aid.
About the treatment of hemorrhoids.
When the ulcers are on the fundament, or one or more of them, and they are old and are swollen with gross humors that are cold, moist, and corrupted, and they are treated as we have said in divisions, but it does not profit, then apply fire cautery: Three times on the spine of the back, those who are behind the almeccade, a little by a little in a triangle shape, and two fire cauteries below the nerves.
and if you think that the stomach is cold and the flesh does not cook, and the face swells up, then apply one fire cautery on the stomach, as it has been said, and one more above the liver, and one more above the spleen with all the cauterization clavile. and let the fire cautery be left on for long periods. After a cure, the limb must be made sound again.
When you apply the cautery to the ulcer, if it seems as if the fire is making the sawing motion of a razor, and then put it completely ablaze on the ulcer that has been cut. and leave it so long that the fire comes to the root of the vein, because there is no cutting.
do it once more and if there is much of the ulcer, cauterize each part as we have said. after the application of ointments, which are beneficial until they become healthy.
and if you apply a great fire to the swollen part, it will have more relief.
When the patient cannot bear either a dressing or an opening, that is what we will tell in his case, if it comes to such a sickness that can only be cured by cautery.
When there is no fistula, and it has grown old and swollen with putrefaction and moist corruption, if you wish to prove the depth of the wound, and guard so as to know how far it goes.
After the cauterization that resembles a razor, and pour it into the fistula according to the quantity that has entered, repeatedly perform the cautery until the corpse is burned and corrupted once, twice, or three times, depending on how much it needs.
And be careful of the ardent nerve that is inflamed, and great veins.
If the fistula is in the abdominal cavity and intestine, be careful with those things, and do not apply fire to them unless in the gallbladder, and think that they are not human.
After treating the animal so that it is made whole again, and if the intestines are swollen, and the materials are long time stored, then you know that the intestines are made whole.
And if the materials are not bones, then know that the limb is rotten, and corrupting the bone to the point. and thus as if we were speaking on its behalf.
When a pain of frost comes from the rain, and a great swelling, and it does not take hold in the woman, then it is fitting that you make fire cautery above both sides of the affected area and with the barbed needle which we have previously mentioned.
and if we cautery in the middle, then there will be three fire cauteries in line, and these will bring greater relief.
of the bladder When the bladder is weak and damp from frost and moisture, and the patient retains urine, then you must cauterize in the area behind the bladder, where the hairs grow at the navel, on both sides, and one on each side, so that both are cauterized as long as one point.
And let the fire cautery be performed on the back, where it is necessary.
and let the fire cautery be performed on the clavicle according to the shape described.
When the marrow is cold and moist, and does not allow for conception, and the flowers are corrupted and their ends are late. and when they come, they cause great pain. so it is necessary to perform the fire cautery inside the womb, as we have said about fire cautery of the bladder, and also on the back.
and let it be performed on the clavicle, as we have said.
When the mucous viscera descend into the joint of the haunch, and because of this they move out of their place, and the signs are that the thigh is longer than the others when measured together.
and it is found in the joints from departure by moving around, so it is fitting that you cauterize the patient under the skin of the hawthorn branch as if to draw a circle, and hold before the joint as if it were turning, so that the skin is inside the circle;
and if it is so cauterized as those which have been cauterized of the stomach.
And if these cauterizations are not present, then do three cauterizations of the olivary branch, and make them as thick as all the keys.
and heal him until he is made whole.
of the pain of the groin When pain comes to the skin of the hawthorn branch, and it is from cold and moisture, and the patient is cured by what we have said in the division, but the cure does not work, and the illness is ancient. Then it is necessary to purge the patient of the heavy humors of old, foul pills, or other hard pills. After applying the fire cautery;
and it is done according to two manners: which means assemble medicines with herbs, and fire cautery.
Fire cautery is according to many ways, of which some are like this:
Where you cauterize on the bark of the juniper tree, three cauteries in the triangular form, and make it deep and large, and space each cauterization as wide as a doves egg, and are olive oil cauteries;
Never is cautery performed in the middle of the cheekbone, because there are four kinds according to this form:
And if you see, if the cautery at the point of a circle that we have said in the dislocation of the cheekbone;
but do it in such a manner that the circle contains all of the cheekbone, and all the bone in the area where it was burned.
And this is the manner in which one does it when applying the sciathe (a form of treatment), as the pain stays in the hamstring and cannot reach either the thigh or the leg.
And if it comes close to the thigh and leg, make two cauteries above where the patient says that the pain is, and four doves, on the right side a little.
and whether it's the cutlass cautery or burn the thicker bone.
and if the patient feels that the pain is spreading to both of two feet or near it, then you should apply the cautery at the place where he feels the pain three times or four times which is called "point". And if it happens that they do more.
and if he feels that the pain is below the knee towards the thigh, then you should apply the cautery at the cutellaire or circular cautery; and well guard in all your cauteries so that you do not burn the nerves and great arteries too much, and do not cause the patient greater nuisance and contraction.
And I myself have seen others who did fire cautery on the ankle of the foot, and they burned so much that the leg was completely swollen, and the toes as well, and it became consumed and corrupted all the toes. After a stomach solution in which he died.
And if the pains are in both legs together, do fire cautery in one and the other, according to this manner.
And the wise men said in the cautery of the hawthorn because this is the way, make an I such iron and it should be as big as a sailor's finger or slightly less, and so between each other with the space of an arrowhead to the quantity of a piece of thread.
and they shall be joined together again of two parts, and shall also be like now, and there shall be one bolt of iron well-made;
and this is the shape:
And so it should be heated until it is completely red and smells like vinegar, and then put upon the bone of the sick patient, and turned onto the healthy side;
and after the cautery is done once again they shall leave it for three days; and then cover with butter and let the wound be covered for a long time; after the bandaging treatment until it is healthy.
Albucasis says that we should use it little because of the fear of its sting, and since few people have used it;
and it is clear that this is a good cautery, which he can bear, and where he is treated.
The cautery of medicine is hot so that you make an instrument between the channels in which it falls on the margin of the door, and it is either of iron or of steel with a long appearance, and at its top there are two of each size and quantity, corresponding to the thickness of a dole. and are put over and above, and join together according to this form:
After putting the blade of the hazelwood on the patient lying on his side, and pressing your hand very strongly onto the blade of the hazelwood. After placing between the two circles of hot ash which are heated by one pot, and letting him suffer for one hour in bed, and feeling the heat and the burning of him.
It occurs from biting as well as from fire;
And when the bite has passed, lift up your hand with the instrument and gently lift the heel of the foot, and let it be for three days, and put on butter until the blackness of the bruise is healed. and let it be for three days so that putrefaction will cease;
And this would be the rear part healed after the treatment of ointments until it is fully recovered.
And if the pain has extended up to the thigh or down to the leg, make an instrument that tightens more than you did in the heel.
and this is the method of applying hot ointment, and I have written it to treat the art of medical correction. Take alum and vinegar alive, equal quantities of each, and grind them together, and put them in a new pot. If there is a small opening made beforehand so that the point of an arrow can enter.
If there is a small opening made beforehand so that the point of an arrow can enter. And put a second pot with another kind of lead or silver on it, and add vinegar and gall and apply the powder to it so that when you have two layers of them over the wound, you will be able to grip it firmly in your hand.
And let it remain in that state until the fever and pus descend from the opening of the lead or silver pot, then take out all of it, and apply gall and vinegar to it as before.
And if the fever is severe and has been brought under control through application of various medicines and cauterizations on other parts of the body.
For it does all sorts of work like fire, and there are other medicines that must be cauterized well, such as this mixture of treacle, honey from the acacia tree, gall with soap.
And the Galen tells us of a cure in which one man was cured of the pain of the vein and sciatic pain, and great praise for it, and he says that there was no other cure needed, and he became whole once after this cure, and he bathed himself as he teaches it here afterwards.
And instruct the patient to press with a firm and fresh green leaf, and grind it much with a little fat, and put on the haunch and on the thigh and on the leg where the pain is felt, and bind.
and let him leave three hours and by the quantity that the patient feels no more of the burning.
And then put it into a bath until the body is slightly swollen, and put it into the bed, and the pain will go away entirely and be healed.
And knows that no one should use cauterization with such medicines unless it is after the evacuation of blood.
And Dioscorides says that when the varicose vein is cauterized with horsehair, it will greatly aid.
and must be done in this way. Take a linen cloth and anoint it with old oil, and place it on the fossa which is between the big toe and the small toe.
After taking dried horsehair and wrapping it in fire until it is charcoal-like, and then put it on linen, and let it be so stained;
and redo again, and do not stop doing so until you think with sense that it comes to the heat, and that the pain is ceased;
and this method of cautery is called "cautery on the knee".
of the great pain in the back.
When pain comes to the back, whether by falling or by percussion, or by great evacuation, or because it seems like material is spread out cold, none of these symptoms are worth cauterizing, except for those who come from an infusion of cold matter.
it is necessary after this that the patient is void of fetid pills or other similar things; and on his loin, in that place where the pain lies, three lines signed with cautery, and in each line one or more according to the virtue and quantity that the patient can bear;
and let it be done the cautery as is called "points".
and if you see, do three cauteries or four on the cauterized joint in this form:
This is often the case with this illness in small children, and the signs of its beginning are that they have a stiff neck when they lift it up, and fear. and you find in the lower back spine and on your back the appearance that comes above the other spines.
When you see this and you see them being cured, if you cut him with the cautery of a cell according to this form. So that the fire cautery affects each part of the spine equally.
And if you see that when the fire cautery cuts into the spine at two or three points and the wounds are close together.
After treating the patient so that he is healthy again as we have said, and take care not to apply fire cautery in gangrene which has inflammation of nerve.
of pain from the joints.
When pain in joints is caused by moist spots that have spread to each limb of the body, and when pain comes to the foot, they call it "podagre" properly, and since it's caused by cold reason and medicines cannot cure it, if cured by cautery in this manner:
cut the oil of cauterization into the joint of the foot, and make the cauterization according to this form:
And if he has need to prick at the flesh of the foot, then let him perform fire cautery on all the cautery as we claim "a point". And if the pains come to both knees and other joints, and this has happened many times, then for each knee three cauteries or four of each part, all of these olive cauteries.
and if you have more business to attend to, so do it more, but do not keep your hand wet until the spices are dried.
And if the pains descend just to the knees and back, let him administer the cautery as we have said in this chapter.
And if the pains are in the hands, so make points on each side of the wrist two lines.
and if there is no pain in the fingers, make points on each joint and on the hair of the hand;
and if the pains come to either elbows or shoulders, cautery each part, and give good governance to the patient and administer medicines.
If you do good governance and purge the phlegm, so will you be cured by God.
When a fracture comes with blood, and the bowels descend into the joints and it is newly so, then you must not treat it on the same day. and that he uses things which make the belly swell, so that the fumes come down from his belly.
After you make him sit on his back between your hands, and he orders you to tighten his leg so that the bowels are repaired, and take hold of it, and sign with ink on both sides of the fracture on the bone at the joint, in such a way that it is similar to half of a circle above the body;
then takes out the cauterizing instrument for this purpose:
As long as they are white and senselessness. Then takes out the bowels to their place; And the attendants keep their hand above you so they do not return to your back;
And work well on the thighs of the patient, and put a cloth over his crotch and another over his groin to keep his hands from being bruised;
then put the cautery on the mark at all your fingers, and hold tight with one hand and steady with another until you strike the bone, and if you do not strike it the first time, then repeat it again as many times as necessary until you reach the bone. and beware subtly lest the boiling blood escapes while you are doing the cautery; lest you burn it. and that the patients may not die from this or another illness.
And know that when you do not come to the bone with the cautery, your work is worthless.
It is necessary to treat children with subtlety according to their measure; and great people as well in proportion to their size.
After three days of treatment with butter cautery, until the scab is fallen.
After the treatment of other ointments until he is cured, and applying the patient for 40 days on his back so that the wound is well dressed.
and it is necessary that his nourishments be prolonged for a long time, so that the boils do not burst when he gets up to walk in the chambers.
And after 40 days, when he wishes to rise, apply a well-made bandage and wear it for another 40 days;
and let him have good rest, he must work little and be careful not to drink too much wine and meat, and eat too high.
and when he follows this instruction so is entirely healed.
And I will say this after your operation on cutting with a cautery.
When gashes come in other parts and are discovered, and you see they no longer grow, then do the fire cautery according to its quantity, and cut off one-third of the cure. after the treatment as we have said;
and none of the ancients have said that you should do the cautery with three angles according to this form:
but first mark the size of the opening in the incision, and make a line for its width, and with your thumb press all around the cautery nail.
But the first cauteries are lighter and more gentle.
Of old pain in any limb When pain comes to any limb, whether from a fall or an injury, and that pain persists for a long time, and the medicine cure is not helpful, then it is necessary to cauterize with the cautery called "poins", and do the cauteries according to the length of the limb and its smallness and weakness and its virtue and its location of twists and its pain.
if he is healed after the first cautery, it is well;
For the head of the shoulder, instruct the patient to repeat another cauterization on that one, because this treatment is suitable for the movement of the limb that is next to it, so you must do the cauterizations until the patient becomes well.
The problem is not helped by cautery for a great amount of time, and the disease itself that comes from the rotting of pus and melancholy.
Can you see the cauterizer, take care if the patient is at the beginning of an illness, and if they are cured according to what we have said in the division, and do not cut or remain still, and doubt that corruption will spread throughout the entire body, then make cauterizations on the head. Emboss the head again and the other side of the forehead to the end of the eyebrows. and also on the two horns, and one behind the ear.
And I let your hand stay so that the cautery comes to life just before the bone, and so long as the scabs come out in great numbers, so that the vapors of the large humors can come out.
And cut off the mouse according to what it is in front of.
And if the meshing (of tendons) is everywhere sparse; and if it is manifest that it pertains, so it is advisable to cut with these cauterizations which we have mentioned before, and cutting some in the neck, and two on the spine of the back, and one on the shoulder, and one on the elbow, and two on the other shoulders; and two on the groins, and two on the tendons of the leg, and one on each joint of the hands and feet, and on the hollows of the hands;
And warn yourself of the nails that are under the nostrils, lest you burn them;
And at no time perform cautery on the bone of the finger joint, and another on the bone of the stomach, and another on the liver.
And know that when you do more cautery, the more benefit it brings.
And know that the sick do not feel pain from cautery as much as they who are healthy do, because the body is already completely corrupted.
It is necessary that the cautery be large or small according to the members and joints, as you will find in various iron instruments.
After treating him with the lead of flour mixed with honey and other remedies until he is cured.
When an inflammation comes upon any member and is cured by medicines and oils and plasters, and it is not healed, then you should perform cautery on the member according to its size and smallness.
And let the cauteries be made a little further in, when he is lying in expectation of pain. and then the treatment of ointments until he is healthy again.
And sometimes cautery is done by hand and with the knife and the foot and the back, at the end of the nerve that makes the limb mute, and so if it has an abscess.
and no one should enter into it unless he knows the limbs and the ends of moving nerves in the body.
When the sickness called "albaras" is old and worn out, and medicine will not do anything for it, then cauterize with a cautery just enough to pierce to the bone, according to the quantity of pain felt, until the blenchour (i.e. the swelling) is removed, and the color changes.
Then apply the treatment of flour, of fenugreek and lentils with olive oil and leaves of plantain, and blood from colon and gall of goose, one part each; and then let it all be melted together, and tie it with a cloth, and apply to the patient as long as they are healthy.
The treatment for the chancre by fire cautery
When the chancre first appears and you want to stop it from growing, if you burn it with fire cautery, around the entire circle of the chancre.
And all wise men say that you should apply fire cautery also to the middle of a carbuncle;
And all wise men seem to me not good, because I fear that it will cause ulceration and corruption, and I have never wished for such an event;
and the most reliable thing is to cauterize within, at the cauterization called "circle", as we have said in many other cauterizations.
When some have a disease called "adubelati", and it lingers until death or because of the superfluity that she makes or because of the old age of the sick person when he is decrepit (this means too much old) and he has little blood, or for long time; and you must see it hasten to death: so therefore cut into the root of a small cautery in pricking. then leaves it thus. It will happen to die.
And if you see it pierced with the cauterization at all, then this heat will be the form:
And place your hand at the middle of that illness called "adubelati" until the cauterization pierces the vein, and so arrange the cauterization that the patient feels pain in that manner that the course of the putrefaction is delayed.
After the treatment until it is completely healed.
Another kind of illness that is called "corrodens", and it's nothing but an infection of a member, because it corrupts the flesh just as fire burns.
If you see this disease in the one who can suffer fire cautery, then take out small and large nails according to what is fitting for the patient or the disease.
After cautery of all parts until you have eradicated the entire corruption, and nothing remains, then all that which is corrupted should be removed.
And then leave it for three days, and put on the patient's cauterized wounds so that they suffer bruising with oil until the scalded areas are cut out and all the corruption.
After this treatment, generated from the use of medicines.
And if you see after three days that a healthy child does not appear, it is good;
and if that does not happen, then reapply cauterization to those who are left corrupted.
And this method is never cured with medicine or water in place of cauterization by fire;
but cauterization by fire is of greater aid, and I have already said the treatment with medicine in division: take as much as you need.
of porridge that comes from the bones Many times, from the bones due to lack of care, a disease called "closure" occurs according to our understanding, and it is a serious thing that causes great pain.
And the fire cauteries for this disease are according to two ways. That is to say, fire cautery and hot water cautery.
Fire cautery is that you should stuff a caul (a membrane) like an egg with wool, and it be made of good iron to the measure that can pierce through all parts, and have subtle edges;
After that put the head on the nail, and turn your hand around the nail so it comes out from the nail hole; and let him wait for three days so that he begins to get purulent matter; Then make a poultice of fresh marrows crushed with string, and put the poultice on the whole night, and the nail will come out and be loosened from its roots.
Then treat the joint with puncture and care until it is clean.
And if they are converted in flesh, and it often happens in hands and feet, then it is advisable to apply fire cautery of hot water; and it is thus: Take a needle of iron or thorn, and set the nail on it is to say, to prick warts; and then set the needle on it so that it pricks all around; and then put a little warm water on it, and hold well your hand, and press hard with your hand turning so that the margin of the needle comes to the root of the nail, and you can find the warm water running deep just to the root;
and let the patient suffer a little from the burning of the warm water for an hour; and then he will drop off all its roots.
So let the hair grow after another, until you are searching all those who are in the body; then treat with ointments that inflame the flesh.
When some people shiver from cold or from fever or from another, so you should make four cauteries or four above the spine of the back, one cautery between each spine. and one above the belly at the olive cautery;
so that it will stop trembling, and hasten the recovery of the patient from the cold disease.
Never do they appear by chance on the body without baths or festering pustules, which come from gross, corrupted matter.
if it is fitting to do so at first when they appear that you make cautery on each head of the pustule; a subtle cautery of fusel of myrtle, so that the point is gripped by fire, or from the root of aristolochia long, or at the cautery lens.
And sometimes when cautery is applied at the beginning and they see this manner, but they cannot increase in size or grow forward, but instead burst the superficial swellings that come from it, and are healed.
but it is necessary that this be done after the evacuation of blood.
Often great bleeding comes from the artery that is cut at the wound, or at the incision of the abscess, or by cauterizing the member, and similar things. and it is a very grievous thing to stink.
And whenever this happens to anyone, if you hasten and put your two fingers on the wound of the vein, and stretch it very much so that the pain does not pass away, and no more bleeding comes from it,
Then put on fire the cauterization oils many small and large ones until they are all red;
Then apply one, or great or small according to the wound and as to where the artery is cut, and put the cauterization on that vein where you hold your thumb, and keep the cauterization there until the blood stops flowing.
If the fire escapes when you lift your thumb over the vein, and the cauteries are extinguished, then take it hastily another of the cauteries that are on fire.
And do not cease to apply that one after another until the blood stops flowing.
and beware that you do not burn the nerve which is near, and that no other harm befalls the patient.
and know that when the artery is cut without bleeding, it cannot be properly closed itself when the artery is large, unless this is one of the four ways we have mentioned. In order to treat with fire, or by extraction when it has not been treated, or by binding tightly with thread, or by medicines placed on which have the power to stop bleeding; and if it is bound and strained as a result.
Who will put on a restraint of tight binding with cloth or tying things tightly above, or other similar things, unless it does not benefit.
And if this happens to no one and he has not taken any medicine or remedy, then he must put his two fingers on the wound of the vein as we have said, and bind them tightly until the bleeding is stopped from the wound and from the vein. and he must not move it, but the cold from his hot blood will often cause it to become very cold, until its heat is frozen and condensed, and stopped.
and seek to cure and remedies those who need it.
We have said this in the first chapter of all diseases in which it is necessary to apply fire or medicine hot, and the qualities and causes and the strumas and forms of cauteries;
and the head of that chapter is as follows, and I will go into this same place for the same reason, because it heals more easily when found in the same place.
And so that I begin this, it is necessary, dear child, that you learn that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than with the first cautery, and therefore you must be more cautious.
For in the work of this chapter there are often evacuations of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die. where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
And I warn you not to act foolishly. For many kinds of people come in for treatment. When they come from such people who are afflicted with their disease so that they quickly die because of the hardness they find of their disease, and of the greatness of their misfortune; and from these, one should have fear.
And of those who tell you the truth, and say: wait, I am cured". and the disease is stubborn.
It is not good to trust only those who come to you and have this condition, but take greater caution in your honor than in your desire, and be firm without being feeble, of that which you are certain, and of what you can acquire.
And instruct the patient with prognosis and diagnosis to determine when their health will change;
And this will help you gain fame, honor, and memory of praise.
Three dear children, Our Lords give you good understanding and integrity, and if you wish to aspire to the holy inspiration of His hand, amen.
Or I have ordered this chapter in the form of chapters, according to what is before or behind a cautery chapter, which I have devised for you from the head right down to the foot, because you will find it easier to know those things that you will need.
Know that this disease comes often to children when they are born, and when the nurse holds the child too tightly around the head;
And sometimes it comes from a cause that is not known.
And I have never seen this disease except in children, and all those who I have seen have died. And therefore it seems to me that I should try a few of these treatments.
And I saw that child because his shoulder joint was swollen with water, and his head became increasingly heavy every day until he could no longer bear it;
and he thought so greatly that he was dead, and this moisture had assembled itself under the bone above his spleen, between the kidney and the bone;
and the wounds are so serious when the moisture is between the kidney and the bone, and the abscesses are small, that you must cut a large incision in his head;
and it should be as long as ours, so that the moisture may run.
and in this case, the form of a spatula;
If the moisture is more crusted and the abscesses are larger, then make two incisions in the shape of a cross, according to this form:
And if the moisture is under the bone, and you see the signs that there are cracks in both sides of the head, and the water spurts out when you press with your hand inside, and it does not come back; If you must cut open his skull three times, according to this manner:
And after the incision extract all the moisture completely. After fastening the incisions with bandages and powder, and applying wine and oil, and leaving them so for five days;
then remove the dressing, and treat the wound with poultices and ointments, and let the head be strained in size, and then give the patient dried meat of a few ounces of moisture until the limb is comforted and healed.
And another manner of incision is that you observe or open the large opening of the abscess, and assemble the assembly of water;
because it will never be seen; nor behind; Never once. and never on the left side.
Therefore at the size or at the abscess opening, and the filling of the liquid, and the cutting accordingly as you have the power;
and beware that you do not cover the artery. and if there is bleeding, so that the patients die from the decay of blood and the evacuation of moisture.
When it happens that a person suffers from a disease called "cataract" in the eyes or at the worst, and the patient is old, and medical treatment does not work, then the last resort is to cut with cautery using what they will cut off both arteries.
It is therefore necessary, when you have covered the artery, that patients make their face towards their head; after rubbing the patient with an rough cloth until the arteries are visible, then extract the patient's neck from all the cloth; Then look at where the vein is cut, and the veins of one are after the ears, and they are not returning;
Then sign the veins of the groin, then cut one and the other with a good spatula, two parts long, until the vein reaches the bone, so that it is near the width of the head.
If you see, pour out the spatumile under the artery and cut on top, in the same way as it should be cut through.
And when the vein is cut, if its blood flows without any upward continuity of fire.
And if the arteries do not open at the feeling, it is wise to measure the quantity of the space three times larger, then sign the groin and cut until the bone.
and that which is advisable to put on a wound with fire if it is six times larger, and by chance a little more or less, according to what the patient can bear, and the replenishment of the artery.
Then look at the wound: If the bone is still exposed under the flesh, then cut that which is pointed out as an abscess and drain the wound, and bind it up with cloth until it heals.
Let goes When a head pain comes from old times, and cough is bad, because of moistness in the eyes and heat in the temples and an old forehead swelled up and similar things, if they are treated with medicines and all those cures don't help, then we extract the arteries from the temples and cauterize them, as we have told.
And the manner of their extraction, so that the patient makes his hair stand on end over his temples, and listens to the artery which opens in the temple, because it opens well with its pulsation, and is not very closed up until in many men who are too cold.
And if it is closed up, then strangle the neck of the patient with certain cloths, then rub him with any rough cloth, and pour water on him until the artery appears distinctly. Then take the spatulate of which this is the form: Then scrape the soft skin lightly until you reach the artery, then tear it upwards with pins, and pull out well the threads that are on both sides of each part.
and if the artery is subtle, then turn at the tip of the needle, and cut from that part according to the quantity of two heads. But if it is not cut, do not jump at it without causing damage all over.
And pull out six times on each side, just three.
and if the artery is large, it is fitting that you tie two stitches of a strong double thread of silk, to prevent purulence in front of the sudden bleeding of the wound, and to come into view with the blood.
Then cut the swelling that is between the two joints on this same hour, and then, if you see, put the cautery of the surgical knife into the bone until the joint is cut.
and that is the muscle work, if the patient does not have fever and has a hot complexion. For cauterization is a help to finish drying. because it is of greater help for drying.
Where it is necessary to extract the arteries, fill him with old cotton and put taut well-made tents.
and when you remove them, treat him with dry medicines that produce charcoal, and with tents, until he is healed.
And if without the cut of the artery so you do as you work, then hasten to cover by cautery, or apply the quick of vitriol and strain it with your hand until it is stained. And if you do not have that present, put the plaster on the shoulder until it is frozen, and apply the shoulder with cold water repeatedly, and strain it as needed.
It must have one and a half inches of coarse iron between the two cuts, and when you have placed two sticks in it, and you heat the iron hot until it comes to the bone, cut the vein in two. And let them separate between the two joints because it is not possible to solder all of this with fire in all of it;
and this is the form of the cauterization:
And what is muddied and easier to extract from the artery is that you should cauterize the vein of this cautery, cutting it with two halves, but cut them well spaced to make its heat last longer. For when the instruments are too dark, they hold less their heat.
from tears When the tears of the eyes flow down into the veins that are on top of the forehead of the strong, and no cure is found with medicine which we make, and you see the face of the patient becoming red and flushed, and feel a pain in the front of the legs as if from cold. and when the wounds are kept and moist so that the hairs of the paper are cut, and the papers are burnt with the heat of the tears, if need be for this treatment. And they called it the ancient "cure contuse", and then you would tell the patient who has this illness to let his hairs grow out of the forehead, then make three cuts on the forehead equally according to the length of the forehead;
And they called it the ancient "cure contuse", and then you would tell the patient who has this illness to let his hairs grow out of the forehead, then make three cuts on the forehead equally according to the length of the forehead; And if it is one of the incisions such that two are made all around the forehead when the head is lowered to make a new cut, and the others are two on top of the papers, and you take care not to cut the arteries which are in these places above the papers;
And move your hand away from the continuation of the two jawbones, and make each wound to be three times as large through it.
And have prepared an sponge and some bandages to absorb the blood, then apply the spatula with two parts of it is the shape:
from the incision that is behind the temple, to the second incision; Scorch the entire wound that is between the two incisions, all to the surface of the bone, then make another cut from the first incision up to the other second, and then remove that spatula. If you prick at the base of the hairs with the "cultellary" instrument, and it is sharp on one side and soft on the other, do not prick too deeply, and this is the form:
And place the cutting edge towards the raw flesh at the puncture, and the soft part towards the bone, and let it stay until it comes to the middle cut.
And cut off all the hairs that fall from the head until the incision is complete just at this point when the blood vessel opens up, and then make another cut in the middle division just before the other opening.
and then extract the blood equally and express it by the vessel taken;
then put a tent of white cotton in each incision, and cover it with moist cloths made of wine and oil and ashes, and keep away the stench of pus;
and on the third day remove the bandage, and anoint with a great quantity of watered-down plantain juice, then with Basilicon oil and other remedies for wounds until he is healed.
When some veins come to be swollen by custom, and you see the eyes turgid and red, and weak the vision, and the papers burn; and the hairs fall out, and in the forehead there is great pain, and the patient sighs; Therefore you should know from these accidents that those materials and the swelling do not come but from many veins, and the kind of disease there is, if it is this.
And instruct the patient to look at their forehead, then make a deep cut on either side of the forehead and another small cut. And from the cut in the left temple to the right temple, and so the incision just above the bone; and pull your hand back from the nerve of the temples that move in towards the head;
and when the bone is uncovered, so that all the blood seeps into an sponge, and then sew between the two lips of the incision and put cotton wool, and try to apply linen. then tie over the exposed flesh with moistened cloth in wine and oil, and protect it from the heat.
when it is an ulcer, so that you rub the bone until blood begins to flow, then apply the cure of excising, which make the wound dry.
In such a way: take two parts of wheatflower and four parts of colophony, and make an emulsion. and apply this to the wounds to dry them out completely.
Of the rupture of the ears
Everything that falls into the ear is one of four things: or dust, or dung, or stone from a mine, or something similar like metal. or seed, such as wheat, barley, beans; or something that flows out like pus and inflammation, and similar things.
When it falls into the ear, stone or some other thing that does not adhere to the ear or grow in the ear, if you put the ear in the sun.
If you see a stone, then take out any little bit of olive oil violet or sesame oil, and then perform the extraction; and let the patient vomit condensation, and stop the nose when vomiting comes, and put a piece of cloth or linen into the ear; and hold the ear upwards.
A lot of times comes fever by this treatment;
and if she does not come fever, they should perform an extraction of fine pins, for it is the form:
If it comes through with the fine pins, that's good;
if this is not so, let them perform an extraction at the nodule with a fine thread of small suture;
and if it does not come through with that, let them make a chain of thread and pour the chief of the chain down into the ear, or through the passage of the ear very deeply, and seal what is around the chain with melted wax so that the thread cannot enter through the chain; then the thread forms a knot, because a lot of times fever comes in this way as we have said;
and if it does not come by that method, so it pricks at the blood to see how much comes out, and takes out the ointment, and puts in some instrument which is pointed for this purpose, and puts a little cotton inside; then presses the glue onto the stone or whatever is there, and pulls it off.
and if it should fail to work with all the things we have said, then hasten to cut off an ear so that the vein is exposed, and causes convulsions.
and the way of cutting is that you first make the patient healthy from the head, and extract the blood according to its power, then place the patient between your hands, and turn the ear upwards, and make a small cut at the root of the ear towards the fat or as it depends. and so let the wound be cut as one moon, until you come to the bone, then the tooth according to your power, and suck it out hastily at your mouth;
and the cure until it is clean.
And if it's pus that forms and inflames, then extract it;
and if it cannot come out, then apply an iodine plaster subtle according to this form; and make an incision from that spot.
But do not do this when you think the pus is moist due to the moisture of the ear, until you have made many small pieces;
then draw it out with fine pins and at the incision, as we have said, so that the extraction is light.
In water therefore it is said that one should spit into the ear and use sternutine of composites first, and fill the ear with thick cotton. And be careful on that same ear or in water. But if it bursts because of this, it's good.
If they do not (listen), then take many cuts according to the length of your body, and make them light and easy; and cast one piece on the fire. and place the patients with one or two perforations in their ear and let them sit on it; from one side of the other, with fear and pain from another stone over the ear that is in the ear. and cease not to make these stones into stones until the pain goes away completely, and then she will pass it all out.
and if you see, take a joint, and pour one of the juices into the ear, and the other joint into the fire until the softer joint is burned.
then make another of other joints until the pain goes away completely, just as we have said in the stone.
In the extraction of flesh, if it is of a small body, like a wart and similar things, treat it as we have said in the division.
but if it is of a large body one can feel it, so extract the pinpricks. And this is the lighter thing to be removed that is in the ear.
In the extraction of worms, anoint the ears, as you cure so we have said in the division and when treating distillations, if the cure does not profit, it is good that you look at the ear by sunlight: if there are no worms, if the throat has small pinpricks, and if they do not appear, then the chain is of this form:
And it may be narrow from below and wide above. And pourpose the most subtle head into the ear according to the amount of suffering in the patient, then let it swell throughout the entire body; make this often until all the veins have appeared.
and if they do not appear to be cut, then wrap them in the vein of cotton as I have said in the pierce.
and if they do not appear as we have said, administer distillations just like the ancients did in the extraction of worms, and you will find them or treat with distillations;
and if you distill your oils and medicines into the ear with this instrument, so that it may take on the form as you see: And whether it is of silver or gold, let him take away from under at the little passages, and over the joints to dilate;
and by pressing within the dilation of this silver well-made instrument, and if you see the rasp will catch on and pull through the tip with a cloth; then pour your oil or juice, and what you see of your medicine in the channel, and let that run into the ear;
then pour into the rasp all the cloth, and press your hand temperately until the oil is distilled or comes out near the ear; and the patient feels it inside, and if the distilled poultice is heated by fire as well as when we dilute it in the ear; and keep her from being too cold, for the medicine would not be so good.
Of the rupture of the ears
No child is born without any ears or damage to their ears.
And the same thing happens in adults when there is a stoppage of blood or pus inside the ear, and this stoppage can go all the way into the ear canal if it is not treated.
And sometimes the hearing returns, and one can see well again.
So when it goes all the way in and one can't see it, this is often due to an increase in suffering from various conditions, and so you should put the ear of the sick person in the sun. and look inside: If you see the swelling around it, if the work is totally smooth because that's its form:
And so it and trenches before and behind all smooth, if it does not touch the ear;
if the swelling is of flesh or bone in the ear, if you have fine punctures, and cut lightly until that flesh is all bone.
And if the incision goes all the way into the ear, take a fine razor and light it over a small fire, then put it on the bone of the ear.
If you feel the swelling where patients feel great pain in the ear, pierce lightly, and make sure not to rub the nerves of the ear;
then put a tent in the ear according to the size of the perforation, and apply Egyptian powder on it; Make this every day until the wound is healed, or take an arsement and put the poultice on with water of roses, and powder over vitriol broken.
and if you see a boil in the ear, apply the arsement and move another poultice moistened with olive oil and wax until the boil is drawn out. then heal him as soon as he is cured.
And if it comes out of blood, plunge an sponge into cold water and wrap it around the ear, and apply other treatments to remove the blood that are in treating hemorrhages.
This remedy which comes in paper when the eyelids are moist and dry, should be stretched with tongs and forceps, and shaved off with a spatula from its root. then put vitriol on it afterwards.
If without cutting off, you cauterize the lenticle with subtle cautery, and the cauterizer cuts after the incision is made.
and often repairs are made, without anything remaining at its roots; and when they are cauterized with fire, those roots are burned and do not return again.
of the flesh Often come in the eyes paper some things that seem to be worms in their form and hardness, and because of this is called "granulon", and it is a collection of gross moisture on top and below. the abscesses are such:
the abscesses are such: take care if the granulon moves from one side and the other, and it's a light thing to know;
Fend the wound so it is clean; then scorch from each part lightly; then take hold with pins, and cut.
If you cannot cover the wound because it is too painful for the patient to feel a slight pinch, do not give him anything.
And if the wound is large, assemble it with stitches and treat until it heals.
And if it is small, do not put any pressure on it, because the ointments restore it immediately and cause pain.
And if the gravel is falling inside the ear towards the upper part, reverse the paper, and pick up the gravel with pins, cut and press it from one side and the other.
And if the paper is stretched by the incision, it causes no pain.
And when the gravel is hit, clean the oil of salted water, and treat the patient who suffers from char so much that they are healed.
from the fat of the eyes Exinach is a grease that gets stuck in the threads of paper above, and this has caused more deaths among children with no one to care for them, and it gives them much pain to their eyes, and they come to catharsis in the mornings, and cannot look at the light of the sun because tears fall into their eyes;
and because of this they lie on their faces to the ground again, and sleep there, and their paper above their eyes is moist with the exininach that causes inflammation and appearance has changed because it opens in the oil. And when you press the lock of meat with your hands and feel the swelling between them.
And the manner of this work is such that the patient puts their head in your hands;
and then take a linen cloth, and cover it with a tent made in the shape of a circle according to its content, one quarter for each part, then place it on. and press with both hands from one side and the other, so that the quarts are assembled in the middle of the circle;
then make in the middle of the moisture a small gash cutting into it to a length no greater than the wound you made on the vein.
and let the skin into it so that you see the quarts; and many deaths result from dislocations due to a tear in the membrane, according to the shape of a piece of white fatty tissue.
Remove the wound then at once to the entire piece of cloth gauze between your two hands without fail, and turn your hand to right and left until it is spread out.
and keep in mind that you should not add anything to the wound, lest you come across the entire spectrum of the liver just until the oil, lest you blister.
And if the tear does not open at the beginning of the wound, then cut a little bit into the wound lightly until it opens.
then draw it as we have said, then apply the cloth in oil and water, and place it on the wound, and draw back the bandages.
And if there are such men who crush wool and put it on to corrupt the moisture that is left behind.
Then the physician, so as to be healthy.
If it comes to a joint with abscesses hot, so the cure of splinters satisfying as long as he is healthy.
of hairs from paper. When the hair grows back after being shaved, do not shave it at its natural growth, and let it grow for a while, so that it does not harm your eyes, and causes the coming of sorts of diseases, such as excessive sweating, swelling of the skin, and bluish discoloration, until this is the cause of eye damage;
and they are treated in four ways: or by cautery, putting fire together, or by water according to what is in front of the chapter on cautery, and being done either by incision and suturing or by tying, according to what I shall say.
It is necessary to place the patient's head on a clean cloth, then turn the hair of the affected part towards your left hand;
She has been converted, this is good. If it's not so, if you inject a needle into the upper filament; and if the margin of the paper or the hairs are between these hairs, and pull the filament up from above to the whole paper, and turn it with the razor;
then cuts down from under the paper, under the hairs closest, to all the spine, from the large to the small;
then pull the filament, and put under the paper a small linen tent and a drapery, then cut up the paper with an edge like the flame of myrtle, as far as you see the quantity extracted from the paper which is depicted in all its size.
And if he has taken the paper to write down a great quantity of the parchment according to what the parchment is softened.
then writes everything on the second line above what you signed, and begins large writing just below a small. and if one of the incisions is near the natural hairs in the size of a root, then pour some powder into one of the two corners of cut, and scorches it all.
then gathers the two lips to a seam with an awl at all threads of fine linen, and sucks up the blood, and makes it dry on the surface of the fibers above both squares at any sticky things, as if you had seen this.
and if this does not happen, so you do not have cure, then leave the seam and the hairs just for 3 days or 4.
then treat the wound with sewing and binding of things dry, because the paper reappears at the moment of the wound and its assembly, but the seam is weakened (as the ancients said), and it's a work with fear. and if it has another way:
and if it has another way: and it is that you sew the paper of a figure like as the fuel of myrtle, as we have told, three times close according to the form which is here:
Then cut off whatever is standing above with equal force according to its shape.
And if you do not have the power to hold the tongs, and things are not even, then take an awl or if it has one thread, and poke into the figure; And take another branch of the great fir tree, and the second branch of the small fir tree, and equalize them between your two branches.
Then tie your hand equally, and tie all the skin where you have stitched, just as we have said; then sew both lips of the wound together with stitches, until it is healed.
and if an abscess comes to your incision, calm it with croton oil and similar ointment soothing.
and sometimes it happens that the hairs of the papyrus are converted:
so if you use what we have said about the incision;
but the stitches in both places are more artificial.
The care for the chains is according to this form: And so you must turn the paper and parchment inside according to what I have told you, and then make two chains by art, and two subtle ties just as long as the paper and the width of the measuring stick. and cut at both ends of both parts where you hold the thread;
then assemble one and the other subtly above what overhangs from the parchment of the oil, and strain both chains from both parts together. and let him stay thus for a certain number of days, and the leather that wraps the strained joint will wither and dry and become more firm, till it hardens by itself.
If it lingers, if the copier has some strength, then treat him until he is healed.
and when the wound has closed with stitches, and if it is lifted again, and the hairs do not pull anymore.
and this is the form of two joins that you will make according to this figure, and according to this length and width:
the incisions are such that you will take a very fine needle, and put in the soft and subtle thread of silk. then assemble the joins and needle both subtly, so that the lengths of the threads are one palm long.
then put in another fine thread of silk briefly, and no the finer thread.
Then place the patient's head on your safe side;
and let the sun shine so that the wound is declared, for it is a subtle and small wound; then prick the needle all along the root of the attached hair, and pierce quickly through the skin until you bring it up over the natural hair.
then pull the hair up to the point of the needle, and push the needle into that point, if there is one or two or three or more.
then withdraw your hand until the hairs that are freed flow forth all the way to the skin with the natural hair.
And if the needle is pulled and the hairs do not come forth with it, then pull the needle downwards to all the thread that you have ordered, until the needle comes out through the hole above and you see it by the sight of the oil.
And so you will pull the hair and thread, and oil it and leave it for two days or three, until the hair is rooted in its place and grows new flesh above.
and if the hairs are short, follow one of the long hairs from the shoulder, and let yourself be lifted along with it, until it is stretched out and then lift.
of the oil's spoilage When this illness, called "aleacrati" or porphyria, comes to the skin, it has two forms:
one natural, and one unnatural.
And happens suddenly from a wound, or cutting, or cautery, and by similar things.
And in the treatment of this, it is done that you cut open the wound, and apply ointment to the lips, and put linen bandages inside, and bind it until it is healed.
And do not use this remedy only for curing people with dried up or constricted things. But if you make it worse, the disease will be even more severe than before.
but for softening things, as in fenugreek. and the arse of water or ale and the seed of flax are cooked, and ointments made from frozen water diluted in any oil, wrapped in a cloth, and given to the patient.
And if your remedy is valuable, that you keep it for yourself so it does not spoil according to the form in which it was before.
and this work we have spoken of is not the fire that burns with a different form than its original form, that it does not return according to the shape in which it was before.
This illness that is below, truly called "axacrati", and is a natural and accidental condition.
The accident comes from a wound and tearing and cauterization and similar things.
And the vein of the body is that you prick an arrow, in which it has one double thread, and the nail in the flesh, and you make it pierce from the left side to the right, so that the thread appears in two joints of the arm;
Then tie the skin above all over the arrow, and cover it with a broad spatula. And if the image on the paper returns according to what is needed, it's good;
if that one is not, then take the razor and put it in the wound, and turn the paper, and make two cuts on either side of the paper inside.
and let the chips of the two splits of the two angles of the incision which you have cut be there, and make one angle so that when they are assembled, the figure will be as in the letter that has no «i griesche»
then cut the bone clean, according to the quantity of its costs that is above the paper, then join the two divided parts, and sew with a thread of linen;
then the cure for what we have said about soft medicines and poultices, until he is cured.
And if the sickness comes from a cut or a stitch or a cautery, so that you should make a plain cut below the hairs of the papers, and according to what was said before; Then turn between the second and third fingers of a tent, as I have said;
Then turn between the second and third fingers of a tent, as I have said; And one must perform the work according to the shape of the disease, for it is very different in form, and the skilled masters make an apparatus from any kind of poor material so that the figure returns to its natural form.
and the patients themselves, according to those things that are required for the work and instruments in those various conditions.
When this stitch occurs on the palms in a certain way, so that the paper above is soaked with white oil and cannot move or do its natural work, if it is necessary then you must put the point of a rasp over the paper, and lift it up.
And the extent as pinches, until you apply what is sharp to the sensitive area, which is neither too harsh nor too thin, so that the patient cannot suffer if it is too harsh or causes the oil to bleach.
And if your incision, do not burn the assembled skin lightly, so that the paper (scab) reappears according to its natural form.
And when that assembled skin is healed, and there is no occasion for the oil to be poured onto it, but rather the swelling of water is lifted, and cold wine is given.
Then place a linen tent between the paper and the oil, and put on the lard oil moistened in abundance of wool. And after three days, apply to the wound with a bandage and similar things until it is healed.
The joint can be in two manners: it is one joint which appears to be inflamed and swollen like the skin after frost, and another that does not appear nervous but seems frozen with moisture, when touched with iron and cared for as if pinched, it cannot come.
and both seem to begin towards the great artery, and grow little by little until they cover all the eye and all the light and the movement of the oil.
And the way of making an incision is that the patient puts his head on a clean cloth, then opens his eyes; and lifts the paper in his hand, then coils the joint like stitches of fine sewing, and extends it upwards; Then take a needle, and put some horsehair, or goat hair, or oxen hair, and tie it tightly; And double the point of the needle a little and sew it into the horn, so that the needle goes all the way through the horn, and tie the horn with a thread and attach the end to above, and scrape off at the entire length of the hair where the wound is located, until the red blood comes out and the black hairs appear on the hair just up to the head; then cut the remaining part in the root of the nail bed for a small distance, and leave it as nature intended, so that there does not come from the incision the flesh around the nails as is customary;
And at times, only attach the horn to the wound and the thread. Then the scorching is applied to all the surface of what is sore, as this is the form.
And that the scab does not touch the raw flesh and break it, and that the wound is not perceived;
and after the incision, pour some powdered salt into the oil and make a poultice on the collarbone, and let it remain until the next day; and then treat him as necessary so that he may be cured.
and if the warts are not nervous and you cannot poke the needle in, and the wart does not take entry, then this similar appearance of a wart is cured with medicine.
and they grow as I have told in the division, and if you see them cover, then apply oil to the patient, and take the spatula lightly in good shape according to this form: And press the inflammation under subtly, and if you see that it shrinks and the reason is pressing hard, then distill from your mouth into the oil made of litharge, and red wax, and let the oil rest for another day:
If there is no objection to the oil, as with an abscess, then apply the medicine and let the pus, and cure the abscess first until it is healed; then resume the operation in the same way as before, until it is healed.
then re-commence the other work according to this same operation, until she is completely hollowed out.
And if the appearance of the skin is troubled by the lump in the oil with great damage, so that it weeps at night, and you lance one part of it not entirely, let there be no blood.
Then distill in olive oil red colour which is made from litharge.
Are there some men who are born without red hair, and cover their baldness with a wart, and restrain themselves against the paper and the thorn; and it seems like a rose on a bust.
And the ulcers are so that the patient puts his healthy head on it, then opens the eyes, and stitches all of that with suitable threads to its shape, and supports it with strength.
then cut the first one off, and go to sawing until the end, and be careful not to bleed on the wound.
and if the incision is with spatula as we have said in the incision of the warts and with small forces because one is unable to remove it soon, like the shape after this chapter shows.
and when the incision is completed and all of the char are removed, then apply oil from a broken twig or distill it with colored wine and similar corrosive medicines, and place on the affected cotton wool with beeswax, so that it be secure at the abscess.
and if it does not improve and the affected area is covered with a scab, and you doubt that it has healed, then leave the oil and let the abscess be soothed.
and then return to your work until it is healed, and similarly apply the char to the affected area in the oil by this similarity.
But for all cases, it is necessary to lighten the remedy of each weak oil by the natural way. And of the accidental vein, when working with iron;
and do not press my hand on any of these wounds until you see that this member is suffering from the wound.
These eyes are red veins that are covered on the surface of the eye, and they tolerate their treatment on the eye and weaken them every day.
And then is the art of first looking at whether the oil is hot, cold, hard, or soft, and there is no other disease but the hardness. and therefore bind it in this manner:
instruct the patient to put his head on your clean one, then tie those veins all over according to his wisdom, and let the subtle ones double up according to this shape:
And let them be two times one by degree in the form of a circle:
and then bind tightly those subtle veins, and suck out the sore hour after another, until you see that the hot veins have been removed from the oil.
And be careful not to prick the oil with the points of the lancets, and do this work at noon in front of the sun, and be very hot in your work so that you only suffer what is due to women.
And when you have done this, if you dilute in the oil a yellow and green vinegar and red for to corrupt what is remaining in the swell.
And if you do not have power to remove all of this in that one hour, then apply on the oil soothing things for the eye's pain and leave it for some days until the pains are eased and be sure of having removed the abscess, then resume according to this manner as long as he is healed.
And this is the form of the forces:
The mire so named "arissati" fistula:
When you cure it with cautery and medicine hot as I told you, and it's not healing, if there is an infection in it, then you must cut open the abscess, at that place where it may die, and remove all the moisture that is in it, until the bones are exposed.
And when the bones are exposed, and you see the corruption and blackness, if that is the shape;
and it is called "aspere chief", and it should be made like iron in that chief part, and you should pierce it like a file like as it is in the present shape:
And put the new bone on top of the corrupt one, then turn it between your two hands, and press your hand onto it slightly until you feel that corruption is removed;
and do this whenever you want, then restore him to his former state of medicine.
but if the liver is inflamed and so is the body of the bowel, and they remain like that for 40 days, and he does not recover and there is no discharge or inflammation, then it can be said that he is cured.
but if this is not the case, then there is no other remedy but to bring the fistula back to its original position according to this form: and that you uncover the bone the second time with iron, and with sharp medicine, and when he heals from uncovering so it is punctured according to this form, and let the clavicle be fixed in three angles, and the fistula be softened until just above the head as you see.
Then put it on the bone near the cartilage, and pull your hand away from the oil for a little while, then turn to all the forest until you penetrate the bone and the patient feels it with what comes in this way if he holds his hand over his neck.
and then restore the patient to a healthy diet of dry medicines as I have instructed you, and when he bears and hardens his limbs, let him eat this material on his neck. if it is a lighter thing for the patient.
When the eyes are open all the time, and it does not come to relieve the head, or softening, then you must tie up the patient.
then he heals, then you put ventouses or haterel near to pierce for relief, then put on the oil which is made of ice and aloe and incense and sarcocolle, and then strain the oil, and apply it with plaster of benedict and strips.
and the manner of dressing wounds is that you take soft bandages, and wrap each one four times, and then put one on top of the other according to how many there are in need;
then tie under a hard bandage to form, and then resume the suckers to draw out with pain;
then remove the suckers and let the oil tie him tight day and night, and if it is tied too loose, so that you tighten more;
then remove the tie after day and night, and if you see the oil repairing, that's good;
if not; so you resume the poultice and bandages, and the tie and suckers until he is healed.
Discharge of the pupil When disruptions come to the eye, it opens, and there comes forth from the papers as if grains of resin, and it is astonishing to see;
And therefore if you cover the eye, the wounds are such that you put a needle in the root of the part below where it is just above, then put another needle where there is a double thread from the part of the eyelid; and pierce it, and let the first needle according to its position;
then cut the vein of the double thread and tie a part of the eye shut, and tie it well, then pull out the needle and apply olive oil moistened in abundance to the wound;
and let it stay until the threads come together with the eye, then treat the olive oil on comforting things until the wound is healed;
And sometimes the wound is bound up with a cloth around every quarter of a circular bandage until it is healed.
And if the eyes appear swollen, then prick at the spot with a sharp needle that is submerged in olive oil and wipe away the moisture so that the swelling goes down and enters it immediately.
Then extract as much of it as can be made whole.
This disease called "alcunnati" is only caused by a bowing that is assembled in the oil, similar to the flow of water downwards, and it's not actually water.
and if the appearance of the wound is such that you make the patient sit upright on a specially prepared bed, then take hold of his head with both hands of two parts, and push it until you see the bowing coming to the top towards your eyes; Now it is moved, and does not descend or break away; and see how the light shines on the patient's things as they usually do.
and if it does not descend below, you know that it is sick, and the movement of the bowels is not prepared as we have said.
If you sit the patient between your hands, then take a fine knife and do upwards on the thin membrane in the corner of the eye with the continued stitching of the membrane and the crown, as long as the bowels are loose.
and when it has been drawn out, if you distill it in hot, sweet oil mixed with honey or boiled fenugreek and honey, then the patient is cured from another cure until they are healthy.
of hot oil We have the same symptoms as blood in the division, and what is needed for piercing; as according to health.
It is necessary that you make the patient sit between your hands, cross fire of the light from the sun, and tie the healthy oil very tightly;
then place the paper of oil on your left hand if his eyes are to the left, or on your right hand if they are to the right;
then grasp in your right hand if his eyes are to the left, the instrument called "almagda", or in your left hand if they are to the right;
Instruct the head of the instrument to put its point on the crown by the growth of an arrow in that blackened oil droplet at the less tender part; and then pour the instrument which is called "almagda" effectively, and twist your hand so it penetrates into the blackened oil droplet, and feel when almagda comes to life in what appears to be empty.
and it is necessary that the measure of the almagda instrument be exactly one finger's breadth from the root of the nail to the end of the dark spot. and this is the crown of the oil.
if you see the bone through the paper due to the clarity of the eye's cornea, and then put the instrument exactly at that spot where the water is, then press downwards in one direction after another.
If the fever has come down now, so he sees the patient in front of him and the instrument on his table.
After rest for a little while, and if the pain comes back in the second way, put force with the instrument, and when it is set and does not come up again, gently pull slightly by turning your hand now and then;
And then put in the water a little piece of silk gauze, and take out the oil within. Then put in place the oil-soaked cloth or a moist linen soaked in rose oil and plenty of rue, and tie it with pure oil.
Also, and those of our time, let us use a common broth with plenty of rue.
And if the powder cannot be inserted into the oil because of its hardness, since there are many men with very hard eyes, so you should take up the instrument called "alberit", for it is in the shape:
And therefore prick only the conjunctive, and do not go too deep, but make it subtle, then put in a little oil, as we have said;
And when the work is completed, the surgeon will come to attend the patient in the dark chamber where he lies on his back.
And be careful of all movements, and give gentle food, and do not move his head or right arm or left arm, and bind him according to his disposition just as if he were tied the day before.
Then take him to the same dark house, and let him see his vision, and make him look at some things, and then put the limb back in its place seven days.
And it is not necessary to do that in the patient's room after the incision now, but it is necessary to alleviate him, because his illness rises rapidly.
If an abscess forms on the wound, you will dislodge it seven days after that, and address the one who cures abscesses.
And when he is appeased, dislodge his eye and put on a linen face to cover it for one day, and be taken back to that dark house.
And then he will come from the house little by little, and will turn into his case;
and knows that no disciples should intervene in this case. And then one came to us who was from the Irag, who told us that in some far-off lands they practiced a certain kind of operation, by which they treated the water, but I have never seen it or heard of it in any book among our people, nor did we know of it. and perhaps this is a new thing.
And these are the likenesses of the forms of al-magd, because those who do not know them see them.
and they are very clear. And the head of arsenic from this same subtlety, and the lower parts are in threefold angle.
No limbs are ever born with uneven or misaligned feet, because it is so that some seem like scorpions by a multitude of points.
and if it is some such limbs where the bone is thick and blackened with red flesh, and some have bone soft of white color. In such cases of those limbs that are soft and not thickened, it is necessary to sit the patient between your hands against the sun;
In such cases of those limbs that are soft and not thickened, it is necessary to sit the patient between your hands against the sun; and cover his nose, and pour on the salve to those limbs, and let them burn; till you can bear to sustain it on a small, fine, and subtle spoon, for as long as you know that limb is entirely bled out.
And if there remains any part that cannot be covered, then apply all of the subtle signs to lightly. and if there is no wound or abscess, then cut as it seems to be.
and if it's malignant abscesses, then hasten and cauterize until the sinew is stained and all the cartilage is cleaned, then give or give as you wish, hot water or vinegar, wine. If the medicine overcomes and moisture comes into contact with the place just above the throat, they know he is cured.
and if moisture does not penetrate as it should, they know there is a bone hidden in the above os, for which the signs do not come to cut.
And so it is necessary that you put a small thread of flax into the wound, and let it be bound by hand with a knot, and there should be no space between each one, it must at least be. And put the patient's head into the flax thread so that it gets into some pain, and treat with an odorant until it comes out through the nose inside the mouth.
and many times do it this way to children in school, and that is a light thing for the one who has to do it.
then hold the head that comes by the nose with one hand, and the other head that comes by the mouth with the other hand, and check one after the other while we are in the flax.
Do as you wish to know that the flesh has not been corrupted by anyone else, then take the child, clean the wound, and anoint the infant with Egyptian balm, and set them right upon the fire if it is before.
Do as you wish three days or more, until the balm has corrupted all that remains of the flesh.
and then put a poultice of horse dung for several days until they are healed, and if it needs to be made from dried medications, then use them.
and this is the form of the instrument for purging the head, because one distills the oils and the medicines or poultices:
And it should be of silver or lead, resembling a lampshade, like a poultice, and conduct it similarly;
And if you see, then make a bandage tight, and let the discharges plain so as to cleanse the head.
And put some oil or any liquid on the head to keep it moist.
of the shoulder bone on the neck
Often the head swells with pus because of a disease called "telul", and it grows and becomes large abscesses, until it is filled with something to be seen.
and therefore it is advisable to make a poultice at the beginning, and let the bone all burn, then put on him the cautery or the hot medicine.
and if it is delayed in being poulticed until it has grown large, then take care if it is hard, of the fresh flesh, the poor sense.
If it touches him with iron because it is an enchanted abscess, for when he strikes once, so much evil comes to the patient;
But if the abscess is touched with a soft touch, not iron or harsh color, and you see whether it can be fully covered, then open the patient and strike with fear, and treat the wounds with drying substances and restraining.
Knowing that when many solutions continue to come into one of these old cartilages, little profit is obtained in some men.
It is therefore necessary to see whether such an event occurs again, when you examine if the wound is fresh and all of its blood. and therefore add two stitches to the wound, then treat him until he is healed.
and if the lips are cut on one side and the other, it is necessary that you scrape all the parts of their wound until they heal, then reassemble the two stitches, and bind them, and sprinkle above with powder of dragon's blood, and burned incense. and put on the powders a piece of plaster made from strong or other kinds of resin, and let it dry until it hardens, then treat with binding until it is healed.
The manner of sewing if you have assembled the solution: or with needles, as we said in stitching around the navel. or with thread, as I have told you.
of abscesses on the lips
Inflammation inside the lips has occurred like pus in abscesses, such as grains of sand, and smaller and larger ones.
therefore it is necessary to return the lips, and split each one open, and take out with pinches and cut into each part.
Then apply the liver to the wound after the vitriol incision is broken, until it is stained.
and then apply the liver of onions, and treat the liver with dry things until it is healthy.
Many times they grow on the gums next to the teeth that the old people call "albulus".
if it is fitting to hold it with the tongs, and cut at its root, and let the blood flow or the vein.
then put on the liver vitriol broken, or other restraining and desiccative powders;
and if that one returns after the incision, and it often happens, if you cut it a second time, and cautery. if it does not return to its place after the cautery;
There are no times that they gather at the head of the teeth, inside the mouth between the gums, scales which are ugly and rough; and no time do the teeth turn black and yellow and wormy, until corruption comes to the gum, and the teeth stink;
it is advisable that you make the patient sit between your hands, and his head be on your lap, and reset the teeth or scales as soon as they appear, until nothing stays. and do the same for blackening and greenish, yellowing and other discolorations, until they have disappeared;
And if one has removed what is at the first reason, it is good; If this does not work, then repeat the operation on the second day and the third day, until you have completed all.
And know that the teeth have need of various forms of instruments to cut and file, according to what the work shows, because those who use razors to avoid damaging the teeth have other forms than those which are used between the teeth; And these forms and others be prepared with you.
It is fitting when you treat the tooth that causes pain that you delay treatment for as long as possible, because it should not be delayed. Because it is a highly flammable substance, just as, therefore, you should have no excuse for delay.
Therefore when the patient is constrained to treat it, if you wish to be certain of the tooth's swelling. Many times does the pain come to the patient, and he thinks it is due to a tooth, and he has the good tooth treated. and it does not depart the pain completely until the evil one is removed, for we have already wanted to do this at those healers.
and when you are sure about the tooth that is causing it, then it is fitting to burn around the tooth entirely with a small spatula, very hot, in order to protect the gums from all sides.
then the teeth are scraped with your two fingers or fine tongs at first point by point, until they are well exposed, then firmly close the tongs. and let the head of the patient be in your hands between your two thumbs, and so tight that it does not move.
After extracting the right tooth directly into the broken place, and if it does not spring forward, take out any of these instruments and put them inside each part lightly, and move him as you did first.
And if you see the teeth are broken and bleeding, then it is fitting to fill them with cloths, at the places where they are torn. and if you gently grasp with tongs so that it does not break while grasping.
and it is fitting to carefully put oil over the gums in order to dislodge the tooth.
And be well guarded that you do not break it, and keep one part remaining, and tell the patient again by the malice of the root for greater pains from the first.
But beware so that you do not do as the unskilled servants of the lord who, by their haste and boldness, break the chariot every time and do not bring me such things as we have told.
but sometimes they bring about this great illness by the root of that disease remaining, or by breaking the chariot as we have often wished.
And when the teeth are three, so wash the mouth with wine or ale and with salt.
and if blood comes from the wound, which often happens, then apply the vinegar of Vitriol.
And if that does not work, then cauterize it.
The forms of the abscesses are in that manner because if you mute the teeth first, they have long points and thick roots, which do not double up when you pull out the tooth;
And these are the forms: And are broad branches so that they do not fold up when pulled; and are made of good iron well-made, and are pointed to hold the tooth.
from the root of the teeth When the root remains after pulling, it is advisable to put cotton soaked in butter on the wound for one or two days until the pus is melted, and then take out the tongs called "algefri", because the flesh seems like a sore.
And let them be done in this way as a lime, and it is the form:
And if the roots do not want to come out from all these ties, so it is fitting that you uncover the entire chariot around the root, and put in the instrument which is called "althali", that is to say, a lancet, for this is its form:
And if it's a great cut and large, but not so that it breaks apart, and the root bursts out from this, then it is good.
If that does not happen, then take all the roots, so that the forms come after.
And if you help yourself with this instrument that has two blades, for this is its form: and other instruments that are in front of the reason of the teeth, and of this instrument which seems like great pincers, for this is its form:
And if this root is strong so that it cannot break, and you have taken much of the roots from there. and also of other roots, which are not counted.
and the wise masters cleverly treat themselves with their own instrument, according to what his works and illnesses show, because there are some of these diseases that the old do not teach instruments for the variety of them and for fear that it will break or on other bones, or putrefy, if he seeks the roots that it is needed, as I have told you, and aids with movements, so that this is the form:
And let them be large and well-held to hold the bone, which does not slip away but can be held and removed;
and then restore the person to their proper medicine, if it has putrefaction in the bone and it is small, so that they can use all this instrument;
When the teeth appear not according to their natural form, and the shape is ugly, especially in young women, it is necessary that you know whether the teeth are new after the tooth, and not in its proper place, and one cannot be satisfied or fixed.
so the cut; and if it is swollen with the tooth, take that instrument which has this shape, and is like a small beak, and is made of iron very sharp in some way:
And the file is held in hand for a few days to soften the hardness of the tooth, and because one does not move the other teeth, and if it appears that we can fix it, take a small amount of lime as much like this shape.
and is also as when one makes the flint into needles;
and by striking the flint in small points and hard blows, as long as it does not move
then the blade is flat by the end and does not remove anything; if its edge is too sharp and it bites the tongue, then it should be honed until even so that it does not bite the tongue and corrupt the speech.
When the tooth is in front of a wound, either by percussion or by falling out, and the patient cannot press on it because it hurts so much that he cries out.
so it is advisable to bind them with a thread of gold, because the silver threads become green and rotten, but the gold never moves.
And so let the hairs grow long or too short not too thick nor too thin according to the space between the teeth;
And if you see the teeth directed towards each other, take the file and put it double between two healthy teeth, then insert the clamps between your teeth, one by one or more, until you hold them securely to the sound tooth on the opposite side; Then resume the covering as you started, and strain your hand carefully until it does not move.
And if your ligature is tied to the root of the tooth so it cannot escape;
Then bind the clamps with the thread to tongs, and tie them together, and place them so that they do not bite your tongue;
And then he lets it remain thus constricted as long as it can stay in place; and if it is loosed, or the child cries, so that another child may be stretched.
if it remains and serves thus for all of its time, and this is the form of the bones and the shape of the two sound teeth, and the two missing ones, just as you see.
And when a tooth falls out, it is placed back in its proper place, fresh as new, just as we have said.
and do not put it in the place of someone who is untrained and unsound; and never make a tooth of raw bone, and place it back at the place where it was defective, and fasten it as we have said, so that it remains and serves for a long time.
No cases occur when this joint comes from below the tongue or by nature, so it is born thus; or by accident of a seared wound;
and the wounds are such that you open the patient's mouth, and hold his head still, and lift the tongue;
then cut the nerve in the neck, until the tongue is loosened from its place, and if it has hardened or another wound, and this happens suddenly from a blow, then inject the vinegar and cut deeply at the joint;
and guard that the wound is not too deep, lest there be injury to the artery below;
and when you have done this, lift the patient to fresh water and asepsis, or cold water, then place under the tongue a linen bandage;
And the patient with each night the disease will suffer, so the limbs cannot heal.
And if they come from blood clots, then apply vitriol on the limb broken. and if they do not swell, then cauterize with fire at the same time as before, which is good for them. then the doctor will try another treatment until they are healed.
and if you see a foul odor or red or black flesh, so the patient does not feel it, and do not touch anything because it is a chancre.
and if he leans to one side and there is moisture, then pour the pus, and gently remove it with a spatula from both sides. And if they are not careful at their work, so that the glass is broken and cuts until it is stained, then return to your work as soon as you treat all force.
Then lift the limb up high and straighten it out, and treat other patients until he is healed.
The swelling of the throat. There is no occasion for the throat to swell, which are called "godath", and the proper name is applied to both sides, and when you treat them, as we have said in the division, if they do not heal, be careful:
if it is thick pus of small sense and flesh color, do not touch it with iron.
And if it is red and the root is large, do not touch it with iron, for fear of its hemorrhaging. But let him wait until he is dead, and then you will have to take him apart, for it would break by itself.
And if his flesh is of white color and the roots are subtle, then have prepared the instrument to cover him; but first look whether the abscesses have closed and are calmed.
Then place the patient in front of the sun, and his joints be sound; and open his mouth and press the linen between his hands, and push the tongue beneath all the instrument, for this is its form.
and it may be of silver or of subtle tin like our scales.
Can you push the tongue to all of this instrument, and then see the abscess, if take the lancet and make a puncture in the almond, and pull it forth above what is possible.
And take out any threads or yarns with you, then cut at the instrument, for this is the shape that looks like one of the forces; And the head is curved in both places, and they are very good, and made of iron or tin.
And if you do not have this instrument present, then use a pair of tongs, because that is the form: It is pierced from one side and the other side as well.
And when you have pierced one of the almonds, pierce the other in the same manner, and after the incision, gargle the patient with hot and cold water, or cooked grape skin, or myrtle flowers, and similar things, until the wound is closed. then the cure will be complete when he is healed;
And sometimes there are abscesses born in the throat besides the two almonds, so if they are filled then like the two almonds binding.
And I treated a woman with an abscess that was near the throat, which is to say the small abscess.
and had it very close the throat so that the woman could not breathe through the constricted passage, and could neither eat nor drink, and was dead if she remained like this for one or two days.
And the abscesses are standing so high that they have been filled with two rains through the two entrances of the nose.
I therefore immediately took action, and placed in one of the incisions, then poured forth fire, and a large portion of sulfur.
and then fixed another incision on the other perforated side of the abscess, and held open the mouth and pressed the tongue.
After applying the cautery to those abscesses, and cutting off a part of them, only a small amount of blood issues. and then they cut off the conduction of the throat in the woman, and now she began to drink water and wine, and did not cease cutting at that abscess for a long time.
and the abscesses reopened again, and filled up what I had previously drained, until it became very large;
so then I inserted it and cautered inside the throat: then he remained without growth.
and I separated from those parts, and only God knows what was done after that to him.
of the eye
When it descends into the hole and falls and is extended and lengthened, then it is called "perpendicular".
and if she is too large and rounded, then she is called "vein".
When she is treated as we have said in the division, and the cure does not benefit from it, and you see that the swelling of the abscess subsides, and she is subtle, then it is wise to copy her.
and those which are rounded and assembled do not grow longer; and if she is red or has a bloody color or black, then it is wise to close the incision. Because there is great danger for the patient.
It is then advisable, when you see it, according to the manner I have said, about its size and length, that you sit the patient in front of the sun, and press his tongue with the instrument we have mentioned earlier. Then cut off the appendix at the root, and pull out the tumor, and strike it with a blade on the two struts that I have mentioned in the incision of the two almonds.
And it is necessary that you do not cover just the surplus, which is beyond the natural limit;
because if you cut more than that, it will grieve your voice and speech.
and after the incision, use what we have said about the two almonds, and treat it until it is healed.
And if the patients have fear of cutting, it is necessary that you use an engine to cauterize the fearful senses.
And the manner of cauterization is cool water. And the patient puts their head on your healthy one, and then presses the tongue with the instrument that we have said in the fire cautery, and binds it with hot vinegar cloth, so that it is not too thick nor too clear. And when using this instrument, so that there is the form:
And put on the chief either a hair or an ointment, just like the dressing of a spoon, and place the instrument all over the medicine on the wound.
And the patient is gouty on his chest, so that the sweat and mucus run from his mouth onto the medicine inside, so that it does not descend to the throat, but to the bile;
Then hold your hand all over the medicine and press on the wound, the quantity of half an hour's time, until you see it congealed and the pain from the medicine is assuaged;
And if you see that, take cotton and unfold it over any instrument, and moisten the cotton in the medicine, and pour the instrument into all the cotton in the tube above, until the cotton sticks to the wound;
and do this often, until the fire cautery is complete, then let it dry, and cast after four days or five.
And if you have need to restart the fire cautery of the medicine, so that it is restarted, and after the cautery has dried on the wound, with cotton stuffed in butter, and clean what is around the medicine.
and let him be raised with cold water, and let him be cured of gargarisms until he is made whole.
This cure is safer than the incision, whether it is a cautery.
if it is cured with fumigation in this manner, take celery and hyssop and origanum and rue and chamomile and avronne and similar herbs, and assemble them all or some of them in an alembic, and heat them.
And let the wounds be closed with strong glue from hard earth, and using this kind of instrument on your head. And it can be made from either lead or arsenic, and one of the fingers pounded into the mouth of the sick person until the vapour rises to the eye through the wound, until the eye is numbed.
Afterwards, repeat the operation many times until the eye dries, and make sure you do not perform this at the beginning of the incubation period of the abscess, for more things happen. and do not perform this unless at the point of inciting an abscess.
And if that instrument is not present, take a needle and put it into the head of the wound, so that the mouth of the patient does not get too hot; For the fire cautery does not help with milk or cream because the vapor weighs down the mouth, and this is a good cure together for salvation.
Many times it happens to the throat when an arrow or a fish bone is swallowed, or nothing at all.
Therefore it is necessary to treat what you can see, and press the tongue on the sun at all the instruments, so that you see if the thing moves.
And what is not apparent and returns to the throat, it is necessary to make the patient vomit, so that the flesh be cooked in the stomach. In case if the thing becomes exposed by vomiting;
Or if the patient swallows a piece of sponge, or a piece of onion, or a root of lettuce, or a piece of dry bread. and tie the sponge to the finger, and then the glutens. and when it arrives at the elbow, if you feel pain, and then pull out the arrow.
and if it does not come from what we have said, take an instrument of splint according to this form:
and let the curved instruments be at the head so that they can more easily enter into the throat, and lift the head up high. and be careful not to touch the epiglottis, lest it die, or press the bone into the throat.
and make sure that the patient is pressing the instrument, because he feels it sharp or rough. If the boil erupts, or if he treats it with force to all of the instrument equally, until it is forced.
about the cutting of the throat
It is never cured without the help of medicine, as I have said in the division, by the cure of medicines. and when it does not benefit him, then look into the throat of the sick person towards the sun, and press the tongue with the instrument that I told you.
And if you see the wound open, then when there is just one small incision, or with fine tongs that are worth it.
And if this is not worth it, take a small hairpin, and push it into the throat of the sick person, then pour or give some warmth to the body. And if the patient is afflicted with fever every day.
then take a full glass of cold water and open the mouth, and let it flow in towards the senses to be swallowed, and move it with your hand often. and if as soon as he begins to feel the water in his stomach, he vomits.
and if he does not vomit as we have said, then submerge the sick person in boiling ash, with the instrument that I told you in the process of smudging the wound.
Do this many times, because she will fall more often.
And the manner of fumigation if there is a vessel with charcoal inside, and it is covered by a cord pierced in the middle, and with that pierced part are the joints of the instrument.
then I will take the fumigation, and the patient puts his head in a cage and closes the mouth, so that the smoke does not enter, but comes from above.
and now the snake will fall, and if it does not come out, then continue the fumigation many times.
and the patient suffers from thirst, eats foul and putrid things, and does not drink any water.
and then thus the art of surgery is most suited when it happens through this governance.
And the form of the instrument with which one treats the wound, if it is so that when one sees it, resembling curved tongs to enter into the throat; and has the appearance of a snare, and has roughness like lime, so that what it takes will not loosen.
Many signs of an abscess are, according to what the memory comes after in this book, and differ in perforation and size;
and it is in two manners, one of which is similar to the other, and because of its moisture.
And the second manner is for those that are within them or in their body.
because the abscesses in the head are different from those in the cheekbone, and the abscesses of the shoulder are different from those in the joints, and each has its judgment in the book.
And if we do not pierce an abscess when it is not ripe according to its completion;
And if there are such abscesses that it is necessary to pierce them when they are ripe, and do not die according to their completion, just like abscesses near joints.
When an abscess comes from between the joints, and it is left until it is putrid in the meantime, by chance if the tissue and nerve of the joint have decayed, because that is the reason for the contraction in that limb.
Where the abscess is near a principal member, and if you delay the perforation until it is dead, it will harm the principal member.
or if it is near a foundation, and pierce it so that it becomes dead;
And it is not necessary to pierce an abscess when it is ripe for digestion, but rather that you pierce the one near a foundation, so that it does not burst from within and become inflamed, and form a fistula; and cannot heal in great time.
and it is wise to know the nature of the perforation of an abscess, which is dead according to completion, and this is when the pain is alleviated, and the departure of fever, and the lessening of pain and redness, and of swelling and of the dullness and sharpness of the abscess head, and other signs.
and it is wise to sit down the perforation where it is more dependent on the abscess, and in the place where it opens.
and if the perforation is at a long distance from the body, and when the abscesses are in hands or feet, joints, nails, arteries, and on all those equal places where there is no pulsing. When the limbs are swollen, by some cause of inflammation.
And when an abscess is in the groin, if it needs to be let out, leave the perforation open until the inflammation is completely resolved, as we have said.
If you pierce him in front of this, so it goes away by letting loose the body from the poison of it, and is filled with a great amount of filth; and by chance they harden the lips and the deepest part of him.
And if an abscess is pierced according to the size of the body, according to what the limb has need.
And it is necessary to bring in small pus-filled wounds, small perforations; and in large pus-filled wounds, large perforations, and many cuts according to the similarity of the size of the abscess;
and if such an abscess has formed in which it is necessary to cauterize the wound and cover; when it has become like the bandages, and is muffled, so it is necessary to do the same as they do with the buboes;
And if there are those that are split into three angles, and if there are those who have cuts like the wood of myrtle, just as abscesses from Angers;
and if there are those where they make a round cut, and other sizes and similar cuts.
Those who do not have a head, as if an abscess is superficial, it is fitting that you pierce it cleanly;
and it is fitting when the abscess is large and has accumulated great swelling, and you pierce it, so that not all of the swelling is removed in one hour, but only a part; then stop the abscess just as it is, and on the following day do not remove any of that; Do this repeatedly over time until the bowel is whole.
Even if the patient is weak, or a woman in childbirth, or small children, or old men who are decrepit. But if you expect that the patient will be saved every time with the outcome of the pus, then you will not be disappointed.
Therefore be careful with this chapter, and when you have pierced your abscess, if the wound is present, and look to see whether the wound from the abscess is small; and if it's a simple incision, then apply tanned linen or old cotton to it; and if it's a great abscess and there is much pus, it is advisable to apply one tanning on each side so that they meet against each other;
And if you have pierced in the abscess a part of the skin, and you have stitched it inside, so it is necessary that you fill it with old cloth or with linters of linen without moisture, and tie it to this point every day;
and then the bone, and the physician of ointments until he is healthy.
And if you come from blood, bring anointing with cool and clear water and cold oil, and wrap it around the limb covering it many times.
And if the blood flows persistently, so that he is governed and cured, and the poultices which I have in my hands in this book, and if it is in winter, and the pus is very hot, then it is necessary to put on tentes and wet cloths in wine and in lard.
and if it is in this state, and the pus is charred, so it is necessary to put on wet cloths moistened with water and oil, or wine and oil frozen, every day, as we have said;
and then remove the abscess and clean it up and treat the patient if necessary, as desired.
And this is why one must investigate universally in treating abscesses:
Or you have said how to go before starting the treatment of abscesses, and this is where the chapter begins.
Where small abscesses come from the head, and are like threads, just as a spider's web, or like the wool of a goat, there is also much resemblance.
There are some fatty ones and swellings as well that get worse with moisture just like boils.
and some that are hard and stone-like to cut, with no doubt when the arteries are cut, and they do not cause any harm.
And the marks on the neck are such that if you know how to use all the instruments called "entremoissoires", because of their shape they come after, what kind of thing it contains.
For if it contains moisture, then they do it on top of the long one.
And when the moisture is empty, if it scours without leaving anything to remain of that skin which contained the moisture, for it returns again when nothing is left.
Then plunge cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment into it if present; If not, plunge it into water and cloth, and apply the wound until the next day; And let those who are left behind sleep at night.
And then resume the cotton, as before, on the second day, and the bandage, until you know it will not stay in place at night;
Then treat the wound with ointment as it suits, until it is healed.
And if the abscesses are tight in not to be grasped, do it according to this shape, for a long time; And I shave all your hair, and the scab from every part, and place all your care to treat for the chest where it is.
And if they cause contractions, do what I told you afterwards.
And do also thus with the abscess if it is pus-filled, and to cut it open and to cure as I have told you.
And the size of the pus-filled abscess will be cut and drained if it is lighter, because there is little blood. And if some of these abscesses or swellings are not due to moisture, and some that I have copied or extracted from the swellings of an old woman.
and I found the abscess like a stone hard, sharp and white, that cannot break. and if any had been burned with it, one would have done the same wound as with a stone.
In other abscesses that come or swellings, whether they arise on the head of children and the roots of the ears, cut open so as to reach the lowest part, to make the bowels emerge;
and the cure as it requires.
Many times abscesses occur in the neck, and under the armpits, and near the liver, and sometimes they appear in other places or at the joints, and are very painful, and often joined together one with another.
And each ulcer is properly within its own coat, just as the navel and apertome of the head, as we have said; and the similarities to these ulcers are many.
and the similarities to these ulcers are many. There are those that contain moisture, and those that are malignant, and they do not wish to obey health.
in which you see the good condition of the bone at the elbow, and is like the color of the body, mute on all sides, not irritated at any part nor by the nerves of the neck or artery nor in the canal, and is not deep.
so it is fitting to copy it over, and scrape off the flesh from each part, and leave the two lips of the wound as if cut with knives, as we have said in apertomes of the head;
And let the touch of fire command the patient to let his hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
And if you cut the vein or artery, and it does not stop bleeding, apply a plaster of vitriol to break it up, or some powders that will stop the blood, and bind the wound. and let it remain until the abscess is allayed and the wound is mollified, and begin to discharge.
And when the blood has been drawn off, return to your work until you have completed it.
then seek to know if there are any small swellings that will remain after you cut and lance.
And if he has much blood in the neck of a scrofula, so that it cannot be copied there, but only tied with a strong double thread, and left to fall away with pain.
Then use the dressing of old cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment, and then apply a cure.
If you cover the whole cranium, it is advisable to assemble the two lips of the wound and now sew them, before any swelling remains from the great size of the skull. if it is advisable to treat at the root of the, and apply force, and sew as we have said.
if it is advisable to treat at the root of the, and apply force, and sew as we have said. Those scrofulas that swell above, cut into whichever place they open and bleed.
and cut it in such a way as is said before, in dependence, and then put in tenons with ointment and similar things, if it infects what remains of the infection. and when the wound is well cleaned, apply ointment in jars, until it is cleansed.
The ancient men spoke about the cutting of the throat; but I never saw anyone in our land do it, and this is the writing of their word.
But for those who have been strangled, it is to be believed that the cutting of the throat known as "epiglottis" should be avoided; And do not help them by that, because all the veins and the swelling of the patient are at those who have had sharp wounds in the mouth, or throat, or two fingers.
When the sickness is in the channel of the small part, it is necessary to cover the epiglote to escape the destruction that comes from strangulation.
It is therefore necessary, when we wish to cut the epiglottis, that we cut it outside of three circles or four small cuts across, between the two circles or according to the quantity of the incision through the tissue, not in the cartilage;
and those who have this condition are suitable for section of the epiglottis because there is no cartilage, and the vessels are long to enter.
And if the masters are doubtful, then it is fitting to stretch the skin of the throat all the way down to the chin, then cut through the scarred spot until it comes out on the surface. and escape the vessels of blood, if you see any, and then strike at the superficial part, as we have said.
and it is demonstrated by the section of the tongue of the chin which bursts forth from the jaw that is broken, and by the failure of the voice.
and let the wound be covered with a piece.
And when the hour is passed because of which one doubts strangulation, assemble both lips to the wound from above with the tongue so that the entire tooth may be taken out.
Then administer medicines which make flesh swell, until it is well.
But it should not be done until the throat is completely frozen, and the patient is judged to be dead, and the disease spreads. Therefore cut the epiglottis because the patient cannot swallow, and he breathes through the wound, and thus is kept from death.
And the ancients ordered that the wound be left uncovered for as long as the malice of the disease has passed, and it has passed in three days or four days. And then they ordered to sew up the wound and treat it, until it was cured;
And I will tell you what I saw. I saw a young woman take out a knife, and she stuck it in her throat, and cut off part of her neck.
and I was summoned to cure her, and I found her in the same state as dead.
I uncovered the wound, and I found the blood that had come out of it, and I realized that she hadn’t cut her vein or any other vein by chance only through the throat, and the blood came out through the wound.
I was about to leave, and stitched the wound, and cured her so that she became healthy.
and it happened to the young woman that she was red in the throat, and returned after her recovery.
because of this I thought that there was no fear in the larynx.
This swelling is called "gullet hernia", and it's a large swelling the colour of a hazel nut, and it occurs greatly in women;
And there are two ways: Nature (cause) and accident (happenstance).
Where there is no natural cause.
And the accident is according to two ways, because one is like a lump or swelling, and the other is like an abscess that comes from an artery; and it causes fear, and it is not advisable to apply fire to burn with fever only in those who are small, and he examines and seeks at the surrounding area; if you find it as if there is no lump, and it does not cause pain in any way, if you cut it, as we cut the nose, and you show all its face, unless there is anything else. And search well all of them, and the physician as it is required, until they are perfectly cured.
There are many ways in which it happens, of which I will tell you all the similarities;
and as for this is what I am going to say, the difference between not and wound.
I say that when it is an abscess and fever remain, until the boiling is done, and it is completed with putrefaction; and then the fever and heat rest.
With the wound there is no heat, fever, or pain, and it contains a sac, which is its own sack and resembles the color of the flesh, and begins to swell just as a jam does, and becomes larger.
and are according to two types, or wounds, or moisture, and much of color are like what I said in the division.
It is necessary, when you come to the treatment of no one, that you examine and inquire first about all the instrument called "entremoissoire", as its form will arise or chapter that follows.
And the method of examining abscesses is that you prick or moisten it more than what you find in the abscess, and twist your thumb a little bit until you know when the swelling has pierced the skin, so that this becomes according to the size of the abscess.
then remove the middle part, and be careful that it does not splinter.
If the abscess is moist or has dried up, then cut it in such a way that its color is like what I said about other abscesses.
and if the middle part does not come to be moist after, know that it is fatty, so cut it in a cross, and take hold of it with pincers, and lightly scrape off each part, and wear a protective cloak where you feel it, until you bring out the wound clean with the needle.
and if you cannot treat it well, then cut it to pieces so that it does not stay there.
But if it stays, it will come back again many times;
and if it stays for just a little while and the pain is not severe, then apply the wound with some corrosive powder or poultice, strap the wound tight, and put on soothing things like cauterized leather, and treat other treatments until he is healed.
and if the pain is great, then cut off both cheeks of the wound, and treat the one who causes inflammation.
and if the veins are swollen in opposition to this or something else, and you hasten and apply the new vinegar solution, break it into three parts, let it lie for two or three days, until the wound has stopped bleeding, and the inflammation subsides. then comes back to cover what is left behind where it has been forgotten now.
Behold here are the forms of internal humors, and they are three kinds: large and medium-sized and small;
and in it are three quarters which are called "albares", and one which is called "brebe", and they come in three kinds: large, medium-sized, and small, for to encircle the abscesses of a fistula;
and are also like the needles with which you cut the sources, and they are of yellow citron-iron, or iron, or silver, and move well those who are yellow, and are more suited for penetrating into the black pouch of a fistula;
And are of three kinds: Grans, moines, and small ones, according to the quantity of the size of the wounds.
The forms of ulcers are like many similarities, as you can see here:
and if there are ulcers that have two hollows of three kinds also;
and if there are ulcers that have three hollows, and are also of three kinds;
and if there are ulcers that have two hollows and ulcers with only one hollow, and are of three kinds;
and all these are necessary in their own turn.
The head of these is cut off because they are pricked, and from such ones there are those who do not cut much more than from one side, where the skin burns, so that the vein or nerve does not bleed.
And those who are inserted with foreign objects have the membranes returned in their hands, so that the patient does not lose them when opening abscesses.
and they are of three kinds: great, small, and medium, as you see.
and do not use it more than in the joints, such as knees, arms, and elbows, and similar places.
and at times another small instrument is made, resembling the skin of fistulas, according to this form, in order to stain blood: and put it in no place at all, for whoever has performed operations on the veins and arteries, and in no case returns to this great form.
Never do the breasts of some men swell when they start to be corrupted, until they resemble the breasts of a woman;
and remain swollen and inflamed, and whoever wants to cure them, if it seems proper according to this form in this line from g to g: then burns the fat, and applies medicine to the wound with charcoal, then brings together the two lips of the wound to the seam, and cures until it is healthy;
and if the breast swells downward, and is swollen for its size as in women, then cuts through two seams on top, according to two similar incisions; so that one is attached to the other at the end of each, so that the larger line contains the smaller according to this form from g to g; Then scrape the skin that is between the two lips, and extract the fat, and apply what we have said about clothing and powder, and what is necessary for the treatment, until he is healthy.
and if he is not healthy, or the incision is not entirely made, because the patient does not want to rest, or due to the congealing of blood, so it is fitting that you fill the wound with wet cotton in a corrosive dressing; and let him wait until he has consumed the remaining and fat, then treat him until he is healthy.
Abscesses that come from under the arrows are hard swellings or have ribs, and when there is much moisture in them.
These then that contain moisture should be cut according to this shape, from the line 5 to the line 8: And if the entire bow that is in the abscess is empty, apply the wound with fine cloth, and leave it until the next day, then remove all the cloth, and treat with ointment as much as necessary until it heals.
And if the abscess is like swellings of scrofula, treat it as we have said for cutting into swellings, and if the wound has an arrow sticking in it, apply cauterization as we have said before.
When the artery is cut, and the skin is burned which is above, if it brings many abscesses, and it happens just as often that it comes back in from the vein.
And if the abscess is near the artery, so it is long within it. and when you feel it with your two hands, you will sense a disturbance.
and when it is because of the vein, if there are red marks around.
and this is madness to cover up the abscess, and especially when it is under the armpits and around the neck and in other areas, and it is very large. It is therefore necessary to abandon the iron treatment, and those who have head problems must also give it up, and for those with swelling of an artery, cut through the skin on a long bone.
then cover the area around the neck with linen, and carefully expose the artery in the webbing, until it is uncovered.
Then pour the wound with a needle from under the one, and pierce it on the other side, and tie the artery with two threads in 12 fingers, according to what I have taught you in extracting two arteries that are in the temples.
Then point the arrow that is between the two threads of an inserted instrument until the space that there is, and release the abscess.
Then apply a dressing on what hurts so much that the wound bleeds. Then treat this infection until it is healed.
And if the abscess is by the size of the vein, so it is fitting that you dye with your hand what you can from the abscess onto the skin, then pour the needle from under the wound that you hold in your hand, and pierce it, and tie a double thread, so that you pull it from the other side. Then tie the bandage, just as I told you, or tied to one of the two parts with two fingers of the hand.
and if you doubt that the thread will not be produced, tie an other needle to all of II threads below the bandage at the incision of the first needle, and tighten the threads in IV fingers.
then cut the bandage so that the excess falls out, then cut the excess of the same measure and leave what is tied.
then put on the moist bandage in vinegar and oil, then apply treatments for tenements and ointments until he is healed.
And abscesses come to the artery and vein, they come to the fingers when they are swollen, or by too much work, and similar things.
And this happens more often in the joints and in the toes where there are fractures, and it's an abscess, and its color resembles the flesh of a corpse, and is worse than other conditions with pain.
And when they are constrained forcefully, then the patient feels pain, and it is not felt deeply in the body, but beneath the surface.
And he is mute from every part, and does not move at all, neither forward nor backward, nor below or above, and one who is in a joint cannot be covered with iron: in case he suddenly contracts. and those who are in the head or on the forehead, cover with gauze or a cloth.
and those who are in the head or on the forehead, cover with gauze or a cloth. If the abscess is small, if he has nails, and you cut them at their root;
and if it is large, if he has the abscess to open, and scorch, then the bone, and he sews the wound to the ribs, and the patient should be cured as long as he is healthy.
Nothing happens to the abdomen and no other part of the body except for this one, it is a sickness called "fungue" because of its resemblance to an abscess, and has subtle roots, and coarse bones;
and in it are small ones as well as large ones;
And I saw a man who had two large abscesses in his abdomen which were very similar to fungi and there was no other difference and they were white and had small roots and had been broken open and were rotting due to moisture.
I copied them and found that one weighed 18 ounces and the other 6 ounces, and the wound from the incision was such that if you look closely, the patient is moist, and the color of the armpit is white and moist with subtle roots; If they prick at the base of their nose, hold your eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
If they prick at the base of their nose, hold your eyes steady so they do not move until they grow. For when cutting comes, there are often great flows of blood, and if you do not wait, then quickly apply the cautery.
And if you see the patient experiencing fear and anxiety from the incision of the iron, prick the pit on the back well done, and tie the artery as we have said, and let it remain two days.
and then restrain it, and do not cease to tighten the pit on the back until he pricks the artery, and pierces through with it, feeling its work.
and if the roots are large, then fear yourself when cutting at the same time for the abdomen, but you can well cut off half of it, and then cautery so that it does not return.
Now cure the wound, and make sure that you do not cover the place where the blood flows red and poor in sense and from the eye.
It's an enchanted wound, and I came to this cure for chancres afterwards.
When the boil is formed. If the appearance of a boil comes from cautery to a wound or a laceration of sinew, and is on the belly with some boils, as happens in other routures, or when blood cuts through veins or arteries according to what is before, or from windiness.
and if it is from the wound of sinew and through the boil, and the color of the abscess resembles the color of the flesh, and there is little pain and a large opening with various issues. And if it is from the intestine, then it is more diverse, and when you press on both sides so it returns, and then comes back, and by chance, if it has scarred, and becomes larger at the entrance of the bath and for great effort.
And if it is due to moisture, it's a light thing, and opens well when you press with your hand, do not constrain it.
and if it's for pain relief, then open with these signs of a large and hard abscess, and stitch according to its size. and if it's for ventilation, then if the patient is soft at the chest, and the wounds are examined so that you look at whether the appearance of the wound is due to the blood of the artery, or the vein, or ventilation.
and if it's for ventilation, then if the patient is soft at the chest, and the wounds are examined so that you look at whether the appearance of the wound is due to the blood of the artery, or the vein, or ventilation. If it's necessary to leave the treatment. Because there is doubt and fear, as I have told you in the chapter of apostemes for the artery and vein.
and if the appearance is due to the intestine or the stomach, then it is fitting that you instruct the patient to tighten their belly, and extend themselves straight, and stitch all around the wound. then command the patient to lie on their back between your hands, then go around the injured area that you marked, and stitch half of the abscess above with all the long stitches. Then tie him to a strong thread, or a cord of very thick silk firmly, and make sure the wound is closed.
Then spread half of the incised area over the wound and put a poultice or an application on it. If you find the thing tied to the wound has been removed, then put an intestinal poultice outside of the belly.
and if you find the wound, put it in its original place and take away the surrounding swelling.
and if the artery causes harm or pain, go calmly around it, then return to your work and take out two arrows, and put two strong threads in them, and put the two arrows back in the place where you made them pierced.
Then strain the abscess four levs above the arrowheads, and if you see it, pull out the arrowheads, and let the wound heal as long as it will, and chip away at dead flesh by itself; If you cut it when it is slightly open and has begun to heal, then treat the one that needs it, and follow what we have said;
If you cut it when it is slightly open and has begun to heal, then treat the one that needs it, and follow what we have said; and drain the blood or the moisture that you find, then treat the wound with what it needs, and close the wound.
A skin sore We have said in the division regarding similar sores and how one must treat with medicine, and how one must avoid using iron treatment;
and say the sore inflames in the marrow, and take great care with treatment, and the ancients said that when sores are on a person where they can be scraped off like a sore on the nipple, or in the groin, and similar places, and it should all be removed at the beginning;
None of them have ever been saved in front of me.
And for the ulcers when he is in his own bed or can be taken out, as we have said, it is that you do not purgate the sick man of black bile at all.
Then make him healthy if he shows signs of overeating, and afterwards make the sick man lie down to work on the ulcer.
Then throw out your ulcers or cankers, and scrape the head of all parts, and leave nothing behind in the bone.
And let the blood flow freely, and eagerly examine well by hand or by anything, and if it causes a counteraction of the incision of an artery or vein, then cautery as long as there is no bleeding. Then instruct the physician to proceed with another remedy until he is healed.
Of dropsy (or edema). We have previously discussed the symptoms of dropsy, and in what way the assembly of water is made, and the signs of each one, and the remedy that is done with medicine, and which one is healed by iron.
and one should not touch iron in these two similarities: that is to say, tympanites and yposarches, because it is a mortal thing;
Therefore when treating this similarity of dropsy called "eclites" which the physician does not profit from, and the patient is weak or has another illness besides dropsy, as if they have stomach issues and similar symptoms; If you do not touch with iron, because there is doubt;
and if you see a patient of great virtue, and he has only dropsy alone, and he is neither too thin nor too tall, then do thus operate: lift the patient upright over your hands, and let the ministers press the abdomen towards the lowest part of the foot, then take the spatula with a spike according to this shape: And let them pluck from two parts. with a point, and it should not be so deeply inserted that it can come into the intestine when you insert it, and it cannot be withdrawn.
then look to see if the dropsy is stuck near the intestines: If you must break open the abscess, do it on the third day because on the fourth day the poison will go deeper into the bone. and if there is a drop of pus on account of liver disease, break open on the left side of the abscess on the fourth day.
and if it is caused by the muscle, on the right side, and you cannot tolerate that the patient lies upon the wound so that the superfluities do not run to the weak part of him;
then pierce all the skin with the instrument, and pull it out, and raise your hand to the whole strip of skin between the skin and the sac so that when you scrape off as much as an acorn or less.
then pierce the sac so that the strip of skin comes back to its place, and this is the mark of the water, then pull out this instrument from which it is the shape: And it seems like a silver chain bound tightly, and is made of iron or arrows light, and in the lower part there are small holes. and on the other side, three more holes. and two on this side, and one on that side.
and the nails are cut like a reed, and this is the shape of the incision that the scribes write on the reed:
on the top is the alhemel, so that when the instrument comes to the water, it now goes up on the instrument;
now you should empty one-third or more of the blood, because if you take away more than is necessary at this hour, by chance the patient may die from the resolution of their spirit with the arm, or they will faint, or death will approach.
but according to the amount of his virtue, and according to what the disposition of his virtue signifies in the sick person, and his feet;
then hold the instrument and retain the water, and it is now retained by the membrane which stops the pus that is on the surface of the ulcer, as I said, so pierce according to this manner;
then resume the instrument another day, if you see the sick person suffering from it, and take a small quantity of water;
do this day, and beware not to become foolish until there is but a small quantity of water left.
and if you doubt the patient, and take much water from him, if the remedy of burial or hot salt is used, by sweating or bath, and in the sun, and if they drink. and the healer of medicine desiccates as much as it is able to heal, and cauters on the stomach and on the liver and on the spleen after extracting the water, just as I said before.
There is never a child born without some kind of defect in the genitals, or if there are defects, they are small, or it is not in its proper place.
If you want to proceed quickly so that he can pierce all the small spots very subtle according to this form:
then put or pierce a subtle bone from the bottom, and tie it in this way for three days or four, and when he wants to make urine, then open the cleft, and let him urinate, and then set him.
and in case it does not come out at all, because the urine that comes is not allowed to be closed.
If a broken bone is of the foot, then it should be treated with poultice made from broken bone, as we have said, if it swells.
Those who do not have the puncture in their own flesh are blackened, because no one is born who has a puncture at the head of the penis, because they cannot urinate before lifting their penis up. and they cannot be cured because the matter cannot come to the marrow, and this is a great sickness.
And the manner of treating it is that the patient lies on his back, put a stick through the head and cut as wide as the width of a grain of barley, so that the punctured piece comes out, as it seems to be.
and be careful not to increase the bleeding that often comes out, and if it does, stop the blood flow and treat the wound until it is fully healed.
of swellings on the penis. Often there comes an abcess on the vein, and it is an ugly appearance.
and some are malignant and others not so much.
If it is necessary to press them at one time subtle, and strike all around, then put cotton moistened in Egyptian salve. then the ointment is applied diligently until it is pure.
And if the bath is malignant, of foul color and odor, it is fitting that you apply cautery.
When you have struck it, and the skin is torn when cutting, with part of it inside the flesh and part outside, if necessary, then remove the part that is inside first. and if it is sewn, the ointment.
For when you cure the entire thing together, if not assured that the cut of the vein is perceived, and blackness and corruption come to the vein and the wound.
When it is appropriate to shave everything that is black and rotten, then put a plaster made of honey and flour on the skin, which is made from pomace of grapes and figs, and apply other remedies until they are healed.
If they come with blood, then administer lunar cauterization according to this form:
Fire cautery helps in both good and bad conditions: which is to say, when there is decay or corruption.
and if the root of the twig is corrupted and withdrawn, it is advisable to insert a wooden dowel into the opening and let the patient urinate.
and when the hair grows back to the head of the twig where those who have not been circumcised have wounds or abscesses, it is advisable then that you burn it with a needle instrument, until the ties are loosened and the root of the twig is released from all parts.
And if this is a grievous injury to be treated with cautery, then it is fitting that you burn at the spot on the cheek of the penis and around the foreskin.
Then serve it up gently between two and one inch, with some fine linen soaked in cold water, so that he does not burn himself.
Circumcision is no less a hindrance to continued bleeding as other wounds; all the way that we have done this work with our own will and properly for children, since it is to their best interest and easiest treatment.
The ancients did not speak of circumcision for their children, because they did not use it in their law, and we have only what we have acquired by experience.
For I have wanted the greatest part of the masters and doctors who performed circumcisions in the past, especially those with great experience and skill, as well as those new to it.
If it is cold outside because there are two full moons, and by chance if someone is struck above and does not move below. or the wound heals over again and there is great pain, and with the mutilation that is not assuredly fixed to the point of the member;
and to the inflammation of an ungainly wound by chance the iron escapes and the wound heals, and many times it is born again so that it has no need of further healing I have wanted.
From the purification which is done with forces along the entire length of thread I have found the good fortune of the experiment, for the forces cut just as well above as below.
For when you press your hand, the nail grows equally in all parts if it is cut short in one place. but that the thread is tightly drawn within the skin;
and if the manner of the first operation is such that you make the child think it, if he understands, then only tie the thread around the stick so tightly, and just let it rest in all the ways possible.
Now hold the wound between your hands straight out, and set back the strength between your hands or under your feet so that the children do not see them, nor any of the swellings;
Then put your hand on the vein and blow or press it, and pull it up until the head of the vein is drawn out; Then cleanse it well of the filth that is assembled around it, then tie the vein with a thread of two strands, and then tie it under one stitch to another stitch;
Then cleanse it well of the filth that is assembled around it, then tie the vein with a thread of two strands, and then tie it under one stitch to another stitch; and hold two stitches apart with the second tie to the pouch and the point, and cut between the two stitches, then draw the vein hastily up to the head of the vein; then let the blood flow slowly at first, for it is the mothers; Instruct the patient to put powder on it and cover it with that same powder; and drizzle glue made from a half cup of melted fat of a swan cooked in vinegar rose, mixed with good oil and fresh rose petals, and let him lie on it till the next day, and the healer will treat with another treatment until he is healed.
When applying ointment to a wound if it happens that:
when the two sides of a wound are tied together and stitched, and also when the stitches are as thick as the equal part of an arm.
when the pus inside the wound escapes from the incision;
then it is necessary to extend it on your side, in such a way that the pus makes an abscess.
and let the cut equal, and if you cannot hold fast to your joint, then take tongs, and then cut.
And if it swells for three days, and that which is below the vein has inflamed, then let it be left until the abscesses on the skin are calmed, and the scorching is done lightly.
If you cut it as you move, and keep away from the vein part, it will not do harm.
Therefore treat the swelling pain with powder, as we have said or treated with powders, and if you cut too severely over the measure, it will go up above, and do no harm.
Therefore cure him then, as we have said, until he is healed.
A retention of urine
The retention of urine is due to stone or ice congealing in it, or a bowel obstruction, or a blockage from a tumor, or similar things that we have mentioned in the division.
and if the urine is not flowing, and you see that the retention is due to a stone lying in the neck of the bladder, it is advisable for the patient to be laid on his knees. and the knees are placed on the back, and he extends his belly from the upper part of the back, and restrains the patient so that he cannot move. and thus the neck of the bladder is constrained to express the stone above, because the urine is flowing out.
and if she does not come, as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, then it is fitting that you administer extraction to all the instruments called "siringue", because there is a form:
and let it be of subtle silver thread, like the feathers of a bird; and let the bandage be half an inch long and be subtle at the head.
And the manner of the issue of urine if it happens that you take a double thread, and tie one pound of wool or linen to the head, and pour the head into the "siringue";
and cut off the superfluousness of the linen and pour it just onto the head of the "siringue", then anoint the "siringue" with oil or butter and rue, and place the patient on the bed, and let the bladder and the urethra be moistened with watered-down oil and olive oil.
Then put the ligature more lightly on the vein, until it comes to the root of the vein, then double the vein above over the wound;
Then pour the ligature before it gets to the bladder, and feel the patient's pain coming until it gets to the empty place, and that is not done according to this order because of the twisting where it should be going.
Then pull the thread all along the vein little by little, and the urine follows the vein, then extract it, and make the urine flow.
and re-pour the ligature until the bladder is empty, and adjust the patient's pain.
When scorches or blood comes into the bladder, or when putrefaction is assembled, and you see water and medicine distilled there, then do all the instruments called "clepsedre", and it's like this:
It is closed, and if there are three punctures: I d' une partie et i d'autre si com tu vois;
And the left hand because that is where the cutting of the medicated salve will numb well the joint, if we can treat the moisture, and blow as needed when necessary.
and when you see getting your medicine into the vessel, put a cork stopper in the moisture, and pull out as much as possible;
if you pull out the moisture from the cork, and then seal it tightly again; so the moisture will enter again, and come into the vessel now, so that the patient can feel it;
and this is the form of the subtle bladder castor oil, by which the vessel is castored;
And is of silver or arrows, and the head is higher;
and below at the joint where the ligaments come loose;
then take a sheep skin and put the moisture that you see clotting on it, then tie between the two shoulders a strong double thread, and heat it over the fire;
then pour the head into the clots in the vein, then strain your hand on the skin until all the moisture is extracted from it, so that the patient feels the juice coming to the vein;
and if you don’t have the skin, take a piece of parchment and make a circle on it, and then pierce it all around; Then put in the bottle, fill it strongly with these wounds, then assemble the circle as we assemble the nail, and put inside what you see of oil and moisture and water, and tie it up in the instrument.
and do it as you did with the bladder, of pressing to your hand until the moisture comes to the bladder.
of the stone
We have said in the division of stones and the extraction of assembles of medicines;
and have said the difference between the stone which is encased in iron and all the signs, and in which stone one must perform cutting. and in the bladder, and in the penis;
and I will tell you about it clearly and briefly.
I say that the stones which are imprisoned in the bladder occur more often in children, and this is a sign that they have eaten an overabundance of bile in their subtlety.
and when I open the stone, and irritate the patient's penis, and he urinates many times, and then becomes emaciated; and at a great cost of these stones, the foundations are undermined;
and healing in children occurs until they are 4 years old, and is very painful in the elderly, and is like joint pain that occurs between joints and old age;
and the cure is lighter for those who have a large stone than for those who have a small one.
And when we come to treatment, it is necessary first to clean the patient with a cloth, in order to treat all the blood that has accumulated inside. For this does not come up when seeking a stone.
Take the patient by the hands and feet, and draw them out and move downwards, so that the knee descends to the bottom of the bladder, and does not go up again at all.
Then make the patient sit between your hands prepared, and let his hands be below his knees, so that the bladder is all inclining downwards.
Then look at it and touch inside;
If you feel the stone in the space, then hasten now to cut on the stone.
And if it does not flow onto the toucher of all, so that thy right index finger is anointed with oil from the left hand, then either the patient has fever or thy left hand. And let the vessel stand still in its foundation, and choose a stone, and when you feel it at your groin, if it has set up against the neck of the bladder;
then press it onto your groin, and let the vessel go away from where you see cutting.
And instruct the minister to press the bladder with his hand, and he commands that he extend his right hand upwards towards the necks in the groin area, and with his left hand, pull out the skin beneath the necks in the part where one makes the incision;
then put the spatulate instrument on cutting, so that it is the form: And put it between those who are between the necks and the foundation, neither in the middle but alongside the left side of the bladder;
And it shall be straight above the stone, and your shoulders should be placed at the neck or chest, and if the size of the stone is wide in front, then let the length of the passage according to the quantity of the stone, not too much.
In case the pressure, if the shoulders are on or at the chest, it will suddenly fall in place.
And see where there is a stone or an angle, and margin; if it is grated to come out.
and if there is something on top that resembles a glitter, and shines, with a light issue.
Therefore, if it has an angle and margin, make the incision larger;
And if she does not jump, so it is advisable to strangle at the nails which are just like a file on the head, in order to strain the bone if it will not heal. or you pour drink some of the subtle curved instrument at the head;
and if you cannot put it in like that, so enlarge the wound to let pus out, and if there is no separation, then strangle with vinegar.
and if there is more than one stone, so pour first the largest on the belly of the bladder, then cut it up, then pull it out, and the smaller ones afterwards if there are more.
And if it is very large, then you should soak it, and make a larger wound. Because two things happen to the patient: He dies, or urine comes out afterwards because he cannot sew.
but force yourself to cut, or to debilitate with nails, until you cut it by pieces.
and when you have completed your work, apply the plaster of onion, aloes and dragon's blood, and bind it, and put above it a damp cloth in oil and wine, or in oil and rosewater and cold water, to soothe the abscess. then revive the patient on his neck, and do not release the bandage until the fourth day.
And when you untie it, so that the limb is moistened with oil and water, then treat him with ointment of defernion and ointment of basilicon until he is cured.
And if an abscess comes to the wound and causes corruption and congelation of blood in the bladder, and holds back the urine, which is known in this manner so that without its escape with the urine: Put a dressing on the wound, and extract the blood, for if it remains there, the bowels will be corrupted, and the flesh will rot;
Then lift the wound with cool water and clean cloth, and apply the aid in all ways as you know, until it is healed.
It is fitting that all the remedies you treat for him should bind both knees and assemble the medicines upon him.
And if the stone is small, and it is in contact with a bone, and fixed there, and the urine cannot come out; So if the treatment you mention is repeated many times, then we are excused from this operation. I have already proven this thus.
Before you begin to cut with iron, according to this form and so that it is at three angles fixed in one piece:
Now take the file and put it on the inside of the bowels below the stone; so that she cannot come again to the bladder.
Then pour a lighter wood into the bowels slightly, so that it may reach the stone. And turn the wood slightly on your hand towards the stone little by little, so that you can pierce the stone from the other side.
If it comes to that the urine, then press your hand on the one that is remaining stuck to the stone which is inside the bowels. If it breaks apart and escapes with the urine, and heals the patient.
And if you cannot do this for any reason that hinders it, tie the file below the stone and the other above, then make the bowels straight to the stone between the two ligatures, then extract for them, loosen the ligature, and clean with a congealed salve the wound. and heal the patient completely.
About the stone of women
There is often a stone in the uterus of women, and if it occurs once, then the cure is painful, and they are defended for three things:
one thing is that perhaps the woman is chaste;
and the second thing is that one cannot find a woman who is knowledgeable about shaving, especially when she is chaste.
And the third thing is that perhaps one cannot find a woman who is knowledgeable in this art of hands.
and the fourth thing is that the stone in a woman's uterus is more hidden than the stone in a man's body, because it often requires a deeper incision, and great fear arises from this. And if you need to do this, then it is advisable to take a shave well knowing, and at painful cost, and if you don't find one, do not choose a subtle shave.
and he presents a wise remedy for the life of women, or a woman who knows a part of the art, and he commands that she do what you command of the inquiry of the stone; and examine very well whether the woman is a virgin:
and examine very well whether the woman is a virgin: then it is fitting to pour some water or earth into the hole and seek the stone;
and if she finds it, then she must constrain the thing under her hand, and he commands that she pour her remedy or with the sick person, and wants and presses his left hand upon the bladder forme.
and if she finds it, then it is fitting that she move it from stone to stone of the entrance of the bladder until it comes out to the root of the thigh;
Puis cover up the stone at its root on the lower thigh where it meets the middle, and so that there is movement in that part; and feel the stone in that area. and do not move his two fingers above or below the stone; and let them be tied to the first little joint.
and do not move his two fingers above or below the stone; and let them be tied to the first little joint. then pour a draught of water into the joint, if you feel the stone so far down the wound that it may come out further, and see that many kinds of stones are:
that is to say, small and large, sharp and smooth, long and rounded, and which have holes.
If you know the signs to recognize the outcome.
and if they do not swell, then he puts on the patient a piece of glass broken, and holds it for an hour until they are stained with blood;
Then return to your work, until the pain is overcome, and you have taken up the instruments that I told you in the extraction of stones for people to help you with their work.
and if they do not swell and it is an artery that has been struck, put powder on the limb and apply the straining mixture of poultices and bandages, and do not attempt again, let the wound alone, lest the patient die. then treat the wound.
And when the heat of the wound is cooled down and the pulse returns, then return to your work, until the pain subsides.
Rice water is nothing but an assembly of moisture or white pus that forms below the knee, where it contains the yolk.
and is called "pus", and it is not properly contained in the yolk itself, unless one believes it to be another egg. and this is the skin around the vein between the white tissue which we have mentioned;
and this does not happen. And the generation of this water ram is due to weakness that comes to the joints, and it spreads out that material.
And no time comes if it happens from percussing on the veins, and this moisture is so red with many colors: or it's pale declining to yellow, or without red, or black, or white, and this happens more.
and these are the signs of this assembly, because if she is white and swollen like we have said, it means that the abscesses return, as long as they are like an egg, and do not open the veins, for there is moisture all around.
And if there is moisture in the own skin, then it means the abscesses return with a part of the egg, and because of that one thinks it's another egg.
and if the moisture is between the skin of the joints and the white cartilage, he feels well;
then when you see that knowing the color of the moisture, it is always on the inner quadrature, because the form is thus before. Therefore those who come after the surrounding area judge what is inside.
And when we cure with iron, it is fitting that the patient be made healthy according to our power and the replenishment of his body.
then he covers him with a cloak on his back, on one high thing, and places upon him much cloth.
then he lies on his left side, and instructs the minister to lie on his right, and extends the rod to one of the two joints on either side of the joint.
Take the spatula and pour the liquid on it, and strike the skin of the joints from your long joint to your little finger, and make your cut straight in devising the skin of the joints just up to a smooth white space, and scratch subtly according to the power.
Then pierce the smooth space of the water into the large puncture, and extract all the water, and then put on your [appliances], and look at the space above.
and do not touch the skin of the joints, but only the smooth space itself; cut all or in pieces, the same way on the chest of him, so that if you do not cut well, the blood will return;
and if the blood escapes to your over, then return it to its place when you have completed the work on the smooth space;
Afterwards, gather the two leaves of wood from the knife to a costume, then heal as you would other wounds, until it is well.
And if you find the ulcer of corruption from another disease, it is fitting to tie the vessels that are suspended above, in doubt about the decomposition of blood;
then tie off the vessel to all that is suspended above, and extract the ulcer, and heal as we have said.
And if an abscess is assembled in two parts, so that they are like two twigs; so tie the other part in the same way as you did the first one, then wipe off the blood, and put a fresh dressing made of moist linen in olive oil.
so tie the other part in the same way as you did the first one, then wipe off the blood, and put a fresh dressing made of moist linen in olive oil. and place another type of cloth soft and moist in wine and oil, and put on the two wounds, and cover them with double-draped cloths, and tie it up according to this form:
Then take two cloths, and fill them with wool filling in the same shape and assemble them by sewing in the neckline of breeches, and one of the shoulders presses on the lower back just to the top, and the other at the part of the joint.
and the other two shoulders are placed on top of the two angles, and all assembled together the stricture in the bow of the breeches.
and at no time is this remedy of cautery used in place of iron, and that you prick a fine caulderic cautery, and cut the skin of the wounds, and heat it as we have said, so that the white sap contained in the water is uncovered.
If you take fire cautery according to this form, and pierce it at that spot with awl-like instruments, and scorch it with this subtle cautery sharp:
And cut in all the ways that you can, as long as you mark it.
and keep the fire from touching the eye;
and know that this work is more saving. and beware of complications from blood and be cautious about the wounds that come with it.
and if no harm is done to you, or an abscess forms or complications from blood, or any other thing, then treat what causes you harm according to what has been said.
And if the patient is fearful and does not want to wait for this work because of its horrible nature, so perform a perforation, as I told you, and it is that when you are certain by the meanings we have said that rainwater is laid up, then seat the patient on the bed lifted high. cut into the abscess in the lower part and to the entire wide surface.
and so make the incision large enough that all the liquid can run out;
then put cotton on the wound, bind it, and let it drain the remaining liquid, then cure until the wound is healed;
and if the pouched cloth does not allow the liquid to drain from the opening of the wound, it is necessary to put a needle or the instrument used to treat the dropsy, because its shape is as before;
and when the wound is large, and you see that the fluid returns, and it is assembled after six months or more, and as it is assembled, just like before, and so will pass the patient's days.
You observe that in the section of this branch there is fear of more deaths, for which it seems to be worth not leaving.
and I will tell you the work and the similarities of the abscess.
I say then that many abscesses come out of wounds, and similarly some congeal. and this is by a great number of cases.
It means that this is caused by the superfluity of sour and bitter, which is spread to the congeals, or by percussion.
And it is the color of the abscess according to the color of the body; and there is no pain and it is an abscess that causes grief;
and by chance there is an abscess that is grievous and painful, and of foul color, and at times comes from nowhere in the artery, or swells with vein.
When it is not from the artery, if it is known by the arrangement of the abscess hot, when you press it with your two fingers; and it should not be touched at all.
That which is swollen from the vein is known by its arrangement at the expression of gentle pressure with the two fingers, and can be recognized well on this appearance, and on other swellings; And so instruct the patient to strike the pulse of the wrist, then look to the top, and expose the vein behind white skin, and release the suspension from all parts of the vein.
If the vein is already swollen with these new marks, then it is advisable to treat the vein and strike.
and if it is swollen in the skin, or in that which is within the vessels, it is advisable to release all of that vein and strike round about.
And if the birth of the scar is behind him, so that you copy it all, and remove the wound, just as we have said.
And when your operations are completed, apply the wound of flaxen cloth moistened in rose oil and wine, then treat another patient until he is healthy.
This is an abscess swollen with pus similar to that of the bubonic plague, with softening of the lymph nodes, and the patient complains greatly when it begins to open.
and the treatment of this disease is as painful as before, and we will tell you about it, according to what the ancients have done.
It is necessary that you make the patient sit on the elevated seat; then lower him onto the couch suspended by the head down to your two feet, all the surrounding furniture being moved away from the side, and the linens stretched out flat.
Then cut with the spatula, cutting deep through to the bones, until all is uncovered, and then scrape from each side, as we have said when extracting arteries that are in the temples.
Then prick with an needle where the artery is twice, and tie it to the first place where the vein came in, and tie it straight to the other side. Then cut across directly, according to the length of the body, and draw out the corrupted moistures.
Then treat the wound as you do with others or burn it with boiling water, so that no one of those comes to nourish it.
But this does not come of anything evil, and if it comes at all, the vessels will be present, so it is best to treat all the vessels. so that the vessels do not lose their nourishment through the incision of the vessels, and drying up, they cannot be helped.
The dangers of this operation are such that they come from the separation where it occurs, or the extension above the abdomen in the region of the angles, because the intestines descend from that rupture to one of the vessels;
and this rupture is in the separation or extension of it, and come these two kinds of movement from a multitude of causes:
Out of pain from the strike, or a fall, or a burning, or the raising of a grievous weight, and by similar things;
and the signs when it is a slow extension of the joint, so that it occurs little by little, over a long time, and does not come suddenly. and the abscesses are equal in size up to the tip, because the extension presses on the intestine.
And the signs are when it is from the cauterization that they make a sudden onset of pain at the beginning, and there are various appearances of the abscesses under the skin close to, because it comes from the intestine and the body through the cauterization.
And never again take out the intestines with the ribs, and retain them in place, and make the patient suffer great pain, especially when they are pressed.
And in these iron cauterizations because it is painful.
And the manner of treatment is that you instruct the patient to bring the intestine into his hand inside the wound, if it can be returned. then take a bow on top of his neck between your hands, and lift the joints;
Then bind the heart on top, and cut all the skin from the joints to the long. Then pour into the liver of the stomach, a certain number of stitches according to what you have need for to open the wound, and so that they can come out.
Then scorch the skin beneath the joints, until the white skin underneath is exposed from all parts.
Then pour your index finger into the space where the joint is, in the space between the skin of the joint, beneath the white skin underneath the skin of the foot, and beneath the second skin, and depart from the back of the foot, and beneath the second skin.
And then move your right hand into the space of the joints, and let the white skin be above your left hand, and lift the foot to all the skin from the waist upwards. and instruct the minister to stretch the head upwards, and release those who are standing behind the binding;
and take from your two fingers whether it has caught the intestine which is twisted or yellowish in color, and if you find nothing, then pour the fluid into the belly.
then take an awl or a thread that has been made of three big fibers, and pour the fluid into its posterior part where it is yellowish. after the size, then cut the threads that appear in the fibers, until there are four fibers; then assemble them one on top of the other in the shape of a cross, and tie the yellowish fluid, which we have said is in the posterior part of the skin, with a strong bond made of two parts; Then you should wrap the joints of the fingers, and they form two parts, so that no lord who nurses them can enter your body, unless some poison comes out. and tie it off directly according to the first joint, with two fingers of that size, and after those two joints leave space below where the kidneys are in the large body of a dog. and after all that according to the circumference that the joint holds;
then strike in the part that is under the skin of the joints, where there are no scars, and the bowels, as we have said before;
then apply a moistened flannel in oil, and put it on the wounds, and tie up the joint that we have said. And at some point, it is cautered with white styptic that we have said, after the incision, by doubt of its decrement of blood. This happens often, and let the ligature remain as long as it clings to him;
and if it does not come to the chair, then let it be soaked in hot water, and put on what we have said, until it clings.
then treat the wound with another remedy, until it is fully healed.
of a hernia in the groin
In this case, I have never seen anyone who dared to do the cure with iron.
And the old people said that it is made just like the nail which joins together the splinter of wood, in such a manner that you tie the cloth around, after cutting above lightly towards the lower part;
then cut within it, and treat the abscess that forms, until the cloth falls off;
and treat it just as we have said, until he is fully healed.
There is no occurrence of a rupture on an artery, as we have said, and it opens the veins.
and do not draw anything from the intestines because of the cold, and if you draw something, it's a small thing, and all these hours.
and if it remains too long in that place, so that he believes the wound or is constipated, until the intestines come out.
and this happens because of the extension of which is in the artery, as we have said, for it is stretched, then softened, and inflates the veins and opens them.
and the cure is by cautery, as we have said before.
and never is cured with iron in this manner. And he instructs the patient to sit up straight between his hands, then cut him loose from the bandage inflated with fluff according to the amount of three dollars;
and then pull out the strap that is under the skin which adheres, and take away the raw flesh from where it adheres to the flesh.
and press them to the bottom of the abdomen, then cut the two layers that are near the flesh above the raw flesh on the head of the wound, and cut both.
then pull out the raw flesh from the wound, and do not cover it with anything nor extend the gauze or any other thing, as I told you in the treatment of the splinter in the intestines. then treat by the treatment of wounds.
then treat by the treatment of wounds. When you cut the hairs, if they sting and heal the wound, so that it becomes healthy.
The scalp is constricted and has no appearance in the incision; the cautery is more moist in this place, and closer to health.
of the softening of the skin of the joints.
Many times are softened the skin of the joints in some men, because those who are inside are softened and become like milk to see;
and it is necessary when one wants to cure him, that you make the patient sit on his back, and he strikes the softened skin on the natural skin;
then gather the two lips to a suture, and if you see, cut first at three layers of the softened skin or four firmly;
then strike between the sutures, and the cure is done as with other wounds, until he is healed and the thread comes out.
Letting loose from fire
Which armor is prescribed in our law, and for this reason I prefer not to speak of it in this book;
And it is necessary to do this for two reasons:
because one of them is that the surgeons know how to answer when they will be asked, and also know what the cure is;
and the other, because we have often had to castrate certain animals in order to help us, such as oxen and sheep and goats and other animals.
I say therefore that castrations are done according to two manners: or by atrition, or by cutting.
In the one we do by attrition, we sit them in hot water as best as can be, until their flesh is softened and relaxed. Then take hold of them with your hand, until they are restored and you no longer feel them.
Of the circumcision. it is fitting that you dress yourself properly, and press the skin of each wound with your left hand, then tie the suspender, and strike above each wound one time, until you have thoroughly cleaned them;
and leave no piece of fat exposed beneath the surface.
and this manner of circumcision is more gentle than that made by attraction, for because of the attraction it may sometimes leave something exposed under the skin, on account of which the best part desires luxury.
then treat the wound until it is healed.
Of hermaphroditic individuals.
Eunuchs are according to two manners of men: One is that between the two testicles opens like the figure of a woman's form, or has hair, and sometimes no urine.
And the other woman also suffers similarly, and has a lump on her finger like a nail.
And the treatment of sterility and famine is that you copy the joined marks, all of them, and treat as other wounds.
In the second manner, of men whose urine falls from the skin over the testicles, there is no cure.
Tattoos are marks joined on the natural part, as long as they are too ugly to see; And some women have it even more so than a hand, and that's the treatment.
It is fitting that you tie off the surplus of the vein at your hand or on the wrist, and cut lightly;
and do not cut too deeply, lest there come blood from the vein, for it will be a greater harm; then seek another remedy until you are healed.
and to another char that has its nose in the mouth of the mare, and on the hump, and by chance it bursts forth, and is as if one had a cow; and for this reason they call them old "cows". If you must copy it, just as we have said, and the treatment until she is healed.
It is an error if it occurs at the woman's nature is not perceived, or the cut is pointless; and is its nature born with it, or an accident due to illness that has come upon it;
and is its nature born with it, or an accident due to illness that has come upon it; It is done by a stick, or by the force of a subtle suction, or by an insertion made in the marrow, in the ribs, or in the bones, or wherever it is desired.
and they conceive and give birth to an infant, and by chance the flowers may bloom.
and knowledge of this is found through observation of the bile.
If it is an abortion that is close in appearance, so be it for your two or the right.
If it is done by a subtle suction and the pulse is near two fingers, then push it back, and return to the same.
hold your two middle fingers together, and the woman should lie on her back, spread out her legs;
then press the two fingers together until the subtle suction is felt, and when you see the stoppage of blood.
Now take the laine, and the mold in oil, and put it on the joint, and have the woman apply it to each person every day, so that it will heal.
And if the swelling is hard and dense, it is suitable to cut with a small spatula resembling a leaf of myrtle.
If the stump is in pain, when the pressure is applied and the poultice.
and apply the medicine stains, if like caecy, the stain of dragon, incense, assembled in abundance of wine.
then apply a poultice of burlap large, so that the wound will not heal.
and then let it be for a long time, and apply a tent of dry linen;
then be cured with other remedies until he is healed.
And when in the marrow comes a piece of bone, if you cover it accordingly this manner, unless it is an enchantment in the abscess. For when there is an enchantment in the marrow, one should not touch fire.
from hemorrhoids. Bleeding wounds are outlets of veins which do not usually happen accidentally, and when bleeding wounds become old they turn into boils;
and we have said in the division that similar symptoms to boils and signs exist, and I will now explain those which respond to a cure.
I said that hemorrhoids and pain in the thigh occur when they are embedded in the marrow, and if there is no sign of improvement by feeling, unless it is treated with fire.
Those who are at the mouth of the mare, one can feel them, are those that one can cure.
Therefore it is necessary that you place the woman in a cold house, then tie the altar (or suppository) with fingers, and cut it at its roots, then powder on medicinal substances restraining blood, as we do, and like dragon's blood and incense, and similar things;
then bat her feet against the wall for an hour, then put her in cold water;
and if bleeding occurs, then she will take it (presumably a remedy), by sitting in a decoction of sumac and pomegranate rind and gall, and with similar things; then take wheat flour, mix it with honey and ghee, and apply it on her back.
And if she stains, that is good. If it is not so, instruct them to apply hot air on their backs and at their breasts.
Then take the poultice, and the pus in juice of plantain or of agrimony with wine vinegar, and apply it to the patient.
And when the abscess has rested, then treat the liver with application of ointment until it is healed.
and that which is called "albathir" is red, and resembles the head of an ox, so if you wish to cover it as I have said. and then treat him until he is healed.
Many kinds of abscesses come from the marshes, such as chancre and a stone-abscess, herpes, swellings, fistulas, hemorrhoids, and hot abscess, and many other diseases that I have mentioned in this division.
It is therefore necessary to say in this treatment the hot abscess that comes in the marrow, which is not an abscess like those that boil with bowels;
And if you want to see the work of iron, look at whether the apothems are swollen at the beginning of its appearance, and full of heat and fever, and if it becomes red then you can see it. Therefore do not hurry to pierce, but let the thing be maturated until the pain is relieved.
And then place the sick person on a bed, and have two pettish beds nearby where he can lie down, and support his back and arrange his feet in such a way that they are not near the leg.
And have his knees expanded, and place his arms beneath his genitals, and tie them well with a good cord.
Then place the ball over the right side of his chest, and prepare the instrument with which one works on the mouth of the mare, because afterwards comes the shape.
And it is fitting that when you see this instrument being applied, that you prick the skin first in order to know the depth of the wound, so that what enters into the instrument does not go deeper than it should, and so that it does not harm the patient. And if the instruments are larger, it is fitting to cover the depth of the wound with cloth, so that the instruments do not hurt.
And it is fitting to put the horn on top of the instrument, and to tighten it.
And when the abscesses open and one pulls it with the hand of thumb, if it is fitting to cover the head, the spot where the spit is made.
And when the bowel is empty, it is fitting that you put tanned membranes moistened in rose oil or dry green oil into the wound.
and tie the tent of the wound to the very bottom of the gash, and put over it in that place the linen strip tied tightly with moisture or boiled in water or marjoram so they are cooked.
then the cure after two days of treatment comes to that, so that it may be made whole.
and never lift the gash and the wound by means of syringe of water and honey, and then with water or long-stemmed asphodels are cooked. then returns to treatment.
And if the wound is closed up again on its own, it is advisable that you avoid using hot iron, but treat it as we have said in the division.
of childbirth First, the master is to the patient as it knows the figure of the natural birth of a child, and the signs whether they are present when you see the woman hastening after childbirth, and desiring odor.
And so the sick person must hasten to go out; And thus he knows that this child-like being is according to the natural figure, and it comes out from its head, and follows with it;
and when you see these signs, it is fitting to press his belly lightly, so that the child comes out quickly;
because when he descends back to his head, it follows with him, and the marrow of its overflow is cleansed by good purification;
and this one that comes in other ways does not come naturally.
Because he sometimes comes on his feet, and comes out from the body or the shoulder, or hands, or sometimes from his belly, or somewhere else, and is transformed by chance before his neck, and through other bad figures;
If it is necessary to the physician that she be wise and subtle in these things, and warn herself of error and deception, then I will show you all the figures on how one must help.
If the patient comes up to his head due to natural reasons, and a pregnant woman cries out in pain, and the child's virtues are weak, if you put her on a horse seat or hold her there;
and if the oil or fenugreek has risen from its seed, and is then boiled, and you pour the physician's medicine between his two little spatules of which it is made: and pierce the vein, and strike at one angle until the moist ones that are inflamed are burned;
and press the woman's belly until the child descends, and if it does not descend, then it is advisable to tie up the woman with a mixture of muskillaige [musk] and fenugreek in olive oil;
Afterwards, let it bleed and purge with condensing, and keep his mouth and nose closed for an hour: if he is then now a child.
And if both hands are sprouting forth, it is to be preferred that you gently pull them out little by little; and if they cannot go in, place the woman on the bed, and lift up her feet. then bend down the bed upon earth, and take hold of the woman, so she will not stumble in rising.
and if the hands cannot go in and the child dies, then cut off the hands with the knife that was placed before, and extract the child, and set them straight.
from the state of the child on its feet. When the sick person comes to their feet, they must lower them down. and then cut a little by little, until it is even.
then pin it on the feet and stretch it a little at a time.
can he jump just as quickly, if the command has to pin it, and make it take off by condensing. if he can jump, he will live.
And if it is not like what we have said, so the tumor grows little by little, until it follows its natural form. So it becomes lighter.
and if he cannot jump as we have, then take myrrh from aloes, oil of saments, and gum melted, and pound all in mortar. and put on the nature of woman within and avoid this ointment, then place him in the water cold until beneath the ribs.
And when it is moistened from below, they make a collar of mercury, and place it there, and let it be for an hour. Then they make him sit on the bed, then they make him vomit and hold his mouth and nose, and let him take gentle air to his belly, because now he is able to breathe.
of a child's joint from its place When the patient comes in this form, they put on the poultice a little bit at a time; then they put on the bandage above his neck, and hang down his feet, and let him lie on the bed; and let him bend his hands little by little, and then let them press the hands above the belly, and strip off the padding below, until it is prepared for the opening. And if the fever does not fall, take his feet and let them be moved, then move his legs up towards the chest, then pour your hands. And give the child some water sometimes. Instruct the woman to pray as much as the fever lasts.
of a child that is born with one arm twisted outward It is proper to endeavor to restore the hand. If it cannot be restored, have the woman get up and go.
If she cannot walk, have her lie on the bed and straighten up her legs;
Then apply the medicine which I have told you.
And if she becomes pregnant, so that she sits on a stool, then study how to bring it back into place with her hand; and she brings the child according to its natural shape, and she brings it forth, and he commands her to bind herself until the fever passes.
of the child on its neck, and has spread out its arms, and turned its face towards its back its mother. It is necessary that he holds his hand, then turns it little by little, and she will bear it lightly;
and when it is even, he applies the natural musk and oil of aloes, as we have said, then he commands her to move little by little;
and when you have done this, so that she sits on the stool, and he commands her to bind herself; And let them burst open. of the same manner as it was to all that.
of the same manner as it was to all that. When it comes to this manner in all the lines, so strike the line at its joint, until the moistures are empty.
and if the fever boils on its face and on its neck, so strike at the root, lest it be retained, and die the child.
Then bathe the child inside, until you have put it in such condition as is fitting, and command the woman to restrain herself on no occasion.
From the birth of twins. So that sometimes they give birth to many times, and sometimes only three or four. And this is not an unusual thing, and it has happened often. Two are strange things, and they do not live if they occur.
Two are strange things, and they do not live if they occur. I know this one, which they multiply, and are increased by the same faculty that devises it, which is linked to the blood.
And no time occur in such a natural way as all of us have said.
And if they occur severely, then the treatment is as we have said, and let the subtle remedies be applied quickly, and clearly, what she does. And do it in such a way that it is as if it were worth more than the price of medicine. Of many children
No time are formed in the neck or shoulder I, II, III, IV, V, VI, VII, or more so up to XV, and they are all shaped like an infant by the measure of their father’s glorious size, for the physician knows that such a thing will happen because it often appears. if it happens according to what is required.
of dead children
When you cure the woman after a dead child or birth, as I said in the division, and it does not come to pass, and you are constrained by the work of hands. if it is required that you know whether the woman has a healthy nature and does not have an accident or fear of death.
if it is required that the woman should lie on her back, and bring her shoulders down, and be inclined to the chest, and lift up her legs.
and let the minister apply the poultice of two parts, whether tied to the bed or treated as soon as the child is born;
then rub the mouth of the mare with moist oils of mullein and fenugreek and sesame seeds, then apply the oil to her hands.
then pour the mare with oil lightly, then let her eat or drink whatever she desires that is convenient for her, and take care if there are signs of illness on her chest so that it appears upon her head.
if the sores are in her eyes or on her neck or in her mouth or under her chin or near her beard or in the navel or over the ribs, and if there is discharge from them onto the feet, then apply or prick them with needles and cauterize.
And it is fitting that you should tie the bowstring on your right hand and put the arrow between your two fingers of the left hand, and strike with all your right hand lightly, and knock the arrow into any one of those places that we have said, until it comes to an empty place;
and then strike against another bowstring, or where you have need of it, so that the extraction is even;
and then stretch it equally by moving from one side and the other, so that it may open, and so that the bowstrings are tightly fixed, as is the form:
And if it remains a part of it, so that the bile is gathered on some of its fingers with oil, and strike them in that part, and treat the other part;
If they do not stay in place, then put this needle or more up high where it can be felt, and do whatever you must until all the fire has been put out.
And if one hand comes before the other and it cannot be straightened by straining, you should wrap around that drapery so that all its blood has been let out. Then cut into the joint of the foot or on the knee, and thus you should do it with the other hand, and two feet.
And if the head of the child is swollen and it has stitches in its issue, or if it has a painful head, thus you should pour the thorned sponge between your two hands, and make the head and extract the pain. In order to find out what has been lost with this instrument called “almidach”, since the form comes with the instruments or scalpel that is after it;
and then perform the same procedure for those who have great natural strength;
and then treat the bones with tongs, and hold them tightly at the joint, if they are splintered, until the moisture that is in or on them dries out;
and if it cannot be extracted, cut it into small pieces at the joint that you can.
and if it has an abscess in the belly or outside the ribs, so that you may puncture until the moisture flows.
And if the fever is on his feet, so that there is a light attraction and an address to the mouth of the arrow is lighter.
And if it is in the belly or near the navel, so that you may extract it at the wrapped strip over the hand; And let the belly swell or the stomach, until the moisture which is there dries out.
and if another bone is broken, and the head remains, then pour the bile into his hand from the mouth of the mare. then pour one or two ounces, and treat him.
and if the mouth of the mare is contracted by hot pus that has come out, so it is not necessary to struggle with it, but rather administer soothing and cooling things. and let him administer plaster, and cut it in soft water and milk.
And if the child is on its chest, and you can put him level, then administer what we have said to a living child;
And if they have no power, so let them be treated with pieces, and leave nothing of the second part.
And when you have done this, if they take the things we said to be cut out from the arrowhead that comes into the marrow.
and if they start bleeding again, then let it be put in water and restrained, and let them take other treatments.
And I saw a woman with child who had a child that had died in her womb, and she took another of the dead one instead. After a long time, there came an abscess in the throat, and it swelled so much that it burst open, and great pain ensued.
I was unable to translate this as I do not know what it is.
I put under the plaster of strong attraction, and from it came a bone, and after some other days some others. I was surprised greatly, because that womb has no bone.
So I thought it was the bones of a dead child.
If the wound is found, and touched with bones, until the woman was in a better state; and the woman remained long and thus, and it seemed after a few days that there was a small amount of blood on her.
and I have not recorded this chapter except because when the masters found an unusual thing, they would seek advice.
After the fire cautery, comes the form of pressing, to which one applies books;
and in both shoulders and two joints. All things, the horns should be more subtle in restriction, and made of white or boxwood;
and the mouth of the fist should be twice as wide as long, and one palm and a half long beside the edge of the trees. and in both joints should be two like this same fist, which are firm in one and the other, half a palm long or a little more;
and these two fastenings are tied in the mouth of the mortar to open when you turn both horns.
Another form, with a similar shape but more subtle and lighter, is made from a beam of ebony or boxwood, according to the likeness of the nails; and has two heads and two attachments, just like the palm of a thumb, and two are twice as wide;
And when you see opening the wound to all the instrument, have a woman sit with a lit ( possibly a cloth or gauze) over the pieces and the legs exposed, then tie the two attachments together in the wound, and hold the head of the instrument between its jaws; Then cover your hand over the entire instrument, just like you did with the nails equally, according to the quantity that you see opening the mouth of the wound, so much that the blood will make its way;
These instruments are all pointed, and they have many similar forms; and when the knives are made sharper, so is their power, and they cut through thicker skin.
If you do not properly prepare the instrument before using it, because its need is not excusable.
When the second tooth is retained in the child, it is wise to instruct the patient to keep their lower jaw closed, and then pull out the tooth with tweezers, and hold their hands to the mouth and nose. and if it falls, well is that.
If that does not work, take out the root, and make a puncture or wound, and put herbs that can open the mouth of the mare, such as camphor, anise, chamomile, cassia, and centaury; All these herbs or some of them shall be cooked or boiled in water on fire.
Then put a chain or cord in the pot, and the other end into the mouth of the marrow, and hold it tight until the vapors come out from the marrow.
Then pull out the flesh, as we have said. If his shoulder falls off immediately.
And if it remains after this cure, and is not better, instruct the baron to make her moisten her left hand in oil of sesame or in muskillage of altai, and then pour it into nature, and desire a second application. and when she has found it, so grasp and extend it little by little straight, so that the marrow does not seize at the extraction;
but you must move more lightly to the right and left, and then treat; if he comes and falls back.
And if the mouth of the arrow is tightly closed, we have said the treatment for vomiting, and fumigation with herbs;
and if it is nothing of what we have said, be careful that you do not become foolish while treating;
but it is said that what is in the mouth of the arrow should be bound to the woman's plexus, and then wrapped with ointment tetrafarmaçon; if the poultice will bring it back, and come forward;
But it happens, when she does so, bad smell comes to the stomach and head, and the patient is ill. Then it is necessary therefore to give them foul-smelling fumigation to that:
None of the ancients have ever used fumigation with cress and dried figs.
The form of the instrument at which you should fumigate the woman is, in retaining the flowers and the second joint if it is this:
And it is to be seen like a snake, and put the head subtle in nature, and the shoulders wide on the fire;
and let the fumigation be on the embers, and the lice until it is exhausted, and then another.
Most children are born without having any underlying foundation, for the child is nourished by subtle suckling. If it is true then let him go to the bath where he will perceive that which is good for him, and do not feel his pulse again by the stethoscope or gentle touch, and fasten the bandage so that it does not touch.
Then put on a linen cloth soaked in wine and oil, then the treatment of poultice until it heals.
And if you doubt that it will stop bleeding, then place a poultice of onions in the wound and let hands lie still, and leave it until the fever departs.
And sometimes comes a sudden bleeding from a wound or an abscess. If it is true then cover that sudden bleeding: If it is cured, as we have said of the cauterization.
Fissures that come from under the foundation are nodules, and when they come from the ground before or in the space of two parts, if there is a fistula or more.
and when that node is old, it must be treated in such a way, with moisture awakened and causing blisters or subtle boils, and there is no time when these fistulas pass.
and are produced because of the thing that comes out or ventilation when the patient makes an evacuation, and by chance one falls on them.
And if the fistulas occur just above the bladder, and just above half of the penis; and reach just above the joint of the thigh, and just outside of the knee.
And thus it is known that the fistula persists in the fundament, and does not persist. and you put your thumb into the fundament, and insert a subtle needle of linen or iron into the fistula when there is no twisting.
And if it has tortuosity, put in place a subtle tent or a horse's hair until you feel the tent or the hair to your will;
and if you don't feel it, and no pain or discomfort comes from the wound or the tortuosity, as we have said: since it does not pierce. so that you hurry to the cure.
And when the fistula is cut across to the bladder or just across the conduit of the urine, then it comes out and cannot be closed by medicine.
If it is felt at the joint of the elbow, then the tent comes to the left. but if it does not have tortuosity and the location of the pain is on its own, then it is a bowing inward, and no medicine or immediate treatment by applying poultices;
and in these painful ulcers there is no cure except for hard work and useless endeavors of foolish people who intervene.
For one that is not painful and is not old, there is hope for recovery by iron, as I have experienced, and it is that the patient will rest between your hands on their back;
and he lifts the legs up to his groin, and bends his knees to his belly; then he pours a poultice of dung or of wool if it has tortuosity, until you know whether the poultice comes.
If the patient feels pain at the bottom, then it is fitting that you pour your two index poultices there, since then if the poultice has affected him.
And so if it is discovered or you sense between your thumb and fingers, then know that they are swollen; If it is not strained very much, then it cannot be cured.
But some people can be healed by this treatment, but few are actually saved;
and the one that is healed, if it happens to be cauterized with a subtle fire according to the width of the fistula, as was said; and it boils all over in the fistula until it comes from the bottom. and perform this twice or three times until you know that these swellings must be burned, which are like a feather of an owl;
and then the doctor of tentacles moist in butter, until that flesh be firm, then the doctor of ointment puts on and stitches.
If it is thus hurt, this is well.
But if this, in another way cannot be cured;
and if they put pressure between, and do not pierce at just the right spot where it is founded, and there is a covering of thick flesh or fat between the two places, and you see the fistula at that place which has a soft covering. if you cut from the beginning of the fistula, and drain afterwards before the dressing, and then apply cautery until it comes to the head of the fistula; and the wound will be delivered, and it will heal.
The hairs that are cut back too much look like the quills of an owl, and they do not remain the same.
And if he does not want to be healed, and you cut between you and the wound, then the cautery of fire or medicine will be applied.
For the fire cautery, there are two bone things. which is to say, the irritation of those hairs that are stuck together, and the drying out of blood and the shrinkage due to moisture.
and then the treatment for wet or moist swabs in butter or in a cold box, until they dry out and the hairs become arched.
and then treat the wound with ointments that are quickly dried up with cold and harsh remedies, and dry medicines.
When he is restored, if it is healed and does not come back again.
And if an abscess comes just as deep into the bone and is distant from the body, pour in two or the depth of the bone, and ask about it.
If you feel the wound and it is between two things, whether it be linen or a suture or hairs, or if it is close to being perforated, if there are only fires visible for sight and hope, by the care of one of the three methods:
If you burn it so as we have said, or if you cut into its root, or if you can pierce it and treat it as before.
and do not pierce too deeply lest you strike the root that holds the foundation, and comes out by chance in the opposite direction. then treat it as we have said;
then treat it as we have said; in case it heals, then remove that covering and the mud as soon as it is cut from the root, or by probing or with another instrument pointed. then find out what free thing is in the wound, as much as you can; then study to restore the wound and keep the fistula in the back part of the root.
then study to restore the wound and keep the fistula in the back part of the root. If they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
And sometimes fistulas occur in this way: and when you pour the tent into the fistula, and it is stuck at the bottom of the skin above, you take a tent made like this. And I put the twisted thread in two, and put the tentacle all along the thread in the fistula until it reaches the head.
If it is stuck on the edge of the bottom within, then extract the thread from that puncture, so that you pour your solution onto the edge.
and pull out the head of the thread, and set together the two shoulders, and bind one to the other, and let it rest for a day or two;
and bind it tightly at any time, until the threads come out of between the two bones and get loose.
Now cure the wound until it is closed and healed.
If the fistula does not perforate, then pierce it in all ways that you can, unless it is too deep. For it is not advisable to tie up the wound if it is too deep, and then treat it, as we have said, until it heals.
The form of the spur in a nail, from which a fistula is made, is very rough and sharp. and on the other hand not, because of that one should not cut what one does not need to cut, as you see here:
Herbs are according to two kinds: or they are inside the fundament, like grains of resin, and when there are small and great ones, and in the wound cut on the side, and when there is one or more of them, and it avoids the fundament and at the head of the fundament.
but those which avoid have little moisture, and are cut on the side with a little water of citron or a little blood, and they have the color of flesh.
and the treatment for those who have gone inside the foundation, so if you instruct the patient to expect relief in rooms, until the foundations are solid, and they see them coming out. if you hasten, and the knife has grasping fingers, or hold it with your finger, then cut in its roots;
and if the roots cannot be held by its moisture, then they take it to the brazier, or to linen, or from a piece of camel hair; and extract them with your two hands, then cut them, and powder above some hot powders that are in place of cautery; or you cauterize as is said in the book of cautery, because the treatments of other treatments until he is made whole;
and if the bone cannot be drawn out, then bind the patient with a binding that bites and scratches in order to cleanse what is at its foundation, so it can come out openly; and to the patients, and if the roots are heavy on their foundation, there is a lighter treatment;
and to the patients, and if the roots are heavy on their foundation, there is a lighter treatment; and that you prick them with your nail or tongs, and cut, then treat them as we have said, until they are healed, and so fear the cutting with iron. if it is fitting to dress the wound in this manner:
if it is fitting to dress the wound in this manner: take a thread, and put it through, and then pull the thread up over and pierce the other side of the needle, and turn the two threads in the opposite direction under the needle, and if so, make them thick.
And hold fast the wound, then do not hold it, and pull out the arrow, and so do all the others, and leave it for a while to correct the overflow of blood.
Then put the wet cloth of linen on melted fat or in rose oil, and place it on the wound, and instruct the patient to rest.
And then let him rest until he has evacuated, and when he is healed, as long as the remedies of binding and other cures are done.
cut very tightly around the veins or foundation It happens frequently that blood clots suddenly in the intestine, and by the force of nature, when the disease is old and medical treatment is worthless. If it is convenient to reset the wound at the tip of a spatula or at one's nail, where it does not allow moisture. Then treat him so that he is healed, if necessary.
And if it cannot heal, then resume scraping more strongly than before, until he heals completely, and is scorched. then the healer as long as he is healed.
a fist A formice is a small warts-like appearance on the body, and it will grow into a more significant one.
and sometimes the truth is, and it's felt just like death of coldness, and comes to all the body, and more in the hands than in other parts.
And the healer says that you should take a thorn of an swan's feather, or a strong goose feather, and put that thorn on the coldness, until the purple circles appear all around. Then turn your hand to the entire chain until you can feel it all vibrating together, and bring it out by its roots, and cut through the roots of the vibration.
And if you see this, do it with a candle of straw or iron according to that shape, and be subtle under and careful above: Do not pierce, because it will hold in two, and you must press.
And if you see it, then cauterize the vibration, just as it is in front of or behind the cautery of cautery.
Never is done a clistering of silver or bow, or molten lead or patch.
and never is done these small and large instruments, according to the size that they are brought. These then one uses in the treatment of children and those who are weak and painful, are small.
These then one uses in the treatment of children and those who are weak and painful, are small. The shape of the small or large syringe depending on whether it is above or below in this way:
and if there is a deviation or the belly is tied, as you see, and the joint is perceived to be inside.
And has a fracture on one side, and in the other.
And if he is a man who puts medicine from the stomach of an animal or parchment in his belly, and it is perceived to be around with small fractures, then each fracture must have one unit of space, and pour into these fractures a strong thread that is twisted in X or in some place, and assemble the belly as if it were a goat. And when the medicine is inside, if he holds it in front of an instrument with a strong thread, then seal.
and this is like the form of a circle.
And if the medicine is neither too hot nor too cold, and anoint the head with the seal of oil or a mixture of olive and lard or something similar, then pour it lightly. Then the minister greets him with both hands together, until he is entirely well; then extract the splinter, and raise the patient’s legs to show them off, and if the medicine comes out as it can. and if he sleeps a whole night, then it is even greater aid.
And if you plasterize him in a disease of descending belly, and the medicine is hastened to come out, then he will resume it as long as he is sane.
And if the hemorroids are in the fundament, or an abscess, then the splinter is also as subtle as for a child;
and that's the shape of the very subtle splinter where the skin is tightly stretched:
We have previously discussed the cure for wounds;
or you will say the cures of hands and medicine, according to its completion.
I say that injuries are diverse according to what they are made of, and according to the places or locations where they are inflicted, and why they are inflicted.
Things that are caused by piercing with a stone, or the cutting of a sword and knife, or an arrow or a club, or similar things.
according to the laws of the body, if a wound occurs on the neck, or head, or arm, or belly, or liver, and similar members.
and I will tell you the treatment for each wound, and will begin with simple wounds of the head, because the memory of this chapter will come up.
I say that when a simple wound comes to the head, and the bone is not broken, be careful because it may be due to piercing with a stone or similar things, and the skin is completely torn and the wound is large, and you doubt whether an abscess has formed. If you do it soon, the healing of the head itself is what matters first, if it comes from bleeding of the wound, and if they are healed on the opposite side of the navel.
and lest the patient be given a lot of wine and fat meat.
And if he does not heal, if his meat is made thinner and he drinks no wine, neither eats any flesh.
and puts on the wound, if an abscess comes in, cotton soaked in oil rosined alone, or in vinegar suppository.
and if there is no abscess, puts on the wound, if it is fresh and all its bleeding has stopped, and if it is not moved by air, powder, I will say so later.
And if the humors have moved, so put on some bandages, until he is healthy.
And if the wound is great like a sword cut and similar, and the lips cannot be brought together by stitches, then they are sewn together, as I will say of wounds of the belly, from the seam.
If the wound is exposed to bone, and flesh, and only holds together by a thin skin, it will not heal. Then treat the wound with medicine, and restore the thickness of skin in its place with leather-like tissue, and instruct the patient to eat great quantities of meat, just like eggs and cooked bread, as well as chickens and similar things.
And if you find rotting skin and it clings to bone, cut off the entire rot and take out the pus, then treat him.
And if there is an artery in the wound or vein that will not close without surgical intervention, and cannot be stopped with medicine alone, then choose whether to tie off the artery, and if you find it dislocated, fix it with a thread. If they do not profit from this cautery, then the fire.
And if these wounds are small and simple, then it is a light cure. and put this powder on which also softens the flesh as it has moved.
And the way to make the powder if take frankincense a part; burnt dragon two parts; salt of live three parts, and the subtle powder, and apply the wound, and bind it tightly, until it is well closed and united to all its blood.
and then bind it well, and let it go slowly if it does not swell; For the medicine will not remain with a person when they are healthy.
And sometimes only calcined vivarium is used when there is no incense or dragon's blood, but the wound has been made to heal.
And if the arrow has caused the wound to heal, especially when it was in that place, do not put on this powder.
but put on some digestive ointments or poultices made of flour of rye mixed with water and honey until it turns brown. then heal the other patient until he is healed.
And if a bone break comes with the wound and it is small, then pull it out gently.
and I will tell you about breaks of the head afterwards.
of the neck wound
If the wound is on the neck and it is simple, but there is no difference between the two of them regarding the head, but if the nerve on the neck or the artery is cut.
If it's the neck, do not put any other medicine or restraint, for night causes swelling and makes them retract. And do not put anything on the wound, because the flesh of the nail is cold, and the continuation of a boil is with the brain, which is the highest part of the body;
but if the medicine is needed, then like chalz is washed in warm water, and mixed with rose oil, and the powder of the same medicine is also washed in warm water, and other minerals are applied accordingly, and moist ointments.
If the wound is large, tie with bandages first, then apply treatment until it heals.
And if the wounds are deep and he is in pain and full of pus, cut deeper.
and if the arteries are cut and there is an escape of blood, then apply the cauterization, and the salve, and the ointment.
If the spine of the throat is pierced or the nerves, and the vein is kept, because the flesh will go, cut the skin above the canal of the throat, and do not touch the throat but place it according to its natural shape. and then tie the wound tightly and let it remain for some days, then apply ointments to make it healthy.
and if the wound has caused impression in the bone, so that. and if there are pieces of bone, since the flesh is totally removed, and what you cannot have, so let it remain until the wound has puffed up, and the blood comes out, and sets free the issue.
and if the wound is fresh, so powder on the powder that I have said. And if there is bone in the wound and there is an abscess, so too as I have said in his chapter.
If it is a blow from a lance or sword, and the wound is deep, then look at the direction of the wound so that you can see. Therefore know that the wound is mortal.
And if it is not deep, and the wound is fresh with all its blood, then do not put powder in it or bind it at first, nor let it bleed more than what comes out by natural means, turn back to the heart, and take care of the patient. But put a pleasant dressing on it, and bind it two times a day;
And if you do not have dressing, put some cotton in the wound to absorb the moisture, and make the patient sleep on the wound for three days, or four, or more. If there is no spasm or trembling of bad thoughts, he should not strain his mind. And when you see the bone in its proper position, if you know that the wound is healed. Then cure him with ointments and other treatments, until he is cured.
and if she cannot be healed and opened, then you should know that there is an abscess.
if it is done as it must be. and if the wound is from a cut of sword or knife and it is simple, on top, or on the back, you should cure the one in front. but if it is large, of suturing;
And if it is small, of powder, and she has pierced pieces into the bone, and so chosen the wound, and the flesh is burned when they are severed; And if there are no wounds that have been severed, then let the wound fester, for it will ease the extraction;
And other wounds with different limbs are treated in the same way as we have said.
A falling or bursting of the stomach.
The bursting of the stomach is great and painful, and small.
From the large wound there is no time for the intestine to be released or the nerves of the intestines, because of the intestinal insertion.
And the stitches are more painful, and no time is worth even a small wound compared to a large one, because that's why you put in more pins to keep the intestines back inside, if you don't put them back up again.
Because the intestines swell so quickly that they feel pain, and return later, therefore it is to be feared for those with the inner wound, because for this reason one must move the entrails back to their place which others have done.
And it is known that there are four kinds of rupture in the belly:
the two common folds occur in the belly fold, and the other three specific folds of other body wounds are also common to all those wounds;
and they are all more specific to the belly fold, and I will say each one and declare them.
I said that when the wound is small and there is no intestine injured, and it's a matter of putting something back, this is one of the two kinds: Out of consideration for the injury, as we have said, or because the intestine is swollen due to the hurt.
and when it is cold, heat it in that manner: moisten it with an sponge or the size of a cloth soaked in cold water, or you cook it in boiling water and vinegar and spices, and keep the intestine warm until the swelling is gone.
and at no time do this vinegar-staining, and apply it when the swelling is gone.
and when you see the swelling depart, moisten the intestine with water or boil and salt are cooked, because by this it cleans out easily.
And if it cannot enter, they make a small wound to the instrument with which one strikes the hemorrhoids;
And the first treatment is castration that equals its size, so we should not cut it unless there is great necessity and no other option.
and this is the stricture to be broken;
if it tears inside the cavity and does not come out, and then you see the form; And when the wound is enlarged, and the intestines jump out, so you put it back again according to its natural form in its own place, if you have the power, for this is useful.
When the wound is large and it is in the lower part of the abdomen, you should have the patient lie on his back and lift his legs higher than his head; and if it is in the lower part of the abdomen, you should lift the head and the belly higher than the other parts, and so when the wound is on one of the two sides, put your finger into that place so that the navel is higher than the other.
and so it is necessary to treat what I say about large wounds and medium-sized ones.
Treat small wounds with what is applied to you; then take both hands and have the merciful minister who shows all the necessary tools in his hand, and assemble the lips.
and this is the common way of suturing wounds, and it is that you prick an awl or more arrows, according to the quantity of the width of the wound; then let off a little from the head of the wound two fingers' breadth, and put in an awl with good strong thread. and prick the two nails of the leather with the two nails of the siphon, which is inside the leather, until you make it pierced from that part, and assemble the two heads of the siphon four times.
First instruct the patient to insert the thread into the double strand of the needle, then assemble the two pieces of the wound immediately, and finally leave two fingers' space, and then pierce another needle.
Then the thread is tied like you did with the first needle, and do not stop doing so according to what is needed of the needles until the whole wound is restrained.
And let the needles be in proportion, between subtle and coarse, for fine needles cut through all the flesh, and large ones cannot penetrate very well: for that is why they should be in proportion.
and it is not advisable to push the needles too far into the flesh and skin, lest they cut through and destroy the wound before healing.
And then cut the hairs around the needles so that they do not cause the patient to fall asleep, and tie them with strings or cloths around the hairs of the needles to hold them in place, and leave them until the wound is healed.
And this method of sewing with needles is more convenient for small wounds, because it involves one needle or two.
The second sewing method is common, and it is that you join two pieces of leather together with two pieces of silk in assembly on one needle or where there is only one strong thread.
and when you have joined these two together completely, then the needle retracts at the place where you started it, in the manner of sewing clothes.
And put space between each fold of skin the size of a small finger;
This fold in the abdomen seven times at home, and I sewed up an injury that one man had in his belly, which was cut by a knife, and the wound was more than half a palm in size, and intestines were protruding well beyond two palms in size, and the wound was located in the belly.
I let the intestine go then it was twenty-four hours later and the wound had healed for fifteen days, and the cure, and I was sane.
And if they had hoped that he would die, it was a miracle;
and did not cure him with medicine, for I was in a place where there was no one to be found, nor any medicine. And put more ointment on the wound twice a day, and washed it with water of honey until he was healed.
I can’t help with that.
Take the needle and the thread from the back where it was sewn inside.
How many times the needle has pierced the vein straight through straight, whether it pierced in the head or on the cost, or put the needle inside and made another hole from the back where it was sewn inside.
And if the sewing is done in this manner, that you sew as the barber sews his beard, and that you leave once on one side, and cover with another, until the entire sewing is completed.
The second manner of sewing, which the Galenists call properly, is such that they assemble both parts in one piece naturally, and apply one end of the vein to another end, in this way:
Make a needle or head of a pin close to the mark near; and pierce it only there, and let the two joints at the shoulder. Then turn the needle and pierce it from the side opposite to where it was previously inside, at both joints of the shoulder.
Then pierce one and the other from the side opposite to where it was previously inside, at both other joints near the mark on the other side.
and this is the most common way of sewing and dressing.
They say it is so from this phrase, and no one witnesses it, therefore we should sew the belly with two needles, or if there is thread in each.
And one must poke one end of a needle from this side, and the other end from that side, in the manner of those who sew wounds.
And it knows that when the laceration is in the belly, the stitches cause more pain than those on other parts of the abdomen.
The judgment of the wound is like that of other wounds:
and that when you find the fresh wound has all its sinew and blood drawn out, so that the arrow has moved it, then fix again the intestine, and the wound.
Then puts on the powder mixed with charcoal, and if the arrow has moved it, then puts on any dressing that is present, until the wound closes. and they cut the thread, and they sew the belly, and the medicine. then treat the wound as other wounds until it is healed.
and if you do not have medicine, put on it as soon as it is recognized, cotton wool and then move it twice a day until it heals.
Because you do not need any other medicine in addition to these dispositions for simple wounds;
and if you doubt that the wound will cause commonality among the principal members, it is fitting to put a lighter linen in oil of tarre hot, or in rose oil, and place it on the abscesses, and below the swellings;
And if he feels pain or putrefaction in the bowels, and this happens many times, since it is caused by wine vinegar, just like that putrefaction comes to his intestine.
and he cuts within, and learns that when it is the large intestines, it is lighter to heal than the small ones.
The intestine which is called "jeun" cannot heal when it is rotten, and this is because of the plant matter that is in it, and because of the subtlety of the entire body, and its proximity to its natural state.
And if the wound is eaten away from the place, he places it behind, just as with the intestine, while it is fresh.
and if it is old and has turned towards blackness or brown, then it is better to remove the one that is black, because there blood and veins will not come from it, for there are veins.
then cut that which is between the ligament, and hang both the two heads down from below the wound until the extraction comes out with the vomiting of the bowels.
of the burn from a blow
When the intestines are ruptured, and the wound is small, it can be restored in some men, because I saw that one man was wounded or pierced by a spear in his abdomen.
and it was the wound on his right side of the stomach, and became infected and developed a fistula, and from this occurred the evacuation and vomiting.
I treated it according to what I knew, and did not stop subtlety until he was healed, and the pus disappeared.
And when I saw it heal, I doubted that the patient had an evil in his stomach. but he did not have any illness, but instead improved in his condition and ate and drank.
and they say to certain experimenters that when he has a small wound in the intestine, he must be bound in this way: Take the bowstring around large testicles, then assemble the lips of the wound, and when the bowstring has passed over the mouth, put it on both lips, so that it constricts his mouth.
and then strike the head, and it will stay in place so that he cannot dislodge it, then take another bowstring after, in this same way as before, until the wound is completely closed. and sew the wound.
Those who have a knot in the intestine, and no trouble to the patient, and can tie the intestine with a thin thread that is cut from the intestine of an animal, in this manner:
Take the head of this string from the intestine as much shaved down as possible, and then tie to the head of this thread thin string, then insert the thread into the needle, and cut the intestine, and pull it back in the wound.
And this manner of sewing on foreign flesh is only used according to the way of faith and hope.
And if the wound is great and wide, especially when it is in one of the narrow intestine channels, there is no remedy except subtlety.
of a fistula or if it is Any wound or abscess that becomes inflamed with age is called a "fistula", and especially when it is swollen and has a discharge.
And a fistula is according to the vertebrae nodulation free of hardness and whiteness, or no pain is felt, and it is also like the beak of a bird.
And sometimes a clear bowstring, and other times a thick one; sometimes little, and at other times enough;
and I have spoken of this in the division of wounds, that any wound which is not healed and does not have a cure, is only due to one of the seven causes: that is to say, by the smallness of the wound or body. or due to its malevolence; or because it has a hard and stubborn quality inside, and on the lips, which does not allow healing to take place; or if there is too much bowstring. The limbs are poor, and the material is of bad quality; For the medicine is not good in the treatment. because it is a sign of plague. because the property in this region is late for digestion and late for health, and fleeing by nature; where there are veins or bones;
and I have shown all these causes and signs and cures for medicine in the division.
It is necessary that I inform you of the treatment for fistula which is done by operation of hands.
which has a fistula in every member of the body; because there are fistulas that come from the great veins, and arteries, and nerves, or to the sac, or to the intestine, or to the bladder, or to any of the ribs, or to the spine of the back, or to any joint of the hands or feet; and if to those who come to take possession of the principal member, and as if they were.
And all the ulcers in this manner are due to bad health, and there is only labor and ignorance.
and if there is no ulcer that does not arise in the place I have told you to look, and you have confidence in the cure, and you see it manifesting, then take a thread of arrow or iron, whether the ulcer is straight or curved;
and if the ulcer is twisted, then search for a subtle thread to push it back, because the threads bend in following its twisting.
and if the ulcer has broken skin and you cannot well search for it with threads, then close one of the breaks, because moisture is more easily closed on another break, and cleansed;
Then let the patient feel the pain in their power, so you know if there is bone or nerve, and it's stuck fast, and ask the patient well about the pain they feel when you press on your hand, and what place it is;
and when you know truly where it is, and if it's near a joint, or a nerve, or an artery, or a vein, or any of the places I have told you about, if you cut according to what I have told you, and remove the foul flesh and corrupted bones that are inside;
and then the cure until it is well, and if the fistula is deeply set in right direction, so that it must be cut deep to remove, as long as you can, then put wet tourniquets in medicine ague, and pour them into the fistula, until the medicine corrodes the remaining superfluous matter at the bottom;
and then I put ointments on clean wounds, so they become healthy;
and if it is not healing with these, then cautery as we have said, and if the bone is corrupted by an ulcer, kill it.
But if a vein or nerve does not grieve or affect the principal members, as we have said;
and if the bone is exposed, and there is corruption and blackening, then remove the corrupted part as much as possible, and cure with ointments on clean wounds until it becomes healthy;
and if it is not healing, and the wound festers as before, know that you are not going to cure it unless you start anew from the beginning.
If you uncover and desire it as much as you are at the bottom, and remove all the corruption, then restore him.
and if he is in such a state, that's good. If this is not the case, know that the corruption has gone too far, you cannot expect anything from it; if there is no other solution than to resort to the art of nature;
and if there is a small, corrupted bone, and you can treat it with tongs, if the strain is on a convenient instrument for this, and if there are many bones, take all of them, don't leave any one.
and if the moisture makes it worse, and there is no error or fear, cut and dry, and deliver the bones.
If you do not remove them within an hour, put the wound under a cloth and apply ointment to prevent rot, and let it sit there until the pus sets in between the bones, and then they will have less difficulty with the bones.
and if it's a large bone, such as the thigh or knee, remove only the rotting flesh until the blackening is complete on the bone, then restore the wound.
and if there is a great part of the corruption, and it comes to form a mole on the bone. if it is suitable and covering all the corrupted area, then let the patient be covered until he has become sound.
and I will tell you of a fistula that occurred in the patient's leg, so that you may take an example and assist me with your work.
It was a young man within XXX years, who had pain in his leg due to a cause that came from within the body, until the materials arrived at the leg, and he fled from a large abscess, and had no other reason for not opening it;
but the mirror by their folly opened so much that the abscesses opened, and they flowed out a lot of material, and it became a fistula, and many of them got infected with pus and moisture of the body;
and many mired his cure within II years, and there was no remedy in the art of hands, until I was summoned, and I came to see his leg and the medicines that were used to treat him, and what was flowing from the infected wounds had great harm to the body; And so he became red the body of the youth, and had the color citrine.
I applied a tent in one of the abscesses, and then I searched for all the abscesses, and found that some were meeting at other parts of the leg.
I failed then, and cut into one of the wounds so that I discovered a part of the bone, and found it corrupted and rotten, and there was corruption inside the bone.
I saw that which appeared to be the corrupted bone, and thought there could be no other corruption except what I had taken.
and began to restore the wound with medicinal salves for a long time and could not heal.
and then resumed, and discovered the bone in its original state, and found the corruption continuing inside the bone, and I saw it, and then I removed it, and thought of healing it. But I could not cut through to an inch of bone, and the treatment was very painful, then I restored him with medicine. and he became healthy and whole quickly, and it did not require further work except for the weakness of the patient, who could no longer endure, and because I feared his death. For the evacuation of blood often takes place, but it brings no harm and the person recovers entirely, and in their place an iron-hard cartilage forms, and they are of good disposition and have no harm or ill effect whatever, neither at rest nor when coming.
And if the bone is broken in any part of the body, and he wishes to be treated in this way: take the ligature, and strain the tendon at the head of the bone which is open, and command that it be stretched upwards; and take another ligature of a thicker rope than the first one, and tie it above the skin which covers the exposed bone, and pull the skin tight until you treat the infected flesh downwards, and uncover the clean flesh as far as you see, lest the wound infects the skin.
And place a stick or a table under the bone to cover up the corrupted flesh;
and it is necessary to sew as soon as you can see and feel the corruption, and sew again afterwards.
And if the bone is corrupted and will not open, and the corruption is in the middle or in a part, then uncover the flesh completely.
Then put a stick under it, and then sew the one part to the other the corruption, sewing above the lower part of the corruption, as we have said;
and if the corruption is in a joint, then cut out the corrupted joint and sew the bone where it contains on the other side;
and if corruption is in the continuation of both joints, so there's no other sign but a boil.
and if corruption is at the nail of the hand, or at the nail of the foot, so that thing is very strong, but you must always inquire how that corruption came to be. and purify it in all the ways you can, but make sure that neither venom nor nerves cause harm.
and know that the incisors and hair are many, depending on the setting of the bones and the appearance of them, their thickness and subtlety, and their size and fragility, and their hardness. and so it is necessary to prepare each type of bone according to their likeness, its instrument.
And it will show you the instrument that you will need, according to the knowledge of this art, and the testimony of the ways of diseases; if it is necessary that you have the instrument according to what it should be.
The joints will dislocate either because of being inside, or because of not being there;
and when you have medicine to cure the corruption by the treatment of medicines, and it does not help, then it is necessary to cover that member up to its joint or where the corrosion comes from, so that the patient escapes death or by malice, which is greater, from the defect of the limb;
and if the signs are that the limbs become black, as if they have been burned by fire, and after that blackness, it spreads to another member, and takes over all the body;
If you touch the fire cautery, and if it is by striking of certain venomous beasts, such as scorpions from the sea and lizards and similar things, so that the corruption is in the head to two, then strike again, and do not give him space until it comes before his hand.
And if it comes to the hand, if you strike on the joint, so that the corruption does not come before the arm;
and if it comes to the arm, if you strike on the elbow;
and if it passes the elbow, it is death, and there are no other remedies than those that depend on its power;
and do so in the same way whenever the corruption comes to a bone; If it comes to the first joint, then apply it after the other joint.
and if it comes to a bone, then cut through all the bone. and if it goes up in the leg, then cut at the joint of the knee.
and if it comes above the knee, then there is no other treatment but to kill the patient.
and the way of cutting or dressing the limb if it is such that you bind above and below, and tie one stretcher to the lower end and another to the upper end, then serve the cloth that is between the two stretchers at a distance of one span wide, until the bone is visible.
the needle or thread, and tie each of these parts with linen, so that the needle does not touch the healthy part, and comes to the patient another wound and abscess.
and if bleeding occurs while you are working, then immediately cauterize the wound with haste, or apply certain powders to restrain it;
then return to your medicine until it is completed, then bind the injured limb with a strong cord, and care for it until it is healed.
and I will tell you how it happened to me in that house of stone:
there was a black spot that seemed to be burning with fire, and this burn came first on his two toes, until it consumed the entire foot;
And when the bones see the corruption, so he covers the foot, and is made well.
And long time after the corruption returned, two fingers of the hand were affected, and he came to me, and I put above those affected areas counteractive things after cleansing the body, and could not stop the corrosion.
and he said that I should cut off the hand, and I did not want to, because I had hope of repelling the matter. and also I doubted whether if I cut off his hand, he would not die, because the virtues of the body are weak;
and he despaired completely, and returned to his own land, and he covered his hand with earth, and was made well.
And I have heard this tale of fire cautery only because of another treatment, if it is needed.
But sometimes an abscess comes up on the skull, and it remains so for a long time that it causes great swelling of the forehead. And then it bursts and perforates, and the bone is shot out, just like our vessels. And the skin that covers it is just as subtle as a dried thread, and does not run against the bone or the nerve; and such disease is called 'healthy', and is not called a fistula.
But if it is so long that it reaches the bone all the way through, then it is called a fistula.
And the treatment is such that you strike that skin all over, and meanwhile as it is subtle, just like we have wrapped. and does not heal because of its corruption.
And if you have assumed that the skin heals, and the corruption is not in its entirety, and the skin is thick from fat, then apply a poultice like this:
examine the size of the breasts and the bowels that are in them from a foul odor, then apply a poultice made with Egyptian medicine as follows: take equal amounts of aloes and oil, and put them to be cooked in one vessel over the fire, until the medicine is red and becomes as thick as honey.
And then take what is needed according to your necessity, and make it in water and in honey, and bind up the breast, and strap the wound. and let the medicine remain on for two hours, then pull it out by pressing.
do this many times, until the breast is well defined, and draw out the pus.
and at no time do bind with hot water of ashes, when this medicine is not available; and take ash from the fust of grapevine, and pour on warm water over it, then let it run, and bind up, until you know that the breast is well healed.
and if the patient cannot bear it, or does not have any relief from Egyptian medicine or hot water of ashes, bind up with water and honey when they start to break out in small boils. You clean it with honey and wine made sweet, so that the honey has property to purify and cleanse, and the wine is boiled until it becomes healthy.
And when you have done this and believe that the breasts are well purified, if the cleanser made from it (the honey) produces pus inside it, and you prick at it with forceps, and make a puncture with oil rose and in wine;
Or you clean it with some medicines and ointments, of which I have previously mentioned the properties or treatment of the ointments;
And if the rupture of the breast is small, and the canker from the cleanser cannot enter, then enlarge with a needle by one puncture, and apply a tent of Egyptian ointment or basilicon ointment, until it is enlarged;
And if the wound is too large, so that the cut and its closure can only be done at a joint where it can enter, and if there is a fracture with the bow (above) exposed, then the patient must lie on one side as much as possible.
And if you cannot cover the shoulder area underneath so as to see it properly, do shape it in such a way that the bone is brought down to its lowest point, for when the bone is deep, do not let it be left untouched and if you cannot cover the shoulder area underneath so as to see it properly, shape it in such a manner: so that the bone moves slightly downward, and do not leave anything of the bone.
so that the bone moves slightly downward, and do not leave anything of the bone. And take conserving medicines to put on the healthy one, and stand over the linen drapery that covers the whole body. then bind the wound with a bandage that is not too tight or too loose, but rather according to its size; and place it on the healthy one to alleviate the pain, and do not put on the thick bandage of fire until after many days once.
and the one who has on the wound in the breast will often take out the bowels, and knows whether it is venom or blood or if it is undigested or un digested.
and take precautions if the patient feels pain or numbness, and if there is an abscess or not, and when you see how your medicine has spread in that manner, then observe whether the wound heals quickly, and approach the healing.
and then put it away at morning or the third day, and when you put in a new bandage, change another and renew the tie.
And if subtle veins are cut after a long time, do not despair of your health, for good health is approaching.
For it is known that there are men who have been late in applying heat to their wounds, and those who do the opposite.
and if a bowled-up indigestion swells up near the breast after many days, knows that the breasts will not heal.
and if the breasts are slow to absorb and are far from healing, add dry medicines mixed with moist ones in equal virtue, since the bandage is tight, for there is a great part of vitriol, and this is the rear medicine.
tie the bandage tightly and make it with rose oil mixed with equal virtue of olive oil and vinegar.
After the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
And this same treatment makes the flesh grow thicker, when no injuries are present, or you take a mirror and oil and incense, and grind it, and make powder on the honey while it is over the fire.
And then in the glue I wrap, and stretch it over the breast, and sometimes an ointment of gold is administered, and roots of the celestial lily, which is as fine as flour. And using simple or compound remedies: Grind them up and make a powder, and put it on the honey that I told you about, and use.
and if the treatment is prolonged and does not heal with this treatment, then you know that corruption has entered deeply into the bone, or it presses on the joints, or makes the limbs hard. if the treatment of the fistula is such as we have said before.
Panarice is an abscess that forms under the fingernail, or under the toe, or sometimes in other parts.
and when it is old and not tended to, so that it comes to an abscess of the flesh, and swells and becomes infected, they cut away and clean the wound as long as they can reach the root of the nail, and sometimes they even cut all the way through.
and the corruption comes just to the bone, so that it brings great pain and a foul smell, and the flesh of both feet is swollen, and its color is flushed.
When you treat it in the manner we have said in division, and the treatment does not benefit him, so it is necessary that you apply to him a piece of iron to all the remaining surplus of the foot, then cauterize the wound afterwards. The cautery is much great aid if the bones are healthy, and the joint is healthy;
and if the joint presses against the cartilage, and begins to pierce it, and swell, so as to apply a cloth under the joint that covers the cartilage, and bandage high up, then carefully strike that subtle and gentle blow, and put on the remaining of the cartilage medicines sharp and corrosive to remove all. then treat with ointments until they are healed.
and if the corrosive is in the bone, then strike it, and pull out, because as long as the bone is corrupted, it cannot heal.
and if you see the doe ( likely a corruption or inflammation of the flesh) corrupted, then strike it in its place as previously said, and treat until it is healed.
And if it is frozen, and you drink, and it feels great pain, then it would be best to cure him first.
then cut the wound with a straight edge at an angle in cutting across it upwards, and be sure that the cut does not come too close to the flesh under the wound, for the patient will feel too great pain.
and if it has happened, then put something on top that soothes.
The two joined bones in the hands of some men are charred and sometimes there is bone, and occasionally there is an ingrown nail, and sometimes the birth of a new joint does not occur at the root of the joint, or it occurs in no one.
Those who are born in any way other than by the two, do not move afterwards, and those who are born at the joint of the two, perhaps will move.
the cut on one who is emaciated is lighter, in this manner: cut the root of a large splint.
That person who is born with a defect in the root of the joint will suffer from illness. if they are tied under it.
In him who is born or must be cut at the bottom, if it suits to first copy around the circumference of the bone just on the bone, then cut the bone to a suitable stringed instrument for this purpose, then treat so that he is healed.
The symptoms that come with a severe injury or condition often arise from birth, or due to sudden wounds, or by fire, or similar causes.
If you cover the wound so that it heals, they must repair it according to its natural forms; then put between two tents or cloths moistened in oil of roses so that it will not heal. or put between two thin slices of onion so that it will be closed, if it is fitting.
If the symptoms come to any of its parts with the palm, then treat the wound as it suits.
Where such large veins are swollen and full of melancholy fluxes, that they come to many other limbs.
and it happens more often in the legs of those who go to feet and who work and carry, rather than others.
It is therefore necessary that you give them no enemas of bile, and then cleanse the spleen with basil.
The iron cure is done in two manners: one is that you cut them and treat the black vein; and the other manner is that you tie a vein, and extract all the blood.
The cutting is done according to this manner: first the leg of the person who is ill with hot water should be cut very hard, until the fat tissue is removed carefully, then extract the leg from the wound upwards to just below the knee.
then cut the vein in three places, with a large cut, then lift and extract the black vein at your finger, from head to toe, until as much blood comes out as the virtues of the patient can bear.
and then tie, and he commands to take meat in sauce with black iron.
and resume the evacuation and bleeding when the veins are empty, and it harms the patient.
the elevating of his chest is according to this manner: raise the leg of the patient if there is much hair on it, then put it in water, and he makes the leg soak in hot water until it becomes red and inflamed with veins.
and if you do not have vinegar, heat it on the fire, and then make an incision directly into the vein at the long point of the elbow or in the area below the knee;
Then cover the wound with linen, and burn the vein of each part until it appears when one feels it;
and as you see it red and black, and when it enters the linen so that it seems like a white thread.
then pour out the blood from below, until it rises to the linen, and then take it up lightly, and cut into another level as before three times.
then burn the skin above the vein until it appears, then lift up the blood, as you have done, and cut into another linen, as you did first.
then cut another size, or as many as you need, then lift it up, and cut again at the foot, then take it and lift it to the second size.
Then take out the bone by piece by piece until it is completely torn apart; then cut.
And if you cannot treat and lift it, then prick the bone with a sharp needle twice on each side of the fracture, and apply the plaster from both sides, until it hardens. And be sure it does not harden, for if it hardens, the bone cannot be treated or lifted and comes to cause harm to the patient.
And when you have completely treated the wound, apply a cloth soaked in wine and olive oil to the patient's leg. And care for him until he is healed.
And if the bone is crooked and twisted and has become dislocated together, and it is not straight as we said, then it must be broken with great force, but do not cover it. and as we have said before.
The form of the iron wedge used to cut open a vein if it is curved and does not pierce, will damage the vein.
and is of a large curve, because if it were subtle, it would cut the vein, but when it is big as we have said, and this is the form:
This vein is set in the legs, or in hot parts where there are no herbs or trees, and on dry land where there is no moisture.
and by chance it is found in other parts than the legs, and this happens because of putrefaction that comes from under the skin, just as it goes inside the body serpent-like and downward, set between skin and flesh.
And if the signs of the beginning of this vein cutting are such that it comes to the leg a great inflammation, then change the joints, and start cutting the vein vigorously, like one pulls out a root from a plant.
When the joint opens, it is advisable that you wrap around an inch and half of the knee with bandages from one side and a half to two inches on the other side, and the ligament, and leave the bandage on the leg, and every time it is not near the joint, wrap it again around the plonc, and the new.
and if it is too long, cut off a part of it, and wrap the rest around, but do not cover its root, until it comes out entirely. because if you cut it, it may enter into the cartilage, and cause an abscess and putrefaction there, and a very bad illness.
because of which thing it is advisable to treat it little by little until the head, and leave nothing of it in the body.
and sometimes this vein when treated with the palm of one's hand, or with X, and a man came to me, to whom it arose from X palms long, and when you copy it, so your blood flows out or gets pierced, and the puncture just reaches its source, so that everything is lost;
and let the material inside be evacuated, and let the medicine penetrate into its depths every day, then the cure is done as with abscesses.
And sometimes to this vein it comes down in rain, and itself when it opens up at the joint of the foot, or of the toe, and it comes out much blood, and from it there flows.
Therefore, cure as we have said beforehand.
of worms that are born between the skin and the flesh This disease is called "disease of the cow" in our land, because it often occurs after drinking, and it has a small worm that nests between the hide and the flesh, and goes through the entire body, mounting and descending, and feels bad at the head as one member suffers until the hide opens or it escapes, and then fomits.
and it is corrupted by the pus of some humors, just like they come from serpents and worms and other parasites or intestines.
and there is doubt about its evilness, because when it goes through the body, and it climbs to the head, and it comes to the joints, by chance enters and destroys them. and this happens many times.
When you see a cure being done and treated, so it cannot be done when it's cold.
Then it is necessary to tie the limb above and below a strong thread tightly, then cut up and treat it, and if the vein is bound completely in its length, and you do not find it when applying the fire cautery on top, so that it dies.
And the greater harm he causes is that he will run oil, as we have said.
And if you see him coming or near the oil, then bind under it with a cord, and cut up and treat.
It is necessary to use the patient in a kind of purgative medicine for broken solutes of bodies, and he should be given food spoiled and putrid.
of the pain which comes from overexertion This disease is called "vakirir" in our land, and it is a pain that comes to some members, and causes them to move from member to member;
and I have seen this which I told you. I was summoned to an ill woman, and she showed me on her arm, and saw a small swelling in the vein of her arm;
and then after a short while, I saw it rise again just like a worm on the shoulder, faster than anything, like living silver when it cuts through.
the pain left the arm, and set up in the shoulder, and then it came again after a short while, running through all the body until it reached the other arm;
She now tells me she has torn her insides inside the body, just as I saw.
I was much surprised that she moved thus from member to member, because I had never seen this disease in such a manner. I have tried to get it to move again for many people who had pain in their limbs before, but I did not do so with her, just as I saw in the woman.
and I thought it was because of that which the woman had a cold body, and the women uncovered wounds, and for that she appeared to be in great distress.
and do not appear to be so for those who are healthy, and have moist bodies and wounds that heal.
And when you see someone curing this sickness, and the patient feels that pain, if it appears as we said, if the humors are above and below in abundance, and then strike at it until the great constraint leaves. and cautery the joint;
and if you cannot see it with your eyes, then the cure of those who treat the swellings, such as fetid pills and serpent pills, and similar things.
The arrows are different, according to their appearance and according to the nature of each person's body or where they pierce.
The various kinds of them are that there are those with great points, and small ones, and spikes, and nails; and those with two angles, and those with tongues, and those that have parts;
and those who are found in any member, expelled according to two manners: or in the principal member, which is like a brain, liver, spleen, stomach, intestines, bladder, and similar members. When she falls then in any limb of these members, and the signs of death, which I will tell you after, appear to you: if it is fitting for you to remove this arrow, because death comes afterwards in many situations; and when this bad sign does not appear to you, and the arrow is not properly extracted, take out the arrow and treat the wound.
And when the sign of the brain occurs, when the arrow shoots and pierces the bone, and blood comes forth from the skull, which causes seizures, and confusion, and swelling, and redness in the eye, and inflammation and redness of the tongue, and spasms and disturbance of understanding, and vomiting blood. and perhaps he has no fever of the nose, or ears; and sometimes it is in the throat and voice; and falls from the white, moist wound like flies, and leaps out in the same way as a stream of urine.
and if this sign appears to you, then take care of the wound, and remove the bandage if it's not on.
the sign of the bandage when it's bleeding or congealing is that it's near the left nipple, and feels like it's been pierced in something hard, not empty. and perhaps the bandage dries up like the flies, and in darkened blood, it comes with cold sweat and frost, and fainting. When the head of the shoulder feels a sense of doubt because the death comes.
The sign of the arrow that does not bleed is only without any scum falling out of the wound, and its throat is swollen, and the patient's face turns red, and they gasp high and are chilled by the frost.
And if an arrow sticks in the covering of the thigh, so that it is lodged between the small ribs; and causes great pain and great difficulty breathing. And all the limbs of the shoulder move.
And if the arrow hits the stomach, by chance so that it falls from the wound any indigestible meat.
And if the arrow hits the stomach, and it falls into nothing but air through the intestine, without any hope for the treatment or extraction of the arrow.
And if an arrow sticks in the bladder, and urine comes out suddenly and flows away, and the patient feels great pain: Knowing that the wound is mortal.
The other limbs, if they are cut and bruised and swollen and the shoulder and elbow and groins and axillary region and spine of the back and flanks and groin and thighs and limb, as the condition is: they are safe according to many opinions. When the arrow is in the nerve or artery and it does not cause harm, as I will tell you, for that reason: that you may do the same.
It happens in the house with an arrow stuck in or near the root of the neck. I tried it, and the treatment of another patient from behind the ear took place, and was safe without any harm.
And they tried to pull out an arrow that had been shot into the fat under the ear behind a piece of paper, and the arrow was pulled back, but no more than to the tip towards his fist, and the arrow was great like a Turkish bow to all the iron for easy pulling over ears;
the treatment was successful, and no further bad accidents happened.
And they pulled out an arrow from the neck of a Christian, and it was an Arabic bow to the ears:
I cleaned the beards and pulled gently until I had done it, and the Christian was made safe.
And take an arrow to his house, where it had fallen on his stomach, and thought he was dying;
and then after having passed thirty days, he did not improve in his condition. I cut up the arrow, and set it in place, and made a mark on it, and there was no bad outcome.
And if I saw a patient who had an arrow stuck in his backside, and the wound was closed.
and the arrow remained inside him, and his natural disposition did not change, nor was he in pain for any of his natural works.
And I saw another man who had an arrow stuck in his face, and the wounds were closed. and he endured thus suffering great pain;
and many other similar afflictions.
And there was an arrow lodged in the king's palace at home, which had been shot into his left side, and was starting to decline towards the right side; and the arrow was entirely blocked.
I went to see the physician after it happened three days. If I found the wound extremely narrow.
I tried to extract it with great subtlety, but I didn't feel anything. and he felt a puncture and pain below his right ear.
I thought it might be the tip of the arrow I placed above his liver and stomach, because they were swollen; And the leeches of the arrow came out.
And the leeches of the arrow came out. I put the plaster on my hands every day, and solved the wound directly, and kept the patient for such a long time that they felt the arrow leech come out inside their nose.
and he told me this. I put some medicine that is both sharp and corrosive on the wound every day, until it was fully opened, and I tried it, and you felt the head of the arrow dry out inside.
then I pressed it into the opening of the wound with that sharp medicine, until the leeches of the arrow appeared visibly.
and after three months, I saw that the wound had opened up and I closed it with hot tongs on both sides, but couldn't get it out;
And so do not cease to subtilize and devise ways of instruments, until the day I took good tongs well-made, according to what its shape will come at the end of this chapter, until I tried it, and restored the wound.
And they judge that the membrane from the nose cannot be restored: I restored it therefore, and the wounds were closed, and the sick were entirely healed.
I have told you the quality of extracting arrows, so that you put your care on what I do not say, because the books cannot grasp everything;
but wise masters know little but a small amount, and on what is present and faltering, find new work, and nine instruments, at the handling of strange things that happen in this art.
I say that arrows do not penetrate or fall out of members where they are fixed, except for two kinds: or from the side where they enter, or from another place.
and the one that falls from where it enters, is an arrow entering into the internal organs, and will never happen again.
And if it does not fall now, let it remain as long as the wound is open and the pus is discharged.
and also if it is stuck in the bone and cannot come out, let it remain for some days, and move it every day.
and then it falls, and if it does not fall, if it pierces into something more substantial, until the internal organs are enlarged, and then take it out.
And if the arrow is returned to the body of the animal if it cannot be seen again, and whoever has all the tentacles. If you feel it, then let it go with an instrumentable thing.
But if you cannot open the wound due to its tightness and because of the deep extraction of the arrow, and there is no bone or nerve in it, then let the wound be closed.
If you can remove the arrow if it has ears in it because they hold, and if there is a chariot stuck on two parts of the bone that you can reach, then break or bend the ears of the arrow so that you can pull it out.
And be subtle so that you do not break the arrow, but rather pull it out more forcefully.
And if you cannot do it once, so that the pain is gone from both sides until the limb is put back in place, then try again, for the extraction (of the bone) is painful. And if the symptoms of bloodletting disagree with you, then follow what we have said about the treatment in this chapter.
and take care of the incision on the nerve and vein, and tie a bandage in such a way that you can easily treat the arrow wound quickly, soon or firmly.
and put the patient back in the shape they were when the arrow hit them, because that is the greatest help to be found there, and if you cannot do so, then put him according to what the sign shows you.
the arrow that comes from another side, or if it is closed up in anything, or the skin is swollen on its own, whether we see it or feel it, apart.
therefore draw the arrow up high, so that the tongs can take hold, and then extract it. if now they are swollen.
And if it is retained in the bone, so turn your hand around completely, until it enters into the bone, and then expand the bone, and pull.
If it cannot come out, then let her go again, and then continue extracting until she comes.
and if the arrowhead was stuck in the flesh, drink the whole of the pus.
and if the arrowhead falls out, and you see the pus, then administer poultice, so that the tip of the arrow between the hair of the instrument.
and then drink more, and if the arrow is stuck in the head, so that you pour the instrument into the wound, to alleviate the extraction.
And if the arrow has entered into it, so it is fitting that you copy all of its length within or where the venom is, if you can, then treat the wound as it needs.
and if the arrow sticks in the belly or more, or in the abdomen, or near the bladder, or on the side, and it is close to the surface, then you can cover it up, if you like.
and protect the vein and the nerve, and then pull it out, and then cauterize the wound, for that is proper. And the treatment until it is healed.
The form of the tongs used to remove arrows are like the beak of a bird, and thus we have this shape:
And there are many ways: big, small, and middle-sized, according to the size of the arrow.
The form with the handle attached to the hair is like the feathers of a bird, to push into the tip of the arrow, as it is in this shape:
Veins from which one is saved are thirty-one, because it has sixteen veins, that is to say: Two branches behind the ears, which are called "herbets". and two arteries that are in the left temple appearing. and two veins that are in the right armpit of the right eye, which are called "aspieres". and the vein which is inflamed at the forehead; and the vein that is in the head, swollen. and the two tendons that are near the neck; and the two veins that are above the lips of the mouth, and these are called "augerich" (or possibly "augeriche"). and the two veins below the tongue.
The veins that are commonly found in each arm.
one is the cephalic vein, which is located on the left side of the chest, and they call it "vein of the head" (or possibly "vein at the forehead"). and the joint is called "fast" and it is composed of the cephalic and basilic veins, and they call it "venne du cuer" among the common people; and the basilic vein is found on the right side of the clavicle, and they call it "venne du ventre" among the common people, and it is located near the fissure, and that is the vein from which one heals, which opens up obviously in the pouch.
And the radial vein is the vein that is between the auricular and ulnar bone, and it has two openings;
and in the leg and on the foot are three veins: one is below the wing of the bicipital vein on the left side of the clavicle, and the second one located at the ankle on the right side of the clavicle; And the vein which is called "nasse", located at the other side of the joint.
and in the other leg there are three veins below those ones.
The vein that is behind the ears, which is used to treat catarrhs and migraine.
and the quality of the vein, just as I told you, is that you lift up the head of the patient and rub the vein with a rough cloth. then the patient's neck is tightened with a rope until the two veins appear behind the ears in two places depending on the head. only if then you see the pulp under your thumb, and where you feel the pulse.
Take the lancet, and the tourniquet below the vein just until the bone, then raise your hand all along the vein upwards, strike and cut the vein well; you must do it twice to cross, and make the wound bleed.
Then tie off and secure, until she is healed;
and I have also said incising and cautery in the first book.
Those suffering from double arteries in both temples, if they have ancient inflammation, and swelling, and eye problems accustomed, and to the eyes due to acute pain.
and the qualities of the patient if are so as I say: And when the patient dislocates his neck, so much that the two veins are tightly closed. and feels pain below the elbow and then becomes numb;
then lifts the vein up to the elbow above the wrist index finger, and cuts the lancet under, and lifts the vein up high, and pricks it, just as you have done in other veins, and make a cut according to your necessity;
then lifts the patient up, and puts his elbow on the vein for an hour, then puts cotton on it; and then forms a bandage, and leaves it until she is healed;
and we have discussed their cautery and extraction, as well as the beginning of this book.
The illness of the vein in the forehead is worth as much as the illness of the head, and has ancient diseases such as emigration, and redness;
and the quality is that patients with straining turn their necks in twisting, until the vein appears; then take the instrument called "trencher", whose shape is:
And place the point on the vein, and pierce upwards with your hand, or with something else, and let the wound bleed according to the quantity you see; Then deliver the patient to their neck, and tie the vein until it is healed and there is no sign of a flame.
It's not suitable to describe a specific outcome for this prompt since it does not provide any context or results. And the healthy are prone to it, because the bone is near, and by chance breaks the flesh when it is subtle.
Those who are sick in both veins that are in two arms will be aided with the eyes, and the tongue, and the redness, and the swelling by the ointment, and with diseases of the face;
and those whose sickness is that the patients twist their neck in a strange way, without any bond, as before.
then the healthy, and if their sickness is through the passage, some short, some long, some small, some large, because there is no flesh. And if the skin is subtle, by chance may break;
then sew the wound, so much as is necessary, and then tie it tightly up.
The sickness of the vein in the nails is so serious, and full of fever, and sharp pains, such as inflammation and redness that comes to the face, and most especially when it is old;
and if the wound becomes so serious that the patient clamps his neck, then pulls on his nails to your left hand, and takes out long, subtle flake, and strikes it into the space between the two nostrils, for the vein does not open well in that place, and the pain will now begin.
And don't go too deeply into the wound, and do a clean cut according to your neediness, then tie it up for a night, because it is quickly restored.
The sickness of the two glands is aided by the constricting of the vein, and at the beginning of swelling, and with much suffering, and with epilepsy, and with corrosions, and with herpes, and itching.
and the qualities of the sickness are that the patients strain their neck away from one and the other, as we have said;
and the masters standing above the patient's head and the patients cutting at one side of the vein, then heal the vein a little longer, then treat the wound temperately, or as much as is necessary;
Then make another incision on the other vein, then cut the ligament, and gently constrict the veins, so that the patient does not strangle. and let him just stay there until morning, so that the wound is healed.
Of the sickness of the feet. The sick of the veins on the lips are aided by coal in the mouth, and by corruption of gums, and tearing of lips, and they do not heal.
And you will test whether it is healing by sitting the patient in front of you, and constricting his neck as I have said; then turn the wrist, and look at both veins, one is in the right hand's wrist and the other is in the left hand's wrist, which you can recognize by their black color, and because there are small black veins around them:
Therefore take both of them, and if you do not recognize them, and are in doubt, then cut the largest one on each side, and do so for all four veins, because it is the same manner.
Of the vein below the tongue The patient suffering from wounds below the tongue benefits after the treatment of the cerebral region, and this is due to the constriction of the throat, and eye troubles, and mouth afflictions.
And if the healer is of such quality that he brings the patient between your hands in front of the sun, and lifts the tongue, and looks under each corner a vein black.
Then heal both the one and the other, and do not pierce too deeply, for under these are the arteries.
The veins of the throat which are commonly healed are healed in two manners:
or piercing with a pointed needle to the full length of the mitten-sized vein, or an olive oil subtle as it is called "anesil". And are large and subtle according to the size and tightness of veins. The famous mercurial form is so renowned, and it is wide as you see:
And has necessity to open the vein cheeks that are smooth with a large amount of blood visible, and which contain a lot of blood and turbidity. and this is like the form of a burning olive tree:
And it is more subtle in application, and it is for healing the small veins subtly, or with subtle blood clots of citron.
The gall of the basilic, which is one of these veins, helps in all diseases that are under the throat, and near the collarbone, and near the chest, and near the stomach;
and it is fitting for a lord that he should heal with his own blood, and that he should war against the artery that is below. And if he cuts the artery and bleeding ensues, then it is fitting that he should staunch it, as I have said; and should not be pinched by the flame, but rather cut like a horse.
And if the ligature does not open immediately, it is advised to remove it and replace it with another. or you want to give some blood, or you will make the vein open with a needle in the arm. if it opens immediately; and cuts the flame with a horse's knife, as we have said.
And if you see the vein opening in front of you, so it is also advisable to remove the arm, touching the joint until you know the pulse; then mark the vein of the wound, and then tie the arm, and cut the vein with a horse's knife; and guard so you do not cut on the artery when you see it swollen, for this is of the artery: choose accordingly.
And if you see it protruding above as the urine of a child, and it is pale and subtle, know that this is without an artery: hurry up then, and put a tourniquet on long, then draw it off when there is no bleeding, for this often happens: if the arm is stuck, and leave it so, and do not move the patient;
and let fear have its way, and do not move him until he is cured.
If he is not scratched at his birth, and it strikes him, and the medicine does not apply to him, then cut the artery when it opens up, because the head of it will retract. and scratches him without being noticed.
Take a splinter from a thorn and insert it, then take one of the halves and tie it to the other well tied yesterday.
if he is not scratched, that's good; if so, if the treatment, as we have said, with powder that scratches blood;
and the hemorrhages do not cause harm to more people with thin blood of the wound and with the power of the arm.
The sick woman in the middle is treated with a strong medicine for her head and body because she is composed of basilic and cephalic, as we have said;
and it is fitting for the lord that he should be wounded in the lower nerve, and if he strikes too hard, and wounds the nerve, and it swells and his health is impaired, and by chance he cannot recover;
And this nerve is often opened many times, and if it does not open in any other person because of its subtlety, it is fitting that you use the aseptic instrument on him; And choose your poor (i.e. weakest) man for this task.
And if he has a vein between the two nerves, then pull it out long.
The sick person of the head is treated with medicine for her head and also helps her eyes;
and it is necessary to heal or staunch the wound with olive oil flame or myrtle flame, because this is the safest of all veins, for it does not damage the nerve or artery. It is necessary to seek the lighter part first, and do not grieve anything if you must start again. and by chance the swelling of the vein may occur in some people, but you do not grieve anything.
The quality of the blood is according to your opinion.
The first thing you must know to heal is that healing is only possible if it is done for the sake of preserving health, and in order to avoid future illnesses.
and whether healing is done on one of the three veins that are in question, namely This is what the text means: And instruct the patient to fast in the beginning of prayer and at autumn and winter after cleansing, when the signs of replenishment appear;
and instruct to fast on the first day or third, after two hours or three days.
The fasting that is recommended has no fixed duration for all diseases, but rather when it becomes necessary to fast on a day or during the night, in every hour and at all times.
And it is not advisable to fast children under the age of XIII years, nor women who are pregnant only up to the seventh month. It is not advisable to treat the elderly who have passed their 60th year.
And when some people fast in any way, if he defecates the intestines of an easy enema, and has a great amount of feces retained, if the veins do not drain off the excess intestinal contents through the pores, causing harm to the principal members.
He who is too rich in flesh, nor in leprosy, so long as it remains unhealed, will not recover.
and if the disease is caused after colic, vomiting, and decrease in stomach wind, and frequent urination with woman, and toil, watchfulness, and purging, then all the virtue, whether through an arm wound or from a bodily source;
and then subtly correct the humors, if he is not greatly overfed, by meats and drinks and medicines, if you have him eat bread.
and then take a bath, as nothing is to be feared, in order to further his cure, and he will recover from the wound in the vein on the third day, just as we have said.
And keep away from work, pain, and luxury, and similar things;
And be calm and cheerful, and let the remedies be applied higher on those who are sick, and rub the arm twice or three times, then release the bandage in a moderate manner, because when it is too tight or not tight enough, it will not correct the limb without.
And then rub the patient's arms with his own hands, until the veins swell and you can feel them.
Then moisten the remedy with a small amount of oil, and put your left thumb on top of that vein below the patient's arm until it swells or fails to swell.
Because there are veins that burst like strings at the patient, and some are so full of windiness, so that when you put the flame on them, they retreat again into the vein, and cannot be opened, and thus it happens to those. If he has opened a vein, if the wound is too narrow, because of this you should advise the surgeons on these things.
And if he has opened a vein for the first time, it is good; but if not, you should continue to reopen it a little lower or above the joint, if the swelling is still present.
And if the swelling is present and the patient hopes for a cure, if he lets it swell for one or two days and does not tie up the arm: perhaps an abscess will form.
do not enter into the bath, then reopen the wound if it pleases.
and if the wound is small, or without subtle treatment and you doubt that it will not cause much blood as you see, then be firm in that same wound itself with all its flame directly.
and the wound is handled quickly, so that the swelling may be reduced; because this happens many times when the wound is small.
If you see the swelling, do not re-open the wound again, and put on a little bit of lard oil, because it lightens the body in sickness, and is mild in this place like the oil that it is.
and thus administer the oil of lard to each wound you treat, so as to dry up the flow of sickness.
and this same thing causes a triangle and bow of pain, when you put it on the limb; if subtlety is lost and splintering when it is too big.
And if one comes across a large abscess, which often happens, when the vein is opened only at those times when it is very small, then hasten to it, and put on a sponge soaked in water and vinegar, with a bit of salt, and restrain for an hour.
and it is fitting to do this after the issue of the vein, and if it remains in the limb for some days without either blackening or greenening, then it will not be harmed. and if you see, put on some aloes or mirror dissolved in calamine juice, monster.
And many times there is an abscess and appearance at the saint's wound:
then take your hand up, and if you find the spot soft to the pressure of the hand, if that appearance is bad. Avoid therefore that you do not put anything of what we have said, because perhaps cutting without the artery.
but the artery must be ligated tight to harden the spot, then treat with another cure until it is healed.
And treat each person according to the quantity of their virtue, and the color of the wound.
For if they are not black, so let them issue blood as long as they are red; and if you see it large, let it be so that it becomes subtle. and if he is too cold, let him cool down.
It is necessary for the one who is weak and has need of extraction of blood to make a larger wound and let the fangs be wider.
And for the weak person, make the opposite, and it is necessary to heal them more quickly and often, and they should be healed by cutting across, not piercing.
And this way of healing is safe from deterioration of blood and compression of nerves, and it is better to heal quickly with a small cut than slowly with a long one.
And for the one whose body needs healing, it is necessary to give moist pain in grape juice. If it is scalded, if drawn from the wound three times or four; and if it is of cold temperament, if you apply a moist bread to the wounded flesh in honey syrup, or in aromatic honey syrup with spices, such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and cloves, and a well-smelling syrup.
And if the palm is affected, after a great amount of blood has been lost, it is fitting that he drink a weak broth made from charcoal and fragrant syrup, and use other things we have said in the division or chapter on syncope for the evacuation of blood.
And if he wants to take out another limb, and heal himself again, it is fitting that when he is weakened by great blood loss, he should recover little by little, according to the continuity of his virtue.
And who wants to take out another limb after the first blood loss, and he has a strong constitution, then he will recover in seven hours after the first bleeding, or in the ninth hour.
And who wants to heal himself on another part, should he be able to heal himself the second day or the third.
For it has much blood inside the body which is scalded, and brings on fever; so if you want to treat a great quantity of blood, and enlarge the puncture so much that it breaks into the brain. then you reward all the signs of recovery and place your hand above the swelling, lest death comes in its place, for this happens many times when the healer is careless.
and it is not necessary when you see a dislocation, to untie the arm, and to make an incision a second time, and if the wound is closed, press firmly on top of. but if it is crooked, then extend the arm quickly, for this would be bad.
but let him wait until he heals a second time; or you will point to the tip of the flame, until the frozen flesh has broken open at the vein's wound, and put on some powder mixed with water, and press gently.
And if the vein is pulled out, let it go and do not hold it tightly, so that the abscess is calmed.
And if the wound needs to be treated again, on the same spot, or in another vein, or in the other arm.
The vein on the arm is healed in place of the wound on the head because it was composed.
And the manner of dressing the wound is that the patient pours hot water on his hand, until the flesh is red.
After a while, bind it gently so that the vein appears well, then heal it now through and not too much or too long;
and let the large wounds be bound, and heal well near the joint of the hand, and if it will not come out, then put the hand in hot water, and let the wound drain in the water, until you have enough.
but if it's in a cold state, do not put the hand back in hot water, for one puts it in winter rather than in heat.
and healing from this vein is more safe than any other vein, without artery or nerve.
The healing of the thumb nail is worth for all diseases of the liver, and this is the way:
Strain the hand, and pour hot water upon it, until the vein is drawn out, if you can see. and if the vein bends and twists, and you cut it all the way through, do not cause any trouble.
and do not cut too far in because the nerves are now numb and dead from the cold, and then put the hand back in hot water, if the pain does not come out of the wound.
And when you have cut the wound as much as necessary, put oil and sinew to close it quickly, and so do each of these things.
The sickness of the left hand is equal to the disease of the mouse, and do it just as I told you over to the right.
The sickness of the spleen is worth more than all other diseases that are in the body, as with illnesses of the stomach, and retention of flowers, and disease of the rains, and of the kidneys and old joints, and similar illnesses.
And tie off the vein if it is that you put some powder in hot water, and rub up the vein until it dies, and tie above the joint of the foot. and if the vein is at the ankle, and comes up from under the foot to great swelling.
The healthy ones when they are weak or more swollen, or at the ankle, what value.
And if you treat it on top of the bone, then ward off the evil that is below, and cut the healthy as well as the diseased.
and apply a blister.
And if it cannot come out, so he puts his foot into the water, and leaves well to empty the vein.
And if the healthy ones require it for the first time, then recapture it on top a little, because the pus is salty;
do not doubt the nerve, as we have said, and do so with the same care for both feet.
The salt of the vein on the calf is at the ankle, and its pus is worth the pain in the hamstring, when it's for draining.
and the qualities of its healing if it is that the sick are in or bathing, and extracting above the ankle four times by twisting, because otherwise the vein will not open.
and when she opens, if you cut her so that it heals in all manner as you can, and across. and it should be copied as much as possible because the limbs are swollen, and she is very sensitive to touch.
and it should be copied as much as possible because the limbs are swollen, and she is very sensitive to touch. And if you cannot find it, so that the wound heals without any signs of blood or pus, on the back of the foot, and towards the little toe, and beware of the roots.
and do as many cuts on the wound until you see, and then tie the ligature, and put cotton and a bandage. she is now healed.
Ventouses are made of horns, or thorns, or glass.
And if evacuation is done according to two manners: or by piercing and attracting blood, or by piercing.
And this evacuation which is done by piercing is according to two manners: or when it is with all fire, or with fire.
and evacuation done by piercing and blood extraction is performed in 13 ways of the body, so that one part may be all bone with the head. and the others are emulsified with the neck; and the other two are in both sides of the neck; and the ventose below the chin; and the wind of the two shoulders; and the wind above the thighs; and the winds above both arms; and the winds of both legs; and the winds of both ankles;
and the woundings do not treat blood, unless for small veins that are scattered throughout the flesh, and because of them one weakens very little, just as one does when cutting into a vein. and it should not be treated with heat, neither fire nor cold, in any disease that comes from overloading, until the entire body is empty.
And if necessity demands because of illness, or by habit, so we bring it forth each hour at the beginning of the month, or at the end, and in every interval;
because there are some who, when they need to bring it forth, have heavy heads;
and some who find repletion and redness in their face, and in their head, and at the neck, and in their eyes;
and some who find a drop of blood in their mouth, and have swollen the tongue, and bleed. and some who dream, and see blood and nausea and wounds and similar things.
When we see these signs, and especially when it is in the middle of the month, we command to ventouse after three hours of the day.
The illness of moisture supports the healthiness of the head ... which comes to the eyes, and it is not suitable for this to happen after the evacuation of all the body;
and this ventilation is in place of the illness of the head, and it is not suitable for those who have a cold constitution to use, or who have flatulence, because this causes them much harm;
and therefore it is not suitable for the elderly to use it, or those who have head colds and other diseases.
And those who recover from this often become blind, and for that reason it is fitting to place the vacuum a little further down by the suspicion of blindness.
Ventilation of the neck is in place of the illness of the head and of the tonsils, and for this reason it is valued at constricting the breastbone, cutting into the channel of the stomach, and applying poultice, and treating with rest.
And it is right to stop for a moment, because if she holds too tightly, so her stomach or back becomes twisted.
The swelling in the chest if it is near the collarbone causes pain in the head, eyelids and ears, and strangulation, and pain in the roots of the teeth, and is in the place of a bellyache.
and it is right that you command the lord to express his hand before applying, so he does not cut an artery, and has no further bleeding.
The swelling under the chin if it causes mouth illness, and gum corruption, and similar illnesses that are in the mouth. and is in place of sore throats.
The windings under the shoulders value to a disease that comes from heat and fullness.
The incisions on the thighs are worth as much as three veins of the arm, because they bring blood from these large veins.
and instruct the master to not cut too deeply, for the flesh is naked from the bone, and it knows underneath the sinews and arteries.
The incisions on the rump are worth like emorrhoids of the fundament, and illnesses underneath, it is necessary that the incision be large, and made with hay, for they have need to treat well; and in case it is subtle, it would break. and will make great wounds.
The incisions on the legs heal quickly, because they draw blood from the whole body, and are worth like old pains from the rain, and of malarial fever, and move the festerings;
And they are located on both shoulders, and both knees, and whatever they weaken the body after long use, causes death in various conditions.
The way to put on a suction is that you first put it empty, and then apply it correctly, and place it hastily, and move it evenly, and do not cease doing so, until you see the vein red and swollen, and touch the redness of the wound;
then put on the suction again, and take care in the position of the body, because there are those who have contracted such diseases, and clerks. so it is fitting to strike once alone, and it is fitting to make large wounds, and a small depth. and cut smoothly.
And if it is not big, so he should be pierced two times: the first time to subtley open the way for the great vein.
and if it is very thick, so he should pierce it three times;
and when we want to catch the vein little by little, he should pierce it only once. And if we want a lot of blood, then we must start again often;
and if it is not thick, then we pierce him through and through, and finish the cut so that the veins are perceived suddenly, and cut at the person with big skin and tough flesh, who has big pores, you should anoint them with oil of aperitif and dissolving. It is made with olive violet oil, or sweet almond oil, or oil of sesame seed.
or oil from rue, or lily, or chamomile, or any other kind.
And if the swelling is big and cold, so take olive oil of marjoram, or balsam, or anise oil.
And if that person has healthy skin and large pores, do not put oil on them, but instead wash it after the water rose, or cold water, or elderberry water, or cucumber water, or porcelain berry water, or other similar.
And those who have much moisture, lift them up with similar remedies, such as mint water and sumac.
and those who have great swelling rise from a old wine, or dew, or decoction of anise and chamomile, or other similar things.
and should not be operated on with a vacuum before or in the bath, but after the bath for an hour or two.
and should not sleep after the operation, and it is necessary that he warms up, when he must be operated on, and when he is swollen.
And warn those who recover are choleric, and if they do not become too angry and inflamed; if you must apply cold things, such as apples of Grenada and endives and lettuce at ease, and similar things; and boiled fish, and char of chestnut, and moist meat.
and boiled fish, and char of chestnut, and moist meat. And those with a cold complexion, should apply syrup of honey and a sweet-smelling wine, which is between old and new, and eat little, and eat boiled fish, and small fowl, and pease.
and on the day it will be purged, he must drink more than eat.
and it is advisable to give some to certain houses triacle or mustard before the purging, or after, for comfort of the main members; And instruct the patient to let his hair grow long but not too long; for it is not fitting that he who is bald should drink.
The venesees that are applied to be painful are those that are placed over the liver, and the mouse, and podagra, and over the stomach and boils, and rashes, and hemorrhoids, for this member does not suffer from being pierced on or at it, and is done only in order to attract blood from one part of the body to another, just as we place them on the mammary glands when they are healing.
in order to loosen the viscosity that is in the member, as we apply venesees to the stomach and boils in order to relax the member.
and to take away the pain, when there is suppuration or a stone, so that by its attractive power the suppuration goes away, or the stone falls out of place.
And so he does it when you put him under the liver and under the spleen because the blood is retained there, and these vessels are emptied to clean only. And sometimes they are managed with fire, and sometimes plain water is poured, as in the case of diseases related to pleurisy, and in such a way that one fills the vessel with hot water or cold water in which there are convallable herbs.
The form of the vacuum administered with fire is thus:
And it should be two fingers wide and half a palm in depth, with the tip bent towards the middle like for piercing an arrow, so that if she hits the artery, the patient will not bleed on putting on the member;
And in the middle there should be a cross-shaped nail or iron, to tie a bandage on, and they should be large and small according to the disease and age of those who take them;
For the boils of children are different from those of adults, and thin ones than fat ones.
And you must then place this boil on the limb:
Take a candle made of wax or linen and put it inside the boil through the handle that is inside the boil, so that the light comes to the bottom of the boil, and does not burn the patient.
and then put it on the limb, and let your two fingers be above the wound that we have said about, so that when you take it off, if there is vapor coming out, and you remove the boil.
and take off the linen in the same way, and reapply it frequently, if you have need.
In the wound that is managed for chest pain, if it is full of fever, do not have a wound or an abscess, and are treated only when it is full of fever, and placed on the limb alone;
and it is the form:
There are no treatments applied only to the gums and skin, such as incisions or stitches, like it is done for broken bones; and in the nostrils of horses, as well as of dogs and mules, and similar animals;
and the quality of the user is such that when you find wounds that are in clean and clear water without risk of infection, then take them;
And let them tie up the hair with a warm water dressing, until they become familiar, and have nothing in their stomachs; and then let them bind a vein and apply pressure, and rub the member until it becomes red, and apply poultices;
and when they are smooth and have healed, if it is possible to apply a tourniquet, then apply it, because this is most effective.
If not, lift the limb from an anchor point, and then to water, very well, and then inspect it;
and if the limb is healed too late after applying poultices, then apply a moist linen strip soaked in cold water, and put it on, until the poultices are dried.
And if they are multiplied, he puts upon them vitriol crushed or vinegar, or similar things, until they are stung.
Or, to heal the cold spots on the skin, you put moistened snowflakes or peeled-off flesh there, and let them dry so that they will stop now;
And if you have more of the same thing needed, then take other poultices.
And if the poultices will not take hold, then rub the skin of the wound with fresh blood or prick an arrow so that the pus comes out, and then put it on, and at once as soon as they feel the wound, they dry.
And when you see that they are draining, then powder some aloes and sawdust, or ashes on a little bit, if it will now take hold.
The Book of Injuries begins. This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine, for restoring fractures and dislocations.
Learn well, dear son, that the fire cautery is a matter so rare and unknown, that no one has ever seen it in any of the old books, nor have they read anything about it.
and for this reason the art is rare in our land, because I have never found any good one.
and I know nothing, except that by the knowledge of the ancient books, where I have studied so much that I have treated the art, and through experience, and by the habit of my life.
and I have here described what is contained in this chapter, and condensed it at the end, and have shown clearly the forms of the instruments that must be used, as I did in these two preceding chapters.
It is therefore necessary that we say in the prologue of this book about the sums of speech and the chapters or where the wise man puts his understanding, and keeps silent for so long that those who have experienced it will learn and acquire this noble art, and teach others.
I say that when breakage or dislocation or torsion or seizure comes to anyone, it is fitting to hasten to heal the sick person from one side and the other, unless any remedy is available, for weakness of body, or illness, or old age; or if his teeth are very bad, or too cold;
and when he consumes cold meats, that is to say cold joints, char of fish and fowl, and does not drink wine, nor eats any fatty foods, and does not stuff himself too much with meat which fills the veins with blood, until you have doubt about an abscess or inflammation in the limb;
if the sick person has used the first treatment.
When the broken bones begin to heal, it is fitting that the patient be nourished with foods that cause great swelling, such as those which have viscosity, just like bread cooked in water, and ris, and testes, and piez, and pance de vaiche, and oefz, and fish, fresh ones, and large wine, and similar things. For swelling caused by this nourishment appears sooner and happens more quickly than the break itself.
And know that the bones of old men and aged people cannot be well healed or soldered according to their nature due to the dryness of the members, nor those who are too soft, as the bones of small children;
but a remedy can be found in crushing the large bones that have become hard and joined the limb together, until they strengthen as they were before; and this should be nourished with great foods, as we have said.
And you know that fractures are diverse in many ways.
But the fracture of the head is different from the fracture of the leg or foot, and I will tell you in this chapter all kinds of fractures. Because there are fractures that occur at the joints, and others caused by cutting, as if with the length of a pinhead to write.
Because there are fractures that occur at the joints, and others caused by cutting, as if with the length of a pinhead to write. And when there is a fracture with an open wound, and a fracture with a small split or crack.
And every kind should have its own instrument and proper equipment in restoration, according to what the memory brings with it;
and it is known that the fracture of the bone occurs because the bone is twisted, and opens well by force, and happens near the pressure of the hand;
And when there is no curvature or bend at the shoulder joint, and the patient does not feel great pain.
But it can still have curvature, or a crack, or a small fracture. If it is not necessary to move your hand, but put on medicines that come after this, and then tighten now subtlety.
And says that the fracture that is in the arm, and are the two parts of the joint, they must now be put back equally, so that the abscess comes out.
and if the abscess bursts, he must let it dry for one day, until the abscess is smoothed out.
then he puts it equal to the muscle that you can easily and surely apply pressure to, and says that the restoration of this is lighter than the restorations of those where there are pieces.
The patient must then bind himself, as it is fitting after this.
And if in the bone there are broken pieces, then take out two parts, as it is either by hand or by foot, or by little fingers, or by two cords, or one cord and by hand;
and put the limb according to its natural figure, so that when the parts of the broken member are missing, repair them by all means as much as possible on each side, and make sure that through your work there is no new injury or pain for the patient;
and put both joints of the bone in the best forms.
And let it feel good in your hand if you think it is not quite right:
If the dressing is applied perfectly, and not too tightly strained or pressed so that they are subjected to hot and painful contractions in their work, as we have wanted many times.
And when the limb is at a standstill, instruct the patient to hold it still, neither when awake nor asleep, neither turning, nor in any other manner. and take care that the limb is securely fixed so that it does not feel any pain. For when it feels no pain, they are not at a standstill, and rather should be placed in such a position that they do not feel any pain.
and take care that the limb is securely fixed so that it does not feel any pain. For when it feels no pain, they are not at a standstill, and rather should be placed in such a position that they do not feel any pain. and be careful that it is placed correctly, lest twisting occurs when it is restored.
and the qualities of the broken limb are as I tell you.
The part of the body that is broken is different in size and form.
For there are small limbs, such as arms and shoulders and similar ones: so it is necessary to wrap a linen cloth of waxed and subtle thread; and those that are large, such as thighs and knees:
so it is necessary to wrap with a wide and hard cord, because the wide cords embrace the entire large limb, and compress it evenly from all parts, so that there is no gap;
then tie around with light bands, three turns or four, according to the limb, and tighten your hand all over the cord, then go to the top of the break and tighten less, so that the break will slowly move away a little.
And soften the joint little by little, so that you pierce a great part of the healthy flesh, then take another ligament, and turn back towards the broken limb;
then go back to the lower part of the break, and tighten it gently, neither too tightly nor too loosely, as we have said in the first rule above;
then put rags of linen or bandages between the ligatures, so that it is all even, then bind everything from above with a strip, and then put your arrows well made on it, if there is no abscess or inflammation.
And if it has inflammation or abscess, then put a soothing substance on the abscess, which will bring out the inflammation, and let it stay like that for some days;
Now strain upon the arteries, and let them be of a heavy chain, or of a fust wood, or of palm splinters, and they should be according to this figure:
but it is fitting that the artery that one places on the break should be slightly larger and wider than the others;
and so long as it is necessary to the limb whether small or large; then strain the arteries in the same way as you did with the first ligature, then tie above with a thread of linen, just like on the first ligature over the break. the tighter you tighten it, the less so.
and it is fitting that the thread should be smooth, not too thick nor too thin, and of fine linen.
For the head of the shoulder, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
And if the patient is wounded by the arrowheads after the bandage is applied to their wounds, then put soaps of linen or wool under them, so that they do not bleed.
When the wound is with a fracture, and the nerves are broken, I will tell you the cure after this.
And know that it is not advisable to strain or pull apart all the broken limbs on the first day. For when the limbs are large, it is not advisable to put in stents unless after five days or seven, or according to your safety following a cautery.
and thus the way of the ancient embalmers for restoring fractures, dislocations, and twists:
and so you take flour that is kept by the walls of the mill, and mix it with much egg, and make this confection, not too clear nor too thick, and use it, because this is the common manner of the embalmers restoring fractures in many ways, especially for women and small children, since it is neither too hot nor too cold.
Another manner of embalmers restoring fractures, dislocations, and twists: Prepare the cautery and antidotes and oil and gum Arabic and mustard, for X. Mirror and aloes, for V. alce (or alchen) of the seventh degree, X. and make powder, and mix with honey and water. if the complexion of the person is hot, then use this plaster, because it has good composition, and restores broken bones quickly, and saves many lives.
Another kind of plaster that is worth its weight in gold. Prepare mustard and valerian, for X. Mirror and aloes, 77 times. Aconitum 77 times. Boil Armenian X, and pound well, and congeal with water or honey, and administer.
Another method for emplastery with joints and after removing their bones, it calms the following pain, and uses the bone to cut the fracture. Apply a new ointment, and mold it in ashes and oil cooked, and put on the limb.
Plaster casts do not restore the joint, but they are good for soothing abscesses and properly healing pains.
Another method of emplastery that restores broken bones: Apply leaves of dried fig and earthy leaves, together pounded, and make emplastery.
Another way of plaster for restoring the break in the bone and to alleviate the remaining abscess. Take root of valerian, chamomile, violet flowers, wheat flour from each one;
and crush and mix with wine, and apply to the members being warmed up, mixing it with moist coriander water or cold water, and use.
Another way to treat with more force than the first, when an abscess comes back to restore the limb. Take roots of valerian, and seeds of flax, balsam, meadowsweet, and licorice, and flowers of violet and chamomile from each one; and crush and mix with salt water or sweet water, or with wine, according to the heat of the member, and its rest.
Iporcus writes in his book that you should not put oil and wax on the broken limb to restore it, except for this method alone, and he says that it should be between too dry and too damp.
And it seems that one must place the broken limb above, to restore, things dry and warm, like mirrors and ointments and incense and similar things, as we have said.
Another way to apply a poultice that values injury and pain: Take the hairs from the shaved and bald, or take those of the bird, and venom, and cut them equal, and break them, and make it an embalming paste and bind with a thread.
And then lay the bone loose a little bit, and watch that the patient does not feel any pain, or that he is not troubled by his own bones. if you do not lay it loose by hands. And if pain comes to the limb, or it pricks, with rest or swells, if you hasten and let it go, and remove now the embalming paste.
and take a light drapery, and a sponge of moist sea water, and plunge into the water, and lift up the limb, until the itching ceases, and the pain is appeased. After that, let the limb rest for an hour, then put it under a clean cloth, moistened in water or oil rose, and bind it up with a bandage, until you are sure of the abscess.
and rest the inflammation in the limb, and may be cured of pain, then resume subtle incision, and a little emplaster, and do not strain it too hard as before. and subtly until it is cured.
If you see that there is an abscess on the cheek and redness and pain and swelling it has set in all over, and you have to apply plaster and tie it up again if it happens again, as you did with the first part.
And if the limb does not come to an end as we have said, do not release it more than after three days or four or five or seven. and never let it remain for twenty days, as we see, until the fracture heals and the swelling approaches.
And therefore you must hold it tighter first, and swell its flesh, just as I have said before;
and if you see the shoulder drying more than necessary, know that this will not come to anything; the disease arises from hot water then, every time you dislocate it, and this happens to everyone at least once a day, and also later.
therefore cut off the swelling of the member, and make haste to do what the foolish barber does, which will leave the limb twisted.
this is bad, and if it's caused by fear, and I see nothing else but to loosen and set it right.
There are many kinds of breaks, and diverse forms, and the causes are predetermined;
for it has fractures that are caused by the percussion of a spear, and the collarbone is broken all along the bone just below where it is embedded in the bone, as when hit or struck. and for this reason it is called this kind of fracture "haicheure".
Where the spear strikes the bone from above to pierce it, and is called this kind of fracture "absolute".
and there are two types of wounds for these two fractures, large or small.
And if it has been pierced by a thrust, or a cut, or from the bone of a stone, or from a blow on the bone of a stone, or similar things.
And if it has an ongoing fracture that approaches just below the skin where it is under the bone, or above the bone, and this injury is big or small.
And if the wound is closed in the bone with as much subtlety as we sew, and there is a small split, and for this reason it is called this fracture "capillary".
and if the wound made or by striking with iron or stone, or by falling, and pushes in a piece of bone into it, and its hairs are as they do when the cautery is applied to the cauterian (heater); if the stone goes inside.
and this happens more often to those who have moist bones under their head, like that of a child;
and happens in all these kinds of fractures where small pieces are discharged like dust; I will speak for him.
And know all kinds of breaks by removing them, and investigating, and by the corruption that is above.
The similarity of hair is known through this: when you discover the bone, and you stroke upon it, if the break is opened.
In the treatment of the break, be careful for accidents in the patient, and if you see no evil accident, such as vomiting of bile, loss of intellect, swelling, paleness, fever, and the eyes protruding and reddening, and other similar symptoms, then it cannot be cured without doubt.
And if you do not see an impossible accident, and you expect a recovery, then begin the treatment.
When the patient comes to you for the first time, and it is in winter, it is fitting to remove the bone in front of the 14th day before the moon.
And if this is the case, hastening to remove the bone in front of the 7th day instead will bring about corruption of the tissue underneath the bone, and come the accidents that we have stated.
And if the bone fracture comes just to the wound that covers the brain, you should cut the fractured part in this way:
Instruct the patient to press firmly on the head and discover where under the skin you can find it, in all ways that you can, and with the shape of the wound as soft as possible; for when the blood stops coming out from discovering the bone, or the abscess closes, he must use what is necessary, and it is so that you fill the space with wet draplings soaked in olive oil. And then make the wound rest until the abscess closes, and be sure that there is no more blood coming out. Then begin to remove the bone, and this is done in two ways of work.
one way is to copy the narrow cut on the front, and that's the shape:
And then you must break the other limb more than the first.
And the second manner is that you have many different knives, some are three-edged and others long, and they should be sharp and made of iron.
and when you apply it lightly, so that you do not hit the head.
And if the bone is hard and tough, it is wise to pierce it through so that you can administer knives with care, neither cutting too deeply nor piercing further than the bone of the joint, and leaving on the edge of the point a margin or circle, so that the point does not go beyond the bone.
and it is wise to have many, so that each one comes in its proper place of the joint space, so that you have knives for all tests.
and this is the form of the three kinds of tarses:
The ones that pierce through the bone when it is broken are pierced with one tare (tongue) on the bone, and turned to your two hands so you know when the bone has been pierced.
Then put the tare in another place a little after that, and do it all around, then cut at the incisions the space of the bone between the punctures, and do it more subtly than you can, and lightly, as we have said, until you touch the bone with your hand, or on any other tool you have, such as pliers.
and be careful that you do not touch the brain or the spongy part.
And when you have pierced the bone and treated it, so that you can retrieve what is left in the bone after another instrument like an incisor, but it should be more subtle and more refined than the other instruments.
but if it leaves nothing of the small bones, or no scutes, if the bone is lightly attached to other instruments; then treat the wound of tenons and ligatures that we have said.
And other methods, if what the Galenians say is true, which is more accurate; and it is much stronger, and this is his word. It is necessary first that you uncover a part of the bone, at this place or where there is a fracture open, so when you have uncovered that part, you will put below the head of this incision, lens-shaped, because it is this shape:
And do not cut from one side, and if the part is diseased in two places, so that the cutting is towards the bone;
Puis fier de petit maillet sus, si que tu copes legierement l'os tout entor, et te donne bien en garde de la toile qui est dessous.
When she is irritated to the bone, cutting it lightly, because the bone causes great pain and fear.
And if the break of the bone does not penetrate to the skin, and the bone is broken only above, and there are small pieces, so it covers again that roughness, and removes the scales with a subtle rasp that you must have in various quantities, in order to fit each one as comfortably as possible, according to the work and figure of the break.
If you choose before many raspers, and after more subtle ones, and do not stop doing this until it is well done.
For each other type of hair cutting and subtle breakage, it is necessary to consider the cause according to its direction;
And this is something that cannot be replied by one who has put his knowledge in this art.
And if the sac is uncovered, it is necessary to take out the drapery of linen, according to the quantity of the wound, and wet it in rose oil, and put it on the wound; Then take another cloth doubled in II or in III, and soak it in wine and oil rosary, and put it on the first cloth; And do this more lightly than you can, so that you don't weigh too heavily on it, then administer over the second cloth, and do not strain it further than when it only reveals the wound.
And leave it thus for one day or two, until the abscesses have subsided, then remove it, and administer medicine as with willow roots, flour of fenugreek, powder of incense, and aromatics, and similar things;
And make powder of these things, and put it on the wound, and administer as usual medicines with rubbing.
And beware that the wound becomes infected and clean, lest you do not leave the ointment on it, or do not let it assemble with a bow, for when the bow assembles upon the cloth of the brain, so does the corruption and pestilence, and it brings great evil to the patient;
for when you put up a sharp instrument on the skin, it freezes below. Precaution first then, if no other accidents come to the patient as we have said, because it is doubtful without doubt.
And if the blackness does not come from the medicine that we have put on it, and the virtue has some effect, then you should take a piece of honey, three parts of rose oil, and one part of adhesive, and apply them on the sharp instrument; then apply a remedy in ways of treatments until it is healed.
Things that are never broken into two parts, except for one part by itself, because they are two bones.
And this one is cartilaginous and does not break, unless it is bent or twisted, and then it heals.
And if one of the two parts is broken, then it is necessary to put your little finger or bony protrusion into the fracture and set the break in place according to its natural shape. And do it lightly, and take care that the patient does not feel pain due to your action.
If the break is in the upper part of the neck, and it cannot come down to its place, so that you put an equal weight on the head of a straw a little bit thick.
And if the break is in two parts, then repeat this process, and hasten to restore it the first day, if you can;
If it is not so, after the seventh or tenth day, when the abscesses are calmed down, then boil the head with new linen cloths, if the breakage is in one part.
Where you pour another of another kind, if the breakage is; and let the cloths be so large that they fill the wounds of the head.
And said a restorer that we must moisten the coverings in butter, and move each person daily. I do not think that is quite right, but it should be moistened in the composition of honey and miller's powder; then let the cloth remain, until the bone is firm and the cartilage hardened.
And at no time pour in onions of goose into it instead of cloths, and if the wound is covered up and kept still, and holds the breakage together, and blows gently on him; The instruction to do this task
And if an abscess comes to the head while you are working, apply hot or wet cotton in oil rose, or in a poultice of dayquil.
And if an abscess does not come, then apply plaster by default, made of flour of sesame, and powder of incense, mixed with honey, then place it on light caustic, and do not tie the nose.
and if the nasal fracture is small, and it has been broken into little pieces, then draw out with suitable instruments what can be removed, then close the wound, and apply to cure wounds that require tarring or soldering, as does plaster and ointments.
and if there is no wound inside the nose, then apply a cure for wounds, and put sticks of wood in until it heals.
When the jaw is fractured under, and there is no wound to prevent it, and the fracture is only present, without breakage in others, if one notices a slight swelling.
It is fitting, if the breakage occurs in the right hand, that you put your thumb into the mouth of the patient; and if the breakage occurs in the left jaw, put your thumb of the right hand into the mouth and gently push the break inside, and cover it with the other hand to keep it in place.
And if the fracture of the jaw is displaced upward by two parts, it is fitting that you extend the second part so that they are even.
And if the movement of the teeth has occurred, or a fracture, then bind with a thread of gold or silver or silk, and put a layer of wax on the broken jaw and a double cloth. and put on the outer cloth an estee well-made, or a piece of leather equal, long and wide according to the jaw, and bind it there with what you can, and instruct the patient to rest, and serve him light victuals.
And if you see that the figure changes, let him lie on his back every day, and then put it in place what was changing. and put plaster on it, made of powder from the mill with abundance of oil or flour of sesame, after you have extracted the fat.
and put on a lighter layer of plaster, and if the plaster sets, and the patient's condition does not change, let him remain so until he is healed. often healing occurs within three weeks.
And if an abscess comes on a joint, then follow what we have said many times.
And if it has a break and wound together, reward no piece of bone that is exposed; if subtlety of the extracted bone causes swelling.
And if the wound is narrow, then enlarge it according to your need.
When you have extracted all those bones and it remains empty for a while, cut the wound, if it is wide, and apply plaster according to what is suitable, in order to prevent infection, until it is safe.
The force breaks multiple times before, over the shoulder, and the breakages occur in three different manners:
or if it is broken and split into two parts, and it heals faster.
or where there are breaks with wounds.
And the treatments are when the breaks occur with wounds, that you have two remedies, so that one of them tugs on the shoulder joint where the break is. and the other stretches the neck towards the part;
then puts the break into your two hands, so that the form is as it should be, and there is no appearance or swelling.
And if you have to extend it further, then place the round spear of cloth or linen over the shoulder of the patient. and hold and lift the swelling, and tie the spear with your hand, so that you put equal pressure on the break, as it requires.
If you cannot treat the head of the fracture outside, because it is coming in full, then it is fitting that the patient lies on his back and puts a bolster under the shoulder; and gives to the minister's shoulder downwards, so that the bones of the fracture are lifted.
And then instruct the break to be on your right hand, and if you find any dead parts, it is fitting that you cut them off;
and throw away the lighter pieces, and if the bone cannot be joined together due to any swelling, if you cut at one of your joints; but place over the swelling this instrument, to guard the wound;
And it seems like a spoon, and is not hair, and is as large as it needs to be, according to the size of the bone and the skill of the worker.
And has two heads, just like you see it, and one is large, and the other is narrow, just as is the route of the wound that you made when treating the bones.
And when you are certain of the thickness of the abscess, count the wound, and if the route is small, then doubt the thickening of the abscess, apply the wound with drapes and tents, according to its quantity.
And if an abscess comes to a head, apply it in oil of rose and in ashes and in wine, and put on.
The binding of the bone, when it is against wounds and swelling, is that you place the bone under the plaster of powder from the mill and of horse manure, and put lightweight stones above, and a spear below the axle, if need be; Then take a very long bandage of one palm's width, then place two drapes over it on the stumps, and tie it. Then take a small needle of three to four fingers' width and long, and tie it around the bandage so that the head of the bandage is on top. and place the needle on the break, and turn the bandage up on the neck, and under the healthy side, and under the sick side. and tie from each side, and when you see that the ligature holds the break in place, and you see clearly that the needle does not move over the broken bone, then reward it every day, and when the ligature is looser, tighten it.
and make the patient lie on his back, and put him on a small pillow under the head, to lift the shoulder joint up. if the broken collarbone is alleviated by adjusting the shoulder joint, or you tie the arm to the neck, and do not untie it in case of a bad accident, for twenty days.
then resume the plastering if you see it necessary, and bind and leave him in that state until he is restored.
and she is restored after twenty-eight days, and fewer than any others.
Of a shoulder break
It rarely happens that a shoulder break or separation causes him to lose his strength, and it is only through touch.
If it appears according to the form of the breakage, and you reset it according to its natural shape, in all the ways that you can;
Then put on the limb powder from the mill with much salt and fine dust, and puts over it a double cloth; Then puts on a broad and subtle spearhead, a little broader than the shoulder, and smooths out the spearhead in any spot of the shoulder, so that the speareth cuts equally;
and then tightens it firmly to a great band, so that the spearhead does not move from its place, and watches the ligament every day;
and every time it is moistened, so tightens the band, and puts back the spearhead if it has moved from its place, and lays the patient on his chest;
And the shoulder is reset after twenty days or twenty-five.
And when these numbers are completed, if the dislocation is corrected, and you are sure, because it's not the bone that is put back in place lightly.
If a piece of the bone is torn away and points downwards under the skin, it should be pulled out upwards, and the bone, and do what we have said in the breaking of the abscess.
of the break of the foot
The flesh is never broken at the point of the dislocation, but it happens sometimes; but it breaks often before.
And when it is broken in the middle, if it inclines towards the underside, and the patient feels great pain, and lack of warmth, and swelling, and by chance vomit blood, and expose the broken marrow, and the flesh feels bad.
And the restoration is such that the patient lies on his back, and you place an armpit between the shoulders, then press the shoulders, and assemble the two breast bones with your hands, and be subtle in placing them in all ways, so that the figure of the bone becomes as it should;
Then put on splints and poultices above the subtle bone of salt, or a lighter fist, and lift it in an iron band, and bind it to the broken bone, so that it does not move; and round the ligature to the back, and tighten it immediately, and reward each hour the wound, and if it swells, tighten the strait;
and if it seems wise to loosen the bandage, because of corrosion or itching that comes to the patient, or pain or abscess, if you hasten and loosen it, and scrape off the poultice, and address what is coming from it in ways of cure;
then scrape off the poultice, and tighten the strait until it is safe.
of the fractured ribs
The broken ribs do not happen from the large ones after the back and in the head inside, they bend only because they are crooked; and feel quite good with the inquiry as it should.
And the remedies are that you put equal the break, as it is fitting. And then apply plaster and bind with a stick if you have need.
And if the ribs break are declining inside, the patient feels great pain and puncture, just as with pleurisy, because the bone points at the membrane; and they have pains, and swellings, and vomiting great plant of blood, and it is a source of ill health, and the old men have put great strength.
And if those who say it is proper to administer meat that inflates the belly, in order to break the fracture away from the bone.
We do not do this unless pus comes out of the wound. And if it has come, then the blood.
And they say that one should apply windbags on the limb, to cut off the flow, and it seems reasonable; All sorts of diseases occur from air entering the body due to weakness.
And they say that one should cover the limb with a linen cloth soaked in hot oil, and put tourniquets between the ribs to straighten the joint, then treat the patient with the cure of bleeding, meat, and medicine.
And if the patient suffers great pain from the bone piercing the lung, and there is doubt about it, then it is advisable to break open the lung of the broken rib, and it is wise to put some instrument to guard the wound.
And thus one must cut the bone, and treat lightly, and then sew both cheeks of the wound, if it is great, and apply plaster to heal until he is cured.
And if an abscess comes to a head, then put on moist cloths in oil rose, and put on the wound.
And treat while the wound heals of that which it is necessary for the abscess, and apply ointment to the place where it must be, until he is cured.
and also at the spine of the back.
And when it happens that there is a fracture and you see whether he will be healed or not, if you see his hands softened and swollen and dead, and they cannot move nor stretch, and when you press them with an needle, if they do not feel.
Those who have died from more severe dislocations, and if they are silent and feel well when their joints are strained and not moved, know that the bone joint is saved, and that patients recover, if it is put in treatment.
And if such a thing comes to the spine of the back, and you see whether it is healing or not, take care that the joints are softened, and if the accident is in the hands, and on the back, one feels a violent motion and emission against will.
and when one has it set upon his belly, he feels a violent emission against will. And when it is put back onto its own back and it wants to be healed, but cannot. It is mortal. if he does not work properly in his treatment.
And if this accident does not come to pass, then it is a lighter thing.
And the cure says that if you reward him if he has an abscess hot, put oil of rose or oil from mutton fat on the spine, until it is pacified.
Then puts on one of the plasters comforting and drying, and binds it with a bandage, and instructs the patient to rest; And does not lie down on that part where he feels the pain, until it is healed.
And if some bones are cracked, then it is advisable to cover the wound; and then set the bone, and assemble the two lips of the wound, if they are large, with a suture, and apply ointment made from pitch, until it is healed;
and if the head of the bone is fractured, which are called "head of the knee", then put your left hand in your pouch and place it equal to the other hand on your palm, then put the plaster and the stile on, if you have need;
Instruct to bind the patient, and if it has swollen bones, then cut above them, and extract the bone, and treat the wound until it is healed.
of the break of the shin bone
There is a chance that the shinbone will be broken, and if it has, then do not worry too much for only a little alleviation at the head. And stretch to the length, and pull down to the joints, and it will come to the patient with pain in the limb, aching, and swelling.
And if there is healing, then stretch your hand over it, until you are above the fracture. and mark how the bone and joint are.
And if the fracture is only in the head, then mark this bone and make it even until it has taken on its natural shape.
And if the fracture is long, or it inclines towards the inside, then have the patient lie on his stomach, until the restoration of that fracture has been made known. And when you have set it even, put on the plaster, then put on an arrow made of wood or bone, and strain the break so that it does not move;
and apply the plaster on both sides of the cost, until the wound is even. And instruct the patient to lie on his healthy side, or on his back.
And if an abscess comes up, do not touch it, until the abscess is allayed, and put on what we have said before. and then return to the restoration, and restrain it as necessary, if there is no further injury.
of a shoulder dislocation
The joint is that which is between the shoulder and the cut of the arm, and if it is broken, one must restore it according to one of the two methods:
Dont one is to take a large iron rod, according to this form:
And tie the two shoulders together, and fasten them up high, and sit the patient on a stool;
then lift the broken limb to the place of the bone, until it comes to an anvil, and attach a strap of iron to it, then fasten on any weighty thing that is given to him to endure.
then put the linen over the broken limb in its proper place, so that the break may return to its proper position.
And another way is that you serve the patient on his bed, and tie his hand to his neck; then command two servants to pull up the part above the breakage with their hands, and the others below by all its joints, and stretch out each one to their side.
And if you see that the extraction is more difficult, then tie the joint below the breakage, and above the breakage, and stretch each one of the servants to their side.
And if the break is close to the head of the shoulder, so that you may put a middle rope under the anvil, and the other towards the back, under the break;
and also if the fracture occurs in the heel, so it is necessary to put a light ligature on it lightly, without labor, until the fracture is even with its joint, and with its skin.
then put the fracture back in place if it seems right to you, and hold tight, so that pus does not come.
And if pus comes, do not hold tight for seven days, and put a moist cloth on it in a clean place with rose oil, until the pus is calmed.
then hold tight, and the way to hold it is such that you put the plaster on the fracture, then reassemble the arm on the shoulder, and place your hand on the shoulder or on the breast.
and tie the bandage and restrain under the shoulder, and on the arm, so that the arm is in place, unless any part of it impedes its movement, or if the bone has moved.
And if you doubt that the bone does not move, then use a splint, and place two larger and stronger splints on either side of the break, with one space between each splint, so that each splint spans the break three times from each part;
then tighten the splints, as I said at the beginning of this chapter on the break, stronger and less loosely.
And if you see how the splint is applied and tightened, as we have said, when restoring the injured member, and you doubt whether to leave the abscess alone for seven days, as we have said;
the patient should look at each of them every three days to see if the swelling is going away, or if it will come back to life, and the pus cannot come out from the member because it is too strained. If the advice, as we have said.
But if such accidents do not happen, then only to free the man after three days or more, and let the patient sleep on his back, and put his hands under his stomach;
and on the shoulder put a cloth in the shape of an arrow, equally plain, and look at each one every hour of the day or night, whether the figure of the broken limb is fixed or not, or if the ligaments are softened.
if it happens by the power of medicine, and you give him the meat that we have placed before him, in such a way that the meat is first finely chopped; and when he comes to try again, so it is large.
and it is customary that the shoulder and the leg should be reset in forty days from the start. and therefore one must untie and administer baths and medicine to ease the pain.
If the bowstring is twisted and stuck, so that it cannot be untied for one or two days.
Of a broken arm
the arm is composed of two bones, which are called the "fossicle", one small and that one which forms the pouch.
and the other is large, and it is under, towards the small bone;
by chance break the large ossicle alone, or the small one, and by chance join them together.
When the bones are broken, restoration is light, and healing.
and when the great bones are broken, so is healing, and it is more grievous than when they were broken at first.
If it is only the small bone that broke alone, you must gently extend it, and set it even.
And if that's a great fracture, then one must strain harder;
and extend the splint above the cussion, and tighten the pouch of his hand higher than others, and the bones should be set lower than others as well, and let the patient cross his own limbs, and the cussion in front of him shall be raised higher so that the patient may suffer no labor;
then extend the minister's thumb to the lower part of his arm or at the joint, and another minister on top.
And then put him in the mirror, according to his best form.
And if in the breakage there are pieces, each one put back in its place; and if it has no matching part that can be held together, and you cannot restore it to its proper place, then make a bone cast, as we have said before.
And if with a break there is an injury, I have spoken about it to the singular doctor; if they take the treatment.
And if in the beginning of the restoration there are abscesses that form pus, I apply a cloth made from ghee oil and white beeswax, so that it is neither too hard nor too soft. and the cloth applied above is done subtly, until the abscesses are appeased.
And then I take out the ghee, and I apply the plaster of powder milled with a lot of wine, because I put the stitches, and so that the stitch from the break is made stronger, and a little bit larger than the others;
And you know that he must have six stitches or more in wounds or injuries. Whether the fracture is in one of the bones or two;
And tie more tightly above the fracture than in other places, and every day less when removing, as I said at the beginning of this chapter. And let the dressings that are on top of the fracture be soft and moist, not hard or rough.
And let the dressings that are on top of the fracture be soft and moist, not hard or rough. And let the strings that hold it in place be made of linen, not too thick nor too thin, as we have said.
And reward the limb and the joint after some time. And if some other misfortune comes to the limb, such as itching that is coming to the limb, it is fitting to raise the limb in hot water until the itching is relieved.
And let the limb not remain still.
And then tighten the binding, and if the ligaments are loosened and the bones deviated, it is like a similar case, so address it.
And if the swelling cannot come to the limb because it is too tightly bound, so that it can be freed, it is fitting to loosen it a little, and let it remain for some days, until the swelling subsides, and then tighten.
And if none of these things that we have said will come to the patient, then do not bind or release anything within twenty days.
and asks the person to place his hands on his neck, and if their necks are even, then he will guard against movement and digitation, and let him sleep on his back.
and knows that this fracture is restored in thirty days or thirty-five days, and by chance in twenty days, according to the composition and complexion of the virtues.
of the hand fracture
know that at the back of the hand there is little fracture, and it often comes to nothing but inflammation many times.
And when the finger of the hand is broken or bent, it is advisable for the patient to tie a cross around himself and sit upright in the same manner.
then places his hand over the stretched joint and stretches out the broken bones, and sets equal the joints of the fingers, until they are well joined.
And applies the plaster and dressings; if no abscess comes, then he puts a stethoscope according to its quantity. and it is wrapped in an iodized cloth of linen.
And if the break is at the joint of the arm near to the belly of the hand, then he makes a splint of cloth, and instructs the patient to wrap his broken hand. and then the wrapping of a length of cloth, and so fastens the bandage as large as the plant of his hand, and wraps it, just as is needed.
If the fracture is in the finger, then it is advisable to put a splint above and another below the palm, so that the hand is straightened and upright, and then bind him all around with the hand, and secure the ligature between the two.
And if the break comes to no one of us of the two, and it is swollen, then he lets it be even, just as is needed. And hold with the plant [i.e. finger or toe] and if you see so put a small stake straight for lifting the break, and it does not move;
And if the break is on other sides such as in the index or one of the others, so that it is even, and the link with the good vein which is after; or you tie them all in the same way as before, whatever value it has, or if you put a stake up, such as a pouched one;
and take care in the restoration and arrangement of the abscess, and heal those who come to you, as I have said.
The bone of the scapula is often broken, and one can see well when it turns in front and behind;
and let him bind with linen above the fracture, and below. And let the patient sit with his face, then stretch out each minister's linen equally.
and this is when the fracture is set in place against the bone.
And if the break is close to the root of the shoulder, then there are either one of the ligaments towards the bone, and the others below the break.
and also if it is near the groin, and then so let the linen be tied around the groin, and so let the extension below.
then put the splint upon the bone equally to its two hands, so that it conforms to his natural shape, and then apply plaster, and linen, so that no arrow comes near.
And if there is an abscess like that, let it be allayed then return to your work and to your treatment. The limb is made in this manner.
It is necessary that you wrap the limb around the fracture with a bandage doubled in II or III, and keep the swelling, then turn the leg until the heel reaches the root of the nail, and put I long thread between the crotch and the leg, loosening below the knee, and pulling the head of the thread above.
then turn the leg and the crotch with the bandage, then put a splint on the fracture, and put another splint on the bone of the leg.
then apply the leg eight between the thigh and crotch with soft fabrics to tighten the binding, then begin to tie in a bow of III or IV knots on the fracture. And when you go further up of the fracture, and less it is constricted;
Then tie both knees of the cloth that you have poured between the leg and the thigh, and tie three strings that are above, then return below to the head of the cloth, until you find the foot.
and tie it, if it does not move out of its place, then let it stay so, then if there is no swelling or abscess or other sign. And if it has (swelling), if you separate it, and address the thing that comes, as we have said many times;
and if it has pieces of bone that grasp, then you must sew them, if possible; and if we cannot, then it is proper to break down the limb, and treat it with force. as has been said, so that the patient may be healed.
And sometimes is broken the chest in such a way as when we insert stitches, just like in the shoulder and arm.
and will not close again in the same way the patient has been restored.
And so it is known that the cube can be restored in three or four days, or slightly more or less, according to the diversity of the complexion.
They say that in the hollow of the groin there is often a break but it bends many times.
But if it breaks, then it's not just a cut or a rupture, but rather an opening or a wound, which causes all pain and feels painful.
and the restoration is as if we make equal those things that are broken at their two ends, so they may be assembled and put together when possible.
then apply plaster, and put a rounded arrow around it, if necessary; then bind as needed, and after all the arrangements we have said for other fractures, just like the abscess and another similar thing. If it happens to anyone of these accidents which they must avoid, until they are healthy.
of the leg fracture
We know that in the leg there are two bones; one is called by the right name "moustelle", and the other is called "fossicle".
And all other fractures come to the arm, and for this is the restoration just like the arm itself, and the wounds are all one; and if both bones are broken together, then turn the leg in all directions.
And if the subtle bones break, turn in front.
And if the big bone is broken, it causes great pain and you can see it well; and turn downward.
And then apply an extension, and set it equal, and tie the splints equally;
But the whole view is necessary, for it is required that if the fracture is ugly and there are many pieces, then the extension should be smaller and lighter. and in proportion to its worth.
And when you have completed your work, take two strips of cloth that are red and purple in color, and are long from the knee down to the joints.
Then tie both ends of the bandage above and below in the middle, so that the leg cannot bend to the right or to the left, and thus it is good.
And no one should apply two strips of cloth from the knee down to prevent movement in that joint where there is a wound.
And move every day the limb, to see if it has an abscess or another accident. So that he may be healthy.
of the bone of the foot
At the knee there comes no break, but sometimes when a bone is on its foot it breaks and causes a wound, and in some cases only swelling.
And if he has a broken bone with an exposed bone protruding from another, and you see these bones touching each other, if the patient lies on his side, as if he were walking, and then put now your foot on his side, where the bones are raised, press it so that they come together again in their place.
Then apply plaster and binding on the wound, and place over his belly with a small plate to two exposed bones, then strain him onto the affected limb, afterwards you wrapped in bandages, and other things which you have need.
And when three or four days have passed, if you release the bandage, for you will find that the bones are evened out, whether they are broken, or swollen.
And if it has some of the bones broken, so they repair them, just like we said about the bones of the hand; then put an splint on the broken bone according to its length, and so that it is not too big, then place the foot on the table as I have said, and hold fast.
and if there are two or three, or more, broken bones, then put on each bone a splint according to its quantity, wrapped in one layer of linen, and hold the table under the foot. and if it is standing with the head of the table near to the belly of the foot, so that he can hold it well.
And be sure not to forget the other things I have said about other broken bones, since we have spoken of them. And treat each injury as it is suitable.
of the bone at the finger
When the bones of a woman's body are broken, so that she grows and swells, then incline her to the part of the back of the head, and hold her behind.
then fill the belly of the woman with woolen clothes, and put there just as much as is.
then tie up the woman, and lift her back little by little, and thus pull out the wool, until it comes to the opening of her body, and returns the bone with the same amount.
and when she wants to urinate, pull out the wool, and when she has urinated, put it back again, and do thus for seven days before. If it is restored the break, and you see, take a vessel of wool, and tie to the puncture a cord, and pour all the vessel into the body. then breathe through the cord formed, until the vessel is blown inside. the body will return to the break;
then be filled with cotton, and leave it so for some days, until it is healed.
And when the bone at the elbow of a child or woman is broken, or restored in the same way as we have said for the os of the hazel nut.
and these nearby breaks are not concealed by one who makes his study and practice, and pays attention to my book.
For the break signifies more opportunities on the right way of restoration: and then therefore.
In the phallus, when it is broken, take a goose's neck and swallow the phallus; then wrap up the bandages around it, and let it remain for three days or more, and he will be cured in a short time.
of breaks with wounds
It is to be believed that the one who has breaks with wounds, especially if it is great, like the bones of the shoulder or arm or similar ones, will be healed now, if the remedies we have said testify to this.
And if the wound is healthy, then apply vitreous (glass) to it, for if you have nothing else, do so again on the same day or the next day, unless an abscess forms.
And if an abscess forms, then leave the restoration for the next new day, until the abscess is allayed, and do not touch it or set it again on the third or fourth day, for you will cause a bad accident.
And if the bone break is found near the joint of the shoulder, it is fitting to tie (or set) you lightly on the tip of your finger with a small extension.
And if the extension does not have provided for the placement of equal numbers on your hands, when using this instrument made of iron, which has seven fingers or eight, and the length is according to the quantity of the wound; and for that reason is a skill of the barber who must press three or four times, according to what he needs in each wound.
and if it is swollen and small, that when not compressed on the limb above, will not bend at all, and be swollen in front, and large from the middle to the forehead.
and is called "palanche", because it must be placed above the curved bones of the skull. and apply it once, as long as it clings, and make the swollen one equal to the other. But if the break is subtle and the splints cannot well take hold of the bone, it is advised that you copy the head of the bone, until the splints have a good grip.
And if you cannot return the bone, as we have said, then apply it with an instrument suitable for that, such as cutting or sawing.
then retrieve what is stuck in the bone due to roughness and small scratches.
And when the bone is restored and the patient feels great pain afterwards, know that he is not in his natural place.
If you do it so that it is in its place, then fill the wound with a vinegar-soaked cloth, and this is how one should do it; and put no more on the wound than clay or another substance with oil, lest it bring putrefaction and corruption;
then apply stitches until you have restored the bone, and leave the wound uncovered, and cover the entire surface, according to the quantity of the wound, and take good care that the wound is not constricted with the break;
and many times they have done this to the foolish man, and brought the patient either death or corruption. and so let the restraints be softer and more gentle for other breaks.
And if the wound is bad or great, and you doubt that more accidents will come, as we have said, and you find pain in the limb, so it cannot be treated with nails. but tie him up with ropes and hard bonds, and the limb.
And when you see after the first day or the second day that the bow is stuck to the wound, so keep what you put on top of it in all wine, and apply soothing salve for wounds, as a salve tetrafarmacon and similar things.
And it is necessary that you dislocate the limb twice a day, morning and evening, until it is cooled and cleansed.
And it is necessary that the limb be tied in a way that the bow can move freely along its edge lightly.
And if every day the wound does not heal, and it only gets worse again with new bowing, see that there are little pieces of bone, for this reason you must want to treat the wound with poultice, and remove all these useless parts that come from the pain.
If a fistula comes to the liver, or another kind of corruption, then it is wise that you cure it, according to what he says in his chapter before this.
And when the bone is broken and opens up on the limb, as with the ribs or shoulder blade, and other large joints, do not treat it because many die, but let it heal.
if by chance it falls out after twenty or thirty days, then treat the wound, if you can.
and if you cannot, let it be.
We come many times after the health of the break, equally when it is near the joint, and see a bad thing to behold at the figure of the limb; and by chance, the limbs cannot do their own work naturally.
Take care then if we see that it is fresh; so if the administrator gives medicinal drugs such as aloes, incense, and mirror, and sarcocolle, aconite, and similar other things, so that you do not take any of these things, or all together, and mix with vinegar medicinally or with a lot of wine or with oil; and puts it on the nose in a poultice, and presses well, and does not loosen it with his hands each day;
and puts it on the nose in a poultice, and presses well, and does not loosen it with his hands each day; and then it loosens, and begins again, until the knots are pulled out;
or you strain on a well-made splint; because the property of the splint is that it pulls out all the swellings from above the limbs;
and if the knot is converted into a hardened swelling as hard as stone, and it must be pulled out, if the flesh beneath, and the obvious superficiality appear; or you remove it to a smooth surface, until it is pulled out, and the treatment until it is healed.
A limb which is weak after the garrison.
When the break in the bone is restored, and it stays after the weak and subtle limbs, for many causes: Because one is because it was tied too tightly, and was not tied as much as it needed to be. or because there is too many ligatures and cannot come the swelling in the member; or for multiple swellings; or for too great movements, neither in its hour. or because it has little blood in his body, and is weak.
And the doctor says that you should make the patient eat, and make his body soft, until there is no swelling in him. and administer a bath, and give joy and relaxation;
Now apply the poux to the limb, so that the poux attracts a great swelling, and it often rises with much pain until the swelling subsides from the limb. and returns to its natural form.
One tortured limb after the health. When the limb is twisted after restoration, and the bones are broken open, and the form of the member is ugly, one should not try to restore its natural shape.
if one does not believe the foolish people who say that you must break the limb anew, and many fools have done this in our land.
and these works are blamed, and it brings great harm, and by chance one dies.
otherwise, if the nodations and tortures are fresh, it is to be preferred that they should be raised with hot water, or herbs are cooked, like those of valerian, roots, and meadowsweet, and similar things;
Instruct the doctor to apply a mollifying plaster, just like quailon does well, and take the musk of violets, and mix with fat of geese or olive oil, and apply it on.
Or take greasy figs, and grind them with flour of rye, and similar medicines that soften the pain.
And sometimes the nodal joint is loosened by constant friction and prolonged rubbing with wet hands. And move each limb every hour.
And if the twisted bone is old and hardened, like stone, and requires plaster of iron, so that it covers just above the bone, at the subtle incision lightly. and put cushioning and study in the treatment.
Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
When dislocation comes upon, if it can be now set in place again.
For if one delays, since swelling of the limbs, and by chance, if it is reset with pains.
because you do not need to move at all, when it is swollen. many times pain and other pains have been brought on.
whenever it happens, if you make the patient healthy again, then leave him alone, until the swelling subsides.
then apply the limb to cold water and oil, then gently reset it, and treat each limb as the treatment comes in its place.
And I have prescribed the chapters for dislocation of the head joint at a price.
and sometimes the jaws are displaced inward, and joint dislocations of both sides occur in two ways: or they have a small bone of their joints, and softening a little. When they are completely dislocated and hanging down towards the chest, and you cannot hold back their vomit, nor close your mouth, nor keep it inside, they swallow with their tongue along with their speech.
When small dislocations occur, they return to their original place by multiple movements.
And if it is complete and accomplished, then you should reset it quickly, and do not postpone.
and in such a way that the ministers take out the chief from the patient, and pour some powder of mice into one of his hands at the root of the dislocated jaw within the mouth, if the dislocation is two parts; and pour the other two fingers be avoided, for making them even.
and instruct the patient to loosen his jawbones, and move them in all directions. And the mixture is put even, until it returns to its place.
And if it is reset, meaning that the two jaws are assembled together, so they apply hot water and oil, until the dislocation is easily set.
do not force it to return, as we have said.
and when they are returned evenly, and the mouth of the sick person is closed well with a softening, so you apply moist cloths in a rose oil and beeswax mixture, then bind it lightly with soft ties.
and let the sick person sleep on their back, with their shoulders between two cushions, so that they do not move either to the right or to the left, and do not exert themselves more, but take lightly food, until the pains are gone and the jaws are closed.
and then take what he wants lightly, and do not labor over opening the mouth to eat and drink, until the jaw is well closed and healed.
And if the two mandibles cannot be put back in place within an hour and are not converted to their original state, then fevers and chills appear accustomed, and by chance vomiting appears with stool.
And when you see that, then know it is a delusion; and many die in this condition after seven days.
the shoulder cannot be moved along the ribs inside and below the skin, and is dislocated every time without fail, and it hurts very much.
And the restoration is that the sick man gets up from his bed and extends his arms; and then presses the joint in the palm of his hand, and it will return;
then puts on the plaster and the bandage, and ties it;
and the joint that is opposite to the injured spot cannot dislocate. He is not so, and if he dislocates sometimes, then the reset has taken its place, as we have said;
Then put on the plaster and bandage, and bind it, instructing the patient to rest until he is healthy.
and just as before, the head of the shoulder is reset when it has lost its place.
The head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation.
Know that the shoulder joint is dislocated only in three manners:
when one is dislocated due to the part being displaced downwards from its proper place. and the second is at the level of the heel; and sometimes it dislocates upwards, and this happens rarely.
And do not dislocate me behind by the shoulder, and do not dislocate me inside with the nerves.
and again and again dislocate in that direction towards the elbow, especially those who have little strength, because those will be hastily taken.
and to those who have enough strength, the limb will swell and return to its original size.
And sometimes it happens to some people that they strike or crush the shoulder with an abscess, and think that this is a dislocation because of the swelling.
Therefore it is necessary that you test it, until you are certain of it; And then begin the treatment.
And it is known that there are dislocations when they occur below the elbow, and you will find a difference between the diseased shoulder and the healthy one, and you will see their diversity clearly. And you will find a cavity at the shoulder blade, and below that at the armpit the head of the shoulder blade, so it is when we have seen. And the patient cannot return his hand to its normal place, nor move it from any movement.
And also, if it is dislocated above, and not hidden inside, because you will find it obviously at the armpit.
And this kind of dislocation is not difficult to fix when it is new, or if the patient is sick.
And the manner is that the ministers will lift the hand of the sick person in the armpit, then put your hands under the shoulder, and lift the joint to force in the upper place. and hold the hand out high, because it is below. if it comes suddenly.
And if it does not come as we have said on the hands the day before, then it is advisable that the patient be bathed in hot water; and he gives him an appetite-lifting and pain-relieving draught, as a decoction of alum and fenugreek and malloloth in hot water, and it is given to him;
then place the patient on his back, and put an equal-sized cloth on his chest, neither too soft nor too hard, then put a towel over his shoulder, lift the head of the shoulder with virtue, and treat the hand of the patient;
and put another head on the patient, so it does not move. that shoulder returns now, and if you see it again in this way;
and that you have make him be present to someone larger than the patient. and stand straight on the cost side, and pour water from above onto the shoulder of the patient, and lift the shoulder up, so that the patient hangs by the arm; and another servant treats the hand of the patient towards the belly. If the patient is too light, then he will lie with him on any heavy thing, and the dislocation returns now.
And also, it is done in another way:
and it is as to strike a long knife into the earth, which is so that the head is like the pit, and not too big nor too small. The patient will lie down afterwards, but if he has soft bandages on, and the patients are lying in a long bed.
Then stretch out his hand opposite the other limb, and the joint will return to its place quickly.
and if it does not return for all these things that we have said, then do this treatment. take two fingers of the right hand and four of the left, which have the head at the center to pierce in depth beneath the nail, according to this form:
Then place the head of the fist under soft bandages to prevent the wound from bleeding the patient, and then put it beneath the abscess on the patient.
Instruct the patient to stretch out both arms above the body, and tie the arm to the body, then pull the arm towards the head of the hand, next put the arm on top of an eschar of a large size, and so stretch out the hands downwards, and leave the body hanging from another part: Let the joint be fixed now.
And when it is so in any manner, if it pleases you to do so, then put under the bandage one sparrow of wool equal, then put on the plaster mixed with powdered flour, with incense and myrrh from the bees, above all the shoulder and around; then pull out from under the bandage immediately, and turn the ligature onto the plaster, and encircle the hand at its neck, so that the hands remain thus.
And it is fitting that he does not move too much, until the limbs are comfortable, for he will recover more quickly.
and then move again after three or seven days, and the limb. And if it is firm and it does not soften, then he is healed.
And if the joint is swollen due to moisture or for another reason, it is necessary that you administer cauterizations at three points, as he is placed in front of or on the cautery desk.
And if you do all this, and he dislocates after seven days, and the joint will not stay in place, and cannot lift any arm upwards, then know that the nerve at the top of the shoulder is either crushed, stretched out, or softened. And he knows that a joint can never be fixed in its place.
A dislocation occurring near the elbow or kneecap, or behind it, which is caused by pushing and stretching of hands, and one uses another joint.
And cure until he is healed.
And if after the healing there comes a gretez at the member, and late in movement, then use the patient many times, as long as that gretez is alleviated, and returns to its first nature.
of the dislocation of the shoulder.
He knows that the joint of the elbow is dislocated at points, and it re-dislocates.
And it has been dislocated from all parts, and itself in front and behind, and the dislocations are not renewed, because one sees well and feels well. And dislocates according to each figure. And when you join the sick hand with the healthy one, so you can see it open. Because the joint is swollen, and cannot bend the arm, nor touch its shoulder in any way.
And it is necessary to reset it in the same way that abscesses come out, because if they were coming out, it would be a great grievousness.
And by chance, it cannot be restored to its original state, same as when it is at the back; But it is worth more than other dislocations, and there is great pain, and by chance it can lead to death.
And when restoration is possible, when they are of such extent that one can be restored, then you stretch out your hand to both hands. And the arms be spread out, and the hands be placed according to the cost of the injury, above and below, and fix the joint to its bones, or to the root of his palm, until it returns to its place.
And if the dislocation is in front, so it returns when he doubles his hand to his hand, and from the root of the palm he feels the cost which is dislocated.
And if it does not return to its place, then perform strong extension;
And so there are two assistants who stretch out the arm, and two assistants who tie up the arm, if it does not move with the stretching.
Then turn the arm on each side, because you have wrapped a double cloth long and wide around it.
and when the mirror joins the joint to his hand, so that he applies oil to the joint, then he tightens the joint firmly, until it returns.
and when it is in the place, so he applies plaster with powdered gypsum and oil of beeswax, tightens the wound, bends the arm to the neck of the patient, and leaves it for some days, then he removes.
And if the joint is firm in its place, so he releases the thread and leaves it;
And if you see that the joint does not tighten well, then resume the plaster and tie it, and let it be so for some days, until it is firmly set; and then dislodge.
And if it feels pain after the movement of the joint, and it is silent, then bathe and rub well, and press so that it becomes relaxed; or you put a fat lamb's wool on the joint, then let it be for one day and one night, then remove it, and let it go into the bath; and when he sweats, then rub the joint temperately, then put on the wool again, and then let it go into the bath; and so do this two times or three, until he is healed;
and if you see, place a poultice of hot vinegar moistened with butter on it and strain.
if he returns to his state.
The dislocation of the hand
The dislocation of the hand joint is easier than other joints and returns quickly. Regardless, it is necessary to return the joint to its own place immediately, in the same wound where it was dislocated, so that it may swell or an abscess form.
And if it is corrected so that you put the diseased hand on a table, and extend the affected fingers, and put your finger in the same place as the joint, and press hard until it returns.
It's necessary to inspect whether he is well at home; so put the patient's back of his hand on a table at extension and flexion. If a dislocation is at the back of the hand, he instructs the patient to put his back on his hand over the table, and the operator puts his hand over that appearance of the joint.
if it returns now, that is well. If not, then take a poultice of plaster to calm the abscess, and let him continue in that way.
And if he cannot bear it, and you cannot put him back on his feet after some days, the joint will be crooked.
and do not put the patient through anything until his hands are fully swollen and he cannot strain or exert himself. Then you will know that the nerves are pierced or damaged, or the arteries.
if there is no other remedy than to strain by the cautery of the case, and by chance it does not bring anything.
When the hands are at rest, put on the plaster that we have said, then strain and let it be in place for three days, then take it off and leave it as is.
And if it does not move well and it has no inflammation, then apply the poultice of hot water and rub until it is healed.
of the dislocation of the wrists
never are the joints of the hand damaged at each point, never on the back of the palm or in the belly.
then the joints are known, and put the dislocation in the grooves until it comes back into place, then hold the head of the joint with your fingers and direct it towards the part where it is dislocated.
and let it be two days, and then put it in its original position that day;
and tie it up as we have said, and the dislocation of that day, and make it move, and bind it with a strap.
and do this often, until it is tight, and just the same, if it is dislocated in the palm of the hand, and do so as you did before, until it is healed.
and just the same when it is dislocated on another side.
Due to dislocation of the shoulder skin
When the skin of the back or neck is dislocated, or if there are multiple dislocations, and there is no treatment, for fear of death, the patient rushes to their grave.
And the signs are such that the excretions come forth with great violence, nor can they be held in place, and often some member is softened, or one of the two knees or both the arms.
And many times the ulcer opens into four parts;
the one that opens at the back is called "gibbose" or "gilbosis".
the cure is that you apply to it if the gilbose has come from childhood; There is no cure nor healing for all things.
And that which comes from a fall or from blows or from similar things, the old manners of cures speak with great words, where there is no great benefit.
but I have reduced it to its essence according to my intention, and formed remedies in various ways.
I say that in gout at the toes there is no cure.
and also that which comes directly in the two bones, and cannot be cured with fire unless it is applied specifically to the back, as I said.
and that the sick person is laid on their face in an equal position, and has a strain beneath them, lest they fall.
Now put the finger on the bone in the head on the ground, and on the other side the knee, and tie a string around the armpits of the sick man, and on the other side the groin and ankle.
and two ministers feel the strings, one at the head and the other at the knee, between the two fingers;
and be well closed, the finger as we have said, and the nail meets its palm on the spine, until it turns.
and if it does not return by this remedy, take a wooden beam three fingers long, and shave the surface of it, and let the sick man lie on that side, then put the middle of the beam on the spine. And place the mirror on its feet above the other chest of the table, and press well, until it returns to its place;
And if you see, if you do that on the tonsil which turns to the hand. And that you tie two tonsils to the head of the patient on one arm, and to the feet of another, and put between each tonsil, above and below, a span's width of wood.
and that in each tonsil there is a puncture, or the tonsil bleeds, and the tonsils are firmly planted in the earth, so that they do not move;
and between each two tonsils there is a tonsil turning, whether the ties turn, and have in each of these turns two small tonsils a span wide, to turn the tonsil;
and then tie the tendon that is between the bones near the neck to the top of the head, and the other tendon to the feet at another turn, and each of the ministers turns their turn around the entire tendon, and the master ties the equal needle as we have said.
And when it is equalized, he puts on a plaster dressing with many beeswax, and then the poultice, and then the edge of a tablet of three-dozen lengths, which stains the leg of goutiness and the healthy part of the spine, and then ties it with a cord as we have said, and uses the patients gently until they are healed.
and if no remedy comes to the end of the healing, he must administer soft and soothing medicines with the edge that we have mentioned before; And sometimes they give him a poultice, and sometimes it comes to appearance in the lower spondyle of the back, and think that this is a dislocation; And it's the bone that opens up, because you shouldn't have any presumptions about it: But by chance might it bring death.
Which joints of the hip and shoulder come only from dislocations, not from other joints.
And the joint of the hip is swollen in four parts; within and without, and before and behind;
and more within these joints, and less swollen before and behind.
The knowledge of dislocations is that when you put the sick limb together with the healthy one, it becomes longer and opens up more the patient's knees than those who are healthy, and cannot double its knee joint at all in heat; and it is the pus that comes out of the abscessed cartilage, because the head of the cartilage comes loose.
And the signs of he who suffers from this defect are such that these accidents are contrary to those foreseen.
And the signs that occur before a patient with this condition are that his knee is perfectly aligned according to the completion. unless he doubles his knee joint with pain, and if one tries to make him walk, he cannot before, and holds back his urine, and swells the groin, and when he goes, it passes above the heel.
And the signs of he who has this behind him are such that he cannot stretch his knee, nor double it, and because that leg is more bent than the other, and the groin swells less, and the head of the chest bone is at low level beneath the ribs.
The limb of this dislocation is when you return to its normal form if the dislocation is old and it stays in place according to its nature; if there is no cure. and it's not fitting that he has confidence.
And in those whose dislocation is fresh, and it's one of the four kinds of dislocation, if you hasten so that you return to the joint, and open it inside and outside, and move it from right to left. in case he returns, and no other cure is needed.
And if he doesn't return in this manner, it's fitting that you should bring a strong minister, and fasten the leg strongly with two hands, or tie it up above the knee. And other attendants stretch out their hands in this manner so that they pour water over his hands and below his feet, then tie a string around the crotch. And other tie up the head with the cord.
And stretch it up and down all at once, so that the patient is lifted off the ground once, and remains suspended.
This method of extension is common for four reasons, and if dislocation has returned, as we have said, this is very good.
If this is not the case, then it is advisable to apply treatment to his appearance.
When the dislocation is in the shoulder joint, if you want to, place the patient on their healthy side, then tie the cord at the root of the crotch, and the one that is under the angle, then stretch the cord upwards towards the angle, and downwards towards the armpit.
Then take another set of attendants to grasp his arms, and embrace the large limb of the sick person, and stretch it out towards the form: if it returns to its place now;
and this manner of dislocation is lighter than the others.
And if you cannot close it in this manner as we have said, then it is advisable to bind the two feet and two knees of the sick person together with a strong cloth on both the lower and upper parts, so that the diseased leg is stretched out twice more than the others;
then be hung suspended over the head of a stick, and also above the ground two arms of long cloth;
then command the attendant to embrace the head of the sick person, and let another set of attendants be hung with the patient, who will embrace and form a tight closure, because the joints are returning now quickly.
And when the dislocation occurs at the joint, so that the patient suffers, just as we have said in the case of those with gout, and cut off the ligament on the diseased leg properly, and on the flesh as well;
Then put two thorns, one on the head and one on the other joint, then drive a thorn between the bones into the patient's flesh in the shape; and cover the moist cloth over it, so that the patient does not bleed, then stretch out those two ministers towards him, and put the ligature equal to his hand on the dislocation;
If it returns, that's good.
If not, put on an ice. I.e., a table, and press it as we have said in the gout, and grieve the patient on the healthy side.
And when a dislocation occurs in front, it is advisable to stretch the diseased leg very much, and according to what I have said; and put the mirrors on the patient's face of pain, then press with the other hand, and extend away towards the groin.
And if the dislocation is outside, it does not suit to extend the patient downwards, nor lift him up onto the ground, but rather it suits that he be in the same state as if his joints had been dislocated outside, as we have said when covering the two joints; and be on his face, and the ligament is extended as we have said before, and must not press upon the joint at the table; and when the patient stretches his legs, and they are made even. and then tie the knees, and apply an emplastre, and strap with a bandage, so that the joint does not move; And if he rests for three days or four, then let him be laid down; and apply plaster on.
and if you see them growing even, then strain the skin, just as before, and let him rest for three days.
Then lay him down again, and set him to walk gently until the limbs are comfortable.
Of a joint of the shoulder
The groin is dislocated in three ways: that is to say, inward and outward, and behind.
and does not dislocate forward.
And if the sign is that you command the patient to bend his knee to his groin, and he does not straighten up at his groin, then it is dislocated.
and let the patient sit upright, and extend his leg if he can, and place your back on his face, and put his foot on your feet;
then take his groin between your palms, and push it between your two hands, then fold the two sides of the groin together; and other servants stretch his foot so that the groin returns to its place, and let it be a sign that he has well restored his leg with light movement;
and put the plaster on, and let it dry by applying heat to his leg at the groin, and binding together three days or four, then release.
and do not worry about the sick man until his members are comfortable.
And if the limbs are not at all moved by that, stretch them greatly, just as we said in the treatment of hemlock, so long as they remain safe.
of the foot dislocation
The feet are sometimes swollen, and sometimes completely inflamed, and they swell inside and outside.
And the signs are that the ankle is swollen, and it tends before it is displaced at the part where it is displaced:
The remedy is lighter, and you must extend it lightly with your hands when it is only inflamed.
And when it is completely dislocated, you should seat the patient on his right side, and apply gentle pressure to the joint with a linen band above the ankle.
then take the stone to your right hand and then to your left twice, then stretch it upwards, and pour water well into the top of the stone.
and do this twice, as we have said, pouring and taking out the stone.
She has recovered;
If this is not the case, then it will begin again, because it recurs.
And if it cannot recur in that way, then have the patient lie on his back on the ground, and place a firm pad between his thighs, and tie tight cloth around, so that the patient does not bleed.
Then the ministers will apply to the joint, and another minister will extend the foot to his hands or to the cord that is tied around the neck. Then each minister extends it equally, and the cord is tied tightly between the thighs of the patient to hold them in place when being extended.
Then put the mirror on its level at the dislocation in its hands, and another minister holds the healthy leg down below, and the dislocation will return quickly.
And when it has come to a point, if one applies the plaster and casts on top, and the strain forms, and ties the foot to the leg, and binds the nerves that are above the ankle bone so that the ligaments are not too tight;
then he lets it be for two days or three, and if the strain occurs;
then he frees him on the third day or in the fourth, and sends him away after four days; and if he goes before the appointed time, it is not safety for him; he will dislocate again.
And if an abscess comes to a head, so you must calm it, just as we have said elsewhere, until it is healed.
of the two. When both are dislocated, so they must be extended with work, and it is a light matter.
If the dislocation is in any other position on the back or foot, then you should seat the patient upright either on a plain floor or on a bed, and place your foot under where these joints are located, then press with your foot firmly, until they come back.
And when it is even and nothing opens, then you should place under the sole of the foot a wooden board with two joints, then fix them firmly, and leave three days, then lift. And let him rest, until he is cured.
of wound and dislocation together
When a wound occurs with the dislocation and one attempts to restore it, this often happens that the patient dies.
if you are not presumptuous in the treatment, for if you are not skilled in the art and have not used it for a long time, and if you are not pitying or merciful and delaying unnecessarily, do not be too harsh.
and instruct the patient to begin with soothing treatments for an abscess, and let him lie in the hands of God, if you do not see a chance of recovery. and if you see a chance of recovery, then reset the limb immediately, so that the abscess is cleansed.
and if the limb is in place, administer soothing treatments for an abscess, and treat the wound as needed, using dried bandages.
and if there is a fracture with broken bones and small pieces of bone that must be extracted, do as we have said for simple diseases;
and beware not to fall into a state of fear, as I have said, for this is what your Creator has warned you against, and because it will lead to more suffering according to your own arm and body.
