O vos, tres chiers filz, je vos ai acomplit cest livre qui est li derriens de la science de medicine ensamble l’emplissement de lui, et ai fait la fin per ses expositions et par ses declarations.	O you, dear son, I have completed this book which is the last of the science of medicine along with its fulfillment, and I made the end through its expositions and by its declarations.
Et m’est venu en vision que je le vos acomplisse avec cest traitier, qui est partie de l’uevre de mains, c’est a savoir «cyrurgie».	And it came to me in a vision that I should complete it with this treatise, which is part of the work of the hands, namely surgery.
Et por ceu que l’uevre de mains est fortraite en nostre region et est etraingie dou tout en tout, si est perie li science et decopee, et n’est riens demorez de li fuers que les petites descriptions en livres des anciens que les mains ont muees.	And because the work of the hands is neglected in our region and is foreign to all, the science has been lost and severed, and nothing remains of its force except for small descriptions in books by the ancients that the hands have moved.
Et de ceu est venue li error et li vanitez, et sont closes les ententions et est aloignie li science.	And from this has come error and vanity, and intentions are closed off and science is kept at a distance.
Or me semble que je la vuel vivifier ensamble l’ordination de cest traitier selonc la voie d’exposition et de declaration et de l’abreviation; et venrai ensamble les formes des ferremens de cautere, et des autres estrumens de l’uevre avec l’ajostement de la declaration et de preparation de li, sicom il est mestier.	Here it seems to me that I should animate it together with the arrangement of this treatise according to the way of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and I will come together with the forms of the instruments of cautery, and other tools of the work with the adjustment of the declaration and preparation of them, as it is necessary.
Et por la raison de ceu que nuls boins maistres de mains n’est trovez en nostre tens, est li ars de medicine eslongié.	And because no good masters of the hands are found in our time, the art of medicine is neglected.
Et covient celui qui s’en entremet sormonter en la science d’anathomie, si com Galiens dit, tant qu’il saiche la juement des menbres, et les formes et les conjunctions et les separations d’aus, et aient connissance des osses et des nerf et des brais et le nombre d’ous, et le demenement et des voines movans et des reposans, et dou leu de lor issue.	And one who undertakes this should excel in the science of anatomy, as Galen says, as far as he knows the judgment of the members, and their forms and conjunctions and separations, and have knowledge of bones and nerves and veins and the moving and resting places of them, and where their channels originate.
Et por ceu dist Ypocras que li nons avec le non est mout, et avec l’uevre est poc; et meismement en l’art de main.	And Hypocras says that the name with the name is much, and with the work is little; and likewise in the art of the hand.
Nos vos disons en l’introite de cest livre que qui n’est conissans des choses devant dites, si se gart qu’il ne chiece en error et qu’il n’ocie les homes; ensi que j’ai veut maintes fois plusors de ces qui s’entremettent de ceste science et si s’abandonent sen science et sens experiment.	We tell you at the beginning of this book that whoever is not knowledgeable about the things previously mentioned, should be careful not to make mistakes and harm people; just as I have many times seen several of those who meddle in this science and then abandon it without knowledge or experience.
Car je vis un fol mire qui copa .i. apostume de scrophules ou col d’une femme, et copa les arteres dou col; por coi tant de sanc issit hors que li femme cheit morte entre ses mains.	For I saw a foolish doctor who lanced an abscess of scrofula on a woman's neck, and also cut the arteries in the neck; so much blood poured out that the woman died in his hands.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui traït une piere d’un home d’eaige, et li piere estoit grans; si emporta avec li une piece de la vessie, et fut mors li hons dedens .iij. jors.	And I saw another doctor who treated a stone in a man's bladder, and the stone was large; he took out a piece of the bladder with it, and the man died within three days.
Et je i avoie ja esteit apelez por lou traire, et vis la disposition dou malaide et la grandor de la piere, et soi bien s’on lou tailloit il en morroit.	And I had already been called to treat him, and I saw the condition of the patient and the size of the stone, and if they cut it out he would certainly die.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui prist en cure .i. duc de nostre terre qui avoit la jambe brisie, et avec la briseure ot plaie; et li mires plains d’ignorance estraint la brisure sus la plaie as esteles par fort lieure, et ne lassa a la plaie point de xalain, et le lassa ensi .i. termine; et li comanda qu’il ne la desliast mie; et demora ensi que li jambe fut toute enflee et li piez et vint a perdition.	And I saw another case where a knight of our land had his leg broken, and with the break he had a wound; and the ignorant doctors set the break above the wound with a strong bandage, and they left no padding on the wound, but left it with a bandage; and they ordered him not to remove it. And so it remained until the leg was completely swollen, as well as the foot, and he lost his limb.
Je fuis apelez por venir a lui, et me hastai por venir deslier la jambe; et quant je l’oi desloie si fut em pais et ne sentit point de dolor.	I was called to attend to him, and I hurried to loosen the bandage on his leg; and when I had loosened it he was in peace and felt no pain.
Mais toute voie li corruptions estoit ja confermee ou membre, et ne la poi saner; et ne cessa li corrution d’aler par le membre tant que li membres fut dou tout perdus.	However, the corruption had already settled in the limb, and I could not heal it; and the corruption continued to spread throughout the limb until the limb was completely destroyed.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui effondra .i. apostume enchancreit, et puis enflama per le malice de sa signorie.	And I saw another case where a doctor lanced an abscess that was swollen, and then it became inflamed due to the maliciousness of his lord.
Car chancre, quant il est purs d’umor melancolique, ne covient mie qu’on i(l) touche de fer s’il n’est en teil leu c’on puisse toute oster ce que est corrumpus.	Because when a ulcer is free of melancholy humor, it must not be touched with iron unless in such a place that one can completely remove all that which is corrupted.
Et por ceu, treschier filz, vos est besoig que vos sachiez que oevre de mains est devisee en .ij. divisions: c’est asavoir, huevre ou il a peril en plusors dispositions; et je mostrerai en chescun leu de cest livre ou il a paour et peril.	And for this, dear son, it is necessary that you know that the work of the hands is divided into two parts: that is, where there is danger in various situations; and I will show in each part of this book where there is fear and danger.
Por coi il est besoig que vos vos en gardez, si que li fol mire ne puissent mal parler de vos Si prenez vos armes en cusenson, et entreprenez vos malaides legierement et fermement, et usez de la millor voie si que per la graice de Deu vos venez a salut et soiez loez; et lassiez les maladies espoantables de grief saniteit; et ostez vos armes de ceu que vos fait douter, et aiez foit en vos si que vos puissiez venir de cestui monde a l’autre de gloire.	Take care that you guard against this, so that the foolish masses cannot speak ill of you. Take up your arms in confidence, and undertake your illnesses with lightness and firmness, and use the best route so that by God's grace you may come to salvation and be praised; leave behind terrible diseases of grief and illness; remove your armor from what makes you doubtful, and have faith in yourself so that you may pass from this world into one of glory.
Galiens dist en aucuns de ses amonestemens: «Ne prenez mie en cure male maladie, que vos ne soiez apelez fol mire.	Galen says in some of his admonitions: "Do not take on a serious illness unless you are called a foolish mass.
» J’ai deviseit cest traitier selonc III chapitres.	I have devised this treatise according to three chapters.
Li premiers chapitres est des cauteres de feu et dé cauteres de medicine ague, et est li chapitres ordenez de lou chief jusques as piez; et des formes des estrumens, et des ferremens de cautere, et de tout ceu qui est necessaire en l’ueuvre.	The first chapter is about fire cauteries and medical cauteries, and it covers the head down to the feet; also included are the forms of instruments and the tools for cautery, and all that is necessary for the practice.
Li secons chapitres si est de taillier et de percier, et des ventouses et des plaies, et des estractions des saiettes, et des semblans choses; et est li chapitres ordenez et les formes des estrumens.	The second chapter is about binding and strangulation, and arrow wounds, and stings, and venomous animal bites, and deadly wounds that come from piercing or strangulation; also included are the instruments used in these cases.
Li tiers chapitres est de restorer les dislocations et des torcions, et des semblans choses; et est ordeneiz des lou chief jusc’as piez, et des formes des estrumens.	The third chapter is about restoring dislocations and twists, and similar things; and it is ordered from the head to the feet, and of the forms of instruments.
Ainsois que nos nos remembriens de l’uevre, il covient que je die la qualiteit de l’aide et dou nuisement de chescune complexion.	Thus, as we remember the work, it is fitting that I say something about the nature of each temperament and their harmful effects.
Je dis que li qualiteis de l’aide, et dou nuisement, est li plus longe parole et subtilz science et li secrez reponus; et de ceu parlerent li plusors des saiges, et s’acorderent a ceu; et me soffisent poc lor paroles, car je redous la longesce.	I say that the qualities of aid and harm are among the most lengthy subjects and subtle sciences, and their secret responses; and the majority of sages spoke about these, and agreed on this: and I am satisfied with a little of their words, for I abhor lengthiness.
Je dis que cautere aide universement a toute complexion ou il a matiere, fuer que .ij. complexions: c’est a savoir complexion chaude sens matere, et complexion seche sens matere.	I say that cautery aids universally in all complexes where there is matter, be it one of two complexes: namely, hot complex without matter, and dry complex without matter.
En complexion chaude et seche ensamble matiere, deviserent aucun et dirent que cautere i est grans aide; et li autre dirent le contraire: que cautere ne vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de sechour.	In hot and dry complexions, some people say that cautery is very helpful; others say the opposite, that cautery is not useful for diseases that arise from heat and dryness.
Car li nature dou feu si est chaude, et ne doit mie estre cureiz de chaude maladie par chalor, ne per sechour; et dist cil qui dist lou contraire que cautere fait grant aide a maladie chaude et seche que vient en cors des homes.	For the nature of fire is hot, and it should not be treated with heat for hot diseases, nor for dryness; and those who say otherwise claim that cautery is very effective for hot and dry diseases that arise in the bodies of humans.
Car quant tu comperes le cors de l’ome et sa moistor a la complexion dou feu, tu trueves le cors froit.	For when you compare the human body and its moisture to the nature of fire, you find the body cold.
Et je m’acorde a ceste parole.	And I agree with this statement.
Car je l’ai troveit aucune fois per experiment.	For I have found this to be true through experimentation.
Et toute voie, ne s’en entremette mie fuers que cil qui l’a esproveit, et qui conoit par lonc usaige le chapistre des cauteres, et la diversiteit des complexions des homes, et les dispositions et les causes de lor maladies, et les sorvenues et l’espaice dou tens; des autres complexions n’avons nos mie paour, meismement em maladies froides et moistes.	And yet, one should not meddle with it unless they have experience with cauterization and a long-standing understanding of the diversity of human complexions, the dispositions and causes of their illnesses, their outcomes, and the seasons; we fear not at all for other complexions, especially in cold and moist diseases.
Et tuit li mire s’asemblerent et s’acorderent au cautere.	And all the doctors agreed and concurred about the cautery.
Et sachiez, filz, que cautere ensamble feu si est des secrez des cures, et de plus grant bonteit que cautere de medicine ardant.	And know, my son, that cautery combines fire with the secrets of cures, and is of greater goodness than burning cautery of medicine.
Car li feus est simples, et ne vient mie fuers que au membre qui est cuis, et ne nuit a autre membre se poc nom.	For fire is simple, and it does not spread to any other part of the body apart from where it is applied, and it does no harm if properly used.
Les medicines ardans vienent de membre a autre en aloignant, et font venir au membre maladies de grief sanation; et par aventure ocit lou malaide Li feus por sa hautece et por la bonteit de sa substance ne fait mie ceu, s’il n’i a superfluiteit.	Burning medicines pass from one part of the body to another by moving away and bringing illness to the body; and sometimes they kill the patient Fire because of its intensity and because of the goodness of its substance does not do this if there is no excess.
Et ceu vos ai je troveit par experiment et par la longesce dou servise et de l’estude que j’ai mis en l’art, et esteit sus la verteit des choses; et por ceu je m’escuse de la longesce de la parole, car il ne me plait mie que je vos oste le secreit qui est reponus ou feu, et la qualiteit de l’uevre, coment il deboute les maladies des cors, si com li philosophe le dit en demostrant; or le recevez en vos pensees.	And I have found this to be true through experiment and through the length of my service and study in medicine, and from being conversant with the truth of things; therefore I excuse myself for the length of my explanation, because it does not please me to take away the secret which is contained within fire, or the nature of its action in healing diseases, as the philosopher describes. So receive this into your thoughts.
Et sachiez, fil, que il s’acorderent en quel tens doient estre faites les cauteres, et eslirent prientens.	And know, son, that they agreed on what time cauteries should be performed, and chose a favorable moment.
Et je dis que cautere est covenable en tous tens, por ceu que li nuisemens sorvenans est desoz mis par l’aide dou cautere; et meismement se li cauteres est por dolors necessaires fors et hastans que ne puent atendre le tens que plus grans malice ne veigne au membre.	And I say that cautery is appropriate at all times, because the harmfulness that arises underneath is removed by the help of cautery; and likewise if the cautery is for necessary, urgent pains that cannot wait until a later time when greater harm might come to the limb.
Et n’i pensez onques, chier fil, si com font li fol mire; car a la maladie qui est sanee par cautere n’a point de revenue; et il le dient ensi; mais il n’est mie si com il cuident, por ce que cauteres nen est que medicine qui mue la complexion, et seche les humors que sont cause de la dolor, et vaut mues que medicine por le hastement de sa valor, et por la vertut de son oevre et de sa signorie.	And never think, dear son, as the foolish do; for the disease that is healed by cautery does not return; and they say so; but it is not as they believe, for cauteries are not medicines that move the complexion, and dry the humors that cause pain, and are worth more than other medicines because of their swiftness, and because of the virtue of their action and their lordship.
Et possans chose est que li maladie viegne aucune fois selonc la complexion dou malaide et lou leu de la maladie et sa vertut; et sont assemblees en lui les superfluitez par l’aquisition des viandes et des semblans choses, se ce n’est cauteres administrez em leu ou il ait poc de superfluitez et de moistor, si com cauteres de dens por la dolor, et les semblans choses, et teil dolor ne revient mie; mais ce avient poc.	And it is possible that the disease comes sometimes according to the complexion of the patient, and the place of the disease, and its strength; and the excesses are gathered in him through the digestion of foods and similar things, if cauteries are not administered in a place where there is little excess and moisture, as in dental cauteries for pain, and similar things, and such pain does not return; but that happens rarely.
Et mout de gens n’entendent mie por coi cauteres est apelez li derriens de medecine, et c’est voir; mais il ne croient mie que cauteres vaille aprés medicine, mais lor ententions est fause, et est cauteres li derriens de medicine por ceu que quant nos aministrons manieres de cures en aucune maladie et elles ne valent, adonc administrons nos le cautere, et il vaut.	And many people do not understand why cauteries are called the last resort of medicine, and it is true; but they do not believe that cauteries are worth more than medicine, but their intentions are false, and cauteries are the last resort of medicine because when we administer methods of treatment for any illness and they are ineffective, then we administer the cautery, and it works.
Adonques apert bien que cauteres est li derriens de medicine, ne mie selonc l’entention des folz mires.	Therefore, it is clear that cauteries are indeed the last resort of medicine, not according to the understanding of foolish people.
Li ancien dirent que cauteres d’estrument d’or est muedres que de fer, et ne dirent ceu fuers que por la qualiteit de l’or et por la hautece de sa substance; et dirent que li leus de cautere ne fait mie porriture, mais ceu n’est mie voir car je l’ai esprovei, et ai troveit que c’est voir en aucuns homes; et cauteres d’or vaut mues que de fer, si com il lou dirent.	The ancient ones said that cauteries made of gold instruments are milder than those of iron, and they said this only because of the quality of gold and its high value; and they said that cauterization does not cause inflammation, but this is not true, for I have tested it and found it to be so in some people.
Et toutevoie quant tu chaufes estrument d’or, tu ne seis mie quant il est chaus par la color de l’or, et s’est tantost refroidiez; et s’on le chaufe trop; si font au feu; et ensi i a assez d’empechement.	And yet, when you heat an instrument made of gold, you cannot tell when it is hot by the color of the gold, and it cools down immediately; and if it is heated too much, it will melt in the fire; and thus there is sufficient precaution.Et il faut que li cauteristes soit bon esprouviers, car oncques ne doit il aler trop lor; et il doit veoir si il est chaus por la color, et ne doit il le chaufer de plusors; et s’il l’alait trop, il ne le doit pas faire, car il en viendrat grant mal.
Et por ce usons nos de cautere de feir que nos l’avons mues apparilliet a nostre oevre.	And for this, we use fire cautery which we have prepared for our work.
Or vos ai ordeneit cest chapitre des lou chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que li voie soit plus legiere a trover.	Here I have arranged this chapter from the head to the feet so that the way is easier to find.
dou cautere olivaire	of the olive cautery
Cist cauteres vaut a moistor et a froidor sus lou cerveil, et en i a dous c’on fait par la cause d’une maladie qui est apelee «soda», et par la cause de maintes humors qui dessendent dou chief as eulz, et as oreilles, et por multitude de songes et dolor de dens et dolor de gorge, et meismement a toutes maladies qui vienent de froidor si com paralisie et sode et apoplexie et semblans maladies.	This cautery is good for moisture and coldness on the head, and there are two types of disease caused by it, one called "soda", and by many humors which descend from the head to the eyes, and ears, and also from many diseases that come from coldness such as paralysis, soda, apoplexy, and similar illnesses.
Li forme de cest cautere si est que li malaides soit espurgiez par medicine solutive mondifiant le chief .iij. nuis ou .iiij., selonc ceu que li vertus et li eaige et li acostumance dou malaide le puet soffrir; et puis fai rere lou chief dou malaide.	The form of this cautery is that the patient be purged with a purifying medicine for three or four nights, depending on what the condition, age, and tolerance of the patient can bear; then have the head of the patient shaved.
Et puis le fai seoir croisiet entre tes mains, et mettre ses mains sor som peis; aprés met la racine de ta palme sus la racine de son neis entre ses .ij. eulz; et lai ou venra tes dois moiens, si saigne d’enche puis eschaufe le cautere qui est apelé «olivare», de coi ci est li forme:	Then have him sit cross-legged in your lap, and place his hands on his knees; afterward, place the root of your palm upon the root of his nose between his two eyes; and where your middle finger comes to, there will you apply the cautery, which is called "olivare", and this is how it is made:
Et le met sor le leu signiet d’encre, et fai en dessendant et en estraignant ta main poc et poc en trestornant; puis lieve ta main isnelement, et rewarde le leu se tu vois l’os .i. sol petit; et se tu ne lou vois, si rencomence le cautere tant que tu voies l’os si com je lou t’ai dit; aprés pren .i. poc de seil, et met en awe et molle coton dedens, et met sor le leu, et li laisse .iij. jors; aprés met sus cotun moilliet en burre; et laisse sus tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés cure la plaie de l’oignement qui est apelez «tetrafarmaçon», tant qu’il soit sanez.	And place it upon the spot marked with ink, and move your hand up and down in a twisting motion; then lift your hand gently, and feel for the bone with your finger; if you do not feel the bone, repeat the cautery as I have instructed until you feel the bone; afterward, take some salt, place it in a piece of cloth, and apply it to the wound; leave it for three days; then apply an ointment called  "tetrafarmaçon" until the wound is healed.
Et se dirent li ancien, que quant plus demoure overte li plaie, plus s’espurge; et por ce si aide mues.	And the ancients say that the more the wound remains open, the more it purges itself; and because of this, they recommend using a poultice.
Et dirent aucun de ces que on doit tant lassier le cautere que partie de l’os soit arse, et puis rese on ceu qui est ars de l’os, et soit curez.	And some say that one should let the cautery burn so much that part of the bone is burned, and then have what is burned of the bone resected and then cured.
Et dient li autre c’on doit le cautere tant lassier sus, et bouter si fort c’on abaite de l’os ausi large comme .i. vertoil que les femmes mettent en lor fusez por ceu que les humors issent mues hors; et doit on lassier la plaie longement overte; aprés le doit on curer et sodeir.	And others say that one should let the cautery burn so much, and press so hard that one removes bone as wide as a needle that women put in their fuse to allow fluids to flow out; then one must leave the wound open for a long time; after which one must cure and bandage it.
Et ces .ij. manieres de cauteres ne me semblent mie estre bones dou tout en tout, fuers qu’en aucuns homes ou il ait voie de paor; et mues me semble que je lou doie laissier; car li chiés li est afoiblis par les solutions continuees de nature, si com nos le tesmoignons ens autres membres; et meisme quant li chiés dou malaide est foibles par nature, et li premiere semblance de cautere est plus salve et muedre por moi, et de celi use je oevre en donques emsamble salut.	And these two methods of cautery do not seem good to me in every way, except in some people where there is fear; and I think I should leave it alone; for the shoulder is weakened by continued solutions of nature, as we witness in other members; and likewise when the shoulder of the patient is weak by nature, and the first appearance of cautery is more safe and mild for me, and with this I work together for salvation.
de l’anciainne dolor dou chief	of the old pain in the head
Quant en tout le chief vient dolor croniques, et dure longement, si doit user li malaides yeris et pilules qui sont apelees «cochie», et d’espurgement de chief et d’oiles et d’emplastres; et s’on li fait le cautere que nos avons devant dit, et il ne vaut.	When chronic pain lasts a long time in the entire head, one should use herbs and pills that are called "cochie", as well as purgatives for the head, oils, and plasters. If they then perform the cautery that we mentioned earlier and it is ineffective,
Pren warde se li chiés dou malade est de fort nature, et qu’il ne soit trop froit; adonques le cauterize desoz celui cautere un poc que nos avons dit desus.	Take care that the head of the patient is not of a cold nature and is not too cold; then cauterize it under this fire cautery a little bit as we said above.
Aprés fai cautere sus chescune corne dou chief jusc’a l’os, si com devant avons dit, et fai .i. cautere ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz»; et est .i. leus en coi on met ventouses; et alige ta main si que tu ne voises mie jusc’a l’os: li malaides sent trop plus grant dolor en cest cautere que as autres, et je em parlerai aillors; et covient que li cauteres des cornes soient plus subtis que cil dont on cautere la moieneteit dou chief, et c’est li forme:	Afterwards, cauterize each horn of the head just to the bone, as we said before, and do one cautery in the place called "vasselz"; and there is a place for which cupping glasses are used; and lighten your hand so that you do not go to the bone: the patient feels much more pain from this cautery than from the others, and I will speak about it later. The cauteries on the horns should be thinner than those used for cauterizing the middle of the head, and its shape is:
dou cautere dou chief	of the cautery of the head:
Quant en une partie dou chief vient dolor sodaine, et est estendue li maladie jusc’a l’oil, et li chiés est espurgiez par medicines mondifians, et on a fait les autres cures que j’ai dit en la division des maladies, et tout ceu ne profite mie: adonques li fai cauteres selonc .ij. manieres, c’est a savoir de medicine ague et de feir.	When sudden pain arises in the head and the illness extends to the eye, and the shoulder is purged with purifying medicines, and one has performed the other treatments I have described in the section on diseases, and none of this helps; then one should apply cauteries in two ways, that is, with a hot iron and with fire.
Li cauteres de medicine ague si est que tu preignes une doce d’alz, et oste l’escorce et le recope .i. poc as .ij. chiés, et puis fent la temple ou li dolor tient en teil maniere que tu puisses reponre la doce d’alz desoz le cuir; et quant elle sera reponuee si le lie et l’estraint bien et le laisse ensi .xij. houres; et puis le deslie et trait fuers la doce d’ail, et laisse la plaie ensi .ij. jors ou .iij.; puis met sus cotun plongiet en burre tant que porreture en isse.	For the cautery with a hot iron, take an almond and remove its shell and coat it in honey; then press it onto both shoulders for about twelve minutes, and once it is pressed on, tie it firmly in place and leave it for twelve hours; then untie it and move it away from the almond, leaving the wound as it is for two or three days; then place a linen cloth soaked in butter over the wound until suppuration occurs.
Aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues si fai ceu d’aucunes medicines comburans que j’ai escrites ou dozime traitier des medicines comburans.	After the wound has healed, apply ointment until it is completely healed; and if you wish, use one of the burning remedies I have written about in the twelfth chapter on burning remedies.
Li cautere de fer si est selonc ceste meniere.	The fire cautery is done in this way.
Chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	Heat the cautery tool until it is the right temperature.
Et est apelez «clos» por ceu que li chief est fait a la forme d’un clo ou il ait .i. poc de corbeure, et em mileu a une petite apparance; et le met sor le leu dolorous, et tien ta main et trestorne le feir un poc legierement, tant que li moitiez de l’espés dou keur soit arse; et lieve ta main que li artere n’arde, que est defuers, et decorre habundance de sanc.	And it is called a "clot" because the head is formed in the shape of a clot with a little hollow in the middle, and it is placed over the painful area, and you hold your hand and twist it slightly so that half of the thickness of the skin is burned; and then take away your hand so that the artery does not burn, for it will burst and blood will flow abundantly.
Aprés met coton en awe de seil, et met sor le leu par .iij. jors; puis i met coton moilliet em burre, et puis cure le leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vuelz cauterize ceste emigraine avec le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare», a tout la pointe, et te garde de coper l’artere en ceste emigraine qui n’est mie anciaine.	Afterwards, put cotton in wine and place it on the spot for three days; then put wet cotton soaked in butter, and then heal the area with ointment until it is cured; and if you wish to cauterize this hematoma with the cautery called "cultellare", do so at the very tip, but be careful not to touch the artery in this hematoma, which is not an old one.
de emigraine	of hematoma
Quant tu cures emigraine si com nos avons devant dit en divisions des maladies, et ne profite mie, et vois que li cauteres devant dis de la medicine et dou fer ne li soffit mie, adonques covient il que tu eschaufes le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare» tant qu’il soit blans; et seigne ainsois sor le leu doillant une ligne de demi doi de lonc, et oste ta main une fois, et l’estrain que tu ne coper l’artere et que ne viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde de la mandibule que muet quant on menjut, et li ners n’ait regart que la muet et que spasmus ne veigne a malaide, et te warde de decorrement de sanc de l’artere quant elle sera copee, ou copement ait grant paour et meismement a celui que ne s’i conoit, et qui n’est estudians et esprovez; et laisse l’uevre em mi voie; mais je vos dirai coment on restainche sanc quant li artere est copee, et je vos mostrerai a leu ou il afiert en cest livre.	When you cure hematoma as we have previously discussed in the divisions of diseases, and it does not help, and you see that the cauteries previously mentioned in medicine, whether with fire or with iron, do not help, then you must heat the cautery called  "cultellare" until it is white; and sign thus on the painful area a line half a digit long, and take away your hand once, and press so that you do not touch the artery and so that the blood does not flow to the bone; and be careful of the jaw so that it does not bite when one chews, and the nerve has no sensation, and so that spasms do not come to the patient, and be careful of bleeding from the artery when it is cut, for cutting causes great fear, especially to those who are not familiar or experienced with it; and leave the wound open; but I will tell you how to stop the flow of blood from an artery when it is cut, and I will show you where it opens in this book.
Et se tu vois que cist cauteres ne soffise mie a la maladie, et li malaides est soffrans, cauterize le enmi le chief ausi com nos avons dit, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et se tu vues, aministre le cautere que nos avons dit ou chapistre de l’estraction de l’artere, avec le cautere qui ait .ij. coutelz; et est cist cauteres millors de celui et plus aidans.	And if you see that this cautery does not suffice for the disease, and the patient is suffering, cauterize him in the middle of the head as we have said, and treat the wound until it is healed; and if you see fit, administer the cautery that we have described in the chapter on the extraction of the artery, with the cautery that has .ij. blades; and this cautery is better and more effective.
de la dolor des oreilles de part froidor	from pain in the ears due to coldness
Quant en l’oreille vient dolor de froit, et on i a ovreit de medicines solutives et des autres cures que nos avons dit en la division, et li dolors ne se muet, adonques eschaufe cest cautere qui est apelez «poins», de coi ci est li forme:	When there is pain in the ear from cold, and one has applied dissolving medicines and other treatments that we have described in the division, and the pain does not go away, then heat this cautery, which is called a «point», with which there is a needle at its end:
Aprés pointoie tout entor l’oreille malaide, ou entor les .ij. se la dolor tient en ambedous, et t’esloigne un poc ensus de la racine de l’oreille puis que tu as signiet le leu d’enche; et ait .x. poins entor chescune oreille; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After puncturing all around the sick ear, or around both ears if the pain is in both, and then move a little way up from the root of the ear once you have marked the area to be cauterized; and there should be .x. points around each ear; afterwards treat the area until it is healed.
de la torture de la bouche	of the torture of the mouth
Torture qui doit estre curee par cautere nen est fuers que de celles que muevent de fleume, si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladie; et ne faire point de cautere as semblances que vienent de sechor et de spame de ners.	There is no cautery for the torments of the mouth except those that come from pus, as we have said in the divisions of diseases; and do not apply cautery to appearances that come from dryness and nerve-spasm.
Quant tu cures ceste semblance de torture qui muet de fleume d’ydres et d’espurgemens de chief et de gargarisme, et ceu ne vaut, adonc covient que tu cauterizes le malaide de .iij. cauteres: l’une en la racine de l’oreille, et l’autre un poc defuers la temple, et le tier en l’ajostement des .ij. levres; et met le cautere en la partie qui apert saine, et li fai cautere endroit le chief de l’oreille desus un poc desoz la corne dou chief, et un autre en la temple ausi longe com uns poce; et laisse le cautere tant sus que li moitiez dou keur soit arse; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	When you treat this appearance of torture that comes from pus, fluids, and discharges from the head, and from gargling, and if this does not work, then you must cauterize the patient with 3 cauteries: one in the root of the ear, and another a little way above the temple, and the third at the junction of the two lips; and place the cautery on the part that appears healthy, and make the cautery on the top of the ear above the horn of the head a little way underneath, and another on the temple as long as a finger; and leave the cautery on until half of the brain is burned; and this is the shape of the cautery:
Et est li semblance dou cutellaire que nos avons mise devant, mais il est un poc plus subtilz et covient que li coutelz soit un poc plus gros; aprés cure lou leu si com j’ai devant dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the appearance of the scalpel that we mentioned before, but it is a little more slender and the blade should be a little thicker; afterwards treat the place as I have said before, until it is healed.
Quant apoplexie est ancieinne et tu la cures ensi com nos avons dit, et il ne profite mie, et li malaides n’ait fievre, adonques li fai .iiij. cauteres: .ij. sus les .ij. cornes dou chief, et .i. emmi le chief, et .i. ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz» si com nos avons devant dit, et lou derrien cautere sus la bouche de l’estomac; et soit curez si com nos avons dit devant.	When apoplexy is old and you treat it thus as we have said, and it does not improve, and the patient has a fever, then do four cauteries: two on the two horns of the head, and one in the middle of the head, and one in the place called "vassels" as we have said before, and the last cautery on the mouth of the stomach; and let it be treated as we have said before.
de litargie	of litharge
A cest maladie covient doner au malaide yeres grans et pilules mondifians le cerveil; aprés reis lou chief dou malaide tout, et li met sus l’occipite l’emplaustre de sinapi qui est escrit ou traitier des emplastres; et c’est li maniere dou cautere: si lou fai si com j’ai dit.	For this disease, give the patient large pills and purgatives to cleanse the brain; then shave the head of the patient all over, and apply to the back of the neck the plaster of mustard which is written about in the book on plasters; and here is how to do the cautery: perform it as I have said.
S’il est sanez ensi, boin est; et s’il ne l’est, se li fai .iij. cauteres des emmi le chief en dessendant jusc’a col, et ait d’espaice entre chescun cautere .i. doi de gros; et le cure si com les autres, et se tu i vues ajoster, et li malaides est soffrans, se li fai .i. cautere en mileu; et se mestiers est, .ij. autres sus les .ij. cornes, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare», si com j’ai devant dit.	If he is cured thus, it is good; and if not, do three cauteries in the middle of the head, descending just to the neck, and have one and a half inches between each cautery; and cure him as with the others, and if you see fit to adjust it, and the patient is suffering, do one cautery in the middle; and if necessary, two more on the two horns, and cure him as before. And let the cautery be that which is called "olive", as I have said before.
de la froidor dou chief	of cold from the head
Il covient que li chief soit mundifiez de yeres et de ceu que nos avons devant dit; aprés reis le chief dou malaide, puis li fai cautere emmi le chief et sus chescune corne, et .i. derrier et .iij. sus l’espinee dou col; et se tu en as plus mestier, et li cors est moiste et li malaides est soffrans, et li maladie est fors, se li fai .iiij. cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos; et li laisse tant que li plus dou keur soit ars, et lieve ta main; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare» que nos avons devant dit.	It is necessary to cleanse the head of hair and anything else that we have previously mentioned; then raise the head of the patient, and make cauterization on the head and on each horn, one behind and three upon the spine of the neck; and if you require more, and the body is moist and the patient can endure it, and the disease is strong, he makes four cauterizations upon the spine of the back; and let him be until the heart is burned most, then lift your hand; after cure it until it is healed, and let the cautery called "olive" which we have previously mentioned.
de l’epilempsie	of epilepsy
Li epilentiques ne doit useir de cautere fuers que cil qui est fleumatique, et covient premier mondifier le cerveil de yeres et d’autres cures que nos avons dites en la division quant li malaides est grans et soffrans de penre medicine.	Epileptics should not use fire cautery except for those who are phlegmatic, and it is necessary to first cleanse the brain of hair and other remedies that we have mentioned in the division when the disease is great and suffering from taking medicine.
Et se c’est uns enfes qui ne lou puisse soffrir, se li fai gargarisme et mastication mondifiant le cerveil sovent avec bones viandes; aprés li reis lou chief em mileu, et i fai .i. cautere selonc ce que nos avons dit devant, et .i. cautere sus lou vassel, et sus chescune corne; et se li malaides est fors et soffrans, se li fai cauteres si com j’ai dit a celui qui ait paralisie et mollification de cors, sus l’espinee dou dos et dou col, et soit li cauteres olivier selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if it is an infant who cannot bear it, make them gargle and chew, cleansing the brain often with good meats; after that, the king will take the head in the middle, and he will make .a cautery according to what we have said before, and a cautery on the vessel, and on each horn; and if the disease is strong and painful, make cauteries as I have said for paralysis and softening of the body, on the spine of the back and neck, and let the cauteries be of olive wood according to the manner that I have said.
Se li malaides est enfes, se li fai .i. cautere subtil selonc ceste maniere:	If the disease is in an infant, make a small cautery according to this method:
Quant par la cause de melancolie sunt les superfluitez ou les moistors corrumpues et fleume grosse, adonques lou cauterize de teils cauteres com nos avons dit a celui qui ait paralisie.	When through the cause of melancholy there are corrupted humours and thick phlegm, then cauterize with mild cauteries as we have said for paralysis.
Et se par la cause de melancolie est li superfluitez declinans a melancolie, et est li cors dou malaide moistes, adonc li done a boivre chose par coi li cervelz soit mundifiez, selonc ceu qu’il est devant en la division.	And if through the cause of melancholy the humours are inclined towards melancholy, and the body of the patient is moist, then give them something to drink that will cleanse the brain, according to what is said before in the division.
Aprés reis lou chief dou malaide; aprés fai .i. torteil de lin bien fait, ausi com .i. cercle, si le met emmi le chief; et li malaides sié croisiez, et soit bien tenus de toutes pars; aprés presente le linement, et vaut mues de burre de berbis ancien; et lou chaufe a feu tempreement, si que li dois s’on li boute le puisse soffrir; aprés vuide le cercle par dedens emmi le chief, et lou laisse refroidier; et fai ce a malaide chescune semaine une fois avec autre governement boin, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the head of the sick person has been shaved, then make a tourniquet out of linen well-made, as a circle, and put it around the head; and tie the patient's arms in a cross, and hold them tightly from all sides; then apply the plaster, and add some mastic of old mutton tallow; heat it gently over fire so that it can be endured when applied; then remove the tourniquet from inside the head, and let it cool down; and do this to the sick person once a week with proper care, until they are healed.
Ou se tu vues cauterize lou en faisant poins plusors a tot le cautere.	Or, if you wish to cauterize the eye, make several small points on the entire cautery tool.
Ceste maniere de cautere amoistit le cerveil igaument; et puis met sus coton moilliet en burre et en graisse de geline.	This cautery method moistens the brain, increasing its size; then place wet cotton in butter and grease from a goose.
de l’awe des eulz	of their eyes
Quant awe vient premierement as eulz par les signes que j’ai dit en la division, adonques encomence et done boivre au malaide chose mundifiant le chief, et le warde de toutes moistors, et lou fai suer ou bain plusors fois a jeun.	When awfulness first comes to the eyes through the signs that I have mentioned in the division, then begin and give the patient drink that cleanses the head, and guard it from all moisture, and make him sweat in a bath several times while fasting.
Aprés li comande a rere son chief, et li fai cautere emmi le chief, et li fai .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. temples se li dessendemens de l’awe est as .ij. eulz ensamble, ou en .i. se li dessendemens est en .i.; et cope a tout le cautere toutes les voines et les arteres que sont desoz le keur, et soient li cautere lonc selon lou large de la temple; et te warde de decorrement de sanc, et se tu vois trop de sanc issir, si li estainche de teil pooir com tu as.	After commanding him to raise his head, and he cauterizes him in the head, and he makes 2 cauteries on the 2 temples if the descents of the eyes are together, or in 1 if the descent is in 1; and cover all the veins and arteries that are under the heart with the cautery, and make the cauteries long according to the width of the temple; and beware of bleeding, and if you see too much blood coming out, then stop it as best you can.
Et je t’enseignerai en l’estraction des arteres et a l’incision la cautele coment tu l’estencheras; et aucune fois fait on cautere ou hatereil desoz les .ij. os derrier.	And I will teach you in the extraction of arteries and in the incision the cautery how you should stop it; and sometimes a cauterization or cutting is made under the 2 bones at the back.
dou cors des larmes	where the body weeps
Quant les larmes des eulz sont ancienes et acostumees et sont sus les voines, ou delez les arteres que sont en l’aparance dou chief defors; et on voit que c’est des superfluitez froides fleumatiques, adonques li fai le cautere que j’ai dit en l’encomencement de l’awe dessendant as eulz: .i. cautere emmi le chief, et .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. temples, et .ij. cauteres ou haiterel desoz les .ij. os; et s’il i a besoigne plus, si le cauterize saigement desus le sorcil a tout .i. petit cautere.	When the tears are old and accustomed, and are on the veins, or near the arteries that are in the appearance of the head outward; and one sees that it is from cold phlegmatic superfluities, then he makes the cautery that I have said in the descent of the eyes: 1 cauterization in the head, and 2 cauteries on the 2 temples, and 2 cauterizations or cutting under the 2 bones; and if there is more need, then cauterize bleeding above the eyebrow with a small cautery all over.
dou cors des larmes par dedens les eulz	from the body through the eyes
Quant tu le medicines selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et il ne profite mie, adonques done a boivre a malaide .iij. nuis cochies; aprés li reis le chief, et li fai cautere ou mileu dou cautere olivaire; et fai .ij. cauteres dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis» sus les .ij. sorcis, un poc desoz les chevous; et te warde de l’artere que tu ne la coper.	When you treat him according to what we have said in the discussion, and he does not improve, then give the patient four nights of bleeding; then cut his head, and cauterize him with olive oil in the middle of the cautery; and make two cauteries with the cautery called "clavilis" on the two joints, one a little under the hairline; and be careful not to touch the artery.
Et c’est li forme dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis»:	And this is the form of the cautery that is called "clavilis":
Quant li papiere de l’oil est mollifie de maladie et de moistor, adonques la cautarize de cest cautere qui est apelez «olivare».	When the film of the eye becomes soft due to illness and moisture, then cauterize it with this cautery tool called "olive".Li cautere de fer si est selonc ceste maniere.
de coi ci est li forme:	The fire cautery is done in this way.
Et se tu vues si fai .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. sorcis ausi lons com li sorcilz sont; et n’i lassiez mie la main fors que tant que li tierce partie de la papiere soit arse, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if you see that there are two warts as long as the warts themselves; and do not leave your hand on them except until the third part of the paper is burned, according to the way I have said.
dou poil qui point l’oil	the hair that pricks the eye
Aucune fois avient que li poil des oilz sont convertit au pardedens, et poignent l’oil, et i fait on cauteres selonc .ij. manieres: c’est a savoir de feu, ou de medicine ardant.	Sometimes the hairs of the eyes are reversed and prick the eye, and they make cauteries according to two methods: that is to say, by fire or by burning medicine.
Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals; et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.	For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Quant il naissent et i sont igalz, adonques met le malaide en ton sain; aprés seigne sus la papiere des eulz une figure que soit ausi com li fuelle dou mirte, et soit li comencemens dou signe delez les poilz; puis i met coton moilliet en glaire d’uef et muscillaige de persillion sus l’oil, puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When they sprout and are even, then put the patient in a healthy state; after that, draw on paper a figure which is also like the leaf of the myrtle, and let the beginning of the sign be among the hairs; then put wet cotton in egg white and the mucous membrane of an onion over the eye, then heat the cautery so that this is the shape:
Aprés cauterize sus la figure que tu as signiet poc et poc mout de fois, que li keurs soit ars lai endroit; et li signes de la santeit de l’uevre est que tu voies la papiere retraite, et les poilz levez a la pointure de l’oil; adonques lieve ta main, et laisse ensi .iij. jors, puis i met coton moilliet en burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	After that, cauterize on the figure you have marked little by little many times, until the area is burned; and the sign of the health of the work is that you see the paper pull back, and the hairs rise at the tip of the eye; then lift your hand and leave it thus for 3 days, then put wet cotton in lard as long as the scald is healed; after that cure with ointment until it is healthy.
Et se aprés ceu vienent li poilz, et li papiere est mollifie adonques rencomence le cautere sus cel leu meisme, si com tu as fait premiers; et se li poil sont defuer, si le cauterize tant que li papiere soit levee a son leu natureil, et soit igals, et ne poignent mie li poil l’oil.	And if after that the hairs come and the paper is softened, then start the cautery again on the same spot, just as you did before; and if the hairs are pulled out, then cauterize until the paper is raised to its natural level, and are even, and do not prick the eye.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient grans et igalz, puis fai de parchemin la forme de la foille de mirte; puis pren de savon fransois et de vive chalz, de chescun une .З., et broie ensamble bien; et le fai hastanment, si qu’il ne refroide, puis en espant sus la forme que tu es fait sicom la foille dou mirte, et met sus la papiere des eulz; et se li maladie tient en .i. oil soulement, si doit on ovrer en .i., et se en ambedous ausi; et met desoz l’oil coton moilliet en abin d’uef; et li chiés dou malaide soit en ton sain et met ton doi mostrant sus la medicine, et presse .i. poc et lou muef toutes les fois que li malaide sent mordication de la medicine, car il sent mordication ausi com de feu.	The burning cautery of medicine is that you instruct the patient to let the hairs grow large and even, then make on parchment the shape of the leaf of myrtle; then take French soap and live coals, of each 1/3, and grind them together well; and make it quickly so that it does not cool, then spread it over the shape you made like the leaf of myrtle, and put it under the eye; and if the disease is in one eye only, then work on that one, and if both, then do the same; and put wet cotton in egg white under the eye; and let the patient's hand be in a healthy state and place your finger showing over the medicine, and press 1 little bit and move it all the time that the patient feels biting from the medicine, because he feels biting just as from fire.
Quant tu as ceu fait longement, si oste la medicine a ton doit.	When you have done this for a long time, then remove the medicine from your body.
Et quant li mordication sera passee, si leve le leu d’awe, et rewarde se tu vois la papiere levee ausi com s’ele estoit levee par constraignement de feu ou par incision; et s’il est ensi, si est bien.	And when the bite has healed, lift up the eyelid and check if you can see the film raised up as it was by the heat or by incision; if so, all is well.
Se ceu non, si remet encor de la medicine sus lou leu ou li medicine n’ait ovreit, tant que tes ovraiges soit igalz, et tes eulz mis a point; puis met sus coton moilliet en burre tant que li keurs ars soit cheus, aprés cure le leu de l’oignement qui est apelez «dyafenis» et d’autre, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If not, apply more medicine to the eyelid or where the medicine has not worked, until your efforts are successful and the eyes are positioned correctly; then place wet cotton in butter until the burns heal, after which treat the area with the ointment called "dyaphenis" and others, until it is healed.Li cautere de feu si est selonc ceste maniere:
Et se t’est mestier que tu te warde bien a ton ovraige par grant warde qu’il ne chiece point de la medicine as eulz.	And if you need to be careful with your work, so that it does not break the medicine on them.
Et se li papiere devient mole aprés, et li poil poignent en l’oil, si recomence la medicine sus celui leu qui est mollifiez de la papiere proprement, ensi com tu as fait devant; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme de la fuelle dou mirte:	And if the paper becomes soft after, and the hair pricks in the eye, then restart the medicine on that area which is softened from the paper properly, just as you did before; then cure it until it is healed; and this is the way of the myrtle twig:
Et saichés que li eul des homes sont divers en grandor et en petitece, et selonc ceu soit tes constraignemens; et ne soit mie reponue li droite voie a celui cui est li estude de cest art.	And know that men's eyes vary in size and shape, and according to this, your techniques should vary; and the correct method should not be rejected for someone who has studied this art.
de la cure de fistule par cautere	on the treatment of fistula by cautery
Quant tu cures fistule si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladies, et tes cures ne profitent mie, adonques covient il que tu li fais cautere selonc ceste maniere.	When you are treating a fistula as we have described in the divisions of diseases, and your treatments do not help, then you must perform cautery on it according to this manner. Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals; et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.
Comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain; et teigne li menistres son chief entre tes mains en teil maniere qu’il ne se mueve, ne ne demoinne son chief; aprés met coton moilliet en abin d’uef ou en jus de persillion sus l’oil; aprés chaufe le cautere qui est teilz: et est chevez au chief si com li forme d’une penne de vouteul, ensamble la queil soit li cautere; se tu vues, si soit apointé des l’un chief dusc’a l’autre, et se tu vues, si soit ausi com une tente; mais toutevoie, cist qui est chevez vaut mues por ton ovraige.	Instruct the patient to place their head in your lap; and have an assistant hold their head steady between your hands so that it does not move or nod; then moisten cotton with egg white or juice of purslane and place it over the eye; next, heat the cautery tool which is shaped like a pen, with a point at one end and rounded at the other, although the one with a point is better for your purpose.
Aprés presse la fistule s’ele est overte, et en trai la porriture, et la seche; et s’ele est close, si la oevre, et trai fuers la bowe; aprés met sus le cautere chaut forment, et tien ta main au cautere a la partie dou neif ensus de l’oil, que ta mains ne faice folie; et met le cautere en la graisse de l’oil, et la corromp.	After pressing the fistula if it is open, drain and dry it; and if it is closed, open it and draw out the pus; then apply the hot cautery tool firmly to the eye, holding it steady with your hand so that it does not move; place the cautery directly on the eyelid, corrupting the eyelid.
Se tu viens au comencement dou cautere jusc’a l’os, si serait bien.	If you come to the beginning of the cautery right up to the bone, that would be good.
Se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere encor une fois, et autre se tu en as mestier, et le laisse III jors; aprés i met sus coton moilliet en burre, et lou cure de l’oignement desiccatif tant qu’il soit sanez, et se XL jors passent qu’il ne soit sanez, si met sus medicine ague corrosive tant que li os soit descovers; et lou reis selonc ceu que il venrait en son chapistre.	If not, then restart the cautery again, and do so if you need to, and let it be for three days; after that place moist cotton on it, and cure it with a drying ointment until it is healed, and if 40 days pass and it is not healed, then apply an corrosive medicine until the bone is exposed; and treat the king according to what he experiences in his body.
Et i a une maniere de cautere de fistule que aucun des anciens dirent.	And there is a way of cauterizing a fistula which some of the ancients mentioned.
Entens a fistule, et fens le leu; aprés met en la fendure I camahan subtil de coi ci est li forme:	Examine the fistula, and mark its location; afterwards, insert into the split the tip of a small needle, which has the shape of a hook.
et i font a la quantiteit d’une .З. de plonc; et tien ta main ou camahan fermement, et ne se mueve li malaides nes point, que li plons fondus ne corre a son oil; et covient c’on mette sus l’oil a malaide coton moilliet en abin d’uefz ou en awe: li plonc si art lou leu de fistule, et lou saine per mervillouse saniteit.	and they make it the size of a bean; and hold your hand or the needle firmly so that the patient does not move, causing the molten lead to flow into his eye; and one should apply wet cotton on the patient's eye, the lead will heal the fistula miraculously.
Et se li fistule est sanee per le cautere que nos avons dit, c’est boin.	And if the fistula is healed by the cauterization that we have described, then it is good.
Se ce non, si covient aministrer pertus au neif, et ramener la fistule au cors dou neif selonc ceu qu’il covient en som propre leu.	If not, one must administer an incision to the nail, and bring the fistula back into the body of the nail according to what is appropriate in its own place.And if the cauterization does not heal the fistula, then you should make an incision on the nail, and bring the fistula back into the body of the nail according to where it belongs.
des crevaices en levres	cracks in the lips
Mout de fois avienent crevaices en levres que sont apelees «poil», et meismement en levres des enfans.	Many times there are cracks in the lips which are called "hairs," and especially so in children's lips.
Quant tu cures ces crevaices de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et li cure ne profite, adonques eschaufe .i. petit cautere cultellaire selonc ceste forme:	When you treat these cracks as we have described above in sections, and the treatment does not help, then heat a small blade-like cautery according to this form:
Et le met hastanment en celles crevaices tant qu’il viegne jusc’a font; aprés cure le leu de cerote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And place it gently in the cracks until it reaches the bottom; after that, treat the area with cerot until it is healed.
de l’aposteme de la goule	of the abscess of the throat
Quant apostume vient en la racine de la goule ou en l’uve, ou ou palais, ou as racines des dens, aprés fait porriture et ront et est enveillis et devient fistule; et tu le cures si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie: adonques covient il que tu aies .i. cautere selonc la quantiteit de la fistule; aprés le bote ou pertus de la fistule, et tien ta main tant que li fer chaus viegne au font de li, et ou derrien leu; et fai ensi une fois ou .ij., aprés le cure de ce que nos avons dit en cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est curez ensi, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si covient descovrir le leu et oster l’os corrumput, selonc ceu que vos le troverez en son chapistre.	When an abscess occurs at the root of the throat, or in the uvula, or the palate, or the roots of the teeth, causing swelling and redness and becoming a fistula; and you treat it as we have said under 'fistulas', and it does not heal: then you should have a cautery according to the size of the fistula; after cleansing the opening of the fistula, hold your hand steady so that the hot iron reaches its depth and the back; do this once or twice, after cleaning as we have said under 'cleaning', until it is healed; if it is healed in this way, it is good; and if not, you must expose the area and remove the rotten bone according to what you find in your examination of the patient.
dou movement des dens	the movement of the teeth
Quant les gencives sont mollifies par moistor et les dens muevent, et tu le cures per medicines et ceu ne vaut, adonc met le chief dou malaide en ton sain; aprés eschaufe le cautere dont li forme venra ci aprés en teil maniere que tu mettes une cainne sor le dent; et met dedens le cautere chaut hastanment, et tien tant ta main que li malaides sente la chalor venant a la racine dou dent; aprés lieve ta main et rencomence le cautere selonc ta volenteit; aprés emplisse li malaides sa bouche d’awe salee, et la teigne une houre et raiche fuers.	When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you treat it with medicine but it does not help, then put the head of the patient in your lap; after heat the cautery which will be described below in such a way that you place a piece of iron on the tooth; and put the hot cautery inside until the patient feels the heat going to the root of the tooth; then lift your hand and reheat the cautery according to your will; after fill the patient's mouth with warm salt water, and let it rest for an hour and release the forces.
Et en teil maniere li dens qui estoit movans si est confermez, et li gencive mollifie restrainte, et li moistors corrumpue sechie.	And in this manner, the tooth that was loose is now firmly fixed, and the gums are softened and restrained, and the putrid moisture is dried up.
de la dolor des dens	of toothache
Quant dolor de dens vient por froidor, ou il i a froidor ou veir, et les cures de medicine ne valent, adonc i ait mestier de cautere selonc .ij. manieres: et cautere de burre et cautere de feu.	When toothache comes from coldness, or there is coldness or whiteness, and medical remedies are ineffective, then cautery is needed in two ways: cautery with butter and fire cautery.
Cautere de burre si est telz que tu preignes burre de vaiche, et le bout en une cuillier de fer ou d’arain; aprés pren coton et envolope sus la pointe d’une tente, et la moille en burre bulit, et met sus le dent dolant hastanment et tien tant qu’il soit refroidiez; et ensi fai sovent tant que sa vertus viegne a la racine de la dent, et se tu vues si moille laine et coton en burre froit, et met sus le dent doillant, et met sus .i. fer chaut tant que li feus viegne au chevement dou dent.	Cautery with butter: take butter from a cow, and the end in a spoon made of iron or bronze; then take cotton and wrap it around the tip of a tent, moisten it in the butter, and apply it to the aching tooth until it cools down; do this repeatedly until its virtue reaches the root of the tooth. If you see the moistened cotton and butter cooling off, apply it to the aching tooth and place a hot iron on it so that the fire reaches the gum around the tooth.
Li cauteres ensamble feu si est telz que tu preignes uns cainne de fer ou d’arain, et soit grosse si que li feus ne viegne a la bouche dou malaide; aprés chaufe le cautere, de coi li forme venra ci aprés, et le met sus le dent et tien ta main tant que li cauteres soit refroidiez; fai ceu sovent, car li dolor sera ostee celui jor meisme ou l’endemain.	The cautery with fire is done by seizing a rod of iron or bronze, and making it thick enough so that the fire does not reach the mouth of the patient; after heating the cautery, which has the shape of a hook, apply it to the tooth and hold your hand until the cautery cools down; do this repeatedly because the pain will be relieved on the same day or the next day.
Et covient que li malaides emplisse sa bouche de boin burre en l’empressement de cel cautere, et puis le raiche fuer; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And it is necessary for the patient to fill his mouth with good butter before this cautery and then to let it go; and this is the form of the cautery:
Et fai cautere dou queil chief que tu voudras, et selonc ceu que tu as pooir; et c’est li forme de la caine:	And cauterize the gum from which you want, and according to what you can do; and this is the form of the rod:
des scrophules	of scrofula
Quant les scrophules sont de fleume et de moistors froides, et ne sont obeissans a digestion par medicines, adonques eschaufe le cautere cheveit de coi ci aprés vient li forme, et ait II aovertures por les fumees a issir au cautere de l’autre partie; et met le cautere chaut sus l’apostume une fois, ou II se mestier est, tant qu’il viegne au font de l’apostume; et se li apostume est petis si met cautere selonc la quantiteit de l’apostume, et le laisse ensi III jors; et met sus coton moilliet em burre tant que li arsure soit ostee; aprés cure le leu d’oignemens et de tentes tant qu’il soit sanez.	When scrofula are due to phlegm and cold moisture, and do not respond to digestion with medicines, then heat the cautery according to the following formula: it should have two openings for the smoke to emerge from the other side; place the hot cautery on the abscess once, where it is needed, until it reaches the bottom of the abscess. If the abscess is small, apply cautery according to its size and leave it for three days. Then moisten cotton in butter and apply it to the burn until the burn is healed. After that, treat the wound with ointments and bandages until it is completely healed.
Li forme de la cainne:	The form of the cane:
Quant les moistors vainquent sus les chenals dou pormon, et meismement quant ce vient de froide complexion, adonc covient que li malaides soit voidiez premiers par medicines solutives; aprés li fai cautere a la racine de la gorge, et te garde que tu ne venir mie jusc’a la gorge, et n’ardre dou keur mais c’un poc.	When moisture prevails in the channels of the lungs, and especially when it comes from a cold constitution, then the patient must first be purged with soluble medicines; after that, cauterize at the root of the throat, and beware not to go up to the throat, but only scorch the heart a little.
Aprés li fai I autre cautere a la jointure dou col au chief de l’espinee, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» de coi nos avons la forme devant; et cure le leu si com nos avons devant dit tant qu’il soit sanez.	After that, apply another cautery at the junction of the neck and the head at the top of the spine, using the cautery called "clavicle," as described earlier; then treat the area until it is healed as we have said before.
de la toust	of the tongue
Quant tous et maladie de pormon sont de moistors froides, et li malaides nen ait fievre ne sechor, et est li maladie anciaine, se li fai ij cauteres sus la forcele en leus vuis; et .i. autre cautere emmi le pis entre .ij. mameles; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» selonc la forme qui est devant dite.	When all diseases of the abdomen are from cold moisture, and the patient has no fever or dryness, and the disease is old, then make two cauteries on the chest in the usual places; and another cautery in between the breasts; and use the cautery called 'clavicle' according to the form described earlier.
Et se tu vues, fai cautere en poignant a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins» de coi li forme est ci devant en la maladie des oreilles; et soient li poins jusc’a XXX, ou enqui entor.	And if you see it, apply cautery with the instrument called "pins," of which the form is described earlier in the section on ear diseases; and let the pins be up to thirty, or even more, surrounding the affected area.
Aprés cure le leu selonc ceu qui est devant dit, et soit li cauteres a III rains selonc ceste forme:	After healing the wound according to what is said above, and let the cautery be performed three times according to this form:
Et por ceu sont li cautere plus legier, por ceu que tu en fais .iij. a cop.	And therefore are cauteries easier to do, because you make them .iiij. times.
de la dislocation de l’ajutoire	of the dislocation of the shoulder
Quant li chiés de l’ajutoire est desaloiez par cause de moistor, et on le remet a leu, et il n’i puet demorer ains revient adés et desalue par petit movement qui avient, si com nos avons esproveit, adonques covient il que tu ramoinnes la dislocation premierement.	When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation.
Aprés soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos et sus son costeit; aprés lieve le keur qui est dedens le titillite as dois de ta main senestre; et se li jointure est desaluee dedens, si eschaufe le cautere qui a .ij. ners douqueil ci est li forme:	Afterwards, stroke the patient's back and side; then lift the chest cavity with your left hand fingers; and if the joint is dislocated inside, heat the cautery which has .ij. nerves like this:
et cauterize lou keur tant qu’il le perce jusc’a costeit, et venrait li fugure dou cautere ensamble .iiij. cauteres; et por ceu est faite cautere avec le cautere qui a .iij. ners, por coi li figure de cauterization sunt sis cauteres; et sont li nerf selonc la subtiliteit d’une tente et c’est li forme dou cautere qui a .iij. ners:	And cauterize the scrotum until it pierces through to the skin, and the figure of the cautery will be four cauteries; and for this reason a cautery is made with the cautery that has three prongs, because there are six cauteries in the form of cauterization, and the nerves are according to the subtlety of a tent, and this is the shape of the cautery that has three prongs:
Et aucune fois est ajostez sus ce .i. nerf por coi il i a .viij. cauteres.	And sometimes it is placed upon this one nerve, because there are eight cauteries on it.
Aprés met sus le cautere porrelz broiez avec seil; aprés fai reposer le malaide, et ne soit meus li membres par lonc tens tant qu’il soit bien confortez.	Afterwards, place crushed shells upon the cautery; afterwards, let the patient rest and not move the limb for a long time until he is fully healed.
Et s’il est desaloiez desus, liquelz chose avient poc, adonques fait cautere sus l’epaisse dou cautere clavile, ou mout de cauteres en poignant.	And if it is dislocated above, then little will happen; therefore, perform the cautery on the thick part of the cautery needle, or a lot of cauteries by pricking.
Car li jointure est refermee, et est ostee li moistor et est sanez li malaides.	For the joint is closed, and moisture is removed and the patient is healed.
Quant en l’estomac vienent froidures et mout de moistors tant qu’il l’estraient a sa complexion, et sont multipliet li catharre a lui, et es manieres de cures acostumees et il ne profite mie, adonc covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son dos, et estende ses jambes et ses mains.	When coldness and much moisture enter the stomach and draw it out of its natural state, and when there are many cathartics in him, and he is not helped by usual remedies and treatments, then the patient should be made to lie on his back and extend his legs and arms.
De ceu en aprés li fai III cauteres I desoz la cuillier dou pis per la quantiteit d’un doi, a tout le cautere clavile, et II cauteres defuers les II costez tant que li figure des cauteres soit a III angles, et ait teil espaice entre l’une et l’autre qu’elles ne soient jointes ensamble quant elles giteront porriture; et soient li cautere si parfont qu’il porpreignent les II pars dou keur, et soit li figure des cauteres selonc ceste forme sens ajostement:	Then make three cauteries on him, one underneath the heel of the foot according to the amount of a nail, with the entire cautery needle; and two cauteries from both sides so that the shape of the cauteries has three angles, and there is such space between them that they are not joined together when they bend; and let the cauteries be so deep that it bleeds in two parts of the heart, and let the shape of the cauteries be according to this form without adjustment:
Et se tu vues cauterize d’un grant cautere enmi l’estomac selonc ceste forme; et celui qui avra paour de cest cautere, cauterize en poignant et seigne sus l’estomac i. point selonc la quantiteit que tu vues d’enche; puis le cauterize a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins».	And if you wish to cauterize a large area of the stomach according to this method, and someone is afraid of this cautery, then cauterize in punctures and mark on the stomach in one point according to the amount that you wish to cauterize; then cauterize with all of the cautery which is called "puncturing.
Aprés le cure de la cure que nos avons eut devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the treatment of the disease that we have mentioned earlier, until it is healed.
Quant au foie vient dolor de froit et de moistor et de grosse ventositeit, tant qu’il est fuer mis de sa complexion natureil per les superfluitez; et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne li profite mie, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son haitereil; et signe d’enche III cauteres selonc ceste forme et ceste figure et ceste quantiteit sus lou foie, defuer les ypocondres, lai ou li coutes de l’ome vient; et ait d’espaice entre chaicun cautere la groissece d’un doi; et soient li cautere dou lonc dou cors, et ne presser mie mout ta main a tot le cautere; et soit arse tant soulement li moitiez dou keur, et soit li malaides drois sus ses piez; et s’il ne peut, si soit gisans, et estende ses jambes, et lieve ses brais; et c’est li forme:	As for the liver, pain is caused by cold and moisture and excessive winds, when it has been moved away from its natural balance by excesses; and the disease is treated as we have said in divisions, but if it does not help, then the patient must be bled on his arm; and mark three cauteries according to this form, figure, and quantity on the liver, above the hypothalamus, where the brain's veins originate; and there should be the thickness of a thumb between each cautery; and the cauteries should be long and gentle, and you must not press your hand too hard as you do them all; and only half of the chest should be burned, and the patient should lie on his back; if he cannot, then he should lie on his side and stretch his legs and raise his arms; and this is the form:
Et se ta volentez est, si cauterize ces cauteres dou cutellaire, se tu es subtilz et saiges en l’art, et te warde que tu n’ardes mie tout le keur, car tu feroies sechier tout le cors; et qu’il ne viegne jusc’a boueil, car li keurs est mout subtilz lai endroit, et lou saiches por voir.	And if you wish, cauterize with the cautery of the scalpel, if you are skilled and wise in the art, and be careful not to burn the heart, for you would dry out the entire body; and let it not come to a boil, for the heart is a very delicate place, and you know this by sight.
Quant il a apostume au foie, et tu vues savoir s’il est en la char dou foie ou en la toile: s’il est en la char, se sent li malaides dolor ne mie trop fort; et s’il est en la toile, si sent dolor forsenee.	When there is an abscess in the liver, and you want to know whether it is in the tissue of the liver or in the membrane: if it is in the tissue, the patient feels pain but not too intensely; and if it is in the membrane, they feel violent pain.
Et lors quant ceste cure desoit les mires, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus sa teste; et puis seigne d’enche le leu ou li apostumes est, et puis chaufe le cautere qui est semblans au rais, de coi ci est li forme:	And then when this treatment is applied to the eyes, the patient should be seated with his head lower; and then sign with your finger on the location of the abscess, and then heat the cautery which is similar in shape to a raisin, from which comes its form:
Et cauterize I cautere tant que li keurs soit ars, et viegne jusc’a syphac, tant que li porreture soit toute fuers; aprés la cure selonc la cure des essues tant qu’il soit sanez; et ne covient mie que de cest cautere use nuls fuers que cil qui ait estudieit longement en l’art de medicine, et par cui mains cestes maladies ont corrut aucune fois.	And cauterize with the cautery until the ulcer is burned, and come to suppuration, until all pus is released; afterwards heal according to the healing of fabrics until it is healed; and one should not use this cautery except by one who has long studied the art of medicine, and by whom these diseases have sometimes been cured.
Adonques puet il hardiement ovrer, et toutevoies il me semble que mues vaut li laissier.	Therefore he can work boldly, and in any case I think it is better to let him do so.
dou cautere de pleuresin	with the cautery of phlegmon
Li ancien dirent que on doit faire a pleuresin cauteres de racines d’aristologe, et en teil maniere: pren une racine d’aristologe longe, la plus grant que tu poras troveir, et soit seche, et soit ausi grosse et ausi longe comme tes dois; et la moille en oile, et l’emprens au feu, et cauterize .i. cautere entre la forcele et lou col, et .ij. petis cauteres un poc en dessendant en la partie qui est desoz la barbe; et .ij. cauteres entre la quinte coste et la sisime, en declinant derrier un poc; et .i. cautere emmi le pis, et .i. autre sus l’estomac, et .i. entre .ij. espaules, et .ij. as .ij. costez dou pis defuers le cautere qui est entre .ij. espaules; et ne presser mie ta main, ains fai apertement ausi com en odorant.	The ancients said that one must make cauteries of roots of aristologus on phlegmon, and in the following manner: take a root of aristologus which is long, the thickest you can find, and let it be dry, and as thick and as long as your fingers; moisten it in oil, and heat it, and cauterize with one large cautery between the throat and neck, and two small cauteries a little lower down on the part which lies under the beard; and two cauteries between the fifth and sixth ribs, declining slightly backward; and one cautery between the navel and stomach, and another over the stomach, and one between the two shoulders, and two at the sides of the navel, departing from the cautery which is between the two shoulders; and do not press your hand, but do it gently as when perfuming.
Et dirent aucun ancien que aucun home usent de cautere de feir semblant a I raseur, et l’eschaufent et le mettent entre les costes, tant qu’il vient a cel aposteme; et saut fuers li dolor, si com nos avons dit en l’aposteme dou foie.	And some ancient authors say that one should use a cautery like a razor, heat it and place it between the ribs until it reaches that abscess; and if pus flows out, then as we said before about the liver abscess.
Mais en cestui ovraige est paour ou li malaides muert maintenant, ou fistule i vient qui ne puet estre sanee.	But in this procedure there is fear of death for the patient, or a fistula occurs that cannot be healed.And some say that if one uses an iron cautery like a razor and cauterizes between the ribs, it will reach the heart; and sometimes pus flows out and the patient recovers, as we have seen happen.
de la mice	of the mouse
Quant tu cures la maladie de la mice de ceu que nos avons dit as divisions des cures, et il ne profite mie, adonques i afierent .iij. manieres de cautere que tuit sont boin.	When you treat the illness of the moon as we have said in the divisions of treatments, and it does not help at all, then they rely on three methods of cautery which are all good.
Desquelz li une maniere si est que tu faices III cauteres, ou IIII, en lignant selonc la longor de la mice, selonc la figure dou cautere dou foie que nos avons dit devant; et n’apresser mie ta main a tout le cautere, et soit li malaides sovins sor son dos; et une autre maniere de cautere si est que tu eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners, si com nos l’avons mostreit en la dislocation de l’espaule; et lieve le keur qui est endroit la mice, ou li coutes dou malaide vient devers senestre, et soit li elevations dont tu lieves le keur selonc la keur, selonc la longesce dou cors, et li cautere soient selonc la largesce dou cors.	Of these, one method is to make three cauteries, or four, by marking according to the length of the mole, according to the figure of the cautery of the liver which we have described above; and do not press your hand on the entire cautery, but let the patient lie on his back; and another method of cautery is that you heat the cautery which has two nerves, as we have shown in the dislocation of the shoulder; and lift the skin where the mole is, or the cut from which the malignant growth comes towards the left, and the elevation by which you lift the skin according to the skin, according to the length of the body, and the cautery according to the width of the body.
Aprés i boute les II ners enflamez tant que li keurs soit perciez de l’autre part, et puis trai fuers le cautere, et ensi en i avra IIII Et se tu vues, si cauterize a tot le cautere a III ners.	Afterwards, pierce the two nerves with the cautery until the skin is pierced on the other side; then pull the cautery away, and thus there will be four cauteries. And if you wish, cauterize the entire cautery at three nerves.
Aprés le cure quant il a geteit porriture par lonc tens, et ce vaut mues que li autre des cures devant dites.	After the scrofula has been cured for a long time, it is better than any of the other remedies mentioned above.
de ydropisie	of dropsy
Cautere ne vaut a ydropique, fors c’a la maniere qui est apelee «asclytes».	Cautery is no good for an idropic, except in the manner that is called "asclytes.
Quant tu la cures selonc les manieres que nos avons dit en divisions, et ta cure ne profite mie, adonques covient il que tu li faices IIII cauteres entor la boude, et I sus l’estomac, et un sus le foie, et I sus la mice, et II derrier le dos sus l’espinee, et I endroit le pis; et soit li cauteres bien pres de l’espés dou keur.	If you have treated him according to the methods we have described in detail, and your treatment does not help, then you should make 4 cauteries around the chest, and one over the stomach, and one over the liver, and one over the spleen, and two on the back over the spine, and one over the pubic region; the cauteries should be close to the heart.
Aprés laisse le cautere aovert por giter porriture lonc tens, et ne lassier mie la cure dou malaide aprés le cautere; et sanation se hasterait, et seront ensamble les .ij. ententions avec l’aide de Deu.	After that, leave the cautery open to drain pus for a long time, and do not stop treating the patient after the cautery; healing will hasten, and the two intentions will come together with God's help.
Li forme dou cautere por le ventre soit li clavile que nos avons devant mostreit; et cil por le dos soit olivaire, selonc ceu qu’il est ci devant mis.	The shape of the cautery for the belly should be the clave that we have shown before; and that for the back should be olive-shaped, according to what is shown there before.
de l’enfleure des piez	of swelling of the feet
Quant li piez sont enflez a celui qui est ydropique, et sont plain d’awe citrine, il covient que tu cauterizes sus le dos dou piet entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire; et lieve ta main avec le cautere sens torner.	If the feet are swollen in an idropic patient, and they are filled with yellow water, you should cauterize on the back of the foot between the little toe and the ring finger; and lift your hand with the cautery without turning it.Quant la cure n’est pas a l’esguis de I’eye, et li piez sont enflez, adonques covient qu’il soit cauterize sus le piet entre l’anulaire et le petit dit «auriculaire» en la partie qui est plus pres du pied; et tu le faices sens torner ta main.
Et n’entrer mie trop em parfont, ensi sarrait fuers li awe citrine, et soit li cauteres selonc cest forme:	Nor enter too deeply, as they say against the yellow awl, and let the cautery be according to this form:
Aprés fai sus .ij. jambes .ij. cauteres en chescune jambe a la pointe dou cutellaire; et soit li cauteres dou lonc, l’un desoz le genoil devant et l’autre defuers, enmi la jambe; et laisse les cauteres aovers longement sens curer, que li awe en isse; aprés le cure des autres cures que nos avons dit.	After that, make two cauteries on each leg at the tip of the metatarsal bone; and let the cautery be long, one below the knee in front and the other above, in the middle of the leg; and leave the cauteries uncovered for a long time without bandaging, until the water comes out; then bandage it after the other bandages that we have mentioned.
de la menoison	of menstruation
Quant solution de ventre vient de froidor et de moistor, tant que li vertus retentive et digestive qui est ou stomac et en l’intestine est afleboie, et ne puet estre curez par manieres de cures; et tu vois le malaide bien soffrant et de fort vertut, si fai .i. grant cautere sus l’estomac selonc ceu qu’il en a parleit ci devant ou cautere de l’estomac, au cautere circule; et .iiij. cauteres entor la boude subtilz a tout .i. cautere clavile subtil, et .ij. cauteres sus les hainches.	When diarrhea comes from cold and moisture, as the retentive and digestive powers that reside in the stomach and intestines are weakened and cannot be cured by any means of treatment; and you see the patient suffering greatly and with great strength, then make a large cautery on the stomach according to what has been spoken of before concerning the cautery of the stomach, using the circulating cautery; and four small cauteries around the belly, one large cautery on each hip.
Et se tu vois les moistors habundans et le malaide soffrant, se li fai cautere sus le poignil, et .i. cautere sus chaicun yle, et .ij. petis cauteres sus l’estomac delez le grant, car li cure est profitans quant il i a bone aide.	And if you see abundance of moisture and the patient suffering, then make cauteries on the elbow, and one cautery on each shoulder, and two small cauteries on the stomach below the large one, for the treatment is beneficial when there is good support.
de la cure des emorroydes	on the treatment of hemorrhoids:
Quant les emorroydes sont ou fondement, ou une ou plusors, et sont ancienes et sont de grosses humors froides et moistes corrumpues, et sont curees si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie, si fai cauteres: III sus l’espine dou dos, celi qui est tout defuers desoz almecdate poc et poc en triangulant, et I cautere desoz la boude II dois; et se tu penses que ses estomac soit refroidiez, et li viande ne cuise, et on voit enfler la faice, adonques li faice on I grant cautere sus le stomac, si com il est devant dit, et I autre sus le foie, et I autre sus la mice a tout le cautere clavile; et laisse le cautere overt lonc tens.	When the hemorrhoids are in the rectum, one or more, and they are old and consist of large cold and moist corrupted humors, and have been treated as we have described in sections, but it does no good, then make cauteries: three on the spine of the back, the one that is entirely beneath the almucade poking and poking in a triangle, and do two cauteries underneath the belly button; and if you think that the stomach is chilled and the food isn't being digested, and they see swelling in the face, then to the face make one large cautery on the stomach, as has been said before, and another on the liver, and another on the liver, and throughout do the cautery with the clava; and leave the cautery open for a long time.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After curing the area until it is healed.
de la charnositeit qui est nommee «thelul»	of the fleshiness which is called "thelul"
Quant tu copes althelul, si eschaufe le cautere qui semble .i. raseur, et puis le met tout embraseit sus cel althelul copeit; et i laisse tant ta main que li cauteres viegne a la naissance de la voine, de coi li sans cort; fai ceu une fois ou .ij., et s’il i a mout d’althelul, si cauterize chaicun si com nos avons dit; aprés les cure d’oignemens profitans tant qu’il soient sanez; et se tu cauterizes d’un cautere grant sus alchatim, si avra plus grant aide.	When you cut the thelul, scorch the cautery which looks like a razor, and then put it all ablaze on the cut thelul; and keep your hand so that the cauteries reach the source of the vein, from which the blood flows; do this once or twice, and if there is a lot of thelul, cauterize each one as we have said. After curing with beneficial ointments until they are healed; and if you cauterize with a large cautery on the scrotum, it will provide more relief.
de plaie mal curee	of a badly cured wound
Quant li malaides ne puet soffrir tailleure ne overture, que nos raconterons en son leu, si vient teil maladie que ne puet estre sanee fuer que par cautere.	When the patient cannot endure cutting or opening, which we will discuss in its place, such an illness comes that it cannot be healed except by cautery.
Quant a aucun vient fistule, et est enveillie et giete porriture et moistors corrumpues, si la doies prover a tot une tente subtil, et garde que tu saiches a tot la tente combien elle a de parfont.	When a fistula occurs, and there is suppuration and a discharge of rotten moisture, you should examine it thoroughly with a thin needle, and be mindful to probe as deep as the tent goes.
Aprés eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et le boute en la fistule selonc la quantiteit que li tente i est entrée, et rencomence lou cautere tant que cil cors porris et corrumpus soient ars, une fois, ou II ou III, selonc la quantiteit de som besoing; et te warde d’ardre lé nerf qui sunt enqui, et des grans voinnes.	After heating the cautery that resembles a razor, insert it into the fistula according to the depth the tent entered, and repeat the cautery until the rotten and corrupted tissue is burned, once or twice or three times, depending on its need; and be careful not to burn any nerves that are nearby, and large veins.
se li fistule vait au cors de la vesie et a l’intestine, si te warde de ces leus, et ne faire ceu fuers que en leu charnut, et pense qu’ele n’est mie persans; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez, et se li leus est saielez, et les matieres sont ostees lonc tens, adonc saiches que li leus est sanez entierement; et se les matieres ne sont ostees, saiche que li leus est troez, et corrumpus li os au font; et ensi com un de ces que nos dirons en son leu.	if the fistula goes into the bladder and intestines, be careful of those places, and do not apply it forcefully to soft tissue, and think that it is not sensible; afterwards cure the area until it is healed, and if the area is swollen, and the matter is discharged for a long time, then know that the area is completely healed; and if the matter is not discharged, understand that the place is punctured, and the bone at its base is corrupted; and thus as one of those we will say in their place.
de la maladie des reins	of kidney disease
Quant dolor de froit vient as rains, et de grosse ventositeit, et ne prent talant de femme, adonc covient il que tu li fais cautere sus les rains d’une part et d’autre au cautere clavile que nos avons devant dit; et se nos le cauterizons em mileu, si avra .iij. cauteres en ligne, et se feront plus grant aide.	When cold pain comes to the kidneys, and there are strong winds, and it does not take on the taste of a woman, then you should cauterize him on the kidneys on both sides with the key-shaped cautery that we mentioned before; and if we cauterize him in the middle, he will have three cauteries in a line, and they will do more good.
de la vessie	of the bladder
Quant li vessie est mole et foible de froit et de moistor, si que li malaides retient l’urine, adonc li fai cautere en la partie defuers sus la vessie, la ou encomencent li poil dou poignil, et .i. a destre et .i. a senestre, et soit chescuns cauteres si lons com li nous d’un poce; et li fais .i. cautere defuers le dos, ou .ij. se tu en as besoing; et soit li cauteres clavile selon la forme devant dite.	When the bladder is weak and flabby from cold and moisture, causing the patient to retain urine, then he should be cauterized on the part above the bladder where the hairs of the pubic hairline begin, one on each side, and each cautery should be as long as a man's fingernail; and he should also have another cautery over the back if it is needed, two if necessary; and the cauteries should be curved as before described.
de la marris	of the bones
Quant li marrix est froide et moiste, et ne laisse mie por ceu a concevoir, et les flors sont corrumpues et lor termines tarde; et quant elles vienent, si sent grant dolor: adonques covient il c’on li faice .iij. cauteres entor la boude, si com nos avons dit ou cautere de la vessie, et .ij. cauteres defuers le dos; et soit li cauteres clavile, si com nos avons dit.	When the bones are cold and moist, and cannot conceive, and the flowers (buds?) are corrupted and their terms delayed; and when they come, there is great pain: then one should be cauterized around the navel, as we have said in the cautery of the bladder, and another two cauteries over the back; and the cauteries should be curved, as we have said.
de la hainche	of the hip
Quant les moistors viscouses dessendent a la boiste de la hainche, et por ceste cause si se muet de son leu, et li signes est que li cuisse est plus longe que li autre quant on le mesure ensamble; et est trovez li leus dou departement vuis, si covient que tu cauterizes le malaide sus la boiste de la hainche a .i. cautere semblant au cercle, et seigne devant le leu entor la boiste si com elle torne, si que li boiste soit dedens le cercle; et si soit li cauteres telz com cil dont on a cauterizeit le stomac.	When the viscous moistors descend to the socket of the hip, and because of this it moves out of its place, and the sign is that the leg is longer than the other when measured together; and one finds the place of dislocation wet, then you must cauterize the dislocation on the socket of the hip with a .i. cautery resembling a circle, and mark before the place around the socket as it turns, so that the socket is within the circle; and the cautery should be like those used to cauterize the stomach.
Et se cist cauteres ne t’est presens, se li fai .iij. cauteres de l’olivaire grans, et soit li cauteres ausi parfont com tous li keurs; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if this cautery is not present, make 3 cauteries of olive oil large enough to fit the wound; and let the cautery be as deep as the wound, and heal it until it is better.
de la dolor de la hainche	of hip pain
Quant dolor vient en la boiste de la hainche, et c’est de froidor et de moistor, et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en la division et li cure ne vaut, et li maladie est anciene: adonc covient il que tu purges le malaide des grosses humors de pilules fetides, ou autres pilules bones semblans.	When pain occurs in the hip socket, it is caused by cold and moisture, and the treatment we have described does not help, and the ailment is old: then you must purge the ailment of the gross humors with foul-smelling pills, or other good-smelling pills alike.
Aprés li fai cautere; et li maniere dou cautere si est selonc II manieres: c’est a savoir ensamble medicines ardans, et cautere de feu.	After the cut, you must cauterize it; and there are two ways of cauterizing: one with burning medicines, and the other with fire.
Cautere de feu si est selonc mout de manieres, desquelz li uns est telz: que tu cauterize sus la boiste de la hainche III cauteres triangulalz selonc ceste forme, et i fai bone profunditeit et grant, et ait entre chaicun cautere d’espaice la groissece d’un doi, et soit li cauteres olivaire; aucune fois fait on cautere en mileu sus lou chief de la hainche, por coi il en i a IIII selonc ceste forme:	Fire cautery has many methods, one of which is to cauterize the hip joint in three triangular cauteries according to this shape, and make them deep and large, with a distance of a thumb's width between each cautery, and use an olive-shaped instrument. Sometimes, a cautery is made in the middle of the hip, so there are four according to this shape:
Et se tu vues, si le cauterize au cautere dou cercle que nos avons devant dit en la dislocation de la hainche; mais fai en teil maniere que li cercles conteigne toute la hainche, et tous li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if you wish, cauterize with the circular cautery that we mentioned earlier regarding the dislocation of the hip; but do it in such a way that the circle contains the entire hip, and all the thickness of the heart is burned.
Et c’est li maniere c’on fait en sciatique, quant li dolor tient en la hainche, et ne parvient mie jusc’a la cuisse ne jusc’a la jambe.	And this is the method done in sciatica, when the pain stays in the hip and does not reach the thigh or leg.
Et s’ele vient jusc’a la cuisse et la jambe, se li fai II cauteres lai ou li malaides dit que li dolor li tient, et I cautere desus la cheville IIII dois, a la partie senestre un poc; et soit li cauteres cutellaire, et soit arse li espesseté dou keur; et se li malaides sent que li dolor s’estende jusc’a dois dou piet ou pres d’enqui, se le cauterize la ou il sent la dolor III poins ou IIII au cautere qui est apelez «poins».	And if the pain extends to two of the foot or close to it, then one should cauterize where they feel the pain with three or four cauteries using an instrument called a "point". And if the patient feels that the pain spreads to one or both feet, then cauterize there where they feel the pain, with three or four cauteries.
Et se mestiers est, se li en fai plus; et se il seit que li dolor soit desoz le genoil vers la cuisse, se li fais cautere au cautere cutellaire ou circulaire, et te done bien garde en tous tes cauteres que tu n’i lassier mie tant le cautere que tu brules les ners et les grans arteres, et que tu ne faices au malaide plus grant nuisance et contraction.	And if necessary, do more; and if he feels that the pain is under the knee toward the thigh, use a scalpel or circular cautery, and be careful with all your cauteries not to leave the cautery in place so long that you burn the nerves and large arteries, and that you cause the patient greater harm and contraction.
Et je meisme ai veus plusors qui ont fait cautere sus la cheville dou piet, et li lasserent tant que li jambe fut toute enflee, et li piez ausi, et fut perciez et corrumpus toz li piez.	And I myself have seen many who had cautery done on the ankle of the foot, and they left it until the leg was all swollen, and the foot as well, and it was pierced and corrupted all through the foot.
Aprés une solution de ventre dont il ot la mort.	After a stomach ache from which he died.
Et se li dolors est en II parties ensamble, fai cautere en l’une et en l’autre, selonc ceste maniere.	And if the pain is in two places together, do cautery in one and the other according to this manner.
Et li saige dirent en la cautere de la hainche, de coi ci est li maniere, fai I tel fer et soit au chief ausi gros com uns nauvillon de dacte, ou un poc moins, et soit par entrechetres et soit des l’un entrechetres jusc’a l’autre d’espaice la quantiteit d’un nou de poce; et soient li entrechetres aovers de II pars, et soient aussi comme noez, et i ait I mainche de fer bien fait; et c’est li forme:	And the wise men said about cautery of the hip, from which comes this manner, make the iron and let it be at the head as large as a new finger nail, or a little less, and let it be with notches and let it be from one notch to another the quantity of the width of a thumb nail; and let the notches be opposite each other in two parts, and let them also be like nails, and have a good handle made on the iron; and this is its form:
Et soit eschaufez tant qu’il soit toz rouges et giete senteles, et puis le mette on sus la boiste de la hainche malaide, et soit tornez sus lou sain costeit; et lou cauterize une fois .i. cautere reont et lou laisse .iij. jors; et puis fai emplaustre de burre, et laisse la plaie aoverte lonc tens; aprés la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	And let it be heated until it is all red and dripping, and then put it on the bone of the hip that is ill, and turn it onto the healthy side; and cauterize once with 1 cautery and leave it for 3 days; and then make a poultice from butter, and leave the wound open for a long time; after the application of ointment until it is healed.
Albucasim dit que nos usons poc de cest cautere por la paor de son regart, et se voions poc qui en usent; et toutevoie ceu est des boins cauteres, qui le puet soffrir, et lai ou il s’afiert.	Al-Bukhari says that we use this cautery sparingly because of its frightening appearance, and seldom see those who use it; nevertheless, it is one of the good cauteries, which can be endured by anyone in whom it is used.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant si est que tu faices I estrument a entrechetres en coi dessende li marge de la porte, et soit d’arain ou de fer a une paroit longe, et en la hautece ait II nous, et ait entre chaicun la quantiteit de la groissece d’un doi; et soient overt defuer et desus, et se joignent ensamble selonc ceste forme:	Medical cauteries burn; so make the instrument into a comb-like shape with teeth descending from the frame, made of brass or iron, and let it have two rows, each row the thickness of a thumb, open below and above, and joining together in this way.
Aprés met sus la boiste de la hainche au malaide gisant sor suin costeit sain, et apresse ta main mout sus la boiste de la hainche; aprés giete entre les II cercles de l’awe chaude qui soit chaufee au feu I poc, et li laisse une houre dou tens, et soffre li malaides la chalor et l’arsure de li.	Afterwards place the box of the hip on the sick person lying on his sound side, and press your hand hard on the box of the hip; afterwards pour between the two circles of the hot ash which has been heated in the fire for a short while, and let the patient endure the heat and burning for an hour.
Car il i trueve mordication ausi com de feu; et quant li mordications iert passee, se lieve ta main avec l’estrument et leve la hainche d’awe douce, et laisse ensi III jors, et met sus burre tant que ceu qui est noir de l’eschaudure soit osteit; et lou laisse III jors que porriture en istrait; et ceu serait li derriene aide aprés le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	Because there will be biting like that of fire; and when the biting has passed, lift your hand with the instrument and gently raise the hip, and let it be thus for three days, and apply butter until the blackness of the scald is gone; and leave it for three days so that pus may come out; and this would be the final remedy after the treatment with ointments as far as he is healed.
Et se li dolor s’est estendue jusc’a la cuisse ou jusc’a la jambe, se li fai I estrument que teigne awe selonc ceu que tu as fait en la hainche igaument; et c’est li maniere de l’awe chaude, et je l’ai escripte ou traitier de la rectification de medicine.	And if the pain has spread to the thigh or leg, make the instrument that colors awe according to what you did in the hip similarly; and this is the way of hot awe, and I wrote it in the treatise on the rectification of medicine.
Pren alcali et chaulz vive, autant de l’une com de l’autre, et les broie ensamble, et les met en I nuef pot.	Take alkali and quicklime, as much of each, and grind them together, and put them in a new pot.
ou il ait I petit pertuis defuer se que li pointe d’un raisor i puisse entreir; et met desor celui pot I autre pot bien plombeit, et met sus alcali et chalz et awe douce sus, tant qu’il en i ait I doi desus les poudres cant tu l’avras bien preingte a ta main; et le laisse ensi tant qu’il en dessende awe ague et chiece ou pot plombeit, puis pren toute cele awe, et la giete sus chalz et sus alcali si com devant.	In this pot, make a small hole so that the point of a needle can enter; and place on top of this pot another pot well-プランバン、and put on top of the alkali and lime a wad of cotton, so that it is two fingers above the powders after you have moistened it well with your hand; and let it stand thus until there falls through the hole in the pot a drop of liquid like agar and pieces into the lead pot, then take all this liquid and pour it over the hot alkali and lime as before.
Et lors si sera mout ague et est aministree en mou d’ovraiges de medicine et en cauteres d’autres membres Car elle fait auteil oevre com feus, et si a autres medicines dont on cauterize bien la hainche ensi com tesisie et miel anacardi et chalz avec savon, toutes ces choses mellees ensamble.	And then there will be much heat and it is administered in various ways using medical practices and cauteries on other members, because it does the same work as fire. And also with other medicines such as theriac and myrrh and chalk mixed with soap, all these things mixed together.
Et Galiens nos raconte une cure dont uns hons fut curez de la dolor de la hainche et de la voine sciatique, et lou loe mout, et dit que on n’i fist autre cure, et qu’il en fut sanez a une soule fois quant on ot fait ceste cure, et il se fut baigniez si com il l’enseigne ci aprés.	And Galen relates a cure where a man was cured of hip and sciatic pain, and he praised it highly, saying that no other treatment was used, and that the man was healed in a single instance after this cure was performed, and he bathed as instructed below.
Et dist en teil maniere que tu preignes dou litargire vert fres et sec, et le broie mout avec I poc de graisse, et met sus la hainche et sus la cuisse et sus la jambe ou la dolor tient, et la lie; et li laisse III houres et par la quantiteit que li malaides ne sente plus l’arsure.	And he described how one should apply litargyre in this way: you take it green and dry, and grind it thoroughly with a little fat, and place it on the hip and thigh and leg where the pain is located, and leave it for three hours; and depending on the intensity of the malady, one should not feel the burning anymore.
Et puis le fai entrer ou bain tant que li cors li soit un poc arousez, et lou fai entrer ou lit, et li dolor s’en ira toute et sera sanez.	And then he makes him enter the bath until his body is a little warmed up, and he makes him enter the bed, and the pain will go away completely and he will be healed.
Et saiches que nuls ne doit user de cautere de telz medicines, se ceu n’est aprés l’evacuation de cors.	And know that no one should use such medicines after a bloodletting.
Et Dyascorides dist que quant li voine sciatique est cauterizee de fiens de chievre, si i aide mout; et doit estre fais li cauteres en teil maniere.	And Dioscorides says that when the sciatic vein is cauterized with goat's dung, it helps a lot; and the cautery must be done in such a way:
Prenez lainne et la beurez d’oile vielz, et metez sus la fossete qui est entre le pouce dou piez et l’autre qui est apelez foscile.	Take lamb's wool and grease it with old oil, and place it on the hollow between the big toe of the foot and the other one called the little toe.
Aprés pren fiens de chievre sec, et l’empren a feu tant qu’il soit charbons, et lou met sus la laine, et le laisse tant qu’il soit estains; et refai encor ensi, et ne cesser de faire ensi tant que tu penses par sens qu’il viegne jusc’a la hainche, et que li dolor soit cessee; et cist manieres de cautere est apelez «cautere de chievre».	After that, take dried goat dung and heat it in the fire until it becomes charcoal, then place it on the lamb's wool and leave it until it turns to ashes; repeat this process again and do so until you feel through sensation that it has reached up to the hip and the pain has ceased. This method of cautery is called "goat cautery".
de la dolor dou dos	of back pain
Quant dolor vient au dos, ou par cheoir ou de percussion ou par trop grant evacuation, ou par semblans de matiere espandue froide, a nule de ces semblances ne vaut cauteres, fuer que a celi qui vient de infusion de froide matiere.	When pain comes in the back, whether from sitting or from impact or from excessive discharge, or from similar appearances of expanded cold matter, none of these indications are suitable for cauterization except for that which comes from the diffusion of cold matter.
Il covient c’aprés ceu que li malaides est voidiez de pilules fetides ou d’autres semblans, que on li faice sus lou dos, lai ou li dolor tient, trois lignes signies d’enche, et en chescune ligne .v. cauteres ou plus selonc la vertut et la quantiteit que li malaides puet soffrir; et soit fait li cauteres selonc le cautere qui est apelez «poins»; et se tu vues, fai .iij. cauteres ou .iiij. au cautere clavile moien selonc ceste forme:	It is necessary, after the patient has voided foul pills or other similar substances, to apply a cautery on the back, where the pain persists, in three lines marked with ink, and in each line .v. cauteries or more depending on the strength and quantity that the patient can endure; and the cautery should be performed according to the cautery which is called "pin"; and if you see fit, perform .iij. cauteries or .iiij. with the cautery key tool according to this form:
Maintes fois vient ceste maladie as petis enfans, et li signes de l’encomencement si est qu’il ont estroite alainne quant il se lievent, et paor; et tu trueves en la derriene espinee dou dos et en nous l’apparance qui vient sus les autres espinees.	Many times this disease comes to young children, and the signs of its onset are that they have a stiff neck when they wake up, and fear; and you will find in the last spine of the back and in us the appearance that comes above the other spines.
Quant tu vois ceu et tu le vues curer, si le cauterize au cautere de celcle selonc ceste forme.	When you see this and you cure it, then cauterize it with the cautery of salt according to this form.
Si que li cautere porpreigne chescune partie de l’espinee egaument.	So that the purple cautery equally affects every part of the spine.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize entor l’espinee au cautere poignant II lignes ou III, et soient li poins pres l’uns de l’autre.	And if you see, cauterize around the spine with a pointed cautery tool 2 or 3 lines apart, and have the points close to each other.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez selonc ceu que nos avons dit, et warde que tu n’amenistrer cautere en gilbositeit qui soit en spame de nerf.	Afterwards, heal the area according to what we have said, and be careful not to apply cautery on any area that is swollen and in a state of inflammation which may be affecting nerves.
de la dolor des jointes	There are two types of cautery: one is by fire and the other is by salt. The salt cautery is better; it does not burn the flesh or the bone or the nerve, but is a great remedy for pains that come from the head.
Quant dolor de jointes sunt de moistors que sont espandues a chaicun membre dou cors, et quant dolor vient em piez, que li mire apelent «podagre» proprement, et quant elle est de froide cause et cures de medicines ne la puent curer, si est curez par cauteres en teil maniere: fai li mout de cauteres entor la jointure dou piet, et soit li cauteres olivaire selonc ceste forme:	When the pain in the joints is caused by moisture that has spread throughout the body's limbs, and when the pain is in the feet, which they properly call "podagra", and when it is caused by a cold and cannot be cured by medicine, then it is cured by cautery in the following way: make the cautery around the joint of the foot, and let the cautery be olive-shaped according to this form:
Et s’il i a besoigne que tu poignes sus la faice dou piet, se li fai cautere a tot le cautere c’on claime «point».	And if it is necessary to prick the sole of the foot, then use the entire cautery tool on the «point.»
Et se les dolors viegnent jusc’a genous et as autres jointures, et ceu avient maintes fois, se li fai cautere sus chaicun genoil III cauteres ou IIII de chescunne partie, a tout le cautere olivaire; et se tu as mestier de plus, si en fai plus, mais n’i tenir mie ta main fuers que tant que li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if the pains come up to the knees and other joints, and this happens many times, then cauterize each knee with 3 or 4 cauteries on each side, using the entire olive-oil cautery tool; and if you need more, then do more, but do not hold your hand in place any longer than until the skin of the heart is burned.
Et se les dolors dessendent jusc’a genoil et au dos, se li aministre le cautere que nos avons dit en son chapistre.	And if the pains descend to the knee and the back, administer the cautery we mentioned in his chapter.
Et se les dolors sunt as mains, si fai poins entor le foscile II lignes; et s’il remaint point de dolor as dois, si fai poins sus chescune jointe et sus lou poil de la main; et se les dolors vienent jusc’as coutes ou jusc’as espaules, si cauterize chescune partie, et fai boin governement au malaide et penre medicines.	And if the pains are in the hands, make points around the wrist two lines; and if there is no pain in the arms, make points on each joint and on the hair of the hand; and if the pains come to the armpits or shoulders, cauterize each part, and make good treatment for the patient and take medicines.
Car se tu li fais boin governement et tu purges fleume, si sera saneis a l’aide de Deu.	For if you give him good treatment and purge phlegm, he will be healed with God's help.
de la routure dou syfac	of the rot of the sinus
Quant routure vient en angres, et li bouelz dessendent as coions et c’est novelement, si covient que quant tu lou vues curer, qu’il ne menjuce mie celui jor; et qu’il use choses qui laichent lou ventre, si que li fiens dessende de son ventre; aprés le fai seoir sus son dos entre tes mains, et li comande qu’il teigne son alaine tant que li boueil soient repairiet, et les ramoinne a tes dois, et seigne d’enche desoz la routure sus l’os dou poignil, et a tout un signe que soit semblans a la moitiet d’un cercle a desus dou cors; puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When rot occurs in the armpit and the bowels descend into the groin, as is often the case with new injuries, one should not eat on the day of treatment. Instead, one should consume food that loosens the belly so that the feces will exit the body; then, make the patient sit up with his back against your hands, and command him to hold his breath until the bowels are relieved and return to their proper position. Take the fire cautery and brand its shape onto the skin above the armpit joint on the bone of the arm, marking a sign that resembles half of a circle on the upper body; then heat up the cautery instrument:
tant qu’il soit blans et qu’il giete senteles.	until it is white and exudes pus.
Puis ramoine les bouels a lor leu; et li ministres teigne sa main sus qu’il ne retornent arrier; et oevre bien les cuisses au malaide, et met desoz lui I cussin et I serjant sus les cuisses, et I autre sus lou pis qui li teigne les mains; puis met le cautere sus lou signe a tout ta main, et lou tien droit et lou tien tant que tu ateignes l’os, et se tu ne l’ateins la premiere fois, si le rencomence encor une autre tant que tu viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde subtilment que li boueil ne saille quant tu fais lou cautere; que tu ne le brulasses; et que par ceu li malaides ne muere, ou autre malz.	Then reset the bones to their place; and have the patient hold his hand out so they do not return; and work the legs of the patient, and put a pillow and a servant under the legs, and another under the feet that holds the hands; then put the cautery on the sign all over your hand, and hold it straight and hold it until you reach the bone, and if you do not reach it the first time, do it again until you reach the bone; and be careful that the pus does not leak when you do the cautery, so you do not burn him, and so that the patient does not die, or get worse.
Et saiches que quant tu ne viens jusc’a l’os au cautere, tes ovraiges ne vaut rien.	And know that when you do not come to the bone with the cautery, your work is worth nothing.
Et covient que li cauteres des enfans soit subtilz selonc la mesure d’ous, et des grans gens aussi grans selonc lor mesure; aprés III jors cure lou leu dou cautere de burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’autres oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez, et gise li malaides XL jors sus son dos tant que li plaie soit bien soudee; et covient que ses norrissemens soit lassatis longement, si que li boueil ne saillent quant il se preigdra d’aler en chambres.	And it is necessary that the cautery for children be subtle according to the size of ears, and for large people as large according to their size; after three days dress the site of the cautery with butter until the scalding is healed; then dress it with other ointments until it is healed, and let the patient lie on his back for forty days so that the wound is well sewn up; and it is necessary to keep the bandages loose for a long time so that the bowels do not protrude when he pushes himself to get up and move around.
Et aprés XL jors, quant il se voudra lever, se li amenistre une faixe bien faite, et la porse XL autres jors; et ait boin repos, qu’il se travaille poc et se warde de trop grant repletion de boivre et de mengier, et de trop haut braire; et quant il fait cest enseignement si est sanez entierement.	And after forty days, when he wants to get up, let him be given a well-made bandage and wear it for another forty days; and let him have good rest, work little, and guard against too much food and drink, and too much exertion; and if he follows these instructions, he will be completely healed.
Et je dirai ci aprés la cure de taillier en son chapistre.	And I will say hereafter about the treatment of cutting on his head.
de la routure dou ventre	of the rupture in the abdomen
Quant routures vienent en autres ventres et sont connisans, et tu vues qu’elles ne croissent plus, se li fai I cautere dou cautere reont selonc sa quantiteit, et soit ars li tiers dou keur; aprés le cure selonc ceu que nos avons dit; et aucun des anciens ont dit c’on le doit cauterizer au cautere a III angles selonc ceste forme:	When ulcers come in other bellies and are known, and you see that they no longer grow, you make the cautery with fire according to its quantity, and burn it in the middle of the chest; then treat it afterwards according to what we have said. And some of the ancients say that one must cauterize with a three-angled cautery according to this form:
mais signe premier le leu d’enche et fai une ligne per la largesce desus la routure, et une autre defuers, et main ta main emmi a tout le cautere clavile.	but first mark the place of entrance and make a line across the width above the ulcer, and another across it, and hold your hand in the middle of all the cautery.
Mais li premiers cauteres est plus legiers et muedres.	But the first cauteries are lighter and gentler.
de dolor anciene en aucun membre	of old pain in any limb
Quant dolor vient en aucun membre, ou de cheoir ou de ferir, et cele dolor tient lonc tens, et li cure de medicine n’i vaut, adonc covient qu’il soit cauterizeis au cautere qui est apelez «poins», et soit li cauteres selonc la longesce dou membre et la petitece et sa foibleteit et sa vertut et sa location de torcions et de sa dolor.	When pain comes in any limb, from falling or being struck, and that pain lasts a long time, and the treatment of medicine does not help, then it must be cauterized with the cautery called "point", and the cautery should be according to the length of the limb and its smallness and weakness and its torture and its location.
s’il est sanez dou premier cautere, c’est bien; se ceu nom, recomence I autre cautere sus celui, car teilz costume est qu’il se doit muer au membre que li est prochiens, por coi il covient que tu faices les cauteres tant que li malaides soit saneis.	if it is healed by the first cautery, that is good; if not, do another cautery on it, for such is the custom that it should move in the member that is nearest to it, so you should do cauteries until the patient is healed.
de meselerie	of miasma
Li meseil sont aidiet aucune fois par cautere par grant aide, et meismement li maladie que vient de la putrefaction de fleume et de melancolie.	Sometimes ulcers are helped by cautery with great relief, especially those diseases that come from the putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy.
Cant tu la vues cauterizer, pren warde se li maladie est au comencement, et s’ele est curee selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et ne dessent ne ne demoure, et tu doutes que li corruption ne porpreigne tout le malaide, adonques li fai V cauteres sus lou chief: I emmi le chief a nouf, et l’autre vers lou front a la fin des chevous; et II sus les II cornes, et I derrierre sus le haiterel; et i laise tant ta main que li cauteres viegne jusc’a l’os, et tant que les escorces en issent fors si que les vapors des grosses humors s’en puissent issir; et le cauterize sus la mice selonc ce qu’il est devant.	When you see it cauterized, take care if the disease is in its beginning, and if it is cured according to what we have said in the division, and does not continue or persist, and you doubt that the corruption might spread throughout the disease, then do 5 cauteries on the head: one in the middle of the head, and another towards the forehead at the end of the hair; and 2 on the 2 corners, and 1 behind on the nape; and let your hand remain so that the cautery reaches the bone, and as much as the skin comes out so that the vapors of the thick humors can come out; and cauterize it on the mouth according to what is in front.
Et se li meselerie est partout esparse; et elle pert manifestement, si covient que tu lou cauterizes de ces cauteres que nos avons dit ou chief, et .i. cautere en som lou neis, et .ij. cauteres sus l’espinee dou col, et .vj. cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos, et .i. grant sus la crupie et .i. autre delez, et .ij. sus les .ij. espaules; et .ij. sus les coutes, et .ij. sus les tendrons dou pis, et .i. sus chascune jointe des mains et des piez, et sus les fosses des mains; et te warde des ners que sunt sus lou derrien calcant, que tu ne les bruler; et aucune fois fait om cautere sus l’os dou poignil, et .i. autre sus l’os de l’estomac, et .i. autre sus lou foie.	And if the ulcer is scattered everywhere; and it is clearly losing ground, then you should cauterize it with these cauteries that we have mentioned: one cautery on the head, two cauteries on the spine of the neck, five cauteries on the spine of the back, one large cautery on the croup and another smaller one, two cauteries on the two shoulders; two cauteries on the elbows, two cauteries on the tendons of the feet, one cautery on each joint of the hands and feet, and on the hollows of the hands; and be careful of the nerves that are on the back of the calf, so that you do not burn them. Sometimes a cautery is made on the bone of the finger, and another on the bone of the stomach, and another on the liver.
Et saiches que quant plus i fais de cautere, plus li fais d’aide, et mues li profite; et saiches que li malaides ne sent point de dolor au cautere si com li sain le sentent, por ce que li cors est ja toz corrumpus.	And know that the more you do cauterization, the more it helps and moves the patient; and know that the sick person does not feel pain from cautery as a healthy person does, because the body is already entirely corrupted.
Et covient ke li cautere soient grant et petit selonc les membres et les jointures, selonc ceu que vos lou troverez en manieres des fers.	And it is necessary that the cautery be large or small according to the members and joints, according to what you will find in the ways of the irons.
Aprés cure lou leu de farine de veces avec miel et autres cures tant qu’il soit saneis.	Afterwards, treat the area with a paste of flour and honey and other treatments until it is healed.
Quant enfleure vient en aucun membre et est curee par medicines et oiles et emplastres, et il n’est mie sanez, adonques li fai cauteres sus le membre selonc la grandour et la petitece dou membre; et soit li cauteres un poc entrans en l’espés dou keur; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	When swelling comes to a member and is cured by medicines and oils and poultices, and it is not healed, then do cautery on the member according to the size of the member; and let the cautery be somewhat penetrating into the depth of the skin; then cure it with ointments until it is healed.
Et aucune fois fait on cautere et a la main et au piet et au dos, a l’issue dou nerf que muet le membre, et ensi si est ostee li enfleure; et toutevoie ne s’en entremette nuls s’il n’est conoissans des membres et des issues des ners movans lou cors.	And sometimes cautery is done on the hand and foot and back, at the exit of the nerve that paralyzes the limb, and thus if the swelling is removed; yet no one should attempt this unless they are knowledgeable about the limbs and the exits of the nerves moving the body.
de albaras	of alder trees
Quant li maladie qui est apelee «albaras» est enveillie, et li engien de medicine n’i valent rien, adonques le cauterize d’un cautere un poc parfont, selonc la quantiteit de l’espés dou keur, tant que li blenchour soit ostee, et soit muee sa color; puis le cure de farine de veces et de lentilles avec oile roset et foilles de plantain, et sanc de colon et sanc d’alondre, de chescun une partie; et soit mellez tout ensamble, et soit liiez d’un drapel, et soit aers au leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the disease called "albaras" occurs, and medicine does not help, then cauterize it with a somewhat deep cautery according to the thickness of the skin, so that the whiteness is removed and its color changes; then treat with a poultice made from equal parts of flax seed, lentils, rosemary oil, and a mixture of colon blood and almond blood; bind it with a cloth and keep it in place until it heals.
li cure de chancre par cautere	the treatment of sores by cauterization
Quant chancre vient au comencement, et tu lou vues arrester, si le cauterize au cautere qui semble I cercle, tout entor au tour dou chancre.	When a ulcer comes at its beginning, and you see it stopping, then cauterize it with the cautery that looks like a circle, all around the edge of the ulcer.
Et toutevoie li saige dirent que on faice cautere ausi au mileu dou chancre; et toutevoie ceu ne me semble mie boin, car je redous que il ne soit ulcerez et corrumpus, et je l’ai ja veut avenir aucune fois; et plus droituriere chose est qu’il soit cauteriés entor, au cautere qui est apelez «circule», si com nos avons dit en mout de cauteres.	And yet the wise say that one should also cauterize in the middle of the ulcer; and yet it does not seem good to me, for I fear it will be burned and corrupted, and indeed I have seen this happen many times; and a more certain thing is that it be cauterized around its edge, with the cautery called "circle", as we have said in much of cauterization.
de l’enfleure qui ne puet meurer	of the swelling that cannot subside
Quant aucuns ait une maladie qui est apelee «adubelati», et elle tarde de meurer ou por la superfluiteit qu’ele fait ou por l’eaige dou malaide quant il est decrepites (c’est a dire trop vielz) et il a poc de sanc, ou por lou tens; et tu la vues haster de meurer: adonques le cauterize entor de mout de petis cauteres en poignant; aprés le laisse ensi.	When someone has a disease called "adubelati", and it is slow to die either because of the excess fluid it produces or due to the age of the patient when they are decrepit (that is, very old), and they have little blood, or because of the duration of the illness; and you see them rushing to die: therefore, cauterize them all over with many small cauteries while pricking; then leave it thus.
Car elle se hastera de meureir.	Because it will hasten death.
Et se tu la vues percier a tout le cautere, si chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	And if you see it piercing all the way through, then heat the cautery tool from which comes the form:
Et met ta main en mileu de cele maladie qui est apellee «adubelati» tant que li cauteres ait perciet lou keur, et soit telz li cauteres que li malaides lou sente defuers en teil maniere que li cours de la porriture soit alegis.	And place your hand in the middle of that disease called "adubelati" until the cauteries pierce the skin, and let the cauteries be such that the patient feels them spreading out in such a way that the flow of the pus is relieved.
Aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	Afterwards, treat it until it is perfectly healed.Et si li malaides ne se peust curer de cele maladie qui est apelée  «adubelati», adonques le metent en milieu del bed et le cure par cauteres que il n’ait point de sang; et s’il ne peust guérir, la mort l’alera.
li cure dou feu par fer	the fire cure by iron
Une autre maniere de maladie i a qui est apelee «corrodens», et n’est autre chose que une mengeson de membre, car ele menjut les membres ausi com li feus les leignes seches.	Another kind of illness there is which is called "corroding", and it is nothing other than a melting of the limbs, for it melts the limbs just as fire melts dry wood.
Se tu vois ceste maladie en leu qui puisse soffrir cautere ensamble feu, adonques eschaufe les cauteres clavile mout petit et grant, selonc ceu qu’il covient au leu ou li maladie est; aprés le cauterize de toutes pars tant que tu erraiche toute la corruption, et nen remaigne rien de li, que tout ceu qui est corrumpus ne soit osteit.	If you see this illness in a place that can withstand cautery with fire, then heat the cauteries very small and large, according to what is appropriate for the location of the illness; afterwards cauterize it all over until you reach all the corruption, and none remains, so that all that is corrupted is removed.
Et puis le laisse III jors, et met sus les leus cauterizez soffre broiet avec oile tant que les eschaudures dou feu soient ostees, et toute li corruption.	And then leave it for 3 days, and put on the cauterized spots a poultice with oil until the burns from the fire are healed, and all the corruption is removed.
Aprés lou cure d’oignemens engendrans char.	After that, treat it with ointments that generate heat.
Et se tu vois aprés III jors que chars saine ne naisse, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere sus ceu qui est demoreit des leus corrumpus.	And if you see after 3 days that new flesh has not appeared, it is good; and if not, then repeat the cautery on what remains of the corrupted spots.Et apres cure li membre de oignemens freds, qu’il soit sans doulor; et adonques est bon que tu le remettes en ses leus.
Et ceste mengeson est aucune fois esteit curee de medicine ague en leu de cautere de feu; mais toutevoie cautere de feu est de plus grant aide, et j’ai ja dit la cure de la medicine ague en la division: pren la quant tu en as mestier.	And this disease is sometimes cured by medicine instead of fire cautery; but nonetheless, fire cautery provides greater aid, and I have already described the cure for the disease with medicine in the division: take the amount you need.
des porrelz qui vienent as piez	of sores that come on the feet
Mout de fois avient que as piez par defuers naist une maladie qui est apelee «clos» selonc nostre entencion, et est une grosse chose fautree qui blece lou piet.	Many times it happens that through defect a disease called 'clot' according to our understanding arises in the feet, and is a large, faulty thing that blocks the toe.
Et li cauteres de ceste maladie si est selonc II manieres.	And the cauteries for this disease are according to two methods.
C’est a savoir cautere de feu, et cautere d’aigue chaude.	They are: fire cautery and hot water cautery.Et li cauteres de ceste maladie si est selonc II manieres: cautere de feu, et cautere d’aigue chaude.
Cautere de feu si est que tu eschaufe I cautere cheveit ausi com est une penne de vouteul, et soit fait de boin fer a la mesure qu’il puisse porpenre le clou de toutes pars, et qu’il i ait subtilz marges; aprés le met tout chaut sus lou clou, et torne ta main tot entor le clou tant qu’il viegne au font dou clou; et lou laisse ensi III jors tant qu’il encomence giter porriture; puis li fai un emplaustre de malves savaiges broiies avec seil, et laisse l’emplaustre sus toute la nuit, et li clous cherra et sera desracinez de ses racines.	Fire cautery is performed by heating the cautery iron like a needle until it turns red, and shaping it to fit the nail, with thin edges; then you apply it all around the nail, rotating your hand around the nail until it reaches the base of the nail; then leave it for three days until pus starts to form; then apply an ointment made from crushed mallows mixed with salt, and leave it on overnight; the nail will loosen and fall off along with its roots.
Puis cure le leu d’oignement enjanrant char tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat the area with a soothing ointment until it is healed.
Et s’il sont convertit par defuers lou cors, et maintes fois avient et en mains et em piez, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere d’aigue chaude; et est en teil maniere: pren une cainne d’arain ou de fer, ou une penne de vouteul, et met sus lou clou et l’althelul, c’est asavoir porrelz verrues; et met la cainne sus si qu’ele porpreigne tout entor, puis i met un poc d’awe chaude, et retien bien ta main, et presse ta main en tornant si que li marge de la cainne viegne a la racine dou clou, et puisse trover l’aigue chaude voie parfonde jusc’a la racine; et soffre li malaides un poc la mordication de l’aigue chaude une houre; puis le laisse ensi, et il se derracinera tous a tout ses racines.	If they appear on different parts of the body, often in the hands and feet, then you must treat them with hot water cautery. It is done this way: take an iron or bronze needle, or a penknife, and place it over the wart; and place the needle so that it covers the entire area, then apply a little hot water, hold your hand steady, and press your hand as you turn the needle so that the edge of the needle reaches the root. Let the patient endure the burning sensation from the hot water for an hour; then leave it like this, and it will be uprooted at all its roots.
Ensi fai un aprés autre, tant que tu esraiches toz ces qui sont au cors, puis les cure des oignemens qui engenrent char.	Thus do one after another, until you draw out all those who are in the body, then cure them of the wounds that engender pus.
li cure dou trembler	the cure for trembling
Quant aucuns tremble de froidor de ners, ou de fievre quartaine ou d’autre, si covient que tu li faices .iiij. cauteres ou .iv. sus l’espinee dou dos, .i. cautere entre chescune espinee; et .i. cautere ou pez, et .i. sus l’estomac au cautere olivaire; si laissera lou trembler, et se hastera li santez de la maladie froide.	When someone trembles from coldness of the nerves, or from quartan fever, or any other cause, you should make four cauteries or four on the spine of the back, one cautery between each vertebrae; and one cautery on the foot, and one over the stomach with the olive-wood cautery; this will stop the trembling and hasten the recovery from the cold disease.
des pustules puans	of stinking pustules
Aucune fois apperent par defuers le cors bathes, ou pustules puans, que vienent de grosses matieres corrumpues.	Sometimes they appear as sores on the body, or stinking pustules, that come from large corrupted matters.
si covient au premier quant eles apperent que on faice cautere sus chescun chief de la pustule: un cautere subtil de fust de mirte, de coi li pointe soit emprise au feu, ou de racine de aristologe longe, ou au cautere lenticulaire.	If necessary, when they first appear, one should make a cautery on each head of the pustule: with a thin cautery of myrtle wood, whose tip is taken hold of by the fire, or of a long root of aristologus, or with a lenticular cautery.
Et aucune fois les cauterize on au comencement quant il aperent, selonc ceste maniere, et il ne puent croistre des enqui en avant, mais est desrompue li superfluitez dont il vienent, et sont sanez; mais il covient que ceu soit fait aprés l’evacuation de sanc.	And sometimes they are cauterized at the beginning when they appear, according to this manner, and they cannot grow from thereforth, but the superfluities from which they come are disrupted, and they are healed; but it must be done after the evacuation of blood.Et s’eles croissent en la chair et en le corps, il faut les cauterize quant on le peut, car si on ne les cauterize pas et qu’il croissez, ou il se veult rompre, il faice mal au corp et li membrez;
quant li artere est copee	when the artery is cut
Maintes fois avient grans decorremens de sanc de l’artere qui est copee a la plaie que vient au pardefuers, ou a l’incision de l’aposteme, ou au cautere dou membre, et as semblans choses; et est mout grief chose d’estenchier.	Many times great flows of blood occur from the artery that is cut at the wound that comes to light, or at the incision of an abscess, or on the cautery of the limb, and in similar things; and it is a very grievous thing to stanch.
Et toutevoie quant ceu avient a aucun, si te haste de mettre ton doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne, et l’estrain mout tant que li sans soit apaisiez desoz ton doi, et que goute n’en isse plus; puis met au feu les cauteres olivaire plusors petis et grans tant qu’il soient tuit rouge; puis empren .i., ou grant ou petit selonc la plaie et lou leu en coi li artere est route, et met le cautere sus cele voine ou tu tiens ton doi, et tien le cautere tant sus que li sans soit restainchiez.	And yet, when this happens to someone, you must quickly put your finger on the wound of the vein and hold it very tightly until the blood is staunched beneath your finger and no drop flows out; then take several small and large olive-wood cauteries and heat them until they are all red; then take either a large or small piece of wool according to the size of the wound and the location where the artery is cut, and put the cautery on that vein where you are holding your finger, and hold it there until the bleeding is staunched.
Et s’il saut fuers quant tu lieves ton doi desus la voinne, et li cauteres estint, si pren hastivement .i. autre des cauteres qui sont au feu.	And if it bleeds again when you lift your finger from the wound and the cauteries are extinguished, quickly take another of the cauteries that are in the fire.
Et ne cesser de faire ceu l’un aprés l’autre tant que li sans soit estenchiez; et warde que tu n’ardes lou nerf qui est delez, et que autre malice ne viegne sus lou malaide; et saiches que quant sans decourt de l’artere, c’on ne lou puet mie bien restenchier meismement quant li artere est grans, se ceu n’est par une des .iiij. manieres que nos avons dit: ou par cautere, ou par extraction quant ele n’est mie traite, ou par fort liement de fil, ou par medicines mises sus qui ont pooir de restenchier sanc; et soit liee et estrainte avennament.	And do not cease doing this one after the other until the bleeding is staunched; and be careful not to hurt the nerve that is nearby, and no other harm should come to the patient; and know that when blood flows from an artery, it cannot be staunched well by itself if the artery is large, except by one of four methods that we have mentioned: by cautery, or by extraction when it has not been treated, or by a strong ligature with thread, or by medicines placed on it that have the power to stanch blood; and it should be bound and pressed firmly.
Qui i amenistrera restenchement de liier estroitement de drapelz ou de metre choses ardans sus, ou autres semblans choses, se n’i profite se poc non.	Whoever administers a tight bandage or places burning objects on top, or similar things, will not benefit if only a little.
Et se ce avient a aucun et il n’ait mie mire ne medicine present, si doit mettre son doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne si com nos avons dit, et bien estrendre tant qu’il soit restenchiez desus la plaie et desus la voinne; et ne remuer lou doit, mais lou moille d’awe froide sovent que soit mout froide tant que li sans soit congelez et engrossiez et restenchiez; et faice des enqui en avant ceu dont il a mestier de cauteres et de medicines.	And if this happens to someone and there is no mirror or medicine available, then one should put their index finger on the wound as we have said, and tightly apply pressure above the wound and vein; and they should not move it but moisten it with cold water frequently so that the blood becomes cold and congealed and tightly applied; and make inquiries in advance about what is needed for cauterization and medicine.
Ci encomence li secons livre des cures de taille	Here begins the second book of wound treatments.
Nos vos avons dit ou premier chapistre toute maladie en coi il covient cautere de feu, ou de medicine ardans, et les oquisons et les causes et les estrumens et les formes des cauteres; et ai mis celui chapistre des lou chief jusc’a piez, et je irai en cest chapistre par celi meisme voie por ceu c’on trueve plus legierement ceu c’on voura.	We have told you in the first chapter about all diseases that require cauterization with fire or burning medicine, and the causes and the instruments and the forms of cauterizations; and I will go through this chapter by the same path so that one may more easily find what they desire.
Et ainsois que je encomence ceu, il covient, chier fil, que vos aprenez que en cest chapistre a plus de peril et de paor que ou premier des cauteres, et por ceu il covient plus grant cautele.	And thus as I begin this, it is fitting, dear son, that you learn that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the first of cauteries, and therefore greater caution is required.
Car en l’ovraige de cest chapistre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne, et a l’incision sus aposteme, et as cures des plaies, et a l’estraction des saiettes, et a l’incision sus la piere, et les semblans choses; ou il a doutance et paor, et en vient li mors a plusors.	For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
Et je vos amoneste que vos n’entreprenez folie.	And I warn you not to attempt foolishness.
Car mout de manieres de gens vienent en cures.	For many kinds of people come for treatment.
si vienent de telz qui s’aïrent si avec lor maladie qu’il muerent legierement por la forsenerie qu’il trueve de sa maladie, et de la grandour de son malice; et de ces doit on avoir paor.	if they come from such who go mad with their illness and quickly die because of the madness that they experience from their sickness, and because of the great severity of their illness; and one must fear these.
Et de ces i a qui te done son sens, et dit: «atendez, je sui garis»; et li maladie est despitouse.	And there are those who regain their senses and say, "Wait, I am healed," and yet the illness is stubborn.
Il ne covient mie que vos vos consentez a ces qui vienent a vos qui ont ceste maniere, mais mettez plus grant cusanson en vostre honor qu’en vostre covoitise, et n’ovrez mie folement mais saigement de ceu dont vos estes certain, et dont vos poez avoir pris et los; et usez de pronostication et de indication en cures de vos malaides a coi salus soit convertie; et ceu vos aidera a aquester bone renommee, et gloire, et memoire de loenge.	You must not consent to those who come to you and have this way of behaving, but put more trust in your honor than in your desire, and do not open yourself foolishly but wisely to that which you are certain of and from which you can receive profit and fame; and use prophecy and indication in the cures of your illnesses to turn health around. And that will help you achieve this good reputation, glory, and praise.
Tres chier fil, Nostres Sires vos doint boin entendement et droiture, et se vos vuelle espireir de la sainte inspiration de sa main, amen.	Very dear son, Our Lord gives you good understanding and righteousness, and if you wish to aspire to the holy inspiration of his hand, amen.
Or je vos ai ordeneit cest chapistre en devisant par chapistres, selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre des cauteres, que je vos ai deviseit des le chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que vos trovez plus legierement ceu dont vos avrez mestier.	Now I have outlined this chapter for you in discussing chapter chapters, according to what is before the chapter on cautery, which I have discussed from the head down to the feet, so that you may more easily find what you need.
dou chief plein d’aigue	from the head full of water
Saiches que ceste maladie vient mout de fois as enfans a l’enfanter, et quant li baille estraint trop fort le chief de l’enfant; et aucune fois vient ceu de cause reponue que on ne seit.	Do you know that this disease often comes to children when they are born, and when the birth canal is too narrow for the child; and sometimes it comes from other reasons unknown to us.
Et je ne vis onques ceste maladie fuers qu’en enfans, et a toz ces que j’ai veus se hastait li mors; et por ceu me semble qu’il me vaut mues lassier l’ovraige en teilz cures.	I have never seen this disease except in children, and in all those I have seen, death was swift; therefore it seems to me that it is better to leave the treatment in several parts.
Et je vis .i. enfant de coi li chiés estoit plains d’aigue, et li chief engroissoit chescun jor tant qu’il ne lou pooit sostenir; et crut tant li moistor qu’il fut mors, et ceste moistor si est assemblee desoz l’os sus lou syphac, entre lou keur et l’os; et li ovraiges si est telz se li moistor est entre lou keur et l’os, et li apostemes est petis, que tu fendes emmi lou chief une fendure large; et soit ausi longe com .ij. nous, tant que li mostor corre; et vez ci la forme dou spatumile:	I saw a child whose head was swollen with fluid, and the swelling increased every day until he could no longer support it; he died from the pressure of the fluid which had accumulated under the bone between the brain and skull, between the brain and bone. If the fluid is located there between the brain and bone, and if the abscess is small, split the head with a wide incision as long as two fingers so that the fluid can flow out; and here is how you should treat hydrocephalus:
Se li moistor est plus creue, et li aposteme soit plus grans, si fai .ij. fendures en maniere d’une croix, selonc ceste forme:	If the fluid is deeper and the abscess is larger, make two incisions in the shape of a cross, according to this form:
Et se li moistor est desoz l’os, et li signes que tu vois les commissures dou chief overtes de chescune partie, et li aigue saut fuer quant tu la presses de ta main au dedens, et ceu ne t’est mie reponut: si covient que tu fendes enmi lou chief .iij. fendures selonc ceste maniere:	And if the fluid is under the bone, and you see the creases of the head opening in each part, and the fluid leaks out when you press it with your hand from within, and this has not helped: then you should split the head into four parts according to this method:
Et aprés l’incision estrai la moistor toute fuers.	And after the incision, draw out all the moisture forcefully.
Aprés estraint les fendures de drapelz et de poudres, et i met vin et oile, et laisse ensi jusc’a cinquieme jor; puis le deslie, et cure la plaie par tentes et par oignemens, et laisse estraindre le chief egaument, et done mengier au malaide viande seche de poc de moistor tant que li membre soit confortez et sanez.	Afterwards, press out the cuts of rags and powders, and put in wine and oil, and leave it thus until the fifth day; then loosen it, and treat the wound by tenting and poultices, and let the head be bound tightly, and give the patient dry food without moisture as much as the member can bear, until it is comforted and healed.
Et une autre maniere d’incision est que tu regardes ou apert li grandor de l’aposteme, et li assemblé de l’aigue; car aucune fois est elle devant; aucune fois derrier; aucune fois en destre; et aucune fois en senestre.	And another way to make an incision is to observe where the abscess is largest and the gathering of pus is most concentrated; for sometimes it is in front, sometimes behind, sometimes on the right, and sometimes on the left.
Taille donques lai ou li aposteme apert, et l’emplissement de l’aigue, et lou fent selonc ce que tu en as le pooir; et warde que tu ne coper l’artere; et veigne flun de sanc, si que li malaides muere dou decorrement de sanc et de l’evacuation de moistor.	So cut where the abscess is open and the pus gathers, and cut according to what you are able; and be careful not to cut the artery, or blood will flow and the patient will die from blood loss and moisture evacuation.
de reume	from gout
Quant il avient a aucun une maladie qui est apelee «catarre» as eulz ou au pis, et li maladie est anciainne, et li cure de medicine ne profite mie, adonques li derraine cure si est li cauteres avec ceu c’on li copera les .ij. arteres.	When someone suffers from a condition called "cataract" in the eyes or elsewhere, and the disease is old, and the treatment of medicine does not help, then the last resort is cautery with which one will cut the two arteries.
Il covient donques, cant tu les vues coper, que li malaides faice rere son chief; aprés li frotte lou leu d’un drapel aspre tant que les arteres aperent, puis estraingne li malaides son col a tout I drapel; puis regarde ou li voine bait, et li leus de l’une et de l’autre sont aprés les oreilles, et poc sont reponues; puis signe les leus d’enche, puis cope l’une et l’autre d’un spatumile agut de II pars, tant que li taille veigne jusc’a l’os, et ceu soit par lou large dou chief.	Therefore, when you see them covered, let the patient lower his head; then rub the area of a tough rag until the arteries appear, then bind the patient's neck with all the rag; then look where the vein beats, and the places on both sides are after the ears, and the pulsations are relaxed; then mark the spots inwards, then cover one and the other with a sharp spatula of two parts, so that the incision comes to the bone, and this is through the center of the head.
Et se tu vues, boute le spatumile desoz l’artere et la cope au desus, en taillant ausi com .ij. dois au traver.	And if you see that, put the spatula under the artery and cut it from above, cutting through as well about two fingers across.
Et quant li voinne est copee, si saut li sans en haut continuelment fuers.	And when the vein is cut, let the blood flow continuously upwards.
Et se li artere n’apert au sentir, si covient que tu mesures la quantiteit de l’espaice de III dois, puis seigne d’enche et fent jusc’a l’os; et ceu qu’il covient dou sanc mettre fuers si est VI c/, et par aventure un poc plus ou moins, selonc ce que li malaides puet soffrir, et la repletion de l’artere; puis regarde la plaie: s’il remaint sus l’os point dou syphac, si le cope que apostemes chaus n’i veigne, puis estrain la plaie et lie, et la cure d’oignement tant qu’ele soit sanee.	If the artery does not open to feeling, then you must measure the quantity of the space of three fingers, then cut in and slice to the bone; and what is necessary of blood drawn off if it is six parts, and by chance a little more or less, according to what the patient can endure, and the fullness of the artery; then look at the wound: if there remains on the bone any dot of pus, so that hot abscesses do not come in, then strain the wound and ligature, and dress it with ointment until it is healed.
de emigrainne	of the emetic
Quant emigrainne anciaine vient, et catarre agut, por les moistors des larmes et les chalors en temples et sode anciene forsenee et semblans choses, et il est medicinez par manieres de cures de medicine et tout ceu ne li profite mie, si estraions les arteres des temples et lou cauterizons, si com nos avons conteit.	When ancient vomiting comes, and a sharp catarrh, due to moisture from the tears and heat in the temples and ancient madness and similar things, and he is treated by various methods of medicine and all that does not help him, then we should open the arteries of the temples and cauterize them, as we have described.
Et li maniere de l’estraction d’elles si est que li malaides faice rere les poilz de ses temples, et entende a l’artere qui apert en la temple, car elle apert bien par son batement, et est poc reponue fuers que en aucuns homes qui sont trop froit; et s’elle est reponue, si estraigne son col li malaides d’aucuns drapelz, puis frote le leu d’aucun aspre drap, et arose le leu d’aigue chaude tant que li artere apere manifestement; puis pren le spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	And the method of extraction is that the patient pulls back his hair from his temples, and feels the artery which opens in the temple, for it opens well by its pulsation, and is little relaxed by pressure in some men who are too cold; and if it is relaxed, he stretches his neck with some cloth, then rubs the area with some rough cloth, and washes the area with warm water until the artery appears clearly; then take the spatulum of which there is the shape:
puis escorche le cuir legierement tant que tu veignes a l’artere, puis la trai en haut as pinceures, et la depart bien des toiles que sont desoz li de chescune partie; et se li artere est subtilz, si la torne a la pointe de l’uncine, puis la cope de celle partie selonc la quantiteit des II chiés.	Then scorch the skin slightly until you reach the artery, then draw it up with forceps, and separate it well from the tissues that are under each part; and if the artery is subtle, return it to the tip of the fingernail, then ligature that part according to the quantity of two fingers.
Car s’elle n’est copee, si ne saut mie li sans dou tout en tout.	For if it is not cut, then the sick person's life hangs by a thread.
Et trai dou sanc des .vj. c/, jusc’a .iij.; et se li artere est grans, si covient que tu la lies en .ij. leus d’un fil double fort de soie, que porriture n’i veigne devant le soudement de la plaie, et veigne decorremens de sanc; puis cope la superfluiteit qui est entre les .ij. liiens en celle houre meisme, et puis, se tu vues, si lou cauterize dou cautere cutellaire jusc’a l’os tant que li chiés soient copez; et c’est li muedre oevre, se li malaides n’a fievre et il est de chaude complexion.	And draw out the blood from the 16th part up to the 3rd; and if the artery is large, you must tie it in two places with a strong double silk thread so that pus does not come before the wound heals, and bleeding comes gradually; then cover the excess between the two ties in the same hour, and then, if you wish, cauterize it with an iron cautery up to the bone until the bones are cut; and this is the main treatment if the patient does not have a fever and is of a hot complexion.
Car li cauteres est aide por finir les moistors: por ceu est il de plus grant aide as moistors.	For cauterization helps to dry up moistures, therefore it is of greater help for moistures.
Ou il covient por l’estraction des arteres que om emplisse lou leu de viel coton et mette on sus tentes bien faites; et quant on les desliera, si soit curez de medicines seches que font naistre char, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se sans cort de l’artere tant dis com tu i oevres, si te haste dou coper par cautere, ou tu emple lou leu de vitriole et l’estrain a ta main que li sans soit estainchiez; et se tu n’as ceu present, si met sor le leu ton doit tant que li sans soit congelez, et arose le leu d’aigue froide tant que li sans cesse, et soit estraint si com il covient; et ceu qui est muedre et plus legier en l’estraction de l’artere est que tu cauterizes la voinne de cest cautere trenchant de .ij. pars, mais li trenchant soient bien espés por warder plus longement lor chalor.	Or it is necessary for the extraction of arteries that one fills the place with old cotton and puts it on top of well-made tents; and when they are removed, it is cured with dry medicines that cause the formation of scar tissue, and with tenting, until it is healed; and if there is a break in the artery during as much as you work on it, then hurry to cover it by cauterization, or you employ vitriol and hold it in your hand so that the blood is stanched; and if you don't have that at hand, then put your finger over the spot so that the blood congeals, and moisten the spot with cold water until the bleeding stops, and then bind it as tightly as it should be; and what is better and lighter for the extraction of the artery is to cauterize the vein with this cutting cautery of 16 parts, but the cutter must be quite thick so that its heat lasts longer.
Car quant li estrumens est trop tenves, si tient moins sa chalor.	For when the strumenti is too thin, it holds its heat less well.
Et doit avoir entre les .ij. coutelz .i. doit de gros d’espaice, et puis quant tu as signiet d’enche les .ij. leus, et tu mes lou fer ardant sus tant qu’il viegne jusc’a l’os, et cope la voinne en .ij. leus; et soient esloigniet entre les .ij. chiés car il n’est mie soudez de cest cautere dou tout en tout; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And you should have between the two knives a thickness of one digit, and then when you have made the incision in both places, place the hot iron on until it reaches the bone, and cut the vein in two places; and the two heads should be separated because they are not soldered together by this cautery from top to bottom; and this is the shape of the cautery:
des larmes	of tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont dessendans des voinnes que sont sus lou test dou chief de fuer, et il ne profite mie cure de medicine c’on i faice, et tu vois la faice dou malaide enrougir, et sent ou front ambulation si com de fremis; et sui oil sont tenve et moiste si que li poil des papieres sont cheut, et sont eschaufees les papieres, et escorchies de l’ardor des larmes, si ait mestier de ceste cure.	When tears are flowing from the eyes that are on top of the forehead, and there is no benefit from medicine that is applied, and you see the face of the patient turn red, and feel pulse movement as if from trembling; and when the eyelids are thin and moist so that the eyelashes have fallen off, and the eyelids are scorched by the heat of tears, then this treatment is needed.
Et l’apelerent li ancien «cure contuse», et est que tu faices a rere au malaide qui a ceste maladie les poilz qu’il ait ou front, puis li fai III fendures ou front igalment selonc la longesce dou front; et soit l’une des fendures ausi com II doi tout emmi lou front en avalant aval jusc’a neif, et les autres II as II costelz par desus les papieres, et te garde de l’incision des arteres que sont as II costez par desus les papieres; et aloigne ta main de la continuation des II mandibules, et soit chescune plaie la quantiteit de III dois au traver joins; et aies apparillie une piece d’esponge et mout de drapelz ses por essuer lou sanc, puis boute le spatumile agut de II pars de coi ci est li forme:	And they used to call this "cure contused", and you should do it for the sick person who has this disease, cut the hairs on their forehead, then make III incisions on the forehead evenly according to the length of the forehead; and let one of the incisions be as deep as two fingers right in the middle of the forehead going down, and the other two at the sides above the eyebrows, and be careful not to cut the arteries which are at the sides above the eyebrows; and keep your hand away from the jaw, and let each wound be as deep as three fingers across, joined together; and have a piece of sponge and a lot of bandages ready to wipe up the blood, then insert the spatulum sharply on both sides where the hairline is:
des l’incision qui est dever la temple jusc’a la seconde incision; et escorche tout le keur qui est entre les .ij. fendures a tot lou syfac qui est sus l’os, puis fai autreteil des la moiene incision jusc’a l’autre seconde, et puis estrai fuer cest spatumile.	From the incision at the temple to the second incision; and scorch all of the skin between the .ii. incisions to the bone, then do the same from the middle incision to the other second incision, then remove this plaster.
si boute en la premiere fendure l’estrument qui est apelez «cultellaire», et est tresbien trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part est souef, ne mie trenchans, et c’est li forme:	Then insert into the first incision the instrument called "culter", which is very sharp on one side and smooth on the other, and it is shaped thus:
Et met le costeit taillant vers la char aerse au keur, et lou costeit souef vers l’os, et lou boute tant qu’il veigne a la moiene fendure.	And place the knife's edge towards the chest cavity at the heart, and the flat side towards the bone, and push it in until it reaches the median incision.
Et cope toz les vasselz que dessendent dou chief as eulz tant que l’incision soit continue jusc’a ceu qui apert dou keur, et puis autreteil fai en la moiene fendure jusc’a l’autre defuer; et puis estrai dou sanc igalment, et espresse lou leu por le sanc pris; puis met en chescune fendure une tente de viel coton, et met sus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile et en aisil, et garde que apostemes chaus n’i veigne; et au tier jor deslie lou liien, et i amenistre grant planteit d’aigue tede, puis lou cure d’oignement basilicon avec oile roset, et d’autres cures dont on cure plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And cut all the vessels that descend from the head to the eyes until the incision is continuous to what opens at the heart, and then make another cut in the median incision to the other defier; and then draw out blood equally, and express the area for the blood taken; then put a tent made of old cotton into each incision, and place dampened cloths in wine and oil and garlic on top, and guard against hot abscesses coming there; and after three days, loosen the ligature, and administer a large amount of cool water, then treat the wound with basilicon ointment mixed with rose oil, and other treatments for wounds, until it is healed.
dou reume des eulz	from the eyes
Quant a aucun vienent catarre agut acostumeement, et tu vois les eulz tenves et petis, et afoiblir la veue, et les papieres brulees; et li poil chieent, et ou chief en parfont a dolor ague, et li malaides esternue; adonques saiches par ces accidens que celles matieres et cil catharre ne vient fuer que de maintes voines, et li muedre cure que i est, si est ceste.	When someone has a constant and habitual catarrh, and you see that the eyes are pale and sunken, and the vision is weakened, and there is pain in the head, and the patient sneezes; then you may know from these signs that those matters and this catarrh do not come from one vein only, but from many veins, and that it comes from the brain, and its cure lies therein.
Et est que tu comande au malaide a rere son front, puis fai une grant fendure emmi lou front, et une autre dou large I poc.	And you command the patient to turn his head back, then make a large slit in the middle of the forehead, and another from the broad nose.
Et comence des la fendure de la temple senestre a la temple destre, et soit li incision jusc’a l’os; et esloigne ta main des ners des temples que muevent au mengier; et quant li os est descovers, si essue tout le sanc a une esponge, et puis desevre entre les II levres de la fendure et i met coton viel, et tentes de lin; puis lie desus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile, et te garde d’aposteme chaut; quant il est ostez, si covient que tu frottes l’os tant que chars i comence a naistre, puis le cure de choses exiccatives, que font enjanrer char.	And begin the incision from the left temple to the right, and cut down to the bone; and keep your hand away from the nerve that moves the jaw; and when the bone is exposed, wipe all the blood with a sponge, and then pull back between the two lips of the slit, and insert old cotton, and tent with linen; then bind moistened cloths in wine and oil on top, and beware of hot abscesses; when it is healed, you must rub the bone until new flesh begins to grow, then treat it with astringent substances that promote healing.
En teil maniere: pren .ij. parties de flor de froment, et de colofoine .iiij. parties, et en fai emplaustre; et l’aministre en ces plaies por enjanrer char per tout.	In the same way: take two parts of flour of wheat, and four parts of colophony, and make a poultice out of it; and administer it to these wounds to promote healing throughout.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	of the ear stoppers
Tout ceu que chiet ens oreilles est une des .iiij. choses: ou grains, ou beste, ou piere de mine ou semblans chose si com fer; ou semence, si com jaisses, feves, pois; ou chose defluans si com aigue et aisilz et semblans choses.	All that falls into the ears is one of four things: grains, or animals, or stones, or similar objects such as iron; or seeds, such as beans, peas; or flowing substances such as water and garlic and similar things.
Quant il chiet en l’oreille piere ou autre maniere de chose que ne s’ajoste mie a l’oreille, ne ne croist en l’oreille, si met l’oreille au solel.	When it falls into the ear, whether stone or other matter that does not adhere to the ear, nor grow in the ear, then put the ear to the sun.
Se tu vois la piere, si distille aucun poc d’oile violet ou oile de sisament, puis i amenistre extraction; et lou fai esternuer de condisi, et li estoupe les narines quant li esternuemens vient, et met entor l’oreille pieces de drapelz ou laine; et estent l’oreille au desus.	If you see a stone, drop some violet oil or oil of wormwood onto it, then administer an enema. Let the patient sneeze from the congestion, and plug their nostrils when they sneeze, and place pieces of cloth or wool around their ears; let the ears be on top.
Mout de fois vient fuer par ceste cure; et s’elle ne vient fuer, se li amenistre extraction as pinceures subtilz, de coi ci est li forme:	It often comes out through this treatment; and if it doesn't come out, then administer an enema with thin forceps, of which there is a description later.
S’elle saut fuer as pinceures, c’est boin; se ceu non, si amenistre extraction a l’oncine subtil de petite doubleure; et s’elle ne saut par ceu, si fai une caine d’arain et boute lou chief de la cainne ou pertuis de l’oreille fort, et estoupe ceu qui est entor la cainne de cire mole si que li vens n’i puisse entrer avec la cainne; puis le trai fuer forment, car mout de fois vient fuer si com nos avons dit; et s’elle ne vient fuer en teil maniere, si prent glut de coi en prent les oisiaus, et met en som aucun estrument qui soit a point por ceu faire, et met un poc de coton entor; puis presse le glut sus la piere ou quel chose que ce soit, et trai fuer.	If it pops out with the tweezers, that is good; if not, then perform an extraction using a small, thin needle of soft metal; and if it does not pop out in this way, make a brass hook and insert its tip firmly into the ear canal, and plug the area around the hook with soft wax so that air cannot enter with the hook; then pull outward firmly, for often it will come out in this way as we have said; and if it does not come out in such a manner, take some glue and attach a bird to it, and place some instrument designed for this purpose, and put a bit of cotton around it; then press the glue onto the stone or whatever it is, and pull outward.
Et s’elle ne saut fuer de toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si te haste de fendre l’oreille ainsois que aposteme chalz i veigne, et spasme; et li maniere de la fendure si est que tu faices premier sainier lou malaide de la cephalique, et estrai dou sanc selonc la mesure de sa vertu, puis fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains et li torne l’oreille au desus, et fent une petite fendure en la racine de l’oreille a la graisse ou leu dependant; et soit li fendure ausi com une lune, tant que tu viegnes a la piere, puis l’oste selonc ton pooir, et la suce hastanment a ta bouche; et la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it does not come out with all these things that we have said, then be quick to split the ear so that an abscess forms there, and a spasm; and the manner of splitting is that you first make the patient fast for three days, and draw blood according to his condition, then have him sit between your hands and turn the ear upward, and make a small slit in the root of the ear at the fat where it depends; and the slit should be shaped like a moon, so that you reach the stone, then extract it according to your ability, and suck it strongly with your mouth; and treat it until he is healed.
Et se c’est grains qui est ens et il enfle, si aministre extraction; et si’il ne puet issir, si amenistre .i. spatumile tenve subtil selonc ceste forme:	And if it is a grain that is in and it swells, then administer extraction; and if it cannot come out, then administer .i. spatule, held subtle according to this form:
et amenistre incision de celui grain.	and administer an incision on that spot.
Mais ne faire mie ceu quant tu penses que li grains est moistes por la moistor de l’oreille, tant que tu en aies fait maintes pieces; puis l’estrai as pinceures subtilz et au succier, si com nos avons dit, si que li estractions soit aligie.	But do not do this when you think that the grains are moist from the moisture of the ear, until you have made many pieces; then pull it out with thin forceps and with a suction cup, as we have said, so that the extraction is gentle.
En l’aigue donques que chiet en l’oreille covient que li malaides use d’esternuement de condisi premiers, et ample l’oreille de viel coton.	In acute conditions when fluid drains into the ear, the patient should first sneeze from congestion, and open the ear with old cotton.
Et soit gisans sus celle oreille meisme ou li aigue est.	And let him lie on that very ear where the water is.
s’elle saut fuer per ceu, c’est boin.	If it jumps out because of this, it's good.
se ceu non, si prent maintes pieres selonc li longesce de ton doit tenves et legieres, et les eschaufe un poc au feu; et em mette li malaides une ou pertus de son oreille, et saille sus i. de ses piez d’autre part, et fiere d’une autre piere sus la piere qui est en l’oreille; et ne cesse de faire ceu de piere em piere tant que li aigue isse toute fuer, et ensi saut elle toute fuer; et se tu vues, si prent I jonc, et boute l’un des chiés en l’oreille, et l’autre chief emprent de feu tant que li plus dou jonc soit ars; puis refai autreteil d’autres jons tant que li aigue isse toute, si com nos avons dit en la piere.	If not, then take many small stones according to the length of your index finger, thin and light, and heat them in fire; and put one of these stones into the ear, and let it fall on its side from another part, and pierce with another stone upon the stone which is in the ear; and do not cease doing this with stone after stone until all the water comes out, and so it will come out entirely. If you see that, then take a straw and push one end into the ear and the other end with fire until the longer straw burns; then do likewise with other straws until all the water comes out, as we have said about the stone.
En l’estraction de la beste, s’elle est de petit cors, si com puce et semblans chose, cure la si com nos avons dit en la division; mais s’elle est de grant cors c’on la puisse sentir, si amenistre extraction de pinceures; et c’est li chose plus legiere a oster qui soit en l’oreille.	In the extraction of the beast, if it is a small body like a flea or similar thing, cure it as we have said in the division; but if it is a large body that one can feel, administer extraction with tweezers; and this is the easiest thing to remove from the ear.
En l’estraction des vers enjanrez as oreilles, quant tu lou cures si com nos avons dit en la division et ou traitier des distillations, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu regardes l’oreille au soleil: s’il i apert nulz vers, si les trai as pinceures subtilz, et s’il n’aperent, si prent la cainne de coi ci est li forme:	In the extraction of worms from the ears, when you treat them as we have said in the section and tract on distillations, and the treatment does not help, then you must examine the ear in the sun; if any worms appear, then pull them out with fine tweezers, and if none appear, then take the quill of a goose feather and pierce the eardrum.
Et soit estroite desoz et large desus.	It is tight below and loose above.
Et boute lou plus subtil chief en l’oreille selonc la quantiteit de la soffrance dou malaide, puis succe forment a tot la caine; fai ceu sovent tant que tuit li ver issent.	And insert the narrowest end of the instrument into the ear according to the amount of suffering from the ailment, then suck strongly on the tube; do this frequently until all the pus comes out.
Et s’il n’obeissent a issir, si estoupe entor la cainne de coton si com j’ai dit en la piere; et s’il ne saillent fuer si com nos avons dit, si aministre distillations que li ancien ont esprovees en l’ocision des vers, et tu les troveras ou traitier des distillations; et si distille tes oiles et tes medicines en l’oreille a tout cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme si com tu vois:	And if it does not come out, then plug the ear with cotton as I have said about the stone; and if they do not come out as we have said, then administer distillations that the ancients have tried in the treatment of worms, and you will find them in the section on distillations; and distil your oils and medicines into the ear through this instrument, whose shape is as follows:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain estrois desoz a .i. petis pertuis, et desus overs por distiller; et por presser dedens la distillation a .i. estrument d’arain bien fait por ceu, et se tu vues pren .i. raseur et envoloupe entor la pointe avenanment coton; puis i giete ton oile ou ton jus, et ceu que tu vues de tes medicines en la cainne, et li caine soit en l’oreille; puis boute dedens lou raseur a tout lou coton, et presse ta main tempreement tant que li oile soit distilleit ou chevement de l’oreille; et lou sente li malaides dedens, et soit li distillations .i. poc eschaufee au feu ainsois c’on la distille en l’oreille; et garde qu’elle ne soit trop froide, car li medicine ne seroit mie si bone.	And it is made of silver or brass with a small hole underneath and holes above for distilling; and to press the distillate into the instrument with a well-made brass instrument for this purpose, and if you wish, take a razor and wrap cotton around the blade; then pour your oil or juice and any remedies you wish into the quill, and the quill is in the ear; then place the razor over the cotton and press your hand gently so that the remedy is distilled onto the eardrum; and the patient feels it inside, and the distillation is a little warm from the fire so that it is not too cold when it enters the ear; and guard against it being too hot, for the remedy would not be as effective.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	of the ear stoppers
Aucun enfant naissent qui n’ont nul pertus ens oreilles; et ceste meisme chose avient as homes par estoupement de plaie, ou de char nee dedens l’oreille, et cist estoupemens vient aucune fois em parfont en l’oreille, si c’on ne lou puet veoir; et aucune fois avient .i. poc defuer lou pertus, et lou voit om bien.	No child is born without an opening in their ears; and the same thing happens to men due to a wound or a growth within the ear, and sometimes this stopper occurs deep within the ear, so it cannot be seen; and sometimes there is only a slight displacement of the opening, which can be easily seen.
Celle donques que vient em parfont, si c’on ne la puet veoir, est de grief sanation em plusors dispositions, et en cele c’on voit covient que tu mettes l’oreille dou malaide au soleil; et regarde dedens: se tu vois l’opilation apparent, si la oevre a tot cest spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	Therefore, when it occurs deep within the ear and cannot be seen, it is a difficult condition in many ways, and in such cases, one should hold the affected ear towards the sun; and look inside: if you see the membrane visible, then observe how the stopper forms.
Et soit agus et trenchans devant et derrier tout plain, si qu’il ne blece l’oreille; se li opilation est de char nee ou cors de l’oreille, si la tien as pinceures subtilz, et la cope legierement, tant que celle chars soit toute ostee.	And it should be sharp and pointed at the front and back, so that it does not pierce the ear; if the membrane is due to a growth or the body of the ear, then grip it with тонé pins, and gently peel it away until all the growth is removed.
Et se li opilations est em parfont en l’oreille, si pren I raseur subtil legier et l’eschaufe un petit au feu, puis li met ou cors de l’oreille.	And if the growth is deep in the ear, take a narrow, thin razor and heat it slightly in the fire, then apply it to the body of the ear.
Se tu sens l’opilation dont li malaides sent grieteit a l’oïr, perce legierement, et garde que tu ne grever les ners de l’oreille; puis met en l’oreille une tente selonc la largesce dou pertus, et la moille en l’oignement egyptien.	If you feel the oppression from which those who are affected greatly suffer when they hear it, pierce it gently, and be careful not to damage the nerves of the ear; then put a plug in the ear according to the width of the hole, and moisten it with Egyptian ointment.
Fai ceu aucun jor tant que li plaie soit soudee, ou tu pren une tente et la moille en aigue rose, et poudre sus vitriole broiet; et se tu vois enflee l’oreille, si couvient que tu traies la tente et remue une autre tente moillie en cerote qui soit fait d’oile roset et de cire, tant que li enfleure soit ostee; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Do this for several days until the wound is healed; then take a tent and moisten it in rose water, and powder over powdered vitriol; and if you see any swelling in the ear, you should draw out the tent and replace it with another tent moistened with cerate made from olive oil and wax, until the swelling is gone; then cure it until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si plonge une esponge et drapelz en aigue froide, et le met sus l’oreille, et use d’autres cures qui oste lou decorrement de sanc qui sont ou traitier des destillations.	And if bleeding occurs, soak a sponge and cloth in cold water, and apply it to the ear; and use other treatments that stop the bleeding from the distilling veins.
de la char des papieres	of paper charcoal
Cist althelul que vienent em papieres des eulz quant ils sont moiste et sont sec, si covient que tu les estendes de tenailles et de pinceures, et le cope d’un spatumile de ses racines; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet.	This poultice comes from plants when they are moist and dry; you should spread it with tweezers and tongs, and the root of a spathe; then put powdered vitriol on top.
Et se sans en decort, si le cauterize dou cautere lenticulaire subtil, et li cauterizeir aprés l’incision vaut mues; et maintes fois repairent, cant aucune chose demoure de lor racines; et quant elles sont cauterizees par feu, si sont arses celles racines et ne revienent mie.	And if there is no scurf, cauterize it with a subtle lenticular cautery, and the cauterizer after the incision heals; and many times they return, until nothing remains of their roots; and when they are cauterized by fire, those roots are burned and do not return.
de la gresle	of hail
Maintes fois vienent em papieres des eulz unes choses que semblent gresle en sa forme et en sa duresce, et por ceu est ceste maladie apelee «grandine», et est une assemblee de moistor grosse en la papiere desus et desoz; li ovraiges est telz: pren warde se li grandine se muet d’une part et d’autre, et c’est legiere chose a savoir; fent la donques dou large, puis l’escorche de chescune partie legierement, puis la prent as pinceures, et la cope.	Many times they come in paper form, things that look like hailstones in shape and hardness, and because of this the disease is called "hail," and it is a gathering of thick moisture on top and bottom; the treatment is such: take care if the hailstone moves from one side to another, and that is an easy thing to know; then make it wide, then peel each part gently, then grab it with tweezers and pluck it out.
se tu ne la pues coper sens percier un poc la papiere, si ne grieve rien au malaide; et se li fendure est grans, si l’assemble a une costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et s’elle est petite, si n’i faire point de force, car li oignemens la restoure tantost et enjanre char.	if you cannot pluck it without piercing the paper a little, then do not harm the patient; and if the tear is large, then stitch it up, and treat it until it is healed; and if it is small, then do not use force, for ointments will heal it quickly and close it up.
Et se li grandine est dessendans au dedens de l’oreille vers la partie desus, si enverse la papiere, et estent la grandine a unes pinceures, et la cope et presse d’une part et d’autre; et se li papiere est esloignie par l’incision, ce ne grieve rien; et quant li grandine est copee, si leive l’oil d’aigue salee, et cure le leu de ceu qui enjanre char tant que li malaides soit sanez.	And if the hailstone is descending inside the ear towards the upper part, then invert the paper, and grasp the hailstone with tweezers and squeeze from both sides; and if the paper is pulled away by the incision, it does not matter; and when the hailstone is crushed, wash the eye with salted water, and clean the area of any pus until the patient is healed.
de la graisse des eulz	of the fat around the eyes
Exinach est une graisse qui est enjanree en toiles des papieres desus, et ce avient plus as enfans c’a nules gens, et grieve mout a lor eulz, et li vienent li catharre as matinees, et ne pueent regardeir la lumiere dou soleil por ceu que les larmes se hastent a lor eulz; et por ceu se couchent il sor lor faices adés, et dorment sus, et sont lor papieres desoz lor sorcilz moistes que li enfleure et li apparance ont covert de l’exinach qui apert en l’oil.	Exinch is a fat that is ensnared in the webs of paper above, and this happens most to children with no one else, and it is very painful for them, and they get the catarrh in the mornings, and they cannot look at the light of the sun because their tears hasten to their eyes; and because of this they lie down on their faces, and sleep on top of it, and their papers are underneath their eyelids moistened by the inflammation and appearance covered by the exinch that opens in the eye.
Et quant tu presses lou leu a tes dois et sent l’exirnach entr’ous.	And when you press the area with your fingers and feel the exinch between them.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain; et puis pren .i. drapeil de lin, et appareille une tente em maniere d’un cercle selonc la quantiteit que conteigne exirnach de chescune partie, puis le met sus li; et presse a tes dois d’une part et d’autre, si que li exirnach soit assemblez emmi le cercle; puis fent em mileu de la moistor au spatumile trenchant une fendure dou large, et ne soit mie plus grans que li plaie c’on fait a la sainie de voinne; et fent le cuir em parfont tant que tu veignes a l’exirnach; et em plusors dispositions vient exirnach de la fendure, selonc la forme d’une piece de graisse blainche.	And the method of the treatment is that the patient places his head on your lap; then take a linen cloth and prepare a tent in the shape of a circle according to the amount of exinach in each part, and then place it over the eye; and press with your fingers from both sides so that the exinach gathers within the circle. Then make an incision in the middle of the moist area with a spatulum, making the incision no larger than the wound made for vein opening; and in various cases, the exinach comes out through the incision, depending on its shape like a piece of white fat.
Estrai la donques a tout une piece de drap charpit entre tes dois au defuer, et torne ta main a destre et a senestre tant qu’il soit espars; et garde que tu n’ajoster en la fendure, que tu ne viegnes a tout le spatumile jusc’a l’oil, que tu ne le bleces.	So take a piece of cloth and hold it between your fingers and thumb, and move your hand to the right and left until it is spread out; and be careful not to touch the fissure, or you will reach all the way to the eye and blister it.
Et se li exirnach n’apert en l’encomencement de la fendure, si acroi un poc la fendure legierement tant qu’il apere; puis l’estrai si com nos avons dit, puis moille drapelz en aisil et en aigue, et met sus le leu, et estrain de bendelz.	And if the excrescence opens at the beginning of the fissure, gently widen the fissure slightly so that it appears; then pull as we have said, and moisten clothes in vinegar and water, and place them on the area, and apply bandages tightly.
Et si a de tels homes qui broient seil et mettent sus por corrompre cele moistor qui est demoree.	And if there are such men who grind seal and put it on to corrupt that moisture which remains.
Puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then the cure until it is healed.
Et s’il vient au leu aposteme chaut, si lou cure d’emplaustres assouajant tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if there is a hot abscess in that place, then treat it with soothing poultices until it is healed.And if there is a hot abscess in that place, then treat it with soothing poultices until it is healed.
des poilz des papieres	of the hair of papers
Quant em papieres naissent poilz ajostez autre que li naturez, et sont enveillit, si nuisent as eulz, et font venir manieres de maladies si com larmes acostumees et mollifications des papieres et albugine, tant que c’est cause de la destruction des eulz; et est li cure selonc .iiij. manieres: ou par cautere ensamble feu, ou par medicine ague selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre de cautere, et est fais ou par incision et costure ou par caines, selonc ceu que je dirai.	When hairs grow from papers, uneven and different from their natural state, they harm the eyes and cause various diseases, such as tears, softening of the papers, and white film, leading to destruction of the eyes; there are four ways to treat this: through cauterization with fire, or with a medicine applied directly to the eye, or through incision and stitching, or with canes, depending on what I will describe.
Il covient que tu mettes lou chief dou malaide en ton sain, puis torne la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre; s’elle est convertie, c’est boin; se ceu non, si i boute une aguille a tout .i. fil desus; et soit ce delez la marge de la papiere ou li poil naissent delez ces poilz, et trai .i. fil au desus a tout la papiere, et la torne au raseur; puis fent en la partie desoz la papiere, desoz les poilz ajostez, a tout le spatumile copant, des le grant larmier jusc’au petit; puis estrai .i. fil, et met desoz la papiere une petite tente de couton et de drapeil, puis seigne sus la papiere une figure d’enche, si com la fuelle de mirte, et toutevoie il covient que li figure soit selonc la quantiteit que tu vues eslever la papiere qui est devisez a toz.	You should place the patient's eye in your dominant hand, then turn the eyelid to the left; if it returns to its original position, that is good; otherwise, insert a needle and thread through the eyelid, close to the edge of the discolored area where the uneven hairs are growing, and run the thread over the entire eyelid. Then, with a scalpel, make an incision under the eyelid, along the uneven hairs, from the large tear duct to the small one; then remove the thread and place a small piece of cotton and cloth under the eyelid. Mark a figure eight on the eyelid, like the shape of a myrrh roll, but the shape should correspond to the amount you see the eyelid raising or distorting.
Et si a teil qui a mestier c’on cope grant quantiteit de la papiere selonc ceu que li papiere est mollifie; puis fent a tout le spatumile sus les II lignes que tu as signiet, et comence des lou grant larmier jusc’a petit; et soit li une des fendures pres des poilz naturez en la groissece d’un raiz, puis boute l’oncine en l’un des II angles dou keur, puis l’escorche toute; puis assemble les II levres a une costure d’une aguille a tout I fil de laine subtil, et essue le sanc, et fai aerdre la superfluiteit des filz sus les II sorcilz a tout aucunes choses gluans, se tu vues faire ce; et se ce non, si n’en aies cure, puis laisse la costure et les filz jusc’a III jors ou IIII; puis cure la plaie sens costure de choses sechans et constrignans, car li papiere se relive au soudement de la plaie et l’assemblement de li, mais li costure est muedre (si com dirent li ancien), et c’est ovraiges sens paor; et si a une autre maniere: et est que tu seignes la papiere d’une figure qui soit ausi com li fuelle de mirte, si com nos avons conteit, a III oncines desevrez selonc la forme qui est ci:	And if to someone who needs it, cut a great quantity of the paper according to how soft the paper is; then, mark all over the two lines that you have marked, and start from the large nostril until small; and let one of the slits be near the natural hairs in the thickness of a hair root, then insert the needle into one of the two corners of the heart, then cut it all off; then sew together the two lips with a single thread of fine wool using a needle, and draw out the blood, and dry up the excess threads on both nostrils using anything sticky, if you see fit to do so; and if not, pay no attention, then leave the sewing and the threads for three or four days; then heal the wound without sewing with dry and constricting things, because the paper lifts up at the sudden healing of the wound and its unification, but the sewing is painful (as the ancients said), and this work is done without fear; and there is another way: it is to mark the paper in a shape that is also like the leaf of a myrtle, as we have described, with three branches according to the form that is here.
puis cope ceu qui sormonte as petites forces igalment selonc la forme qui est ci:	then cut out those on top with small scissors evenly according to the shape that is here:
Et se tu n’as pooir de tenir les tenailles, et li chose n’est mie igalz, si prent une aguille ou il ait I fil, et la boute emmi la figure; et boute I autre fil delez lou grant larmier, et lou secont fil delez lou petit, et assemble entre tes dois les filz igalment; puis lieve ta main igalment, et lieve tout le cuir sus coi tu as signiet, si com nos avons conteit, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie par costure, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se aposteme vient a ton incision, si l’apaise de cerote et de semblans oignement assouajans; et aucune fois avient que li poil de la papiere sont convertit: si covient que tu uses ceu que nos avons dit de l’incision; mais li costure en l’une et en l’autre est plus artificialz.	And if you cannot hold the forceps, and the object is not aligned, then take a needle and thread it through the center of the wound; and thread another piece of thread through the large hole of the ear, and the second thread through the small one, and tie the threads together between your fingers evenly; then lift your hand evenly, and lift all the skin you have marked, as we have described, then bring together the two lips of the wound by sewing, and treat it until it heals; and if an abscess comes to your incision, then soothe it with cerate and similar soothing ointments; and sometimes the hair of the paper is converted: so you must use what we have said about the incision; but sewing in one and the other is more artificial.
Li cure des caines si est selonc ceste forme: et est que tu convertisses la papiere et la fent dedens selonc ceu que j’ai dit, et puis fai .ij. caines par art, et .ij. liiens subtilz ausi lonc com li papiere et li largesce dou spatumile est; et cope as .ij. chiés de .ij. pars ou tu tiens les filz; puis assemble l’un et l’autre subtilment sus ceu que sormonte de la papiere de l’oil, et estrain les .ij. cainnes des .ij. parties forment; et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, et li cuir qui iert estrainte morra et nercira et porrira, tant qu’il cherra par lui.	The treatment of warts is as follows: you must first turn the paper and place it inside according to what I have said, then make two warts using art, and two thin lines as long and wide as the spatumile; then tie two knots at both ends where you hold the threads; then bring one knot close to the other gently above the paper on the eye, and pull the two warts from their roots; leave them like that for a few days, and the skin that was pulled will die and harden and fall off as it shrinks.
S’il tarde, si le cope a unes forces, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et quant li plaie iert soudee, et si ert levee li papiere, et ne poindront plus li poil; et c’est li forme des II cainnes que tu feras selonc ceste figure, et selonc ceste quantiteit de lonc et de large:	If it is slow to heal, and the wound has strength, then treat it until it is healed; and when the wound is sewn and the paper is lifted, and the hairs no longer hurt; and this is the form of the two chains that you will make according to this figure, and according to this quantity of long and wide:
li ovraiges est telz que tu preignes une aguille subtil, et i boute .i. fil de soie souef et subtil; puis assemble les chiés et noe l’un et l’autre subtilment, et soit li longesce des filz une palme de lonc; puis ordene en la chasse .i. autre fil subtil de soie briément, et noe les chief dou fil; puis mette li malaides son chief en ton sain; et soit delez lou soleil si que li ovraiges soit declairiez, car c’est uns ovraiges subtilz et menus, puis boute l’aguille a tout la chasse en la racine dou poil ajosteit, et la fai percier en la papiere hastanment tant que tu la traies desus lou poil natureil; puis estrai le poil jusque sus la chasse, et boute en la chasse celui poil, s’il en i a .i. ou .ij. ou .iij. ou plusors; puis estrai ta main tant que li poilz veigne fuers a tout la chasse en la papiere avec lou poil natureil.	the tools are such that you thread a thin needle with a fine silk thread, then tie the ends together gently and make the length of the threads about a palm long; then arrange another fine silk thread in the spatumile, and tie the end of this thread as well; then put the patient's head in your lap, and let them face the sun so that their skin is exposed, for it is a delicate treatment; then thread the needle all the way into the root of the hair close to the skin until you draw it out through the paper with the natural hair; then pull the hair all the way up to the spatumile, and insert the hair into the spatumile along with the natural hair.
Et se li chasse est traite et li poilz ne vient fuer avec li, si trairas la chasse au desoz a tout le fil que tu i as ordeneit, tant que li chasse veigne fuer dou pertus desus et que tu la voies par la vision de l’oil; adonques si trairas la chasse et le fil, et clo l’oil et lou laisse clo .ij. jors ou .iij., tant que li poil s’aerde en son leu et naisse li char sus; et se li poilz est petis, si acompaigne .i. poil lonc des chevoulz naturez, et soit alevez avec celui ou tu le laisse, tant qu’il soit eslongiez et puis le lieve.	And if the hunt is treated and the hair does not come out with it, then you will treat the hunt underneath to the very end that you have ordered, until the hunt comes out of the hole above and you see it through the vision of the eye; then you will treat the hunt and the thread, and close the eye and leave it closed for 2 or 3 days, until the hair grows back in its place and the flesh grows over it; and if the hair is short, accompany it with a long hair from the horses' mane, and let it grow with that which you leave, until it is elongated and then release it.
de la porriture de l’oil	of the eyelash
Quant ceste maladie qui est apelee «aleacrati» ou li porriture vient en l’oil, si en i a de II manieres: l’une natureil, et l’autre innatureil.	When this disease called "alacrity" or warts comes in the eye, it happens in two ways: one natural, and the other unnatural.
Et avient par soudement de plaie, ou de tailleure ou de cautere, et par semblans choses.	And it happens suddenly from a wound, or a cut, or cautery, and similar things.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige en li est que tu fendes celle soudure, et dessevre les levres de li, et met dedens tentes de lin, et la lie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et ne covient mie que tu uses en la cure de li de choses que sechent et restraignent.	And the method of treatment for it is that you split the sore, and loosen the edges of it, and put in tenters of linen, and let it heal; and you must not use in its cure anything that would dry it out and constrict it.Et si li tentier ne se pot acostumer a la soudure, ou s’ele ne voudra estre fendee, si covient que tu le traites de l’altra maniere, et qu’il soit tenus en la cure de li, si com te dit en li章es ci-dessus.
Car se tu fais ceu, si revient li maladie pire que li premiere; mais i oevre de choses amollissans, si com fenugreic; et l’arose d’aigue ou altee et semence de lin soient cuites, et oignemens dyaquilon fondut en aucun des oiles, et i envoloupe une tente, et le cure de ceu.	And if the tent cannot be accommodated to the sore, or it will not open up, then you must treat it in the other way, and care for it as described above in the chapters. For if you do this, the disease will return worse than before; but work with softening things, such as fenugreek; rosewater, or water made from dill, and linseed cooked, and ointment of dried olives melted in some oil, and wrap a tent around it, and care for it thus.Et si li maladie vient de la seconde maniere, si covient que tu traites li membre en la cure de li come si il estoit natureil; et s’ele viengne d’une contumace et d’un mal engin, si convint que les tentes soient en l’huile de lin, et l’arose d’aigue, ou en altée.
Et li tresors de ta cure si est que tu te dones en garde qu’ele ne soude mie selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant; et cist ovraiges que nos avons dit nen est fuers que adresemens de ceste maladie, qu’elle ne reviegne selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant.	And the goal of your treatment is to ensure that it does not fuse according to the shape it was before; and these works that we have spoken of are only remedies for this disease, so that it does not return according to the shape it was before.
de la char qui vient en l’oil	of the flesh that comes in the eye
Ceste maladie que est desoz qui vraiement est apelee «axacrati», et est naturelz et accidens.	This disease, which is below, is truly called "axacrati", and it is natural and accidental.
Li accidens vient de plaie et de fendure et de cautere et de choses semblans; et li voie de l’ovraige en li si est que tu preignes un aguille, en coi il ait I fil double, et la fiche en la char, et li fai percier des le senestre larmier tant c’a destre, si que li filz veigne en II chiés de la char; puis estent la char au desus a tout l’aguille, et la cope a I spatumile large.	Accidents come from wounds and cuts and cautery and similar things; the way to treat them is to take a needle with a double thread, pierce the skin on one side so that the thread goes through both ears of the jaw, then the meat above the needle, and the cup to the large spatula.
Et se li figure de la papiere revient selonc ceu qu’il covient, c’est boin; se ceu non, si pren I raseur et le met en la fendure, et torne la papiere, et fent II fendures ou costeit dedens la papiere; et soient li chiés des II fendures des II angles de l’incision que tu as copeit, et soit fais uns angles si que quant elles sont assemblees, que li figure soit ausi com li figure d’une lettre qui a non «I griesche»; puis oste celle char, selonc la quantiteit que ses costez est agus desoz, de ceu qui enseut la papiere, puis ajoste les II parties desevrees, et les cout d’un fil de lainne; puis lou cure de ceu que nos avons dit des medicines mollifians, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the shape of the paper returns as it should be, that's good; if not, then take a razor and put it in the cut, and turn the paper over, and make two cuts along the edges inside the paper; and the ears of the two cuts should be the two angles of the incision you have peeled, and make angles so that when they are assembled, the shape is like the shape of the letter "I" in Greek; then remove the meat, according to the quantity that its sides are cut under, from what follows the paper, then join the two separated parts and sew them with a thread of wool; then treat it as we have said with soft medicines and poultices until it is healed.
Et se li maladie vient de fendure ou de costure ou de cautere, si covient que tu fendes une fendure plainne desoz les poilz des papieres, et selonc ceu qui est ci devant; puis desevre entre les .ij. leivres d’une tente, si com j’ai dit; et doit on faire l’ovraige selonc la forme de la maladie, car elle est mout diverse en forme, et li saiges maistres appareille engien de tout som pooir coment il faice revenir la figure a sa forme natureil; et li malaides meisme, selonc ceu qu’il i covient d’ovraige et d’estrumens em plusors dispositions.	If the illness comes from a split or a stitch or cautery, then one must make a clean split underneath the hairs of the paper, and according to what is stated above; then unravel between the two lips of a tent, as I have said; and one should perform the operation according to the form of the illness, for it is very diverse in form, and the wise master prepares remedies with all his might, so that the figure returns to its natural shape; and the patient himself, according to what he needs in terms of treatment and instruments in various dispositions.
dou soudement de la papiere	suddenly from the paper
Quant ceste soudure avient a mains homes en teil maniere que li papiere desus est sodee avec le blanc de l’oil, et ne puet movoir ne faire ses ovraiges naturez, si covient donques que tu i boutes la pointe d’un raseur desoz la papiere, et la lieve en haut; et l’estent as pinceures, tant que tu copes ceu qui est aert au spatumile subtil, qui ne soit mie trop agus ne trop trenchans, si que li malaides ne puisse soffrir que li spatumile trop agus ne blecent l’oil; et soit ton incision, dont tu escorche celle assemblee, legierement, si que li papiere reviegne selonc sa forme natureil; et est sanee toute celle assemblee, et font aucune fois en l’oil aigue salee, et le leve d’aigue douce, et de coliere; puis met entre la papiere et l’oil une tente de lin, et met sus l’oil laine moillie en abun d’uef; et aprés le tier jor use dou coliere et des choses soudans tant qu’il soit sanez.	When this suddenness happens to human beings in such a way that the paper above is separated from the white of the eye, and cannot move or perform its natural functions, then one must therefore push the tip of a razor underneath the paper and lift it up; and hold it with tweezers, so as to grasp what is cut in the subtle spatula, which is neither too sharp nor too blunt, so that the patient does not feel that the spatula is too sharp or cutting into the eye; and make your incision, by which you peel away this membrane, very lightly, so that the paper returns to its natural shape; and when all of this membrane has been removed, there may sometimes be a sore in the eye, and it should be washed with warm water and then with cool water, and then a tent of linen should be placed between the paper and the eye, and lamb's wool dampened in egg white should be laid over the eye; and after the third day, one should use collyrium and soothing remedies until it is healed.
de l’ungle de l’oil	of the nail of the eye
Saiches que li ungle est selonc .ij. manieres: elle est nervouse et semblans a .i. dur syfac, et une autre qui n’est mie nervouse, mais est semblans a blainche moistor congelee, que quant on la touche de fer et on la cuide panre as pinceures, si ne puet om; et l’une et l’autre semblance encomence devers le grant larmier, et croist poc et poc tant qu’ele cuevre toute la veue et toute la lumiere et le movement de l’oil.	Know that there are two types of ulcer: one is nervous and resembles a hard ulcer, and the other is not nervous but resembles white congealed moisture; when touched with iron and pinched, it feels like paneling to the fingernails, but no one can feel it. Both types begin at the outer corner of the eye, growing little by little until they cover the entire eye, obscure its light, and impair its movement.
Et li maniere de l’incision si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz; et lieve la papiere a ta main, puis coil l’ungle as pinceures de petite doubleure, et l’estent au desus; puis pren une aguille, et i met .i. poil de cheval, ou de vaiche, ou de buef, et .i. fil fort; et double la pointe de l’aguille un poc et la fiche emmi l’ungle, et la perce a tout l’aguille, et lie l’ungle d’un fil et l’estent au desus, et escorche a tout lou poil le costeit de l’ungle qui enseut la prunele et la soie au poil jusc’au chief, puis cope lou remanant en la racine dou larmier a tout lou spatumile subtil et as petites forces, et laisse la char natureil ou larmier, si que par l’incision ne veigne li cors des larmes acostumeement; et aucune fois s’estent li ungle a l’oncine soulement, et au fil, si com nos avons dit; puis l’escorche on a tout le spatumile souef de coi ci est li forme:	And the method of incision is to have the patient place his head against your hand, then work the eyelids; and hold the paper in your hand, then pinch the edge of the ulcer with tiny pincers and stretch it upward; next take a needle and thread a horsehair, or cow's hair, or ox's hair through it, and double over the point of the needle slightly before inserting it into the ulcer, and tie the ulcer with a thread and stretch it upward, then scrape along the edge of the ulcer from its base toward the eyebrow until you reach the tear gland, using tiny movements and leaving the natural flesh of the tear gland untouched, so that the incision does not affect the flow of tears; sometimes only the edge of the ulcer needs to be tied, as we have said, with thread, then scrape along the spatumile:
Et garde que li spatumile ne touche la toile charnue et la rompe, et que li prunele ne soit percie; et aprés l’incision giete en l’oil un poc de seil broiet, et dou coliere fait de litargire, et le laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; puis le cure de ceu qu’il i covient tant qu’il soit sanez.	And be careful that the spatumile does not touch the fleshy membrane and rupture it, and that the tear gland is not pierced; after the incision, drop a little powdered chalk into the eye, and make a collar out of litarge, leaving it in place until the next day; then treat the eye as needed until it heals.
Et se li ungle n’est mie nervouse, et tu ne pues bouter l’aguille, et li uncines n’i puet entrer, maintes fois est curee ceste semblance d’ungle de medicines; et naissent sicom j’ai conteit en la division, et se tu la vues coper, si oevre l’oil dou malaide, et pren le spatumile legier poc agut selonc ceste forme:	And if the nail is not nervous, and you cannot push in the needle, and the hook cannot enter, many times this semblance of a nail is cured by medicines; and they grow as I have described in the division, and if you see it covered, then work the eye of the malady, and take the spatule lightly poked according to this form:
Et reis l’ungle desus subtilment, et se tu vois qu’elle amenuise point et li rasion i apresse, si distille de ta bouche en l’oil coliere fait de litargire et dou coliere rouge et seil broiet, et estoupe l’oil jusc’a l’autre jor; puis rencomence l’autre ovraige selonc ceste meisme oevre, tant qu’elle soit toute ostee.	And raise the nail gently, and if you see that it is not lessened and the reason is pressing, then distill from your mouth into the eye a collar made of litarge and red copper ore, ground together, and stop the eye until the next day; then start the other work according to this same method, until it is entirely removed.
Se aucune chose ne t’est contraire en l’oil, si com aposteme chaus, adonques la lait, et cure premier l’aposteme chaut tant qu’il soit sanez, puis rencomence l’ovraige si com devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If there is nothing contrary in the eye, such as a hot abscess, then milk it, and first cure the hot abscess until it is healed, then start the work again as before, until it is healed.Si li ungle est ost, adonques tu le remets, et si li est alongie, adonques tu le rompts; car il ne poait demorer a son leu.
Et se li apparance de la chair dou larmier nuit en l’oil par grant nuisement, si la sospent a l’oncine, et en cope une partie et non mie tot, que cors de larmes n’i viegne; puis distille en l’oil coliere rouge qui est fais de litargire.	And if the appearance of the flesh from the arm hurts the eye greatly through great harm, then suspend it at the elbow, and cut off a part and not all, so that the body of tears does not come; then distill into the eye red collyrium which is made from litharge.
de la char qui naist sus la prunelle	of the flesh which grows above the pupil
Es eulz d’aucuns homes naist aucune fois char rouge, et cuevre la prunele et restraint sus les papieres et les torne au defuer, et semble une rose de balauste; et li ovraiges si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz, et coil toute celle char as uncines convenaubles a ceu, et la sostien a la force; puis cope la premiere char, et vai tout copant au raseur jusc’a la fin, et te garde que tu ne bleces l’oil a l’ovraige; et soit li incision dou spatumile que nos avons dit en l’incision de l’ungle et as petites forces de coi on oste lou sebel, si com li forme aprés cest chapistre lou demostre; et quant li incision est acomplie et ostee toute li char, si emple l’oil de seil broiet ou tu i distille coliere rouge et semblans medicines corrosives, et met sus l’oil defuer coton avec abin d’uef, si qu’il soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut; et s’il i demore rien, et li sans chaus te sormonte, et tu doutes aposteme chaut, si laisse l’oil et cure l’aposteme de choses apaisant aposteme chaut; puis revien a ton ovraige tant qu’il soit sanez, et ensi fai cant chars est ajostee en l’oil par ceste semblance.	In some men, a red lump sometimes appears on the tip of the penis, covering it and pressing against the foreskin, resembling a rosebud; the treatment is to place the patient's head over yours, then work on the lump, and press all the lump towards the nail bed with firm pressure; then cut into the first lump and continue cutting all the way to the root, being careful not to hurt the eye during the procedure; and let the incision be as deep as a spider web, as described in the section on nail incisions, and use gentle force to remove it, as demonstrated in this chapter; once the incision is complete and all the lump removed, apply oil of sea-brook or similar corrosive medicine, and place cotton soaked in egg white over the eye to secure it; if nothing remains, and the cold pain persists, and you suspect a hot abscess, then leave the eye alone and treat the abscess with soothing remedies for hot abscesses; then return to your work until the eye is healed, and do the same for any other lumps that appear in the eye in this manner.
Mais toutevoie il covient que tu aliges la cure de chescun oil foible de la voie natureil; et de la voie accident, en ovraige de fer; et ne bouter mie ta main en aucun de ces ovraiges tant que tu voies que cist membres soit soffrans celui ovraige.	But nevertheless you should ease the treatment of every weak part of the natural way; and in accidental work with iron, do not put your hand into any of those works until you see that this member can bear such work.
des voines des eulz	of the veins of them
Sebel sont voinnes rouges que sont covertes sus l’oil, et tolent a la veue son ovraige et afoiblissent l’oil toz jors.	Thus are red veins which are covered on the eye, and tolerates one's vision and weakens the eye all day.
Mestier est donques au premier que tu regardes se li oil, en coi sebel est, est fors, et n’i a autre maladie fuers que lou sebel; adonques le coil en teil maniere: comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain, puis sospent celles voines a tout l’oncine selonc sa sapience, et soit li oncines subtilz double selonc ceste forme:	It is therefore necessary, first, that you examine the eye, because in this way it is, it is swollen and there is no other disease except the redness; then he should be treated in this way: instruct the patient to put his head in your lap, then gently squeeze those veins all around according to his skill, and let the fingers be twice as subtle according to this form:
Et soient dui oncine par degrez en .i. cors selonc ceste forme:	And let two compresses be in degrees in .i. body according to this form:
puis c’on coil as forces celles voinnes subtilment, et essue lou sanc houre aprés autre, tant que tu voies removoir celles voines fuers de l’oil; et garde que tu ne blecier l’oil as pointes des spatumiles, et fai cest ovraige a houre de midi devant lou soleil, et soies mout fervans en ton ovraige si que tu ne copes fuer que celles voinnes; et quant tu avras ce fait, si distille en l’oil coliere vert et rouge por corrumpre ceu qui est demorez dou sebel.	then you can squeeze these veins gently, and let the blood flow out an hour after another, until you see the veins recede from the eye; and be careful not to cut the eye with the points of the spatulas, and do this work at noon before the sun, and be very diligent in your work so that you do not slip outside these veins; and when you have done this, then distill into the eye green and red color to corrupt what is left of the scabies.
Et se tu n’as pooir de coillir tout ceu en celle houre, si fai emplastre sus l’oil de choses apaisans la dolor des eulz, et le laisse aucuns jors tant que li dolors soit apaisie et soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut, puis rencomence selonc ceste maniere qui est devant tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme des forces:	And if you do not have the power to squeeze all of this in that hour, then make a poultice on the eye of soothing things for the pain of the eyes, and leave it for a few days until the pain is relieved and there is a hot abscess, then begin again according to what is written above until he is healed; and this is the way of doing it:
de la fistule de l’oil	of eye fistula
Li mire si nomment «arissati» fistule: quant tu la cures per cautere et par medicine ague ardant selonc ceu que j’ai devant dit, et elle n’est mie sanee, si est engien en li que tu fendes sus l’aposteme, lai ou il doit meurer, et trai toute la moistor que i est, tant que li os soit descovers.	Examine the fistula, which is called "arissati" in Latin: when you cure it with cautery and medicine that burns according to what I have written before, and it is not healed, then there is a wound in it where you should cut into the abscess, the place where it should be, and draw out all the moisture until the bone is exposed.
Et quant li os iert descovers, et tu verras la corruption et la noiror, si la reis a tout l’estrument de coi ci est li forme; et est apelez «aspre chief», et soit fait de feir inde a .i. chief reont, et soit pointoiez si com une lime si com il est en la presente forme:	And when the bone is uncovered, you will see the decay and blackness; there is the instrument of which this is the form; it is called "aspre chief", and it should be made of iron into a flat head, and punctured like a file as it is in its current form:
Et met sus lou leu de l’os corrumput, puis le torne entre tes dois, et presse ta main un poc tant que tu saiches que celle corruption est rese; et fai ceu aucune fois, puis restoure lou leu de medicines exiccatives.	And place it on the location of the decayed bone, then turn it between your fingers, and press your hand a little so that you know the decay has been removed; do this several times, then restore the site with astringent medicines.
se li leus est soudez, et char i naist, et li cors de la bowe est soudez, et remaint ensi XL jors, et il ne renovele et n’est mie apostemez, et accidens mavais n’i vient, saiches qu’il est sanez; se ceu non, si n’i a autre engien que de ramener la fistule au pertus dou neif selonc ceste forme: et est que tu descuevre de l’os la seconde fois par fer, et par medicines agues, et quant il iert descovers si prent I foret selonc ceste forme, et soit li chiés de fer a III angles, et li fust soit atenuis jusc’a chief si com tu vois ci:	if it is glued and the skin grows on it, and the body of the bow is glued and remains so for 40 days, and does not renew itself and is not abscessed, and nothing bad happens to it, you will know that he is healed; if not, there is no other way than to bring the fistula to the opening of the nose according to this form: then uncover the bone again by fire, and with sharp medicines, and when it is uncovered take up the iron forest according to this form, and let the head of the iron be three-pointed, and the rod be thinned until the end as you see here:
puis le met sus l’os delez lou larmier, et esloigne ta main de l’oil I poc, puis torne a tot le foret tant qu’il perce l’os et le sent li malaides par ceu que li vens en ist s’il tient sa main sus son neif; et pues restoure lou leu de medicines seches, si com je t’ai ensigniet, et quant li char naist et endurcist li leus, si vait li matiere au neif; si est plus legiere chose au malaide.	then he puts it on the bone of the arm, and moves his hand away from the eye a little, then returns to press down with all his might until it pierces the bone, and the patient feels it through the wind that enters if he holds his hand over his nose; then dry up the wound with medicines as I have taught you, and when the flesh heals and hardens, examine the matter in the nose; this is easier for the patient.
de l’issue de l’oil	of the exit of the eye
Quant li eulz apert fuer dou tout en tout, et il ne vient point de destorbier au nef, ne amenuisement, si covient que tu lies lou malaide; puis le saine, puis li met ventouses ou haterel sens ferir por succier, puis met sus l’oil .i. liien fait d’acaice et de aloe et d’encens et de sarcocolle, et puis estrain l’oil, et l’emplaustre sus de bendes et de drapelz; et li maniere des drapelz si est que tu preignes drapelz assez molz, et double chescun en .iiij., et puis met l’un sus l’autre selonc la quantiteit que li eulz en ait mestier; puis l’estrain par desus d’un bendeil dur forment, et rencomence les ventouses por succier sens ferir; puis oste les ventouses et laisse l’oil estraint jor et nuit, et se li liiens amolist, si covient que tu l’estraignes mout; puis oste lou liien aprés le jor et la nut, et se tu vois l’oil repairier, c’est boin; se ce non; si rencomence l’emplaustre et les drapelz et lou liien et les ventouses tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the eyes open fully and there is no disturbance to the eye or diminution, then you must ligate the patient; then cleanse the eye, then place leeches or a cupping glass without piercing to draw out any fluid; then apply an ointment made of acacia, aloe, incense, and sarcocolla over the eye, and then compress it with bandages and cloth. The manner of the bandages is that you take soft cloth, double each one over four times, and then place one over another according to the quantity that the eye requires; then compress it firmly from above with a hard bandage, and repeat the leeches to draw without piercing; then remove the leeches and leave the eye compressed day and night, and if the ligature becomes soft, you must compress it tightly; then remove the ligature after a day and a night, and if you see the eye healing, that is good; if not, then repeat the ointment and the bandages and the ligature and the leeches until it is healed.
dou derrompement de toile uvee	from a torn woven fabric
Quant disruptions vient en la toile uvee, puis apert, et vient fuer des papieres si com .i. grain de resins, et est espoantauble a veoir; adonques se tu la vues coper, li ovraiges est telz que tu boutes une aguille en la racine des la partie desoz jusc’a celi desus, puis boute une autre aguille ou il ait .i. fil double des la partie dou larmier; et la fai percier, et laisse la premiere aguille selonc la disposition; puis cope lou leu dou fil double et lie une partie de l’uve entor, et l’estraint bien, puis estrai l’aguille et met sus l’oil lainne moillie en abun d’uef; et le laisse tant que li filz chiece avec l’uve, puis cure l’oil de choses confortans tant que li plaie soit sanee; et aucune fois li plaie est restrainte par l’uve chescune part d’un cercle de drap, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	When disruptions occur in woven fabric, then it opens and appears like a grain of resin, and is terrible to see; therefore, if you see it covered, the work is such that you pierce an needle in the root of the part below up to the part above; and then pierce another needle where there is a double thread from the part of the armhole; and tie the fabric around the eye, and compress it well, then remove the needle and place a soft egg-soaked cloth over the eye; and leave it until the threads tear with the fabric, then cleanse the eye with comforting things until the wound is healed; and sometimes the wound is constrained by the fabric in a circle of cloth all around, until it is healed.
Et se li eulz done grant apparance, si le perce au spatumile subtil qui viegne em parfont de l’oil, et corre la moistor albuginé et dessende li eulz, et entre ens tantost; puis l’estrai tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the eyes give great indication, then pierce them with a sharp spatulate instrument which enters through the eye socket, and scrape away the white moisture and bring the eyes down, and enter inside immediately; then extract it until it is healed.
de la bowe de l’oil	from the socket of the eye
Ceste maladie qui est apelee «alcunnati» nen est fuers que bowe qui est assemblee en l’oil, semblant a aigue dessendant, et ce n’est mie aigue; et li maniere de l’apparance de l’ovraige si est que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege appareilliet et droit, puis prent le chief entre tes mains de II pars, et lou muef tant que tu voies la bowe venir au desus a tes eulz; puis soit ens fichie, et ne dessende et soit descombree li lumiere, et voie li malaides les choses si com il soloit; et s’elle ne dessent desoz, saiches que c’est aigue, et se li dessendemens de la bowe n’est appareilliez si com nos avons dit.	This disease called «alcunnati» is nothing but a membrane gathered in the eye, resembling a descending pus, but it is not pus; and the manner of its appearance in the treatment is that you make the patient sit on a prepared and upright seat, then take his head in your hands from both sides, and move it until you see the membrane coming above your eyes; then it should be pinched, and the light should go down, and the patient should see things as he used to; and if it does not go under, know that it is pus, and if the descending membrane is not apparent as we have said.
si fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, puis prent le spatumile subtil et fent sus la toile cornee I poc par la continuation de la conjunctive avec la toile cornee et la corone, tant que li bowe isse; et quant elle ert issue, si distille en l’oil aigue chaude mellee a miel, ou aigue ou fenugreic est boillis et miel, puis soit curee d’autre cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	If you make the patient sit between your hands, then take the spatulum and gently probe the conjunctiva with it, and with the cornea and the crown, until the membrane is released; and when it is released, distill into the eye hot water mixed with honey, or water or fenugreek boiled and honey, then treat it with other remedies until it is healed.
des aigues de l’oil	of the eye waters
Nos avons jai les semblances des aigues en la division, et ceu qu’il covient por percier; si en oevre selonc la santeit.	We have described the appearances of the diseases in the division, and what should be done to pierce them; now act according to the state of health.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains croisiet, fuers de la lumiere por le soleil, et li lie l’oil sain et estreint mout fort; puis met la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre se li eulz est senestres, ou a ta main destre se li eulz est destres; puis prent en ta main destre, se li eulz est senestres, l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda», ou a ta main senestre, se li eulz est destre; puis met la pointe de l’estrument delez la corone par la groissece d’un rait en celle blenchor de l’oil a la partie dou menor larmier, puis boute l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda» vertuousement, et trestorne ta main tant qu’il perce en la blenchor de l’oil, et sente que almagda viegne a la chose vuide; et covient que li mesure de la voie almagda soit au parfont de la mesure des l’espaice qui est des la prunele jusc’a la fin de la noirour; et c’est li corone de l’oil; si verras l’os en celle papiere por la clarteit de la toile cornee, et pues met l’estrument jusc’a leu ou li aigue est, puis l’espresse desoz une voie aprés autre.	You should make the patient sit between your crossed hands away from sunlight, and press his healthy eye tightly shut; then place the paper of the eye in your left hand if it is the left eye, or in your right hand if it is the right; then take in your right hand, if it is the left eye, the instrument called «almagda», or in your left hand if it is the right eye; then insert the tip of the instrument along the edge of the cornea by the thickness of a hair into the white part of the eye near the edge of the lower eyelid, and gently press the instrument until it penetrates the white part of the eye, and you will feel that «almagda» reaches the empty space; and the depth of «almagda’s» path should be equal to the thickness of the space between the pupil and the edge of the iris; this is the crown of the eye; then you will see the bone through the paper due to the clarity of the cornea, and then insert the instrument up to the level where the water is, then express it under one path after another.
se li aigue dessent maintenant, si voit li malaides devant lui et l’estrument en son oil.	If the pain descends now, then the patient sees before him and the instrument in his eye.
Aprés repose I petit, et se li aigue remonte la seconde voie, met la fuer avec l’estrument, et quant elle est ens fichie et ele ne monte, si estrai almagda legierement en tornoiant ta main poc et poc; et puis remette en aigue un poc de seil gemme, et leive de ceu l’oil dedens.	After rest a little, and if the pain ascends the second way, push the instrument gently while turning your hand a little, and when it is lodged and does not move, then extract it gently in a twisting motion; then put in a little sea-gem and remove the eye from it.
Puis met par defuer l’oil estoupes ou lainne moillie en oile roset et en abun d’uef, et lie avec l’oil sain.	Then, push the eye out with force, using a wet sponge or lamb's wool in rose oil and an abundance of egg white, and bind it with clean cloth.
Nos, et cil qui sont de nostre tens, mettons sus comin broiet avec abun d’uef.	We, and those of our time, put on a mixture of comfrey with an abundance of egg white.
Et se almagda n’i puet entrer en l’oil par sa duresce, car il i a de teilz homes qui ont trop durs les eulz, si covient que tu preignes l’estrument qui est apelez «alberit», de coi ci est li forme:	And if the almgada cannot enter the eye because of its hardness, for there are some people who have very hard eyes, then you must use the instrument called 'albarit', which has this form:
Et perce donques la conjunctive soulement, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, mais fai I leu subtil, puis i boute almagda, si com nos avons dit; et au complissement de l’uevre appareille au malaide I dorteur avenant, en coi il dorme sus son dos en I leu tenebrous; et soit deveez de toz movemens, et preigne legieres viandes, et ne mueve son chief ne a destre ne a senestre, et soit liiez selonc sa disposition jusc’a tier jor; puis le deslie en cele maison meisme tenebrouse, et esprueve sa veue, et lou fai veoir aucunes choses, et puis li remet lou lien jusc’a septime jor; et ne covient mie que tu faices ceu en l’oure de la cure ou aprés l’incision maintenant, mais il covient que tu aliges ceu, por ceu que li aigue monte hastanment.	And so, pierce the conjunctiva only, and do not go too deep, but make the slit fine, then insert the instrument gently as we have said; and when the work is complete, prepare for the patient a dark room in which he sleeps on his back in a dim place; and let him be free of all movements, and take light foods, and not move his head to the right or left, and let him be bound according to his condition for three days; then untie him in that same dark house, and test his sight, and let him see some things, and then put the bandage back on until the seventh day; and you must not do this during the hour of the cure or after the incision now, but you should lighten it so that the water rises quickly.
se apostemes chaus vient, que tu desliies l’oil devant le septime jor, et l’adrece de ceu qui assouaige aposteme; et quant il est apaisiez, si deslie la veue et met sus sa faice I orilliet por covrir aucun jor, et soit adés en celle maison tenebrouse.	if such an abscess comes, that you loosen the eye before the seventh day, and receive from him who soothes an abscess; and when it is soothed, then loosen the view and put on his face the small gold edge to cover some sore, and let him be in that dark house.
Et puis isse de la maison poc et poc, et se convertisse en ses cas; et saiches que nulz deciples ne se doit entremettre en cest cas.	And then go out of the house little by little, and return to your own case; and know that no disciple should intervene in this case.
Et uns vint a nos qui estoit de la Yrach, qui nos dist que en som pais faisoit om almagda perciet, a coi on succe l’aigue, mais toutevoie je n’en vis onques nul en nostre terre, ne je ne lou lis onques en livres des anciens; et par aventure c’est une novele chose.	And one came to us who was from Iran, who told us that in his country they pierce with alum, and suck out the water, but I have never seen anyone doing this in our land, nor have I read about it in books of the ancients; and perhaps it is a new thing.
Et ce sont les semblances des formes de almagda, por ceu que cil qui ne les conoit les voie; et soient d’arain proprement:	And these are the appearances of the forms of almagest, because those who do not know them will see them; and they are properly made of bronze.
Et soient li chief d’aus de ceste meisme subtiliteit, et li derriene en .iij. angles ague.	And let the heads be of the same subtle metal, and the rear in 3 angles sharp.
de la char sor le neis	of the heart through the nose
Aucune fois naissent ou neis chars ajostees diverses, de coi il i a aucunes qui semblent scorpions a mout de piez; et si i a de telz ou il ait char enchancree de fuxe color, et si a char souef de bone color.	Sometimes there are born or born dogs with diverse deformities, from which some seem like scorpions with many feet; and so there are some with a deformation of a dark color, and some with a light-colored sore.Et il y en a qui sont com sanz teinture, et si i a qui est char ou piez ou au vis ou a la main, ou a autre part de son corp, si doit li chevalliers covrir sa paie et l’huem, et aler a l’ecole et demourer en telle maison.
En celle donques de ces chars qui est souef, et ne mie enchancree, covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains encontre lou soleil; et oevre ses narines, et giete l’oncine a celles chars, et les trai fuers; pues cope ceu que tu em pues sostenir au spatumile subtil agut d’une part, tant que tu saiches que celle char est toute ostee.	In this case, for the wagon which is flat and not curved, you should make the patient sit between your hands facing the sun; open his nostrils, pour vinegar on the wagon, and pull it out; then grab what you can hold with a thin spatula from one side, until you know that the wagon has been removed.
Et s’il en remaint aucune chose c’on ne puisse coper, si l’ovrez a tout .i. des estrumens subtil legierement, si qu’il n’i demoure rien; et se sans te sormonte, ou aposteme chaus, si lou secort si com il covient; et se c’est apostemes malignes, si te haste et lou cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez et soient ostees toutes les chars, puis giete ou neis aisil et aigue ou vin.	And if anything remains which one cannot cover, then open it at its thinnest and lightest part, so that nothing remains; and if without swelling, or an abscess forms, then lancing as appropriate; and if they are malignant abscesses, then hasten to cauterize them until the pus is drained and all the evil is removed, then apply ice or cold water and wine.
Se li neis oevre, et moistors en vient jusc’a palais, saiches qu’il est sanez; et se moistors ne perce si com il covient, saiches qu’il i a char nee en l’os desus, a coi li estrumens ne vient mie por taillier: adonques covient il que tu i boutes I fil de lin un poc gros, et soit noez de mains nous, et ait entre chescun nout d’espaice I doit ou moins; et mette li malaides lou chiés dou fil en son neif a som pooir, et traie en odorant tant qu’il viegne par lou neif dedens la bouche; et maintes fois font ensi li enfant as escoles, et c’est legiere chose a celui qui le vuet faire; puis tien le chief qui vient par lou neif a une main, et l’autre chief qui vient par la bouche a l’autre main, et saiche l’un aprés l’autre en soiant as nous qui sont ou fil.	If the nostrils open and moisture reaches the palate, you will know he is cured; and if moisture does not pass through as it should, you will know there is a foreign body in the bone above, which the instruments cannot reach: therefore, you must insert a fairly thick thread of linen, knotted at one end, leaving some space between each knot, about the thickness of a finger or less; then make the patient hold the end of the thread in his nostril with as much force as he can, and pull it gently through until it comes out through the mouth; many children do this at school, and it is an easy matter for anyone who wishes to do so. Then hold one end of the thread which is coming out of the nostril in one hand, and the other end which is coming out of the mouth in the other hand, and pull them gently apart while holding them close to your nose.
Fai ceu tant que tu saiches que li nout ont corrompue celle char, puis trai lou filz, essue le sanc, et moille lou fil en oignement egiptien, et le remet derechief au neis si com devant; fai ceu III jors ou plus, tant que li oignemens corrode tout ceu qui est demorez de char; et puis met ou neis une caine de plonc aucuns jors tant qu’il soit sanez, et s’il a mestier de medicines sechans, si en use; et c’est li forme de l’estrument por purgier lou chief, a coi on distille les oiles et les medicines ou neis:	Do this until you know that the nails have corrupted the flesh, then pull out the nail, wipe away the blood, and moisten the thread in Egyptian ointment, and put it back into the nose as before; do this for 3 days or more, until the ointments corrode all that is left of the flesh; and then put a plug of linen in the nose for several days until it heals, and if he needs dry medicines, use them; and this is the form of the instrument to cleanse the head, through which one distills oils and medicines into the nose:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, semblant a une lampe overte, si com une cainne, et li conduis ausi; et se tu vues, si fai une cainne close, et soit li estrumens plains por espurgier lou chief; et ait .i. mainche au chief por lou tenir quant on chaufe l’oile ou aucune liquor.	It should be made of silver or bronze, resembling an open lamp, like a tube, and it must also be straight; and if you wish, make a closed tube, and let the instrument be filled for cleansing the nose; and there should be a handle on the instrument to hold it while heating the oil or any other liquid.
de la char sor le neis	of the heart through the nose
Maintes fois naist au chief dou neis une maladie qui est apelee «telul», et croist et devient grans adés, tant qu’il est vis chose au regarder; et por ceu covient que tu lou copes au comencement, et l’oste tout fuer, puis met sor leu lou cautere ou la medicine ardant; et s’on le tarde a coper tant qu’il soit grans, si pren warde s’il est durs, de fuxe color, de povre sens: si ne lou touchier mie de fer car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, car quant on le cope aucune fois, si en vient grant malice au malaide; et se li apostemes est de soef touchement, non mie de fuxe color, et tu vois c’on le puisse tout coper, si vuide le malaide et lou cope sens paor, et cure le leu de choses sechans et restraignans.	Many times a disease called "telul" arises at the top of the nose and grows and becomes large, to such an extent that it is visible to the eye; therefore one should cut it at the beginning and remove the whole pustule, then place on the fire cautery or burning medicine; but if one delays cutting it until it has become large, take care whether it is hard, discolored in color, and of poor sensation: then do not touch it with iron, for it is an encrusted abscess; because when it is cut once, great harm comes to the patient. And if the abscess is due to pressure rather than discoloration, and you see that one can cover it all, empty the patient and cut it without fear, and treat the area with dry and constricting substances.
quant li neis est copez et cosus	when the nose has been cut and sewn up
Saiches que quant solutions de continuation vient en une de ces cartillagines ovraiges, i profite poc, fuer que en aucuns homes.	Know that when a solution of continuance comes in one of these soft cartilage-like things, it benefits little, unless in some men.
Il covient donques cant ceu avient a aucun, si regarde se li plaie est fresche a tout son sanc; et adonques ajoste les II levres a une costure, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se les levres sont ja desevrees d’une part et d’autre, si covient que tu escorches toutes les parties de lor keur tant qu’elles sainent, puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et l’estraint, et poudre sus poudre de sanc de dragon, et encens broiet; et met sus les poudres une piece d’emplaustre de fort ou d’autre emplaustre soudant, et le laisse tant qu’il chiece par lui, puis le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Therefore, whenever this happens to someone, examine whether the wound is fresh and full of blood; then bring together the two lips with a stitch, then heal it until it is cured; and if the lips are peeled on both sides, then you should scrape away all parts of their skin until they heal, then bring together the two lips with a stitch, and tie them, and apply powder upon powder of dragon's blood and incense ground; and place over the powders a piece of strong plaster or other binding plaster, and leave it so that it may heal by itself, then heal it with ointment until it is cured.
Li maniere de la costure si est que tu assembles la solution: ou par aguilles, si com nos avons dit en la costure dou ventre; ou par fil, si com je le t’ai fait savoir.	The method of sewing is that you assemble the solution: either with needles, as we have said in the sewing of the abdomen; or with thread, as I have already informed you.
des apostemes des levres	of abscesses on the lips
A mains homes avient dedens les levres aposteme dur, semblans a grains de veces, et menor et plus grant; adonques couvient que tu tornes les levres, et fendes sus chescun nout, et le prent as pinceures et le cope en chescune partie; puis emple lou leu aprés l’incision de vitriole broiet, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; et puis lou leive d’aisil, et cure lou leu de choses seches tant qu’il soit sanez.	In the hollows of the lips there are hard abscesses, similar to grains of wheat, small and large; therefore you must split the lips, and cut into each pustule with pincers, and scrape away the pus from every part; then apply powdered vitriol to the incision, until the blood is dried up; then use raw garlic, and clean the area of any dried matter until it is healed.
de la char des gencives	of gum swelling
Maintes fois naist sus les gencives char ajostee, que li ancien apelent «albulus»; si covient que tu la sostienes as tenailles, et la cope a sa racine, et laisse corre la bowe ou le sanc; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet, ou autres poudres restraignans et desiccatives; et se celle char revient aprés l’incision, et maintes fois avient, si la cope la seconde fois, et la cauterize: si ne revient mie aprés le cautere; et ce sont les formes des estrumens por coper.	Many times a tooth grows on the gums, which the elders call «albulus»; one should hold it with tweezers and cut at its root, and let the blood or puss flow; then place powdered vitriol or other binding and dessicating powders over the site; and if that tooth comes back after the incision, and this happens many times, then cut it again and cauterize it: if it does not come back after cauterization, then it will not return. These are the forms of treatment for teeth.
des sordens	of the eyes
Aucunes fois sont assemblees au chief des dens, dedens la bouche entre les gencives, escorces qui sont laides et aspres; et aucune fois sont li dent noir et citrin et vers, tant que li corruption vient a la gencive, et sont li dent puant; si covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, et ses chiés soit en ton saint, et reis les dens ou les escorces aperent, tant qu’il n’i demore rien; et ensi fai de la noiror et de la verdor, et de la jaunice et des autres taiches, tant qu’elles soient mondees; et s’on oste ceu que i est a la premiere rasion, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence a rere le secont jor et lou tier, tant que tu aies tout reis; et saiches que li dent ont mestier de diverses formes d’estrumens por reire, selonc ceu que li oevre lou demoustre, por ceu que li raseur dont on reit defuer les dens ont autres formes que cil dont on reit entre les dens; et cestes formes et autres soient avec toi appareillies.	Sometimes they are gathered at the top of the teeth, in the mouth between the gums, and there are ugly and rough growths; and sometimes the teeth are black, yellow, or green, as far as the corruption extends to the gum, and the teeth stink; so one should have the patient hold his head steady with his jaw in your lap, and you should pick at the teeth or growths that are visible, until nothing remains; and thus you should do with the blackness, yellowness, and other stains, until they are all cleaned out; and if it is removed on the first attempt, that is good; if not, then one must repeat the procedure again the next day or the third, until everything is cleaned out; and know that teeth require diverse forms of tools for cleaning, according to what the work demonstrates, so that the pick used to clean between the teeth has different forms from those used to clean the teeth themselves; and these forms and others should be prepared for you.
Il covient quant tu cures lou dent de sa dolor que tu tardes dou traire tant com tu pues, car ce ne doit om mie faire; car c’est une substance mout haute jusc’a donc c’on n’ait point d’excusation dou raier.	When you cure a tooth of its pain, you should hurry to pull it out as far as you can, because one must not delay in doing so; for there is no excuse for not pulling it out.
Adonques quant li malaides est constrains dou traire, si covient que tu soies certains dou dent doillant.	Therefore, when the patient is compelled to withdraw, you must be certain about the toothache.
Maintes fois desoit li dolor lou malaide, et cuide qu’elle soit ou dent saint, et fait traire le boin dent; et toutevoie ne se depart mie li dolor per ceu, tant que li malvais estrais, car nos l’avons ja veut faire a ces sainors; et quant tu es bien certains dou dent doillant, si covient que tu escorches entor lou dent a tout i. spatumile fort por warder la gencive de toutes pars; puis le mues a tes dois ou as tenailles subtilz au premier poc et poc, tant qu’il soit bien eslochiés, puis i afferme bien les tenailles; et soit li chiés dou malaide en ton saint entre tes genous, et lou tien bien si qu’il ne se mueve.	Many times the pain deceives the patient and believes it to be in a sound tooth, and so he has the healthy tooth pulled out; and yet the pain is not alleviated through this as long as the decayed tooth remains, for we have already tried this with those healers; and when you are quite certain about the toothache, then you must scrape around the tooth all the way to the gum; then move it with your fingers or with subtle tweezers bit by bit, until it is well loosened, then grip it firmly with the tweezers; and let the patient's head be in your lap, and hold it steady so that it does not move.
Aprés estrai lou dent droitement sens brisier, et s’il ne saut fuer, si prent aucun de ces estrumens et le boute dedens de chescune part legierement, et lou remuef si com tu as fait premier.	Afterwards, pull out the tooth firmly without breaking it, and if it does not come out, take one of those instruments and insert it into each side gently, and move it as you did before.
Et se li dens est perciez et mengiez, si covient que tu l’emplisses de drapelz, lai ou li pertus sont; et si l’estraint subtilment as tenailles, que il ne brise a l’estraindre; et covient mout saigement ovrer entor la gencive por deschaucier lou dent.	And if the tooth is pierced and eaten away, then you must fill the hole with pieces of cloth, and gently pinch it with tweezers so that it does not break while being pulled; and one must work carefully around the gum to loosen the tooth.
Et te done bien en warde que tu ne le brises, et en remaigne une partie, et reveigne au malaide par la malice de la racine plus grans dolors de la premiere.	And be careful that you do not break it and leave a part behind, which will cause greater pain due to the root's toxicity.
Et te warde que tu ne faices mie ensi com font li ignorant sainor, qui par lor haste et par lor hardiesce brisent aucune fois le charreit, et n’i amenistrent mie ceu que nos avons conteit; mais font venir aucune fois par l’oquison de ceu grant maladie por les racines que i demorent, ou por lou charreit qu’il brisent, si com nos avons sovent veut; et quant li dens est trais, si lavez lou leu de vin ou d’aisil et de seil; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, que sovent avient, si emple lou leu de vitriole broiet; et se ceu ne vaut, si le cauterize.	And be wary of acting like ignorant healers who, in their haste and arrogance, sometimes break the tooth, not heeding what we have advised; they sometimes cause great illness through the toxicity of the roots left behind or by breaking the tooth, as we have often seen. Once the tooth is pulled, wash the socket with wine or garlic and salt; if bleeding occurs, which is common, apply ground vitriol; and if that doesn't work, cauterize it.
Les formes des estrumens, a coi om muet les dens premier, soient a longes pointes et a gros mainches, qu’il ne doublent mie quant tu trairas le dent; et ce sont les formes:	The shapes of forceps, which are silent in the teeth first, should have long points and thick handles so they do not double when you pull the tooth. And these are the shapes:
Et soient de gros membres si qu’il ne ploient mie au traire, et soient de fer inde bien fait, et soient dentez por mues tenir.	And they should be of thick members so that they do not bend when pulling, and they should be well-made of iron, and they should be toothed to hold the roots.
de la racine des dens	of the root of teeth
Quant li racine demoure au traire, si covient que tu mettes sor le leu coton moilliet em burre I jor ou ij.,	When the roots remain in the tissue, then you must put moist cotton on the area for one or two days.
tant que li leus soit amolis, pues i boute les tenailles qui sont apelees «algefri», de coi li chiés semblet bec de soigne; et soient dedens faites ausi com une lime et c’est li forme:	until the area is soft, then insert the forceps called "algefri", which make the shoulder look like a sick bird's beak. They should be made like a file, and that is their shape.
Et se les racines ne vuellent issir a tout ces tenailles, si covient que tu descuevre la char tot entor la racine, et i met l’estrument qui est apelez «althali», c’est a savoir palainche, de coi ci est li forme:	And if the roots do not want to come out with all these tweezers, you must uncover the skin all around the root, and place the instrument called "althali", which is made of ivory, thus its form:
Et soit fors et gros si qu’il ne brise mie, et se li racine saut par ceu, c’est boin; se ceu non, si t’aide de toz les estrumens, de coi les formes vienent ci aprés:	It should be strong and thick so that it does not break, and if the root comes out through this, that is good; if not, then use all the instruments, whose forms come later:
Et si s’aide on de cest estrument qui ait .ij. rains, de coi ci est li forme:	And one should also use this instrument with .ij. tweezers, of which the form is as follows:
et d’autres ferremens qui sont devant en la rasion des dens, et de cest estrument qui semble unes grans tenailles, dont ci est li forme:	and other tools which are before in the reason of teeth, and with this instrument that resembles a large pair of tweezers, of which the form is as follows:
Et soit cist estrumens fors qu’il ne puisse brisier, et saiches que mout d’estrumens de dens sont; et ausi d’autres estrumens, qui ne sont mie contez; et li saiges maistres subtilz trueve par soi meisme son estrument, selonc ceu que ses ovraiges et li maladie li demoustre, car il i a de teilz maladies ou li ancien n’enseignerent point d’estrument por la diversiteit d’au;s et s’om brise point dou charreit ou des autres os, ou il porrit, si i cerche as estrumens qu’il i covient, que je t’ai dit, et t’aide des gestes, de coi ci est li forme:	And let this instrument be outside so that it does not break, and know that there are many instruments of teeth; and also other instruments which are not counted; and the wise subtle master finds his own instrument by himself, according to what his works and the disease show him, for there are some diseases in which the ancients did not teach any instrument because of their diversity; and if it does not break from the carriage or other bones, or it protrudes, then he seeks the instruments that he needs, that I have told you about, and helps with gestures, of which here is the form:
Et soient gros et bien tenant por tenir l’os, qu’il n’eschaipe, mais le puisse tenir et oster; et puis restoure lou leu de medicines convenant a ceu, et s’il ait en l’os porriture, et elle est petite, si la reis a tout cest estrument:	And let them be large and well-fitting to hold the bone, so that it does not slip, but he can hold and remove it; and then restore the site with appropriate medicines, and if there is protrusion in the bone, and it is small, then he should treat it with this instrument:
Quant li dent apperent ne mie selonc lou cors natureil, et li forme est laide, et meismement en femmes puceles, si covient que tu saiches se li dens est neis aprés lou dent, et n’est mie en droit leu, et on ne lou puet soier ne limer: adonques lou raie; et s’il est aers avec lou dent, si prent cest estrument dont ci est li forme, et est semblans a .i. petit bec, et soit de fer inde agut en som:	When the tooth appears not according to nature and its shape is ugly, especially in virgins, then you should know if the tooth is new after the tooth, and it is not in the right place, and it cannot be filed or polished; then pull it out; and if there is air with the tooth, take this instrument of which here is the form, and it is like a small beak, and let it be of iron sharpened at the end:
Et lou cope poc et poc em mains jors por la duresce dou dent, et por ceu que tu ne mueves les autres, et s’il est apparans c’on le puisse limer, si lou lime d’une teil lime com ci est li forme:	And pull it gently day by day because of the hardness of the tooth and so that you do not move the others; and if it is apparent that it can be filed, then file it with a type of file like this:
et est ausi com li lime de coi on fait les aguilles; et en lime lou dent poc et poc em mains jors legierement, si qu’il ne se mueve tant qu’il chiece; puis la plaine en la fin a tout aucun raseur, et se li dens est trop trenchans et il blece la lengue, si covient limer l’aspreteit tant qu’il soit igalz, si qu’il ne blece la lengue ne ne corrompe la parole.	and it is like the lime that needles are made from; and with the lime, lightly prick the tooth little by little, so that it does not move until it chips; then smooth it at the end with a file completely, and if the tooth is too sharp and bites into the tongue, then file down the sharpness so that it neither bites nor corrupts speech.
quant li dent lochent	when the tooth is loose
Quant li dent devant lochent, ou par percussion ou par cheoir, et li malaides ne puet presser sus ceu qu’il menjue qu’il ne chient, et tu les as curez de medicines restrignans, et ceu ne vaut; si les covient restraindre d’un fil d’or, car li filz d’argent devient vert et porrit, mais li ors ne se mue onques; et soit li filz moiens ne trop gros ne trop menus, selonc la quantiteit de l’espaice entre les dens; et se tu vues adrecier les dens, si pren lou fil et lou boute double entre les II dens sains, puis met les chiés entre les dens meus, s’il en i a I ou plusors, tant que tu veignes saigement jusc’au dent sain d’autre part; puis rencomence la coverture jusc’a la partie ou tu encomensas, et estrains ta main subtilment et saigement, tant qu’il ne se mueve point; et soit ta lieeure a la racine dou dent si qu’il ne puist eschaper.	When the tooth is loose from either pushing or falling, and the patient cannot bite down on what he eats without defecating, and you have tried restricting medicines, but it does not work; then they must be restrained with a gold wire, because silver wire turns green and rots, but gold never moves. The wire should be neither too thin nor too thick, according to the amount of space between the teeth. And if you see the teeth leaning towards each other, take the wire and wrap it double between two healthy teeth, then put the shoulder between the teeth, if there is one or more, until you reach the healthy tooth on the other side; then begin covering again up to where you started, and pull your hand gently and with force, so that it does not move. Your aim should be at the root of the tooth, so that it cannot escape.
Puis cope les chiés dou fil a unes tenailles, et les assemble, et les repont entre le dent sain, et le met ensi qu’il ne blece la lengue; et puis le laisse ensi estroit tant com il puet demorer, et s’il deslie, ou li filz ront, si l’estraint d’un autre fil; si demorrait et servira ensi tout son tens, et c’est li forme des dens et li figure de l’adrecement des II dens sains, et des II meus, si com tu vois:	Then grasp the teeth with tweezers, and bring them together, and fit them between the healthy teeth, and place it so that it does not bite the tongue; and then leave it thus tightly as long as it can stay, and if it becomes loose, or the wire breaks, then tighten it with another wire; let it remain and serve in this way for its entire lifetime, and this is the form of the teeth and the arrangement of the two healthy teeth, and the two defective ones, just as you see:
Et quant li dent chiet, si lou remet on en son leu, de fres en fres, si com nos avons dit; et ne s’en entremette mie qui n’est saiges et soffrans, et aucune fois fait on la forme d’un dent d’os de vaiche, et lou met on au leu ou li defaute est, et l’estraint on si com nos avons dit, et demore et sert ensi lonc tens.	And when a tooth chips, if it is put back in its place, freshly and as we have said; and only a wise and experienced person should attempt this, and sometimes one makes the shape of a tooth out of cow's bone, and puts it in the place where the defect is, and restrains it as we have said, and it remains and serves thus for a long time.
de coper lou liien de la lengue	to cover the vein of the tongue
Aucune fois est cist liiens qui vient desoz la lengue ou naturez, que on naist ensi; ou par accident de plaie soudee; et li ovraiges est telz que tu oevre la bouche dou malaide, et ait sa teste en ton sain, et li lieve la lengue; puis cope lou liien nervous dou large, tant que li lengue soit desloie de son tenement, et se il i a duresce ou nout, et c’est de soudement de plaie, si i boute l’uncine et cope dou large celui liement; et garde que li fendure ne soit mie trop em parfont, por l’artere qui est desoz; et quant tu as fait, si leve le leu d’aigue rose et d’aisil, ou d’aigue froide, puis met desoz la lengue une tente de lin; et la teigne li malaides chescune nuit, que li leus ne puisse soder.	Sometimes this ligament which comes under the tongue, either by nature from birth, or by accident from a wound; and the treatment is such that you open the mouth of the patient, and has his head in your healthy mouth, and holds his tongue; then grasp the nervous ligament widely, so that the tongue is loosened from its housing, and if there is hardening or swelling, and this is from a sudden wound, then it pierces with the hook and grasps the ligament widely; and be careful that the slit is not too deep, for the artery which is underneath; and when you have done, then raise the place with rosewater and garlic, or with cold water, then place under the tongue a tent of linen; and tie the patient's head every night so that the lips do not adhere.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si met sor le leu vitriole broiet; et se li sans te vaint, si le cauterize au cautere lentiginout, qui est boin a ceu; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez,	And if blood oozes out, then apply ground glass to the site; and if the wound bleeds, then cauterize it with a lenteginous cautery, which is good for this purpose; then treat it further until it heals.
et se tu lou vois de fusse color ou noir ou dur, si que li malaides ne lou sent, si n’i touchier point, car c’est chancre; et s’il est declinans a blenchor, et il i a moistor, si i giete l’oncine, et lou fent d’un spatumile subtil, et lou delivre d’une part et d’autre; et se li sans te vaint a ton ovraige, si met sus vitriole broiet tant qu’il soit estainchiez, puis revien a ton ovraige tant que tu traies tout fuer; puis leve lou leu d’aisil et de seil, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you see it discolored to a dusky or black color, and the patient does not feel any pain, do not touch it because it is a ulcer. If it is declining towards a phlegmon and there is moisture, insert the claw and open it with a spatulum, releasing it from both sides. If bleeding occurs due to your action, apply ground vitriol until it stops; then return to your treatment, continuing until you have removed everything. Afterwards, apply aqua rosa and aqua silice, and treat the wound with other treatments until it heals.
des apostemes de la gorge	of abscesses in the throat
Aucune fois vient dedens la gorge boces qui sont apelees «godath», et les apele on proprement les II amandres, et quant tu les cures, si com nos avons dit en la division, et elles ne sont sanees, si pren garde: se c’est apostemes dur de petit sens et de fusse color, si ne lou touchier mie de fer.	Sometimes there are growths in the throat called 'godath', and they are properly called 'almonds'. When you treat them, as we have said in the division, and they do not heal, then be careful: if they are hard abscesses of a small size with a light color, do not touch them with iron.
Et s’il est rouges et li racine est grosse, si ne lou touchier mie de fer, ausi por lou decorrement de sanc; mais lou laisse tant qu’il soit meur, et adonques tu lou partiras, ou il rompirait par soi; et s’il est de blainche color reont, et li racine est subtilz, si aies apareilliet l’estrument por coper, mais regarde premierement se li apostemes chalz repose et est apaisiez.	And if it is red and the root is thick, do not touch it with iron because of bloodletting; but leave it until it is dead, and then you will burst it, or it will burst by itself; and if it is a white color and the root is thin, have ready an instrument for cauterizing, but first check that the abscess is cool and has calmed down.
Adonques fai seoir lou malaide devant lou soleil, et ses chiés soit en ton sain, et li oevre la bouche et lou preigne li serjans entre ses mains, et presse la lengue desoz a tout l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme; et soit d’argent ou d’arain subtil ausi com uns coutelz:	Therefore have the patient sit facing the sun, and his head should be in your shade, and open his mouth and hold the instrument between your hands, and press the tongue underneath all of it, with which is made the form; and it should be of silver or thin bronze just like a knife.
Cant tu presses la lengue a tout cest estrument, et tu vois l’aposteme, si pren l’oncine et lou fiche en l’amandre, et la trai fuer au desus plus que tu pues; et trai aucune chose des toiles avec, puis la cope a l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme, que semble unes forces; et toutevoie li chief sont corbé, et l’un endroit l’autre, et sont molt agut, et est fait de fer inde ou d’andainne:	While pressing the tongue with this instrument, you will see the abscess. Take a pair of tweezers and grab it, then pull it up into the tonsil and out from the top as hard as you can; pull some of the threads along with it, then cover the instrument with a cloth, which is part of its shape, so that it looks like a fork. The prongs are curved, one facing one way and the other facing the opposite way, and they are very sharp, made from iron or steel:
Et se tu n’as cest estrument present, si lou cope as tenailles, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you do not have this instrument available, use a pair of tongs with the same shape:
Et soit trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part nom; et quant tu as copeit l’une des amandres, si cope l’autre selonc cele meisme maniere, et aprés l’incision gargarize li malaides aigue chaude, et aigue et aisil, et se decorremens de sanc avient, si gargarize li malaides aigue, ou escorces de pomes grenates soient cuites, ou fuelles de mirte, et semblans choses, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois naissent en la gorge autres apostemes que les .ij. amandres, si les cope donques ensi com les .ij. amandres igament.	And it has a sharp edge on one side and a flat edge on the other; and when you have cut one of the tonsils, then cut the other according to the same manner, and after the incision gargle the patient with warm water, and with water and garlic, and if bleeding occurs, then gargle the patient with water, or with peels of pomegranates that have been cooked, or with bay leaves, and similar things, until the bleeding stops; then cure it until it heals; and sometimes other abscesses appear in the throat besides the two tonsils, so cut them then just as the two tonsils are cut.
Et je medicinai une femme d’un aposteme que li estoit neis dedens la gorge, c’est a savoir I aposteme de petit sens; et avoit jai bien pres close toute la gorge, si que li femme ne pooit expirer por le conduit qui estoit estoupez, et ne pooit ne mengier ne boivre, et fust morte s’elle demorast ensi I jor ou II.	And I treated a woman for an abscess that was inside her throat, specifically a small abscess; and she had a very closed throat, so much so that the woman could not breathe through the opening that was blocked, nor eat or drink, and would have died if it continued like that for another day or two.
Et li apostemes estoit jai si montez qu’il avoit fuer mis II rains par les II pertuis dou neis.	And the abscess had grown so much that it had forced out two holes in the nose.
Je hastai donques tantost, et fichai en l’un I oncine, puis lou traï fuers, et en traï grant porcion de bowe; puis refis autreteil en l’autre pertus dou neis, et li ovrai la bouche et li pressai la lengue; aprés fichai l’oncine en ces apostemes, et en copai une partie, et n’en issit fuers que un poc de sanc; et ensi fut destoupez li conduis de la gorge la femme, et comensa maintenant a boivre aigue et puis vin, et ne cessai de taillier de cel aposteme par lonc tens; et li apostemes recroissoit adés, et remplissoit lou leu que je avoie vuidiet, tant qu’il refut mout gros; adonques je l’engignai et lou cauterizai dedens la gorge: ensi demora sens croistre; et me partis de ces parties, et ne soi que Deus fist de li aprés moi.	I hastened therefore, and inserted a hook into one of the nostrils, then drew it out forcefully, and cut away a large portion of the abscess; then I did the same in the other nostril, and opened her mouth and pressed her tongue; afterwards, I inserted the hook into the abscess and scraped away at it, and only a little blood came out; and thus I cleared the passage of the throat of the woman, and she was now able to drink water and then wine, and I continued to cut away at this abscess for a long time; and the abscess regrew and filled up the space that I had emptied, so much so that it became very large; therefore, I lanced it and cauterized it inside her throat; thus it remained without growing; and I left these parts, and may God help her after me.
de l’uve	from the grape
Quant reume dessent a l’uve, et elle est enflee et elle est longe, si est apelee «perpendiculaire»; et s’elle est desoz grosse et reonde, si est apelee «uve».	When a tumor descends into the eye, and it is swollen and long, it is called "perpendicular"; and if it is thick and round beneath, it is called an "eye".
Quant elle est curee si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, et tu vois que li chaus apostemes est apaisiez, et elle est subtilz, si covient que tu la copes; et celle qui est reonde assemblee et n’est mie longe; et elle est sanguine ou de fusse color ou noire, si covient que tu eschues l’incision de li.	When it is treated as we have said in the division, and the treatment does not help, and you see that the abscess has subsided, and it is subtle, then you must cut it; and that which is round and not long, and is blood-red or flesh-colored or black, then you should avoid cutting into it.
Car il i a grant peril sus lou malaide.	For there is great danger to the patient.
Il covient donques, quant tu la vois, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit, de sa blenchor et de sa longesce, que tu faices seoir le malaide devant lou soleil, et li presse la lengue a l’estrument dont nos avons fait la remembrance ci devant; puis fiche l’oncine en l’uve, et la trai desoz, et la cope a I des II estrumens que j’ai dit en l’incision des II amandres.	Therefore, when you see it, according to the manner that I have described, of its whiteness and length, you should make the patient sit facing the sun, and press his tongue with the instrument of which I have spoken before; then insert the probe into the eye, and cut beneath, and scoop it out using one of the two instruments that I have mentioned for the incision of the two almond-shaped areas.
Et covient que tu ne coper mie fuer que la superfluiteit qui est outre le termine natureil; car se tu en copes plus, si grieves a la voix, et a la parolle; et aprés l’incision, use de ceu que nos avons dit en l’incision des II amandres, et le cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And you must not cover anything more than the excess that is beyond the natural term; for if you cover more, it will grieve the voice and speech; and after the incision, use what we have said about the incision of the two testicles, and cure it until it is healed.
Et se li malaides a paor dou coper, si covient que tu i use d’engien a la cauterization de li sens paor.	And if the patient has fear due to covering, then you should use the cautery of the sense of fear.
Et li maniere dou cautere si est aigue ague.	The manner of the cautery is for acute fever.
Et est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, et puis li presse la lengue a l’estrument que nos avons dit ou chapistre de cautere, et confis avec aigue vive chaus, si qu’elle ne soit mie trop espesse ne trop clere; et en emple le chevement de cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme:	And it is that the patient puts his head in your lap, and then presses his tongue against the instrument we described in the chapter on cautery, and breathes in with hot breath, so that it is not too thick or too clear; and he employs the movement of this instrument, from which comes its form:
Et ait ou chief une cheveure ou om met la medecine, si com li chevemens d’une cuillier, et met l’estrument a tout la medicine sus l’uve; et li malaides soit gisans sus son costeit, si que li salive et li muscillaige corre de sa bouche de la medicine dedens, si qu’ele ne dessende a la gorge, et lou blece; puis tien ta main a tout la medicine et la presse sus l’uve, la quantiteit de la moitiet d’une houre, tant que tu la vois nercie et li mordications de la medicine soit apaisie; et se tu vues, pren coton et l’envoloupe sus aucun estrument, et moille lou coton en la medicine, et boute l’estrument a tout le couton en la cainne desus, tant que li coton s’aerde sus l’uve; et fai ceu sovent, tant que li cauteres soit parfais, puis la laisse elle seche, et chiet aprés .iiij. jors ou .v. Et se tu as mestier de rencomencier lou cautere de la medicine, si le rencomence, et aprés le cautere l’essue entor l’uve, de couton embut em burre, et mundifie ceu qui est entor de la medicine; et soit arosez d’aigue froide, et soit curez de gargarismes tant qu’il soit sanez.	and has a handle on the top where one puts the medicine, like the handle of a spoon, and one places the instrument with all the medicine on the eye; and the patient lies on his side, so that the saliva and mucous flow from his mouth due to the medicine, so that it does not descend into the throat and cause bleeding; then hold your hand over the medicine and press it onto the eye for the amount of half an hour, until you see it becoming numb and the bites of the medicine calm down; and if you see [this], take cotton and wrap it around any instrument, and soak the cotton in the medicine, and insert the instrument all the way into the eye with the cotton on top, so that the cotton adheres to the eye; and do this often until the cautery is complete, then let it dry and fall off after 4 or 5 days. And if you need to repeat the cautery of the medicine, then repeat it, and after the cautery, wash around the eye with cotton dipped in butter, and cleanse what is around the medicine; and use rosewater, and cure it with gargles until it heals.
Ceste cure est plus save de l’incision, ne que li cautere; s’elle est curee de fumigation selonc ceste maniere, pren calament et ysope et origanum et rue et camomille et avronne et semblans herbes, et les assemble toutes ou aucunes d’eles en .i. pot, et i met aisil, et fai bullir; et li potz soit bien gluez de fort terre, et enmi le pot ait .i. estrument cheveit selonc ceste maniere:	This cure is safer than incision or cautery; if it is cured by fumigation according to this manner, take calamin, hyssop, oregano, rue, chamomile, avens, and similar herbs, and assemble all or some of them in one pot, and put garlic in it, and let it boil; and the pot should be well-glazed with strong clay, and in the pot there is one instrument with a handle according to this manner:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, et soit li uns des chiés boutez en la bouche dou malaide tant que li vapor monte a l’uve par la caine, tant que li uve soit mortifie; aprés lou rencomence sovent, tant que li uve seche, et garde que tu ne faices ceu au comencement de l’avenement de l’aposteme chaut, car plusors choses i avienent; et ne faire mie ceu fuer que a la declination d’aposteme chaut.	And it should be made of silver or bronze, and one of the lips pressed into the patient's mouth so that the vapour rises to the eye through the canal, until the eye is mortified; afterwards, he should do this often, until the eye dries, and take care not to do this at the beginning of the appearance of a hot abscess, for various things can happen there; nor do this beyond the decline of a hot abscess.
Et se cist estrument n’est presens, si pren une caine et met dedens lou chief une craiffe d’uef, si que li bouche au malaide n’ait mie trop chaut; car li craiffe d’uef ne lait mie la vapor grever la bouche, et c’est bone cure ensamble salut.	And if this instrument is not present, take a cane and put inside it the yolk of an egg, so that the mouth of the patient is not too hot; for the egg yolk does not let the vapor weigh down the mouth, and it is a good remedy altogether.
Maintes fois s’aert a la gorge os ou espinee de poisson, ou aucune chose; si covient donc que tu traies ceu que tu pues veoir, et li presse la lengue au soleil a tout l’estrument, si que tu voies mues la chose; et ceu que ne t’apert mie et est reponus en la gorge, covient que tu faices vomir le malaide ainsois que li viande soit cuite en l’estomac; par aventure si istra li chose aerse par le vomissement; ou li malaides englutisse une piece d’esponge, ou une piece de navel, ou une racine de laitue, ou .i. morceil de pain sec; et lie a l’esponge .i. fil, et puis la transglutisse; et quant elle venra au leu, si s’aerdra, et puis trairas fuer; et s’elle ne vient fuer de ceu que nos avons dit, si pren .i. estrument de plonc selonc ceste forme:	Often a fish bone or spine, or some other thing, becomes stuck in the throat; therefore you must try to pull it out as far as you can see, and press the tongue against the sun with all your strength, so that you can feel the object moving; and if it does not come loose and remains stuck in the throat, you should make the patient vomit until the food is digested in the stomach; perhaps the object will come out through vomiting. Or let the patient swallow a piece of sponge, or a piece of navel-wool, or a lettuce root, or a dry crumb of bread; and tie a string to the sponge, then swallow it; and when it reaches the spot, it will lodge there, and then you can pull it out; and if it does not come out in the way we have described, take a leaden instrument according to this form:
Et soit li estrumens corbés au chief si qu’il puist plus legierement entrer en la gorge, et ait le chief en haut leveit; et warde que tu ne touchier l’epiglote, que li tous ne li viegne, ne ne bouter mie l’os dedens; et mues vaut que li malaides i boute l’estrument, por ceu qu’il seit mues ou li chose est aerse; si la boute aval, ou il la traie fuer a tout l’estrument igalment, tant qu’elle soit fuer.	And let the instrument be bent at one end so that it can more easily enter the throat, and have the upper part lifted up; and take care not to touch the epiglottis, lest you harm it, nor push the bone in; and move the patient's head so that he vomits, in order for the object to come out; then let him swallow the instrument again, or pull it out with the instrument, equally, until it is out.
de la sansue de la gorge	of the blood of the throat
Aucune fois est medicinee li sansue, si com j’ai dit en la division, par la cure de medicines; et quant ceu ne profite mie, adonques regarde en la gorge dou malaide au soleil, puis que tu li presses la lengue a l’estrument que je t’ai dit.	Sometimes the blood is drawn, as I have said in the division, by the treatment of medicines; and when this does not help, then look into the throat of the sick person towards the sun, and then press his tongue with the instrument that I told you about.
Et se tu vois la sansue, si la trai a tout I petit uncine, ou as tenailles subtilz que valent a ceu.	And if you see the blood, draw it out with a small hook, or with fine tweezers that are fit for this purpose.
Et se ceu ne vaut, si pren une caine chevee, et la boute en la gorge dou malaide, puis boute ou chevement de la caine I fer chaut, et fai ce sovent.	And if this does not work, take a curved cane, and put it into the throat of the sick person, then put on the curve of the cane hot iron, and do this often.
Et se teigne li malaides d’aigue toute jor.	And if the patient has a fever all day long.
puis pren plein I voirre d’aigue froide, et oevre la bouche, et la giete ens sens englutir, et la mueve a sa main sovent; et si tost com li sansue sent l’aigue, si chiet.	Then take some cold water and open your mouth, and pour it in without swallowing, and move it around with your hand often; and as soon as the blood feels the water, let it flow out.
Et s’elle ne chiet si com nos avons dit, si subfumige lou malaide d’asefetide, a l’estrument que j’ai dit en la fumigation de l’uve; fai ceu maintes fois, car elle cherra sens targier.	And if it does not flow out as we have said, then suffocate the patient with assafetida, using the instrument that I described for fumigating the throat; do this several times, for it will come out without harm.
Et li maniere de la fumigation si est que tu preignes I pot ou il ait charbons vis, et soit li pos covert d’un coverseil perciet en mileu, et en celui pertus soit li chiés de l’estrument; puis i giete ta fumigation, et li malaides mette lou chief de la cainne en sa bouche, et cloie la bouche, si que li fumee n’en isse mie, mais viegne jusc’a la sansue; et la sansue cherra maintenant, et s’elle ne chiet, si rencomence la fumigation par maintes fois; et soffre li malaides soif, et menjuce choses salees et als, et ne boive point d’aigue; et adonques li iert mestier qu’elle isse fuer par cest governement.	And the way to do the fumigation is to put burning charcoal in a pot, and place over it a perforated cover, and put the instrument's head into the hole; then pour in your fumigating agent, and the patient should place the end of their throat inside their mouth, close their mouth so the smoke does not escape, but rather goes into their blood; and the blood will flow out now, and if it does not, repeat the fumigation several times; and let the patient endure thirst, and eat salted and dry things, and drink no water; and then it will be necessary for them to go to the toilet.
Et li forme de l’estrument a coi on trait la sansue, si est, quant on la puet veoir, semblans a tenailles corbés por mues entrer en la gorge; et ait semblance au bec de soigne, et i ait asperiteit de lime, si que ceu qu’elle prent, elle ne puet lassier; et vez ci la forme:	And the shape of the instrument with which one treats the throat looks like bent tongs so as to be able to enter the throat; it resembles a bird's beak and has roughness from sandpaper so that what it grasps, it cannot let go; see the shape:
li chapistres des apostemes	the chapter on abscesses
Mout de semblances d’aposteme sont, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient ci aprés d’un et d’autre en cest livre, et sont diver en perforation et en taille; et c’est en II manieres dont l’une est en sa semblance meisme, et de ceu qu’il tient moistor.	Many types of abscess appear, according to what memory brings hereafter from one and another in this book, and they are diverse in perforation and size; and there are two ways of which the one is in its appearance itself, and that which it holds moisture.
Et li seconde maniere si est por les leus ou il sont au cors.	And the second way is for the places where they are in the body.
car li apostemes dou chief est autres que cil dou fondement, et li apostemes dou leu charnut est autres que cil qui vient en jointures, et chescuns ait son jugement en l’uevre.	For the abscesses of the head are different from those of the foundations, and the abscesses of fleshy places are different from those that come in joints, and each has its own judgment in the work.
Et si a apostemes c’on ne doit mie percier, tant que li bowe est meure selonc son acomplissement; et si a de telz qu’il covient percier quant il sont crut, et ne meurent mie selonc lor acomplissement, si com aposteme qui sont delez jointures.	And if there are abscesses which one must not pierce until the bowels are dead according to their fulfillment; and there are some that one must pierce when they are crud, and they do not die according to their fulfillment, as with abscesses that are near joints.
Car quant apostemes vient delez jointures, et on le laisse tant qu’il est porris entor, par aventure si sont corrumput li liien et li nerf de la jointure, par coi ce est cause de contraction en celui membre.	Because when abscesses come from these joints, and one lets them be as long as they are swollen around the edge, perhaps the ligaments and nerves of the joint are corrupted, by which that is caused to contract in that member.
Ou li aposteme est delez lou membre principel, et se tu tardes la perforation tant qu’il soit meurez, si nuira au membre principeil; ou il est delez lou fondement, si le perce on ainsois qu’il soit meurs; et ne covient mie que tu perces aposteme crut sens digestion acomplie, fuers que celui qui est delez lou fondement, qu’il ne porrisse em parfont, et soit alongiez dedens, et i viegne fistule; et ne puisse saner en grant termine.	Or if the abscess is near the principal member, and you delay to open it until it is mature, it will harm the principal member; but if it is on the bottom, one should open it in such a way that it does not burst outward, and it can become long inside, and then there will be a fistula, and it cannot heal quickly.
Et covient que tu saiches l’oure de la perforation de l’aposteme qui est meur selonc l’acomplissement, et c’est quant li dolor est apaisie, et li departemens de la fievre, et l’amenuisement de la dolor et de la roujor, et dou debatement et de l’aguisement dou chief de l’aposteme, et les autres signes; et covient que tu faices seoir la perforation ou plus dependant leu de l’aposteme, et la ou il apert mues; et soit li perforation dou lonc dou cors, et se li apostemes est as mains ou as piez, ou en jointures et au ners et as arteres, et en toz leus igalz ou il n’a point de ploieure.	And you must know the time of the piercing of the abscess which is dead according to its maturity, and that is when the pain is appeased, and the departure of the fever, and the diminishment of the pain and redness, and the softening and sharpening of the head of the abscess, and the other signs; and you must make the piercing in the most dependent place of the abscess, and where it appears soft; and let the piercing be deep in the body, and if the abscess is in the hands or feet, or in joints and on nerves and arteries, and in all places equally where there is no fold.
En ces que ploient, par selonc celui membre.	In those who are bent, according to the affected member.Car en l’ovraige de cest chapistre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne, et a l’incision sus aposteme, et as cures des plaies, et a l’estraction des saiettes, et a l’incision sus la piere, et les semblans choses; ou il a doutance et paor, et en vient li mors a plusors.
Et quant apostemes est en leu charnut, si vaut mues que tu laisses la perforation tant qu’il soit confermez en digestion acomplie, si com nos avons dit.	And when an abscess is in a fleshy place, it is better to leave the puncture until it is confirmed by completed digestion, as we have said.
Car se tu lou perces devant ceu, si iert alongiez li cors dou venim de lui, et est plains de mout d’ordure; et par aventure endurcissent les levres et li parfondetez de lui.	Because if you puncture it before that, the venom will flow through the body, and it will be filled with much filth; and perhaps the lips and depths of it will harden.
Et si a aucun aposteme que sont perciet selonc le large dou cors, selonc ceu que li membres en ait mestier.	And for any abscess that is punctured according to the width of the body, according to what the member needs.
Et covient que tu amenistres em petis apostemes, petis pertus; et en grans apostemes, grans pertus, et maintes fendures selonc la semblance de la grandor de l’aposteme; et si a de tels apostemes ou il covient chever lou keur, et coper; quant il est jai devenus ausi com I drapelz, et est amortis, si covient faire ausi com on fait as bubes: et si a de telz que sont fendut en III angles, et si a de telz dont on cope ausi com la fuelle de mirte, si com apostemes des angres; et si a de telz ou on fait une reonde taille, et autres tailles et semblant copeure.	And you must treat small abscesses with small openings; and large abscesses with large openings, and many slits according to the appearance of the size of the abscess; and for such abscesses where one should cut the skin, and cover it up; when it has become like a piece of cloth, and is deadened, then one should do as one does with blisters: and there are some that are split into three angles, and some which one covers like a myrtle leaf; and there are some where one makes a round incision, and other incisions, and similar coverings.
Cil qui n’ont point de chief, si com aposteme souef superficial, il covient que tu lou perces plainnement; et covient quant li apostemes est gros, et il a coillit grant bowe, et tu lou perces, si ne traire mie toute la bowe en celle houre, mais en trai une partie; puis estoupe l’aposteme jusc’a l’autre jor, puis en trai aucune chose derechief; fai ceu par maintes fois de greit en greit, tant que li bowe isse toute; meismement se li malaides est de foible vertut, ou femme portans, ou petis enfes, ou viez hons decrepites.	Those who have no head, such as a superficial boil, you should pierce it plainly; and when the boil is large and has formed a great pus pocket, and you pierce it, do not draw out all the pus in that hour, but only a portion; then stop up the boil until the next day, then draw out some more; do this several times from great to small, until all the pus is drained; likewise if the patient is of weak constitution, or a woman carrying child, or a young child, or an elderly decrepit man.
Car li esperis tressaut aucune fois avec l’issue de la bowe, que par aventure muert li malaides, et tu ne t’en persois.	For the pus may sometimes spurt out with the opening of the boil, and the patient might die from it, and you would not realize it.
Eschuez donques cest chapistre par grant cautele, et quant tu as perciet ton aposteme, si essue la plaie, et regarde se li plaie de l’aposteme est petite; et se c’est une tailleure plainne, si amenistre tentes de lin ou de viez coton; et se c’est uns grans apostemes, et il i a mout de pertus, si covient que tu boutes en chescun une tente si qu’ele viegne l’une contre l’autre; et se tu as copeit en l’aposteme une partie dou cuir, et tu l’as cheveit entor, si covient que tu l’emplisses de viel couton ou de rasure de dras de lin sens moistor, et le lie jusc’au tier jor; puis l’oste, et le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Therefore, approach this chapter with great caution; and when you have pierced your boil, wash the wound, and examine if the wound of the boil is small; and if it is a plain incision, apply tenters made of linen or old cotton; and if it is a large boil, and there are many openings, then you should insert a tent in each opening so that they press against each other; and if you have cut into the boil a portion of the skin, and lifted it up all around, then you should fill it with dry cotton or rasped linen without moisture, and leave it for three days; then remove it, and treat it with ointment until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc avient a ton ovraige, si amenistre aigue froide et aisil, et moille I drapeil, et met sor le leu decorrant par maintes fois.	And if blood flow occurs due to your work, administer cold water and vinegar, and moisten the cloth, and place it over the flowing area many times.
Et se li decorremens de sanc persevere, se i amenistre governement et cure, et les poudres que j’ai dit em mains leus en cest livre, et se c’est ou tens d’iver, et li leus ou li apostemes est est mout nervous, si couvient que tu mettes sus tentes et drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile chaut; et se c’est en esteit, et li leus est charnus, si covient que tu mes sus drapelz moilliez en aigue et en oile, ou en vin et en oile froit, jusc’au tier jor, si com nos avons dit; et puis deslie l’aposteme et l’essue et le cure, si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the blood flow persists, administer treatment and care, and the powders I mentioned with my own hands in this book; and if it is during winter, and the area on the abscess is very nervous, then you should place wet tents and cloths soaked in warm wine and oil; and if it is summer, and the area is fleshy, then you should place wet cloths soaked in water and oil, or in cool wine and oil, for a third of a day, as we have said; and then open the abscess, wash and treat it, as it should be, until it is healed.
Et ceu covient il conoistre universement en cures des apostemes: or vos ai dit coment on doit aler avant as cures des apostemes, et vez ci le chapistre.	And now you should know generally about the treatment of abscesses. I have told you how one must proceed before treating abscesses, and you have the chapter here.
des soros	of sores
Ou keur dou chief vienent petis apostemes, et sont manieres de nous que sont en toiles, ausi com li josier d’une geline, et mout en i a de semblances.	From the head come small abscesses, and they are caused by us being in fabrics, like the goiter on a goose's neck, and there are many variations of them.Et si li chief est hote, et li leus ou li aposteme est hote, si covient que tu mettes sus drapelz moilliez en aigue fraiche, jusc’au tier jor; puis deslie l’aposteme, essue li leus, et cure-le si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.
Il en i a de gras et de telz ou il a moistor ausi com poulz; et si a de telz qui sont dur et pierous au taillier, et n’i a point de doutance se li artere n’i fait contraire.	There are some that are fatty and others that are moist like pus; and there are some that are hard and stone-like in texture, and there is no doubt if the artery does not act contrary.
Et li ovraiges de la taille si est que tu esprueve a tout I estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», de coi li forme vient ci aprés, quel chose il contient.	And the work of the abdomen is that you must examine all instruments called "endoscopies", from which the form comes later, what it contains.
Car s’il contient moistor, si lou fent par desus dou lonc.	For if it contains moisture, they will cut it from above.
Et quant li moistor est vuidie, si escorche sens rien laissier la peil qui contient celle moistor, car il revient adés quant on i laisse rien; puis plonge coton en oignement egiptien, s’il est presens; se ceu non, en aigue et en seil, et en emple la plaie, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; et ceu corront ceu qui est demorez dou nit.	And when the moisture is evacuated, they scrape without leaving anything the skin that contains the moisture, because it returns again if nothing is left; then dip cotton in Egyptian ointment, if it is present; if not, in water and salt, and apply it to the wound, and leave it until the next day; and those who remain overnight will heal.
Et pues rencomence lou coton, si com devant, le second jor, et lou tier, tant que tu saiches bien qu’il ne demoure point dou nit; puis cure la plaie d’oignement a ceu convenauble, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And then cotton is applied again, as before, on the second and third day, until you are sure that it no longer hurts at night; then the wound is treated with ointment as appropriate until it heals.
Et se li apostemes tient I nout gras, si le cope selonc ceste forme, dou lonc; et i giete tes oncines, et l’escorche de toutes pars, et met toute ta cure de traire fuer la cotte ou il gist; et se li artere te fait contraire, si fai ceu que je t’ai dit aprés.	And if the abscess contains pus, open it according to this method, deeply; and squeeze your fingers, and scrape off all of the scabs, and apply all of your treatment by pulling outward through the cot, where he lies; and if the artery makes a sound contrary to what I have said, then do as I have told you after.
Et ausi fai de l’aposteme s’il est pierous, et dou taillier et dou curer si com je t’ai dit.	And also treat an abscess if it is stone-like, and cut and treat it as I have told you.Si li artere clent, si la traie fuer l’aposteme sus la cotte, tant que li sang ne s’en poie; et si le sang est gras, si met sel et vinyer, et remue li cot ains qu’il s’escanse, et distrai li sang; et se li sang ne s’escante pas, si traie li cot ou il gist sus l’aposteme, tant qu’il s’escanse par le siel de li cotte.
Et li taille sus l’aposteme pierous et le moiste, si est plus legiere, car il sont de poc de sanc.	And the incision on the pus-filled, moist abscess is lighter, because there is less blood.
Et si a aucuns de ces apostemes ou chief ou il n’a point de moistor, et de ces fut I apostemes que je copai ou chief d’une vielle femme; et trovai l’aposteme ausi com une piere xourde, aspre et blainche, et ne pooit brisier; et s’on en eust ferut aucun, on li eust ausi bien fait plaie com d’une piere.	And if some of these abscesses have no moisture in them, and I found one such abscess in the head of an old woman; and I found the abscess as hard as a stone, rough and white, and it could not be crushed; and if one had broken it, it would have caused a wound like a stone.
En autres apostemes venans ou chief, fuer que ces qui vienent as chief des enfans et as racines des oreilles, li overture si soit toz jors au plus dependant leu, por mues issir la bowe; et les cure si com il covient.	In other abscesses that come in the head, unlike those that occur in children and at the roots of the ears, the opening should be at the most dependent location to allow pus to drain; and treat them as appropriate.
des scrophules	of scrofula
Maintes fois avienent cist aposteme au col, et desoz les asseles, et ens angres, et aucune fois vienent autre part ou cors, et sont mout, et sont enjanrees l’une avec l’autre.	Many times abscesses occur in the neck, and under the armpits, and in the groin, and sometimes they come elsewhere in the body, and they are large, and some are connected with each other.
Et chescune scrophule est proprement dedens sa cote, si com li nout et li aposteme dou chief, si com nos avons dit; et les semblances de ces scrophules sont maintes.	And each scrofula is properly within the chest, as are the abscess and swelling in the head, as we have said; and there are many similar scrofulae.
Il i a de teles que contienent moistor, et si a de malignes qui ne vuellent obeir a santeit.	There are some that contain moisture, and there are some that do not obey health.
en celle donques que tu vois de bone disposition au tochier, et est semblans a la color dou cors, et muet de chescune part et n’est mie aerse as ners dou col ne a l’artere ne au conduit, et n’est mie parfonde; si covient que tu la copes par desus, et l’escorche de chescune partie, et estent les II levres dou keur as oncines, se tu en as mestier, si com nos avons dit en apostemes dou chief; et la trai poc et poc, et soies seur que tu ne coper lou nerf ne la voine, et ne soit mie li spatumile agus ne trenchans, que li mains n’eschaipe, et ne voise trop avant, que tu ne coper mie ceu que tu ne dois.	For those in which you see a good disposition to touch, and are similar in color to the body, and move from all sides and are not enlarged towards the nerves of the neck or the artery or the conduit, and are not deep; you should cut it from above and scrape off each part, and be careful that you do not cut into the nerve or vein, and do not use the spatula or scalpel so that the hand slips, and do not go too far ahead, but only as much as you need.
Et se tu copes la voinne ou l’artere, et ceu ne te laisse ovrer, si met en la plaie vitriole broiet, ou aucunes poudres que restainchent sanc, et estraint la plaie; et la laisse tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et soit amollie li plaie, et encomence a porrir.	And if you grasp the vein or artery, and it does not let you work, then put into the wound vitriol ground, or any powders that stop blood, and constrict the wound; and leave it until the abscess is eased, and the wound is softened, and begins to fester.
Et quant li sans est estainchiez, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que tu l’acomplisses; puis quier a ton doit indice s’il i demoure nules petites scrophules, si les cope et les munde.	And when the blood is stanched, return to your work, until you complete it; then consult your right index finger if any small scrofula remains, then pick and clean them.
Et s’il a en la racine de la scrophule voinne grant, si ne covient mie que tu copes celle scrophule en sa racine, mais la lie d’un fil double fort, et la laisse cheoir par li, sens nuisement; puis emple la plaie de viel coton plongiet en oignement egiptien, puis la cure.	And if he has a large vein in the root of the scrofula, you must not pick that scrofula at its root, but ligature it with a double strong thread, and let it hang without harm; then treat the wound with old cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment, and then cure it.
Et se tu copes toute la scrophule, si covient que tu assembles les II levres de la plaie, et les cout maintenant, puis qu’il n’i a point demoreit de superfluiteit por la grandor de la scrophule.	And if you cut around the entire scrofula, then you should bring together the two lips of the wound and sew them up now, since there is no longer any surplus due to the size of the scrofula.
si covient que tu entendes a coper la racine de li, et traire fuer, et la cout si com nos avons dit.	you should proceed to cut around the root of it and pull it out, then sew it up as we have said.
Celles scrophules que tienent superfluiteit, perce lai ou il apert meure; et la perce ensi com celle devant dite, en dependant, puis i amenistre tentes avec oignement et semblans choses, si qu’elle corrompe ceu qui est demorez de la corruption; et quant li plaie est bien mundee, si la cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Scrofula that holds surplus material, pierce it where it appears to be dying; and pierce it as previously described, hanging from the wound, then apply poultices with ointment and similar things so that it corrupts what remains of the corruption; and once the wound is clean, use ointment to encourage the growth of flesh until it is healed.
de squinance	of scrofula
Li ancien dirent et parlerent de la tailleure de la gorge; mais je ne vis onques en nostre terre qui la feist, et c’est li escripture de lor parole.	The ancients spoke of throat surgery, but I have never seen it done in our land, and this is the record of their words.
A ces qui ont squinance, il covient que li fendure de la gorge qui est apelee «epiglote» soit eschuee; et c’on ne faice aide par ceu, por ceu que toutes les voines et li pormon dou malaide sont a ces qui ont aposteme chaut en la bouche, ou en la gorge ou en .ij. amandres.	For those with scrofula, the flap of flesh in the throat called the "epiglottis" should be cut away; and this is done to help those with an abscess that is hot in the mouth, or in the throat, or in both armpits.
Quant li maladie est en la chenal dou pormon, il covient coper l’epiglote por fuir la perdition qui vient de l’estranglement.	When the disease is in the channel of the windpipe, it is necessary to cover the epiglottis to avoid the danger that comes from strangulation.Si li maladie est en la gorge, il covient que tu fendures la gorge et li pormon dou costé, car il ne peut aler si non.
Il covient donques, quant nos volons fendre l’epiglote, que nos le fendons desoz III cercles ou IIII une petite fendure dou travers, entre les II cercles ou par la quantiteit de la fendure dou syfac, ne mie en la cartillaige; et cil leus si est covenaubles a la section de l’epiglote qu’il n’i a point de char, et li vasseil sont lonc d’enqui.	Therefore, when we want to split the epiglottis, we should split it below three circles or four at a small slit across the two circles, or depending on the size of the slit, not in the cartilage; and those places which are suitable for splitting the epiglottis where there is no flesh, and the vessels are long within.
Et se li maistres est paourous, si covient qu’il estende le cuir de la gorge a tout l’oncine, puis fende lou keur tant qu’il viegne a la cheneil; et eschue les vasselz de sanc, se tu vois aucune chose, et puis cope lou syfac, si com nos avons dit; et est demostrez par la section dou fleume de la cheneil ki saut fuer par le leu qui est rompus, et par la defaute de la voix; et laisse la plaie overte une piece.	And if the master is fearful, he should stretch the skin of the throat to the Adam's apple, then split the windpipe until it reaches the larynx; and avoid the blood vessels, if you see any, and then close the wound, as we have said; and it is demonstrated by the section of the windpipe of the larynx which jumps out through the hole that is broken, and by the loss of voice; and leave the wound open for a while.
Et quant li houre est passee de coi on doute l’estranglement, assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie dou keur, et la cout toute soule sens la cartillaige; puis aministre medicines qui font naistre char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the hour has passed of which one doubts the strangulation, bring together the two lips of the wound from the heart, and sew it up completely without the cartilage; then administer remedies that promote flesh growth until it is healed.
Albucasim dist c’on ne faice ce jusc’a tant que li gorge est toute estoupee, et li malaides est jugiez a mort, et li defaut li alaine.	Albucasim says one should not do this until the throat is completely swollen, and the patient judged dead, and the lack of breath evident.
Adonques cope on l’epiglote por ceu que li malaides ne puet alener, et il respire par la plaie, et ensi est gardez de mort; et por ce commanderent li anciain a laissier la plaie overte tant que li malice de la maladie soit passee, et elle est passee en III jors ou en IIII Et adonques il comanderent a coudre la plaie et curer, tant qu’elle fut curee; et je vos dirai ceu que je vis.	And then cover the epiglottis so that the patient cannot choke, and he breathes through the wound, and thus is guarded from death; and because of this, the ancients commanded to leave the wound open until the malice of the disease was passed, and it passed in three or four days. And then they commanded to sew up the wound and to treat it, once it was healed; and I will tell you what I saw.
Je vis que une damoisele prist I coutel, et le ficha en sa gorge, et copa partie des chenelz dou pormon; et je fui apelez por li curer, et la trovai ausi com morte.	I saw a maiden take a knife and thrust it into her throat, and cut part of the muscles of her neck; and I was called to heal her, and found her as dead.
Je descovris la plaie, et trovai le sanc qui en estoit issus, et soi bien qu’elle n’avoit mie copeit voine ne conduit fuer que la gorge, et li vens issoit fuer par la plaie.	I uncovered the wound and found that blood had issued from it, and I judged that she had not coughed up any blood or vomited anything other than through her throat, and the blood was coming out through the wound.
Je me hastai, et cousi la plaie, et la curai tant qu’elle fut sanee; et n’avint a la damoisele fuer qu’elle fut roge de voix, et revint aprés a sa disposition; por ceu di je que en la tailleure de l’epiglote n’ait mie paour.	I hurried and sewed up the wound, and healed her until she was cured; and the maiden had no scar but that her voice was hoarse, and afterward she returned to her former state; therefore I say that one should have no fear of cutting the epiglottis.
de la grosse gorge	of the large throat
Cist apostemes est apelez «hernie de gorge», et est uns grans apostemes en color d’une jaisse, et est molt en femmes; et est selonc II manieres: naturez, et accidens; ou natureil n’a point d’engien.	This hernia is called "hernia of the throat," and it is a large abscess the color of a grape, and it occurs often in women; and there are two types: natural and accidental; the natural type has no cause.The accidental type occurs when something becomes stuck in the throat and the person tries to vomit it out but cannot. Instead, the object is forced into the windpipe and causes an abscess there. The patient suffers great pain and, if not treated quickly, dies. If the object is large, such as a bone, it must be cut up with a knife before it can be extracted from the throat.
Et li accidens est selonc II manieres, de coi l’une est semblans a gras nous, et li autre maniere est semblans a aposteme qui vient de nous d’artere; et il i ait paour, et ne covient mie ovrer de feir fuers que en celi qui est petite, et le prueve et cerche a tout l’intromissoire: se tu le trueves ausi com I nout gras, et ne pent a nulle voine, si le cope, si com on cope les nous, et le trai a tout sa coife, s’il en i a point; et encerche bien tot, et le cure si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	And the accidents are according to two ways, one of which is similar to a cyst, and the other way is like an abscess that comes from an artery; and there is fear, and it is not appropriate to operate by making incisions except in the small ones, and test and examine all the entrance: if you find it just as the cyst, and cannot be opened at all, cut it, just as we cut a cyst, and treat it throughout its coat, if there is any; and examine thoroughly, and cure it as it should be, until it is perfectly healed.
des nous	of us
Maintes manieres de nous sont, dont je dirai toutes les semblances; et or covient que je die toute la difference qui est entre nout et issue.	There are many types of cysts, of which I will describe all the similarities; and now I must explain all the differences between a cyst and an abscess.
Je dis que issue est chalors et fievre tenans, tant que li ebulicions est passee, et est acomplie li porriture; adonques repose li fievre et li chalor.	I say that childbirth is a fever and heat that lasts until the delivery is complete and the placenta is expelled; then the fever and heat subside.
Avec lou nout n’a ne chalor ne fievre ne dolor, et contient I syfac, qui est ses propres sac et est selonc la color dou cors, et encomence ausi com une jaisse, et devient gros; et sont selonc ij semblances, ou grais, ou moiste, et mout de color sont si com j’ai dit en la division.	With a cyst, there is no heat, fever or pain, and it contains pus, which is its own sac and is according to the color of the body; it starts like a pimple and becomes swollen; and they are according to two appearances, dry or moist, and their colors are as I have said in the division.
Il covient, quant tu viens a la cure dou nout, que tu esprueves et l’enquier premierement a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», selonc ce que sa forme venra ou chapistre qui est aprés.	It is necessary, when you come to the treatment of the pustule, that you examine and inquire into it first with all the instruments called "entromissoires", according to what its form will allow, as described in the chapter that follows.
Et li maniere de l’inquisicion des apostemes des nous est que tu preignes ou plus moiste leu que tu trueves en l’aposteme, et torne tes dois poc et poc, tant que tu saiches que li estrumens ait perciet le keur, puis que ce soit selonc la grandor de l’aposteme; puis estrai l’entromissoire, et pren garde en ceu que saut fuer.	And the manner of inquiring into abscesses in the brain is to squeeze in the wettest place that you find in the abscess, and twist your fingers little by little, until you feel that the instrument has pierced the core; then, according to the size of the abscess, extract the instrument and take care not to let anything escape.
Se moistor corrans cort, queil color elle ait, si le fent si com j’ai dit des autres apostemes; et se aprés l’entromissoire nen vient moistor, saiches qu’il est gras, si le fent donques en croix, et le prent as pinceures, et l’escorche legierement de chescune part et warde la cotte ou il gist que tu la traies saine avec le nout; et se tu ne la pues traire saine, si la trai par pieces si qu’il n’i demoure rien.	If the pus runs clear, whatever color it may be, they should proceed as I have said for other abscesses; and if after the instrument no pus comes out, know that it is solid, so they should cut into it in the shape of a cross, seize it with forceps, and gently scrape away the skin on each side, guarding the membrane underneath which they draw it out intact; and if they cannot draw it out intact, then they should cut it away piece by piece until nothing remains.
Car s’il i demoure rien, si revient li nous par maintes fois; et s’il en demore un poc, et li sans te grieve, si emple la plaie d’aucunes poudres corrosives agues, et estraint la plaie, et met sus choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li nous est grans, si cout les II levres de la plaie, et le cure de ceu qui enjanre char.	If it stays nothing, it will return to the nose many times; and if something remains, without causing you grief, employ corrosive powders on the wound, constrict the wound, and apply hot poultices for abscesses, and treat with other remedies until healed; and if the nostril is large, cut both lips of the wound, and treat with that which produces pus.
et se li voine batans t’est contraire ou autre si te haste et emple le leu de vitriole broiet, et lou laisse liiet .ij. jors ou .iij., tant que li plaie porrisse, et repose li ebulicion dou sanc; puis revien au coper ceu que i est demoreit dou nout.	and if the wound is bleeding profusely or otherwise behaving contrary to how it should, then hasten and apply ground vitriol, and leave it for two or three days until the wound scabs over; then return to using what was previously effective.
Vez ci les formes des estrumens entromissoires, et sont de III manieres: grans et moien et petit; et s’en i a III quarrez qui sont apelez «albaret», et I qui est apelez «breb», et s’en i a de III manieres: grant, moien, et petit, por encerchier les apostemes de fistule; et sont ausi com les aguilles dont on cout les sorceles, et sont d’arain citrin, ou de fer, ou d’argent, et mues valent cil qui sont jaune, et sont plus esprovez de plonc noir por encerchier les corbeures de fistule; et sont de III manieres: grans, moiens, et petis, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce des pertus.	Here are the forms of the trocar, which are of three kinds: large, medium, and small; and there are three types of holes that are called "albaret", and one that is called "breb"; and there are also three kinds: large, medium, and small, according to the quantity of the width of the openings.
Les formes des oncines sont de mout de semblances, si com tu vois ci: grans, moiens, et petis; et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures de III manieres ausi; et si a oncines qui ont III corbeures, et sont ausi de III manieres; et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures, et oncines d’une corbeure soulement, et sont de III manieres; et tuit cist sont necessaire en lor leu.	The shapes of warts are very varied, as you can see: large, medium, and small; and there are warts that have two curves in three ways; and there are warts that have three curves, and they are also in three ways; and there are warts that have two curves, and warts with only one curve, and they are in three ways; and all of these are necessary in their place.
Li chief de ces a coi on fent sont trenchant, et de telz i a qui ne taillent mie fuer que d’une part, dont on escorche les nous, por ceu c’on ne cope la voine ne le nerf; et de ces intromissoires sont les alemeles reponues en mainches, si que li malaide ne s’en persoivent a l’overture des apostemes; et sont de III manieres: grant, petit, et moien, si com tu vois; et n’en use on mie fuer que en leu charnut, si com jambes, et bras, et mameles, et as angres, et en semblans leus; et aucune fois fait on I autre estrument petit, semblant a escorces de fistices, selonc ceste forme, a coi on estainche sanc:	The heads of these knives have cutting edges, and some only cut from one side, so that the vein or nerve is not cut; and these instruments are used in many ways, so that the patient does not suffer when opening abscesses; and they are in three forms: large, small, and medium, as you can see; and they are only used on fleshy parts, such as legs, arms, breasts, and similar places; and sometimes another small instrument is made, similar to a slice of wood, according to this form, with which blood is stopped.
et le met on aucune fois au leu qui saine a copement des voines, et as arteres, et aucune fois reont selonc ceste grant forme:	and sometimes it is placed in the place that heals by opening veins and arteries, and sometimes they are bound according to this large form;
Aucune fois enflent les mameles d’aucuns homes quant cil encomencent estre corrumput, tant qu’eles semblent mameles de feme; et demorent laides et enflees, et qui les vuet curer, si le covient soier selonc ceste forme des ceste ligne .b. jusques a .g.:	At times the breasts of some men swell when they become corrupt, looking like women's breasts; and they remain ugly and swollen. Anyone who wishes to treat them should follow this recipe from line b to g:
puis escorche la graisse, et emple la plaie de medicine enjanrant char, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie a costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et se li mamele cline aval, et est amolie por sa grandor si com il avient as femmes, si la fent en II costelz desus, par II semblans fendures; de coi l’une soit tenans a l’autre a la fin de l’une et de l’autre, si que li plus grans ligne conteigne la menor selonc ceste forme, des ceste ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.; puis escorche le cuir qui est entre les II levres, et oste la graisse, et i amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de costure et de poudres, et ceu qui est necessaire en la cure, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez, ou li incision n’est mie toute faite, por ceu que li malaides ne vuet reposer, ou por le decorrement de sanc, si covient que tu emplisses la plaie de coton moilliet en oignement corrosif; et le laisse tant qu’il menjuce le remenant et la graisse, puis le cure tant qu’il soit saneis.	Afterward, scrape off the fat and treat the wound with a caustic poultice, then bring together the two lips of the wound with stitches, and heal it until it is cured; and if the breast sags downward and becomes soft due to its size as happens to women, then make two slits on it from above in the shape of similar cuts; so that one side holds the other at the end of one slit and the other slit, so that the larger slit contains the smaller according to this form, from line b to g; then scrape off the skin between the two lips, remove the fat, and administer what we have said about stitches and powders, and whatever is necessary in the treatment until it is healed. If it is not healed or the incision is not fully done due to the patient's discomfort or blood flow, you should fill the wound with moist cotton in a corrosive ointment; and leave it until it absorbs the remainder of the fat and the skin, then heal it until it is cured.
des apostemes des asselles	of abscesses of the armpits
Cist apostemes que vienent desoz les asseles sont manieres de scrophules dures ou il ait cotes, et s’en i a que contienent moistor.	These abscesses which come under the armpits are types of hard scrofula where there are nodules, and some contain moisture.
Cil donques qui contienent moistor covient qu’il soient copez selonc ceste forme, des la ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.:	Those who contain moisture should be cut according to this form, from line .b. to line .g.:
Et quant toute li bowe qui est en l’aposteme est vuidie, si emple la plaie de viel coton, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor, puis oste tout le coton, et cure d’oignement avenant a ceu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when all the bowels which are in the abscess have been emptied, employ the wound with old cotton, and leave it until the next day; then remove all the cotton and treat it with appropriate ointment until it is healed.
Et se li apostemes est de semblances de scrophules, si le fent si com nos avons dit en fendures des scrophules, et se li plaie rent bowe, si amenistre cautere si com nos avons dit devant.	And if the abscess is of the appearance of scrofula, they should proceed as we have said in slits for scrofula; and if the wound becomes swollen, they should apply cauterization as we have said previously.Et se li apostemes est desoz le col ou desoz les asseles, si covient que il soit fendu a la radice selonc la ligne m. jusc’a la ligne .g., car en cest lieu il conviens que il soit fenduz selonc la ligne de la nature.
de la routure de l’artere	on the rot of an artery
Quant li artere est route, et li cuir est soudez qui est sus, si en vient maintes fois apostemes, et tout aussi avient il a la voine enflee et aposteme; et si le conoist on ensi quant c’est por l’artere, si est li apostemes lons em parfont; et quant tu le sens a tes dois, si sens I estraignement; et quant c’est por la voine, si est reons defuer aparans; et c’est folie de coper cest aposteme, et meismement quant il est desoz les asseles et as angres et ou col et em mout d’autres leus, et est mout grans.	When the artery is open and the skin above it, this often leads to abscesses, and also causes the vein to swell and become abscessed; and one can recognize this when it is due to the artery, as the abscesses are long and deep; and when you feel it with your fingers, there is a tugging sensation; and when it is due to a vein, there is a hard lump beneath the skin; and it is foolishness to cover these abscesses, especially when they are on the joints and at the angles and in the neck and many other places, and they are large.
Il covient donques eschuir la cure de fer, et celui qui est a chief covient eschuir ausi, et en celui qui est d’enfleure d’artere fent par desus le cuir dou lonc; puis oevre la taille as oncines, et depart bellement l’artere des toiles, tant qu’ele soit descoverte; puis boute desoz li une aguille, et la fai percier jusc’a l’autre costeit, et estraint l’artere d’un fil double en II leus, selonc ceu que je t’ai ensigniet en l’estraction des II arteres qui sont en temples; puis point le leu qui est entre les II liens d’un intromissoire tant que li sans en isse qui i est, et soit deliiez li aposteme; puis amenistre la cure que enjanre bowe, tant que li liien chient; puis cure ceu d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li apostemes est por la taille de la voinne, si covient que tu teignes a ta main ceu que tu pues de l’aposteme a tout le cuir, puis boute l’aguille desoz le leu que tu tiens a ta main, et la fai percier, et i ait I fil double, si que tu le trais de l’autre costeit; puis lie l’aposteme, si com je t’ai dit, ou liien de l’une de II pars as II chiés dou fil; et se tu doutes que li filz n’isse fuer, si i reboute une autre aguille a tout I fil desoz tout l’aposteme a l’incision de la premiere aguille, et estraint les filz en IIII leus; puis cope l’aposteme tant que li superfluitez en isse, puis cope la superfluiteit dou keur et laisse ceu qui est liiez; puis met sus I drapeil moilliet en vin et en oile, puis li amenistre cures de tentes et d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	Therefore one should avoid cauterizing with iron, and if it is on the head, one should also avoid cauterizing there; and when it is an abscess due to a swollen artery, one should cut through the skin above it along its length, and then carefully cut away the artery from the surrounding tissue, so that it is exposed; then insert a needle beneath the skin at the center of the abscess, and pierce it all the way through to the other side, and tie off the artery with a double thread in two places, according to how I instructed you for the extraction of the two temporal arteries; then poke the spot between the two threads with an introducer until the pus comes out, and then release the abscess; then apply a poultice of hot bowels, until the thread cuts through the skin; then treat it with suitable ointments until it is healed; and if the abscess is due to an incision in the vein, one should take some of the pus from the abscess and smear it over all the surrounding skin, and then insert a needle beneath where one is holding the pus on their hand, and pierce it through so that there are two threads, and tie off the artery with a double thread at three places; then lance the abscess so that the excess pus comes out, and then lance the pus from the skin and leave what is tied; then place a moistened cloth in wine and oil over it, and treat it with tenting and ointments until it is healed.
des apostemes des ners	of abscesses of the nerves
Ausi com aposteme vienent en l’artere et en la voine, vienent aposteme as ners quant il sont ferut, ou par trop grant travail, et semblans choses.	Also, as abscesses come in the arteries and veins, they come to the nerves when they are wounded, or from too much work, and similar things.
Et ceu avient plus sovent as adjutoires et as dois et en toz leus ou il ait jointures, et c’est I grief apostemes, et sa color semble la color dou cors, et est em plusors dispositions sens dolor; et quant on l’estraint forment, si sent li malaides dolor, et n’est mie em parfont dou cors, mais desoz lou keur; et muet bien de toutes pars, et ne va ne avant ne arrier, ne desoz ne desus, et celui qui est en jointures ne covient mie coper par fer: par aventure i vanroit contraction; et cil qui est ou chief ou ou front, fent le cuir au spatumile.	And this happens more often in the shoulders and elbows and all over where there are joints, and it is a painful abscess, and its color resembles the color of the body, and it is in various states without pain; and when one presses on it hard, the patient feels pain, and it is not deep in the body, but under the skin; and it is mute everywhere, and does not move forward or backward, or down or up, and that which is in joints should not be covered with iron: by chance there might be contraction; and for that which is on the head or forehead, use the spathumile.
Se li apostemes est petis, si le tien a unes tenailles, et le cope en sa racine; et s’il est grans, si le sospent a l’oncine, et l’escorche, puis l’oste et assemble la plaie a la costure, et lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the abscess is small, hold it with tweezers and squeeze it at its root; and if it is large, slit it with a knife, and scrape it, then cut out the bone and close the wound with stitches, and let it heal.
des grosses boces pendans	large bumps hanging
Aucune fois avient en ventres et ne mie autre part thelul, et est une maladie qui est apelee «funge» par la semblance d’aus, et est li racine subtilz, et li chiez gros; et en i a de petis et de mout grans; et je vis I home qui en avoit II ou ventre qui estoient plus semblans a funges que ai autre chose, et n’i avoit point de difference, et estoient blanc, et avoient menue racine, et estoient jai fendut, et en corroit adés moistor.	At times it occurs in the belly and nowhere else; it is a disease called "fungus" due to its resemblance to ears, with thin roots and thick branches. There are both small and very large ones. I saw a man who had two on his abdomen that looked more like fungi than anything else, without any difference between them, white in color, with thin roots, and split open, from which moisture flowed.
Je les copai et trovai en l’un XVIII onces pesant, et en l’autre VI З., et li ovraiges en l’incision si est que tu regardes se li malaides est moistes, et li color de l’artelul est blainche et moiste et de subtil racine; si le cope au spatumile large, et soient en ta presence li cautere au feu.	I cut them open and found one weighing 18 ounces and the other 6 ounces; the treatment for the incision is such that you examine whether the disease is moist, and the color of the joint is white and moist with thin roots; then apply the spatula widely, and have the fire cautery ready in your presence.
Car au taillier vient maintes fois trop grans decorremens de sanc, et se li sans te vaint, si te haste donques dou cauterizer; et se tu vois le malaide espoanteit et paourous de l’incision dou fer, si prent I fil de plonc bien fait, et en lie l’artelul si com nos avons dit, et le laisse II jors; et puis le restraint, et ne cesser d’estraindre lou fil de plonc tant qu’il cope l’artelul, et chiece par lui sens travail; et se les racines sont grosses, si a paour au coper meismement por le ventre, mais tu em pues bien coper la moitiet, puis le cauterize qu’il ne reviegne; puis cure la plaie, et garde que tu ne coper le thelul qui est de fuxe color et de povre sens et de lait regart.	Because there are often excessive bloodlettings when cutting, and if the blood flows, then quickly apply the cautery; and if you see the disease is frightened and fearful of the iron incision, take a well-prepared thread and tie the joint as we have said, and leave it for two days; then restrain it, and do not stop tightening the thread until he cuts the joint, and through him without pain; and if the roots are large, then have fear of cutting the abdomen in the same way, but you can cut half of it, then cauterize so that it does not return; then treat the wound, and be careful not to cut the abdomen which is of pale color and poor sense and of milky appearance.
Car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, et je venrai a la cure de chancre ci aprés.	For this is an encrusted abscess, and I will come to the treatment of cancer next.
quant li boude ist fuer	when the boil bursts
Se li apparance de la boude vient par cautere de plaie ou de fendure de syfac, et est sus le ventre et en ist aucuns des bouez, si com il avient en autres routures, ou de sanc qui cort de voines ou d’arteres selonc ceu qui est devant, ou de ventositeit; et se c’est par la routure dou syfac et par l’issue dou bouel, si est li color de l’aposteme semblans a la color dou cors, et est legiere chose sens dolor, et apert de diverse issue.	If the appearance of the boil comes from cauterizing a wound or a fissure in the sinus, and it is on the abdomen and in some of the bowels, as happens in other routs, or from blood that flows from veins or arteries according to what is mentioned above, or from wind; and if it is from the rout of the sinus and from the output of the bowel, then the color of the abscess is similar to the color of the body, and it is a slight thing without pain, and it opens from various outputs.
Et se c’est por l’issue de l’intestine, adonques est il plus divers, et quant on le presse a ses dois si se repont, et puis revient, et par aventure si est sarrez, et agrandist mout a l’entree dou bain et por fort travail.	And if it is due to the protrusion of the intestine, then it is more varied; and when one presses it with their hands, it retreats, and then comes back out, and sometimes it is blocked, and increases significantly at the entrance of the bath and with intense effort.
Et se c’est por moistor, c’est legiere chose, et apert bien quant tu le presses a ta main, ne ne constraint mie; et se c’est por sanc, si apert par ces signes li apostemes gros et dur, et est fichiez selonc une quantiteit; et se c’est por ventositeit, si est souef au tochier, et li ovraiges si est que tu regarde se li apparance est por le sanc de l’artere, ou de la voine, ou ventositeit.	If it is due to moisture, it is a slight thing, and it opens well when you press it with your hand, and it does not constrain; and if it is from blood, then the abscesses are large and hard, and they are fixed according to a quantity; and if it is from wind, then it is soft to the touch, and the actions are that you should look to see if the appearance is from blood in the artery or vein, or wind.
Si covient que tu laisses la cure.	Then you must let it heal.
Car il en a doutance et paor, si com je t’ai dit ou chapistre des apostemes, por l’artere et por la voine.	For there is doubt and fear, as I told you in the chapter on abscesses, because of the artery and vein.
Et se li apparance est por l’intestine ou lou boueil, si covient que tu comandes au malaide qu’il teigne son alaine, et soit estendus tout drois, puis seigne d’enche tout entor la boude; puis le comande a gesir sovin entre tes mains, puis va entor le leu que tu as signiet a tout le spatumile, puis estent la moitiet de l’aposteme au desus a tout le grant uncine; puis le lie entor d’un fil fort, ou d’une corde de fort soie fermement, et soit li nous dou liien assolz; puis oevre la moitiet de l’aposteme estendut sus le liien, et i boute ton doit indice, et quier l’intestine; se tu le trueves pris dou liien, si le deslie, et boute l’intestine au defuer dou ventre; et se tu trueves le boueil, si le prent a l’oncine, et en cope la superfluiteit; et se li artere te fait contraire, ou li voine, si vai belement entor, puis revien a ton ovraige et pren II aguilles, et i boute II fors filz, et boute les II aguilles entor ceu que tu as fait en crois que tu feis percier; puis estrain l’aposteme en IIII leus sus les aguilles, et se tu vues, oste les aguilles, et laisse lou leu tant qu’il porrisse, et chiece li char morte par soi; ou tu la cope quant elle iert subtiliie et porrie, puis le cure de ceu qu’il covient, et cheve l’aposteme si com nos avons dit; et estrai le sanc ou la moistor que tu trueves, puis cure le leu de ceu qu’il couvient, et soude le leu.	And if the appearance is in the intestines or bowels, then you must command the patient to tighten his belly and be stretched out straight, then sign around the swollen area; then command him to lie still between your hands, then go around the place where you have made the incision all around the spasticity; then stretch out half of the abscess above the string, then tie it tightly with a strong thread or strong silk cord, and release the bowels; then open the other half of the abscess stretched over the string, and probe the intestines; if you find it caught in the string, then untie it and pull out the intestines from the abdomen; and if you find the bowels, then take them at the incision and cut off the excess; and if the artery makes a noise, or the vein, then go around gently, then return to your work and take two needles, and thread them with two strong threads, and pierce through where you have made the cross incision; then pull out the abscess in four places with the needles, and if you see any, remove the needles and let the place heal as it can, and cut away the dead flesh by itself; or when it becomes thin and healable, then clean it as it should be, and treat the abscess as we have said; then draw out the blood or moisture that you find, then clean the area as it should be, and stitch the wound.
dou chancre	from sores
Nos avons dit en la division les semblances de chancre, et coment on i doit ovrer par medicines, et coment on doit eschuer la cure de fer; et disons le chancre enjanreit en la marris, et grant cautele a en la cure, et dirent li ancien que quant chancres est en leu ou on le puet raier si com chancre qui est em mameles, et en la cuixe, et en semblans leus, et le doit tout oster quant il est en l’encomencement; et quant il est grans et anciens, si ne covient mie que tu l’aproches, car je n’en poi onques nul saner; ne nulz n’en sana onques devant moi.	We have discussed in the division the likenesses of sores, and how one should work with medicines, and how one must avoid the cure by iron; and we speak of sores which are found in the genitals, and great caution is needed in their treatment. The ancient ones say that when sores are in a place where they can be scratched, like sores found on breasts, or thighs, or similar places, then one should completely remove them when they are in their beginning stage. But when they are large and old, one should not touch them, for I have never been able to heal any such sores, nor has anyone healed them before me.
Et li ovraiges, quant il est en leu ou on le puet oster, si com nos avons dit, est que tu purge aucune fois le malaide de cole noire; puis le fai sainier s’il ait manifeste repletion, puis afaite le malaide .i. boin leu por faire l’ovraige; puis giete tes oncines ou chancre, et le cheve de toutes pars, et l’oste de toutes pars sens rien laissier; et laisse corre le sanc tout fuer, et espreint bien le leu a ta main ou a aucune chose, et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire de l’incision de l’artere ou de la voine, si le cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the sore is in a place which can be removed, as we have said, it is that you purge the patient with black bile; then make him satiated if there is manifest repletion, then open the sore gently 1 inch wide to perform the operation; then cut the flesh of the sore, and the skin and fat from all around it, leaving nothing behind; and let the blood flow out freely, and press the wound with your hand or something else, and if the bleeding from the artery or vein causes a pulse, cauterize it until the pulse stops; then treat the wound further until it is healed.
de ydropisie	of dropsy
Nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’idropisie, et en queil maniere li assemblee de l’aigue est faite, et les signes de chescune semblance, et la cure qui est faite par medicines, et cele qui est curee par fer: si est eclites soulement; et ne doit on touchier de fer en ces II semblances: c’est a savoir, tympanites et yposarche, car c’est mortelz chose; donques quant tu medicines ceste semblance de ydropisie qui est apelee «eclites» de medicines, et li cure ne profite, si regarde se li malaides est foibles, ou s’il ait autre maladie que ydropisie, si com toust et solution de ventre et semblans choses; si n’i touchier de fer, car il i a doutance; et se tu vois le malaide de fort vertut, et il n’a autre maladie que ydropisie soulement, et il n’est mie trop jones ne trop vielz, si dois ensi ovrer: lieve le malaide droit sus tes mains, et li ministres presse le ventre em boutant l’aigue a la plus basse partie dou pis, puis pren le spatumile espinous selonc ceste forme:	We have already discussed in the division the appearances of dropsy, and how the gathering of water is caused, and the signs of each appearance, and the treatment which is carried out with medicine, and that which is cured by iron. Only these two appearances are mentioned; and one must not use iron on them: they are tympany and hydropsy, for they are deadly conditions. So when you treat this appearance of dropsy, called tympany, with medicines, and the cure does not help, then consider whether the patient is feeble or has another illness besides dropsy, such as a swollen stomach and similar things; in that case, do not use iron, for there is doubt involved. But if you see the patient is of robust health and has no other illness than dropsy alone, and is neither too young nor too old, then one must act thus: lift the patient straight up and press their belly towards the lowest part of their feet to force out the water, then take the spathonis spine according to this form:
Et soit trenchans de II pars.	And cut into two parts.
a pointe, et toutevoie ne soit mie si entrans qu’il puist venir jusc’a l’intestine quant on le fiche ens, et ne le puist blecier; puis regarde se li ydropisie est enjanree devers les intestines: si covient que tu fendes ensus de la boude III dois droit desoz sus lou poignil; et se li ydropisie est por la maladie dou foie, si soit ta fendure au senestre de la boude III dois; et se c’est por la miuce, si soit a destre, et ne covient mie que li malaides gise sus la fendure que les superfluitez ne corrent a celui foible leu; puis perce tout le cuir a l’estrument, et le boute, et lieve ta main a tout le spatumile entre le cuir et le syfac ausi com en escorchant a la quantiteit d’une ungle ou enqui entor; puis perce lou syfac tant que li spatumile viegne au leu vuit, et c’est li leus de l’aigue, puis le trai fuer, et i boute cest estrument de coi ci est li forme:	And cut into two parts. A point, and yet not so deeply that it can reach the intestines when inserted, nor can it cause bleeding; then examine if the hydrocephalus is located towards the intestines: in this case, you should make a cut three fingers' width straight below the armpit; and if the hydrocephalus is due to liver disease, the incision should be made on the left side of the armpit; and if it is due to diarrhea, then on the right. It is important that the patient does not lie on the incision so that the excess fluids do not flow towards the weakened area. Then pierce the skin with the instrument, and insert it, releasing your hand as you move between the skin and the syphons, similar to skinning a finger or an egg; then pierce the syphon until the fluid flows out, indicating the location of the water, then draw it out, and insert this instrument from which the water comes:
Et est semblans a une caine d’argent subtil, et est d’arain ou d’archaut legier, et a en la partie desoz I petit pertus; et ou costeit d’une part, III pertus; et II d’autre part, et I d’autre; et est li chiés tailliez si com une penne, et c’est li forme de l’incision dont li escrivains taille la penne:	And it is similar to a silver-colored wire, made of thin bronze or light brass, and has in the lower part a small hole; and on one side there are three holes, two on the other side, and one on the other; and the head is cut like a feather, and this is the shape of the incision that scribes use to cut the pen:
au chief desus est li alemele, si que quant li estrumens vient a l’aigue, si dessent maintenant sus l’estrument; vuide la donques la moitiet ou la tierce part, car se tu en vuides plus qu’il ne covient en celle houre, par aventure si muert li malaides por la resolution de son esperit de l’arme, ou il chiet paumez, ou il aproche a la mort; mais en vuide selonc la quantiteit de sa vertut, et selonc ceu que les dispositions de la vertut dou malaide signifient, et ses poulz; puis trai l’estrument et retien l’aigue, et elle est retenue maintenant por le keur qui estoupe le pertus qui est sus le syfac, de coi j’ai parleit, que tu perces selonc ceste maniere; puis rencomence l’estrument l’autre jor, se tu vois le malaide soffrant ceu, et trai de l’aigue une petite quantiteit; fai ce aucun jor, et te garde de foloier tant qu’il ni demore mais c’un poc d’aigue.	at the top of which is the alembic, so that when the instrument comes to a boil, it descends immediately into the instrument; empty half or a third of it, for if you empty more than is proper at that hour, the patient may die due to the escape of his spirit through the weapon, or he may fall unconscious, or approach death; but empty according to the quantity of his strength, and according to what the dispositions of his strength signify, as well as his pulses; then withdraw the instrument and retain the water, which is now retained by the cork that stops the aperture on the syphon, about which I have spoken, that you pierce in this manner; then resume the instrument the next day, if you see the patient enduring it, and draw off a small quantity of water; do this every day, and beware of letting go until there is no more water but a little.
Et se tu doutes sus le malaide, et tu i lais mout d’aigue, si le cure de la sepulture ou sablon chaut, et par mout sueir ou bain et au soleil, et se teigne de boivre; et le cure de medicines desiccatives tant qu’il soit sanez, et cauterize sus l’estomac et sus lou foie et sus l’esplen aprés l’estraction de l’aigue, si com j’ai dit devant.	And if you doubt the illness, leave it be and apply hot earth or sand, and with much sweating or bathing in the sun, and drinking tea; and treat with medicines that dry up until he is cured, and cauterize the stomach and liver and spleen after extraction of the water, as I have said before.
de l’estopement de la verge	of the swelling of the penis
Aucune fois naissent enfant qui n’ont point de pertus en la verge, ou li pertus est petis, ou il n’est mie en son leu.	Sometimes children are born without an opening on their penis, or the opening is small and not in its proper place.
Si le covient tantost qu’il n’aist percier a tout I spatumile molt subtil selonc ceste forme:	If necessary, one must pierce it with a very fine instrument according to this form:
puis met ou pertus I clo subtil de plonc, et le lie et le tien ensi III jors ou IIII et quant il vuet faire urine, si soit ostez li clos, et faice urine, et puis li remet; et par aventure nen i couvient point, car li urine qui vient fuer ne lou laisse close.	Then put into the opening a subtle plug of lead, and tie it and leave it for three or four days, and when he wants to urinate, remove the plug and let him urinate, then replace it; and perhaps this is not needed at all, because the urine that comes out will open it on its own.
Cil de cui li pertus est petis, si est medicinez dou clo de plonc, si com nos avons dit, si s’eslargera.	Those whose passages are narrow, if they are medicated with a plug of wool, as we have said, will widen.
Cil qui n’ont mie le pertus en lor leu sont bleciet, car aucun naissent qui ont le pertus au chief de la verge, por coi il ne puient pissier avant s’il ne lievent lor verge en haut; et ne pueent enjanrer por ceu que li matiere ne puet venir jusc’a la marris, et c’est une male maladie.	Those who do not have an opening in their place are blocked; for some are born with the opening at the head of the penis, which prevents them from urinating unless they lift their penis upwards; and they cannot ejaculate because the material cannot reach the urethra, and this is a serious illness.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, puies estent le chief de la verge et le cope ausi com la taille d’une penne, si ke li pertus chiece em mileu, si com il covient; et te garde de decorrement de sanc qui i vient maintes fois, et s’il avient, si l’estainche de ceu qui estainche sanc, et cure la plaie tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the way to do it is for the patient to lie on his back, then the head of the penis and the foreskin are cut to the size of a feather, so that the opening is in the middle, as it should be; and beware of bleeding which often occurs, and if it does, stanch the flow of blood, and treat the wound until it heals.
des pustules de la verge	of the penis
Maintes fois vienent cist albathe en la verge, et est une apparance de char laide; et en i a malignes et non malignes; si covient que tu les preignes a .i. oncine subtil, et les cope et munde toutes, puis met sus coton moilliet en oignement egiptien; puis le cure d’oignement diafinicon tant qu’il soit sanez.	Many times these blisters come on the penis, and they have an unattractive appearance; and there are both malignant and non-malignant ones; so you must grasp them with a small, sharp knife, and cut away and clean all of them, then put on wet cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment; then treat it with diafinicon ointment until it is healed.
Et se li albathe est maligne, de pute color et depuant, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere.	And if the ulcer is malignant, discolored and foul-smelling, then you must apply cautery.
Quant tu l’as copeit, et se li albathe est en som la verge, et en ait partie dedens la peil et partie defuer, si covient que tu oste l’albathe qui est dedens premier; et quant il est soudez, si le cure defuer.	When you have cut it, and if the ulcer is on the shaft of the penis, and part of it is within the skin and part outside, then you must first remove the ulcer which is inside; and when it is healed, then cure the part outside.
Car quant tu le cures ensamble, si n’est mie asseurez li chiez de la verge qu’il ne soit perciez, et vient noiror et corruption en son la verge et ou coion; si covient chever tout ceu qui est noir et corrumput, puis lie sus l’emplaustre de miel et de farine qui soit fait d’escorce de poumes grenates et de veces, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	For when you treat it together, if the glans are not secured so that they are not pierced, and blackness and corruption come to the glans and the scrotum; then one must cut away all that is black and corrupted, then apply the ointment of honey and flour made from pomegranate rind andwalnuts, then treat it with other treatments until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si amenistre le cautere lunaire selonc ceste forme:	And if there is bleeding, apply the lunar cautery as follows:
Li cauteres si aide as II dispositions ensamble: c’est asavoir, au decorrement de sanc, et a la corruption; et se li chiés de la verge est corrumpus et retrais, si covient que tu boutes ou conduit de la verge une cainne de plonc, et pisse li malaides parmi; et quant li pelz iert aerse au chief de la verge qui avient a ces qui n’ont mie esteit circoncis, ou il avient por plaie ou por aposteme, si covient donques que tu l’escorches a I estrument cheveit, tant que li liiens soit desliiez, et soit delivrez li chiez de la verge de toutes pars; et se c’est grief chose de deviser ceu, si covient que tu l’escorches a I spatumile aucun poc dou chief de la verge et de la peil; puis dessevre belement entre II, et i met I subtil drapeil de lin moilliet an aigue froide, qu’il n’aerse derechief.	The cautery has two purposes: for bleeding and for corruption; and if the glans are腐 and retracted, one must insert a straw into the urethra and the patient should urinate through it; and when there is a sore or an abscess at the tip of the glans in those who have not been circumcised, one must then scrape away the skin with a sharp instrument, so that the foreskin is loosened and the glans is completely exposed; if this is painful to do, then one should scrape it with a spatulum made of wood, at the tip of the glans and through the skin; then separate them gently and place a thin damp linen cloth between them in cold water, so that they do not adhere again.
de la circoncision	On circumcision:
Circoncision n’est mie desliemens de continuation si com les autres plaies; toutevoie quant nos faison ceste oevre de nostre volenteit, et proprement as enfans, si est mestier que nos faisiens la millor oevre, et la plus legiere a salut.	Circumcision is not like other wounds in that it does not heal on its own; nevertheless, when we perform this procedure intentionally, especially on children, we must do the best and least harmful job.
Je dis que li ancien ne dirent mie la circoncision de lor enfans, car il n’en usent mie en lor loi, et n’en avons mais que ceu que nos avons aquis par experiment.	I say that the ancients did not speak of the circumcision of their children, for they did not use it in their law, and we have no more than what we have acquired by experience.
Car j’ai veut la plus grant partie des maistres et des sainors qui faisoient circumcision entor .i. dal, et as forces, et a tout une novacule; si fuioit li keurs car il i a .ij. toiles, et par aventure si cope on celi desus et demore celle desoz.	For I have seen the greater part of masters and surgeons who made circumcision around the foreskin, and in many places, and on any new-born; then the hymen would be cut because there are two membranes, and sometimes one is cut above and the other remains below.
Or la recovient coper, et est li dolor double, et a la mundification qui est dou dal n’est mie asseuree li pointe dou membre; et a la mundification de l’ungle par aventure eschaipe li fer, et corront l’uevre, et maintes fois naissent ensi qu’il n’ont mestier de mundification et je l’ai veut.	Now they recover quickly, and the pain is doubled, and in the cleaning which is done to the foreskin is not secure the tip of the member; and in the cleaning of the nail sometimes the iron slips and they ruin the work, and many times are born thus that they do not need cleaning, and I have seen it.
De la mondification qui est faite as forces a tout le liien de fil ai je troveit la bonteit de l’experiment, car les forces taillent justement ausi bien desus com desoz.	Of the cleaning that is done to the foreskin all over the thread I have found the goodness of the experiment, for the forces cut justly above as below.Or li fuit li doler qui tailla l’ungle, si doit il le tailler par fin et non pas par costé, car par fin il ne se peult mander; si doit il estre tailli par costé, et il faut qu’il soit tailli tant qu’il eschieve la chair.
Car quant tu presses ta main, si tailles igalment en I tout soul tens; mais que li filz soit bien estrois entor lou cuir; et soit li maniere dou premier ovraige si est que tu faices penser l’enfant, s’il entent, que tu ne li fais fuer que liier le fil entor la verge tant soulement, et pues le fai esjoir en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis le fai ester entre tes mains tout droit, et repont les forces entre tes mains ou desoz tes piez que li enfes ne les voie, ne aucun des estrumens; puis boute ta main a la verge et souffle ou keur, et la trai en haut tant que li chiés de la verge soit ens; puis la mundifie bien de l’ordure qui i est assemblee, puis lie le leu signiet d’un fil double, puis la lie desoz I poc a I autre liien; et la tien as II dois par la seconde lieeure au pouchet et au doit indice, et cope entre les II liiens, puis lieve le keur desus hastanment et trai le chief de la verge; puis laisse corre le sanc poc et poc, car c’est li muedres; et met poudre sus et sus la poudre I drapeil glueit d’un moieuf d’uef cuit destempreit d’aigue rose, confit avec oile roset boin et fres, et lou laisse sus jusc’a l’autre jor, et le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Because when you press your hand, you cut evenly into it all around; but the thread should be well-tied around the skin; and the manner of the first work is such that you make the child think, if he understands, that you are only tying the thread around the rod, and then you make him stretch in all the ways you can; then hold him straight between your hands, and support your weight between your hands or under your feet so that the child does not see any of the instruments; then put your hand to the rod and breathe on the wound, and pull it up until the head of the rod is inside; then cleanse it well from the dirt that has gathered there, then tie the place marked with a double thread, then tie it under the other end; and hold it with both hands by the second ligature at the pouch and the index finger, and press between the two ligatures, then lift the wound gently and pull the head of the rod; then let the blood flow little by little, for that is the pus; and put powder on top of the powder, a cloth glued with an egg cooked in rosewater, confit with good, fresh rosemary oil, and leave it on until the next day, and treat it again until it heals.
Li forme des forces a la mundification si est ceste: li dui chiés soient tenves et soient trenchans, et soient li chiés ausi grant com li mainche igalment:	The form of the foreskin after cleansing should be as follows: the two foreskins should be thin and pointed, and the foreskin should be as large as the palm of the hand evenly.
li error de la mundification si est quant li keurs dedens fuit a l’incision; donques il covient que tu l’estendes a ton ungle, ainsois que li leus faice aposteme; et le cope igalment, et se tu ne lou pues tenir a ton ungle, si le tien as tenailles, et puis le cope.	the error of purification is when the pus within the incision escapes; therefore you must extend it with your fingernail, so that the skin forms an abscess; and then cut it equally, and if you cannot hold it with your fingernail, hold it with tweezers and then cut.
Et s’il trespassent .iij. jors, et ceu qui est desoz la verge est enflez, si le laisse tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et l’escorche legierement; si le cope si com tu pues mues, et te garde de la partie de la verge, ce ne li nuira niant.	And if it persists for 3 days, and what is under the foreskin is swollen, let it be until the abscess has subsided and the skin is slightly peeled; then cut it as much as you can, and beware of the part of the foreskin, it will not harm him in any way.
Cure donques le leu de choses soudans plaie de poudre, que nos avons dit ou traitier des poudres, et s’on cope dou keur outre mesure, et il va au desus, si ne nuira point; cure le donques, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Therefore, treat the area of the wound with a soothing powder, as we have described in the treatise on powders; and if it cuts too deeply into the foreskin, and it goes above, it will not harm; therefore, cure it, as we have said, until it is healed.
dou retenement de l’urine	from the retention of urine:
Li retenue de l’urine si est d’opilation de piere, ou de sanc congeleit, ou de bowe, ou de char nee, ou de semblans choses, que nos avons dit en la division; et se li urine n’est desliie , et tu vois estre la retenue por la piere qui est jai ou col de la vessie, si covient que li malaides soit corbés sus ses genoulz; et li soient mis li piez sor le dos, et estende son ventre de la partie desus lou dos, et restraigne li malaides s’alainne tant com il puet; et adonques est constrains li colz de la vessie a l’expression de la piere au desus, por coi li urine est desliie e; et s’elle ne vient, si com nos avons dit, et li malaides sent grant dolor, si covient que tu i aministres extraction a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «siringue», de coi ci est li forme: et soit d’argent subtilz legiere chevee, si com li penne d’un oiseil; et soit li caine d’une palme de lonc et demie, et soit subtilz au chief.	The retention of urine is due to a stone, or congealed blood, or an obstruction in the bowel, or charred feces, or similar causes that we have mentioned in the division; and if the urine is not released, and you see it retained by a stone lodged at the neck of the bladder, then the patient should be bent over on his knees; and his feet placed on his back, and he should press his abdomen from above the back, and restrain himself as much as he can; and this forces the neck of the bladder to expel the stone upwards, thus releasing the urine. If it does not come out as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, then you must use a device called a "syringe", which is crafted like a feather, made of thin silver, as long as a bird's feather; the shaft should be half a palm in length, and thin at the tip.
Et li maniere de l’issue de l’urine si est que tu pren I fil double, et lie au chief I poc de laine ou de couton, et boute le chief dou fil dedens la siringue; et cope la superfluiteit de la lainne et le boute jusc’au chief de la siringue, puis oint la siringue d’oile ou de burre et d’aubin d’uef, et fai seoir le malaide sus I siege, et li arose la vessie et la verge d’oile moiste et d’oile d’olive et d’aigue tede; puis met legierement la siringue en la verge, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la verge, puis double la verge desus devers la boude; puis boute la siringue avant jusc’a la vessie, et la sente li malaides venir jusc’a la chose vuide, et ceu n’est mie fait selonc cest ordre fuer que por ceu que li conduis ou elle vait est tors; puis estent le fil a tout la laine poc et poc, et li urine en suit la laine, puis l’estrai fuer, et fai corre l’urine; et rencomence la siringue tant que li vessie soit vuidie, et soit aligiez li malaides.	And the manner of the emission of urine is that you take a double thread, and tie to the end a little wool or cotton, and insert the end of the thread into the syringe; and squeeze out the superfluity of the wool and fill it up to the end of the syringe, then anoint the syringe with oil or lard and egg yolk, and make the patient sit on a seat, and squeeze the bladder and penis with moist oil and olive oil and warm water; then gently insert the syringe into the penis until it reaches the root of the penis, then bend the penis upward toward the body; then fill the syringe up to the bladder, and feel the patient's bladder being emptied into the void, and if this is not done according to this order, it is because the leader who guides it is wrong; then pull out the thread all the way through the wool, and the urine follows the wool, then pull it out, and let the urine flow; and repeat the syringe until the bladder is emptied and the patient is relieved.
des maladies de la vessie	diseases of the bladder
Quant escorcheures ou sanc vient en la vessie, ou porriture i est assemblee, et tu i vues distiller aigues et medicines, si fai a tout l’estrument qui est apellé «clepsedre», et c’est li forme:	When scabs or blood comes into the bladder, or pus is accumulated there, and you see it distilling with water and medicine, then do all the instrument that is called "clepsydra", and that is its form:
Elle est close, et si a III pertus: II d’une part, et I d’autre, si com tu vois; et li leus chevez par coi li medicine cort soit telz qu’il estoupe bien la verge sens adition, si c’on em puisse traire la moistor, et bouter quant mestier est; et quant tu vues giter tes medicines en la vessie, met le chief dou keusteur en la moistor, et trai au traiant qui est ens; si trairas la moistor au kesteur, et puis reboute fort le traiant ens; si entrera li moistors ens, et venra a la vessie maintenant, si que li malaides la sentira; et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil dont on clisterize la vessie: si est ci:	It is closed and has three openings: two on one side and one on the other, as you can see; and the hair-like channels through which the medicine is administered should be such that it blocks the urethra without addition, so that moisture can be extracted when needed, and injected when necessary. And when you see your medicine moving into the bladder, put the end of the catheter into the moisture, and draw it out as it goes in; then push the catheter firmly back in, and the moisture will follow and enter the bladder, causing the patient to feel it. This is the form of the subtle catheter used for cathartics: thus it is done:
Et est d’argent ou d’archaut, et est li chiés plus haut; et desoz a I sein ou li liiens chiet; puis pren une vessie de mouton et i met la moistor dont tu vues clisterizer la vessie, puis la lie entre les II seins forment d’un boin fil double, et chaufe I poc celle moistor sus le feu; puis boute le chief dou clistere en la verge, puis estrain ta main sus la vessie a tout la moistor avenanment, tant que li malaides sente que celle moistor est jai venue a la vessie; et se tu n’as la vessie, si pren une piece de parchemin, et en fai I cercle, et le perce rondement entor; puis boute I fil fort en ces pertus, puis assemble le cercle si com on assemble I dal, et met dedens ceu que tu vues d’oile et de moistor et d’aigue, et le lie en l’estrument; et fai si com tu as fait de la vessie, de presser a ta main tant que li moistor veigne a la vessie.	It is made of silver or brass, and the end is higher up, below which there is one testicle or scrotum; then take a sheep's bladder and put in it the moisture you want to use for cathartics, and tie it between the two testicles with a strong double thread, and heat this moisture over fire. Then insert the tip of the catheter into the urethra and press your hand against the bladder gently until all the moisture goes in, so that the patient feels that the moisture has reached the bladder. If you don't have a bladder, take a piece of parchment, make it into a circle, and pierce it all around; then thread the strong wire through these openings, then assemble the circle as one would assemble a wheel, and put inside it oil, moisture and water, and attach it to the instrument. Do as you did with the bladder, pressing your hand until the moisture goes in.
de la piere	of stone
Nos avons jai dit en la division les manieres de piere, et l’estraction ensamble medicines; et ai dit la difference entre la piere enjanree as rains, et toz les signes, et en queil piere on doit ovrer de taille; et en la vessie, et en la verge; et je le vos dirai apertement et briément.	We have already spoken in the division of stones, and their extraction together with medicines; and I have said the difference between a stone lodged in the ureter, and all the signs, and in which type of stone one should operate on the cutting; and in the bladder, and in the penis; and I will tell you plainly and briefly.
Je dis que li piere qui est enjanree en la vessie si avient plus sovent as enfans, et c’est signe que li aigue saut de la vessie semblans a aigue en sa subtiliteit; et i apert harene, et graite li malaides sa verge, et li pent maintes fois, et puis enroidist; et a mout de ces saut li fondemens; et est legiere li sanation des enfans jusqu’il ont .iiij. ans, et est mout grief en viellars, et est as jones moiene, a ces qui sont entre jonesce et viellece; et est li cure plus legiere de ces qui ont la piere grans, que de ces qui l’ont petite.	I say that the stone which is lodged in the bladder occurs more often in children, and it is a sign that the water goes from the bladder, resembling water in its subtlety; and it seems like a hare's ear, and it hurts the patient its penis, and it can hurt him many times, and then he gets worse; and many of these have the hernia; and the healing is much easier for children until they are 4 years old, and it is much more painful in the elderly, and it is in between youth and old age; and the cure is much easier for those who have large stones than for those who have small ones.
Et quant nos venons a la cure, si couvient premier mundifier le malaide per clistere, por traire tout le fiens qui est as intestines.	And when we come to the treatment, it is necessary first to cleanse the patient with an enema to draw out all the feces that is in the intestines.
Car il encombre aucune fois a querir la piere.	Because it sometimes clogs up when seeking the stone.
Puis prenez le malaide par les piez, et lou deboutez et movez au desoz, si que li piere dessende au parfont de la vessie, et saille aucune fois dou leu haut; puis le fai seoir entre tes mains appareilliet, et ses mains soient desoz ses cuisses, si que li vessie soit toute declinans aval; puis la quier et la touche dedens; se tu sens la piere en l’espaice, si te haste maintenant de taillier sus la piere.	Then take the patient by the feet, and raise him up and move him around so that the stone descends to the bottom of the bladder, and sometimes it comes out from above; then let him sit between your prepared hands, and his hands be under his thighs, so that the bladder is entirely inclined downward; then probe and touch inside; if you feel the stone in the passage, then hurry now to cut upon the stone.
Et s’elle ne chiet au touchier dou tout, si moille ton doi indice d’oile de la main senestre, se li malaides est enfes, ou ton doi moien, se li malaides est jovencelz acomplis; et le boute en son fondement, et quier la piere, et quant tu la sens a ton doi, si l’amoine au col de la vessie; puis presse sus a ton doi, et la boute au defuer lai ou tu vues taillier.	And if it does not come out with the touch, then moisten your index finger of the left hand with oil, if the patient is old, or your middle finger, if the patient is young; and insert it into his anus, and probe for the stone, and when you feel it at your finger, push it up to the neck of the bladder; then press upon your finger, and push the stone out where you want to cut.Et s’il adouce li col de la vessie a ton doi indice et qu’il le piege en son fondement, et que tu sens que li piere ne chiet pas, si doit il demourer alai ou tu l’as moue, et que li malade se leve et marche adont qu’il soit bien frotz en li col de la vessie; puis refaites la cure.
Et comande au ministre qu’il presse la vessie a sa main, et li comande qu’il estende a sa main destre les coions en haut, et a sa main senestre oste le cuir qui est desoz les coions en la partie ou on fait la taille; puis i boute le spatumile copant, de coi ce est li forme:	And instruct the assistant to press the bladder with his hand, and tell him to lift the testicles with his right hand, and with his left hand pull back the skin underneath the testicles in the area where the incision is made; then insert the spatulum tightly, which is its shape:
Et fent entre ceu qui est entre les coions et le fondement, ne mie em mileu mais au costeit de la naige senestre; et soit drois sus la piere, et tes dois soit adés ou fondement, et soit li taille dou traver si qu’ele soit large par defuer, et dedens estroite, selonc la quantiteit de la piere, ne mie trop grans; par aventure la presse si li dois qui est ou fondement, qu’elle saut fuer sens travail; et saiches qu’il i a teil piere ou il a angles, et marges: si est griés a issir; et si a teil qui est souez, semblans a une glant, et reonde, dont li issue est legiere.	And they feel in the space between the testicles and the anus, not in the middle but on the left side of the navel; and it lies straight upon the stone, and both hands are pressed against the anus, and the incision is made across the navel so that it is wide on top and narrow at the bottom, according to the size of the stone, not too large; for fear that the pressure from the hand against the anus may cause it to escape without effort. And know that there is a kind of stone which has angles and edges: this is difficult to extract; and there is another kind which lies beneath, resembling a gland, and is round, whose extraction is easy.
A celi donques ou il a angles et marge, fai la taille plus grant; et s’elle ne saut, si covient que tu estraignes sus as tenailles qui sont ausi com une lime au chief, por mues estraindre la piere si qu’elle n’eschaipe; ou tu boute desoz li I estrument subtil corbé au chief; et se tu ne la pues engignier ensi, si eslarge I poc lou pertus, et se li sans decort, si l’estrainche de vitriole; et s’il i a plus d’une piere, si boute premier la plus grant au col de la vessie, puis cope sus, puis le trai fuer, et les petites aprés s’il en i a plusors.	And if there are angles and edges on this stone, make the incision larger; and if it does not come out, then you must use tweezers like a file at the tip to pull out the stone so that it does not slip away; or you insert below an instrument with a curved tip; and if you cannot grip it thus, then enlarge the opening and apply vitriol, and if there is more than one stone, then insert first the largest at the neck of the bladder, then cut above, then pull it out, and likewise the smaller ones if there are several.
Et s’elle est mout grans, si la covient soier, et faire plus grant plaie.	And if it is very large, then it must be sutured, and a larger wound made.
Car II choses avienent au malaide: ou il muert, ou li urine vient adés par lai que li leus ne puet souder; mais toutevoie t’efforce dou traire, ou dou debrisier as tenailles, tant que tu la traies par pieces; et quant tu as acomplit ton oevre, si emple la plaie d’encens et d’aloe et de sanc de dragon, et l’estraint, et met par sus I drapeil moilliet en oile et en vin, ou en oile et en aigue rose et aigue froide, por apaisier l’aposteme chaut; puis resovine le malaide sus son col, et ne desliier lou lien jusc’au tier jor.	For two things can happen to the patient: he may die, or urine will escape through the wound that cannot be closed; but still you must try to pull it with tweezers, until you have pulled it in pieces; and when you have finished your work, anoint the wound with incense and aloe and dragon's blood, and hold it pressed, and place over it a moistened cloth in oil and wine, or in oil and rosewater and cold water, to soothe the hot abscess; then re-bind the disease over his neck, and do not loosen the bandage until the third day.
Et quant tu le desliies, si arose mout bien lou leu d’oile et d’aigue, puis le cure d’oignement dyafinicon et d’oignement basilicon, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you loosen it, wash the site well with oil and water, then treat the wound with thin ointment and thick ointment until it heals.
Et se apostemes chaus vient en la plaie et corrosions, et congelemens de sanc en la vessie, et soit par ceu retenue li urine, qui est conue en teil maniere que sans saut avec l’urine: boutes donques ton doi en la plaie, et estrai celui sanc, car s’il i remaint, si corront la vessie, et la porrit; puis leve la plaie d’aigue et d’aisil et de seil, et li aide en toutes les manieres que tu seis, tant qu’il soit sanez; et covient que toutes les oures que tu le cures, que tu li lie les II cuisses, et assemble les medicines sus le leu.	And if hot abscesses and corrosions come in the wound and blood congealings in the bladder, and it is retained by this, so that urine passes with the blood: then press your finger into the wound, and draw out that blood, for if it remains, it will corrupt the bladder and burst it; then wash the wound with water and garlic and salt, and help him in every way you know, until he is healed; and it is necessary that whenever you dress his wound, to tie his two thighs together, and assemble remedies over the site.
Et se li piere est petite, et ele est ou conduit de la verge, et fichie ens, et li urine ne puet issir; si le cure de ceu que je dis ainsois, que tu lou tailles maintes fois, est on escusez de la taille per ceste cure.	And if the stone is small, and it is in the urethra, and lodged there, and the urine cannot pass; then the treatment of what I have said above, that you should cut many times, serves as an excuse for cutting with this treatment.
Je ai ja ce proveit ensi.	I have already proven this.
Pren .i. foret de fer selonc ceste forme et soit a .iij. angles fichiees en .i. tison:	Take a piece of iron according to this shape and let it be pointed at three angles and fixed in a brand:
puis pren I fil et lou lie entor la verge desoz la piere, si qu’ele ne puist venir arrier en la vessie; puis boute le foret en la verge legierement, tant qu’il viegne a la piere; et torne le foret a ta main en la piere poc et poc, tant que tu puisses percier la piere d’autre part; si venra tantost li urine, puis presse ta main sus ceu qui est demorez de la piere qui est dedens la verge.	Then take a thread and tie it around the penis under the stone so that it cannot go back into the bladder; then push the awl gently into the penis until you reach the stone, and turn the awl in your hand inside the stone a little at a time, until you pierce the stone from another side; then the urine will flow, and press your hand on what is left of the stone that is still inside the penis.
Si est tantost brisie, et saut fuer avec l’urine, et est garis li malaides; et se tu ne pues ce faire por aucune chose qui le deffent, si lie I fil desoz la piere et I autre desus, puis fent la verge endroit la piere entre les II liiens, puis l’estrai fuer, et deslie lou liien, et mundifie lou sanc congeleit qui est en la plaie; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it is broken at once and jumps out with the urine, and the patient is healed; and if you cannot do this for any reason that prevents it, then tie a thread under the stone and another one above it, then stretch the penis over the stone between the two threads, then pull it outward, and untie the string and clean the congealed blood in the wound, and treat it until it is healed.
de la piere des femmes	of women's stone
Poc avient que piere soit enjanree en femmes, et s’il avient aucune fois, si est li cure grief, et est deffendut por .iij. choses: l’une est que per aventure li femme est vierge; et li seconde est c’on ne puet trover femme bien saichant qui se descuevre as mires, meismement quant elle est caste.	It sometimes happens that stone is lodged in women's bodies, and if it does, the cure is difficult due to three reasons: one is that the woman might be a virgin; the second is that one cannot find a woman who is knowledgeable enough to examine them, especially when she is chaste.
Et li tierce maniere si est que par aventure on ne puet trover femme bien saichant en cest art de mains; et li quarte maniere si est que li piere de la femme si est plus em parfont que li piere de l’ome, por coi il i couvient faire plus parfonde taille, et grant paour i a. Et se necessitez semont a ceu, si covient que tu preignes une mieresse bien sachant, et a poines la trueve on, et se tu n’en trueves, point si quier I caste mire subtil; et li presente une baile bien saige en la vie des femmes, ou une femme qui saiche une partie de l’art, et li comande qu’ele faice ceu que tu li comandes de l’inquisicion de la piere; et regarde mout bien se li femme est vierge: adonques li covient bouter son doit ou fondement et querir la piere; et s’ele la trueve, si la constraigne desoz son doit, et li recomande qu’elle boute son doit ou con la malaide, et quiere et presse sa main senestre sus la vessie forment.	And the third way is that by chance one cannot find a woman well skilled in this art of midwifery; and the fourth way is that a woman's stone is more deeply embedded than a man's, so it requires a deeper incision, and there is great fear involved. And if necessity arises, one should take a experienced midwife, and with difficulty force her to do it, and if you cannot force her, then desire a wise older woman to examine the patient; or a woman who knows part of the art, and instruct her to do what you command from your examination of the stone. And be very careful if the woman is a virgin: then one should press on her perineum and feel for the stone; and if she finds it, force it out from under her perineum, and instruct her to press and squeeze with her left hand over her bladder firmly.
S’elle la trueve, si covient qu’elle la mueve de greit en greit des l’entree de la vessie jusque desoz, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la cuisse; puis cope sus la piere en la racine de la cuisse encontre le mileu dou con, lai ou il est mues apparilliet, et sent la piere en celle partie; et ne mueve son doi desus la piere ou desoz, et soit li taille au premier petite; puis boute lou rait en la taille, se tu sens la piere si acroi la plaie tant que li piere puisse issir fuer, et saiches que maintes manieres de pieres sont: c’est a savoir, petites et grans et aspres et souez, longes et reondes, et qui ont rains.	If she has a hernia, it is necessary to move it gradually from the entrance of the bladder down to the root of the thigh; then press on the stone at the root of the thigh against the middle of the groin, where the groove is located and feel the stone in that part; do not move your finger above or below the stone, and make the incision small at first. Then open the wound as far as you can feel the stone, and know that there are many kinds of stones: some are small and large, rough and smooth, long and round, and some have hairs.
si saiches les semblances por savoir l’issue.	if you know their appearances in order to understand where they come from.
Et se li sans te vaint, si met au leu vitriole broiet, et li tien une houre tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer, et aies des estrumens que je t’ai dit en l’estraction de la piere as homes por toi aidier en ton oevre; et se li sans te vaint, et c’est de l’artere qui est copee, si met la poudre sus le leu et l’estrain de tentes et de bendelz, et ne rencomencier plus ceu, et laisse la piere et ne la traire mie, que par aventure morroit li malaide; puis cure la plaie.	And if the blood comes out, put ground vitriol on it and hold it there for an hour until the bleeding stops; then return to your task so that the stone can come out, and have some instruments which I told you about in the extraction of the stone from men to help you with your work. And if the blood comes out and it is an artery that is cut, put powder on the spot and constrict it with bandages and a tourniquet, and do not stop doing this, and leave the stone and do not pull it at all because perhaps the patient will die; then cure the wound.
Et quant li chalor dou sanc est apaisie, et li leus porrist, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer.	And when the heat of the blood has subsided and the pulse has returned to normal, return to your work until the stone is out.
de hernie carnouse	of carnous hernia
Ramice aquouse n’est autre chose que assemblee de moistor ou blanc syfac, qui est desoz lou keur des coions, que contient l’uef; et est apelez «syfac», et aucune fois est proprement en la toile de l’uef, si c’on cuide que ce soit .i. autre oef; et c’est li cuir dou coion entre lou blanc syfac que nos avons dit; et ceu n’avient se poc non.	Rami ce aquo us e is nothing other than the gathering of moisture or white pus, which is under the heart of the testicles and contains the egg; and it is called "sy pha c", and sometimes it is properly in the membrane of the egg, if one believes that it is another egg; and it is the skin of the testicle between the white pus which we have said; and this doesn't always happen.
Et li generation de cest ramice si est de foibleteit que vient as coions, et est espandue celle matiere.	And the cause of this disease is weakness which comes to the testicles, and that matter is spread.
Et aucune fois si vient de percussion sus les coions, et ceste moistor si a maintes colors: ou c’est color declinans a jaunice, ou c’est sans rouge, ou noir, ou aquous blans, et ce avient plus; et ce sont li signe de conoistre ceste assemblee, car s’elle est ou blanc syfac que nos avons dit, si est li apostemes reons, I poc lonc si com li figure d’un oef, et n’apert mie li coions, car il a moistor tout entor.	And sometimes it comes from a blow to the testicles, and this moisture has many colors: or it is jaundice-colored, or red-less, or black, or watery white, and that happens more; and these are the signs of recognizing this assembly, for if it is in the white syphilis that we have said, then the abscesses are healthy, a little long like an egg, and do not appear to the testicles, because there is moisture all around.
Et s’il a moistor en la propre toile, si est li apostemes reons avec une partie de l’uef, et por ceu pense on que c’est uns autres oef; et se li moistor est entre le cuir des coions et le blanc syfac, si le sent om bien; donques quant tu vues savoir la color de la moistor, si esprueve a tout l’intromissoire quarreit, de coi li forme est ci devant.	And if there is moisture in the actual testicle, then the abscesses are healthy with part of an egg, and because of this people think it's another egg; and if the moisture is between the skin of the testicles and the white syphilis, it feels good. So when you want to know the color of the moisture, try at all the entry points, from which the shape is as mentioned above.
Selonc ceu donques qui vient aprés l’intromissoire, juge de ceu qui est dedens.	According to this, then, what comes after the intrusion, judge what is within.
Et quant nos la curons par fer, si covient que li malaides soit sainiez selonc som pooir et la repletion de son cors; puis le sovine sus son dos, sus une chose un poc haute, et met desoz lui mout de drapelz; puis sié sus sa senestre, et comande au ministre qu’il sié a destre, et estende la verge a l’un des II costelz dou keur des coions; puis pren le spatumile leit, et cope le cuir des coions parmi leu dou lonc jusque delez lou poignil, et soit ta fendure toute droite en devisant le cuir des coions jusc’a syfac blanc, et l’escorche subtilment selonc tom pooir; puis perce lou syfac plain d’aigue a I large pertus, et estrai toute l’aigue, et puis met tes oncines, et estent lou syfac amont; et ne touchier le keur des coions, mais que le syfac soulement; cope tout ou par pieces meismement le costeit de lui subtil, que se tu ne le copes bien saigement, si revenra li aigue; et se l’uef saut fuer a ton oevre, si le ramoinne en son leu quant tu avras acomplit l’uevre dou syfac; puis assemble les II leivres dou keur des coions a une costure, puis le cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when we treat it with iron, the patient should be healed according to his strength and the fullness of his body; then he lies on his back on something slightly raised, and many layers of cloth are placed beneath him; then he sits up on his left side, and the assistant sits on the right, and the rod is stretched towards one of the two ribs next to the heart; then take the spatulum and gently scrape the skin between the ribs down to the breastbone, and make a straight incision through the skin of the ribs up to the white part of the rib, and carefully cut it according to your strength; then pierce the rib with a large hole, and draw out all the water, and then put in your fingers, and stretch the rib upwards; and do not touch the heart, but only the rib; gently scrape all around the rib, otherwise the water will return; and if the egg jumps out during your work, put it back in its place when you have finished the work on the rib; then sew together the two edges of the rib with a single stitch, and then treat it like other wounds until it is healed.
Et se tu trueves l’uef corromput d’autre maladie, si covient que tu lies les vasselz que sont suspensoire, en doutant le decorrement de sanc; puis cope le coion a tout le suspensoire, et estrai l’uef, et le cure si com nos avons dit.	And if you find that the sac is corrupted by another disease, then you should ligate the vessels that are suspended, fearing the loss of blood; then cut off the testicle at its suspension, and extract it, and treat it as we have said.
Et se aigue est assemblee en II parties ensamble, saiches que ce sont II ramices; si cope l’autre partie si com tu as fait la premiere igalment, puis essue lou sanc, et met en la plaie lainne moillie en oile roset; et met defuer autre laine moillie en vin et en oile, et met sus les II coions, et met desus drapelz doublés, et le lie sus a tout le liien qui est selonc ceste forme:	If water is gathered in two parts together, you know that they are two bladders; then press the other part as you did the first equally, then wipe away the blood and put into the wound soft lamb's wool soaked in rose oil; and put another piece of lamb's wool soaked in wine and oil over it, and place it on the two sides and lay folded sheets over them and tie it up around all the length that is according to this form.
Puis pren II drapelz, et les emple de laine charpie selonc ceste semblance et soient assemblez par cousture en la gorle des braies, et li uns des chiés preigne sus le fondement jusc’au dos, et li autres a la partie dou poignil; et li autre dui chief sus les II angres, et soit toute assemblee li restreinture en la boucle dou braier; et aucune fois est medicinee ceste ramice de cautere en leu de taille de fer, et est que tu preignes I cautere cultellaire subtil, et cope le cuir des coions, et soit eschaufez si com nos avons dit, si que li syfac blanc que contient l’aigue est descovers; si pren lou cautere selonc ceste forme, et perce celui syfac as oncines, et l’escorche a cest subtil cautere chaut:	Then take two sheets and stuff them with lamb's wool according to this shape and they are sewn together at the crotch of the breeches, and one end is pressed under the buttock up to the back, and the other to the area of the groin; and the two other corners on the two sides, and all the binding is done in the loop of the breeches; and sometimes this dislocation is treated with cauterization instead of an iron incision, and it is necessary that you press the small sharp cautery tool onto the skin of the sides, and it is heated as we have said so that the white sac containing the water is exposed; then take the cautery tool according to this shape and pierce that sac at the joints, and scorch it with this fine hot cautery tool.
Et lou cope en toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que tu esraiches tout; et garde que li feus ne touche l’uef; et saiches que ceste oevre est plus salve; et mues gardans de decorrement de sanc, et muedres que li ovraiges de taille; et se nulle chose te fait contraire, ou aposteme chaus ou decorremens de sanc ou autre chose, si cure ce qui te fait contraire, selonc ceu qui est devant dit.	And the cup in every way that you can, as long as you stretch everything out; and be careful not to let the fire touch the egg; and know that this work is safest; and move carefully so as not to cause bleeding, and damage to the surgery of the incision; and if nothing makes you contrary, or abscesses or bleeding or anything else, then cure what makes you contrary, according to what has been said before.
Et se li malaides est paourous, et ne vuet atendre cest ovraige por son horribleteit, si amenistre perforation, si com je te di, et est que quant tu es bien certains par les significations que nos avons dit que ramice aquouse est lai, si fai seoir le malaide sus I siege leveit; pues perce l’aposteme an la partie desoz a tout le spatumile large, et met la perforation dou lonc dou cors; et soit larges li pertus, si que toute li aigue corre fuer; puis met coton sus le leu, et le lie, et laisse por corre le remenant de l’aigue, puis le cure tant que li plaie soit sanee; et se li blainche toile ne laisse issir l’aigue en la bouche de la plaie, si covient que tu i boutes une penne ou l’estrument dont on trait l’aigue des ydropiques, de coi li forme est ci devant; et eslarge I poc la plaie, et saiches que li aigue revient, et est assemblee aprés VI mois ou enqui entor, et quant elle est assemblee si com devant, et ensi passera li malaides ses jors.	And if the patient is fearful and does not want to undergo this treatment because of its horribleness, then administer a perforation as I have told you, and it is that when you are quite certain from the signs which we have mentioned, that the watery pus has drained away, then make the patient sit up on an elevated seat; then pierce the abscess in the lower part to the depth of a span, and insert the perforation into the wound deep in the body; and let the openings be large so that all the fluid can drain out; then put cotton over the site and bandage it, and leave it for the remaining fluid to drain out, then treat the wound until it is healed; and if the white membrane does not allow the fluid to discharge through the mouth of the wound, then you must insert a feather or the instrument used to treat fluid in hydrops patients, the shape of which has been described earlier; and widen the wound, and know that the fluid will return and be reabsorbed after six months or so, and when it is reabsorbed as before, and thus the patient will pass their days.
de l’aposteme des coions	of the abscess of the testicles
Saiches que en la section de ceste ramice a paor em plusors dispositions, por coi il me semble que mues vaut c’on la laisse; et je vos dirai l’ovraige et les semblances de l’aposteme.	Know that in the treatment of this disease there are many complications, due to which I believe it is better left untreated. And I will tell you about the procedure and the appearance of the abscess.
Je dis donques que maint aposteme vienent ou cors, et meismement as coions; et c’est par mout de cas.	I therefore say that many abscesses come in the body, especially in the genitals; and there are many causes for this.
C’est a savoir par superfluiteit aigre et ague, qui est espandue as coions, ou de percussion; et est li color de l’aposteme selonc la color dou cors; et ne trueve point de dolor, et est aposteme grief; et par aventure est uns apostemes griés paourous et pierous, et de fuxe color, et aucune fois vient de nout d’artere, ou d’enfleure de voine.	It is caused by an excess of bitterness and bitterness, which is spread in the veins, or from a blow; and the color of the abscess is according to the color of the body; and there is no pain, and it is a serious abscess; and sometimes there are grayish, fearful, and stony abscesses, and a flowing color, and sometimes it comes from an artery, or from inflammation of the vein.
Quant c’est par nout d’artere, si est conus par la disposition d’aposteme chaut, quant tu la presses a tes dois; et ne covient mie que tu i touches.	When it is from an artery, it is recognized by the hot disposition of the abscess, when you press it with your fingers; and you should not touch it.Quant c’est de nout d’artere, si est conus par la disposition d’aposteme chaut, quant tu la presses a tes dois; et ne covient mie que tu i touches.
Cil qui est fais d’enfleure de voine est conus par sa disposition a l’expression dou touchement des dois, et puet om bien faire la taille sus ceste semblance, et sus les autres chars; et est que tu cope lou keur des coions, puis estent l’uef en haut, et le trai fuer dou blanc syfac, et delivre lou suspensoire de toutes pars de l’uef.	He who is affected by a swelling of the vein is known by his disposition to the expression of the touch of the fingers, and can be effectively treated with a tourniquet on this appearance and on other characters; and you should press the hollows of the testicles, then the egg is above, and the white part below, and release the suspensory ligament from all parts of the egg.
Se li uef est ja sodez avec ces chars nees, si covient donques que tu traies l’uef, et lou cope; et s’il est aers au syfac, ou en ceu qui est dedens les vasselz, si covient que tu delivre toute celle tenve, et la cope reondement.	If the egg is already cracked with these new characters, then you must therefore break the egg and press it; and if there is air in the white part, or in what is inside the vessels, then you must release all that membrane and press it smoothly.
Et se li naissance de la char est ou leu derrier, si covient que tu la copes toute, et estrai l’uef, si com nous avons dit.	And if the yolk is at the back end, then you must open it all and remove the yolk as we have said.
Et quant tes ovraiges est acomplis, si emple la plaie de laine moillie en oile roset et en vin, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when your work is finished, then dress the wound with soft lambs' wool soaked in rose oil and wine, then treat it with other treatments until it is healed.
de l’aposteme des coions	of the abscess of the testicles
Cis est uns apostemes envoloupez d’un envoloupement semblant a I borjon, avec le mollifiement des coions, et se muet li malaides griement quant il vait; et li cure de ceste maladie si est bien pres ausi paourouse com ceste ci devant, et toutevoie nos vos dirons l’ovraige de li, selonc ceu que li ancien firent.	This is an abscess wrapped in a wrapper similar to an onion, with the softening of the testicles, and the patient feels great pain when he moves; and the cure for this disease is just as fearful as the one before, and yet we will tell you about its treatment according to what the ancients did.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege aleveit, puis li boute le suspensoire des coions aval a tes dois, a tout le vasseil qui sont prochien a la verge, et les teigne li maistres, et les estende forment; puis cope au spatumile trenchant large dou traver endroit les vasselz, tant qu’il soient descovert, et puis escorche de chescune part, si com nos avons dit en l’estraction des arteres qui sont en temples; puis i fiche une aguille ou il ait I fil double, et le lie au premier leu ou li vis est venue, et le lie derechief a l’autre chief; puis les cope em mileu droitement, selonc la longesce dou cors, et en trai les moistors corrumpues; puis cure la plaie si com les autres ou on enjanre bowe, si que aucun vassel chiecent que norrissent l’un des coions; car par ceu n’i vient point de mal, et se a toz les vasselz vient vis, si covient traire les coions a tout les vasselz; si que li oes ne perde son norrissement por l’incision des vasselz, et sechent et ne se puient aidier.	It is necessary for you to make the patient sit on an elevated seat, then tie the suspensory of the testicles down with your fingers, tightly around all the vessels near the penis, and squeeze them hard; then cut through the vessels with a broad, sharp knife, so that they are exposed, and then scorch each side, as we have said in the extraction of the arteries in the temples; then insert a needle where there is a double thread, and tie it to the first place where the vein appeared, and tie it directly to the other end; then draw them gently according to the length of the body, following the corrupted moisture; then cure the wound as with the others, or insert a bow, so that any vessel that is bleeding is exposed; for this does not cause harm, and if all the vessels are bleeding, one should draw the testicles toward all the vessels; so that the ureter does not lose its function due to the incision of the vessels, drying up and unable to help itself.
de la routure dou syfac	of the rot of the sinus
Li avenemens de ceste ramice si est par la section que vient ou syfac, ou l’estension sus le ventre en la partie des angres, por coi li intestine dessendent de celle routure a l’un des coions; et ceste routure est ou dou syfac, ou de l’estension de li, et vienent ces II manieres de mout de causes: ou de percussion, ou de saut, ou de braire, ou de levement de grief faix, et par semblans choses; et li signes quant c’est de l’estension dou syfac, si est qu’il avient poc et poc, en lonc tens, et ne vient mie soudainnement; et est li apostemes igalz jusque vers le parfont, por ceu que li syfac apresse l’intestine.	The events of this dislocation occur through the section that comes from the hernia, or the extension over the abdomen in the region of the intestines, causing them to descend from this rupture to one of the groins; and this rupture is in the groin, or from the extension of it, and these two types of hernia come about for many reasons: from a blow, or from jumping, or from coughing, or from lifting a heavy burden, and from similar things. The sign that it is an inguinal hernia is that it occurs little by little over a long period of time, and does not come on suddenly; and the abscesses are even all the way to the bottom, because the groin presses on the intestines.
Et li signes est quant c’est de la section dou syfac, qu’elle fait venir a l’encomencement dolor soudaine, et est li apostemes divers apparans, desoz le cuir pres, et c’est por l’issue de l’intestine et le cors au defuer dou syfac.	And the signs of dislocation of the shoulder blade are that it causes sudden pain at the beginning, and there are various abscesses under the skin near the surface, which is due to the exit of the intestines and the body being displaced by the shoulder blade.
Et aucune fois dessent li cirbes avec l’intestine, et est retenus enqui, et fait grant dolor soffrir au malaide, meismement quant il est pressez.	And sometimes the nerves are displaced with the intestines, and it is retained inside, causing great pain to the patient, especially when it is pressed.
Et en ces cures de fer a paor, por coi il s’en covient eschuir.	And in these iron treatments, one should fear, for which it is necessary to avoid them.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que tu comande ou malaide qu’il ramoine l’intestine a sa main au dedens en la plaie, s’il i puet rentreir; puis soit sovinez sus son col. entre tes mains, et lieve les cuixes; puis estent le keur au desus, et cope tout le cuir des coions dou lonc; puis boute dedens les leivres de la taille uncines selonc ceu que tu en as mestier por ovrir la plaie, et soit telz que li oes em puist issir; puis escorche lou syfac que est desoz lou cuir des coions, tant que li blans syfac dur soit descovers de toutes pars; puis boute ton doi indice en ceu qui enseut lou coion, en ceu qui est entre lou blanc syfac qui est desoz lou cuir de l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac, et depart ceu qui est derrier l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac; et pues muef a la main destre dedens lou keur des coions, et estent lou blanc syfac en haut a ta main senestre, et lieve l’uef a tout lou syfac devers la taille; et comande au ministre qu’il estende l’uef en haut, et deslie ceu qui est aers derrier le liement; et quier a tes dois s’il a point de l’intestine envoloupeit ou blanc syfac dur, et se tu en trueves aucune chose, si le boute au ventre desoz; puis pren une aguille ou il ait I gros fil fait de X filz, et la boute en la derriere partie dou syfac, qui est aprés lou cuir des coions; aprés la taille, puis cope les chiés qui apperent des filz, tant qu’il i ait IIII filz; puis les assemble l’un sus l’autre en maniere de croix, et en lie lou syfac, dont nos avons dit qui est desoz lou cuir des coions, d’un fort liien de II pars; puis envoloupe les chiés des filz, et les lie forment de II pars, si que nuls des vasselz que les norrissent ne puissent entrer en ous, que aposteme chaus n’i viegne; et met derechief le liien selonc le premier liien lonc II dois de celui, et aprés ces II liiens laisse dou syfac qui est desoz lou keur des coions le grant d’un doi; et aprés tout l’autre selonc la rondesce que li euf porte; puis cope en la partie qui est desoz le cuir des coions, tant qui li sans corre, et li bowe, si com nos avons dit ci devant; puis amenistre laine moillie en oile, et met em plaies, et i amenistre le liien que nos avons dit.	And the manner of treatment is that you instruct the patient to pull the intestine back into the wound with his hand if he can; then hold the neck between your hands and lift the buttocks; then have someone else push down on the abdomen, and spread open the skin of the groin all around; then insert the fingers of your left hand into the opening in the groin, in the space between the white hernia sac and the testicle, and between the second hernia sac, and behind the testicle, and between the second hernia sac; and move your right hand inside the groin, and have the white hernia sac rise up towards your left hand, and lift the testicle away from all of the hernia sacs towards the abdomen; then ask your assistant to push up on the abdomen, and release whatever is beneath the scrotum; and feel with your fingers if there is any intestine wrapped around the white hernia sac, and if you find anything, pull it back into the abdomen; then take a needle with a thick thread made from ten strands of thread, and insert it into the rear part of the hernia sac, which is under the skin of the groin; then grasp the ends of the threads that appear, so that there are four threads; then tie them together one above the other in the shape of a cross, and tie off the hernia sac with two strong ties from both sides, so that none of the vessels that supply it can enter, causing an abscess to form; then place the second tie according to the first long tie, about two finger widths away; and after these two ties, leave open the hernia sac that is under the groin, the size of a thumb; and after all this, grasp in the area under the skin of the groin, so that the blood flows, as we have said before; then apply soft lamb's wool soaked in oil to the wounds, and place on it the tie that we have described.
Et aucune fois est cauterizez li blans syfac que nos avons dit, aprés l’incision, par doutance de decorrement de sanc.	And sometimes the white syphilis that we have mentioned is cauterized after the incision, out of fear of bleeding.
Car ce avient maintes fois, et laisse le liien tant qu’il chiece per lui; et s’il tarde au cheoir, si soit arosez d’aigue chaude, et met sus ceu que nos avons dit, tant qu’il chiece; puis cure la plaie d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	For this happens many times, and let the wound drain through it until it hurts no more; and if it is slow to heal, then apply a poultice of hot water, and keep applying what we have said until it heals; then dress the wound with another dressing until it is perfectly healed.
de hernie carnouse	of carnous hernia
En ceste ramice ne vis je onques nul qui osast faire la cure par fer.	In this chapter I have never seen anyone dare to perform the treatment with iron.
Et li ancien dirent qu’ele est faite si com li ramice qui est ensamble la vis, en teil maniere que tu lie les vasselz, aprés la taille sus ous legierement au desoz; puis cope em mi, et cure l’aposteme de ceu qui oevre, tant que li vasselz chient; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the ancients say that it is done like the ramie fiber which is together with the vein, in such a way that you tie the vessels above lightly after the incision below; then press gently on it, and treat the abscess with what we have described, until the vessels drain; and treat it as we have said, until it is healed.
Aucune fois vient routure ens angres, si com nos avons dit, et apert li leus; et ne dessent nulz des intestines as coions, et s’il en i dessent, c’est poc, et repaire toutes houres; et toutevoie s’il demoure trop en cest point, si croit li plaie ou syphac, tant que li intestine dessent; et ceu avient par l’estension dou syfac qui est as angres, si com nos avons dit, car il est estendus, puis est mollifiez et enflez li leus et apert; et li cure si est par cautere, si com nos avons devant dit; et aucune fois est curee par fer en ceste maniere: et est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos entre tes mains, puis cope le leu de la routure enfleit dou large selonc la quantiteit de III dois; et puis estrai le syfac qui est desoz le cuir que l’ensuet, puis pren lou rait et lou met sor le leu apparant dou syfac; et lou presse au parfont dou ventre, puis cout les II leus apparans dou syfac sus lou chief dou rait, et cout l’un et l’autre; puis estrai le chief dou rait, et ne coper point dou syfac ne n’estendre l’uef n’autre chose, si com je t’ai fait savoir en la cure de la ramice des intestines; puis le cure par la cure des plaies.	Sometimes there is a hernia in the veins, as we have said, and it opens up; and none of the intestines come out through it, and if some do, it is a little bit, and you repair it every hour; and even if it remains too long in this state, then the wound swells or becomes gangrenous, because of the extension of the gangrene which is in the veins, as we have said, for it extends, then becomes soft and swollen and opens up; and it is treated by cautery, as we have already said; and sometimes it is treated with a hot iron in this way: and you should have the patient lie on his back between your hands, then press the hernia gently with a large piece of cloth according to the quantity of three fingers; then extract the gangrene which is under the skin, then take the thread and place it over the visible part of the gangrene; and press it firmly against the abdomen, then tie the two visible ends of the thread, and tie them one and the other; then pull out the end of the thread, and do not cover the gangrene or extend anything else, as I have told you in the treatment of intestinal hernias; then treat it with wound treatment.
Et quant tu copes les filz, si le mundefie et cure la plaie, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And when you cut the threads, cleanse and treat the wound until it is healed.
Li syfac est constrains, et n’a point d’apparance en la routure, et li cauteres est muedres en cest leu, et plus prochiens a salut.	The syphilis is hidden, and has no appearance in the mouth; and the cautery is effective in this place, and is closer to a cure.
de l’amollissement dou cuir des coions	from the softening of the skin of the testicles
Maintes fois est amollis li cuirs des coions en aucuns homes, por ceu que les chars que sont dedens sont mollifiees, et est lait a veoir; et est mestier, quant on le vuet curer, c’on faice gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li cope le cuir qui est mollifiez sus le cuir natureil; puis assemble les .ij. levres a une costure, et se tu vues, cout premier la superfluiteit dou cuir mollifiiez a .iij. costures ou .iiij. fermement; puis cope entre les costures, et lou cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez, et chient li fil.	Many times the skin of the testicles becomes soft in some men because the parts inside become soft and look swollen; and when one wants to cure it, he should make the patient lie on his back, and cut the soft skin on top of the natural membrane; then bring together the two lips with a single stitch, or three or four stitches firmly; then cut between the stitches, and treat it like other wounds until it is healed, and remove the stitches.
dou chastrement	from chastity
Saiches que chastremens est escomeniez en nostre loi, et por ceu il me plairoit que je n’en parlasse mie en cest livre; et n’est necessaires fuer que por II manieres: dont l’une est que li mires en saiche respondre quant on li demandera, et en saiche la cure; et li autre, por ceu que nos avons sovent mestier de chastrement d’aucunes bestes por nos aidier, si com de bouc et de mouton et de chait et d’autres bestes.	You should know that castration is forbidden in our law, and because of this, I would prefer not to discuss it in this book. It is only necessary for two reasons: the first is so that physicians can answer questions about it and know how to perform the procedure; the second is because we often have need of castrating certain animals to help us, such as bulls, rams, goats, and other beasts.
Je dis donques que chastremens est fais selonc II manieres: ou par atraction, ou par fendure.	I say, then, that castration is done in two ways: by pulling or by cutting.Si li atrait a la maniere de l’efile; si le fend a la maniere que je dirai.
En celle que nos faisons par attraction, faisons nos seoir la beste en aigue chaude, tant que li coion soient mollifiez et pendant; puis les preing a ta main, tant qu’il soient remis et que tu ne les sentes plus.	In this method of traction, we make the animal stand in warm water until its joints are softened and relaxed; then pull with your hand until they are reset and you no longer feel any resistance.
Du chastrement de taille: covient que tu teignes la beste, et li presse le cuir des coions a ta main senestre, puis lie le suspensoire, et cope sus chescun oef a I cop, quant tu les avras bien escorchiez; et i laisse aucun poc dou syfac et lou subtil syfac qui est sor les vasselz; et ceste maniere de chastrement est muedre que cele qui est faite par attraction, por ceu que a l’atraction demoure par aventure aucune chose des coions, par coi li beste desire luxure; puis cure la plaie tant qu’ele soit sanee.	On castration: you should hold the animal still and press its testicles with your left hand, then tie off the scrotum, and chop at each testicle until they are well chopped up; leave some of the thin membrane that covers the testicles, and some of the fluid within them; this method of castration is better than traction because with traction sometimes something from the testicles might remain, causing the animal to desire sex; then treat the wound so it heals properly.
des hermofrodites	Of hermaphrodites
Hermofrodie est selonc II manieres as homes: l’une si est que entre les II coions apert ausi com li figure de la nature d’une femme, ou il ait poil, et aucunes fois en cort li urine.	Hermaphroditism occurs in men in two ways: one is where between the testicles there appears the shape of a woman, with hair and sometimes the penis also urinates;
Et li autre maniere si est en femmes, et ait sus lou poignil ausi com une verge et II coions.	And the other manner is in women, and has on the little finger as well as a rod and two scrotums.
Et li cure de l’ome et de la fame si est que tu copes les chars ajostees toutes, et les cure si com autres plaies; en la seconde maniere, des homes dont li urine saut par lou cuir des coions, si n’a point de cure.	And the treatment for men and women is that you bandage all the swollen testicles, and treat them as you would other wounds; in the second manner, for men whose urine seeps through the scrotum skin, there is no cure.
de la tentigene	of the testicles
Tentigene est une chars ajostee sus la partie natureil, tant qu’elle est trop laide a veoir; et aucunes femmes l’ont ausi grant com une main, et c’est li cure.	Testicles are swollen testicles on the natural part, so large and unsightly that it is unpleasant to look at; some women have them as big as a hand, and that is the cure.
Il covient que tu teignes la superfluiteit de la tentigene a ta main ou as oncines, et la cope legierement; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et a une autre char que naist a la bouche de la marris, et l’emple, et par aventure saut fuer, et est selonc la semblance d’une kowe, et por ceu l’apelerent li ancien «maladie kowee».	You should dye the excess of the testicle with your hand or a knife, and bandage it lightly; do not cut too deeply so that blood does not leak out, then treat one wound with another cure until it is healed; and there is another swelling that arises in the mouth of the mare, and they use it, and sometimes it bursts, and is similar in appearance to a cow's udder, and so they call it "cow disease.
Si covient que tu la copes, si com nos avons dit la tentigene, et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	If you must cope with it, as we have said about the tendon, and treat it until it is healed.
de erratique	of erratics
Erratique si est quant li nature de la femme n’est mie percie, ou li pertus est petis; et est naturez par naissance, ou accidens par maladie que venue i est; ou c’est par char ajostee, ou dou syfac subtil ou espés, et est fais em parfont en la marris, ou en costez, ou desoz, ou que soit; et deffent le concevoir, et l’enfantement, et par aventure les flors a avoir; et li connoissance de ceu si est par le regart de la baile.	It is errant if the nature of the woman is not perceived, or the opening is small; and it is natural at birth, or accidental due to illness that comes to it; or it is caused by a wound, or a subtle or thick ulcer, and it is made deep in the head, or on the sides, or underneath, or wherever it may be; and they should understand conception and childbirth, and perhaps flowers to have; and the knowledge of this is through the observation of the dance.
Se li estoupemens est prochiens apparans, si quier a tes dois ou au rait.	If the stumps are visible nearby, you can pick them with your fingers or with a stick.
S’il est dou syfac subtil, et il est prochiens as II leivres, si te haste, et la ront ensi: met tes II dois indices ensamble, et li femme soit sus son dos, espandues ses jambes; puis estent les II leivres forment, tant que li subtilz syfac soit rons, et soit overs li estoupemens; puis pren laine, et la moille en oile, et la met sus le leu, et gise li femme a home chescun jor, si qu’il ne puist souder.	If it is a subtle ulcer and it is nearby the lips, you can treat it as follows: place your two index fingers together, and have the woman lie on her back with her legs spread; then form the lips, so that the subtle ulcer is pulled, and cover the stumps; then take wool, moisten it in oil, and place it over the wound, and let the woman stay at home every day, so that it may not adhere.
Et se li syfac est dur et espés, si covient que tu lou copes au spatumile semblant a foille de mirte.	And if the sty is hard and thick, you must cut it with a spatula like a myrtle leaf.
Se li estoupemens est de char nee, si la sospent a l’oncine et la cope; et aies les medicines estainchans sanc, si com acaice, sanc de dragon, encens, ensamble abun d’uef; puis amenistre une caine de plonc large, si que li plaie ne puisse souder; et ensi soit longement, et li amenistre une tente de lin sec; puis soit curez d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the wound is made of flesh, it should be pricked and cut; and have medicines to stop bleeding, such as hemlock, dragon's blood, incense, and egg white; then administer a broad-bladed knife so that the wound does not close; and so for a long time, and then apply a tent of dry linen; then cure with other cures until it is healed.
Et quant en la marris vient char nee, si la covient coper selonc ceste maniere, se ce n’est apostemes enchancrez.	And when there is flesh damage, it should be cut according to this manner, unless it is an ingrown abscess.
Car a l’aposteme enchancreit qui est en la marris, ne doit on touchier de feir.	For in an ingrown abscess that is in the joint, one must not cut.
des emorroides	of hemorrhoids
Emorroydes sont overtures de voines dont sans cort acostumeement, et quant les emorroydes sont vielles si devienent thelul; et nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’aus, et les signes, et je dirai ci celles qui resoivent curation.	Hemorrhoids are veins that open through which blood flows out, and when hemorrhoids are old, they become thorns; and we have already said in the division their appearances, signs, and I will say here those who receive a cure.Quant la veine est ouverte, si covient que tu la cuites de feu, et que tu li metes une ligature sus le col; et se la veine est trovee, si la peines tant qu’il soit sainz; et quant il est sainz, si peut aler a sa voie.
Je di que les emorroides et li thelul, quant il sont em parfont en la marris, et il n’aperent au sentir, si n’est mie li cure par fer.	I say that hemorrhoids and thrombosed piles, when they are deeply embedded in the rectum, and do not appear to the touch, are not cured by the application of a hot iron.
Cil qui sont a la bouche de la marris, c’on puet sentir, sont cil c’on puet curer.	Those that are at the mouth of the rectum, which one can feel, can be cured.
Il covient donques que tu mettes la femme en une maison froide, puis estent l’altelul as tenailles, et le cope en ses racines, puis poudre sus medicines restraignans sanc, si com acaice et sanc de dragon et encens, et semblans choses; puis boute ses piez a la paroit une houre, puis la met en aigue froide; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, si la fai seoir en une decoction de sumac et d’escorce de pomes grenates et de gales et de semblans choses, et puis pren farine d’orge, et la confis avec miel et aisil, et en fai I emplaustre sus son dos.	Therefore you should put the woman in a cold room; then with tweezers, pull out the hemorrhoid and the throb at its roots; then powder it with blood-restraining medicines such as acacia, dragon’s blood, incense, and similar things; then bind her feet to the wall for an hour, then put her in cool water; and if there is any bleeding, have her sit in a decoction of sumac and pomegranate bark, gall nuts, and similar things; then take barley flour and mix it with honey and garlic, and make a poultice out of it to apply to her back.
Et se il estainche, c’est boin.	And if it is staunched, that is good.
Se ceu non, se li fai aerdre ventouses au dos et as mameles sens ferir; puis pren lainne, et la moille en jus de plantain ou en jus d’aglentier avec vin viel, et fai aerdre au leu.	If not, use cupping glasses on the back and nipples without bleeding them; then take linen, wet it in plantain juice or dogwood juice with old wine, and apply it to the affected area.
Et quant li aposteme repose, si cure lou leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et celle qui est apelee «albathir» est rouge, et est semblans a I chief aspre, si le covient coper si com j’ai dit le thelul; et puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the abscess has settled, treat the area with ointment until it is healed; and that which is called 'albathir' is red and resembles a hard lump, so cover it as I have said before; then treat it until it is healed.
des apostemes de la marris	of abscesses in the anus
Maintes manieres d’aposteme vienent en la marris, si com chancre et aposteme pierous et herpes et estiomenes et fistules et emorroides et aposteme chaut, et plusors autres maladies que j’ai dit en la division.	Many types of abscesses occur in the body, such as ulcers and pus-filled sores, herpes, cysts, and hemorrhoids, as well as hot abscesses, and several other ailments which I have mentioned in the classification.
Il covient donques que je die en cest traitier l’aposteme chaut qui vient en la marris, qui n’est mie des apostemes que coillent bowe; et se tu vues savoir l’ovraige de fer, si regarde se li apostemes est agus en l’encomencement de sa venue, et plain de chalor et de fievre, et s’il devient rouge se tu le pues veoir.	Therefore, I shall describe in this treatise the hot abscess that occurs in the body, which is not among the abscesses that collect fluid; and if you want to understand the nature of fire, observe whether the abscess is painful at the beginning of its appearance, and if it is accompanied by heat and fever, and if it turns red when you examine it.
Adonques ne te haster mie de percier, mais lou fais meurer tant que li dolor soit apaisie; et puis fai seoir lou malaide sus I siege, et ait II petis sieges ou il se cline, et apoie sus son dos et assemble ses piez as parties defuer la jambe; et soient ses cuixes espandues, et mette ses braz desoz ses genous, et les lie bien d’un boin liien; puis succe li baille devers lou destre costeit, et i amenistre l’estrument dont on oevre la bouche de la marris, de coi ci aprés vient li forme; et covient que quant tu i vues amenistrer cest estrument, que tu fiches le rait premier ens por savoir la parfondeté de la marris, si que ceu qui entre ens de l’estrument n’i viegne plus em parfont qu’il ne doit, et qu’il ne blece la malaide; et se li estrumens est plus grans, si covient covrir la parfondesce de la marris de drapelz, si que li estrumens ne li grieve; et covient qu’il mette le cornet de l’estrument au desus, et qu’il teigne l’estrument.	Then do not hurry to pierce it, but let the pain subside; then have the patient sit on a chair with two small seats to lean on, and support his back, and bring his feet together away from the affected leg; let his thighs be spread apart, and place his arms under his knees, and tie them well with a good bandage. Then suck the wound towards the right side, and administer the instrument used to open the mouth of the wound, from which the shape of the wound will become apparent; when you see the instrument administered, push it in first to determine the depth of the wound, so that what goes into the instrument does not penetrate deeper than it should, nor harm the patient; if the instrument is larger, cover the depth of the wound with a piece of cloth so that the instrument does not cause discomfort; then the patient should hold the tip of the instrument and operate it.
Et quant li apostemes apert, et on lou fent a la main mol, si le covient coper au chief, au spatumile leit; et quant li bowe est vuidie, si covient que tu mettes en la plaie tentes moillies en oile roset, ou en oile vert sec; et met la tente fuer de la plaie au parfont de la marris, et met par defuer sus la marris et sus le poignil lainne nette moillie en aigue ou malves soient cuites; puis le cure aprés II jors d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois leve on la marris et la plaie par clistere d’aigue et de miel, et puis d’aigue ou racines de lis et aristologe longe soient cuites; puis reveigne a l’oignement.	And when the abscess has burst open and they have opened it with the hand gently, then it should be covered with a poultice of red lead or white lead; and when the bowels are emptied, then you should put into the wound moist tenters, in rose oil, or in dry green oil; and place the tent outside the wound at the bottom of the injury, and place a bandage over the injury and over the small clean lamb's wool moistened in water, or mallows are cooked; then heal after two days of ointment coming to this, until it is healed; and sometimes raise the injury and the wound by a clyster of water and honey, and then of water or roots of lily and aristolochia are cooked for a long time; then return to the ointment.
Et se li plaie est reponue en la marris, si covient que tu te gardes de cuire de fer, mais cure la si com nos avons dit en la division.	And if the wound is depressed into the injury, then you should be careful not to cook with iron, but heal it as we have said in the division.
de l’enfantement	of childbirth
Mestier est premier a la baile qu’elle conoisse la figure de l’enfantement natureil, et li signes si est quant tu vois la femme apresser aval, et desire odorer l’ar: adonques se haste li enfes de fuer issir; adonc saiches que cil enfantemens est selonc la figure natureil, et est li issue soz son chief, et li secondine avec lui; et quant tu vois ces signes, si covient presser legierement son ventre, si que li enfes isse tost; car quant il dessent sus son chief, si ist li secondine avec lui, et est mondee li marris de ses superfluitez par bone mundification; et cist qui vient autrement ne vient mie naturelment.	It is necessary for the midwife to first know the natural form of childbirth, and the signs that it is about to occur when you see the woman pushing downward, and desiring to smell flowers; then hasten the child's emergence; thus you know that this childbirth follows nature, and the afterbirth comes out beneath the head, and the placenta comes with it; and when you see these signs, gently press her belly so that the child emerges quickly; for when it descends upon its head, the placenta comes with it, and the mother is cleansed of her excesses by proper purification; and this one who comes in a different way does not come naturally.
Car il vient aucune fois sus ses piez, et vient fuer li cors ou li chiés, et les mains, ou il vient sus son ventre, ou sovin, et est convertis par aventure sor son col, et par autres figures malvaises; si est mestier a la baile qu’elle soit saige et subtilz en ces choses, et se warse d’error et de decevement, et je vos mostrerai toutes les figures coment on li doit aidier.	For sometimes it comes out feet first, or the body or shoulder, or hands, or it comes from the abdomen or armpit, and is turned around onto its neck, and in various other evil forms; thus it is necessary for the midwife to be wise and cunning in these matters, and beware of error and deception, and I will show you all the forms and how one must assist.
Se li enfes vient sus son chief par issue natureil, et li femme enfante griement, et li vertus de li est foible, si la fai seoir sus une selle, ou les femmes la tienent; et arose sa nature d’oile ou fenugreic soit cuit, et puis boute li baile entre ses dois le petit spatumile dont ci est li forme:	If the baby emerges head first in a natural delivery, and the woman gives birth with great effort due to her weak constitution, then make her sit on a stool or have other women support her; then apply a warm ointment made from fried oil or fenugreek between the midwife's fingers in the form of a small spatula:
et fende la secondine, et cope a son ungle tant que li moistors qui est ens corre fuers; et preint lou ventre de la femme tant que li enfes dessende, et s’il ne dessent, si covient clisterizer la femme de muscillaige de fenugrec avec oile de sisament; puis la fai preindre et esternuer de condisi, et tien sa bouche et son neis une houre: si istra maintenant l’enfes.	And split the amnion, and scrape his fingernail until the moisture that is within flows out; and press on the belly of the woman so that the child comes down, and if he does not come down, then one must cleanse the bowels of the woman with a poultice of fenugreek and olive oil; then make her vomit and sneeze with a condiment, and hold her mouth and nose for an hour: then now deliver the child.
Et se les II mains issent fuer, si covient que tu les ramoinne legierement poc et poc; et s’elles n’i puent entrer, si met la femme sus I siege, et li lieve les piés en haut; puis deboute le siege sus terre, et teigne on la femme, qu’elle ne chiece au deboutement; et se li mains n’i puet entrer, et li enfes muert, si li cope les mains au couteil qui est ci devant mis, et estrai l’enfant, et ramoine igalment.	And if both hands come out, then you must reset them gently a little at a time; and if they cannot enter, then place the woman on a chair, and raise her feet upward; then lean the chair against the ground, and support her so that she does not strain while standing; and if the hands still cannot enter, and the child is dead, then he should scrape the hands with the knife which was mentioned before, and extract the child, and reset similarly.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses piés	of the birth of the child on its feet
Quant li enfes vient sus ses piez, si lou covient bouter en haut; et puis le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit igalz; puis preigne I des piez et l’estende poc et poc.	When the child comes out on its feet, you should push it upwards; then turn it little by little until it is straight; then grab its feet and stretch it out a little bit at a time.
Cant il saut jusc’as cuixes, si la comande a preindre, et la fai esternuer de condisi; si saut fuer, se Deus vuet.	If it jumps up to its hips, instruct it to grab hold, and make it sneeze with some scent; if it wants to jump out, let God will it.
Et s’il n’ist fuer si com nos avons dit, si le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit selonc la figure natureil.	And if it doesn't jump out as we have said, then slowly turn it back to its natural position.
Car adonques ist il legierement.	For then it is easy.
Et s’il ne vient fuer si com nos avons, dit si pren muscillaige de altee, et oile de sisament, et gomme fondue, et broie tout en I mortier; et met sus la nature de la femme dedens et defuer cest oignement, puis la fai seoir en aigue tede jusque desoz les costelz; et quant elle est moillifie desoz, se li fai I coliere de mirre, et li met desoz, et li laisse une houre; puis la fai seoir sus I siege, puis la fai esternuer et estraint sa bouche et son neis, et li preint le ventre legierement, car li enfes saut maintenant.	And if it does not come out as we have said, take musk, and oil of sixes, and melted gum, and grind them all in a mortar; and apply this ointment to the nature of the woman inside, then have her sit in warm water up to her ribs; and when she is soft below, make her a collar of myrrh and put it on her, and leave her for an hour; then have her sit on a seat, then make her sneeze and squeeze her mouth and nose, and gently press her belly, for the child will come out now.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses genous	the child will emerge onto its knees
Quant li enfes vient en ceste forme, si i mette li baile ses mains poc et poc; puis soit sovinee sus son col, et li pendent li piez aval, et soit gisans sor I lit; et plie ses mains poc et poc, et puis li preint les mains sus lou ventre, et li oste les cussins desoz, tant qu’elle soit appareillie aval; et se li enfes ne saut, si pren ses piez et li muef forment, puis li muef lou ventre amont, puis i boute tes mains; et ewe l’enfant poc et poc; et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse.	When the child comes in this form, the midwife puts her hands on it little by little; then she lies on her side, and the child hangs down with its feet below, and lies on the bed; and she bends her hands little by little, and then presses her hands on the belly, and takes away the cushions underneath, until the child is delivered down below; and if the child does not cry out, she takes its feet and moves it about, then moves the belly upwards, then puts in both hands; and rocks the child little by little; and commands the woman to hold on until the child emerges.
de l’issue de l’enfant qui vient dou large une main pendant	of the emergence of the child who comes out with one hand hanging down
I covient engignier a ramener la main: s’on ne la puet ramener, si fai lever la femme, et aler; s’elle ne puet aler, si la fai gesir sus I lit, et li deboute les jambes forment; puis amenistre lou muscillaige que j’ai conteit; et s’elle n’enfante, si la fai seoir sus I siege, puis estudie au rameneir la main; et ewe l’enfant selonc la figure natureil, et la fai esternuer, et li comande qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse fuer.	I must try to bring the hand back: if I cannot bring it back, then let the woman get up and walk; if she cannot walk, then let her lie on the bed and lift her legs straight up; then administer the mustard poultice that I described; and if she does not give birth, then let her sit on a chair, then try to bring the hand back again; and rock the child according to its natural position, and make her sneeze, and command her to hold on until the child emerges.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus son col, et ait espandues ses mains, et sa faice tornee devers lou dos sa mere	from the child's exit above its neck, and spread her hands, and turn her face towards her mother's back
I covient que li baile teigne sa main, puis le torne poc et poc, et l’ewe legierement; et quant il est igalz, si met sus la nature muscillaige de altee et oile, si com nos avons dit, puis li comande qu’elle se mueve poc et poc; et quant tu avras ce fait, si la fai seoir sus I siege, et li comande k’elle se preigne; et la fai esternuer.	I want the bailiff to dye his hand, then turn it little by little, and move it gently; and when it is even, put on the natural mustard and oil mixture, as we have said, then instruct her to move it little by little; and when you have done this, make her sit on a chair, and tell her to grip; and make her sneeze.
de ceste meisme maniere a tout la secondine	in the same way for all the afterbirth
Quant il vient fuer en ceste maniere a tout la secondine, si cope la secondine a ton ungle, tant que li moistors soit vuidie; et se li enfes pent sus sa faice et sus son col, si la cope des la boude, qu’elle ne soit retenue, et muere li enfes; puis boute l’enfant dedens, tant que tu l’aies mis si com il covient, et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne aucune fois: adonques si istra legierement.	When it comes out in this way to all the afterbirth, then scrape away the afterbirth with your nail, as long as the fluids are drained; and if the baby can move on its face and neck, scrape it off so that it is not retained, and the baby dies; then put the baby back inside, so that you have placed it as it should be, and instruct the woman to grip a few times: then she will get better slowly.
de l’issue des gemelz	of the hernia
Saiches que gemeil naissent maintes fois, et aucune fois en naissent .iij. ou .iiij.; et ceu n’est mie estrainge chose, et poc avient.	Know that twins are born many times, and sometimes three or four; and this is not a strange thing, but it happens rarely.
Dui sont estrainge chose, et ne vivent mie, se poc nom; je sai ceu, qu’il soient multipliiet, et sont desevrez par lou syfac qui les devise, qui est liiez a la boude; et aucune fois issent ausi naturelment com uns tous sous, si com nos avons dit.	They are strange things and do not live, unless by name; I know that they are multiplied and separated by the syrup that divides them, which is bound to the jug; and sometimes they emerge as naturally as a toe, as we have said.
Et s’il issent griement, si la cure si com nos avons dit, et soit li baile subtilz, et faice tost et legierement ceu qu’elle fait; et faice ensi com il vaut mues a salut.	And if they emerge quickly, then the surgeon should act as we have said, and be subtle, and do quickly and lightly what he does; and thus proceed as it benefits the patient.
de plusors enfans	of many children
Aucune fois sont formez en la marris I ou II ou III ou IIII ou V ou VI ou VII, ou plusors jusc’a XV, et sont tout formeit en forme d’enfant par le mesurement dou saige glorious, et couvient que li baile saiche tout ceu, car par aventure semblans chose li avient; si faice selonc ceu qu’il covient.	Sometimes they are formed in the sea, one or two or three or four or five or six or seven, or more up to fifteen, and they are all formed in the shape of a child according to the measurement of the glorious sage; and the surgeon should know all this, for by chance a similar thing may occur; so act according to what is appropriate.
de l’enfant mort	of a dead child
Quant tu cures la femme de l’enfant mort ou ventre, si com j’ai dit en la division, et il ne vient fuers, et tu es constrains d’ovraige de mains; si covient que tu saiches se li femme est de saine vertut, et n’ait accident ou elle ait paor de mort; si covient que li femme soit sovinee sus son dos, et soit ses chiés enclins aval, et les jambes levees; et li ministre la teigne de II pars, ou elle soit liie au lit si qu’elle ne soit traite au dessendement de l’enfant; puis frotez la bouche de la marris d’oiles moistes avec muscillaige de altee et de fenugrec et semence de lin, puis oigne li baile ses mains de ces oiles et de ces muscillaiges; puis les boute en la marris legierement, puis quiere I leu ou elle boute les oncines que soient covenaubles a ceu, et pren warde se li enfes est apparilliez qu’il dessende sus son chief; si fiche les oncines en ses eulz ou en son col ou en sa bouche ou en som palais ou desoz la barbe ou en la forcele ou pres des costez, et se li dessendemens est sus piez, se li fiche ou poignil et as costes moienes; et covient qu’il teigne l’oncine a sa main destre, et mette la corbeure entre ses dois de la senestre main, et li boute a tout sa main legierement, et fiche l’oncine en aucun de ces leus que nos avons dit, tant qu’il viegne a la chose vuide; et c’est li forme de l’oncine:	When you are treating a woman for a dead fetus or womb, as I have said in the division, and it does not come out by itself, and you are forced to use your hands, then you should know if the woman is of sound health and free from any accident or fear of death; then the woman should be supported on her back, with her head tilted down and her legs raised; and the surgeon should apply the cautery in two parts, or she can be tied to the bed so that she does not move while giving birth to the child; then grease the mouth of the womb with moist oils mixed with musk-scented aloe and fenugreek and flax seed, then grease the surgeon's hands with these oils and musks; then he should gently insert his fingers into the womb, and probe the locations where it is necessary, and take care that the child is positioned to come out head first; then he should insert his finger into her ears or nose or mouth or throat or under her beard or in her armpits or along her sides; and if the delivery is through the feet, he should insert them at the ankle and the inner thighs; and he should apply the cautery to his right hand, and hold a piece of cloth between his left fingers, and gently insert it into any of the locations we have mentioned, until he reaches the empty space; and this is the shape of the probe:
puis fiche encontre I autre oncine, ou le tier se tu en as mestier, si que li estractions soit igalz; et puis l’estent igalment en movant d’une part et d’autre, por mues issir, et soit li oncines dentez por mues tenir, si com ci est li forme:	then pierce the other knuckle, or the third if you need to, so that the extractions are even; and then they are even as they move from one side to the other, so that they can exit, and the knuckles are bitten to hold them in place, just like this is the shape:
Et s’il en demoure une partie, si oigne li baile aucuns de ses dois d’oile, et les boute en celle partie, et traie l’autre partie; et s’il en i demoure point, si met cest oncine ou plus haut leu, et fai ceu tant qu’il s’en isse tout fuers.	And if a part remains, then grease some of his fingers with oil and rub it in that part, and pull out the other part; and if nothing remains, then put this knuckle or a higher one, and do this until everything comes out.
Et se l’une mains vient devant l’autre, et il ne puet ramener por l’estreignement, si covient que tu envoloupes sus I drapeil, tant qu’il isse tote; puis la cope en la jointure de la plante ou au coute, et ensi covient que tu faices en l’autre main, et as II piés.	And if one hand comes before the other, and he cannot bring it back due to the tightness, then you must wrap a cloth around it until it comes out; then grab the end at the joint of the finger or at the wrist, and you should do this for the other hand as well, and also for the feet.
Et se li chiés de l’enfant est gros et il est estrois en l’issue, ou il ait ou chief aigue assemblee, si covient que tu boute le spatumile espinous entre tes dois, et fent le chief et estrai l’aigue; ou tu la ront a l’estrument qui est apelez «almidach», de coi li forme vient avec les estrumens ou chapistre qui est aprés cestui; et ensi meisme faice se li enfes a grant chief naturelment; et puis traie fuer les osses as tenailles, et se li chiés saut fuer et il estraint a la forcele, si soit fendus, tant que li moistors qui est ou pis issue fuer; et s’elle ne puet issir, si le cope par pieces au mues que tu pues; et s’il est enflez au ventre ou desoz les costez, si covient que tu lou perces tant que li moistors corre.	And if the head of the child is large and narrow in its passage, or if it has a sharp pain gathered at its head, then you should push the spathulum between your fingers, open the head, and draw out the fluid; or pierce it with the instrument called "almidach", from which the mold comes with the instruments that follow this one. And in the same way, if the child has a large natural head, then pull on the bones with tweezers, and if the head pops out and is forced, it should be split so that the moisture that is at the bottom of the passage can come out; and if it cannot emerge, then cut it into pieces as much as you can. And if it is swollen in the belly or under the ribs, then you should pierce it so that the moisture runs out.
Et se li enfes est sus ses piez, si est li attraction legiere, et li adrecemens a la bouche de la marris est legier.	And if the swelling is on his feet, the pull is light, and the movement towards the mouth of the wound is easy.
Et s’il est estrois au ventre ou au pis, si couvient que tu l’estraies a I drapeil envoloupeit sus la main; et fent le ventre ou le pis, tant que li moistors qui i est corre; et se li autre membre sont osteit, et li chiez demoure, si boute li baile sa main em parfont de la marris, et le traie jusc’a la bouche de la marris; puis i boute I oncine ou II, et le trai fuer; et se li bouche de la marris est retrecie por aposteme chaut qui i est venus, si n’i covient mie travillier, ains covient amenistrer choses moistes et grasses; et li amenistre emplaustres, et siece en aigue mollifians et amoistans.	And if it is stuck in the belly or the foot, you should pull it out with the cloth wrapped around your hand; and make an incision in the belly or the foot, as far as the moisture that is there; and if the other members are dislocated, and the feces remain, he puts his hand into the wound up to the bottom of the wound; then he puts in a finger or two, and pulls it out; and if the mouth of the wound is narrowed by a hot abscess that has come there, one should not work on it, but rather administer moist and greasy things; and he administers poultices, and uses water that is softening and moistening.
Et se li enfes est sus son costeit, et tu le pues mettre igal, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit en l’enfant vif; et s’on nen ait pooir, si lou trai fuer par pieces, et n’i laissier rien de la secondine.	And if the fetus is above its side, and you can make it equal, then administer what we have said about the living child; and if one cannot, then pull it out in pieces, and leave nothing of the placenta.
Et quant tu avras ce fait, se li amenistre ceu que nos avons dit ens apostemes chaus que vienent en la marris; et se decorremens de sanc vient, si soit mise en aigue restraignant, et li amenistre autres cures.	And when you have done this, if the patient is experiencing the abscesses that come in the sea; and if there is bloodletting, let it be applied to water restraining, and give him other treatments.
Et je vis une femme en cui ventre uns enfes avoit esteit mors, puis consut .i. autre sus celui, et refut mors li autres.	And I saw a woman in whose belly some fetus had been dead, then another was sewn over it, and the other died as well.
Aprés lonc tens li vint uns apostemes en la boude, et enfla tant qu’il ovrit, et comensa a grant porreture.	After a long time, an abscess came in her armpit, and swelled so much that it opened, and began to discharge profusely.
je fui apelez a la cure, et i pensai lonc tens, et ne pot soder li plaie.	I was called to the priest, and I thought for a long time, and could not heal the wound.
Je mis sus emplaustre de fort attraction, et en issit uns os, et aprés aucuns jors uns autres.	I applied a strong attractive plaster, and an bone came out, and after a few days another one did too.
Je me mervillai mout, por ceu c’ou ventre n’a point d’os.	I was very surprised because the belly has no bones.
Si pensai que c’estoit des os d’un enfant mort.	I thought they were the bones of a dead child.
Je quis la plaie, et en traï mains os, tant que li femme fut em millor point; et vesquit li femme lonc tens ensi, et issoit adés un poc de bowe dou leu; et je n’ai recordeit cest chapistre fuer que por ceu que, quant li maistres trueve une estrainge chose, qu’il i saiche mettre aide.	I wanted to see the wound and put my hand in it as long as the woman was in a better state; and the woman lived a long time like this, and she occasionally got out of bed; and I didn't include this chapter until after, because when masters find something strange, they know how to apply a remedy.
dou ramener la marris a son leu	to bring the dislocation back to its place
Ci aprés vient li forme dou pressor, a coi on ewe les livres; et a .ij. tornans as .ij. chiés des .ij. liiens.	Hereafter comes the form of the press, to which one ties books; and at two turns of the two arms.
Toutevoie, li cornes soit plus subtilz dou restrictoire, et soit fais de ebene ou de bux; et soit li bouche dou fust I doi de large, et li marge des arbres I doit, et de lonc une palme et demi; et enmi les II liemens soient dui ajostemens de cest meisme fust, qui soient fermeit en l’un et en l’autre, de demi palme de lonc ou un poc plus; et cist dui ajostement sont bouteit en la bouche de la marris por ovrir quant on torne les II cornes.	Nevertheless, the horns should be more subtle than the rest, and made of ebony or boxwood; and the mouth of the fust should be two fingers wide, and its edges should be smooth, and one palm and a half long; and between the two ends there should be two adjustments of this same wood, which are tightly fitted together, each half a palm or a little more in length; and these two adjustments are placed in the mouth of the sea to open it when we turn both horns.
Une autre forme, a sa semblance plus subtilz et plus legiere, soit faite de fust de ebene ou de bux, selonc la semblance des tenailles; et ait as II chiés II ajostemens, si com tu vois, d’une palme de lonc, et II dois de large; et quant tu vues ovrir la marris a tout l’estrument, si fai seoir la femme sor I lit, les piez pendant et les jambes overtes, puis boute les II ajostemens ajostez ensamble en la marris, et tien le chief de l’estrument desoz entre ses cuixes; puis oevre ta main a tout l’estrument, si com tu as fait as tenailles igalment, selonc la quantiteit que tu vues ovrir la bouche de la marris, tant que li baile faice ceu qu’elle vuet.	Another form, with a more subtle and lighter appearance, is made of ebony or boxwood, resembling pincers; it has two joints at each end, as you can see, one palm-length, and two fingers wide. When you see the instrument opened to its full extent, have the woman lie on her back, legs hanging over the edge of the bed, then fit the two joints together inside the vagina, and hold the head of the instrument between her thighs. Then operate your hand on the instrument, as you did with the pincers, according to the amount you see the opening of the vagina, until the midwife does what she wants.
Cist estrument sont tuit sormontez, et sont multiplies lor semblances; et quant li mires les ait apareilliez, tant est plus hastans li oevre, et plus haute as homes por lor quantiteit.	These instruments are all decorated, and their designs vary; and when the patient sees them prepared, the effect is more immediate and more powerful on people due to their appearance.
Si ne despire mie l’estrument que tu ne l’aies apparelliet, car lor necessitez n’est mie escusauble.	Do not be discouraged by the instrument until you have prepared it, for their needs are not preventable.
Quant li secondine est retenue a l’enfantement, si covient que tu comandes a la malaide qu’ele reteigne son alaine, et puis la fai esternuer de condisi, et li estraint tes mains a la bouche et au neis; et s’elle saut per ceu, bien est.	When the afterbirth is retained during childbirth, instruct the patient to hold her breath and then make her sneeze gently with your hand over her mouth and nose. If she sneezes because of this, all is well.
Se ceu non, si prent I pot, et fai I pertus ou cuvercle, et i met herbes que puissent ovrir la bouche de la marris, si com calament, rue, anis, camomille, cassialigne et centoire; toutes ces herbes, ou aucunes d’eles, soient cuites ou pot en aigue sus le feu; puis met une caine ou pertus dou pot, et l’autre chief en la bouche de la marris, et la teigne tant que li vapors viegne dedens la marris; puis la fai esternuer, si com nos avons dit.	If not, one takes a pot and makes an opening or lid, and puts in herbs that can open the mouth of the wound, such as camomile, rue, anise, cassia, and centaury; all these herbs, or some of them, are cooked in water over fire; then one places a tube or spout into the pot, and the other end into the mouth of the wound, and lets the vapors enter the wound; then one makes the patient sneeze, as we have said.
Si saut li secondine hastanment.	Then the secondine suddenly.
Et s’elle remaint aprés ceste cure, et n’ist mie fuer, si comande a la baile qu’ele moille sa main senestre en oile de sesement ou en muscillaige de altee, et puis la boute en la nature, et quiere la secondine; et quant elle l’avra trovee, si la preigne et l’estende poc et poc droitement, si que li marris ne chiece a l’estraction; mais la covient movoir legierement a destre et a senestre, et puis traie; si venra et se desaerdra.	And if it remains after this treatment and does not go away, one commands the midwife to moisten her left hand in oil of sesamum or in mullein-mousse, and then put it into the birth canal and seek out the second membrane; and when she finds it, she should grab it and extend it little by little straight, so that the wound does not tear during extraction; but one must move it slightly to the right and left, and then pull; it will come out and release itself.
Et se li bouche de la marris est jai estrecie, nos avons dit la cure d’esternuer, et de fumigation des herbes; et s’elle n’ist de tout ceu que nos avons dit, si garde que tu ne foloies au traire; mais il couvient que ceu qui est a la bouche de la marris, que tu le lies a la cuixe de la femme, puis la clisterize d’oignement tetrafarmaçon; si la porrira et remettra, et venra fuer; mais toutevoie, quant elle porrist si en vient male odor au stomac et au chief, et blece la malaide.	And if the mouth of the wound is narrow, we have spoken of the cure for sneezing and of the fumigation of herbs; and if it is not from anything that we have said, beware lest you err in the treatment; but it is necessary that what is at the mouth of the wound, that you tie it to the thigh of the woman, then cleanse her with an ointment of the four-part prescription; then she will release and recover, and the foul odor will come out; but nonetheless, when she releases, a foul odor comes to the stomach and the head, and the illness is cured.
Si covient donques fumigations covenaubles a ceu: aucun des anciens ont esproveit fumigation de cresson et de figues seches.	If necessary, therefore, appropriate fumigations should be used: some of the ancients have tried fumigation with watercress and dried figs.
Li forme de l’estrument a coi on fumige la femme a la retenue des flors et de la secondine si est ceste:	The shape of the instrument with which one smokes out the woman for the retention of flowers and afterbirth, if it is this:
Et est de voirre semblant a une caine, et met on le chief subtil en la nature, et les chiés larges sus le feu; et soit li fumigations sus les charbons, et la teigne tant qu’elle soit gastee, et rencomence une autre.	And it is like glass in appearance, and one puts the fine end into the nature, and the wide end above the fire; and the fumigation is over the charcoal, and the stain until it is wasted, and then one starts another.
de percier lou fondement	of piercing the foundation
Maint enfant naissent qui n’ont mie le fondement perciet, ains l’ait estoupeit uns subtilz syfac: si covient donques a la baile qu’ele perce celui syfac a son doit, et ne lou perce mie de spatumile agut, et garse le lacement qu’elle ne le touche; puis met sus lainne moillie en vin et en oile, puis la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Many children are born who do not have the foreskin pierced, but the skin is closed over a fine shaft; therefore, it is necessary for the midwife to pierce that shaft with her finger, and not to pierce it with a sharp instrument, and to guard against touching the foreskin; then put wet linen in wine and oil, then cure it with ointment until it is healed.
Et se tu doutes qu’il ne restoupe, si met ou pertus une caine de plonc, et li laisse mains jors, et soit ostee quant li enfes vuet aler en chambres.	And if you doubt that it will heal, then put a splint of wood through the wound, and leave it for several days, and remove it when the child wants to walk.
Et aucune fois vient cist estoupemens de soudement de plaie ou d’aposteme; si covient coper celui soudement: si soit curez, si com nos avons dit de la caine de plonc.	And sometimes this healing happens suddenly from a wound or abscess; then it must be covered suddenly: it should be treated, as we have said, with a splint of wood.
de la fistule dou fondement	from the fistula in the anus
Fistules qui vienent desoz le fondement sont nodation, et groissor que vienent delez lou fondement defuer, ou en l’espaice des II parties, si a une fistule ou plusors; et quant celle nodation est anciene, si aoeuvre, et encort moistor awouse blainche ou subtilz bowe, et aucune fois sont ces fistule persans; et sont conues par ceu qu’il en ist ou egestion ou ventositeit quant li malaide fait egestion, et par aventure en saut uns vers.	Fistules which come from under the anus are nodular and grow larger than those which originate from within the anus or between its two parts; there may be one fistula or several. When this nodulation is old, it opens up, and pus and white fluid flow out, or sometimes a thin fluid; these fistulas can be smelly. They can be detected by observing whether there is any discharge or flatulence when the patient breaks wind, and occasionally a smell may escape from one of them.
Et si a fistules que percent jusc’a la vessie, et jusc’a la moitiet de la verge; et parvienent jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, et jusc’a nout de la kowe.	And there are fistulas that pierce all the way to the bladder, and halfway down the penis; and they reach up to the hip joint, and even to the testicles.
Et ensi conoist on la fistule persant au fondement, et ne mie persant: et est que tu boutes ton doi indice ou fondement, et boute une aguille subtil d’arain ou de fer en la fistule quant il n’i a tortuositeit.	And so one can tell whether a fistula at the anus is persistent or not. You should push your finger into the anus and insert a thin needle made of bronze or iron into the fistula if it is straight.
Et s’il ait tortuositeit, si i boute une tente de plonc subtil, ou I poil de cheval, tant que tu sentes la tente ou le poil a ton doit; et se tu ne le sens, et il ne vient dou pertus egestion ne ventositeit ne ver, si com nos avons dit: saiches qu’elle ne perce mie; si te haste dou curer.	If it is tortuous, insert a thin and flexible rod or a horsehair until you feel the resistance of the rod or hair at your finger; if you do not feel any resistance and there is no discharge or flatulence, as we have said, then you know that it has not pierced through; so you can proceed with the cure.
Et quant li fistule est persans jusc’a la vessie ou jusc’a conduit de l’urine, si en saut li urine, et ne puet soudeir par medicines.	And when the fistula extends to the bladder or the urethra, and the urine leaks out, and cannot be stopped by medicine.
S’elle est percie jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, si est li tente venans jusc’au leu; s’il n’i a tortuositeit et li invention de la dolor entor, si est qu’il en ist adés bowe, et n’i vaut medicine ne soudement par oignement; et en ces fistules persans n’a point de cure fuer que labor, et vaniteit des folz mires qui s’en entremettent.	If it is pierced to the joint of the thigh, then there will be a vein bleeding to that spot; if there is no kink and the pain is all around, then it will heal quickly with a poultice; in these piercing fistulas, there is no cure other than labor, and foolishness of those who interfere.
En celle qui n’est mie persans et n’est mie anciene, a esperance de saniteit par fer, si com j’ai esproveit, et est que li malaides gise entre tes mains sus son dos; et li lieve les jambes jusque sus ses cuixes, et ait ses cuixes enclinees a son ventre; puis boute une tente d’arain, ou de plonc s’il i a tortuositeit, tant que tu saiches ou li tente vient.	In one that is not pierced and is not old, there is hope of recovery by iron, as I have experienced; the patient lies on his back, and the healer lifts his legs up to his thighs, and bends his thighs towards his belly; then he inserts a tent made of copper or lead if there is a kink, until he finds where the vein is.
Se li malaides la sent entor le fondement, si covient que tu i boutes ton doi indice, se sens adonques que li tente l’ait perciet; et soit descoverte ou tu sens entre ton doit le syfac ou la char, adonques saiches qu’elle est persans; si n’i travillier mie c’on ne la puet saner.	If the patient feels it in his anus, then you must insert your finger, if you feel that the tent has pierced it; and if it is uncovered where you feel between your finger and the flesh, then you know it is pierced; otherwise, do not work on it, for you cannot heal it.Si la tente ne vient mie par li fondement, si covient qu’on l’estrecce de l’autre costé par la coye, et s’il ne se peut guérir, s’il est persans ou non; car adés il n’y a medicine, ne non plus ne valerat que l’on le saigne, car adés la tentée est persans.
On dist toutevoie c’on em puet bien saner aucuns, mais ce avient poc; et li aide c’on i fait, si est c’on eschaufe le cautere subtil selonc la largesce de la fistule, si com il est devant dit; et le boute tout chaut en la fistule, tant qu’il viegne delez le fondement; et faice ceu II fois ou III, tant que tu saiches que ces chars fautrees soient arses, qui sont semblant a une penne d’oiseil; et puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre, tant que celle chars isse fuer, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char et soudant.	One can still heal some of them, although this rarely happens; and the aid that one gives, is that one scorches the subtle cautery according to the width of the fistula, as it is said before; and one stuffs it all hot into the fistula, until it comes out through the fundament; and one does this two or three times, until one knows that these falsified meats are burned, which resemble a feather of a bird; and then one cures with moist bandages on butter, until these meats come out, then one cures with ointment binding the flesh and healing.
S’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	If it is thus healed, that is good.
Se ceu, nom autrement ne puet estre sanez; et se li tente entre, et ne perce jusc’au doit qui est ou fondement, et a entre ton doi et la tente une coverture espesse de char ou de syfac, et tu vois la fistule a ceu qui enseut la coverture dou keur; si le cope des l’encomencement de la fistule, et boute adés avant la tente, et pues le cautere aprés, tant qu’il viegne au chief de la tente; et sera delivré li tente, et cherra; puis mondefie celles chars fautrees que semblent une penne d’oisel, et n’en remaigne niant.	If it is not healed otherwise; and if the tent comes in, and does not pierce to the bottom which is at the fundament, and there is between your finger and the tent a thick covering of meat or of syphac, and you see the fistula following the covering of the flesh; then cut off the beginning of the fistula, and stuff in before the tent, and then cauterize afterwards, until it comes to the top of the tent; and the tent will be delivered, and fall out; then remove those falsified meats that resemble a feather of a bird, and nothing remains.
Et si li sans te vaint, et cort entre toi et l’uevre, si le cauterize de feu ou de medicine ague.	And if the pus runs out, and flows between you and the wound, then cauterize it with fire or with medicine.
Car li cauteres de feu assemble II bones choses: c’est a savoir, l’arsure de ces chars ajostees, et l’esteinchement de sanc et la sechor de la moistor; puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre ou en choz broiez, tant que li leus giete bowe, et isse fuer li chars arse en la bowe; puis cure la plaie des oignemens soudans enjanrans dure char, et sont les medicines seches.	For the fire cautery unites two things: namely, the burning of the joined bones, and the stopping of blood and drying out of moisture; then the treatment of swollen tents with butter or ground substance, until the hole drips, and the burnt bone comes out through the drip; then treat the wound with sudden, hardening oil, and these are the dry remedies.
Car quant il est restoree, si est sanee et ne revient mie.	For when it is restored, it is healed and does not return.
Et se fistule vient jusc’a parfont dou fondement, et est esloigniez dou cors, se li boute ton doi ou fondement, et enquier ceu.	And if a fistula comes all the way from the anus, and is separated from the body, put your finger in it or plug it up, and ask for help.
Se tu sens la tente, et entre II est li toile ou li syfac ou chars, ou il est pres a percier, si n’i ait fuers que voie de fiance et d’esperance, par l’aministrement de l’une des III manieres: ou tu le cauterizes si com nos avons dit, ou tu le cope jusc’a fons, ou se tu pues si i met tentes et cure si com premier; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que tu ne coper le tenement qui tient le fondement, et viegne li egestions par lai sens volenteit; puis le cure, si com nos avons dit; par aventure si sera sanez, ou tu esloigne celle coverture et la munde puis qu’elle est copee delez lou fondement, ou par tente ou par autre estrument apointé; puis mondefie cele char fautree qui est en la plaie, tant com tu pues; puis estudie a restorer la plaie, et a demorer la fistule en la partie defuers le fondement: si iert plus legiere chose au malaide.	If you feel the tent, and between them is the membrane or bone, or it is about to pierce, then there is no hope but through the administration of one of three things: either cauterize as we have said, or cut to the bottom, or if you can, place a tent and treat as before; do not go too deep, so that you do not cut into the structure holding the foundation, and let the discharge come out willingly in that direction; then treat as we have said; perhaps it will be healed. Or remove that covering and clean after it has been cut away from the foundation, by tent or other pointed instrument; then mend that broken bone which is in the wound, as much as you can; then work to heal the wound and to stop the fistula in the part away from the foundation: thus the illness will be lighter.
Et aucune fois sont fistules selonc ceste maniere: et est quant tu boutes la tente en la fistule, et elle est ou costeit dou fondement delez lou cuir desus, si pren une tente percie au chief selonc ceste forme:	And sometimes they are fistulas according to this manner: and it is when you put the tent in the fistula, and it is on the side of the foundation from the skin above, then take a tent pierced at the top according to this shape:
Et i boute .i. fil tort en .ij., et boute la tente a tout le fil en la fistule tant qu’il soit au chief.	And thread .ii. threads through it, and push the tent all the way through the fistula until it reaches the top.
S’elle est persans en la marge dou fondement dedens, adonc estrai lou fil de celui pertus, ensi que tu boutes ton doi ou fondement; et trai le chief dou fil, et assemble les II chiés ensamble, et estraint l’un a l’autre, et le laisse I jor ou II; et le restraint aucune fois, tant que li filz cope ces chars que sont entre dous, et chiecent; puis cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit soudee et sanee.	If it is piercing in the margin of the foundation inside, then pull out the thread from that hole so that you put your finger on the foundation; and pull the end of the thread, and bring the two ends together, and squeeze them, and leave them for a day or two; and sometimes they are squeezed until the threads grip the flesh between them, and separate; then cure the wound until it is sewn and healed.
Se li fistule ne perce, si la fai percier en toutes les manieres que tu pues, s’ele n’est trop em parfont.	If the fistula does not burst, then have it burst in every way you can, if it is not too deep.
Car il ne covient mie faire por le lacement coper si em parfont, et puis le cure, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Because it is not appropriate to bandage too tightly and then to treat, as we have said, until it has healed.
Li forme dou spatumile espinous dont on fent la fistule si est mout agus d’une, part et trenchans; et d’autre part non, por ceu c’on ne cope mie ceu c’on ne doit mie copeir, si com tu vois ci:	The shape of the spatha or thorn that is used to make the fistula is very sharp on one side and smooth on the other; because it should not grip what it should not grab, as you can see here:
des emorroydes	of hemorrhoids
Emorrydes sont selonc II manieres: ou elles sont dedens le fondement, ausi com grain de resin, et s’en i a petites et grans, et en cort adés sanc, et s’en i a une ou plusors, et sont defuer le fondement et au chief dou fondement; mais celles qui sont defuer si ont poc de moistor, et encort adés ou un poc d’aigue citrine ou un poc de sanc, et ont la color dou cors; et li cure de ces qui les ont dedens le fondement, si est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il s’espreigne por aleir en chambres, tant que li fondemens li isse fuer, et c’aperent li filz; si te haste, et le pent as tenailles, ou tu le tien a ton ungle, puis le cope en ses racines; et se li uncine ne les pueent tenir por ses moistors, si les prent a I drapeil, ou a couton, ou d’une piece de chamelot; et les estrai a tes dois, puis les cope, et poudre desus aucunes chaudes poudres que soient en leu de cautere; ou tu les cauterize si com il est dit ou chapistre de cautere, pues les cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li fondemens ne puet issir, si clisterize le malaide de clistere mordant et aspre por laver ceu qui est ou fondement, si qu’il puist issir apertement; cant li malaides se preint, et se li fil sont fuer dou fondement, si est li cure legiere; et est que tu les preignes a ton ungle ou as tenailles, et les cope, puis les cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez, et qu’il redoute l’incision par fer.	Hemorrhoids are of two types: they can be inside the anus, like grains of resin, with both small and large ones, and they draw blood, and some have one or more hemorrhoids, and they protrude from the anus and the top of the anus; but those that protrude have less moisture, and yet they can still draw blood or a little yellow water, and they are colored like the body; and to treat them when they are inside the anus, you should instruct the patient to use the bathroom until the anus relaxes and the veins appear; then quickly grab them with tweezers or your fingernail, then squeeze their roots; if the fingernails cannot hold them due to moisture, then take them with a piece of cloth, or cotton, or a piece of camel hair; then pull them out with your fingers, then squeeze them, and powder them with hot powders that are used as cauterization; you can also cauterize them as described in the chapter on cauterization, then treat other hemorrhoids until they heal; if the anus cannot relax, then cleanse what is inside with a strong and harsh enema so that it can relax completely; when the patient defecates, and if the veins protrude from the anus, then the treatment is simple; grab them with your fingernail or tweezers, squeeze them, then treat them as we have said until they heal and fear incision with iron.
Si covient que tu amenistre la costure selonc ceste maniere: pren I fil tort, et le boute en une aguille, et puis trai le fil au desus et fai percier l’aguille d’autre part, et torne les II chiez dou fil desoz l’aguille, et si soit dou large; et estraint le fil forment, puis noe le fil, et estrai l’aguille, et fai ensi de toz les autres, et en laisse I por corre la superfluiteit dou sanc; puis met sus le fondement I drapeil moilliet en oile roset ou en cerote, et met sus le fondement, et comande au malaide k’il repose; et puis le laisse tant qu’il chiecent, et quant il seront cheut, si les cure d’oignement et d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	You should administer the suture in the following manner: take a twisted thread and put it through a needle; then pull the thread from above and pierce the needle from the other side, and bring both ends of the thread under the needle, and let it be loose; tighten the thread firmly, then tie the thread, remove the needle, and do likewise with all the others, leaving one to draw off the excess blood; then place a damp cloth in rose oil or cerate over the wound, and command the patient to rest; then leave him as long as he needs to until he has healed, and when he has healed, treat it with ointment and other remedies.
dou sechement dou fiens ou fondement	from dryness of the vagina or anus
Maintes fois avient sechement de fiens en l’intestine, et par constrignement de nature, et quant li maladie est vielle et medicine n’i vaut.	Many times there is dryness of the bowels in the intestines, and due to the constraints of nature, and when the illness is old and medicine does not help.
Si covient que tu reses a la point d’un spatumile ou a ton ungle l’escorce desus, qui ne le laisse a moistir; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sodez si com il covient; et s’il ne puet soder, si rencomence la rasure plus fort que devant, tant qu’il saine mout, et soit escorchiez; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	It is necessary to cut the skin at the tip of a spatula or your nail; then treat it until it scabs over as it should; and if it cannot scab over, restart the scraping more vigorously than before, until it heals thoroughly and is scoured; then treat it until it has healed.
dou fremit	where it trembles
Formice est une petite apparance fautree antor le cors, et va mout em parfont; et aucune fois la trueve li frois, et le sent on ausi comme mort de fremit, et vient en tout le cors, et plus as mains que autre part.	Ant is a small creature that creeps beneath the body and moves very quickly. Sometimes it bites, and one feels it as a tremor, like something dead, and it affects the whole body, especially the hands more than any other part.
Et li cure si est que tu pren une cainne d’une penne d’oie, ou une penne de vultul fort, et met celle caine sus le fremit, tant que li cercles porpreigne le fremit tot entor; puis torne ta main a tout la cainne tant que tu copes tout entor le fremit, et le met em parfont, et esraiche le fremit de ses racines.	And the cure is to take a feather of a goose or a strong vulture, and place that feather on the tremor, until the purple circle around the tremor; then turn your hand all around the feather, so as to press all around the tremor, and push it deeply, and draw out the tremor by its roots.
Et se tu vues, si fai ceu d’une caine d’arain ou de fer selonc ceste forme, et soit subtilz desoz et traians desus:	And if you see, make it with a cane of bronze or iron according to this form, and let it be thin underneath and drawn out on top.
ne mie perciet, por mues tenir au doi, et mues presser Et se tu vues, si cauterize lou fremit, si com il est devant ou chapistre de cautere.	Do not pierce it, so that it can be held in the hand, and press and squeeze it. And if you see, cauterize the shiver, as it is before in the chapter on cautery.
de la forme dou clistere	of the shape of the enema
Aucune fois fait on clistere d’argent ou d’archaut, ou d’arain fondut ou mailliet; et aucune fois fait on de ces estrumens petis et grans, selonc ces a cui il sont amenistrez.	Sometimes an enema is made of silver or brass, or of molten copper or sheet metal; and sometimes they are made small or large, according to those to whom they are administered.
Cil donques c’on amenistre en la cure des enfans et qui sont foible et dolorous, sont petis.	Those that are administered to children, the weak and sick, should be small.
Li forme dou clistere petit et grant si est desus large, ou li ventres est liiez selonc ceste maniere:	The shape of the enema, whether it is small or large, depends on the width of the rectum, according to this method:
et i ait une desevrance ou li ventres soit liiez, si com tu vois, et li chiez soit dedens perciez; et ait a l’un des costez II pertus, et en l’autre I; et soit li ventres ou om met les medicines d’une vessie de beste ou de parchemin, et soit perciez tout entor de menus pertus, et ait entre chescun pertus I doit d’espaice, puis boute en ces pertus I fil fort de fil crut tort en X ou enqui entor, et assemble le ventre si com est une chievre; et quant li medicine est dedens, si la lie a l’estrument devant d’un fil fort, puis clisterize; et c’est li forme dou cercle:	And there is a hole where the belly is tied, as you see, and the anus is inside pierced; and it has two openings on one side and one on the other; and the belly is where one puts the medicines in a bladder or parchment, pierced all around with small holes, and between each hole is a distance of an inch, then tie it around with a strong thread, twisted in an X or spiral around, and assemble the belly as one does to a goat; and when the medicine is inside, then tie it with a strong string, and clysterize; and this is the form of the circle:
Et soit li medicine ne trop chaude ne trop froide, et oint le chief dou clistere d’oile ou d’aubun d’uef, ou de semblant chose, puis le boute ens legierement; puis l’espreigne li ministres a ses II mains ensamble, tant qu’il soit toz vuis, puis estrai lou clistere, et lieve li malaides ses jambes a la paroit, et se li medicine vuet issir, si la teigne tant com il puet; et s’il dort une nuit atot, si est plus grans aide.	Let the medicine be neither too hot nor too cold, and anoint the head of the syringe with oil or egg white, or something similar, then insert it gently; then the minister should squeeze his two hands together simultaneously until they are both empty, then remove the syringe, and let the patient lower his legs to the ground; if the medicine wants to come out, he should hold it as long as he can; and if he sleeps for a night, it is even more helpful.
Et se tu le clisterizes em maladie de decorrement de ventre, et li medicine se haste d’issir, si le rencomence tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you use the syringe for the sickness of a flowing stomach, and the medicine rushes out, he should repeat it until he is cured.
Et se li emorroide sont ou fondement, ou aposteme, si soit li clistere ausi subtilz com por I enfant; et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil sus coi li cuir soit estraint:	And if the hemorrhoids are in the anus or rectum, or an abscess, then the syringe should be as fine as for a child; and it is the subtle shape of the syringe that causes the skin to be stretched:
des plaies	of wounds
Nos avons jai dit en la division la cure des plaies; or vos dirons les cures de mains et de medicine, selonc l’acomplissement.	We have already discussed in the division the cure of wounds; now we will discuss manual and medicinal cures according to their completion.
Je dis que les plaies sont diverses selonc ceu qu’elles sont faites, et selonc les leus ou les plaies sont faites, et de coi elles sont faites.	I say that wounds are diverse according to how they are made, and according to the place where the wounds are made, and what makes them.
Les choses par coi plaies sont faites sont par gitement de piere, et taille d’espee et de couteil, ou de lance ou de fust ou de siette, ou de semblans choses; ou que sont faites selonc les leus dou cors, si com plaie que chiet sus le col, ou sus le chief, ou le peis, ou le ventre, ou le foie, et semblans membres; et je vos dirai la cure de chescune plaie, et encomencerai as plaies dou chief simples, car li remenbrance venra en son chapistre.	The things by which wounds are made are by the impact of stones, and cutting with sword or knife, or lance or staff or arrow, or similar objects; or they are made according to the places in the body, such as a wound that falls on the neck, or head, or foot, or stomach, or liver, and similar members; and I will tell you the treatment of each wound, and I will begin with simple wounds of the head, for the memory will come in its chapter.
Je dis que quant simple plaie vient ou chief, et li os n’est brisiez, si pren garde se c’est de gitement de piere ou de semblans choses, et li cuir est toutevoie rompus et est li plaie grans, et tu doutes levement d’aposteme chaut: si le fai tantost sainier de la cephalique meismement s’il vient poc de sanc de la plaie, et soit li sainie au contraire de la partie navree; et eschuisse li malaides repletion de vin et de viandes grosses.	I say that when a simple wound comes to the head, and the bone is not broken, one should take care if it is from a blow of stone or similar objects, and the skin is still broken and the wound is large, and you quickly doubt a hot abscess: then make the patient bleed with the cephalic vein itself if there is little blood coming from the wound, and the bleeding should be in the opposite direction from the injured part; and let the patient avoid fullness of wine and rich foods.
Et s’il ne vuet sainier, si soit amenuisie sa viande, et ne boive point de vin, ne ne menjuce point de char; et met sor la plaie, se apostemes chaus i vient, coton moilliet en oile roset soulement, ou en vin stiptice; et s’il n’i a aposteme chaut, si met sus la plaie, s’elle est fresche a tout son sanc, et elle n’est muee par l’air, poudre, que je dirai un poc ci aprés; et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucuns oignemens, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if he does not want to bleed, then let his food be diminished, and do not drink wine or eat meat; and put cotton moistened with rose oil only on the wound, if hot abscesses come from it, or put wine with a styptic agent on it; and if there is no hot abscess, then put powder on the wound, if all its blood is fresh and it has not been moved by air.
Et se li plaie est grans si com de tailleure d’espee et de semblans, et les levres ne se pueent assembler par tentes, si les assemble par cousture, si com je dirai as plaies dou ventre, de la costure.	And if the wound is large, like that of a sword, and the lips cannot be brought together by sutures, then bring them together by stitches, as I will describe for wounds in the abdomen, in the rib cage.
Se li plaie est descoverte de l’os, et pent, et ne tient mais que a un poc, si le cope; puis cure la plaie de medicine, et restoure char dure en leu de cuir, et comande au malaide a mengier grosses viandes, si com testes et froment cuit, ausi com poulz, et semblans choses.	If the wound is exposed to the bone, and gapes open, and holds only by a little bit of skin, then cut it; next, cure the wound with medicine, and restore hard flesh in place of skin, and instruct the patient to eat coarse meats, such as testes and cooked wheat, as well as fowl, and similar things.
Et se tu trueves ou cuir porriture, et il n’aert a l’os, si cope lou porrit tot, et giete fuer, puis le cure; et se il ait artere en la plaie ou voine, dont sans cort, et il ne puet estainchier par medicines, si quier l’artere, et se tu la trueves desloie, si la lie d’un fil; et se ceu ne profite mie, si la cauterize.	And if you find rot in the skin, and it does not reach the bone, then cut away the rot, and gouge it out; then cure it, and if there is an artery in the wound or vein, which causes bleeding without stopping, and medicine does not stem the flow, then tie off the artery, and if that does not help, cauterize it.
Et se ces plaies sont petites et simples, si est li cure legiere: et est que tu mettes ens ceste poudre qui soude ainsois que li ars l’ait muee.	And if these wounds are small and simple, the treatment is easy: put this powder on so that it will not move until the wound has healed.
Et li maniere de la poudre si est: pren encens une partie; sanc de dragon II parties; chalz vive III parties, et le poudre subtilment, et emple la plaie, et l’estraint forment, tant qu’elle s’aerse bien et se joigne a tout son sanc; et puis la lie bien, et la laisse sens desliier, s’elle n’enfle; car on n’oste la madicine tant qu’ele soit sanee.	And the method of the powder is as follows: take frankincense one part, dragon's blood two parts, quicklime three parts, and finely ground it, then apply it to the wound, and bind it tightly so that it heals well and joins with all its blood; and then dress it well and leave it untied if it does not swell; for the medicine is not removed until it is healed.
Et aucune fois fait on ceu de chalz soulement, quant on n’ait l’encens ne lou sanc de dragon, mais que li ars n’ait muee la plaie.	And sometimes cautery is done with a hot iron only, when one does not have incense or dragon's blood; but the wound must be moved by the cautery.
Et se li ars ait mueit la plaie, meismement en esteit, si n’i met om mie ceste poudre; mais met sus aucuns oignemens digestis, ou poulz de farine d’orge faites d’aigue et de miel, tant qu’ele giete bowe; puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the wound has been moved by the fire, and it is in the same place, do not put any of this powder on it; but apply some soothing ointments, or barley flour made from water and honey, until it feels better; then cure it with other cures until it is healed.
Et se li brisure d’os vient avec la plaie, et elle est petite, si l’estrai as pinceures subtilz; et je vos dirai ci aprés les brisures dou chief.	And if a bone fracture comes with the wound, and it is small, I will extract it with thin pincers; and I will tell you about fractures of the head later.
de la plaie dou col	of a wound on the neck
Se plaie vient ou col et elle est simple, si n’a point de difference entre li et celi dou chief, mais se li ners dou col ou li artere est copee.	If the wound is in the neck and it is simple, there is no difference between it and that of the head, but if the nerve of the neck or artery is cut.
Se c’est li ners, si n’i a autre engien que laissier la cure, et n’i mettre nulle chose restraignant, car il nuit as ners et les fait retraire; et ne mettre sus la plaie rien froit, car li substance des ners est froide, et li continuation d’aus si est avec le cerveil, qui est li plus haus membres; mais soit li medicine souez, si com chalz lavee en aigue douce, et mellee avec oile roset, et cucie lavee ausi en aigue douce, et autres pieres de mine selonc ceste maniere, et oignemens moistes.	If it is a nerve, there is nothing else to do but let the cure take its course, and not put anything constricting on it, for it hurts the nerves and makes them withdraw; and do not put anything cold on the wound, for the substance of the nerves is cold, and their continuation with the brain, which is the highest member; but use soothing medicines, such as washed chalk in fresh water, and mixed with rosemary oil, and cooked washed in fresh water, and other stones according to this method, and moist ointments.
Et se li plaie est grans, si la cout et lie de bendes, puis la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the wound is large, cut it and bind it with bandages, then treat it until it is healed.
Et se les plaies sont parfondes et ele est chevee et pleinne de bowe, si la perce ou plus bas leu; et se li artere est copee, et decorremens de sanc en vient, si la desoivre, et la loie, et la cauterize se mestier est; et se li espinee de la gorge est copee, ou li keurs, et li conduiz est gardez, par coi la viande va, si cout le keur sus la cainne de la gorge, et ne touchier la gorge mais la remet selonc sa figure naturel; et puis l’estraint avenanment, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le cure d’oignemens desechans tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li plaie a fait empression en l’os, si la quier; et s’il i a pieces d’os, si les trai fuers toz se tu pues, et ces que tu ne pues avoir, si laisse tant que li plaie porrisse, et soit desevree et aligie li issue; et se li plaie est fresche, si poudre sus la poudre que j’ai dit.	And if the wounds are deep and it is chapped and full of pus, then pierce it or cut lower down; and if an artery is cut, and there is a flow of blood, then ligature it and cauterize it if necessary; and if the spine of the throat is cut, or the windpipe, and the food passage is blocked, so that food cannot pass, then cut the windpipe above the cartilage of the throat, and do not touch the throat but reset it according to its natural shape; and then ligature it appropriately, and leave it for a few days, then treat with a poultice until it is healed; and if the wound has made an impression on the bone, then drill it out; and if there are pieces of bone, then remove all that you can, and leave those that you cannot reach until the wound suppurates and is cleared and the passage is unblocked; and if the wound is fresh, then apply powder over the powder I mentioned earlier.
Et s’il a en la plaie os et il i a fistule, si la cure ensi com j’ai dit en son chapistre.	And if there is bone in the wound and there is a fistula, treat it as I have described in its chapter.
de la plaie de lance ou de coutel	of the wound from a spear or knife
Se c’est cop de lance ou de coutel, et li plaie est parfonde, si regarde se de la plaie saut ventositez cant li malaides alainne: saiches adonques que li plaie est mortelz; et s’elle n’est parfonde, et elle est fresche a tout son sanc, si n’i mettre mie a la premiere houre la poudre, ne ne la liier mie por le sanc que ne demorse em parfont, et reviegne au cuer, et ocie lou malaide; mais i met oignement atractif, et le lie II fois le jor; et se tu n’as oignement, si met en la plaie viel coton por succier fuers la moistor, et fai dormir le malaide sus la plaie III jors, ou IIII, ou plusors; si n’i venra mie spasme, ne tremor male de cuer n’estraingnemens d’alainne; et quant tu vois les bones dispositions, si saiches que li plaie est sauve.	If it is a wound from a lance or knife, and the wound is deep, then examine if the wound bleeds profusely: you will know that the wound is mortal. But if the wound is not deep, and it is fresh with all its blood, then do not put the powder in at first, nor ligature it for the bleeding that may occur profusely and return to the heart, and kill the patient; but apply an attractive ointment, and bind it twice a day. And if you have no ointment, then put old cotton in the wound to suck out the moisture, and let the patient sleep on the wound for three, or four, or more days; thus no spasms, nor tremors of the heart, nor pains of the body will come. And when you see good signs, then you will know that the wound is healed.
Cure la donques de tentes et d’autres cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’elle ne puet saner, et oevre, adés saiches que il i a fistule; si la cure si com on doit.	Treat it then with poultices and other remedies until it is healed; and if it cannot heal and continues to suppurate, you will know that there is a fistula; treat it as such.
Et se li plaie est d’incision d’espee ou de coutel, et elle est simple, ou pis ou au dos, si la cure de ceu qui est devant; s’elle est grans, de cousture; et s’elle est petite, de poudre, et s’elle est empressee en l’os, et en a copeit pieces, si quier la plaie, et les trai fuers s’il sont desevrez; et s’il ne sont desevrez, si laisse porrir la plaie, si aligera li estractions; et des autres plaies as autres membres est li jugemens si com nos avons dit.	And if the wound is from a sword or knife incision, and it is simple, in the front or back, treat it as before; if it is large, sew it up; and if small, treat it with powder, and if it has pierced deep into the bone, and broken off pieces, remove the wound, and the foreign bodies if they are loose; but if they are not loose, let the wound fester to ease the extraction; for other wounds in other limbs, the treatment is as we have said.
dou derrompement dou ventre	rupture of the belly
Li derompemens dou ventre est grans et moiens et petis; de la grant plaie saut aucune fois li intestine, ou li ners des intestines, par coi li intromission d’aus; et li costure est plus malaisie, et aucune fois vaut pis li petite plaie que li grans, por ceu c’on remet plus a poinnes les intestines en, s’on ne les i remet de chaut en chaut; por ce que li intestine enflent tantost qu’il sentent le froit, si rentrent plus a poinnes, et por ceu vaut mues li moieinne plaie, por ceu c’on ramoine mues l’intestine a son leu que as autres II Et saiches que li routure dou ventre est selonc IIII manieres: les II costures communes avienent en la costure dou ventre, et li costure des autres plaies dou cors et II autres costures propres sont communes as autres plaies; et toutevoie elles sont plus propres avec la costure dou ventre, et je dirai une chescune et declairerai.	There are great, medium and small ruptures of the belly; from the large wound sometimes the intestines or the nerves of the intestines emerge, through which the intestinal passages occur; and sewing it up is more difficult, and sometimes a small wound is worse than a large one, because one must return the intestines into it little by little, as they are more likely to swell when they feel cold, so they return in more quickly; therefore a minor wound is better, as one can reset the intestine to its place more easily than with others.And know that there are four types of ruptures of the belly: the two common sutures occur in the sewing up of the belly, and the sutures of other wounds on the body; and the other two sutures are specific to the belly, and I shall explain each one.
Je di que quant li plaie est petite, et aucune chose de l’intestine ist fuer, et griés chose est dou remettre, ceu est par l’une des II manieres: ou por la petitece de la plaie, si com nos avons dit, ou por ce que li intestine est enflez por le froit.	I say that when the wound is small, and something of the intestines has come out, and a grievous thing is to be remedied, it is by one of two methods: either due to the smallness of the wound as we have said, or because the intestines are swollen due to cold.
Et quant il est frois, eschaufez lou en teil maniere: moillie une esponge ou I mol drapeil en aigue tede soulement, ou tu cuis en aigue squinant et cipre et spique, et arose l’intestine tant que li enfleure soit ostee; et aucune fois fait ce vins restraingnans, et est muedre que awe soule por desenfler.	And when it is cold, warm it in such a manner: moisten a sponge or a soft cloth in tepid water only, or boil in water with squill and cyprus and spice, and wipe the intestines until the swelling is relieved; and sometimes wine that has been restrained and cooled is useful for reducing swelling.
Et quant tu vois l’enfleure departir, si amoiste l’intestine d’aigue ou altee et malves soient cuites, car par ceu est aligie li entree a poc de chose; et s’il n’i puet entrer, si fent un poc la plaie a l’estrument de coi on cope les emorroydes; et li premiere cure est muedre que li taille, que nus n’i doit taillier sens grant necessiteit n’i ait; et c’est li estrumens por le fendre: si trenche dedens en la corbeure et defuer non, et vez ci la forme:	And when you see the swelling departing, then moisten the intestines with water or altus and malva that have been cooked, for by this there is a constriction of the entrance due to a little thing; and if it cannot enter, then make a small opening in the wound with an instrument used for hemorrhoids; and the first treatment is better than cutting, which one should not do without great necessity; and the instrument for splitting it is: insert into the curve and displace it, and see the shape:
Et quant li plaie est enlargie, et li intestine saut fuer, si le remet arer selonc la forme naturel en son leu propre, se tu en as pooir, car ce vaut mues.	And when the wound is enlarged and the intestines jump out, he puts them back according to their natural shape in their proper place, if you have the power, because it is better that way.
Quant li plaie est large, et elle est en la partie desoz lou ventre, si covient que tu faices gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et met ses jambes plus haut que son chief; et s’elle est en la partie desoz le ventre, si met le chief et le pis plus haut que les parties desoz, et ausi se li routure dou ventre est en l’une des II parties si met t’entente en ceu que li partie navree soit plus haute que li autre; et ensi covient amenistrer ceu que je dis en plaies grans et moienes.	And when the wound is large and it is in the lower abdomen, you should make the patient lie on his back and raise his legs above his head; and if it is in the lower abdomen, then he should be made to lie on his side with his head and feet higher than the lower parts, and also if the rupture in the abdomen is in one of the sides, then one part should be higher than the other; and thus you should arrange as I say for large and medium wounds.
Es plaies petites met ceu que t’est apparilliet, puis aies entre tes mains I ministre pitous ki teigne toute la routure a sa main, et assemble les levres; et c’est la maniere commune de costures, et est que tu preignes une aguille ou plusors, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce de la plaie, puis laisse des le chief de la plaie I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une aguille ou il ait I boin fil fort; et perce les II chiés dou cuir avec les II chiés dou siphac, qui est desoz le cuir dedens, tant que tu la faices percier de celle partie, et assemble les II chief dou siphac les IIII ensamble; puis l’estrain d’un fil double entor l’aguille de II pars, puis assemble les II chiés de la plaie avenanment, et puis laisse I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une autre aguille; puis la lie dou fil si com tu as fait la premiere aguille, et ne cesser de ceu faire selonc ceu que tu as mestier des aguilles, tant que toute li plaie soit restrainte; et soient les aguilles moienes, entre subtilz et grosses, car les aguilles subtilz copent toute la char, et les trop grosses si ne pueent mie bien entrer: por ceu covient qu’elles soient moienes; et ne covient mie bouter les aguilles trop au defuer de la char et dou cuir, k’elles ne copent et oevrent la plaie devant la soudure; et puis cope les chiés des aguilles, qu’elles ne blecent lou malaide au dormir, et i met tentes ou drapelz au chiés des aguilles por mues tenir, et les laisse tant que li plaie soit soudee; et ceste maniere de costure as aguilles est plus covenauble en petites plaies, car il i soffist une aguille ou II Li seconde costure si est commune, et est que tu assemble les II chiés dou cuir et les II chiés dou syfac ensamble a une aguille ou il ait I fort fil moien; et quant tu avras perciez ces chiez toz IIII ensamble, si ramoinne l’aguille a la partie ou tu as encomenciet, en la maniere c’on cout les dras; et met d’espaice entre chescune costure la grossece d’un menor doi; ceste costure sevent li home, et je cousi une plaie c’uns hons avoit ou ventre, qui estoit navrez d’un coutel, et estoit li plaie plus d’une palme de grant, et issoit des intestines bien II palmes de grant, et estoit li plaie enmi le ventre.	For small wounds, use whatever you have available, then take a piece of thread between your fingers and tie the wound's edges together; this is the common method of suturing, and it involves taking a needle with a strong thread, leaving a gap at the head of the wound, and piercing both sides of the skin and the underlying tissue below until you reach the other side, then tying off the thread around the needle so that there is a double thread; then bring the edges of the wound together gently, leaving another gap, and insert another needle; continue doing this according to how many needles you need for the wound's size, making sure the needles are not too thin or too thick, and don't push them too deeply into the flesh or skin so they don't cut or open the wound before it heals; then tie off the threads so that they don't bother the patient when he sleeps, and place tents or pieces of cloth over the needle heads to hold them in place until the wound is healed; this method of suturing with needles is best for small wounds. The second type of suturing is common, and involves taking a needle with a strong thread and tying together the edges of the skin and underlying tissue on both sides at one needle, then bringing the needle back to where you started in the manner that drapes are sewn; space each suture the width of a minor finger; this method works for both men and women, and I once sewed up a man's wound on his abdomen that was cut with a knife; the wound was more than a palm wide, and the intestines protruded more than two palms out, and the wound was in the middle of his abdomen.
Je li ramenai l’intestine puis k’il ot esteit XXIIII houres fuer, et fut li plaie soudee jusc’a XV jors, et le curai, et fut sanez.	I returned his intestines after they had been out for 24 hours, and the wound was sutured for 15 days, and I healed it, and he recovered.
Et li mire l’avoient jugiet qu’il morroit, et ce fut miracle; et ne le curai mie d’oignement, car je estoie en I leu ou on n’en trovoit point, ne nule medicines; et metoie sens plus sus la plaie coton viel II fois le jor, et le lavoie d’aigue de miel tant qu’il fut sanez.	And they had judged that he would die, and it was a miracle; and I did not treat him with ointment, for I was in a place where one could not find any medicine; and I put old cotton on the wound twice a day, and washed it with water of honey until he recovered.
Or vos dirai les II propres manieres de cousture: pren l’aguille, et la boute des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens; quant elle a perciet le keur de droit en droit, si lai le chief dou siphac ou cousteit ou tu as bouteit l’aguille, et la fai percier d’autre part des la partie dedens jusc’a celi defuer; et li entendemens de ceste costure si est que tu cous ausi com li peletier font les pelz, et que tu laisses une fois le syfac d’une part, et le reprent d’autre, tant que li costure soit toute acomplie.	Now I will tell you the two proper methods of suturing: take the needle and pierce it from the outside into the inside; when it has pierced the skin directly in, then lay hold of the thread on the inside where you inserted the needle, and have it pierce through the other side of the outside layer into the inside. And the understanding of this suturing is that you sew as the furriers do furs, and you leave a turn of the thread on one side, and take it up on the other, until the entire suturing is complete.
Li seconde maniere de costure, que Galiens dist proprement, si est si com aucun font, qui assemblent les II parties ensamble naturelment, et apploient l’un des chief dou syfac a l’autre chief, en teil maniere: fiche une aguille ou chief dou mirach prochiene, et fai percier celui leu soulement, et laisse les II chiés dou syfac; puis torne l’aguille, et la fai percier des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, as II chiés dou syfac; puis fai percier l’un et l’autre des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, en II autres chiés dou mirach que sont on l’autre costeit; et c’est li muedre maniere de costure et li plus commune.	The second method of stitching, which Galen describes correctly, is like that used by some who join two pieces of skin together naturally, and apply one end of a thread to the other, in the following manner: insert a needle at the tip of the nose, and pierce only that spot, leaving the two ends of the thread; then turn the needle and pierce through from the outside to the inside, at the two tips of the nose; then pierce one and then the other from the outside to the inside, in two other places on the nose that are on the opposite side; this is the correct way to stitch and the most common.
Galiens si dist ceste parolle, et aucun le tesmoignent, c’on doit coudre le ventre a II aguilles, ou il ait fil en chescune; et doit on bouter l’une aguille d’une part, et l’autre d’autre, en la maniere de ces qui cousent corroies; et saiches que quant li routure est enmi lou ventre, si est li cousture plus griez que des autres leus dou ventre.	Galen says this, and some witnesses it, that one should sew the belly with two needles, with a thread in each; and one should push one needle from one side and the other from the other, in the manner of those who sew wounds; and know that when the sutures are in the middle of the belly, the stitching is more difficult than in other places on the belly.
Li jugemens de la plaie si est telz com li jugemens des autres plaies: et est que quant tu trueves la plaie fresche a tout son sanc, ainsois que li ars l’ait muee, si remet arer l’intestine, et lou cout; puis met sus la poudre enjanrant char, et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucun oignement que soit present, tant que li plaie bowe; et chicent li fil, et soient soudez li sifac, et li mirach; puis cure la plaie si com les autres, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu n’as medicines, si met sus, tantost qu’ele comance a giter bowe, coton viel, et le remue II fois le jor tant k’il soit sanez.	The judgments of the wound are such as the judgments of other wounds: and it is that when you find the fresh wound all its blood, so that the burn has moved, then put back the intestine, and the cover; then put on the powder-encasing charcoal, and if the burn has moved, put on any ointment that is present, until the wound heals; and sew the thread, and seal the sutures, and the mirror; then cure the wound as the others, until it is healed; and if you do not have medicine, put on old cotton immediately when it begins to heal bow, and move it twice a day until it is healed.
Car tu n’as mestier d’autre medicine en plusors dispositions cant les plaies sont simples; et se tu doutes que li plaie ne faice communiteit as membres principelz, si covient ke tu moilles lainne legiere en oile de tempree chalor, ou en oile roset, et la met entor les angres, et desoz les asselles; et s’il sent dolor ou porriture en bouelz, et maintes fois avient, si les clisterize de vin noir tede, et meismement se li porriture vient jusc’a l’intestine; et le perce dedens, et saiches que quant c’est li gros intestines, si est plus legier a saner que li petis.	For you do not need any other medicine in many dispositions where the wounds are simple; and if you doubt that the wound will make community with the principal members, then you should moisten light wool in tempered oil, or rose oil, and put it around the angles, and under the shelves; and if there is pain or porridge in the bowels, and often happens, then enema with warm black wine, and likewise if the porridge comes just to the intestine; and perceive that when it is the large intestines, it is easier to heal than the small.
Li intestine qui est apelez «jeun» ne puet saner quant il est navrez, et c’est por la planteit des voinnes que i sont, et por la subtiliteit de tout le cors, et l’aprochement de sa nature des ners.	The intestine, which is called 'young', cannot heal when it is raw, and this is due to the thinness of the veins that it has, and because of the subtlety of the whole body, and its proximity in nature to the nerves.
Et si li zirbe saut de la plaie, si le remet arrier ausi com l’intestine, tandis qu’il est fres; et s’il est vielz et devenus vers ou noir, si covient que tu lies le leu qui est noir, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, car il i a voinnes et arteres; puis cope ceu qui est entre le liien, et met les II chiés pendans des la partie desoz la plaie jusque defuer por aligier l’estraction quant li zirbes chiet, et li plaie bowe.	If the skin tears away from the wound, then put it back as you would with the intestine, while it is fresh; and if it has become old and turned green or black, then you should ligate the area that is black so that bleeding does not occur there, for there are veins and arteries there; then cut away what is between the ligature, and hold the two edges of the wound pendant from the lower part of the wound until it is ready to be extracted when the skin tears, and the wound heals.
de la routure dou boueil	of the road of the boil
Quant li intestine est rons, et li plaie est petite, si la puet on restorer en aucuns homes, por ceu que je vis que uns hons fut navrez ou ventre d’une lance; et estoit li plaie au destre de l’estomac, et fut envillie et devint fistule, et en issoit li egestion et li ventositez; je i mis cure selonc ceu que je poi, et ne cessai de subtilier tant qu’il fut sanez, et li leus soudez.	When the intestine is torn, and the wound is small, then one can restore it in some people, for I saw a man who was pierced by a lance in the belly; and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, and it became an abscess and fistula, and from it came both defecation and flatulence; I applied a dressing according to what I could, and did not cease to suck until he was healed, and the wounds closed.
Et quant je le vis souder, je doutai que li malaides n’eust mal en son ventre; et il n’i ot point de mal, mais demora en millors dispositions, et menjans et bevans; et dirent aucun experimentors que quant il a petite plaie en l’intestine, qu’il doit estre liiez en teil maniere: pren fremis a grans testes, puis assemble les levres de la plaie, et quant li fremis ait overte la bouche, si la met sus les II levres, si qu’elle estraigne sa bouche sus; et puis li cope la teste, et ce se tient si qu’il ne puet desliier, puis met I autre fremit aprés en celle maniere que devant, tant que li plaie soit toute porprise; et cout la plaie.	And when I saw him sew up the wound, I doubted that the patient would have pain in his belly; and he had no pain at all but remained in a better condition, eating and drinking. And some experimenters said that when there is a small wound in the intestine, it must be bound in such a way: take a thread from a large testicle, then bring together the lips of the wound, and when the thread has opened its mouth, put it on both lips so that it stretches his mouth; and then tie off the thread, and it will stay as it is so that it cannot come undone. Then put another thread after in the same way until the wound is completely closed, and then cut the wound.
Cil chief si s’aerdent en l’intestine, et ne vient nulle nuisance au malaide, et se puet on liier l’intestine d’un fil subtil qui est copez de l’intestine d’une beste, en teil maniere: pren le chief de cest fil d’intestine que soit mout descharnez, et puis lie au chief de cest fil I fil de lin subtil tort, puis boute le fil en l’aguille, et en cout l’intestine, et le ramoinne en la routure; et ceste maniere de costure de fremis nen est fuers que selonc la voie de fiance et d’esperance; et se li plaie est grans et large, meismement quant elle est en l’un des grailes intestines, si n’i a engien ne santeit, fuer que subtiliteit.	If these sores are in the intestine and do not cause any harm to the patient, then one can sew up the intestine with a fine thread cut from an animal's intestine in this way: take the end of this intestinal thread which is very dry, then tie it to a fine linen thread which is twisted, put the thread through the needle, pierce the intestine and sew it up; and this method of sewing with threads is certain only according to the hope and expectation. And if the wound is large and wide, especially when it is in one of the gravelly intestines, there is no health or cure unless with great subtlety.
de fistule ou qu’ele soit	of fistula wherever it may be
Saiches que toute plaie ou aposteme, quant il enveillist, si est apelee universement «fistule», et meismement quant elle est chevee et rent bowe.	Know that any wound or abscess, when it wakes up, is universally called a "fistula", and especially when it is swollen and becomes pus-filled.
Et fistule est selonc la verteit nodation fautree dure et blainche, ou on ne sent dolor, et est ausi chevee com li penne d’un oiseil; et aucune fois en saut clere bowe, et autre fois espesse; aucune fois poc, et autre fois assez; et je en ai jai parleit en la division des plaies, que toute plaie que n’est sanee, et il n’i a char, ce n’est fuers que par une des VIIII causes: c’est a savoir, par la petitece dou sanc ou cors; ou por sa malice; ou por ceu qu’il i a char dure dedens, et sus les levres, que n’i laisse naistre char; ou il i a trop de bowe; ou li leus est porris, et li matiere est de male qualiteit; ou li medicine n’est mie bone en la cure; ou por ceu que li corruption est maniere de pestilence; ou por la proprieteit en la region est tardive li digestion, et tarde li santeit, et enflee par nature; ou il i a voinnes ou os: et j’ai ja mostreit toutes ces causes, et les signes, et les cures de medicines en la division.	And a fistula is according to the green nodule made of a hard white lump, where there is no pain, and it is as swollen as the eye of a bird; and sometimes it clearly pops out, and sometimes it becomes thick; sometimes little, and sometimes quite a lot; and I have already spoken about these in the division of wounds, that any wound that isn't healed and has no pus, this is only due to one of the nine causes: that is, because of the smallness of the blood or body; or because of its malice; or because there is hard matter within it, and on the lips, which does not allow pus to form; or there is too much swelling; or the place is poor, and the matter is of bad quality; or the medicine is not good in the treatment; or because the corruption is of a pestilential nature; or because the digestion in the region is slow, and the healing is delayed, and it is swollen by nature; or there are veins or bones: and I have already shown all these causes, and their signs, and the cures of medicines in the division.
Or covient que je te faice a savoir la cure de fistule qui est faite par oevre de mains.	Now I will tell you about the treatment for a fistula that is done by hand.
Saiches que fistule avient en tous membres dou cors; car il i a fistules que vienent as grans voines, et as arteres, et as ners, ou au syfac, ou a l’intestine, ou a la vessie, ou a aucunes des costes, ou a l’espinee dou dos, ou a aucune jointe des mains ou des piez; et si a teil que vient a la proprieteit dou membre principeil, et as semblans leus.	You should know that fistulas can occur in any part of the body; for there are fistulas that come from large veins, and arteries, and nerves, from the syphilis, or intestines, or bladder, or any of the sides, or the spine of the back, or any joint of the hands or feet; and also those which come to the principal property of the main member, and similar places.
Et toutes les fistules que sont de ceste maniere sont de grief sanation, et n’i a fors que labour, et ignorance; et se il i a aucune fistule que ne veigne mie jusc’a leu que j’ai dit, et tu as fiance de la cure, et tu la vues conoistre, si pren une tente d’arain ou de fer, se li fistule est droite, si la quier; et se li fistule est torte, si la cerche d’une subtil tente de plonc, car li plons se ploie mues entor la tortuositeit; et se li fistule a mains pertus et tu ne la pues mie bien cerchier par tentes, si la clisterize par l’un des pertus, car la moistors si cort d’un pertus a autre, et la mundifie; puis la quier saigement a ton pooir, que tu conoisses s’il i a os ou nerf, et est chevee em parfont, et demande bien au malaide de la dolor qu’il sent au presser de ta main, et le leu ou il la sent; et quant tu savras vraiement le leu ou elle est, et s’elle est loing de jointure, ou de nerf, ou d’artere ou de voine, ou en aucuns des leus que je t’ai dit, si la cope selonc ceu que je t’ai dit, et oste fuer la fautreure et les chars corrumpues que sont dedens; et puis la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee, et se li fistule est bien parfonde de droit endroit, si covient que tu copes em parfont, tant com tu pues, puis i met tentes moillies en medicine ague, et les boute jusc’au chief de la fistule, tant que li medicine corrode la superfluiteit qui est demoree au fons; et puis i met oignemens enjanrans sainne char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez par ceu, si le cauterize si com nos avons dit, et se li os est corrompus de la fistule, si le cope.	And all the fistulas that are in this way are of grief sanation, and there is nothing but labor and ignorance; and if there is any fistula that does not come to the place I have said, and you have confidence in the cure, and you see it being understood, then take an iron or bronze tent, if the fistula is straight, then probe it; and if the fistula is crooked, then probe with a thin piece of lead, for the lead bends according to the crookedness. And if the fistula has multiple openings and you cannot probe it well with tents, then cleanse it by enema through one of the openings, for moisture goes from one opening to another, and cleanses; then press it hard in your hand to the point that you can feel whether there is bone or nerve, and test its depth, and ask the patient about the pain they feel when you press. And when you know the true location, and if it is far from a joint, or nerve, or artery, or vein, or any of the places I have mentioned, then probe it according to what I have told you, and remove the festered matter and rotten flesh that is inside; then cure it until it is healed. And if the fistula is very deep and straight, then you should probe as deeply as you can, then place moist tents in medical water, and insert them into the head of the fistula to the point that the medicine corrodes the excess that remains at the bottom. Then apply ointments to promote healthy flesh, until it is healed; and if it is not healed by this method, then cauterize as we have said. And if the bone is corrupted by the fistula, then probe it.
Se voinne ou ners ne te greve ou membres principelz, si com nos avons dit; et se li os est descovers, et il i a corruption et noiror, si lou reis tant que li corruption soit toute ostee, puis le cure de choses enjanrans char tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez, et rent bowe si com devant, saiches que tu n’es mie alez jusc’a font: si descuevre et quier tant que tu soies au fons, et oste toute la corruption, puis restore le leu; et s’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	If a vein or nerve troubles your principal limbs, as we have said; and if the bone is exposed, and there is decay and blackness, then treat it with things that warm until it is healed; and if it is not healed, and returns as before, know that you have not gone deep enough: then expose and probe until you reach the bottom, and remove all the decay, then restore the place; and if it is thus healed, that is good.
Se ceu non, saiches que la corruption est trop en parfont, que tu n’i pues avenir; si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier a nature; et s’il i a i petit os corrumput, et tu le pues traire as tenailles, si l’estrai a I estrument covenauble a ceu, et s’il i a maint os, si les trai trestoz, ne n’en laissier nes un; et se li moistor te fait contraire, et il n’i a error ne paour, si cope et moistor et char, et delivre les os.	If not, know that the decay is too deep for you to reach it; then do nothing but let nature take its course; and if there is a small bone decayed, and you can pull it out with tongs, then extract it with an appropriate instrument for that purpose, and if there are many bones, pull them all out one by one; and if moisture causes contrary effects, without error or fear, then cut and dry and warm, and release the bones.
Et se tu ne les pues oster a une houre, si met sus la plaie chose enjanrant porriture, et laisse tant que li leus soit porris entor les os, et adonc si avront plus legierement les os; et se c’est uns grans os, si com de jambe ou de cuisse, si reis tant soulement la corruption tant que li noiror soit toute ostee, puis restoure la plaie; et s’il en i a grant partie dou corrumput, et vient jusc’a mole de l’os; si le covient soier et coper tout jusc’a la corruption, et puis le cure tant qu’il soit soudez; et je te dirai d’une fistule qui avint I home en sa jambe, si que tu i preignes exemple et aide en ton ovraige.	And if you cannot remove them in an hour, place something over the wound to promote pustulation, and let it fester around the bone, and then the bones will come loose more easily; and if it is a large bone, such as in the leg or thigh, simply treat the corruption until the blackness is gone, then dress the wound; and if a large part of it is rotted away and comes down to the marrow of the bone, it must be cleaned out and packed all the way to the corruption, and then treated until it heals. And I will tell you about a fistula that happened to a man in his leg, so that you may take example and aid from it in your work.
Il fut I jovencelz entor XXX ans, qui ot une dolor en sa jambe d’une cause que vint dedens le cors, tant que les matieres vinrent a la jambe, et fut enflee d’un gros aposteme, et n’ot point de cause defuer por ovrir; mais li mire par lor folie ovrerent tant sus que li apostemes ovri, et en corroient mout de matieres, et devint fistule, et i vint mout de pertus que tuit gitoient bowe et moistor dou cors; et maint mire i mirent cure entor II ans, et n’i ot nul saige en l’art de mains, tant que je i fui apelez, et vi sa jambe et les medicines dont on le curoit, et ceu que corroit par les pertus a grant cors; et devenoit rouges li cors dou jouvenceil, et avoit color citrine.	He was a young man of about 30 years who had pain in his leg from a cause that originated within the body, so much so that the matter came to the leg and it became swollen with a large abscess, and there was no reason to drain it; but through their folly, the surgeons operated on it until the abscess burst, and much matter flowed out, and it became a fistula, and many openings appeared from which pus and moisture from the body issued; and many surgeons treated him for two years, but there was no wise man in the art of medicine among them, so I was called to attend him, and I saw his leg and the remedies with which he was being treated, and the matter flowing from the openings into a great wound; and the skin of the young man became red and had a yellow color.
Je boutai une tente en l’un de ces pertus, et puis cerchai toz les pertus, et trovai que li uns venoit encontre l’autre de toutes les parties de la jambe.	I set up a tent in one of the openings, and then I searched all the openings, and found that some came face to face with others throughout the leg.
Je me hastai donques, et copai en l’un des pertus tant que je descovri une partie de l’os, et le trovai corrumput et perciet, et venoit li corruption jusc’a l’os dedens; je soiai ceu qui m’aparissoit de l’os corrumput, et cuidai qu’il n’i eust autre corruption, fuer que celi que je ostai; et comensai a restourer la plaie de medicines sodans par lonc tens, et ne pot souder; et puis rencomensai, et descovri l’os si com devant, et trovai la corruption continuee en l’os, et la soiai, et puis l’ostai, et me penai de souder le leu; mais je ne pou tant que je copai entor une palme de l’os, et le traï fuer a tout son mole, puis le restourai de medicines; et il fut sanez et soudez hastanment, et ne covint plus rencomencier l’ovraige fors por la foibleté dou malaide, qui ne pooit soffrir, et por la paour de mort que je avoie de lui.	I hastened then, and probed one of the openings until I discovered a part of the bone, which I found to be rotten and pierced, with the corruption extending into the bone; I cleared away what appeared to me to be of the rotten bone, and believed that there was no other corruption besides what I removed; and then began to heal the wound with strong medicines for a long time, but it would not heal; so I began again, and discovered the bone as before, and found the corruption continuing in the bone, which I cleared away, then removed it, and tried my best to heal the site; but I could not heal it despite probing around the bone for about an inch, and then removing all of its rotten matter; afterward, I healed it with medicines; and it was healed rapidly, and there was no need to restart the treatment except because of the weakness of the patient who could not endure it, and due to the fear of death which I had of him.
Car por l’evacuation sanglotoit sovent, mais il fut sanez entierement, et nasquit en leu de l’os une char dure, et fut de bone disposition et n’ot point de nuisement ne de contraire dou tout en tout, ne a l’aleir ne a venir.	For often the blood evacuated, but it was entirely healed, and in place of the bone a hard lump grew, and it was of good disposition and did not cause any harm or discomfort going or coming.
Et se li os est brisiez en aucun leu dou cors, si le covient soier en ceste maniere: pren I liien, et l’estrain au chief de l’os qui apert, et comande aucun k’il l’estende en haut; et met I autre lien de lainne plus gros dou premier liien, et le lie sus la char qui est desor l’os, et estent le chief, si que tu traies la char corrumpue au desoz, et descuevre la char sus le leu ou tu vues soier, que li soie ne blece la char; et met I tison ou une tauble desoz l’os por mues coper la char corrumpue; et covient tant soier com on puet veoir et sentir la corruption, et soier ancor autre fois.	And if the bone is broken anywhere in the body, one should treat it in this way: take a thread and tie it to the head of the exposed bone, and instruct someone to pull it upward; and place another piece of linen underneath the bone, and tie it around the lump that is above the bone, pulling it so that the corrupt flesh is drawn below, and uncovering the flesh above where one sees the need for treatment, so that the thread does not cut into the flesh; and place a hot iron or a wooden plank beneath the bone to press down on the corrupt flesh; and one should continue to treat it in this way until the corruption is visible and can be felt, and then treat it again.
Et se li os est corrumpus, et n’apert mie, et li corruptions est en mileu ou en une partie, si descuevre la char toute; puis met I tison desoz, et puis soie des l’une partie a l’autre la corruption, et soit li soieure dou lonc de la corruption I poc, si com nos avons dit; et se li corruptions est en la jointure, si cope la jointure corrumpue, et soie l’os ou elle contient de l’autre part; et se li corruptions est en la continuation des II jointes, si n’i a autre angien que dou coper; et se li corruptions est ou poignil de la main, ou ou poignil dou piet, si est mout fort celle chose, mais toutevoie il covient que tu enquieres celle corrosion, coment elle t’apert; et la mundifie en toutes les manieres que tu pues, mais que li voine ou li nerf ne te faicent contraire; et saiches que li incisoire et les soies por coper ces os sont maintes, selonc l’assise des os et l’aparance d’ous, et lor grossece et lor subtiliteit, et lor grandor et lor petitece, et lor duresce; et por ceu covient il apareillier a chescune semblance d’ovraige son estrument; et saiches que l’uevre te moustrera l’estrument dont tu avras mestier, selonc la conissance de cest art, et le tesmoignaige des manieres des maladies; si porpense l’estrument dont tu as mestier selonc ceu qu’il le covient.	And if the bone is broken and does not open, and the corruption is in the middle or in one part, then uncover the flesh all around; then put a fire brand underneath, and then probe from one side of the corruption to the other, and make the incision at the end of the corruption, as we have said; and if the corruption is in the joint, then cut through the corrupted joint, and probe the bone on the opposite side; and if the corruption is in the area between two joints, there is no need to cut through; and if the corruption is in the knuckle of the hand or the foot, then this thing is very strong, but nonetheless you must investigate the corrosion, how it presents itself to you; and cleanse it in every way you can, but be careful that the vein or nerve do not cause harm to you; and know that there are many tools for cutting through bones, depending on the structure of the bones, their appearance, their thickness and thinness, their size and smallness, and their hardness; and therefore one must prepare a tool appropriate to each type of work; and know that your practice will show you the tool you need, according to your knowledge of this art, and the testimony of the ways of sickness; so consider the tool you need according to what is required.
dou feu	by fire
Li chiés porrissent ou par cause dedens, ou par cause defuer; et quant tu avras medicinee celle corrosion par la cure des medicines, et il ne profitent mie, si covient coper celui membre jusques au leu ou li corrosion vient, si que li malaides eschaipe par ceu de la mort, ou par la malice, qui est plus grans, de la defaute dou membre; et li signes si est que li membres devient noir, si qu’il semble qu’il soit ars dou feu, et porrist aprés la noiror, pues va celle corrosions de membre em membre, et prent par tout le cors; si te haste dou coper, et se c’est par la percussion d’aucunes venimouses bestes, si com scorpion de mer et wivre et semblans, se li corrosion est au chief dou doi, si le cope, et ne li doner mie espaice de venir jusc’a la main.	The head can suffer damage from within or without; and when you have treated this corrosion with remedies, if it does not improve, then cover the affected limb up to the point where the corrosion occurs, so that the patient escapes death or, what is worse, disability due to the defect in the limb. The signs are that the limb becomes black, as though burned by fire; and after the blackness comes the corrosion of the limb, spreading throughout the body. So act quickly to cover it, and if the damage is from the sting of some venomous creature such as a sea scorpion or adder, and the corrosion is on the head, then cover it and do not give it space to spread to the hand.
Et s’elle vient jusc’a la main, si la cope a la jointe, si que la corrosion ne viegne jusc’a bras; et s’elle vient au bras, si le cope au coute; et s’elle passe le coute, c’est li mors, et n’i vaut amenistremens fuers que li quantitez de sa vertut; et tot ensi fai quant li corrosion vient ou piet: s’elle vient en la premiere jointe, si la cope aprés l’autre jointe; et s’elle vient ou piet, si cope tout le piet; et s’elle monte en la jambe, si cope a la jointure dou genoil; et s’elle vient desus le genoil, si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier le malaide a mort; et li maniere dou coper ou dou soier le membre si est que tu le lie desus et desoz, et estende uns menistres l’un des liiens aval, et uns autres ministres l’autre liien amont, et tu dessevre la char qui est entre les II liiens a I spatumile large, tant que li os soit descovers; puis le cope ou soie, et met de chescune part I drapeil de lin, si que li soie ne touche le leu sain, et viegne au malaide autre lesion et aposteme chaus.	And if it reaches the hand, then cover it at the joint so that the corrosion does not spread to the arm; and if it reaches the arm, then cover it at the elbow; and if it passes the elbow, then it is fatal, and there is no remedy but to reduce the amount of poison according to its strength. And thus you should act whenever corrosion occurs in the foot: if it is in the first joint, then cover it after the next joint; and if it is in the foot, then cover the whole foot; and if it climbs up the leg, then cover at the knee-joint; and if it comes above the knee, then there is no other remedy but to bind the patient so that he dies, for the corruption will spread throughout his body. And the way to cover the limb with a bandage is to tie it above and below, and use a spatumile (wide bandage) to stretch one end of the bandage below while another person stretches the other end above, so that the flesh between the bandages is exposed; then cover it with a linen cloth on each side so that the bandage does not touch the healthy skin and cause further damage or abscesses.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient quant tu oevres, si cauterize le leu hastanment, ou tu met sus aucunes poudres restraignans; puis revien a ta medicine tant qu’elle soit acomplie, puis lie le membre navreit d’un liien covenauble, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et je te conterai k’il avint a I home en som piet: il li avint une noiror qui sembloit arsure de feu, et celle corrosion vint premier en son doi dou piet, tant qu’elle porprist tout le piet; et quant li hons vit la corrosion, si se hasta de coper le piet, et fut sanez; et lonc tens aprés li revint li corrosion ou doi de la main, et il vint a moi, et je li mis sus choses repercussives aprés la mundification dou cors, et ne pot cesser li corrosions; et il vot que je li copasse la main, et je ne vou, que je avoie esperance de repercuter la matiere; et doutai ausi que se je tailloie sa main, qu’il ne morist, car li vertus de l’ome estoit foible; et il se despera toz, et revint en sa terre, et se hasta de coper sa main, et fut sanez; et je n’ai ceu conteit fuers que por ceu c’on faice autreteil, s’on en a mestier.	And if blood flows when you work, then cauterize the area gently, or apply some restraining powders; then return to your medicine until it is complete, then tie the injured member with a suitable bandage, and treat it until it is healed; and I will tell you what happened to a man in his sleep: he had a blackness that looked like a burn, and this corrosion started at the big toe of his foot, so that it affected the entire foot; and when the man saw the corrosion, he covered his foot, and it was healed; and a long time after, the corrosion returned to his finger, and he came to me, and I placed some repulsive things on him after purification of the body, and he could not stop the corrosions; and he wanted me to cut off his hand, but I did not want to, for I had hope of driving out the matter; and I also doubted that if I cut off his hand, he would die, for the man's strength was weak; and he despaired completely, returned home, covered his hand, and it healed; and I have heard no other account except that one should do this to others, if they need it.
Aucune fois vient aposteme en leu charnut, et demore si longement qu’il fait grant assemblee de bowe; et puis ront et perce, et en saut li bowe, et demoure li leus vuis, ausi com uns vasselz; et li cuir qui est desus est ausi subtilz com I drapelz deliiez, et ne corront mie jusc’a l’os, ne jusc’au nerf, et telz maladie si est apelee «sain», et n’est mie apelee «fistule»; mais s’elle est si alongie qu’elle viegne jusc’a l’os em parfont, si est apelee «fistule»; et li cuire si est que tu cope celui cuir tout entor, et meismement quant il est subtilz, ausi com uns drapelz; et ne s’aert mie por sa corruption.	At times an abscess forms in a fleshy part, and remains so long that it creates a large gathering of pus; then it ruptures and drains, and the pus flows out, leaving the site hollow, like a vessel; the skin above is as thin as a layer of cloth, and does not heal up to the bone or nerve; such an ailment is called a 'sore', but not a 'fistula'; but if it extends so far that it reaches the bone in a deep place, then it is called a 'fistula'; and the skin is like a covering over this entire area, and especially when it is thin, like cloth; and it does not heal due to corruption.
Et se tu as fiance que li cuirs s’aerde, et li corruption n’est mie en parfont, et li cuir est espés de char, si le cure de clistere ensi: regarde se li seins est grans, et li bowe qui en ist est de puant odor, adonques le clisterize de medicine egiptiaine qui est ensi faite: prenez aisil, et oile, et litargire, igalment, et metez cuire en I vassel au feu, tant que li medicine soit rouge, et deviegne ausi espesse com miel; et puis pren de ceu selonc ta necessiteit, et le font en aigue et en miel, et en clisterize lou sein, et estraint le pertus; et laisse la medicine ens par II houres, puis l’estrai en espreignant; fai ce mout de fois, tant que li seins soit mondefiiez, et soit ostee li puor; et aucune fois est clisterizeis d’aigue de cendres, quant ceste medicine n’est presens, et est que tu preignes cendres de fust de vigne, et giete aigue desus, puis la coule, et en clisterize, tant que tu saiches que li seins est bien mondez; et se li malaides ne le puet soffrir, ne la medicine egiptiaine ne l’aigue de cendres, si le clisterize d’aigue et de miel ou il ait un poc de litargire broiet; ou tu la clistirize de miel et de vin melleit, que li mielz ait proprieteit de mundifiier et de laver, et li vins fait aerdre le sain; et quant tu as ce fait, et tu as fiance que li seins est bien mundifiiez, si le clisterize de ceu que fait naistre char en li, et est que tu preignes emplaustre diafinit, et le font avec oile roset et en vin; ou tu le clisterize d’aucunes medicines et d’oignemens, dont j’ai dit les proprietez ou traitier des oignemens; et se li pertus dou sein est petis, et li cainne dou clistere n’i puet entrer, si l’eslarge d’un fer un poc, et met ens une tente de l’oignement egiptiein, ou oignement basilicon, tant k’il soit eslargiez; et se li plaie est trop large, si la cout et i laisse tant soulement I leu ou li clistere puisse entrer, et se li pertus que giete bowe est au desus, si le cope ou plus bas leu que i est.	And if you have confidence that the skin is healing and the corruption is not deep, and the flesh is thick, then treat it with a clyster as follows: examine whether the breast is swollen, and the pus that flows from it has a foul odor; then make the Egyptian medicine which is thus prepared: take honey, oil, and litharge in equal parts, and melt them in a vessel over fire until the medicine turns red and becomes as thick as honey; then take some according to your need, dissolve it in water and honey, and clysterize the breast, and squeeze the opening; and leave the medicine there for two hours, then squeeze it out; do this several times until the breast is cleansed and the pustule drained; and if the Egyptian medicine or the ashes of vinegar are not available, then use a clyster of water with honey in which you have mixed a little litharge; or you may clysterize with honey and wine to which you have added some mallow to soften and cleanse the wound, while the wine causes it to drain; and when you have done this, and you are sure that the breast is cleansed, then clysterize with something that will cause flesh to grow in it; take a diaphoretic poultice made with rose oil and wine; or clysterize with other medicines and ointments whose properties I have described in the section on ointments; and if the opening of the breast is small so that the cane of the clyster cannot enter, then widen it with a sharp instrument and apply a tent of the Egyptian ointment, or basilicon ointment, until it is widened enough for the clyster to enter; and if the wound is very large, then cut and leave only the space where the clyster can enter, and if the opening through which the pus flows is above, then cover it below.
Car quant li bowe est en parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char; et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si appareille en tel maniere que li bowe corre au plus bas leu que i est, car quant li bowe est parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si apareille en teil maniere: que li bowe corre legierement aval, et n’i lassier rien de la bowe; et pren medicines consolidatives por mettre sor le sain, et estent sus I drapeil de lin que cuevre tout le sain; puis cope as forces endroit le pertus dou sein I poc plus large dou premier, pues estent oignement souef sus I autre drapel selonc la quantiteit dou pertus, et le met sus le pertus dou sain por aligier la bowe, et n’oster mie le grant drapeil fuers que aprés maint jor une fois; et celui qui est sor le pertus dou sein, oste sovent por oster la bowe, et saiches ceu que corra de la bowe, se c’est venin ou poc ou assez, ou digeste, ou indigeste; et pren warde se li patiens sent dolor ou nom, et s’il i a aposteme ou non, et quant ta medicine s’est en teil maniere estendue et tu vois la nature que saut sus le pertus dou sain, si saiches que li seins s’aert ja, et aproche li santez; et puis le deslie le matin, ou le tier jor, et quant tu delies la plaie, si chainge I autre drapeil, et renovele l’oignement.	For when the bowels are in perfect health, do not allow them to be constipated; and if you cannot cover the breast underneath as you wish, then arrange things so that the bowels move to the lowest place they can reach. For when the bowels are constipated, do not allow them to be constipated, and if you cannot cover the breast underneath as you wish, then arrange things: let the bowels move gently downward, and leave nothing of the bowels behind; take consolative medicines to put over the wound, and have linen cloth covering all the wound; then plug up the opening of the breast more widely than before, then apply an ointment on the other cloth according to the size of the opening, and place it over the opening of the wound to ease the bowels, but do not remove the large cloth for several days; and that which is over the opening of the breast, remove often to remove the bowels, and learn what comes from the bowels, whether it is venom or pus or enough, or digested, or undigested; take heed if the patient feels pain or not, and if there is an abscess or not, and when your medicine has spread in such a way and you see the nature that rises over the opening of the wound, then know that the breast is healing, and the health is approaching; and then untie it in the morning, or at noon, and when you untie the wound, change the other cloth, and renew the ointment.
Et se li seins giete bowe indigeste aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie.	And if the breast milk flows strongly after many days, you can be sure that the breast will not dry up.
Et se venins subtilz cort aprés lonc tens, si ne te desperer mie de la santeit, car li santez aproche.	And if subtle poisons run long after a time, do not despair of health, for health approaches.
Car il i a homes cui tarde enjanremens de char en ses plaies, et de ces que font le contraire; et se bowe indigeste saut dou sein aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie; et se li seins tarde d’aerdre, et est porloigniez, si ajoste medicines sechans moistes en substance et seches en vertut, si com oignement diafinit, car il i a grant partie de vitriole, et c’est li derriene medicine; pren oignement dyafinit, et le font avec oile roset, et l’arose de viel vin igal en substance; puis le confit et en use; et ceu meisme fait mielz cuit engroissiez, quant oignemens dyafinit n’est presens, ou tu pren mirre et aloen et encens, et le broie, et le poudre sus le miel quant il est sor le feu; et puis en glue I drapel, et l’estent sor le sein, et aucune fois i aministre on aristologe longe, et racines de lis celeste, qui est ausi com farine de veces et centoire; et en use de simples ou de compostes: broie les, et en fai poudre, et met sus le miel que j’ai dit, et en use; et se li cure est alongie, et n’est curez par ceste cure, adonc saiches que la corruptions est em parfont, et fait empression en l’os, ou as membres durs, ou as liemens; si le cure de la cure de fistule, si com nos avons dit ci devant.	And if there are long-lasting wounds in the flesh from which pus oozes slowly, and others that produce the opposite effect; and if a breast swells for a long time without being able to release its contents, you can be sure that it will not heal; and if a breast is swollen and hard, it is due to an impression on the bone or in the limbs, or in the tissues. This is also true of fistula wounds, as we have already discussed.
de l’aposteme de l’ungle	of the nail abscess
Panarice est un aposteme que naist desoz l’ungle dou pouchiet de la main, ou dou piet, ou par aventure naist en autres dois; et quant il est envielliez, et on n’i prent garde, si i vient I aposteme chaus, et corront et giete bowe tant qu’elle corront la racine de l’ungle, et par aventure la corront toute; et vient li corrosions jusc’a l’os, tant qu’il i vient dolor puant, et est li chiés dou doi larges, et est li color fuxe.	Panarice is an abscess that arises beneath the nail of the finger or toe, or occasionally in other places; and when it becomes infected, and no attention is paid to it, then a hard abscess forms, and it runs and oozes pus as far as the root of the nail, and sometimes all the way to the bone; and corrosion extends to the bone, causing a foul-smelling pain, and the affected digit becomes swollen and discolored.
Quant tu le cures si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu copes a i. fer toute la superfluiteit qui est demoree de l’ungle, puis cauterize la plaie aprés.	When you treat it as we have described in the previous section, and the treatment is not effective, then you should cut away all the excess tissue that has accumulated beneath the nail, and then cauterize the wound afterwards.
Li cauteres est mout grans aide se li os est sains, et li ungle est sainne; et se li ungle apresse la char ens, et l’encomence a poindre, et la blece, si covient que tu mettes lou rait desoz l’ungle que point la char, et la boute en haut, et cope celi char subtilment et legierement, et met sus le remenant de la char medicines ardans et corrosives por oster tout; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	Cauterization is very effective if the bone and nail are healthy; but if the nail grows over the wound, and starts to grow into the tissue, and the nail bed becomes inflamed, then you should place a thread beneath the nail to lift it up, and cut away the infected tissue gently and carefully; then apply burning and corrosive medicines to remove all the infection; afterwards treat the wound with ointments until it heals.
Et se li corrosion est en l’os, si le cope, et trai fuer, car tant com li os corrumpus i est, si ne puet saner; et se tu vois le doi corrumpre, si le cope en I des nous si com il est devant dit, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est ferus, et boutez, et il sent grant dolor, si covient que tu le sainnes premier; puis cope l’ungle dou spatumile agut en taillant de travers desus, et warde que li taille ne viegne jusc’a la char qui est desoz l’ungle, car li malaides sentiroit trop grant dolor; et s’il avient, si met chose sus qui apaise.	And if the corrosion is in the bone, then cut it out and draw it out, for as long as the bone remains corrupted, it cannot heal; and if you see the bone is corrupted, then cut it in half at the joint as has been said before, then cure it until it heals; and if it is broken, and swollen, and he feels great pain, then he must be treated first; then cut the nail of the finger with an incision across the top, and be careful that the cutting does not reach the flesh under the nail, for the patient would feel great pain; and if this happens, then place something on it to soothe the pain.
la dolor dou sourdoit de la main	the pain of a deaf person's hand
Li dois ajostez qui naist en mains d’aucuns homes par aventure est toz charnus, et par aventure i a teil ou il a osses, et aucune fois i a ungle, et aucun d’aus naissent en la racine de la jointure, ou li naissance est en aucuns nous des dois.	The two toenails that sometimes grow on the hands of some people by chance are all fleshy, and sometimes they have bones in them, and sometimes they have nails, and some grow from the root of the joint where the nail grows from one of the toes.
Cil qui naist en aucune nout dou doi ne se muet, et cil qui naist a la jointure dou doi, par aventure se muet; la taille de celui qui est charnus si est legiere, en teil maniere: taille le en sa racine d’un large spatumile.	Those born with a hernia in the navel do not die, but those born with a hernia at the joint of the navel sometimes do; the size of one who is fleshy is slight, in such a way: cut it at its root with a wide spatulum.
Cil qui naist en la racine de la jointure si est grief a curer: si te tien dou coper.	He who is born at the root of the joint, if you hold it tight.
En celui qui naist ou doit au derrien nout, si covient que tu copes premier la char reondement jusc’a l’os, puis cope l’os a une soie convenable a ceu, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	For one who is born with a hernia in the navel at the back, you should first scrape away the flesh roundly up to the bone, then scrape the bone to an appropriate size for that, then heal it until it is well.
Li soudemens que vient as dois ensamble vient par naissance, ou par soudement de plaie, ou par arsure de feu, ou par semblans choses.	The joints that come together come by birth, or by wound, or by burn, or by similar things.
Si couvient que tu copes celle soudeure, si que li doit repairent selonc lor formes naturelz; puis met entre dous tentes ou drapelz moilliez en oile roset, qu’il ne se soudent; ou tu met entre dous pieces de plonc subtilz, tant que li leus soit soudez, si com il covient.	Then you should scrape that seam so that the intestines return according to their natural forms; then put between two tents or moistened sheets in rose oil, so that they do not adhere; or put between two pieces of thin lead, until the seams are souded, as it should be.
Se soudemens vient a aucun de ses dois avec la paume, si cope celle sodure si com il covient.	If a person with a sore palm comes to you, then treat that wound as it should be treated.
des vils	of the evil one
Vis sont voinnes grosses envoloupees pleines de superfluitez melancoliouses, que vienent em plusors membres dou cors; et plus avient en jambes de ces qui vont a piet et qui travaillent et portent, que a autres.	Veins are large, enveloped vessels filled with melancholy superfluities, which come from various parts of the body; and they occur more in legs of those who walk and work and carry things than in others.
Il covient donques que tu li aministres aucune fois espurgement de cole, et puis le saine de la basilique.	Therefore, you should administer to him an emetic, and then the basil drink.
Li cure de fer si est selonc II manieres: l’une est c’on les cope, et traie on fuer le sanc noir; et li autre maniere si est que tu lieves la voinne, et la trai toute fuer.	There are two ways of treating them: one is to cut them, and draw out the black blood; the other way is that you open the vein, and draw it all out.
Li taille si est selonc ceste maniere: arose li premier la jambe d’aigue chaude mout fort, tant que li gros sans soit subtiliiez, puis estrain la jambe dou malaide des desus la cuixe jusc’a la partie desoz le genoil; puis cope la voinne en I leu, ou en II ou en III, d’une taille large, puis eslieve et trair fuer le sanc noir a ta main, des l’un chief jusc’a l’autre, tant que tant de sans en isse com li vertus dou malaide puet soffrir; et puis la lie, et li comande qu’il se teigne de viandes enjanrant cole noire; et recomence l’evacuation et la sainie quant les voinnes sont plainnes, et nuist au malaide.	The incision is done in this way: first, heat the leg with very hot water until the large vessels are dilated, then stretch the leg from the thigh to the knee; then cut the vein in one place, or two or three places, with a broad incision, then open and draw out the black blood by hand, from one end to the other, as much as the patient can endure; then ligate it, and order that he eat meat mixed with black gall; and repeat the incision and phlebotomy when the veins are refilled, and the patient is worse off.
Li alevemens de li est selonc ceste maniere: reis la jambe dou malaide, s’il i a mout de poil, puis le met ou bain, et li arose la jambe d’aigue chaude tant qu’elle deviegne rouge, et enflent les voinnes; et se tu n’as point de baing, si le chaufe au feu, et puis le cope endroit la voinne dou lonc au chief dou genoil, ou en la partie desoz a la cheville; puis aoevre le cuir a l’oncine, et escorche la voinne de chescune part, tant qu’ele apere quant on la sent; et on la voit rouge et noire, et quant elle entre ou cuir si semble ausi com une corde blainche; puis boute le rait desoz, tant qu’ele soit alevee dou cuir, et puis la pent a l’oncine legier, puis le cope en I autre leu ensus III dois; puis escorche le cuir sus la voinne tant qu’ele apere, puis la lieve au rais, si com tu as fait, et la pent a un autre uncine, si com tu as fait premiers; puis cope une autre taille, ou plusors se tu en as mestier, puis la lieve, et la cope au doi dou piet, puis la trai et lieve jusc’a la seconde taille; puis l’estrai de taille en taille, tant qu’elle isse toute fuer, puis la cope; et se tu ne la pues traire et lever, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil fort double, et la lie et la trai, et i boute desoz I rait, et torne ta main d’une part et d’autre, tant qu’il en isse; et garde qu’elle ne cope, car s’elle cope, si ne la puet on traire ne lever, et en vient nuisement au malaide; et quant tu l’as toute traite, si met sor le leu de la plaie laine moillie en vin et en oile roset; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	The treatment of the ulcer is as follows: raise the leg of the patient, if there is a lot of hair, then put it in the bath, and apply hot water to the leg until it turns red and the veins swell; and if you do not have a bath, heat it by the fire, and then press on the vein from the top of the knee down to the ankle, or in the part below the ankle; then open the skin at the base of the ulcer, and scrape off the ulcer from all sides until it bleeds; and when one sees that it is red and black, and when it enters the skin it looks like a white cord; then push the thread under, so that it comes out of the skin, and then pull it gently, as you did before; then make another cut, or more if necessary, then pull and cut at the toe, then draw and lift it up to the second cut; then extract it from cut to cut, until it is all out, then cut it off; and if you cannot pull and lift it, then put a strong double thread through a needle, tie it and pull it out, and push it under the thread, and turn your hand from side to side so that it comes out; be careful not to cut it, because if it is cut, it cannot be pulled or lifted, and harm will come to the patient; and when you have treated it all, put a piece of wool soaked in wine and rose oil on the wound site, and cure it until it is healed.
Et se li vis est contraite et torte et envoloupee ensamble, et ele n’est mie droite, si com nos avons dit, si covient que tu la fendes tortement, mais ne la coper mie; et la trai si com nos avons devant dit.	And if the bone is bent and twisted and enveloped together, and it is not straight as we have said, then you must split it crookedly but do not cover it; and treat it as we have said before.
Li forme dou fer dont on cope la vis si est corbes, et ne trenche mie, qu’il ne cope la voinne; et est de grosse corbeure, car s’il estoit subtilz, si coperoit la voine, mais soit gros si com nos avons dit, et ci est li forme:	The shape of the iron with which one splits the bone must be curved and not cut into the vein; it should be a thick curve as we have said, and here is its shape:
de la voinne civile	of the civil vein
Ceste voinne est enjanree en jambes, en chaudes parties ou il ne naist herbes ne arbre, et en terre ou il n’a point de moistor; et par aventure naist autre part qu’en jambes, et ceu avient de la porriture que vient desoz le cuir, si com il vient dedens le cors serpens et vers, enjanrez entre cuir et char.	This vein is angular in the legs, in hot parts where no herbs or trees grow, and in land that has no moisture; and by chance it grows elsewhere than in the legs, and this happens from the pustules that come under the skin, just as snakes and worms come inside the body, angling between skin and flesh.
Et se li signes de l’encomencement de ceste voinne si est qu’il vient en la jambe une tres grans enflammation, puis se chainge li leus, et comence li voinne fors issir, ausi com une racine d’une plante.	And if the signs of the beginning of this wound are that a great inflammation comes in the leg, then the color changes, and the wound begins to come out, as well as the root of a plant.
Quant li chiés apert, si covient que tu envoloupes entor une piece de plonc des une З et demi jusc’a II З., et la noe, et laisse le plonc pendant a la jambe, et totes les fois qu’il en ist point au defuer, si l’envoloupe entor le plonc, et la nowe; et s’elle est trop longe, si en cope une partie, et envoloupe le remenant, et ne la coper mie en sa racine, tant qu’elle soit toute issue; car se tu la copes, si rentre en la char, et fait venir aposteme et porriture ou leu, et male maladie; por la queil chose il covient qu’elle soit traite poc et poc jusc’a chief, et n’en remaigne rien ou cors; et est aucune fois ceste voinne quant elle est traite de V paumes de lonc, ou de X, et uns hons vint ja a moi, a cui elle issit de X paumes de long, et quant tu la copes, si boute I rais ou pertus, et la perce jusc’a fons, si que tout en isse; et soit vuidie li matiere qui est dedens, et amenistre au leu medicines enjanrans porriture aucun jor, puis le cure si com les apostemes.	When the wound opens, you must wrap a piece of cloth around it from one and a half to two and a half inches, and tie it, and leave the cloth hanging on the leg, and every time that something comes out of it, wrap the cloth tighter; and if it is too long, cut off a portion and wrap the remainder, and do not cover the root while it is still coming out; because if you cover it, it will go back into the flesh and cause an abscess and swelling in that spot; therefore this wound should be treated little by little until it is completely healed, and nothing remains in the body; and sometimes this wound is as long as five or ten inches, and a man came to me whose wound issued for ten inches, and when you cover it, it causes a pus-filled lump, and you must treat it like an abscess.
Et aucune fois a ceste voinne mains rains, et meismement quant elle apert en la jointure dou piet, ou ou piet, et i vient mout de pertus, et dont il saut rains; cure le donques si com nos avons dit devant.	And sometimes this vein leaks, especially when it opens in the joint of the foot, or in the foot, and much pus comes out, and from which it bleeds; therefore, treat it as we have said before.
des vers qui naissent entre cuir et char	of worms that grow between skin and flesh
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «maladie de buef», por ceu qu’elle avient maintes fois as bués, et est un petis vers qui naist entre cuir et char, et va par tout le cors montant et dessendant, et le sent om bien a l’aler de membre en membre, tant qu’il desront le cuir ou il vait, et saut fuer; et est enjanrez de porriture d’aucunes humors, si com vienent vers et serpens et lumbris et ascarides ou ventre; et doute on de son malice, car quant il va par le cors, et il monte au chief, et il vient a l’oil, par aventure rentre, et destruit l’oil; et ceu avient maintes fois.	This disease is called "cow disease" in our land because it often affects oxen. It is caused by a small worm that grows between the skin and flesh, moving throughout the body, ascending and descending, until it breaks through the skin, causing bleeding; and it can be harmful, for when it reaches the eye, it can enter and destroy it. This often happens.
Quant tu le vues curer et traire, si ne puet on fuers que quant il vait: si covient donques que tu lies le leu desus et desoz d’un fort liien bien estroitement, puis cope sus et le trai fuer, et se li vers est em parfont en la char, et tu ne le trueves, si le cauterize de feu sus, tant qu’il muire; et li plus grans nuisemens que il fait, si est qu’il corront l’oil, si com nos avons dit; et se tu le vois venir ou chief pres de l’oil, si estraint desoz lui le sorcil forment, puis cope sus, et le trai fuer; et covient user le malaide de mundifiement de cors de medicines solutives por les males humors porries, et se warse de viandes enjanrans porriture.	When you see it being treated and lanced, you cannot prevent bleeding except when it is incised: therefore, you must tie the area above and below tightly with a strong ligature, then cut and draw it out; and if the worm is deep in the flesh and you do not extract it, cauterize it with fire until it dies. The greatest danger it poses is that it can enter the eye, as we have said; therefore, when you see it approaching the head near the eye, firmly constrict the eyelid, then cut and draw it out. You must also use cleansing medications for the body to dissolve malicious humors, and use cooling foods to counteract the heat of putrid humors.
de la dolor qui vient de ventositeit	of the pain which comes from windiness
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «vakirir», et est une dolor que vient en aucuns membres, et pues se mue de membre en membre; et je vis ceu que je vos di.	This disease is called "vomiting" in our land, and it is a pain that occurs in some members, and then moves from member to member; and I saw what I am telling you.
Je fui apelez a une femme malaide, et me descovrit som bras, et vis une petite enfleure en la voinne dou brais; et I poc aprés, li vis monter ausi com un ver a l’espaule, plus tost que nulle chose, ausi com vif argent quant il cort de leu a autre; li dolor se departit de celui leu, et se ficha en l’espaule, et puis un poc aprés corrut par tout le cors, tant qu’ele vint en l’autre brais; puis me contait qu’elle tornioit adés entor le cors, si com je la vis.	I was called to a sick woman, and she uncovered her arm, and I saw a small swelling on the inside of her elbow; and soon after, I saw it rise up onto her shoulder like a worm, quickly and brightly like silver when it moves from one place to another. The pain left that spot and went into her shoulder, and then a little later ran through her whole body until it came to her other arm. Then she said that she felt it moving around her body, just as I saw it.
Je me mervillai mout coment elle se movoit ensi de membre em membre, car je n’avoie onques veut ceste maladie selonc ceste maniere.	I was very surprised how she moved from limb to limb like that, because I had never seen this illness behave in that way before.
Toutevoie, je avoie veut maint que bien avoient veut movoir dolor de leu a autre, mais je ne l’avoie mie veut, si com je le vis en la femme; et je me pensai que c’estoit por ceu que li femme avoit sec cors, et les voinnes descovertes, et por ceu apparoit celle ventositez constrainte; et n’aperent mie selonc ceste raison a ces qui sont delicious, et qui ont moistes cors et voinnes reponues.	Nevertheless, I have seen many whose pain moved from one place to another, but I did not see it as I did in the woman; and I thought that it was because women have dry bodies, and their veins are exposed, and this forced the windiness to appear. This is not true for those who are fat, with moist bodies and relaxed veins.
Et quant tu vues curer ceste maladie, et li malaides sent celle dolor, s’elle t’apert si com nos avons dit, si la lie desus et desoz hastanment, et puis cope sus tant que cele ventositez constrainte au leu isse fuer; et cauterize le leu; et se tu ne la vois a tes eulz, si le cure de ceu qui deboute les ventositez, si com pilules fetides, et pilules de serapin, et semblans autres.	And when you see to cure this disease, and the patient feels the pain, if it appears to you as we have said, then bind it above and below tightly, and then press on it until that windiness forced out of its place; and cauterize the spot; and if you do not see it yourself, then have it treated by one who dispels windiness, such as with foul pills, and serapin pills, and similar others.
des saiettes	of arrows
Les saiettes sont diverses, selonc lor semblances et selonc les leus dou cors ou elles chient.	Arrows are diverse, depending on their appearance and the place in the body where they land.
Li diversitez de lor si est qu’il i a de celles qui ont grans pointes, et petites, et chevees, et soudees; et de celles qui ont II angles, et de celz qui ont lengues, et de celles ou il a pieces; et celle qui chiet en aucun membre si chiet selonc II manieres: ou en membre principeil cheveit, si com cerveil, cuer, foie, pormon, rains, intestine, vessie, et semblans membres.	Their diversity is that there are some with large points, and small, and hooked, and blunt; and those with two angles, and those with tongues, and those with pieces; and that which breaks in any limb breaks according to two manners: either in a principal limb it breaks, as in the brain, heart, liver, lung, spleen, kidney, intestine, bladder, and similar limbs.
Quant elle chiet donques en aucun leu de ces membres, et li signe de mort, que je te dirai ci aprés, t’aperent: si covient que tu te warses de l’estraction de ceste saiette, car li mors vient aprés en plusors dispositions; et quant cist mal signe ne t’aperent mie, et li saiette n’est mie em parfont, si la trai, et cure la plaie.	When she falls in any part of these members, and the sign of death, which I will tell you about later, appear to you: then you should be wary of removing this arrow, because death comes afterwards in many dispositions; and when this bad sign does not appear to you, and the arrow is not deeply embedded, then pull it out and treat the wound.
Et li signe dou cerveil quant li saiette i chiet et perce l’os, et saut li syfac fuer qui est sus le cerveil, est quant scotomie et sode et esvertin et roujor ens eulz, et enflammation et roujor de lengue, et spasme et permixtion d’entendement, et vomissemens de cole; et per aventure ist sans fuer des narines, ou des oreilles; et par aventure pert la parole et la voix; et saut de la plaie moistor blanche semblant a poulz, et en saut ausi com bruee de char; et se cist signe t’aperent, si te tien de la cure, et trai la saiette s’elle n’est ens.	And the signs of trepanation when the arrow hits and pierces the bone, and the brain fluid leaks out from above the brain, are when there is scotomia and swelling and redness in them, and inflammation and redness of the tongue, and spasms and confusion of the mind, and vomiting of phlegm; and perhaps there is discharge from the nose or ears; and perhaps he loses his speech and voice; and from the wound there is white moisture like pus, and also as a bruise on flesh; and if these signs appear to you, then stop the bleeding and treat the wound, and pull out the arrow if it is not already out.
Li signe de la siette quant elle chiet ou cuer, sont qu’elle est pres de la mamele senestre, et sent ausi com s’elle estoit fichie en chose dure, ne mie vuide; et par aventure li siette se muet ausi com li poulz, et en cort noir sanc, et vient froidor et suor froide, et sincope: saiches adonc sens doute ke li mors dessent.	The signs of seizures when they occur in the chest or heart are that they are close to the left breast, and feel as though they are stuck in a hard object, not moving; and sometimes the seizures stop like the pulses, with dark blood, and coldness and cold sweat come on, and syncope: then you may be sure that death is near.
Et li signe de la saiette que nevre lou pormon est que sans plains d’escume saut de la plaie, et li gorge enfle, et li malaides mue color, et sospire haut et quiert le froit ar.	And the sign of an arrow wound that never leaves the body is foam without pain, emerging from the wound, and a swollen throat, and the patient's colour changing, and gasping for breath and seeking the cold air.
Et se li saiette chiet en la coverture dou pis, si est delez les petites costes; et giete grant alainne et grant dolor et sospire; et li muevent tuit li membre des espaules.	And if the arrow hits in the groin area, between the ribs; and it causes great pain and suffering, and gasping; and all the limbs move from the shoulders.
Et se li saiette chiet ou stomac, par aventure si saut de la plaie aucune chose de la viande indigeste.	And if an arrow pierces the heart or stomach, by chance something indigestible may come out of the wound.
Et se li saiette chiet ou ventre, et en saut point de fien par l’intestine rout, si n’a point d’esperance en la cure, ne en l’estraction de la saiette.	And if an arrow pierces the belly and nothing comes out through the intestines but feces, there is no hope for a cure nor for extracting the arrow.
Et se li saiette chiet en la vessie, et li urine en saut et vient defuer, et li malaides sent fort dolor: saiches que li plaie est mortelz.	And if an arrow pierces the bladder, and urine comes out and escapes, and the patient feels great pain: know that this wound is deadly.
Li autre membre, si com li faice et li colz et li gorge et li espaule et li adjutoire et li espinee dou dos et li forcele et li cuixe et les jambes, et li membre semblant, sont sauf selonc plusors dispositions.	The other members, such as the face, neck, throat, shoulder, armpit, spine of the back, buttock, thigh, and leg, and similar members, are safe according to various dispositions.
Quant li saiette est en lou nerf ou l’artere, et elle n’est venimouse, si com je vos dirai qu’il m’avint, por ceu que vos faciez autretel.	When the arrow is in a nerve or artery and is not poisonous, as I will tell you so that you may do likewise.
Il avint a I home c’une saiette li chut ou larmier en la racine dou neis: je la tentai, et la traï d’autre part desoz la graisse de l’oreille, et fut sanez sens nusement.	It happened in the case of one man that an arrow hit him in the jaw, and I treated it, and removed it below the ear under the fat, and he was cured without loss of speech.
Et traï a un jeu une saiette que li chut en la graisse de l’oil desoz la papiere desoz, et li saiette estoit reponue, et n’en poi ataindre que la pointe devers lou fust, et estoit li saiette grans d’un arc turcois, a tout I fer legier sens oreilles; li jeus fut sanez, et ne li vint nulz mavais accidens.	And I removed an arrow from a man's eye which had hit him under the eyelid, below the eyeball; the arrow was embedded, and only the tip could be seen pointing towards the nostril, and the arrow was as long as an archer's bowstring, and made of iron, thin but without notches; the man was cured and suffered no ill effects.
Et traï une saiette de la gorge a un crestien, et estoit li saiette arabique a oreilles: je soiai les barbions, et subtiliai tant que je la traï, et fut sanez li crestiens.	And I took an arrow from the throat of a Christian, and the arrow was Arabic and in his ears; I cut off the barbs, and carefully extracted it, and the Christian was healed.
Et traï une saiette a I home, que li estoit cheue ou ventre, et pensai qu’il moroit; et puis qu’il ot passez XXX jors, si ne mua point sa disposition; je taillai sus la saiette, et l’engignai, et la traï fuer, et n’ot point de mavais accident.	And I extracted an arrow from a man's home, which was lodged in his stomach, and I thought he would die; but after thirty days had passed, his condition did not worsen; I cut above the arrow, and dislodged it, and it came out without any ill effects.
Et si vis I home cui une saiette chut ou dos, et fut li plaie soudee sus; et demora li saiette dedens li, et ne chainja point ses dispositions naturez, ne ne trova nuisement en aucune de ses oevres naturelz.	And if you see a man whom an arrow has pierced in the back, and the wound is sewn shut on top of it; and the arrow remains inside him, and his natural functions remain unchanged, and he experiences no discomfort in any of his natural processes:
Et vis I autre homme, cui il chut une saiette en sa faice, et fut soudee li plaie; et demora ensi sens soffrir grant dolor; et mout d’autres semblans.	And I saw another man whom an arrow had struck in the face, and the wound was sewn shut; and he remained in this state without experiencing great pain; and there are many similar cases:
Et traï une saiette a I home des princes le roi, que li estoit cheue enmi lou neiz, et estoit un poc declinans a la destre partie; et estoit li saiette toute reponue Je fui apelez a la cure aprés ceu qu’elle fut cheue III jors.	And drew an arrow at the house of the prince the king, who had a wound in his eye, and was slightly bent to the right side; and the arrow was all drawn out I was called to the cure after three days.
Si trovai la plaie mult estroite.	I found the wound very tight.
Je la quis a tout une subtil tente, et ne la sentis mie; et il sentoit pointure et dolor desoz sa destre oreille.	I wanted to try it with a subtle needle, and I didn't feel anything; and he felt piercing and pain below his right ear.
Je pensai que c’estoit de la pointe de la saiette Je mis sus lou leu emplaustre atratifet digestif, por ceu que li leus n’enflast; et m’aparut li leus de la saiette.	I thought it was from the tip of the arrow I put a digestive and attractive plaster on the spot, so that the skin wouldn't swell; and the arrow's head appeared to me.
Je i mis l’emplaustre mains jors, et resouda li plaie derechief, et demora ensi li malaides lonc tens, tant qu’il sentit la saiette I jor dedens son neis; et il le me dist.	I put the plaster on for more days, and the wound healed again, and the ailment lasted a long time, so much so that he felt the arrow in his eye for a day; and he told me about it.
Je mis sus la plaie medicine ague corrosive par mains jors, tant qu’elle fut overte, et la tentai, et sentis le chief de la saiette qui s’aerdoit au leu; puis ajostai en l’overture de la plaie par celle medicine ague, tant que li chiés de la saiette m’aparut visablement; et trespassa bien li termines entor IIII mois, et puis eslarja si li plaie que je i boutai les tenailles, et le meus d’une part et d’autre, et ne pot issir; adonques ne cessai de subtiliier et d’engignier de manieres d’estrumens, tant que je la pris I jor as tenailles bien faites, selonc ceu que sa forme venra en la fin de cest chapistre, tant que je la traï, et restourai la plaie.	I applied a strong corrosive medication to the wound for several days until it was open and I could feel the head of the arrow; then I treated the wound with the medication until the head of the arrow became visible; and the wound healed well within four months, and then I extracted the arrowhead with forceps, probing from either side, but it would not come out; so I continued to probe and manipulate with instruments until one day I extracted it with specially made forceps, as described in the latter part of this chapter, and treated the wound.
Et li mire jugent que li cartillaige dou nez ne puet restorer: je la restourai adonques, et fut soudee li plaie, et fut sanez li malaides entierement.	And I saw that the cartilage of the nose could not be restored; so I reconstructed it, and the wound was sutured and the patient fully healed.
Or t’ai dit la qualiteit de l’estraction d’aucunes saiettes, si que tu mettes ta cure sus ceu que je ne dis mie, car li livres ne puet mie tout porprendre; mais li saiges maistres compere sus bien poc grant chose, et sus ceu que li est present et defaillant, trueve nueve oevre, et nuef estrument, au dessendement des choses estrainges qui avienent en cest art.	Now I have told you the quality of the extraction of some arrows, so that you place your treatment on what I do not say, because books cannot contain everything; but wise masters understand well very little, and what is present and lacking, they discover new work, and a new instrument, in the descent of strange things that happen in this art.
Je dis que les saiettes n’issent des membres ou elles sont fichies fuer que selonc II manieres: ou par lou leu ou elles entrent, ou par d’autre part; et celle que saut fuer par lai ou elle entre, c’est saiette entrans en leus charnus, et saut fuer aucune fois maintenant.	I say that arrows pierce the members where they are lodged in two ways: either by the place where they enter or by another part; and those that exit through the place where they entered are arrows piercing through fleshy places, and sometimes they exit now.
Et s’elle ne saut maintenant, si la laisse tant que li chars soit porrie entor, et soit alegie li issue; et ausi s’elle est fichie en l’os, et elle ne puet issir, si la laisse ensi aucuns jors, et la muef chescun jor; et adonques elle saut, et s’elle ne saut, si perce entor a tout I foret subtil, tant que li leus entor soit eslargiez, et puis la trai.	And if it does not exit now, then leave it as long as the flesh around it becomes putrid and the passageway is cleared; and also, if it is lodged in the bone and cannot exit, then leave it for several days, and move it every day; and then it will exit, and if it does not, then pierce through to the very tip of a subtile forest, so that the passageway around it is widened, and then pull it out.
Et se li saiette est fichie en l’os dou chief, et vait jusc’a l’un des ventres dou cerveil, et aucuns des accidens que j’ai dit apert au malaide: si ne la traire mie, mais la laisse tant qu’elle soit igalz aprés aucuns jors, car se li saiette vient jusc’a syfac, c’est li mors.	And if the arrow is lodged in the bone of the head, and goes to one of the vents of the brain, and some of the accidents that I have mentioned appear in the patient: do not pull it out, but let it be until it is even after a few days; for if the arrow reaches the brain, that is death.
Et se li saiette n’est fichie fuer qu’en l’os soulement, et ne vient jusc’a syfac, et demoure li malaides aucuns jors sens mavais accident, si l’engigne dou traire.	And if the arrow is lodged only in the bone and does not reach the brain, and the patient remains for several days without any bad signs, then try to extract it.
Et s’elle est mout fichie ensi et ne puet issir fuer, si i aministre tareres entor, si com je t’ai dit; puis cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it is deeply lodged and cannot be removed, then administer cauterization around the wound, as I have told you; then clean the wound until it heals.
Et se li saiette est reponue en leu dou cors si c’on ne la puisse veoir, si la quier a tout la tente; et se tu la sens, si la trai a aucun estrument covenauble; et se tu ne pues por l’estrecement de la plaie, et por la parfondesce de la saiette, et il n’i a os ne nerf ne voine, si la fens tant que li plaie soit grans; et trai la saiette se tu pues, et s’il ait en la saiette oreilles a coi elle tient, si oste la char qui est ens fichie de II pars au mues que tu pues, et puis brise ou ploie les oreilles de la saiette, tant que tu la puisses traire; et subtilie bien que tu ne brisier la saiette, que tu la trairoies plus griement.	And if the arrow is lodged deep in the body where you cannot see it, then probe all over for it; and if you feel it, pull it out with a suitable instrument; but if because of the depth of the wound or the length of the arrow there is no bone, nerve, or vein in the way, then open up the wound widely; and if there are ears on the arrow that are holding it in place, cut away the flesh around them on both sides as much as you can so that you can pull out the arrow; probe carefully so that you do not break the arrow and make the extraction more difficult.
Et se tu ne pues a une fois, si la lai jusque li leus entor soit porris, puis la trai, car li estraction iert alegie.	And if you cannot extract it in one go, then leave it until the surrounding area becomes swollen; then pull it out, for extraction will be easier.
Et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de la cure en son chapistre; et te warde de l’incision dou nerf et de la voinne, et met engien coment tu pues mues traire la saiette sens peril, ou tost ou tart, ou fermement ou belement; et met le malaide selonc la forme qu’il estoit quant li saiette li chut ens, car c’est li plus grans aide que i soit, et se tu ne pues, si lou met selonc ceu que li signe lou te mostrent.	And if the bleeding makes you feel worse, then administer what we have said about the treatment in its chapter; and guard against incision of the nerve and opening a vein, and put on a bandage as you can, pulling out the arrow without danger, quickly or slowly, firmly or gently; and put the patient in the position he was in when the arrow hit him, for that is the greatest aid there is, and if you cannot, then place him according to what the symptoms show you.
Li saiette que vient fuer d’autre part, ou il apert aucune chose de li, ou li cuir est enflez endroit si c’on le voit ou sent aparamment: taille donques sus, tant que les tenailles i puissent prendre, et puis l’estrai: si saut fuer maintenant.	Arrows that come from elsewhere, or where something is visible underneath the skin, or the skin is swollen in that area, either visibly or through sensation: cut there, as deep as the tweezers can reach, and then pull it out; if it won't come out right away, cut again.
Et s’elle est retenue en l’os, si tornoie ta main rondement, tant qu’elle entre en l’os, et eslarge l’os, puis la trai.	And if it is stuck in the bone, rotate your hand rapidly, so that it goes into the bone and widens the opening, then pull it out.
Et s’elle ne puet issir, si la laisse encor, et puis rencomence l’estraction tant qu’elle isse fuer; et se li fust de la saiette i est, se le boute a tout le fust; et se li fust chiet, et tu vues aministrer boutement, si i aministre I estrument cheveit, si que li pointe de la saiette entre en la cheveure de l’estrument; et puis boute fuer, et se li saiette est chevee, se i boute I estrument a pointe entrant ens, por alegier l’estraction.	And if it cannot be extracted, then leave it for now and try again to pull it out until it comes out; and if there is a splinter in the arrow, then cut off the arrow at the base of the splinter; and if the splinter is short, and you want to administer a poultice, then administer the poultice so that the point of the arrow enters into the poultice; and then pull it out, and if the arrow is stuck in the poultice, push in the poultice with the point entering so as to ease its extraction.
Et se li saiette est entouchie, si covient que tu copes toute la char entor ou li venins est, se tu pues, puis cure la plaie si com il couvient.	If the arrow has touched, you must cut away all the flesh around where the poison is, if you can, and then cure the wound as it should be done.
Et se li saiette chiet ou peis ou au ventre ou a la vessie ou au costeit, et elle est prochiene, et tu pues coper sus, se i cope; et te garde de coper la voinne et lou nerf, et puis l’estrai, et puis cout la plaie, se mestier est; et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And if the arrow hits the leg or foot or belly or bladder or side, and it is superficial, and you can cut over it, then cut away the flesh around it; and be careful not to cut into the vein and nerve, and then extract the arrow, and then close up the wound, if necessary; and cure it until it is healed.
Li forme des tenailles dont on trait les saiettes sont semblans au bec d’oiseil, et vez ci la forme:	The shape of the tongs used to treat arrows are similar to a bird's beak, and here is the shape:
Et en sont mout de manieres: grans, moienes, et petites, selonc la quantitei de la saiette.	There are many types: large, medium, and small, depending on the size of the arrow.
Li forme dou boutant cheveit est ausi com li penne d’un oisel, por bouter a la pointe de la saiette, si com ci est li forme:	The shape of the feathered end is also like the feathers on an arrow, to catch and stick to the tip of the arrow, as shown in the illustration.
li forme des tenailles por bouter et por sachier si est ci:	the shape of the tongs for pushing and probing if it's there:
des voinnes dou cors communes	veins of the common body:
Des voinnes dont on se saine sont XXXI, de coi il a ou chef XVI, c’est a savoir: II batans qui sont aprés les oreilles, qui sont apelees les dous «herbech»; et les II arteres qui sont en II temples apparans; et II voines que sont en II larmiers des II eulz, que sont apelees «aspires»; et li voine que est emmi le front; et li voinne que est au chief dou neis; et les II guindeges qui sont ou col; et les II voinnes que sont en levres desus de la bouche, et ce sont les voines que sont apelees «augeherich»; et II voinnes que sont desoz la lengue.	There are 31 veins that can be used for bleeding, and there are 16 of them in the head; two veins behind the ears, called 'ear-veins'; two arteries in the temples, visible; two veins in the corners of the eyes, called 'eye-veins'; one vein in the middle of the forehead; one vein at the tip of the nose; two veins in the neck; two veins above the lips, and these are the veins called 'upper-lip-veins'; and two veins below the tongue.
Les voinnes dont on saine communement sont V en chescun bras: l’une est li cephalique, et est dou senestre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou chief»; et li moiene est apelee «faste», et est composte de la cephalique et de la basilique, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou cuer»; et li basilique si est ou destre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gent «voinne dou ventre», et est sus le foscile, et est celle dont on saine, qui apert manifestement sus le pouchet.	The veins from which we commonly bleed are V in each arm: one is the cephalic, which is on the left side of the chest, and the common people call it 'vein of the head'; and the middle one is called 'fast', and it is composed of the cephalic and the basilic, and the common people call it 'vein of the heart'; and the basilic is on the right side of the chest, and the common people call it 'vein of the belly', and it is above the cubital fossa, and it is the one from which we bleed, which opens clearly above the elbow.
Et li salvatelle est li voine qui est entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire, et si a II rains; et en la jambe et ou piet sont III voinnes: l’une si est desoz la corbeure dou pochet dou senestre costeit, et li seconde sophene qui est a la cheville dou destre costeit; et li voine qui est apelee «nesse», que est en la cheville de l’autre costei; et en l’autre jambe sont III voinnes desoz celles.	And the salvatelle is the vein between the auricular and the annular, and it has II branches; and in the leg there are III veins: one of them is below the curve of the pouch on the left side of the chest, and the second is sophene which is at the ankle of the right side of the chest; and the vein which is called 'nesse', that is at the ankle of the other side; and in the other leg there are III veins below those.
Li sainie des voinnes que sont aprés les oreilles si aide as catharres anciens, et a emigraine; et li qualiteis dou sainier, si com je te dis, et est que tu reises lou chief dou malaide, et frote lou leu ou les voinnes sont d’un drap aspre; puis estrigne li malaides son col a une vis, tant que les II voinnes aperent derrier les oreilles en II leus dependens dou chief: quier les donques a ton doi, et ou tu sens lou poulz desoz ton doi, si seigne d’enche; puis pren la lancette, et la boute par desoz la voine jusc’a l’os, puis lieve ta main a tout la voinne amont, et cope et lou cuir et la voinne bien II dois dou traver, et fai issir dou sanc tant que tu vues; puis l’estrain et lie, tant qu’ele soit sanee; et j’ai ja dit l’incision et le cautere ou premier livre.	The bleeding of veins that are behind the ears is helped by old catarrhs and by emigration; and the qualities of the bleeder, as I told you, and it is that you raise the head of the patient, and rub the area where the veins are with a rough cloth; then tighten the patient's neck with a screw, so that the two veins appear behind the ears in two places depending on the head: then squeeze them to your finger, and where you feel the pulse under your finger, sign with ink; then take the lance and pierce it under the vein up to the bone, then lift your hand to the entire vein upstream, and pierce both the skin and the vein well through the two sides of the finger, and make the blood come out until you see it; then tighten and ligate it, so that it is healed; and I have already said about incision and cautery in the first book.
Li sainie des II arteres que sont en II temples, si vaut a emigrainne anciene, et sode, et obtalmie acostumee, et au cors des larmes agues as eulz; et li qualitez dou sainier si est si com je dis: et est que li malaides estraigne son col, tant que les II voinnes aperent apertement; et sent lou polz desoz ton doi, et puis seigne d’enche; puis lieve lou keur sus la voinne en haut a ton doi indice, et boute la lancette desoz, et lieve la voine en haut, et la cope, si com tu as fait en II autres voinnes, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit; puis deslie lou malaide, et met ton doi sus la voine une houre, puis met sus coton; et puis la lie forment, et la laisse tant qu’elle soit sanee; et nos en avons jai parleit et de lor copement et de lor estraction, ou comencement dou livre.	The bleeding of the two arteries that are in the two temples is good for long-standing migraine, and eye pain, and habitual blindness, and watery eyes; and the quality of the bleeder is as I said: and it is that the patient holds his neck still, so that the two veins appear clearly; and feel the pulse under your thumb, and sign with your finger; then lift the vein on top of the finger up to your index finger, and insert the lance underneath, and lift the vein on top, and bind it as you did in the other veins; then release the patient, and put your finger on the vein for an hour, then place cotton underneath; and then bind it tightly, and leave it until it heals; and we have spoken of their binding and their extraction at the beginning of the book.
Li sainie de la voine dou front si vaut autant com li sainie de la cephalique as maladies de la faice ancienes, et a emigraine, et a roujor; et li qualitez si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant, tant que li voine apere; puis pren l’estrument qui est apelez «fosseur», dont ci est li forme:	The bleeding from the vein of the forehead is as effective as the bleeding of the cephalic vein for ancient diseases of the face, and for migraine and redness. The nature of the disease is such that the patient turns his head in torture until the vein appears; then take the instrument called 'fosseur', of which here is the form:
Et met la pointe sus la voinne, et fier sus de ta main, ou d’autre chose, et laisse dou sanc issir selonc la quantiteit que tu vues; puis delie au malaide le col, et lie la voine tant qu’elle soit saneel et aucune fois l’uevre on d’un flaime large.	And place the point over the vein, and press with your hand or something else, and let the blood issue according to the amount you see; then loosen the neck of the patient, and tie the vein until it is healed, and sometimes the wound can be treated with a broad flame.
Toutevoie, il ne covient mie que li flaimes soit trop agus; et le saine de travers, car li os est pres, et par aventure brise li flaimes quant il est subtilz.	Nevertheless, the flames should not be too sharp, and the wound should not be too deep, for the bone is near, and by chance the flames might break when they are thin.
Li sainie des II voines que sont en II larmiers si aide as eulz, et a la tigne, et a la roujor, et a l’oriuel en l’oil, et as maladies de la faice; et li qualitez de lor sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant d’aucun liien, si com devant; puis le saine, et soit li sainie dou traver, un poc dou lonc dou flaime un poc large, car il n’i a point de char.	The bleeding of the two veins in the temples helps with toothache and tinea and redness and pain in the eye, and with diseases of the face; and the nature of their bleeding is such that the patient turns his head in torture by means of some ligature, as before; then he bleeds, and the bleeding should be through a long and somewhat wide flame, for there is no flesh.
Et se li flaimes est subtilz, par aventure si brise; puis fai corre dou sanc, tant com tu en as mestier, et puis lie sus couton, et le lie bien.	And if the flames are subtle, by chance it will break; then make the blood flow, as much as you need, and then bind it with a thread, and tie it well.
Li sainie de la voine dou neis si vaut a ague, et a sode forsenee, et a maladies de faice, si com emigraine et roujor que vient en la faice, et meimement quant elle est anciene; et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estrigne son col, puis estrain son neis a ta main senestre, et pren lou flaime subtil lonc, et le fiche emmi la levre en l’espaice qui est entre les II narines, car li voinne n’apert mie bien enqui, et li sans comencera maintenant a corre; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit, puis la lie une nuit, car elle est mout tost restoree; et c’est li forme dou flaime:	The vein of the nose is good for ague, and for violent fever, and for facial diseases, such as migraine and redness that comes to the face, and especially when it is chronic; and the quality of the vein is that the patient constricts his throat, then he squeezes his nostrils with his left hand, and takes a long, thin flame, and inserts it into the lip in the space between the two nostrils, for the vein does not open well otherwise, and the blood will begin to flow now; and do not go too deeply, and let the blood flow according to your need, then ligate it for one night, for it is quickly restored; and this is the form of the flame:
Li sainie des II guindeges si aide a l’estrecement de l’alainne, et a l’encomencement de meselerie, et a mout de maladies, et a empetigine, et a corrodens, et a herpes, et estiomenes; et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col desoz l’une et l’autre, si com nos avons dit; et soit li maistres estans sus lou chief dou malaide, et li malaides siece sus I siege, puis saine la voine dou lonc un poc largement, puis trai dou sanc tempreement, ou tant com mestier est; puis refai autreteil en l’autre voinne, puis deslie lou liien, et estraint andous les voines moienement, que li malaides n’estrangle; et le laisse jusc’au matin, que li plaie soit sanee.	The vein of the two ears helps with the constriction of the windpipe, and with the beginning of hoarseness, and with many diseases, and with impetigo, and with ulcers, and with herpes, and with stomach aches; and the quality of the vein is that the patient constricts his throat, as we have said; and let the master stand over the head of the patient, and the patient sit on a chair, then open the vein of the long one a little widely, then gently draw blood, or as much as is needed; then do the same in the other vein, then loosen the ligature, and gently squeeze both veins, so that the patient does not choke; and let him be until the morning, so that the wound heals.
de la sainie des leivres	of bleeding from the lips
Li sainie des voinnes des levres desus si aident a cole en la bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et fendures de levres, et dou neis et entor.	Bleeding from the veins of the lips above helps with cold in the mouth, and corruption of the gums, and splitting of the lips, and toothache and pain in the jaw.
Et li qualitez de la sainie si est de faire seoir lou malaide devant toi, et estraint son col si com j’ai dit; puis torne la levre, et regarde as II voinnes, dont l’une est a la destre levre et li autre a la senestre, et les conoist on par ceu qu’elles sont noires, et par ceu que entor elles a voines menues noires: cope donques l’une et l’autre, et se tu ne les conois, et tu en es en doutance, si cope la plus grosse de chescune part, et tout ausi fai des II voinnes que sont desus et desoz, car c’est une meisme maniere.	And the qualities of bleeding are to have the patient sit facing you and stretch his neck as I have said; then turn the lip and look at the two veins, one on each side, which can be recognized because they are black, and because there are tiny black veins around them: grasp both of these, and if you cannot recognize them and are in doubt, then grasp the largest of each side, and do the same with the two veins above and below, for it is the same procedure.
de la sainie desoz la lengue	And the qualities of bleeding under the tongue: have the patient stick out his tongue and grip it from below with your left hand; then take a sharp knife and cut both sides of the frenulum, and cut straight through until you reach the muscle, and then pull the tongue down so that it hangs down. Then hold the tongue steady with your left hand and grasp the frenulum with your right hand, pulling it up towards the nose as far as you can, while cutting with a knife under the root of the tongue; when you have finished cutting, let go with your left hand and with your right pull it up towards the nose until it comes away. Then take a piece of wool and put it over the wound to stop the bleeding, and let him spit out the blood that has collected in his mouth.
Li sainie des voinnes que sont desoz la lengue si aide aprés la sainie de la cephalique, et c’est a l’estrecement de la gorge, et as maladies de l’uve, et as maladies de la bouche; et li qualitez dou sainier si est que li malaides siece entre tes mains devant lou soleil, et li lieve la lengue, et regarde desoz en chescun costeit une voinne noire: saine donques l’une et l’autre, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car desoz sont les arteres.	The bleeding of the veins that are under the tongue is helped after the bleeding of the head vein, and it is due to the constriction of the throat, and the diseases of the uvula, and the diseases of the mouth; and the quality of the bleeder should be such that the patient severs between your fingers in front of the sun, and lifts his tongue, and looks under each side for a black vein: therefore heal one and the other, and do not go too deep, because the arteries are underneath.
Les voinnes dou coute dont on saine communement sont sainies selonc II manieres: ou em poignant a tout I flaime mirtin large, ou olivaire subtil si com coutez trenchans, et est apelez «anesil»; et sont large et subtil selonc la largesce et l’estrecement des voinnes.	The veins of the neck that are commonly bled are bled in two ways: either by piercing with a completely flame-widened needle, or with a thin olive-shaped one, like a cutting thistle, and it is called "anesil"; and they are wide and subtle according to the width and constriction of the veins.
Li forme dou flaime mirtin si est mout renommee, et est large si com tu vois:	The shape of the flame martin is very renowned, and it is broad as you can see.
Et ait mestier por ovrir les voinnes chevees plaines de gros sanc apparent, et que contienent gros sanc et trouble; et c’est li forme dou flaime olivaire:	And it is necessary to open the veins that are smooth-haired and full of thick blood, and which contain thick and troubled blood; and that is the form of the olive flame.
et est plus subtilz apointé, et est por sainier les voinnes subtilz, ou il a subtil sanc citrin.	and is more pointed and is for bleeding subtle veins, where there is subtle yellow blood.The following text is a medieval medical treatise written in Old French, around the 12th-13th centuries.
Li sainie de la basilique, qui est une de ces voinnes, si aide as maladies que sont desoz la gorge, et ou col, et ou peis, et ou ventre; et covient au sainor qu’il saine saigement, et qu’il se warse de l’artere qui est desoz.	The basilic vein, which is one of these veins, helps with diseases that are under the throat, in the neck, chest and abdomen; and the bleeder must bleed freely, and cauterize the artery underneath.
Et s’il cope l’arterre, et decorremens de sanc vient, si le covient estainchier, si com j’ai dit; et ne doit mie estre poignans li flaime, mais taillans si com anesil.	And if it pierces the artery and bleeding ensues, then it must be staunched as I have said; but the flame should not be piercing, but gentle like a needle.
Et se li basilique n’apert manifestement, si covient que tu l’estrainges, et chainge une autre; ou tu quieres aucun rain de li, ou tu saine en leu de li la voinne emmi le bras: elle apert manifestement; et la cope au flaime anesil, si com nos avons dit.	And if the basilic does not open clearly, then you must stretch it and change to another; or you can take some of it, or you can bleed in its place in the arm: it will open clearly; and stop with the gentle flame as we have said.Et si la voinne ne s’en va pas tant qu’elle doit, si covient que tu l’estrainge ains qu’il se deffait; et s’il ne se deffait mie, si doit on le fendre ou tailler, ou chainger la voinne en autrui leu.
Et se tu vues conoistre le leu de la sainie, si covient ainsois que tu estraignes lou bras, que tu touches le leu tant que tu conoisses le poulz; puis signe le leu d’enche, et puis lie lou bras, et cope la voine dou flaime anesil; et warde que tu ne ferir en l’artere quant tu vois le leu enfleit, car c’est de l’artere: eschui la donques.	And if you wish to find the location of the bleeding, you must stretch the arm and feel the pulse until you know where it is; then sign the spot with your finger and tie the arm, and stop the vein with flame before you sign it. Be careful not to pierce the artery when you see the spot swelling, for that is the artery: therefore avoid it.
Et se tu vois saillir en haut ausi com l’urine d’un enfant, et li sans est rouges et subtilz, saiches que c’est sans de l’artere: haste toi donques, et met ton doi sus longement, puis oste ton doi se li sans estainche, que maintes fois avient; se lie lou bras, et laisse ensi, et ne lou mueve li malaides; et soit sus paour, et ne lou mueve tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you see it rising as high as a child's urine, and the blood is red and thin, know that this is blood from the artery: therefore hurry and put your finger on it for a long time; then remove your finger if the bleeding stops, which often happens. Tie the arm and leave it alone, and do not move the patient until he is healed. And if he feels fear, do not move him until he is cured.
Et se li sans n’est estainchiez, et il te vaint, et li medicine ne t’est presens, si cope l’artere s’elle apert, car li chief de li retraient; et estainche li sans.	And if the blood is not staunched and he bleeds and there is no medicine present, then compress the artery where it is cut off, and stop the flow of blood.
Et pren une escorce de fistice, et la fent, et pren l’une des moitiez et lie sus bien jusc’a l’autre jor; se li sans estainche, c’est bien; se ce non, si le cure, si com nos avons dit, des poudres qui estainchent sanc; et li estainchemens n’est mie griés em plusors dispositions por le petit leu de la plaie, et la possance dou liien dou bras.	Take a piece of bark from an elm tree and split it, then take one half and bind it tightly until the next day; if the bleeding stops, that is good; if not, then treat it with a cauterization, as we have said, using powders that stop bleeding; and the cauterization does no harm to the arm in most cases because of the small wound and the strength of the arm.
Li sainie de la voinne em mileu si aide qu’elle trait sanc dou chief desus, et dou cors desoz, por ceu qu’elle est composte de la basilique et de la cephalique, si com nos avons dit; et covient au sainor qu’il se warse por lou nerf qui est desoz, et s’il point trop em parfont, et il trueve lou nerf, et il enfle et li santez soit griés, et par aventure ne puet saner; et cist nerf apert mult de fois, et s’il n’apert en aucuns homes por sa subtiliteit, si covient que tu lou saines de l’estrument anesil; et eschui lou nerf a ton pooir.	The bleeding from the vein in the middle is helped by its drawing blood from the head above and the body below, because it is made of basil and cedar, as we have said; and the doctor should be careful of the nerve beneath, not piercing too deeply, and finding the nerve he should inflame and hurt it, and perhaps it cannot heal; and this nerve often opens, and if in some people it does not open because of its subtlety, then you should treat it with an instrument called an "anesil"; and guard the nerve as best you can.
Et se il a voinne entre les .ij. ners, si la fent dou lonc.	And if there is a vein between the two nerves, they cut it from the long one.
Li sainie de la cephalique si aide, qu’ele atrait sanc dou chief, et aide as eulz; et covient sainier em poignant au flaime olivaire ou au flaime mirtin, car c’est li plus sauve de toutes les voinnes, car il n’a desoz li ne nerf ne artere.	The vein of the head if it helps, it draws blood from the head, and it helps the eyes; and one must bleed it with a flame of olive oil or a flame of myrtle, for it is the safest of all veins, because there are no nerves or arteries beneath it.
Toutevoie, covient querir lou plus legier leu, et ne grieve rien s’on faut la premiere fois, et on rencomence; et par aventure enfle li leus a aucuns homes, cant on faut la premiere fois, mais il ne grieve rien.	Nevertheless, one should seek the lightest place, and not hurt anything if one fails the first time, and try again; and perhaps it inflames the eyes in some men, when one fails the first time, but it doesn't hurt at all.
La qualitez de la sainie si est selonc ta pensee.	The quality of the bloodletting depends on your thoughts.
Li premiere chose que tu dois savoir de sainier, si est que sainie n’est amenistree fuer que por garder santeit, et por eschuir les maladies a venir; et soit li sainie faite en l’une des III voinnes que sont ou coute: c’est a savoir, cephalique, faste, et basilique; et se doit on sainier en l’encomencement de prientens a geun, et en autompne et en yver aprés mengier, quant li signe de repletion aperent; et se doit on sainier le premier jor ou le tier, aprés II houres ou III dou jor.	The first thing you should know about bleeding is that it is only done to maintain health and prevent diseases; and bleeding should be done in one of three veins: the head, the arm, or the hand; and one should bleed at the beginning of lent, and in autumn and winter after eating, when the signs of digestion are apparent; and one should bleed on the first or third day, after two or three hours of the day.
Li sainie qui est aministree as maladies n’a point d’oure determinee, mais que quant besoing est de jor ou de nut, en toutes houres et en toz tens; et ne covient mie sainier les enfans jusc’a XIIII ans, ne femme portant fuer que des lou quart mois jusc’a septime.	The bleeding that is administered for illnesses does not have a set time, but when there is a need during the day or night, at all times and in all seasons; and one should not bleed children until they are 14 years old, nor women who are pregnant past their fourth month until their seventh.
Ne ne se doient mie sainier li viel qui ont passez .lx. ans.	Nor should the very old be bled who have passed 60 years.
Et quant aucuns se vuet sainier, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient k’il mondefie les intestines d’un clistere legier, s’il a mout de fiens retenut, si que les voines n’atraient des intestines les superfluitez porries nuisans as membres principelz; ne ne se saine mie cil qui est trop saolez de viandes, ne qui est yvres, tant k’il en soit fuer, ne ydropiques; et se warse on de sainier aprés colique passion, et vomissement, et decorrement de ventre, et multipliement d’abiter a femme, et de traval, de veiller et de juner, et ceu que tot la vertu, ou par chose de l’arme ou dou cors; puis subtilie les humors, se li sans est gros, par viandes et par bevraiges et par medicines, se tu en as lou poir; puis entre ou bain, s’aucune chose ne lou deffent, por subtiliier lou sanc, et te saine de la voinne dou pis entor la tierce, si com nos avons dit; et te garde celui jor de travail, et de poinne, et de luxure, et de semblans choses; et soies liez et joians, et soit li sainieres plus haut que cil cui on saine, et li frote lou bras II fois ou III, puis estraigne lou liien desus moienement, car quant il est trop estrois ou poc, si ne puet corre li sans; et puis le frote le leu as mains, tant que les voines enflent, et les sente on; puis moille li sainieres le flaime d’un poc d’oile viel, puis mette son doit de sa main senestre sus celle voinne desoz lou leu un poc ou il vuet sainier, que li voinne ne fue et faille au ferir.	And when someone wishes to bleed, in whatever manner, they should clear the intestines with a gentle enema if they have much retained feces, so that the veins do not draw harmful excess fluids from the intestines into the principal limbs; one should also not bleed those who are too full from eating meat, or who are thirsty, as long as they are suffering from it, or those who are drunk; and if someone needs to bleed after a colic attack, vomiting, diarrhea, and excessive sexual activity with a woman, and from exertion, waking, fasting, and that which weakens the body through arms or the rest of the body; then subtly draw out the humors through food, drink, and medicine if you have the skill; then enter a bath, if nothing else affects it, to draw out the blood, and bleed from the vein in the foot around midnight, as we have said; and guard against exertion, and pain, and excess on that day; and be calm and cheerful, and let the person bleeding be higher than the one being bled, and rub their arm two or three times, then tighten the ligature gently above the site of bleeding, for if it is too tight or too loose it will not affect the blood; then wet the blade with a little old oil, then place their left thumb on the vein below where they wish to bleed, so that the vein opens and does not slip from the blade.
Car il i a voinnes que fuient ausi com cordes au sainier, et si a de telz que sont plainnes de ventositeit, si que quant on met sus le flaime, si retrait a flaime, et ne puet ovrir li voinne, et ensi est on de ceus; et s’il aoevre la voinne, si est li plaie trop estroite, por ceu si covient que li sainieres soit avisez en ces choses.	Because there are veins that flow like cords to the wound, and some that are full of windiness, so that when one puts them on the flame, they withdraw from the flame and cannot open the vein, and thus one is of those; and if he opens the vein, then the wound is too narrow, so it behooves that the surgeon be skilled in these things.
Et se li voine oevre la premiere fois, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence ancor un poc desoz celui leu ou sus hastanment, se li leus n’est enflez.	And if the vein opens the first time, it is good; if not, then try again a little lower at the site of the vein or above it, unless the area is swollen.
Et se li leus est enflez, et li malaides s’espoante, se li laisse I jor ou II, et ne liier mie le bras: par aventure i venra apostemes chaus; ne n’entre ou bain, puis rencomence la sainie s’elle li plait; et se li pertuis est petis, ou li sans cort subtilment et tu doutes qu’il n’isse mie tant de sanc com tu vues, si fier en celui pertuis meisme a tout le flaime droitement; et l’uevre un poc hastanment, ainsois que li leus soit enflez; car ceu avient maintes fois, quant li plaie est petite.	And if the part is swollen and the patient faints, let him for a day or two without binding the arm: perhaps hot abscesses will come; then return to bleeding if it pleases her; and if the orifice is small, insert the needle thinly into the vein, and you doubt that it does not flow so much blood as you wish, then pierce in that same orifice directly with the flame; and work gently a little while the part is swollen; for this happens many times when the wound is small.
Se tu vois le leu enfleit, si ne rencomencier mie la sainie, et met sus un poc de lie d’oile, car elle alige lou cors dou sanc, et est muedre en cest leu li lie que li oile; et ensi aministre la lie de oile en chescune sainie que tu saines les voines, por estanchier lou cours dou sanc; et ceu meisme fait triaicle et bowe d’eus, quant on le met sus le leu; si subtilie li sans et s’espart quant il est trop gros.	If you see the place swollen, do not re-open the wound, and put a little liniment of oil on it, for it eases the body of blood, and in this place the liniment that is made of oil; and thus administer the liniment of oil in every wound that you open veins, to stop the flow of blood; and it does the same thing to them when they are applied to the place; it subtilely draws out the blood and disperses it when it is too large.
Et s’il i vient uns apostemes gros, qui avient maintes fois, meismement quant il n’est sainiez fuer que a celi fois ou li overture de la voinne est petite, si te haste, et met sus le leu esponge moillie en aigue et en seil un poc chaut, et l’estraint une houre; et covient que tu faices ceu aprés l’issue dou sanc de la voinne, et s’il demoure au leu aprés aucuns jors aucune noiror ou verdor, si ne li nuist mie; et se tu vues, met sus aucune chose de aloes ou de mirre remise en jus de calament, monstastre, ou semblant.	And if there is a large abscess that often occurs, especially when the opening of the vein is small, be quick and put a sponge moistened in warm water on the place, and hold it for an hour; and you must do this after the flow of blood from the vein, and if it remains in the place after a few days any blackness or green color, it will not harm; and if you see it, put some aloe or myrrh reduced to a poultice, medication, or similar.
Et maintes fois avient aposteme et aparance a la sainie de la basilique: met donques ta main sus, et se tu trueves le leu mol a la compression de la main, si est celle aparance male.	And many times there is an abscess and appearance at the exit of the basilic vein: so put your hand on it, and if you find the place soft to the pressure of the hand, then that appearance is bad.
Eschui donques que tu ne mettes sus aucune chose de ceu que nos avons dit, car par aventure en cort sans de l’artere; mais li fai .i. emplaustre sec por endurcir le leu, puis le cure d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Therefore be careful not to put anything on it from what we have said, because sometimes it cuts through an artery; but make a dry plaster to harden the area, then treat the wound with other treatments until it heals.
Et trai a chescun dou sanc selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu, et de la color dou sanc.	And treat each wound according to its quantity and the color of the blood.
Car se li sans est noir, si en laisse issir tant qu’il soit rouges; et se tu lou vois gros, si lou laisse tant qu’il soit subtiliiez; et s’il est trop chaus, si le laisse refroidier.	For if the blood is black, let it flow until it is red; and if you see it thick, let it flow until it is thinned out; and if it is too hot, let it cool down.
Et covient a celui qui est plains et fors, et ait mestier d’estraction de sanc, c’on li faice plus large plaie, et soit li flaimes larges; et a celui qui est foibles, fai le contraire, et le covient sainier poc et sovent, et le doit on sainier en taillant de travers, ne mie en poignant; et ceste maniere de sainie est sauve de decorrement de sanc et de copement de nerf, et vaut mues que li sainie dou lonc ne dou large.	And it is necessary for one who is full and swollen, and needs bloodletting, that one makes a larger wound, and the cuts should be wide; and for one who is weak, do the opposite, and one must let blood little and often, and one must let blood by cutting across, not by pricking; and this way of letting blood is safe from blood flowing and from damaging nerves, and it is better than letting blood from a long or wide cut.
Et a celui cui li cors faut a la sainie, covient doner pain moilliet en jus de pomes grenates; s’il est eschaufez, si trai dou sanc III fois ou IIII Et s’il est de froide complexion, si menjuce devant la sainie pain moilliet en sirop muzé, ou en sirop de miel aromatique avec espices, si com poivre, canelle, gingibre, et chiches, et sirop bien odorant.	And for one whose body needs letting blood, one should give wet bread in pomegranate juice; if they are hot-tempered, then draw out blood three or four times. And if they are of a cold complexion, then eat before the bleeding wet bread in syrup made from roses, or in aromatic honey syrup with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and cloves, and fragrant syrup.
Et s’il paume a la sainie, aprés l’issue de mout de sanc, si covient qu’il hume brouet de char, et sirop odorant subtil, et use des autres choses que nos avons dit en la division ou chapistre de sincope, por l’evacuation de voinne.	If he faints after losing a lot of blood, then he should drink warm broth and subtle scented syrup, and use the other remedies we mentioned in the chapter on syncope for opening a vein.
Et s’il vuet esventer som bras, et sainier autre fois, si covient, quant il est afoiblis par grant sainie, k’il se saine poc et poc, selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu continueement.	And if he wants to empty his arm and bleed again, then when he is weakened by a large bleeding, he should bleed a little at a time according to the amount of his continued strength.
Et qui vuet esventer som bras aprés la premiere sainie, et il a cors fort, si se saine .vij. houres aprés la premiere sainie, ou aprés la nuevime houre.	And whoever wishes to open their arm after the first bleeding, and they have strong pulses, then heal for .vii. hours after the first bleeding, or after the new hour.
Et qui se vuet sainier d’autre part, si se doit sainier lou secont jor ou le tier.	And whoever wishes to bleed from another part, then they should bleed on the second day or the third.
Car il a mout de sanc dedens le cors qui est ja eschaufez, et fait venir fievre; si en covient traire grant quantiteit, et eslargir le pertus tant qu’il chiece em pameson; puis que tu rewardes toutes les conditions de sainie, et met ta main sus som poulz quant il saine, que li mors ne viegne en leu de pameson, et ceu avient maintes fois, quant li sainieres est negligens; et ne covient mie quant tu vues desliier lou bras, et faire issir sanc la seconde fois, et li pertus est clos, que tu presses forment sus; ne s’il est corbes, qu’il estende lou bras hastanment, car ce seroit malz; mais le laisse tant qu’il saine la seconde fois; ou tu i point a la pointe dou flaime, tant que li sans qui est congelez a pertus de la voinne isse fuer, et met sus I poc de seil remis en aigue, et presse sus legierement.	For there is a lot of blood in the body that has been heated, and it causes fever; so you must draw off a large quantity, and widen the vein until it bleeds freely; then you should check all the conditions of bleeding, and place your hand on his pulse while he is bleeding, so that death does not come through the orifice of the vein, and this often happens when the bloodletting person is careless; and when you see the arm being released and the blood coming out a second time, and the vein is closed, you must not press it hard; nor if it is bent, should he stretch his arm violently, for that would be bad; but let him stay as it is while he bleeds a second time; or you can touch it with the point of a flame until the blood which is congealed at the opening of the vein melts and flows out, and then place a little water on it, and press gently.
Et se li voine est enflee, si la laisse et ne l’estreindre mie, tant que li aposteme soit apaisiez.	And if the vein is swollen, leave it and don't constrict it until the abscess is drained.
Et se necessitez est dou traire dou sanc la seconde fois, si le saine en celui leu meisme, ou en un autre voinne, ou en l’autre bras.	And if it's necessary to let blood a second time, then bleed in the same vein, or in another vein, or in the other arm.
Li voinne emmi le bras est sainie en leu de la voine dou chief por ceu qu’elle est composte.	Veins in the arm are bled in the area of the vein near the shoulder because it is closer to the heart.
Et li maniere de la sainie si est que li malaides boute sa main en aigue chaude, tant que li foscile soit rouges; puis soit liiéz moienement, si que li voinne apere bien, puis le saine maintenant dou travers, ne mie dou large ne dou lonc; et soit li pertus larges, et soit sainiez bien pres de la jointe de la main, et se sans n’en puet issir, si remet la main en aigue chaude, et laisse corre lou sanc en l’aigue, tant que tu en aies assez; et se c’est en esteit, si ne rebouter mie la main en aigue chaude, car on l’i met plus en yver que en esteit; et li sainie de ceste voine est plus sauve de toutes autres voinnes, qu’il n’i a ne artere ne nerf.	And the way of healing it is that the patient puts his hand in warm water until the vein turns red; then let him move it slightly so that the vein appears clearly, then heal it now from the side, not from the wide or long side; and let the hole be wide, and heal near the joint of the hand, and if blood cannot come out, then put the hand in warm water and let the blood run into the water until you have enough; and if it is in winter, do not turn the hand back in warm water, because it is put in more in winter than in summer; and the healing of this vein is safer than all other veins, as there is no artery or nerve in it.
Li sainie de la salvatele de la main destre si vaut a toutes les maladies dou foie, et c’est li maniere: estrain la main, et boute en aigue chaude, tant que li voinne soit enflee, si c’on la voie; et se la saine de travers, et se tu la copes dou tout en tout, si ne grieve rien; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car li nerf sont desoz toz desnuez de char, et puis remet la main en aigue chaude, se li sans est congelez en la plaie, et n’en puet issir.	The healing of the salvation of the right hand is good for all diseases of the liver, and this is how it works: stretch out the hand, and put it in warm water until the vein swells; then heal it from the side, and if you cover it completely on both sides, it will do no harm; and do not go too deep into the wound, because the nerves are completely stripped of flesh underneath. Then put the hand back in warm water if the blood is frozen in the wound and cannot come out.
Et quant tu avras trait dou sanc tant com mestier t’est, si met sus la voinne oile et seil por souder hastanment, et ensi fai de chescun rain.	And when you have treated the blood as necessary, put oil and silk on the vein to heal quickly, and do this for each vein.
Li sainie de li en la main senestre si vaut a la maladie de la mice, et fai tout ausi com je t’ai dit devers destre.	The bleeding in the left hand is good for the disease of the mumps, and do everything just as I have told you about the right side.
Li sainie de la sophene si vaut a toutes les maladies que sont desoz le cors, si com maladies de la marris, et retenement de flors, et maladie des rains, et des cuixes et des jambes ancienes, et semblans maladies.	The sauce of the sophia is good for all diseases that are under the body, such as diseases of the kidneys, and retention of fluids, and diseases of the intestines, and of the hips and old legs, and similar diseases.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides boute som piet en aigue chaude, et frote sus la voinne tant qu’elle pere, et lie desus la jointure dou piet; et li voinne si est a la cheville, et par desus lou piet en vont mout de rains; saine la donques ou plus large rain, ou a la cheville, que mues vaut.	And the qualities of its sauce are such that the patient puts his foot in warm water, and rubs the vein until it appears, and applies the sauce to the joint of the foot; and if the vein is at the ankle, and up the foot there goes a lot of veins, then treat it at the widest vein, or at the ankle, whichever is better.
Et se tu la saines sus lou piet, si te warde des ners qui sont desoz, et la saine de traver ausi com en copant; et soit li flaimes anesil.	And if you heal it on the foot, then beware of the nerves underneath, and heal it by crossing also as in cupping; and let the flames be mild.
Et se li sans n’en puet issir, si remet lou piet en l’aigue, et laisse bien vuidier la voine.	And if the pus cannot come out, then put the foot into water, and let the vein drain well.
Et se li sainieres faut la premiere fois, si rencomence la seconde au desus un poc, car li leus est salz; ne ne douter de nerf, si com nos avons dit, et ensi fai de la sophene de l’autre piet igalment.	And if the sauce fails the first time, then do it again the second time above a little, because the site is salty; and do not doubt about nerves, as we have said, and thus make the sophia of the other foot equally.
Li leus de la voinne sciatique est a la cheville de fuer, et sa sainie vaut a la dolor de la hainche, quant c’est por sanc chaut.	The site of the sciatic vein is at the ankle, and its remedy is for pain in the hip, when it is due to hot blood.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides entre ou bain, et estraigne desus la cheville IIII dois en tordant, car autrement n’apert li voinne; et s’elle apert, si le saine en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et en traversant; et vaut mues que tu la copes, car li leus est saus, et elle est mout reponue a mains homes.	And the qualities of its healing are that the patient enters the bath, and twists above the ankle IIII turns in twisting, for otherwise the vein does not open; and if it opens, then heal it in every way you can, and by crossing over; and it is better that you cover it, for the place is safe, and it is very relaxed in many people.
Et se tu ne la trueves, si saine aucun rain de li qui apert ou dos dou piet, et vers lou petit doi, et te warde des ners; et fai tant corre dou sanc que tu vues, et puis deslie lou lien, et met sus coton et l’estraint; ele est maintenant sanee.	And if you do not believe it, then heal any vein that opens on the back of the foot, and towards the little toe, and be careful of the nerves; and make the blood flow as much as you see, and then loosen the bandage, and place cotton on top and tighten it; it is now healed.
des sainies de ventouse	of cupping glasses
Ventouses sont fait de cornes, ou d’arain, ou de voirre; et ventosation si est faite selonc .ij. manieres: ou par ferir et atraire sanc, ou sens ferir.	Suctions cups are made of horn, or brass, or glass; and suction is performed in two ways: by striking and drawing blood, or without striking.
Et ceste ventosation qui est sens ferir si est selonc II manieres: ou elle est a tout feu, ou sens feu; et ventosation qui est faite par ferir et par estraction de sanc si est faite en XIIII leus dou cors, de coi li uns est tout en som le chief; et li autres est emmi le col; et II autres en II costeis dou col; et li ventouse desoz lou menton; et li ventouse des II espaules; et li ventouse sus les crupies; et les ventouses emmi les II bras; et les ventouses des II jambes; et les ventouses des II chevilles; et li ventosation ne trait point de sanc, fuer que des menues voinnes que sont esparses en la char, et por ceu n’en afoiblist om mie, si com on fait de sainie de voinne; et ne covient mie qu’elle soit aministree, ne a tout feu ne sens feu, en aucune maladie qui vient de repletion, tant que toz li cors soit vuidiez.	And this cupping which is done by burning is done in two ways: with or without fire; and cupping that is done by burning and by bloodletting is done in 14 places on the body, of which one is all in the head; and the other is in the neck; and two others are on either side of the neck; and the cupping glass under the chin; and the cupping glasses on the two shoulders; and the cupping glasses over the hips; and the cupping glasses among the two arms; and the cupping glasses of the two legs; and the cupping glasses of the two ankles; and the cupping does not draw blood, except for small veins that are scattered in the flesh, and because of this it does not weaken at all, as is done by bloodletting; and it should not be administered with or without fire in any disease that comes from fullness, until the whole body is emptied.
Et se par necessiteit de maladies covient ventoser, ou por acostumances, si l’amenistrons chescune houre en l’encomencement dou mois, ou en la fin, et emmi et en chescun tens; car il i a de telz qui, quant il ont mestier de ventoser, si ont pesant chief; et si a telz qui truevent repletion et roujor en lor faice, et en lor chief, et au col, et tenebrour as eulz; et telz qui truevent une goute de sanc en lor bouche, et ont enflee la lengue, et raichent sanc; et si i a de telz qui songent, et voient par nut sanc et navrez et mors et semblans choses.	And if for the necessity of illness or due to habits, we administer bleeding every hour at the beginning or end of the month, and throughout all times; for there are those who, when they need to bleed, have a heavy head; and there are those who experience fullness and redness in their face, and in their head and neck, and darkness in their eyes; and some who experience a drop of blood in their mouth, and have a swollen tongue, and taste blood; and there are those who dream, and see through their eyes night, and terror, and death, and similar things.
Et quant nos voions ces signes, et meismement quant c’est emmi lou mois, nos lou commandons a ventoser aprés .iij. houres dou jor.	And when we see these signs, especially if it is during the month, we command them to fast after 3 hours of the day.
Li sainie de la muze si aide a la grieteit dou chief … que vient as eulz, et ne covient mie que ce soit aprés l’evacuation de tout lou cors; et ceste ventosation si est en leu de la sainie de la cephalique, et ne covient mie que cil qui est de froide complexion en use, ou qui ait chatharre, car ce lor fait mout grant nuisement; et por ceu ne covient mie que li veillart en usent, ne qui ont ou chief froides maladies.	The bleeding of the nose helps with headaches ... that comes to the eyes, and it should not be after the evacuation of all the body; and this bleeding is in place of the cephalic bleeding, and it should not be used by those of a cold complexion, or who have catarrh, for it does them great harm; and therefore the elderly should not use it, nor those with cold diseases of the head.
Et cil qui s’en saine sovent, si devient oblious, et por ce covient mettre la ventouse un poc plus aval par la doutance d’obliance.	And those who heal often become blind, and because of this, one must place the cupping glass a little lower down due to the fear of blindness.
Li ventosation emmi le col est en leu de la sainie dou chief et de la basilique, et por ceu vaut elle a l’estrecement dou pis, et a fendure de la chenal dou pormon, et a toust, et a repletion; et la covient poc bouter, car s’elle tient trop fermement, si enjanre obliance ou stomac et ou cuer.	The ventilation in the neck is located at the junction of the windpipe and the esophagus, and for this reason it helps with tightness in the feet, and with splitting of the channels of the lungs, and with constipation, and with fullness; and one must not push on it too much, for if it is pressed too firmly, it can cause damage to the stomach and the heart.
Li ventosations as II costelz dou col si vaut as dolors dou chief, et obtalmie et emigrainne, et a l’estranglement, et a la dolor as racines des dens, et est en leu de la sainie de la basilique; et covient que tu comandes au sainor qu’il espresse sa main au mettre, qu’il ne cope l’artere, et ne veigne decorremens de sanc.	The ventilations at the sides of the neck help with headaches, and eye pain and inflammation, and with strangulation, and with tooth pain, and are located at the junction of the esophagus; and one must instruct the surgeon to express his hand while placing it, so that he does not press on the artery and cause a gush of blood.
Li ventosations desoz lou menton si vaut a maladie de bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et semblans maladies qui sont en la bouche; et est en leu des sainies des .ij. levres.	Ventilation under the chin is good for diseases of the mouth, and corruption of the gums, and similar diseases which are in the mouth; and it is in the place of bleeding from the two lips.
Li ventosations des espaules vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de remplissement.	Ventilation of the armpits is good for diseases that come from heat and fullness.
Li ventosations des coutes si vaut autant com des III voinnes dou bras, car elle atrait sanc de ces grosses voinnes; et comande au sainor qu’il ne fiere mie trop em parfont, car li leus est nus de char, et sait desoz ners et arteres.	The ventilations in the armpits are like three veins in the arm, for they draw blood from these large veins; and instruct the surgeon not to push too deeply, for under the skin there are nerves and arteries.Li ventosation de la cotte, si est li leus des ners et arteres qui vons a la main; et covient que tu comandes al sainor qu’il ne cope l’artere, car il adreint decorremens de sanc et mort.
Li ventouse qui est sus la croupe si vaut as emoroydes dou fondement, et as maladies desoz, et covient que li ventouse soit grans, et soit d’arain, qu’elle a mestier de bien traire; et par aventure, s’elle estoit subtilz, si briseroit; et i fai grans plaies.	The cupping glass which is placed on the hip is as good for hemorrhoids and diseases underneath, and it should be large, made of copper, and have a strong suction; and perhaps if it were thin, it would break, causing large wounds.
Les ventouses des jambes si sainent apertement, car elles atraient sanc de tout le cors, et valent as dolors ancienes des rains, et de la marris, et de la vessie, et ramoinnent les flors; et sont en leu des .ij. sophenes, et des .ij. chevilles, et toutevoie elles afoiblissent lou cors aprés lonc us, et font venir paumison em plusors dispositions.	The leg cupping-glasses heal very apparently, for they draw blood from the whole body, and are good for old pains in the legs, and in the hips, and in the bladder; and bring back the period, and are placed on the two sciatic nerves and the two ankles, yet they weaken the body after long use, and cause fainting in many conditions.
Li maniere de mettre la ventouse si est que tu la mettes premier vuide, et succe tempreement, et la met hastanment, et remue igalment, et ne cesser de ceu faire, tant que tu voies lou leu rouge et enfleit, et apere li roujor dou sanc; puis fier, et remet les ventouses, et pren warde en la disposition des cors, car il i a telz qui ont tanre char, et clers porez: si covient ferir une fois soulement, et covient faire larges plaies, et un poc parfondes; et suce legierement.	The manner of applying the cupping-glass is to place it first empty, and suck gently, and apply it firmly, and move equally, and not cease doing this until you see the place red and swollen, and the redness of the blood appears; then stop, and remove the cupping-glasses, and take heed in the disposition of the body, for there are some who have such thin skin and wide pores: therefore only strike once, and make large wounds, and a little deep; and suck gently.
Et se li sans est gros, si couvient ferir .ij. fois: la premiere fois por subtiliier la voie dou sanc gros.	And if the vein is thick, it is necessary to strike twice: the first time to open the path of the thick blood.
Et se li sans est tres espés, si covient ferir la tierce fois; et quant nos volons traire dou sanc poc et poc, si nos soffist soulement une fois.	And if the vein is very thick, it is necessary to strike a third time; and when we want to draw blood a little at a time, we only need to strike once.Et se li sans est clers et espés, si convient ferir  .iiij. fois soulement.
Et se nos volons mout de sanc, si rencomensons sovent; et se li sans est espés, si fier em parfont, et li termines si est que li keurs soit perciez soudement, et couvient a celui qui a gros cuir et dur, et qui ont estrois porelz, que tu oignes les leus des ventouses d’oile aperitif et dissolutif: se c’est en esteit, d’oile violet, ou d’oile d’amandres douces, ou d’oile de semence de cucurbite; et se c’est en yveir, d’oile de cresson, ou de lis, ou de camomille, ou autre semblant.	And if we want a lot of blood, we should suck often; and if the blood is thick, we pierce it with a needle, and the points are such that the skin is pierced suddenly, and it is suitable for those who have thick and hard skin, and who have narrow pores, to anoint the places of the cupping glasses with an aperitif and dissolutive oil: if it is in the summer, with violet oil, or sweet almond oil, or pumpkin seed oil; and if it is in winter, with watercress oil, or lily, or chamomile, or similar.
Et se li superfluitez est grosse et froide, si pren oile amaratin, ou de balsamite, ou oile d’anet, et les semblans.	And if the swelling is large and cold, take oil of amaranth, or of balsamite, or aniseed oil, and similar oils.
Et se cil cui on saine a tendre char et larges porelz, se n’i covient mettre point d’oile, mais le covient laver aprés la ventosation d’aigue rose, ou d’aigue froide, ou d’aigue de morelle, ou d’aigue de cucurbite, ou d’aigue de porcelainne, ou autre semblant.	And if those to whom one heals have soft flesh and wide pores, no oil should be put on them, but they should be washed after cupping with rosewater, or cold water, or mulberry water, or pumpkin water, or porcelain water, or similar.
Et cil qui a mout de moistor, si se leve d’aisil, ou d’aigue de mirte, et de sumac, et de semblans choses.	And those who have a lot of moisture, if they rise from garlic, or myrrh water, and sumac, and similar things.
Et cil qui ont grosses superfluitez se levent de vin viel, ou d’aigue de seuc, ou de decoction d’anet ou de camomile, ou d’autres semblans; et ne se covient mie sainier de ventouse devant le bain ne em bain, mais aprés lou bain une houre ou II; et ne dorme mie aprés la ventosacion, et covient k’il se warse, quant il se doit ventoser et quant il est ventosez.	And those who have large excesses should rise from old wine, or from water of vinegar, or from a decoction of fennel or chamomile, or similar; and one must not bleed with leeches before the bath nor in the bath, but after the bath for an hour or two; and one must not sleep after the venting, and it is necessary that he should warm himself, when he is to be bled and when he is bled.
Et warde se cil qui se saine est coleriques, et se li sans est trop agus et enflamez; si covient qu’il preigne choses froides, si com pomes grenates et endives et laitues a l’aisil, et semblans choses; et menjuce pucins, et char de chastron, et viandes moistes.	And beware if the one who is bled is choleric, and if the blood is too sharp and inflamed; then he should eat cold things, such as pomegranates and endive and lettuce with garlic, and similar things; and soft foods, and cheese curds, and moist meats.
Et cil qui a froide complexion, si preigne syrop de miel, et vin odorant moien, qui est entre viel et noveil, et menjuce poc, et menjuce pucins et petis oiselz et pijons; et lou jor qu’il se ventousera, si doit plus boivre que mengier; et covient doner a aucuns homes aucune fois triaicle ou muscate devant la ventosacion, ou aprés, por conforter les membres principalz; et soit subtiliiez li sans, mais il ne covient mie que cil qui sont chaut le boivent.	And those of a cold complexion should drink honey syrup, and moderate old wine, which is between old and new, and soft foods, and cheese curds and small birds and peewits; and on the day that he is bled, he should drink more than eat; and it is good to give some men triacle or musk before the venting, or after, to comfort the principal members; and subtle things are good for the blood, but one must not give them to those who are hot.
Les ventouses que sont mises sens ferir sont celles que sont mises sus lou foie, et sus la mice, et podagre, et sus lou ventre et la boude et les rains et la hainche, car cil membre ne soffrent mie ferir sus oulz, et ne le fait on fuer que por atraire sanc de membre em membre, si com nos mettons sus les mameles quant li neis sainne; por oster la viscositeit qui est au membre, si com nos metons ventouses sus le ventre et sus la boude por amenuisier le membre; et oste la dolor, quant il i a opilation ou piere, si oste par sa vertu atractive par aventure l’opilation, ou desaert la piere de son leu; et ensi fait ele quant on le met sus lou foie et sus la mice quant il i a ventositeit retenue, et ces ventouses sont aministrees vuides por sucier tant soulement; et aucune fois sont aministrees ensamble feu, et aucunes fois plainnes d’aigue tede, si com em maladies dou pleuresin, et en tel maniere c’on emplisse la ventouse d’aigue chaude soule, ou d’aigue ou il ait cuit herbes covenaubles a ceu.	The cupping glasses that are placed without burning are those that are placed on the liver, and on the mumps, and on the gout, and on the belly and the buttocks, and the legs, and the hips; for these members do not endure being burned on the eyes, and it is only done to attract blood from one member to another, as we put them on the breasts when the nipples are healthy; to remove the viscosity that is in the member, as we put cupping glasses on the belly and buttocks to reduce the member; and it removes pain when there is oppression or stone, or by its attractive virtue, it removes the oppression, or the stone from its place; and so it does when one places it on the liver and on the mumps when there is retained windiness, and these cupping glasses are administered empty to suck only; and sometimes they are administered with fire, and sometimes filled with warm water, as in diseases of the pleurisy, and in such a way one fills the cupping glass with hot water alone, or with water in which appropriate herbs have been cooked.
Li forme de la ventouse aministré a feu si est ci:	The shape of the cup to be administered with fire is as follows:
Et ait II dois de large et demi palme de parfont, et ait ou costeit entor lou mileu I petit pertus, ausi com por bouter une aguille, et soit d’arain, souef devant si qu’ele ne blece lou malaide au mettre sus lou membre; et ait em mileu une verge de travers d’arain ou de fer, por mettre une chandoile emprise, et en soient et grans et petites selonc les maladies et l’eaige de ces qui les prenent; car les ventouses des enfans sont autres que des vielz, et des maigres que des gras.	And it is two digits wide and half a palm deep, and on the side around the middle there is a small hole, like for pushing a needle through, and it should be made of copper, smooth in front so that it does not scratch the patient when placing it on the limb; and in the middle there is a rod crossing through, made of copper or iron, for placing a candle, and they are both large and small according to the illnesses and the age of those who take them; for the ventouses for children are different from those for the old, and for the thin from the fat.
Et doit on ensi mettre ceste ventouse sus lou membre: empren la chandoile de cire ou I linement, et le met emmi la ventouse au traver de la verge qui est emmi la ventouse, si que li clartez soit au fons de la ventouse qu’elle ne brule le malaide; et puis la met sus lou membre, et tes dois soit sus lou pertus que nos avons dit, si que quant on vuet, si en va li vapor, et oste on la ventouse; et emprent on le linement si com devant, et le rencomence sovent, se tu as mestier.	And one should thus place this ventouse on the limb: take the candle of wax or the liniment, and place it within the ventouse, through the rod that is within the ventouse, so that the flame is at the bottom of the ventouse and does not burn the patient; and then place it on the limb, and hold your fingers over the hole we mentioned, so that when one wishes, the vapor may go out, and then remove the ventouse. And take the liniment as before, and repeat it often if you have need to.
En la ventouse donques qui est aministree em maladie de pleuresin, a tout aigue, n’a point de verge ne de pertus, et n’est amenistree fuer que quant ele est plaine d’aigue, et est mise sus lou membre tant soulement; et c’est li forme:	In the cupping glass which is administered for pleurisy, for all acute diseases, there is no tube or opening, and it is not removed until it is full of water, and is placed on the limb only; and that is the form:
Sansues ne sont amenistrees fuer que en membres ou on ne puet mettre ventouses por lour petitece, si com levres et gencives, et semblans leus; et en leus desnuez de char, si com doi ou neis, et autres semblans; et li qualitez de l’user si est que quant tu trueves sansues que sont en aigues douces nettes sens porreture, si les pren; et les met une nut en aigue douce, tant qu’elles soient famillouses, et n’aient rien en ventres; et puis soit sainiez de voinne et de ventouse, puis frote le membre tant k’il soit rouges, et met sus les sansues; et quant elles seront plainnes, et cherront, se c’est leu ou on puisse mettre ventouse, se li met, car ce vaut mout aprés.	Leeches are not removed until in members where one cannot place cupping glasses due to their smallness, such as lips and gums, and similar places; and in bare flesh, such as fingers or toes, and others; and the quality of their use is that when you find leeches that are in clear, clean water without any dirt, you take them; and put them in clear, fresh water until they become accustomed and have nothing in their bellies; and then one is bled with a vein and a cupping glass, then the member is rubbed until it turns red, and leeches are placed on it; and when they are full and fall off, if it is a place where one can use a cupping glass, one does so, for that is much better.
Se ceu non, si leve le leu d’aisil, et puis d’aigue, mout bien, et puis l’espreint; et se li leus saine trop aprés lou cors des sansues, si moille I drapel de lin en aigue froide, et met sus, tant que li sans soit estenchiés; et se li sans est multipliez, si met sus vitriole broié, ou gales, et semblans choses, tant qu’il soit estenchiez; ou tu met sor le leu moitiez de feves pelees, et les laisse tant qu’elles s’aerdent au leu, si estanchera maintenant; et se tu en as de plus mestier, si pren autres sansues.	If not, then lift the area with alum and water, and then spritz it; and if the bite marks are too close to the body's veins, moisten a linen cloth in cold water and place it over the bite until the swelling is reduced; and if the bites are numerous, place powdered vitriol, or similar substances, over the area until the swelling is reduced; or place half a handful of peeled peas over the site and leave them there until they turn black, and the swelling will then subside; and if you need more, take more leeches.
Et se les sansues ne se vuellent prendre, si frote le leu de sanc fres, ou tu i fiche une aguille tant que li sans en isse, et puis les met sus, et tantost com elles sentent lou sanc, si s’aerdent; et quant tu vues qu’elles chieent, si poudre sus un poc d’aloen et de seil broiet, ou de cendre, si cherront maintenant.	If the leeches will not attach, then rub the bite with fresh blood, or pierce the bite with a needle so that some blood comes out, and then place the leeches over the bite; and as soon as they smell the blood, they will attach; and when you see that they are excreting, then sprinkle some powdered aloes and salt, or ashes, over them, and they will stop.
Ci comence li livre des brisures	Here begins the book of fractures
Cist chapistres est maintes fois necessaires en l’art de medicine, et est restorement de brisure et de desaluement.	This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine and is for the restoration of fractures and dislocations.
Saichiez, chier fil, que li fol mire se gietent de cest chapistre, qu’il ne virent onques nul des anciens livres, ne lettre n’en lurent; et por ceste cause est estraingie li science en nostre terre, car je n’en trovai onques nul boin; et n’en sai nient, fuer que par la science des anciens livres, ou j’ai tant estudiiet que je en ai traite la science, et par experiment, et par l’acostumance de ma vie; et je vos ai jai descrit en cest chapistre ceu qui est contenut, et l’ai abregié en la fin, et ai mostreit clerement les formes des estrumens que sont amenistrez, si com j’ai fait en ces II chapistres ci devant.	Know, dear son, that the fools of this chapter say that they never saw or read about it in any ancient books; and for this reason, knowledge is strange in our land, for I have never found anyone good at it; and I know nothing about it except through the knowledge of ancient books, in which I have studied so much that I have acquired knowledge, and through experimentation and the habits of my life. And I have described to you in this chapter what is contained therein, and have summarized it at the end, and have clearly shown the forms of the instruments that are used, as I have done in the two chapters before.
Il covient donques que nos disons ou prologue de cest livre les sommes de la parole et les chapistres ou li saiges met son entendement, et demore sus la verteit, si que cil qui sont esproveit saichent et aprenent cest art noble, et l’aprenent a autrui.	Therefore, we should say in the prologue to this book that the subjects of the discussion and the chapters in which the sage places his understanding, and dwells upon the truth, so that those who are experienced may know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
Je dis que quant brisure ou dislocation ou torsions ou quasseure vient a aucun, si covient que tu te hastes de sainier lou malaide d’une part et d’autre, s’aucune chose ne lou te tot, si com foiblece de cors, ou enfes, ou viellars; ou se li tens n’est tres chaus, ou trop frois; et menjuce cholz frois, c’est a savoir froides joutes, et char d’oiseil et de chevril, et ne boive point de vin, ne menjuce nules grasses chars, et ne s’emplisse mie trop de viandes qui remplissent les voinnes de sanc, tant que tu n’aies doute d’aposteme chaut, ne d’espandement de matiere au membre; si reviegne li malaides a som premerain governement k’il a useit.	I say that when there is a fracture or dislocation or twisting or break, you must quickly treat the patient from both sides with hot remedies, if nothing else helps, such as weakness of the body, or children, or the elderly; and if the weather is not very warm or too cold; and eat cool foods, that is, cold meats, and hare and rabbit meat, and do not drink any wine, nor eat any fatty foods, and do not fill themselves too much with food that fills the veins with blood, until you suspect a hot abscess or spreading of matter in the limb; then return the patient to their previous regimen.
Et quant li os brisiés comence a restourer, si covient que on norrisse le malaide de viandes que font gros norrissement, ou il ait viscositeit, si com froment cuit en aigue, et ris, et testes, et piez, et pance de vaiche, et oefz, et poissons fres, et gros vin, et semblans chose.	And when the broken bones begin to heal, one must feed the patient foods that promote swelling and viscosity, such as cooked wheat in water, rice, testes, pigs' feet, pig's belly, offal, fresh fish, and strong wine, and similar things.
Car a teil norrissement se reprent mues et plus tost li brisure.	Because with more swelling the break will be closed more quickly.
Et saichiez que li os brisiez des vielz et des decrepites ne se pueent mie bien reprendre ne souder selonc lor nature por la sechor des membres, ne cil ausi qui sont trop tendre, si com os de petis enfans; mais n’a cure, ramoinne sus l’os brisiet I gros tenrons qui s’aert et joint le membre ensamble, tant qu’il enforce si com il fut devant; et ne li tot point de son oevre, et por ceu le covient norrir de grosses viandes, si com nos avons dit.	And you should know that broken bones of the old and decrepit cannot be well set or healed according to their nature because of the dryness of the limbs, nor those that are too tender, such as the bones of small children; but have no fear, reset the broken bone with the large tendons that hold the limb together, forcing it back into its original position; do not stop working on it entirely, and for this reason one should eat lots of meat, as we have said.
Et saiches que les briseures sont diverses em maintes manieres.	And know that fractures come in many forms and manners.
Car li brisure dou chief est autre que li brisure dou pis, ou de la jambe, et je vos dirai en cest chapistre toutes manieres de brisure.	For the fracture of the head is different from the fracture of the foot, or of the leg; and I will tell you in this chapter about all types of fractures.
Car il i a brisure que vait a arvol, et autre en aguisant, si com li taille d’une penne por escrire.	For there is a fracture which goes to the bone, and another in puncturing, like the tip of a feather for writing.
Et si a brisure avec plaie, et brisure a tout une petite fendure.	And if there is a break with a wound, and a break all over a small split.
Et a chescune maniere ait son engien, et son estrument propre en la restauration, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient en son leu; et est conue li brisure de l’os par ceu que li leus est tors, et apert bien par defuer, et sone au presseir de la main; et quant il n’i a tortuositeit ne son au tochier, et li malaides ne sent mie grant dolor, se n’i a point de brisure; mais il puet bien avoir tortuositeit, ou fendure, ou petite brisure.	And each type of bone has its own method of healing and its own appropriate instrument for restoration, according to what the memory indicates in its place; and one can tell that a bone is broken when it is crooked, and clearly visible through the skin, and sounds hollow when pressed by the hand; and if there is no crookedness or deformity, and the patient does not feel great pain, then there is no fracture, but there may still be crookedness, or a crack, or a small break.
Si ne covient mie que tu lou mueves a la main, mais met sus medicines que vienent ci aprés, et puis l’estraint maintenant subtilment.	You must not move it by hand, but apply the medicines that follow, and then hold it firmly but gently.
Et saiches que li brisure que vait en arvol, et sont les II parties desjointes, il les covient maintenant mettre a point igalment, ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne; et se apostemes chaulz i vient, si lou laisse aucun jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez; puis le met igal au mues que tu pues legierement et saigement, et saiches que li restauration de li est plus legiere que li restaurations de celi ou il ait pieces; puis l’estraint, si com il covient ci aprés.	And know that the fracture which goes into the bone, and the two parts are separated, they must now be put back together evenly so that hot abscesses may come out; and if cold abscesses come out, let it rest for a day, until the abscess is soothed; then put it back to where you can easily and gently, and know that the restoration of this one is easier than the restoration of that one which has pieces missing; then tie it up, as it should be done afterwards.
Et se en l’os a piéces brisies, si l’estent de II pars, se c’est mains ou piet, ou a ta main se c’est uns petis membres, ou a II cordes, ou a une corde et a ta main; et met le membre selonc sa figure natureil, si que quant les parties dou membre brisiet sont desevrees, si ramoinne par toz engiens les additions en lor leus au mues que tu pues, et garde que par ton ovraige ne viegne au malaide lesion ne doulor; et ajoste bien les II chiés des os selonc les millors formes.	And if in the bone there are broken pieces, if it is in two parts, whether it is hand or foot, or if it is a small member, or by two strings, or by one string and by the hand; and put the member according to its natural shape, so that when the broken parts of the member are separated, then bring them back together using all your skills to the places where you can, and be careful that your work does not cause injury or pain to the patient; and join the two heads of the bones well according to the best forms.
Et le sent bien a la main s’il te semble k’il ne soit mie bien: si la dresce bellement, et ne l’estraindre mie trop, ne presser si com font cil qui i font venir par lor ovraige aposteme chaut et contraction au membre, si com nos avons veut maintes fois.	And you can feel it with your hand if it doesn't seem right; then dress it nicely, and don't pull or press too hard as those do who bring about hot abscesses and contractions in the limb through their work, as we have seen many times.
Et quant li membres est a point, si chastie bien lou malaide qu’il ne lou mueve, ne en veillant ne en dormant, ne en tornant, ne en autre maniere; et warde bien que li membres soit si asseurez qu’il ne sente nule dolor.	And when the limb is ready, then carefully guard the patient so that he does not move it, whether waking or sleeping, turning or in any other way; and be sure that the limb is secured so that he feels no pain.
Car quant il sent nulle dolor, si n’est mie a point, et le covient mettre en teil disposition qu’il ne sent nule dolor; et te garde k’il soit mis droitement, que tortuositez n’i veigne quant il iert restorez; et li qualitez dou membre brisiet est selonc ceu que je te dis.	For when he feels no pain, it is not yet healed, and you must put him in such a position that he feels no pain; and be careful that the limb is set right so that no crookedness comes to it as it heals; and the nature of the broken limb is according to what I have told you.
Saiches que li membre brisiet sont divers em petitece et en grandor et en forme.	You should know that broken members are diverse in smallness and size and shape.
Car il i a petis membres, si com brais et dois et semblans: si covient envoloupeir drapelz de lin molz et subtilz; et cil qui sont gros, si com cuixe et jambe: si covient envoloupeir d’un liien large et dur, car li larges liiens embraice tout le grant membre, et l’estraint de toutes pars igalment, si qu’il n’i a nule taiche; puis lie entor estoupes legieres, III tours ou IIII selonc lou membre, et estraint ta main un poc a tout le liien, puis vai au desus de la brisure et l’estraint moins, que la brisure puis esloigne un poc la brisure; et mollifie lou liien poc et poc, tant que tu preignes grant partie dou leu sain, puis repren I autre liien, et torne entor derechief sus lou leu brisiet; puis revai a la partie desoz de la brisure, et l’estraint moienement, ne mie trop fort ne trop molement, si com nos avons dit en la premiere lieure desus; puis met entre les liiens estoupes de lin ou drapelz, tant qu’il soit toz igalz, puis lie tout par desus I bendeil, et puis met tes esteles bien faites sus, s’il n’i a aposteme ou enfleure.	For there are small limbs, such as arms and legs: these should be wrapped in soft, fine linen; and for larger limbs, such as thighs and legs, use a broad, strong bandage, for the broad bandages embrace the whole large limb and constrict it evenly all around, so that no swelling comes to it; then tie it around with light pads, three or four times according to the limb, and tighten your hand a little on the bandage all around, then go above the break and tighten it less so that the break is drawn out a little; then soften the bandage little by little, until you grasp most of the healthy part, then take another bandage and wrap it straight back over the broken part; then go to the part below the break and tighten it gently, not too tightly or too loosely, as we have said in the first hour above; then place between the bandages pads of linen or cloth until they are all even, then tie everything up on top with a bandage, and then put your splints well-fitted over them if there is no abscess or swelling.
Et s’il i a enfleure ou aposteme, si met sus chose apaisant aposteme chaut, et qui oste l’enfleure, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors; puis estrain sus tes esteles, et soient de moitiet d’une large cainne rese saigement, ou de fust dont on fait les clives, ou de rains de palme, et soient selonc ceste figure:	If there is swelling or an abscess, apply something hot that soothes the abscess and reduces the swelling for a few days; then press gently with your fingers, and have them made of half a cane, or from wood used to make splints, or from palm fronds, shaped like this:
mais il covient que li estele que om met sus la brisure soit un poc plus grosse et plus large que les autres; et soit ausi longe com il covient au membre de petitece ou de grandor; puis estraint sus les esteles ausi com tu as fait a la premiere lieure, puis lie desus un fil avenanment, si com en la premiere lieure sus la briseure; plus estroit est ensus, adés moins; et covient que li fil soient moien, ne trop gros ne trop menus, et soient de lin mol; car se li fil sont gros, si com j’ai veut des oevres des folz qui font lor lieures des cordes de linement tort, et c’est grant error, car li lieure ne puet estre igal s’il est trop subtilz, et ne covient mie qu’il ait entre chescune estele moins dou doi d’espaice.	But the splint that is placed on the dislocation should be slightly larger and wider than the others; it should be as long as necessary for the smallness or size of the limb; then press gently as you did at first, then tie a thread over it, just as you did over the dislocation; the tighter it is, the better; and the thread should be medium thickness, not too thin nor too thick, and made of linen. For if the threads are thick, as I have seen in the works of foolish people who make their ligatures from twisted linen, that is a great mistake, because the ligature cannot be even if it is too thin, and there should be no space between each splint.
Et se li malaides est navrez par les chiés des esteles aprés l’estrignement en leus sains, si met desoz elles estoupes de lin, ou lainne charpie, si qu’il ne se blece.	And if the patient is weak after the stretching in their healthy arms, then place beneath them a pad of linen or other soft cloth so that they do not hurt themselves.
Quant li plaie est avec la briseure, et li keurs est rompus, je en dirai la cure ci aprés.	When the wound is accompanied by a fracture and the bone is broken, I will describe the treatment for it later.
Et saiches qu’il ne covient mie estraindre d’esteles toz les membres brisiez le premier jor.	And know that one should not dislocate all the broken limbs on the first day.
Car quant li membres est grans, se n’i covient mie mettre esteles fuer que aprés V jors ou VII, ou plus selonc ta seurteit d’aposteme chaut sorvenant; et vez ci la maniere des emplaustres anciiens por restorer brisure, dislocation, et torsion: et est que tu pren de la farine que se tient as parois dou molin, et la confis avec abun d’uef, et met ceste confection, ne trop clere ne trop espesse, et en use, et c’est li commune maniere de l’emplaustre restorant la brisure a plusors dispositions, et meismement as femmes et as petis enfans, car il n’est mie ne trop chas ne trop frois.	For when a limb is swollen, one should not put on a poultice until after five or seven days, or more depending on the heat of the abscess; and here is the method of ancient poultices for healing fractures, dislocations, and twisting: take flour that is found on the walls of the mill, cook it with plenty of egg, and apply this mixture, neither too thin nor too thick, and use it. This is the common method of poultice for healing fractures in various conditions, especially in women and small children, as it is not too hot nor too cold.
Autre maniere d’emplastre restorans la brisure et la dislocation et la torsion: pren З abareis et ladani et enule et asefetide et gomme arabique et mugat, ana .x. З.; mirre et aloes, ana .v. З.; alechil .viiij. З.; et en fai poudre, et les melle avec aubun d’uef; se li complexion de l’ome est chaude, si use de cest emplaustre, car il est de bone composition, et restoure les os brisiés hastanment, et vaut a plusors homes.	Another way of plaster restoring fracture and dislocation and twist: take 3 parts of barley and ladani and enule and assafetida and gum arabic and mastic, each 10 parts; myrrh and aloes, each 5 parts; alechil 7 parts; and grind them into powder, and mix with plenty of egg; if the complexion of the man is hot, use this plaster, for it is of good composition, and restores broken bones quickly, and is useful to many people.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a torsion: pren mugat et vismalve, ana X З.; mirre et aloes, ana VIIII З.; acaice VI З.; bolic armenic X З., et broie bien, et confit avec aigue ou abun d’uef, et l’aministre.	Another method of poultice that is good for twisting: take myrrh and balm of gilead, each 10 grams; frankincense and aloe, each 7 grams; honey 6 grams; Armenian bole 10 grams, and grind well, and cook with water or plenty of egg, and administer it.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a jointes et as os desevrez de lor leus, et apaise la dolor sorvenant, et le taille usent de l’os, et la briseure: pren lainne novele, et la moille en aisil et en oile cuit, et met sus lou leu.	Another way to treat joints and bones that have been dislocated from their sockets, and to soothe the resulting pain, and to reduce swelling and Bruchure: take fresh lamb's wool, moisten it in vinegar and oil, and apply it to the affected area.
Cist emplastres ne restoure mie, mais il est boins por apaisier d’aposteme chaut, et oste proprement les dolors.	This plaster does not restore, but it is good for soothing hot abscesses and relieving pain.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre qui restoure les os brisiez: pren foilles de figuier seches, et foilles de pavol terrestre, et broie ensamble, et fai emplaustre.	Another method of ointment that restores broken bones: take dry fig leaves and earthworm leaves, and crush them together, and make an ointment.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a la restoration de la brisure de l’os et por amenusier lou remenant de l’aposteme.	Another way to make an ointment for the healing of broken bones and to reduce inflammation from an abscess: take equal parts honey, vinegar, and lard; boil them together and apply it to the affected area.
Pren racine de vismalve, camomille, flors de violettes, farine de veces, de chescune une partie; et broie, et confis avec vin, et se li membres est eschaufez, se le confis avec aigue de coriandre moiste, ou d’aigue, et en use.	Take the root of marshmallow, chamomile, violet flowers, and wheat flour, in equal parts; pound them and cook in wine. If the member is swollen, cook it with moist coriander water or water, and apply it.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre plus fors que li premier, quant aposteme dur vient a la restauration dou membre.	Another way of making a plaster stronger than the first, when a hard abscess comes to the restoration of the limb.
Pren racines de vismalve, et semence de lin, balauste, mellilote, et sansuce, et flors de violetes et de camomille, de toutes ana une partie; et broie, et confit avec aigue de salz, ou aigue douce, ou avec vin, selonc la chalor du membre, et son repos.	Take the roots of marsh-mallow, and flax seed, balanites, melilot, and Saint John's wort, and the flowers of violets and camomile; of all these take an equal part. Grind them and cook with salt water or fresh water or wine, depending on the heat of the limb and its condition.
Ypocras dist en son livre c’on ne mette sus lou membre brisiet por restorer fuer que cerote fait de cire et d’oile, et nulle autre chose plus, et dist qu’il soit entre dous ne trop molz ne trop durs.	Hypocras writes in his book that one should not put anything on a broken member to restore it other than a cerate made of wax and oil, and nothing else, and that it should be between soft and too hard.
Et il semble galien c’on doit mettre sus lou membre brisiet, por restoreir, choses seches un poc chaudes, si com mirre et aloes et encens et semblans choses, si com nos avons dit.	And it seems that Galen says one should put on the broken member, to restore, dry things a little warm, such as myrrh and aloe and incense and similar things, as we have said.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a lesion et a dolor: pren mugath et chevolz d’omes decopez, ou pennes d’oiseil, et vismalve, et seil igalment, et les broie, et en fai emplaustre et lou lie.	Another method of plaster that helps with injury and pain: take mugwort and human hair shaved off, or bird feathers, and honey, and mix them together, and make a plaster from it and apply it.
Et puis lou deslie un poc aprés, et pren garde se li malaides ne sent nule dolor, ne ne s’est meus li os de son leu; si ne lou deslie par mains jors Et se dolor vient au leu, ou prurite, sens repos ou enfleure, si te haste, et le deslie, et oste l’emplaustre maintenant; et pren drapeil legier, et esponge de mer moiste, et plonge en aigue, et en leve lou leu, tant que li prurite cesse, et soit apaisie li dolor; puis laisse reposer lou membre une houre, puis met sus lainne seche, moillie en aigue ou en oile roset, et lie sus une nut, tant que tu soies seur d’aposteme chaut; et repose li enflammation dou membre, et soit ostee li dolor, puis rencomence la lieure subtil, et un poc d’emplaustre, et ne l’estraindre mie si fort com devant; et subtilie tant qu’il soit sanez.	And then loosen it a little after, and be careful that the patient does not feel any pain, nor move the bone from its place; if not, loosen it by hand every few days. And if pain comes to the site, or itching, without rest or swelling, hurry and loosen it, and remove the plaster immediately; then take light cloth, and sponge of the sea moistened in water, and lay on the site until the itching ceases and the pain is appeased; then let the limb rest for an hour, then apply lamb's wool, moistened in water or rose oil, and wind around a nut, so that you are sure there is no hot abscess; and let the inflammation of the limb subside, and the pain be removed, then begin again the gentle binding, and a little plaster, and do not tighten it as much as before; and gently until it is healed.
Et se tu vois que aposteme chaus et roujor et dolor et enfleure sont jai osteit dou tout, et tu as mestier d’emplaustre et de liien, si le rencomence, si com tu a fait premier igalment.	And if you see that the abscess is hot and red and painful and swollen, and you need ointment and binding, then restart it in the same way as before.Et se li maux sont jai osté dou tout, et li membra sont jai sane, si ne fitz mie ren de la lieure ne de l’emplaustre; mes s’il est encores dolor, et enfleure, et roujor, si fitz ren come tu a fait avant.
Et s’il ne vient au membre nient de ceu que nos avons dit, si ne le desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou IIII ou V ou VII; et aucune fois le laisse XX jors, selonc ce c’on voit, tant que li briseure s’aert, et aproche li ajostement de la char sus; adonques lou restraint plus que premier, et li engroisse sa viande, si com j’ai dit devant; et se tu vois lou leu sechier plus que mestier n’est, saiches que norrissemens n’i puet venir; arose lou donques d’aigue chaude tede, toutes les fois que tu lou deslies, et ce soit chescun tier jor, et eslaiche un poc la lieure; par cest ovraige donques cort li norrissemens au membre, et esmende hastanment ceu que font li fol mire, que restourent le membre tortement: c’est malvais, et si est ovraiges paourous, et je n’i voi autre chose que dou lassier et de l’ovrer droitement.	And if nothing of what we have said comes to the limb, do not release it until after three or four or five or seven days; and sometimes let it be for twenty days, according to how the fracture is healing, and the joint drawing near to the bone beneath; then restrain it more than before, and increase his food, as I have said before; and if you see the site drying out more than is necessary, know that swelling cannot come there; therefore use warm water on it every time you release it, and do this every third day, and loosen the ligature a little; thus swelling comes to the limb through this work, and it improves quickly what the foolish people do, who restore the limb crookedly; it is wickedness, and it is work for cowards, and I see nothing in it but laziness and doing it properly.
des diverses manieres de brisure	of the various methods of breaking
Maintes manieres de brisures sont, et diverses figures, et les causes sont destintees; car il a brisures que sont faites de percussion d’espee, et li colz oste tout l’os jusc’a syfac qui est desoz l’os, si com fait haiche ou fust; et por ceu est apelee ceste maniere de briseure «haichure».	There are many types of fractures, with different appearances and distinct causes. Some fractures are caused by the impact of a sword, breaking the bone all the way to the sinus cavity underneath, as with an axe or a staff; this type of fracture is called "axe fracture".
Ou li espee cope l’os par desus sens percier, et est apelee ceste maniere de brisure «absolue»; et est li plaie de ces .ij. brisures grans ou petite.	Or the sword cuts through the bone from above without breaking it, and this type of fracture is called "absolute"; the wound from these two types of fractures is large or small.
Et s’il i a percussion emboee, ou fendure ou de colz de piere, ou de cheoir sus piere, ou d’autres semblans.	And if there is a deep impact, or a split or blow from a stone, or falling on stone, or other similar occurrences.The following text is a medieval medical treatise written in Old French, around the 12th-13th centuries.
Et s’il a brisure persant, qui aproiche jusc’a la toile qui est desoz l’os, ou elle est sus l’os, et est ceste plaie ou grans ou petite.	And if it has a penetrating fracture which approaches the membrane that is below the bone, or it is above the bone, and this wound is large or small.
Et si a plaie qui est reponue en l’os ausi subtil com uns chevous, et est li fendure petite, et por ceu est apelee ceste brisure «capillaire»; et si la plaie qui est faite ou par ferir de piere, ou par cheoir, ou par semblant chose, et fait entrer la piece de l’os aval, et est li leus chevez si com font li chaudelier quant il fierent sus les chaudieres; si entre li piere dedens.	And if there is a wound that is lodged in the bone as thin as a hair, and the crack is small, then this type of fracture is called "capillary". And if the wound is made by stone or by falling, or similar, and drives the bone piece inward, and the site is chapped like a blacksmith when they work on kettles; then the stone enters inside.
Et ceu avient plus a sous qui ont ou chief moistes os, si com chief d’enfant; et avient a toutes ces manieres de brisure que pieces menues en sont desevrees si com esteles; et je em parlerai en son leu.	And this happens more often to those with moist bones in the head, like an infant's skull; and it occurs with all types of fractures when small pieces are displaced like tiles. I will discuss this later.
Et conoissons toutes manieres de briseures par la detraction sus elles, et l’inquisition a tentes, et par la char corrumpue qui est sus.	And we know all kinds of fractures by the distraction upon them and the examination at night, and by the foul smell that is upon it.
Li semblance capillaire est conue par ceu que quant on a descovert l’os, et on frote enche sus, si apert li brisure noire.	The hairline fracture is known by this: when one has exposed the bone and rubs it, the black crack appears.
En la cure de la brisure, pren garde as accidens dou malaide, et se tu vois nul malvais accident, si com vomissement de cole, et amission d’entendement, et estension, et paumeson, et fievre ague, et les eulz issir fuer et rougir, et autres semblans em plusors dispositions, si ne puet saner sens doute.	In the treatment of fractures, take care of the accidents of illness, and if you see no evil accident, such as vomiting of bile, and loss of consciousness, and extension, and palpitations, and fever, and eyes popping out and turning red, and others similar in various dispositions, then it cannot heal without a doubt.
Et se tu ne vois accident espoantauble, et tu esperes salut, si comence la cure.	And if you do not see a miraculous event, and you hope for salvation, then begin the treatment.
Et quant li navrez vient premier a toi, et c’est en yver, si covient oster l’os devant lou quatorzime jor au mues que tu pues.	And when the newborn comes to you first, and it is in winter, then you should remove the foreskin before the fourteenth day that you can.
Et se c’est en esteit, si te haste d’oster l’os devant lou septime jor, ainsois que li toile desoz l’os soit corrumpue, et vienent li accident que nos avons dit.	And if it is in the spring, then you should hurry to remove the foreskin before the seventh day so that the tissue underneath the foreskin does not decay and cause the problems we have described.
Et se li brisure de l’os vient jusc’a la toile que cuevre lou cerveil, si covient que tu fendes la partie fendue ensi: et est que tu preignes lou chief dou malaide navreit, et descuevre sus l’os en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et sus la figure de la plaie plus souef que tu pues, et se decorrement de sanc vient au descovrir l’os, ou aposteme chaus, se li aide de ceu qu’il covient, et est que tu emplisses lou leu de drapelz moilliez en oile roset; et fai reposer la plaie tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et soies asseurez de decorrement de sanc; puis comence entor l’os a oster, et c’est fait selonc II manieres d’ovraige: l’une manieres si est que tu copes au taillement estroit devant, et c’est li forme:	And if the fracture of the bone comes to the membrane that covers the brain, then you should split the broken part thus: and you must grasp the head of the injured person, and expose the bone in every way you can, and the shape of the wound as much as possible; and if bleeding occurs when exposing the bone, or an abscess forms, treat it with what is appropriate. Then fill the area with soft rags dampened in rosemary oil; and let the wound rest until the abscesses are soothed, and be certain that there is no more bleeding. Then begin to remove the bone all around, and this is done in two ways: one way is to cut tightly from the front, and this is the form:
Et puis i boute .i. autre taillement plus grant que lou premier.	And then put on another bandage larger than the first.
Et li seconde maniere si est que tu aies nombre de taillemens divers, les uns estrois et les autres larges, et soient a pointe, et soient de fer inde; et en oevre legierement, que tu ne bleces le chief.	And the second way is that you have various bandages, some narrow and some wide, and they are pointed, and made of iron; and work gently so that you do not bleed the head.
Et se li os est fors et durs, si covient que tu lou perces entor, ainsois que tu i aministres taillemens avec tareres, ne mie parfont qu’il ne percent outre l’os dou test, et doit avoir desus la pointe une marge ou .i. cercle, que ne laisse passer la pointe outre l’os; et t’en covient avoir plusors, si que chescuns viegne en son leu de l’espés de l’os, si que tu aies tareres por toz test; et c’est li forme des .iij. manieres de tareres:	And if the bone is thick and hard, you should pierce around it, so that you administer cauteries with needles, not so deep that they penetrate through the bone of the skull, and it should have a rim or ring above the point, so that the point does not pass beyond the bone; and you should have several, so that each comes in its place into the thickness of the bone, so that you have needles for all the holes; and this is the shape of the three types of needles:
Li qualitez por percier entor l’os brisiet est que tu mettes .i. tarere sus l’os, et torne a tes dois tant que tu saiches que li os est perciez; puis remet lou tarere autre part un poc aprés, et ensi fai tout entor, puis cope as incisoires l’espaice de l’os qui est entre les pertu, et fai ceu plus subtilment que tu pues, et legierement, si com nos avons dit, tant que tu en traies l’os a ta main, ou a aucun des estrumens que tu as si com tenailles, pinceures; et garde que tu ne touchier au cerveil ne au syfac.	The qualities for piercing around the broken bone are that you put one needle on the bone and turn it with your fingers until you know that the bone is pierced; then remove the needle somewhere else a little later, and do this all around; then cut into the space between the holes with knives, as thinly and lightly as you can, as we have said, until you draw out the bone in your hand or with some of the instruments that you have, like tweezers or pincers; and be careful not to touch the brain or the sinus.
Et quant tu avras l’os perciet, et trait, si couvient que tu reses l’apreteit qui est demoree de l’os a tout I autre estrument semblant a un incisoire, mais il covient qu’il soit plus tenves et plus subtilz que li autre incisoire; et s’il demore rien des petis os, ne nulles escailles, si les oste legierement a I des estrumens; puis cure la plaie de tentes et d’oignemens que nos avons dit.	And when you have pierced and treated the bone, then you should remove the sharpness that remains on the bone with any appropriate instrument resembling an incision tool, but it must be more slender and finer than other instruments. And if anything of the small bones or scales remain, gently remove them with the instruments; then treat the wound with tenting and ointments as we have described.
Et li autre maniere d’ovraige si est cil que Galiiens dist, qui est plus saus; et le loa molt fort, et c’est sa parole.	And the other method of treatment is that which Galen speaks of, which is safer; he praises it highly, and his words are:
Il covient premier que tu descuevres une partie de l’os, lai ou li brisure apert mues, si que quant tu avras descovert celle partie, si metras desoz lou chief de cest incisoire lenticulaire, de coi ci est li forme:	First, you must uncover a part of the bone, where the fracture is open and moving; then, when you have uncovered that part, place underneath it the head of this lens-shaped instrument, which has a curved shape.
Et ne trenche mie d’une part, et est li partie ague en II costez, si que li trenchans est devers l’os; puis fier d’un petit maillet sus, si que tu copes legierement l’os tout entor, et te done bien en garde de la toile que est desoz; s’elle est aerse a l’os, si l’oste legierement, car on l’oste bien sens nuisement, et sens paor.	And do not cut from one side, and the part is swollen on both sides, so that the cutting is towards the bone; then strike with a small mallet above, so that you lightly tap the bone all around, and be careful of the membrane that is underneath; if it is adherent to the bone, loosen it slightly, for the bone can be loosened without harm, and without fear.
Et se li brisure de l’os ne perce jusc’a la toile, et li os est copez tant soulement par desus, et il i a petites pieces, si couvient rere celle asperiteit, et oster les escailles au raseur subtil dont tu dois avoir diverses quantitez, por amenistrer en chescun leu le plus covenauble, selonc l’ovraige et la figure de la brisure.	And if the break in the bone does not go all the way through to the membrane, and the bone is only cut slightly on top, with small pieces, then you should re-examine that roughness, and remove the scales with a sharp rasp, of which you must have several quantities, to use in each place the most suitable one according to the work and the shape of the break.
Si reis devant de grant raseurs, et aprés de plus subtilz, et ne cesser de ceu faire tant k’il soit bien.	First use the coarse rasps, then the finer ones, and do not stop until it is smooth.
En chescune des autres tailleures capillaires et brisure subtil, covient que tu amenistres cause selonc son adrecement; et c’est chose que n’est mie reponue a celui qui a mis son estude en cest art.	In each of the other subtle hairline fractures and breaks, you should treat them according to their nature; and this is not a matter that can be fully explained to one who has devoted his study to this art.
Et se li syfac est descovers, si covient que tu preignes I drapeil de lin, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et le moille en oile roset, et le mete sus la plaie; puis pren I autre drapeil doublé en II ou en III, et le moille en vin et en oile roset, et le met sus le premier drapeil; et fai ceu plus legierement que tu pues, que tu ne grever lou syfac, puis aministre par desus I autre liien, et ne l’estraindre mie fuer que tant k’il teigne la plaie soulement; et le laisse ensi I jor ou II, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, puis le deslie, et i aministre medicines si com racines de lis, et farine de veces, et poudre d’encens, et aristologe, et semblans choses; et de ces choses fai poudre, et met sus la plaie, et i aministre adés medicines mondefians sens mordication; et warde que li plaie soit adés nette, que tu n’i laissier mie l’oignement, ne n’i laissier mie assembler bowe, car quant bowe s’asemble sus la toile dou cerveil, si la corront et porrist, et avient au malaide grans malice; car quant on met sus lou syfac chose mordant, si nercist par desus.	And if the ulcer is exposed, you should take a linen cloth, according to the size of the wound, and moisten it in rose oil, and place it over the wound; then take another cloth doubled in two or three, and moisten it in wine and rose oil, and place it over the first cloth; and do this as gently as you can, so that you do not burden the ulcer, then administer another bandage above it, without tightening it more than is necessary to hold the wound; and leave it thus for one or two days, until the abscesses are soothed, then loosen it, and apply medicines such as roots of lilies, and flour of vetches, and powder of incense, and aristologus, and similar things; and make a powder from these things, and place it on the wound, and then administer mild remedies without biting; and be careful that the wound is clean, so that you do not leave any ointment on it, nor allow pus to gather, for when pus gathers on the membrane of the brain, it hardens and pierces, causing great harm to the patient; for when one applies something caustic to the ulcer, it dries on top.
Pren warde donques, se nulz mavais accidens vient au malaide, si com nos avons dit, si est doutable sens doute.	Take care then, if any bad accident comes to the patient, as we have said, without a doubt.
Et se noiror n’i vient fuers que por la medicine c’on a mise sus, que teil vertu ait, si covient que tu preignes une partie de miel, et III parties d’oile roset et en glue I drapel, et lou met sus lou syfac; puis lou cure de manieres de cures qu’il couvient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if darkness comes only because of the medicine that has been applied, and such is its virtue, then you should take a portion of honey and three parts of rose oil and glue it to a piece of cloth, and apply it to the ulcer; then treat it with appropriate wound treatments until it heals.
Saiches que aucune fois sont brisies les .ij. parties dou neis desus, ou li une par li soulement, car ce sont .ij. os; et cil desoz est cartillaginous, et ne brise mie, si ne fait fuer k’enbower ou tordre, et puis saine.	You should know that sometimes the two parts of the nose are broken, one by itself, because they are two bones; and below is cartilage, which does not break but only bends or twists, and then heals.
Et se l’une des II parties est brisie, si covient que tu boutes ton petit doi ou pertus dou neis, et met igal cele brisure dedens a ton doi indice, et au pouchet par defuer, tant que li neis reveigne selonc sa figure natureil; et fai ce legierement, et warde que li malaides ne sente dolor par ton ovraige.	And if one of the two parts is broken, then you should boil your little finger or a needle, and place it evenly in the break, guiding it with your index finger and pulling upwards, until the nail returns to its natural shape; do this gently, and be careful that the patient does not feel pain from your treatment.
Et se li brisure est en la partie desus lou neis, et ne puet venir li dois au leu, si couvient que tu lou mettes igal au chief d’un rait un poc gros.	And if the fracture is above the elbow and the bone cannot be put in place, then you should place it evenly at the top of a fairly thick rod.
Et se li brisure est de II pars, si refai autretel, et te haste de restorer lou premier jor, se tu pues; se ce non, aprés lou septime ou le disime, quant li apostemes chaus est apaisiez, puis bouthe au chief dou neis tentes de drapelz de lin, se li brisure est en une partie.	And if the break is in two parts, then do the same, and try to restore it on the first day, if you can; if not, after the seventh or tenth day, when the abscess has calmed down, then boil a tent of linen cloth at the tip of the nail, if the break is in one part.And if the break is in two parts, do the same, and try to restore it on the first day if you can; if not, after the seventh or tenth day, when the abscess has calmed down, then boil a tent of linen cloth at the tip of the nail, if the break is in one part.
Ou tu boutes .i. autre d’autre part, se li brisure i est; et soient les tentes si grosses qu’eles emplissent les pertus dou neis.	Or you bind one from each side, if the fracture is there; and let the bandages be so thick that they fill the holes of the bones.
Et dirent aucun restorour c’on doit moillier les tentes em burre, et muer chescun jor.	And some restorers say that one must wet the bandages with butter, and change them every day.
Il ne me semble mie que ce soit bien, mais covient qu’elles soient moillies en confection d’aubun d’uef, et de poudre de molin; puis laisse la tente, tant que li os soit fers, et li cartilaiges endurcis.	I do not think that is good, but one should wet them with egg white and flour; then leave the bandage until the bone is healed and the cartilage hardened.
Et aucune fois boute on ou neis pennes d’oie en leu de tentes, et si a .i. souef drapeil entor, et se tient la briseure, et soffle li malaides parmi; or fai lou kel ke tu vues.	And sometimes one puts in goose feathers instead of bandages, and on top a silk cloth; and the patient holds it in place, and breathes among them; do as you wish.
Et se apostemes chaus vient au neis tandis com tu i oevres, si i met cerote ou coton moilliet en oile roset, ou en .i. poc de dyaquilon.	And if there are abscesses on the nose while you are doing this, put cerotic ointment or cotton soaked in rose oil, or in a pouch of diaquilone.
Et se apostemes chaus n’i vient, si met emplastre par defuer, de farine de sisament, et de poudre d’encens, confites avec aubun d’uef, puis met sus estoupes legieres, et ne liier mie lou neis; et se li brisure dou neis est petite, et il est brisiés em menues pieces, si l’estrai as estrumens covenables a ceu, puis cout la fendure, et la cure de choses enjanrans char, et soudant, si com emplastres et oignemens covenables a ceu; et s’il n’a dedens lou neis nule plaie, si lou cure de tentes, et i met cainnes de plonc, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if an abscess forms, then apply a poultice of flour of fulling-mills and incense powder, cooked in egg white, then place on top light sponges and do not bind the nail; and if the crack in the nail is small and it is broken into small pieces, extract them with suitable instruments, then clean the wound, and apply healing ointments and bandages; and if there is no wound inside the nail, then treat it with bandages, and insert slivers of soft wood until it is healed.
de la routure de la mandibule	from the dislocation of the jaw
Quant li mandibule est route desoz, et il n’i a point de plaie defuer, et li brisure est defuer tant soulement, et n’est mie brisiez en dous, fuer que corbelz dedens, si le conoist on legierement.	When the jaw is fully dislocated and there is no external wound, and only the joint is dislocated, not broken in two where the corbel sits inside, then it is easily recognized.
Il covient, se li brisure est en la destre partie, que tu boutes ton doi indice en la bouche dou malaide; et se li brisure est en la mandibule senestre, si boute ton doi indice de la main destre, et boute la brisure dedens legierement, et l’afaite a l’autre main par defuer, et met igal.	If the dislocation is on the right side, you should place your index finger in the mouth of the patient; and if it is on the left side, then use the index finger of your right hand, and push the joint gently back into place, and adjust it evenly with the other hand.
Et se li brisure de la mandibule est desevree en .ij., si covient que tu aministres extension de .ij. pars, tant qu’il soit igalz.	And if the joint of the jaw is displaced to one side, you should administer an extension of one part, until it is even.
Et se commovemens des dens avient, ou routure, si les estrain d’un fil d’or ou d’argent ou de soie, puis met sus la mandibule brisie cerote, et met sus .i. drapel double; et met sus lou drapel une grant estele bien faite, ou une piece de cuir igal, longe et large selonc la mandibule, et la lie sus au mues que tu pues, et comande a malaide qu’il se repose, et menjuce viandes legieres.	And if there is movement of the teeth, or dislocation, then bind it with a thread of gold or silver or silk; then put a cerote on the jaw, and put a double drape over it; and place a large, well-shaped splint, or a piece of leather the same size, long and wide according to the jaw, and tie it in place as tightly as you can, and instruct the patient to rest and eat light foods.
Et se tu vois que li figure se chainge, si le deslie au tier jor, et puis remet a point ceu que c’est chaingiet; et met emplaustre sus, de la poudre dou moulin avec abun d’uef ou farine de sisament, aprés ceu que tu as osteit lou cerote; et met sus l’emplaustre lainne legiere, et se li emplaustres s’aert, et li disposition dou malaide ne se chainge, laisse le tant k’il soit sanez; maintes fois est sanez en .iij. semainnes.	And if you see that the figure changes, then loosen it on the third day, and then put back what has changed; and put plaster on top of it, made from powdered millstone with egg white or flour, after removing the cerate; and then apply another light plaster on top, and if the plasters adhere, and the condition of the malady does not change, leave it until it is healed; often it is healed in 3 weeks.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit maintes fois.	And if hot abscesses come, then administer what we have said many times.
Et s’il i a brisure et plaie ensamble, rewarde se nule piece de l’os en est ostee; si subtilie de l’oster as estrumens covenaubles a ceu.	And if there is a fracture and wound together, examine whether any piece of bone has been removed; then remove it with suitable instruments.
Et se li plaie est estroite, si l’eslarge a flaime selonc ta necessiteit.	And if the wound is narrow, widen it with flames according to your need.
Et quant tu avras ostees toutes ces pieces, et il n’i demore nule, si cout la plaie, s’ele est large, et met sus .i. des emplaustres covenaubles a ceu, por enjanrer char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have removed all these pieces, and there remains none, then close the wound, if it is wide, and place upon it suitable poultices to promote healing, until it is cured.
de la forcele	of the foreskin
Li forcele brise plusors fois devant, devers l’espaule, et li brisure si est selonc .iij. manieres: ou elle est brisie et desevree en .ij., et i a pieces, et est li plus legiere a restorer; ou il i a brisure avec plaie.	The foreskin can tear in many ways, toward the shoulder, and there are three types of tears: one where it is torn and separated into two pieces, which is the lightest injury to treat; another where there is a tear with a wound; and lastly, where the entire foreskin is torn off, which is the most serious injury.
Et li ovraiges si est quant li brisure est sens plaie, que tu aies .ij. ministres, si que li uns teigne l’ajutoire que sent la forcele brisie; et li autres estende lou col vers la partie; puis met igal la brisure a tes dois, si que li forme soit si com il covient, et n’i ait ne apparance ne chevement.	And the procedure for when there is no wound with the tear is to have two attendants, one of whom holds the shoulder where the foreskin is torn, and the other stretches the neck toward the affected area; then, using your fingers, bring the torn edges together so that they are aligned, with no gaps or overlaps.
Et se tu a mestier de plus estendre, si met desoz l’espaule au malaide une spere reonde de drap, ou de lainne, et soit grosse selonc ta necessiteit; et estent et lieve la forcele, et estraint le spere a ta main, si que tu mettes igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And if you need to extend further, then place under the shoulder of the patient a round pillow of cloth or wool, as thick as necessary; and hold it lightly in your hand, and press the pillow with your hand so that you make the break even as it should be.
Et se tu ne pues traire le chief de la forcele au defuer, por ceu qu’elle vient em parfont, si covient que li malaides gise sovin sus son hatereil, et met desoz l’espaule .i. oreillier moien, et boute li ministres l’espaule aval, tant que li os de la forcele soit levez.	And if you cannot pull the head of the shoulder out of joint because it is dislocated, then the patient should lie on his back, and place under the shoulder a small pillow, and the assistant should press the shoulder down, until the bone of the shoulder is raised.
Et puis adrece la brisure a tes dois, et se tu lou trueves debrisiet, si covient que tu fendes sus; et trai fuer les pieces legierement, et se li os ne puet joindre por aucun sormontement, si le cope a l’un des incisoires que tu as; mais que tu mettes desoz la forcele cest estrument, por warder lou syfac:	And then stretch the break with your fingers, and if you find it broken, then you should split it open; and pull the pieces gently apart, and if the bone cannot join because of any swelling, then cut one of the incisions that you have made larger, but place this instrument under the shoulder to guard against the synovial sac:
et semble une cuiller, et n’est mie chevez, et soit ausi large com il lou covient, selonc la grandor de l’os et la possance de l’uevre; et ait II chiés, si com tu vois, et soit li uns larges, et li autres estrois, si com est li routure de la plaie que tu as fait quant tu as trait les os; et quant tu es asseurez d’aposteme chaut, si cout la plaie, et se li routure est petite, ou tu doutes aposteme chaut, si emple la plaie de drapelz et de tentes, selonc sa quantiteit.	It should be shaped like a spoon, and not too deep, and as wide as is appropriate according to the size of the bone and the nature of the injury; it should have two sides, as you can see, one wide and the other narrow, according to the shape of the wound that you made when you treated the bones. And when you are sure that the abscess is hot, cut the wound open, and if the wound is small or you doubt that the abscess is hot, cover it with bandages and tents, according to its size.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si moille .i. drapel en oile roset et en aisil et en vin, et met sus.	And if a hot abscess comes out, moisten a bandage in rose oil and garlic and wine, and place it on top.
Li estrignement de l’os, quant il est sens plaies et sens tailleure, est que tu mettes sus l’os l’enplaustre de la poudre dou molin et d’aubun d’uef, et met estoupes legieres sus, et met une spere desoz l’assele, se tu en as mestier; puis pren une tres grant bende d’une palme de large, puis met I drapeil double sus estoupes, et l’emplaustre; puis pren une estele subtil de III dois de large et de lonc, et l’envoloupe entor celui bendeil, si que li chief dou bendeil soient pendant; et met l’estele sus la briseure, et torne le bendeil sus lou col, et desoz l’asselle sainne, et desoz l’asselle malaide; et la ramoinne de chescune partie, et quant tu vois ke li lieure tient la briseure avenanment, et tu vois clerement que li estele ne se muet desus l’os brisiet, si le rewarde chescun jor, et quant li liiens eslaiche, si lou restraint; et fai gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li met quant il dort I petit orillier desoz l’assele, por lever l’ajutoire en haut; si aligera li brisure de la forcele par l’aligement de l’espaule, ou tu li lie lou bras au col, et ne lou desliier se malvais accidens n’i vient, jusc’a XX jors; puis rencomence l’emplaustre, se tu vois qu’il en ait mestier, et l’estraint et le laisse ensi, tant qu’il soit restorez; et elle est restoree au plus en XXVIII jors, et en moins a aucuns homes.	The stretching of the bone, when there is no wound or cut, is to put on the bone the plaster made from mill-dust and egg white, and place light sponges on top, and if necessary, place a sphere underneath the sore; then take a strip of cloth one palm wide, and place a double layer of cloth on the sponges and plaster; then take a thin rod three fingers wide and long, and wrap it around the cloth, so that the end of the cloth hangs down; and place the rod on the fracture, and wind the cloth around the neck, and under the healthy shoulder blade, and under the affected shoulder blade; and adjust each part, and when you see that the ligature holds the fracture in place, and you clearly see that the rod does not move over the broken bone, then remove it every day, and when the ligature loosens, restrain it again. Have the patient lie on his back, and when he sleeps, place a small pillow under the shoulder blade to raise the shoulder; thus the fracture will be healed by the stretching of the shoulder, or you can tie the arm to the neck for up to 28 days; then restart the plaster if you see that it is needed, and adjust it in this way until it is healed.
de la brisure de l’espaule	of the dislocation of the shoulder
Poc avient que li espaule brise ou large leu ne em mileu, et ne lou seit on fuers que par lou touchement; si l’apareille selonc la figure de la brisure, et la ramoinne selonc sa forme natureil, en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis met sor le leu poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, et estoupes legieres, et met sus I drapeil double; puis met sus une estele large et subtil, un poc plus large de l’espaule, et se desoz l’estele est chevemens en aucun leu de l’espaule, si emple celle cheveure d’estoupes de lin, si que li estele siece igalment; et puis l’estraint a tout une grant bende fermement, si que li estele ne se mueve de son leu, et regarde le liien chescun jor; et toutes les fois k’il amolist, si l’estraint, et met igal l’estele s’elle est fuer de son leu, et gise li malaides sus son costeit; et li espaule est restouree en XX jors ou en xxv, Et quant cist nombres est acomplis, si le deslie, et soies seur, car ce n’est mie os qui se mette fuer legierement.	At times the shoulder is broken or widely displaced, and it feels no pain except upon being touched; then adjust the apparatus according to the pattern of the fracture, and reset it in its natural shape in every way you can; next, put powder from the mill, mixed with egg white, and light lint on the spot, and over that a double piece of cloth; then place a broad, thin board, a little wider than the shoulder, over all this, and if there is a swelling anywhere on the shoulder, stuff that area with lint so that the board lies flat; and then bind it very tightly with a large bandage so that the board does not move from its position, and check the ligature every day; and whenever it becomes slack, tighten it, and adjust the board if it has moved from its place, and let the patient lie on his side; and in twenty or twenty-five days the shoulder will be healed. And when this period is over, loosen the bandage and have no fear, for it is not a bone that can be set easily.
Et se une piece de l’os tent avant, et point desoz lou keur, si fent sus, et l’oste, et fai ceu que nos avons dit en la brisure de la forcele d’apaisier aposteme chaut.	And if a piece of the bone protrudes forward and not underneath the heart, pierce and open the bone, and do what we have said about the fracture of the collarbone to soothe the hot abscess.
de la brisure dou pis	of the fracture of the foot
Li peis est aucune fois brisiez em mileu, mais ce avient poc; mais il brise sovent au defuer.	The penis is sometimes broken in the middle, but this rarely happens; it often breaks at the tip.
Et quant il est brisiez emmi, si decline au desoz, et sent li malaides grant dolor, et faute d’alainne, et toust, et par aventure vomist sanc, et apert li chevemens en l’os brisiés, et lou sent om bien.	When it is broken in the middle, it inclines downward, and the patient feels great pain, and lacks strength, and becomes dizzy, and sometimes vomits blood, and the hair falls out from the broken bone, and he feels much better.
Et li restoracion si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, et li met .i. cussin entre les espaules, puis presse les espaules, et li assemble les costes des .ij. costelz a tes mains, et subtilie dou mettre igal a toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que li figure de l’os soit si com il covient; puis met sus emplaustres et estoupes desus l’estele subtil de salz, ou d’autre fust legier, et l’envoloupe en .i. drapeil, et la lie sus l’os brisiet, si qu’elle ne se mueve; et torne le liien reondement au dos, et l’estraint avenanment, et rewarde chescune houre la liure, et s’elle ramolist, si l’estraint; et s’il lou covient desliier, por corrosion ou por prurite que vient au leu, ou dolor ou aposteme, si te haste, et lou deslie, et raie l’emplaustre, et adresce ceu qui i est venus de manieres de cures; puis ramoinne l’emplaustre, et l’estraint tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the treatment is that the patient lies on his back, and places a cushion between his shoulders, then presses his shoulders together and brings his ribs closer together with his hands, carefully ensuring they are even on both sides, so that the bone is in the correct position; then he applies poultices and bandages made from fine salt or some other light material over the fracture, wrapping it in a cloth and securing it to the broken bone so it does not move; and he winds the ligature around the back again, tightening it gently, and checks every hour whether it has loosened, and if it has, he tightens it; and if it needs to be loosened because of corrosion or itching that has come over the area, or pain or an abscess, then he should do so promptly, removing the poultice and addressing the issue with appropriate treatments; then he reapplies the poultice and bandages, tightening them until it is healed.
de la brisure des costes	about the breaking of ribs:
Saiches que li briseure des costes ne vient fuer que en leus gros aprés le dos, et au chief dedens, et ne ploient fuer que por ceu qu’eles sont glairouses; et le sent om bien a l’inquisition as dois.	You should know that rib fractures only occur in the thick part near the back, and in the front, and they do not bend except because they are slippery; and it feels good when pressed on both sides.
Et li restoremens si est que tu met igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And the treatment is that you reset the break as it should be.
Et puis met l’emplaustre, et l’estraint d’une estele, se tu en as mestier.	Then apply the ointment and bind it with a bandage, if necessary.
Et se li brisure des costes est declinans au dedens, si sent li malaides tres grant dolor, et pointure, ausi com de pleuresin, car li os point la toile; et alaine a poinnes, et toust et vomist grant planteit de sanc, et c’est de grief santeit, et li ancien i ont mis grant engien.	And if the rib fracture is bent inward, the patient feels great pain and piercing, as with pleurisy, because the bone pierces the lining; they also have difficulty breathing, and cough up and vomit a large amount of blood, which indicates a grave condition, and the ancients considered it dangerous.
Et si a de ces qui dient qu’il le covient aministrer viandes qui enflent le ventre, por bouter la briseure au defuer.	And if there are those who say that one should administer foods that swell the belly, in order to push the fracture outward.
Nos ne faisons mie ceu, que apostemes chaulz n’i viegne, s’il n’i est venus.	We do not agree that hot poultices should be applied if they have not already been used.
Et s’il i est venus, si le saine.	And if it has come, then heal it.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on met ventouses sor le leu, por sucier forment, et c’est semblant a raison; toutevoie, doutance i a que li ventouse n’atraie les superfluitez au leu por la disposition de foiblece.	And some say that cupping is done on the affected area to draw out impurities, and this seems reasonable; nevertheless, there is doubt that the cupping may attract impurities to the site due to weakness.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on doit covrir le leu de lainne moillie en oile chaut, et met on tentes entre les costes por metre igal la lieure entor, puis soit curez de la cure de pleurisin, de viande et de medicine.	And some say that one must cover the affected area with moist woolen cloth soaked in warm oil, and place tenting between the ribs to apply pressure evenly all around, then it is treated with the treatment of pleurisy, meat, and medicine.Et autrui dit que l’on doit covrir li leu de lainne seche et de velle, et mettre oile chaut sus li leu; puis soit curez de la cure d’esguarison, et de medicine.
Et se li malaides sent grant dolor qu’il ne puet soffrir par l’os qui point la toile, et doutance est au malaide, si covient fendre sus lou leu de la coste brisie, et covient mettre desoz I estrument por warder lou syfac; et adonques doit on trenchier l’os, et traire legierement, et puis coudre les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, et le curez d’emplaustres, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the patient feels great pain that he cannot endure from the bone poking through the skin, and there is doubt about the patient, then one should split the rib beneath the broken rib, and place an instrument to push against the diaphragm; and then one should cut the bone, and gently pull, and then sew up the two lips of the wound, if it is large, and treat with ointments until healed.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si met sus drapelz moilliez en oile roset, et met sus lou leu; et cure tandis le leu de ceu qu’il covient a aposteme, et soit gisans sovins sus lou costeit ou il doit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the abscesses become suppurating, then place moistened napkins in rose oil, and place them on the site; and treat the area around the abscess as needed, and let him lie quietly on his side where he should be, until he is healed.
de la brisure dou col	of the fracture of the neck
Aucune fois vient briseure as os dou col, et poc avient k’il ploie; et ausi a l’espinee dou dos.	Sometimes there is a break in the bones of the neck, and it can bend; and also at the spine in the back.
Et quant ce avient a aucun, et tu vues savoir s’il sera sanez ou non, si pren warde se tu vois ses mains mollifiies et enflees et mortes, et ne les puet movoir ne estendre, et quant tu les poins d’une aguille, si ne lou sent.	And when this happens to someone, and you want to know if he will be healed or not, take note if his hands become soft and swollen and numb, and he cannot move or straighten them, and when you prick him with a needle, he does not feel it.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz em plusors dispositions, et s’il les muet et sent bien quant on les estraint et point, saiches que li jointure de l’os est sauve, et que li malaides iert curez, s’on i met cure.	Know that it is deadly in many cases, and if he becomes mute and can feel nothing when you dislocate and prick him, know that the joint of the bone is safe, and that the illness is cured if treatment is applied.
Et se semblans chose vient a l’espinee dou dos, et tu vues savoir s’il iert sanez ou non, si pren warde se li piez sont amollis, et se li accident i sont qui sont em mains, et sus lou dos saut ventositeit et egestion sens volonteit; et quant on l’a sovineit sus son ventre, si saut egestion sens volonteit.	And if a similar thing happens to the spine in the back, and you want to know if he will be healed or not, take note if his feet become soft, and if the symptoms are in his hands, and there is flatulence and defecation without willing it; and when he lies on his stomach, there is defecation without willing it.
Et quant il est sovinez sus son dos et il vuet asseller, si ne puet.	And when he is lying on his back and wants to sit up, he cannot.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz: si ne laboreir mie en sa cure.	Know that it is deadly; therefore do not labor at all in its treatment.
Et se cist accident ne li vienent, si est li chose plus legiere.	And if this does not happen to him, then the case is lighter.
Et li cure si est que tu rewardes s’il i a aposteme chaut, si met sus l’espinee oile roset ou oile de moieuf d’uef, tant qu’il soit apaisiez; puis met sus un des emplaustres confortans et sechans, et le lie d’un liien, et comande au malaide a reposer; et ne dorme mie sus celle partie ou il sent la dolor, tant k’il soit sanez.	And the treatment is that if he has a hot abscess, he should put on the spine rose oil or hen's egg white oil until it is soothed; then apply one of the comforting and drying poultices, and bind it with a bandage, and instruct the patient to rest; and not to sleep on the painful part until he is healed.
Et se aucuns os se dessevre, si covient coper sus lou keur; et oste l’os, puis assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, a une costure, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li chiés de l’os est brisiez, ki est apelez li «chiés de la kowe», se i boute ton pouchet de ta main senestre, et le met igal a l’autre main a ton pooir, puis met l’emplaustre et l’estele sus, se tu en a mestier; puis l’estraint, et s’il i a os desevreit, si fent sus, et l’oste, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And if any bone is exposed, it must be covered with a bandage; and the bone removed, then the two lips of the wound, if it is large, sewn together with a single stitch, then treat the wound with ointment and gauze, as needed; then bind it tightly, and if there is an exposed bone, put pressure on it and remove it, and treat the wound until it heals.
de la brisure de l’os de la hainche	of the fracture of the hip bone
Poc avient que li os de la hainche soit brisiez, et s’il avient, si n’avient fuer c’un poc d’amenuisement au chief; et fent dou lonc, et decline au pardedens, et vient au malaide dolor au leu, et pointure, et enfle ceu que brise.	Then it happens that the bones of the hip are broken, and if they are, then a little lessening in the head; and they grow long, and decline to the sides, and come to pain at the site, and piercing, and swelling where they are broken.
Et li restoration si est que tu estendes ta main sus, tant que tu soies sus la briseure; et saiches quelz est li brisure et li figure de li; et se li brisure est au chief soulement, si met igal cele brisure, tant qu’ele soit a figure natureil.	And the restoration is that you extend your hand over it, so that you are on the break; and know which is the break and its shape; and if the break is only in the head, then put equal pressure on that break, so that it becomes the natural shape.
Et se li brisure est dou lonc, ou elle decline au dedens, si fai gesir le malaide sus son ventre, tant que li restauration de cele brisure te soit aparillie.	And if the break is long, or it declines inward, then let the patient lie on his belly, so that the restoration of that break may be prepared for him.Et se ele est dou lonc et decline au pardedens, si met ele a figure de croisse; et li restauration de cele brisure est que tu le tiens sus, et qu’ele ne se mueve pas.
Et quant tu l’avras mise igal, si met sus l’emplaustre, puis met sus une estele de fust ou de keur, et estraint la briseure, si qu’ele ne se mueve; et emple le leu desoz les costes, tant que li lieure soit igalz.	And when you have put it back in place, then apply the plaster, and then put on a wooden or leather splint, and bind the break, so that it does not move; and fill the space under the ribs, so that the shoulder blade is level.Et se tu n’es pas si puissans que ele ne soit igale, si covient que tu esprouves li chef a l’envers, et qu’ele ne se muevent pas tant que ele sunt igales; puis metz sus l’emplaustre et li estele, si com j’ay dit.
Et comande au malaide k’il dorme sus son costeit sain, ou sus son dos.	Instruct the patient to sleep on his healthy side or on his back.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si n’i tochier, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et met sus ceu que nos avons devant dit; et puis revien a la restauration, et l’estraint si com il covient, s’il n’i a nul mavais accident; et c’est li maniere.	And if a boil arises, do not touch it until the boil has subsided, and apply what we have previously mentioned; then return to restoration, and restrain as necessary, if there is no bad occurrence; and that is the way.
de la brisure de l’ajutoire	of the dislocation of the shoulder
Li adjutoires est ceu qui est entre lou coute et lou chief de l’espaule, et s’il est brisiez, si le doit on restorer selonc l’une des .ij. manieres: dont l’une est que tu pren .i. fust plain de moiene groissor, selonc ceste forme:	The adjutoires is that which is between the elbow and the head of the shoulder, and if it is dislocated, it should be restored according to one of the two methods; one of which is that you take a stick of medium thickness, according to this shape:
Et lie as .ij. chiés .ij. liens, et les pent en haut, et siece li malaide sus .i. siege; puis li giete som bras brisiet sus le fust, tant qu’il viegne a l’aissele, et ait em mi une corbeure de fust, puis pent sus aucune pesant chose ou li ministres l’estende aval; puis mette li mires la briseure igal a ses mains ensamble, tant que li briseure retorne si com il covient.	And tie both shoulders with two bonds, and they can lift them up, and beat the patient on a seat; then let him break his arm on the anvil, so that he comes to the elbow, and put a curve of wood in it, then lift it onto a heavy object or the minister stretches it down; then put the mirror on the fracture equal to his hands together, so that the fracture returns as it should.
Et li autre maniere si est que on sovine le malaide sus son hatereil, et li lie la main a son col, puis comande a .ij. ministres que li uns teigne ceu qui est sus la briseure a ses mains, et li autres teigne desoz a tout .i. liien, et estende chescuns a sa partie.	And the other way is that one pins the patient to his hat, and ties his hand to his neck, then commands two ministers, one of whom presses what is on top of the fracture with his hands, and the other pulls from underneath to the end of the bond, and each stretches his part.
Et se tu vues que li estraction soit plus fors, si estraint I liien desoz la briseure, et sus la briseure, et estende chescuns des ministres a sa part.	And if you want the extraction to be more forceful, then compress beneath the fracture and above it, and extend each of the ministers to his part.
Et se li briseure est prochiene au chief de l’espaule, si covient que tu mettes I liien moien desoz l’assele, et I autre vers lou coute, desoz la briseure; et ausi se li briseure est devers lou coute, si i covient mettre I liien legierement, sens labor, tant que li briseure soit igalz sus lou leu, et sus lou coute; puis met igal la brisure, si com il covient, et l’estraint, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the fracture is near the head of the shoulder, then you must place one bandage in the middle of the shoulder joint, and the other towards the neck, beneath the fracture; and likewise if the fracture is towards the neck, then it is necessary to place the bandages lightly without effort, so that the fracture remains aligned above and below the neck; then align the fracture as it should be, and compress it, unless warm abscesses come about.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si ne l’estraindre mie jusc’a .vij. jors, et met sus lainne moillie en aisil et en oile roset, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez; puis l’estraint, et li maniere de l’estraindre si est que tu mettes l’emplaustre sus la briseure, puis assemble le bras sus l’ajutoire, et met ta main sus l’espaule ou sus lou sein; et met le drapeil, et estraint sus l’ajutoire, et sus lou bras, si que li bras soit en leu d’esteles, s’aucune chose ne le te deffent, ou se li os n’est muez.	And if abscesses come and you cannot tighten it but he dies, then it is necessary to make a small incision on the fracture, wash it, and put a plaster on it; and tie his hands to his neck, and his feet to his hat; and also tie his neck to his hat, so that you keep him in place for 3 or 4 days, until he is healed. And if abscesses come, then do not tighten it for 7 days, and put soft linen in vinegar and rose oil on the abscesses, until they are soothed; then tighten it, and the way to tighten it is that you put the plaster on the fracture, then assemble the arm on the shoulder, and put your hand on the shoulder or on the breast; and put a cloth, and tighten on the shoulder, and on the arm, so that the arm is in place, unless any part pulls it down, or if the bone is moved.
Et se tu doutes que li os ne se mueve, si use d’esteles, et met sus la brisure une estele plus large et plus fort des autres, et ait entre chescune estele .i. doi d’espaice, et soit chescune estele si grans qu’elle passe la briseure .iij. dois de chescune part; puis estrain sus les esteles, ensi com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre sus la briseure, plus fort et moins en aloignant.	And if you doubt that the bone will move, use a spanner, and place over the fracture a spanner larger and stronger than the others, with half a finger's width between each spanner, and let each spanner be large enough to pass over the fracture by three fingers on each side; then pull on the spanners, as I said at the beginning of this chapter, more strongly and less distantly.
Et se tu vois l’assise des esteles, et l’estrignement, si com nos avons dit, en l’oure que tu restoures le membre brisiet, et tu doutes l’aposteme chaut, si le laisse a liier jusc’a septime jor, si com nos avons dit; puis regarde chescuns III jors lou lien, que prurite ne enfleure n’i viegne au leu, ou li norrissemens ne puist venir au membre por ceu k’il est trop estrois.	And if you see the position of the stars, and the constriction, as we have said, in the hour that you restore the broken member, and you doubt the hot abscess, let it lie bound until the seventh day, as we have said; then examine the binding every three days, so that itching or swelling does not come to the spot, or the growth of hair to the member because it is too tight.
Si l’adrece, si com nos avons dit.	If the wound, as we have said.
Et se nulz telz accidens n’i vient, si ne lou desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou plus, et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ait ses mains sus son stomac; et met desoz l’ajutoire I cussin plain de laine igalment, et regarde chescune houre dou jor ou de la nut, que li figure dou membre brisiet ne se mueve, ou ne soit amollis li liiens; si l’adrece par la vertu de medicine, et li done la viande que nos avons devant mis, en teil maniere que li viande soit au premier subtilz; et quant il comance a reprendre, si soit grosse.	And if no such accidents come, do not unbind it until after three days or more, and let the patient sleep on his back, and have his hands on his stomach; and place under the shoulder one cushion filled with wool evenly, and examine every hour of the day or night that the figure of the broken member does not move, or the binding become soft; then heal it by the virtue of medicine, and give him the food that we have mentioned earlier, in such a way that the food is most subtle; and when he begins to recover, let the food be thick.
Et est costume que li ajutoire et li jambe doient estre repris en XL jors dou tout; et adonques lou doit on desliier et aministrer bain et medicines d’oignemens por le leu adrecier.	And it is customary for the shoulder and leg to be bound for forty days from all movement; then one should loosen them and apply baths and ointment treatments to heal the area.
Et se li estricture est laide et emboee, si demore a desliier L jors ou II mois.	And if the dislocation is severe and stuck, it will take longer to loosen, up to two months.
de la brisure du bras	of the dislocation of the arm
Li bras est compos de .ij. os, qui sont apelez li dui «foscile», de coi li uns est petis, et est cil qui enseut le pouchet; et li autres est grans, et est cil qui est desoz, devers lou petit doi; par aventure brise li grans foscile soulement, ou li petis, et par aventure andui ensamble.	The arm is made up of two bones, which are called the 'ulna' and the 'radius'. The ulna is smaller and sits underneath the elbow joint, near the little finger; the radius is larger and sits on top, near the thumb. Sometimes only the larger bone breaks, or the smaller one, but sometimes both break together.
Quant li petis fosciles est brisiez, li restaurations est legiere, et li sanations; et quant li grans est brisiez, si est li sanation male, et plus griés que quant il sont brisiez andui ensamble.	When the small bones are broken, their restoration and healing is easy; but when the large bones are broken, healing is more difficult and painful than when they are broken all at once.Quant la teste de li fosciles est brisié, si convient que tu le remes a son leu et li dounes bain por la guariçon, et li failles oignemen.
Se c’est li petis foscile qui est brisiez soulement, si le covient poc estendre legierement, et mettre igal.	If only the small bone is broken, then it should be put back into place gently and stretched slightly to align it. Se c’est li gros fosciles qui est brisié, si convient que tu le remes a son leu; et si il ne peut estre a son leu, si convient que tu le traies soulement en la guariçon, si com il est requerre.
Et se c’est li grans foscile, si le covient estraindre plus fort; et l’estende sus I cussin, et teigne le pouchet de la main plus haut des autres, et li petis dois plus bas des autres dois, et soit li malaides croisiez sus lui meisme, et I cussin devant lui plus haut, que li malaides ne soffre nule labor; puis estende li ministres som bras a la partie desoz a sa main, ou a I liien, et uns autres ministres a I autre au desus.	And if it is the great nerve, then it must be stretched more strongly; and he should lie on his back, with his hand higher than the rest, and the little finger lower than the other fingers, and the patient should be crossed over him, and the pillow before him higher, so that the patient does not endure any labor; then the minister should extend his arm to the part below his hand, or to the wrist, and another minister above.
Et puis le mette li mires igal, selonc sa millor forme.	And then the minister should apply pressure equally, according to the best form.
Et se en la brisure a pieces, si met chescune en son leu, et s’il en i a nule desevree ke poigne lou keur, et tu ne la pues restorer en son leu, si fent sus et l’oste, si com nos avons dit devant.	And if there are pieces in the fracture, put each one in its place, and if none of them fit that poke the heart, and you cannot restore it to its place, then do as we said before, on the chest and the bone.
Et se avec la briseure a plaie, je en ai parleit au chapistre singuler; si pren la cure.	And if with the fracture there is a wound, I have spoken singularly about it in the chapter; then take the cure.
Et se en l’encomencement dou restorement sorvient apostemes chaus, si glue I drapeil de cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire blainche, que ne soit mie ne trop durs ne trop molz; et lie I drapeil par sus subtilment, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez.	And if, at the beginning of the restoration, hot abscesses occur, then apply a bandage made of rosin oil and white wax, neither too hard nor too soft; and lay the bandage gently over them, until the hot abscesses are soothed.Et puis le fasse I minister subtilment li restaurement, selonc sa millor forme.
Et puis oste lou cerote, et i met l’emplaustre de la poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, pues met les esteles, et soit li estele de la briseure adés plus fors, et un poc plus large que les autres; et saiches que il doit avoir VI esteles ou bras em plusors dispositions: soit que li briseure soit en l’un des os, soit en II; et estraint plus sus la briseure que autre part, et toz jors moins en aloignant, si com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre; et soient li drapelz que sont sus la briseure molz et moistes, et ne soient mie dur ne aspres; et soit li filz, dont il est estrains, de lin, ne trop gros ne trop menus, si com nos avons dit.	And then remove the cerote, and apply the plaster of the powder from the mill with an egg yolk, then place the stars, and let the star on the fracture be a little larger and stronger than the others; and know that it must have six stars on the arm in various positions: whether the fracture is in one of the bones or two; and apply more pressure above the fracture than elsewhere, lessening it as it heals, as I said at the beginning of this chapter; and let the bandages over the fracture be soft and moist, not hard or rough; and let the thread used to apply pressure be made of linen, not too thick nor too fine, as we have said.
Et rewarde lou membre et lou liien aprés aucuns jors.	And then remove the bandages and examine the limb and the fracture after a few days.
Et se aucuns mavais accidens vient au membre, si com prurite ki vient au membre, si covient que tu aroses lou membre d’aigue chaude, tant que cil prurites soit apaisiez; et laisse le membre ne mie estroit reposer.	And if a bad accident happens to the limb, such as itching, you should sprinkle warm water on the limb until the itch is soothed; and let the limb not be tightly bandaged while resting.
Et puis rencomence l’estrignement, et se li liiens est amolis et li os desevrez, et semblant chose, si l’adresce.	And then begin the stretching again, and if the ligaments are relaxed and the bones displaced, and similarly, address it.
Et se pren warde se li norrissemens ne puet venir au membre, por ceu qu’il est trop estrois, si covient que tu l’amollisses .i. poc, et laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant que li norrissemens i corre, et puis l’estraint.	And if one takes a bandage and the swelling cannot come to the member because it is too tight, then one must soften it a little and leave it for several days until the swelling goes down and then tighten it again.
Et se nules de ces choses que nos avons dit ne vient au malaide, si ne lou desliier jusc’a XX jors.	And if none of these things that we have said happen to the patient, then do not release him until 20 days.
ou enqui entor, puis li pent les mains a son col, et soit ses cols igalz, et se warde de movement et de degitement, et dorme sus son dos; et saiches que ceste briseure est restoree en XXX jors ou en XXXV, et par aventure en XX jors, selonc les compositions et les complexions des vertus.	Or, if none of these things that we have said happen to the patient, then keep him in bed for up to 35 days or perhaps 20, depending on the temperament and the nature of his body.
de la brisure de la main	of the fracture of the hand
Saiches que au dos de la main et as nous des dois avient poc de briseures, et n’i vient mais que ploieure maintes fois.	Know that in the back of the hand and on the knuckles there are few fractures, and only stretching occurs many times.
Et quant li plante de la main est brisie ou ploie, si covient que li malaides siece croisiet, et siet droitement devant lui igalement; puis met sa main sus la toie estendue, et estende li ministres les os brisiez, et les mete igalz li mires, tant qu’il soient bien joint; et met l’emplastre et les estoupes, se apostemes n’i vient, puis i met une estele selonc la quantiteit dou leu; et soit envoloupee en .i. drapeil de lin.	And when the palm of the hand is broken or folded, it is necessary for the patient to cross his arms and stand upright in front of him equally; then he places his hand on the extended cloth, and the minister extends the broken bones and puts them together evenly until they are well joined; and they put the plaster and the bandages, if no abscesses come, then they put a splint according to the quantity of the place; and it is wrapped in a linen cloth.
Et se li briseure est au pardedens entor lou ventre de la plante, si fai une spere de drapelz, et comande au malaide qu’il l’estrigne a sa plante brisie; et puis l’estrain d’un lonc drapeil, et soit li estele de keur souef ausi grans com li plante de la main, et l’estraint, si com il covient.	And if the fracture is in the palm around the belly of the hand, make a sphere of fabrics, and instruct the patient to squeeze his broken palm; then stretch it with a long cloth, and the splint made of cured leather should be as large as the palm of the hand, and it is stretched and bound as it should be.
Et se li brisure est au defuer, si covient que tu mettes une estele sus, et une autre desoz en la plante, si que li mains soit overte et droite, puis le lie tot entor la main, et estanche lou liien entre les dois.	And if the fracture is in the back of the hand, you must put a splint on top and another one underneath the palm so that the hand is open and straight, then tie it all around the hand, and stop the bleeding between the fingers.Et se li brisure est entre les dois, si covient que li malaide mette sa main croisie sus la brisure, et tu estaines lou liien entre les deux os brisiez, et lie tout entor la main; et se il y a grant flux de sang, si covient qu’il le frotte, si que li sang ne fluit.
Et se li briseure vient a aucun des nous des dois, se c’est li pouchés, si le met igal, si com il covient; et l’estraint avec la plante, et se tu vues si met une estele droite petite por lever la briseure, et ne se mueve; et se li brisure est as autres dois, si com en l’indice ou l’un des autres, si le met igal, et lou lie avec lou doi sain qui est aprés; ou tu les lie toz en .i. tenant, que mues vaut, ou tu met sus une estele, si com ou pouchet; et pren warde en la restauration et en la disposition d’aposteme chaut, et secor ceu qui i vient, si com j’ai dit.	And if the fracture is in one of the fingers, whether it is the nail, it should be put back in place and bound as it should be; and if there is a great flow of blood, it should be rubbed so that the blood does not flow. And if the fracture is in any of the other fingers, such as the index or any other, it should be put back in place and bound with the finger next to it; or you can bind them all together, whatever works better, or you can put a splint on top, as in the case of the nail. Take care in the restoration and in the application of hot abscesses, and dry up what comes out, as I have said.Et se li brisure vient en la jointure des deux os de la main, si covient que tu remettes li planté igal a son leu; et li lie tout entor la main, et li esteles qu’il soit droitz et igal entre les dois; ou tu mets une estele selonc la granture dou li membre, si com il covient.
de la cuixe brisie	of a broken thigh
Li os de la cuixe est maintes fois brisiez, et bien le voit on quant elle torne devant et derrier; et li restauration si est c’on lie .i. liien desus la briseure, et .i. autre desoz.	[The bones of the thigh are often broken, and one can see this when it turns front and back; its restoration is by binding one band above the fracture, and another below.]
Et li malaides gise sus sa faice, puis estende chescuns ministres son lien a sa part igalment; et c’est quant li brisure est emmi l’os.	And the patient lies on his face, then each assistant applies his band to his side equally; and this is when the fracture is within the bone.
Et se li brisure est prochiene a la racine de la cuixe, si soit li uns des liiens devers lou poignil, et li autres liiens desoz la briseure.	And if the fracture is near the root of the thigh, then one ligament should go towards the buttock and the other below the fracture.
Et ausi s’elle est prochiene au genoil, et adonques soit li liens delez lou genoil, et soit li extension aval; puis mette li mires l’os igal a ses II mains, tant qu’il soit selonc sa figure natureil, et puis met l’emplaustre, et lou lie, se apostemes chaz n’i vient.	And similarly, if it is near the knee, then one ligament should go above the knee and the other below the fracture; then put the splint on the bone to make it even with both hands, so that it is according to its natural shape, and then apply the plaster, and the ligature, if abscesses don't form.
Et s’il i a aposteme chaut, si le laisse apaisier puis revien a ton ovraige et a ta cure; li lieure est faite en teil maniere.	And if there is a hot abscess, let it subside then return to your work and treatment; the technique is performed in this manner.
Il covient que tu envoloupes sus la briseure I bendeil dur doublé en II ou III, et en demoure li superfluitez, puis torne la jambe tant que li talons veigne a la racine de la naige, et boute I fil lonc entre la cuixe et la jambe, delez lou genoil desoz, et veignent li chief dou fil au desus; puis torne sus la jambe et sus la cuixe le bendeil, puis met sus la briseure esteles, et met une estele sus l’os de la jambe; puis emple le leu vuit entre la jambe et la cuixe de drapelz souef por mettre igal l’estrignement, puis comence a liier forment III tors ou IIII sus la briseure; et quant plus vas en sus de la briseure, et moins l’estraint; puis enten as II chiés dou fil que tu as bouteit entre la jambe et la cuixe, et en lie III esteles que sont desus, puis revai au desoz au chief dou fil, tant que tu veignes delez le piet; et l’estraint, si qu’il ne se mueve de son leu, puis le laisse ensi, puis k’il n’i vient ne aposteme ne enfleure n’autre semblant.	You should wrap a strong folded bandage two or three times around the fracture; then pull the leg so that the heel comes to the root of the nail, and thread a long piece of thread between the thigh and the leg below the knee, with the end of the thread coming up above; then wrap the bandage around the leg and thigh again; then place splints on top of the fracture and one splint on the bone of the leg; then fill the space between the leg and the thigh with soft rags to make the binding even; then start to tie it securely three or four times around the fracture; and as you go higher up the fracture, ease the tightness; then tie two ends of the thread that you have threaded between the leg and the thigh, and tie three splints that are on top, then go back down to the end of the thread below the foot; tighten it so that it does not move from its place, then leave it as it is, until no abscess or swelling or anything else comes.
Et s’il i avient, si le deslie, et adresce ceu que i vient, si com nos avons dit maintes fois; et se il i a pieces de l’os que poigne, si le covient ewer, s’om puet; et s’on ne puet, si covient fendre le leu, et traire fuer; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant k’il soit sanez.	And if it happens, you should loosen it and address what has happened, as we have said many times; and if there are pieces of bone that protrude, they should be removed if possible; and if not, the area should be split open and cleaned; and the wound treated as we have said until it is healed.
Et aucune fois est brisie li cuixe ensi c’on i met esteles, si com en l’ajutoire et ou bras; toutevoie, en la restauration ensi faite ne cloche mie li malaides.	And sometimes the thigh is broken in this way, with the placement of splints as in the shoulder and arm; nevertheless, the malady is not cured with this treatment.
Et saiches que li cuixe est restoree en .l. jors, ou poc moins ou poc plus, selonc les diversitez des complexions.	And you should know that the hip is restored in one day, or a little less or more, according to the different constitutions.
de la ruelle dou genoil	of the joint of the knee
Saiches que en la ruelle dou genoil avient poc brisure, mais elle ploie maintes fois.	Know that in the knee joint there is little breaking, but it bends many times.
Et s’elle brise, si n’est mais c’une fendure, ou I pertus, et avient a tout plaie, et sens plaie, et ce sent om bien.	And if it breaks, it is only a split, or a perforation, and it happens with any wound, and without a wound, and this feels good to everyone.
Et li restauration si est c’on mette igal ceu qui est rons a ses dois, tant qu’il soit assemblez mues c’on puet; puis met l’emplaustre, et i met une estele reonde, se tu en as mestier, et l’estraint si com il covient, puis rewarde toutes les dispositions que nos avons dit ens autres briseures, si com aposteme chaut et autre semblant; si met a chescun accident ceu k’il li covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the restoration is that one puts what is broken back in place with their fingers, as long as it can be; then apply the plaster, and if necessary, put on a round splint, and bind it as it should be; then follow all the instructions we have given for other fractures, such as hot abscess and similar conditions; then treat each accident as appropriate, until it is healed.
de la brisure de la jambe	of the fracture of the leg
Saiches que en la jambe ait II os, de coi li uns est apelez par droit non «mustelz», et li autres est apelez «foscile»; et avient tout auteil briseure com il vient au bras, et por ceu est li restauracion si com celle dou bras igalment, et li ovraiges est tout i. Et se li dui os sont brisiet ensamble, si torne li jambe de toutes pars.	Know that in the leg there are two bones, one of which is called by right 'mustelz', and the other is called 'foscile'; and all injuries happen as they do in the arm, and therefore its restoration is the same, and the work is all the same. And if both bones are broken together, then the leg turns from all sides.
Et se li os subtilz est brisiez, si torne devant.	And if only the smaller bones are broken, then it turns forward.
Et se li gros os est brisiez, si sent on grant dolor, et le voit on bien; et torne desoz.	And if the large bone is broken, one feels great pain and sees it well; and it turns inside out.Et se li petit os est brisiez, il n’en sent mye dolor, et ne le voit on mye, et ne le sçait on mye, si ne est pas li membre tortu, et le membre est igalement en son droit.
Adonques amenistre extension, et le met igal, et lie les esteles igalement; mais toutevoie, il covient se li brisure est laide, et il i a plusors pieces, que li extension soit menor et plus legiere; et l’alige selonc ta vertu.	Then provide extension, and make it even, and tie the bones evenly; but still, if the fracture is ugly, and there are several pieces, then the extension should be less and lighter; and adjust according to your skill.
Et quant tu as tout acomplit ton ovraige, si pren .ij. faixes de fust chevees que porpreignent la jambe d’une part et d’autre, et soient dou lonc de la jambe des le genoil jusque desoz; puis envoloupe en .ij. leus .i. bendeil desus et desoz, et le lie em mileu ausi, et a ceste lieure ne pora li jambe decliner a destre ne a senestre, et ensi est bien; et aucun i aministrent .i. bers dou lonc de la jambe, et s’est de fust, et i met on la jambe por warder de movement, et proprement fait on ceu en la brisure ou il a plaie; et remue chescun jor la jambe, por veoir s’il i a aposteme chaut n’autre accident; si le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have finished your work, then take two wooden splints that support the leg on both sides, and make them as long as from the knee to underneath; then wrap two bands around each one above and below, and tie it in the middle, and at this time the leg cannot decline to the right or left, and so it is well; and some people use a board as long as the leg, and they put the leg on it to prevent movement, and properly apply it where there is an injury; and move the leg every day to check for any hot abscess or other accident; then treat it until it is healed.
de la brisure des os dou piet	of the break in the bones of the foot
A la cheville ne vient point de brisure, mais as os dou piet vient aucune fois brisure et as dois poc, et n’i avient fuer que quassure em plusor dispositions.	At the ankle there is no break, but sometimes there is a break in the bones of the foot and also two wounds, and it happens with various injuries.
Et s’il avient as os dou piet brisure, et tu vois ces os sormonter l’un l’autre, si mette si malaides som piet sus la terre, ausi com s’il voloit aler, et puis met maintenant ton piet sus lou sien, lai ou li os sont levez, puis le presse tant k’il reveignent en lor leus; puis met l’emplaustre et estoupes sus, et met desoz lou ventre dou piet une petite tauble a .ij. chiés plains, puis l’estraint au piet avenanment, puis que tu as envoloupez drapelz entor, et autres choses dont tu as mestier.	If it happens that the bones of the foot are broken and you see the bones sticking out, have the patient lie on his back, as if he were going to walk, and then put your foot on top of his, where the bones are protruding, and press down until they return to their places. Then apply the ointment and bandages, and place a small wooden board under the arch of the foot, and then bind it tightly with bandages and other materials as needed.
Et quant .iij. jors ou .iiij. seront passez, si deslie lou liien, car tu troveras les os igalz, soient brisiez, soient desaluez.	And after three or four days have passed, loosen the bandage, for you will find the bones healed, whether broken or dislocated.
Et s’il i a aucuns des dois brisiez, si les restoure, si com nos avons dit as dois de la main; puis met au doi brisiet une estele selonc la longesce dou doi, et soit un poc plus large, puis met desoz le piet celle tauble que j’ai dit, et l’estrain avenanment; et s’il en i a .ij. ou .iij., ou plus, brisiez, si met sus chescun doi une estele selonc sa quantiteit, envoloupee en .i. drapeil de lin, et estraint la tauble desoz lou piet; et soit estans sus lou chief de la tauble defuer lou ventre dou piet, si qu’il le teigne bien.	And if one or both of the toes are broken, set them as we have said for the fingers of the hand; then place a splint according to the length of the toe, and let it be a little wider, and place under the foot that board which I have mentioned, and tighten it appropriately. And if there are one, two, or more broken, place on top of each toe a splint according to its quantity, wrapped in a linen cloth, and tighten the board underneath the foot; and let the end of the board press firmly against the sole of the foot.
Et covient que tu n’oblier mie les autres choses que j’ai dit as autres briseures, des que nos avons dit; et secor chescun accident si com il covient.	And you must not forget the other things I have said about other fractures, since we have spoken of them; and treat each incident as it should be treated.
de la brisure de l’os dou poignil	of the fracture of the bone in the wrist
Quant li os de la nature la femme est brisiez, si la fai seoir enlargie, puis l’encline a la partie dou dos, et soit tenue par derrier; puis emplisse li baile la nature de la malaide de couton, et en i mette ausi gros com I sto; puis deboute la femme, et lieve lou dos poc et poc, et adonques saut li coton, tant qu’il vient a l’entree de la nature, et revient li os avec lou sto; et quant elle vuet pissier, si oste lou coton, et quant elle a pissiet, se li remette, et ensi faice VII jors ou entor: si sera restoree li brisure, et se tu vues, pren une vessie de berbis, et lie au pertus une cainne, et boute toute la vessie en la nature; puis soffle en la cainne forment, tant que li vessie soit enflee dedens: la nature si revenra li brisure; puis soit emplie de coton, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the bones of a woman's nature are broken, she is made to sit upright, then inclined towards her back, and held from behind; then fill the opening of the wound with cotton wool, and insert as many pieces as there are wounds; then help the woman to stand up, and gently flex her back little by little, and thus the cotton will jump out, until it reaches the opening of the wound, and the bones will return with the cotton; and when she wants to urinate, remove the cotton, and when she has urinated, replace it, and so do this for seven days or more: then the fracture will be restored. Then take a lamb's bladder, tie a cane to the opening, fill the entire bladder inside the wound; then blow into the cane forcefully, until the bladder is inflated inside: the wound will close, then it should be filled with cotton, and left like that for some days, until it heals.
Et quant li os dou poignil de l’ome est brisiez, ou de la femme, si le restoure ensi com nos avons dit en l’os de la hainche; et ne sont mie occultees ces briseures prochienes a celui qui i met son estude et son us, et entent mon livre.	And when the bone of the man's or woman's finger is broken, restore it as we have said for the bone of the hip; and these breaks are not hidden from him who puts his study, use, and attention into my book.
Car li brisure li signifie em plusors dispositions la droite voie de la restauration: enten le donques.	For the breaks show in many ways the right way to restore them; understand this therefore.
En la verge, quant elle est brisie, pren une gorge d’oie et i boute la verge; puis envoloupe drapelz entor, et le laisse .iij. jors ou enqui entor, et il sera sanez hastanment.	In the penis, when it is broken, take a goose's throat and bottle it with the penis; then wrap cloth around it, leave it for three days, and it will be healed quickly.
de brisure avec plaie	from breaking with wound
Il covient a celui qui a brisure avec plaie, meismement s’elle est grans, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire ou semblant, qu’il soit sainiez maintenant, si que les sainies que nos avons dit le tesmoignent.	It is necessary for one who has a break with a wound, especially if it is large, such as in the thigh or shoulder bone or similar, to be treated immediately, as the remedies we have described attest.
Et se li plaie saine, si la restainche de vitriole, se tu n’as autre chose, puis rencomence a restorer la briseure en cele meisme houre, ou celui jor, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the wound heals, and there is no infection from vitriol, if you have nothing else, then restart by resetting the dislocation in that same hour, or that day, if no abscesses arise.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si laisse la restauration jusc’a nuevime jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et n’i touchier ne au tier jor ne au quart, car tu i feroies venir malvais accident.	And if a hot abscess comes, let recovery wait until the next day, so that the abscess may be quieted; and don't touch it on the third or fourth day, for you would bring about an evil accident.
Et se li os brisiez est aparans sus lou keur descovert, si covient que tu lou mettes a point legierement a tes mains, a extension petite.	And if the broken bone is appearing on the uncovered chest, one should gently put it back into place with slight extension.
Et se li extensions ne t’est apareillie por mettre igal a tes mains, si le ramoine a cest estrument qui est de fer, qui a .vij. dois ou .viij. de lonc, et li largesce est selonc la quantiteit de la plaie; et por ceu est mestier au mire qu’il empreigne .iii. ou iiij., selonc ceu qu’il en ait mestier en chescune cure de briseure; et soit rons et un poc gros, k’il ne ploie mie a la compression sus lou membre a ton ovraige, et soit agus devant, et gros des le mileu en avant, ensi:	And if extension is not achieved by hand, it can be done with this instrument made of iron, which is seven or eight inches long; and the width should depend on the size of the wound. For this, a mirror is needed so that one can see how much is needed in each case of fracture: it should be round and slightly thick so as not to bend under pressure when applied to the affected area, with a point in front and thicker from the middle forward, thus:
Et est apelez «palainche», por coi il covient que li chiés corbes soit mis sus lou chief de l’os apparent; et le boute a une fois, tant k’il reviegne, et soit igalz l’un encontre l’autre.	And it is called "palainche", so that the curved head of the bone should be placed upon the apparent bone; and it is pressed once, until it returns, and is even with the other.Et li chiés de la mainteine, si il est desaloiez et ne puet demorer, covient le ramoner a la première dislocation; car il n’est pas bon qu’il soit contusioné en plusors lieux.
Et se li brisure est subtilz, et li estrumens ne puet bien prendre l’os, si covient que tu copes lou chief de l’os, tant que li estrumens en ait possance.	And if the dislocation is subtle, and the instrument cannot hold the bone well, then you must chip the head of the bone, so that the instrument can hold it.Et si li brisure est griez, et le chef de l’os est trove par la pelezure del chiés, si covient que tu ramones la dislocation premierement; car il n’est pas bon qu’il soit contusioné en pluxors lieux.
Et se tu ne pues ramener l’os, si com nos avons dit, si lou cope d’un estrument covenable a ceu, ou incisoire ou soieure, a ton pooir; puis reis ceu qui est demorez en l’os d’aspreteit et de menues escorces.	And if you cannot reset the bone, as we have said, then use the head of a suitable instrument, or a knife or saw, according to your skill; then remove that which is lodged in the bone by rasping and cutting away tiny pieces.
Et quant li os est ramenez, et li malaides sent grant dolor aprés, saiches qu’il n’est mie en son leu natureil.	And when the bone is reset and the patient feels great pain afterwards, know that it is not in its natural place.
Si fai tant qu’il soit en son leu, puis moille I drapeil en vin stiptique noir, et proprement se c’est en esteit; et ne mettre mie sus la plaie cerote ne autre chose ou il ait oile, qu’il n’i faice venir porriture et corruption; puis aministre esteles quant tu as restoreit l’os, et laisse la plaie descoverte, et cope la coverture tout entor, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et te done bien en garde que li plaie ne soit estrainte avec la brisure; et maintes fois ont ce fait li fol mire, et ont fait venir sus le malaide ou mort ou corrodent aucune fois; et soit li estrignemens plus molz et plus souef des autres brisures.	Then do what you can to put it back in its place, then moisten the cloth with red wine and apply it properly if there is swelling; and do not put any ointment or other substance on the wound that might cause pustules and corruption; then apply the bandages once you have reset the bone, leave the wound uncovered, and wrap the dressing around according to the size of the wound, and be very careful that the wound is not pressed by the binding; and many foolish people have done this, causing death or corrosion in some cases; and the compression should be softer and gentler for dislocations.
Et se li plaie est male ou grans, et tu doutes que mavais accidens n’i veigne, si com nos avons dit, et tu trueves dolor au leu, si n’i covient mie mettre sus esteles; mais envoloupe entor, en leu d’esteles, drapelz durs, et les lie.	And if the wound is large and deep, and you fear an evil outcome as we have said, and you find pain in the area, then do not put bandages on it; but wrap around it, instead of bandages, hard cloths, and tie them.Et si li os est desaloez et tu ne le puit demourer en son leu, se il adonques vout remener et demourer en lor leu natureil, failles tant qu’il soit en son leu; et si ne le poigniez mie a li nassances, por quoi il ne s’esloigne mie de son leu natureil.
Et quant tu vois aprés I jor ou II enjanrer bowe a la plaie, si oste ceu que tu as mis sus a tout vin, et i met oignement sanant plaies, si com oignement tetrafarmaçon et semblans.	And when you see after one or two days that pus is coming from the wound, then remove what you have put on it and put on an ointment that heals wounds, such as tetrafarmaçon and similar ointments.
Et covient que tu deslies lou membre .ij. fois le jor, lou matin et au vespre, tant qu’il soit soudez et sanez.	And when the bone is back in its natural place, it should be made comfortable and not restricted; and if there are great pains, anoint with healing oil or ointment by rubbing, such as oil of larkspur, or of laurier, or of garlic, or of onions, or of other healing oils.
Et covient que li membres soit aparilliez en teil maniere que li bowe corre aval legierement.	And it is necessary for the limb to be prepared in such a way that the bowstring runs downstream easily.
Et se maint jor trespassent, et il ne puet souder mais rent adés bowe, saiches k’il i a petites pieces d’os, por coi il covient que tu quieres la plaie avec tente, et oste toutes ces pieces desevrees que font venir celle dolor.	And if they persist for many days and the bow cannot be set but keeps slipping back, know that there are tiny pieces of bone causing this, so you must probe the wound with a probe, and remove all these broken pieces that cause the pain.
Et se fistule vient au leu, ou autre maniere de corruption, si covient que tu le cures, selonc ceu qu’il dist en son chapistre ci devant.	And if a fistula or other form of corruption occurs, you should treat it according to what he said in the chapter above.
Et quant li os est brisiez, et apert sus lou membre, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire, et autres semblans des grans membres, si ne le traire mie, car maintes fois en vient li mors, mais le laisse tant qu’il porrisse; par aventure cherra par lui aprés XX jors ou XXX, puis cure la plaie, se tu pues; et se tu ne pues, si la laisse.	And when a bone is broken and open in the limb, such as in the thigh or shoulder and similar large limbs, you should not treat it at all, for many times death will result; but let it be until it can heal; perhaps it will close up after 20 or 30 days, then cure the wound if you can; if you cannot, leave it.
des brus qui vienent sor la sodure	of bruises that come over the soudure
Nous vienent maintes fois aprés la santeit de la briseure, meismement quant c’est pres de la jointure, et laide chose est a veoir li figure dou membre; et par aventure ne puet faire li membres ses ovraiges naturelz.	Health often comes after the fracture, especially when it is near the joint, and it is an ugly sight to see the distorted limb; and sometimes the limb cannot perform its natural functions.
Pren warde donques se li nous est fres: si li aministre medicines stiptiques, si com aloes, encens, et mirre, et sarcocolle, acaice, et semblans autres, ensi que tu preignes aucune de ces choses, ou toutes ensamble, et les confit avec vin stiptique ou avec abun d’uef ou avec aisil; et les met sus le nout en estoupes, et l’estraint bien, et ne la desliier en mains jors; et puis la desloie, et rencomence une autre, tant que li nodations soit ostee; ou tu estrain sus une piece de plonc bien faite; car li proprietez dou plonc si est qu’il oste toutes les enfleures desus les membres; et se li nodation est ja convertie en durteit ausi com piere, et il est besoing de l’oster, si la cope desus, et fent la superfluiteit apparent; ou tu la reis a aucun raseur, tant qu’ele soit ostee, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Take care therefore if the pus is fresh: administer to him astringent medicines such as aloes, incense, myrrh, and sarcocolla, acacia, and similar others, so that you prepare any of these substances or all together, and cook them in wine, vinegar, egg white, or garlic; place it on the wound in poultices, and keep it tightly bound for several days; then loosen it, and reapply another one, until the swelling goes down; or apply a piece of well-prepared plaster, for the properties of the plaster are such that it removes all swellings from the limbs; if the swelling has turned into a hardness like stone, and needs to be removed, cut it away, and bring out the excess material; or have it removed by a surgeon, so that it heals, and is cured.
dou membre qui est foibles aprés la garison	of the limb which is weakened after healing
Quant li brisure de l’os est restoree, et demoure aprés li membres foibles et subtilz, si avient por mout de causes: de coi l’une est por ceu qu’il fut liiez trop estroit, et ne fut mie liiez si com il covenoit; ou por ceu qu’il i ot trop de liiens, et ne pooit venir li norrissemens au membre; ou por multitude d’arosement; ou por trop grans movements, ne mie en son houre; ou por ceu qu’il a poc de sanc en son cors, si est foibles.	When the fracture of the bone is healed, and the limb remains weak and thin, there are several causes for this: one is that it was bound too tightly, and not bound as it should have been; or because there were too many bandages, and the limb could not receive its nourishment; or due to excessive bleeding; or because of too much movement, and not at the right time; or because there is a lack of blood in his body, and he is weak.
Et li cure si est que tu faices mengier le malaide, et faire le cors tendre, tant que li sans soit multipliiez en lui; et li aministre bain, et li done joie et liesce; puis met poix sus le membre, si que li poix atraie a li grant norrissement, et l’arose sovent d’aigue tede, tant que li norrissement corre au membre; et reviegne a sa figure natureil.	And the cure is that you cause the patient to eat, and make the body tender, so that the blood is multiplied in him; and administer a bath to him, and give him joy and rest; then apply pitch to the limb, so that the pitch attracts to the great swelling, and moisten it often with warm water, so that the swelling subsides into the limb; and return to its natural figure.
dou membre tort aprés la santeit	until the limb is straightened after health
Quant li membres est tors aprés la restauration, et li os brisiez apert, et li forme dou membre est laide, toutevoie ne pert mie son ovraige natureil: si ne croire mie les folz qui dient c’on doit brisier lou membre tout de noveil, et maint fol mire ont ce fait en nostre terre; et cist ovraiges est blamez, et en vient grans malz, et par aventure li mors; toutevoie, se li nodations et li torture sont fres, si covient k’il soient arosez d’aigue chaude, ou herbes mollifians soient cuites, si com foilles de vismalve, et racines, et mellilote, et semblans choses; et li fai .i. emplaustre mollificatif, si com dyaquilon bien fait, et tu pren le muscillaige de vismalve, et la confit avec graisse de geline ou oile de sisament, et fai emplaustre sus; ou tu pren figues graisses, et les broie avec fien de colon, et semblans medicines que amenuisent le soudement.	When the limb is twisted after healing, and the broken bone is open, and the shape of the limb is deformed, nevertheless it does not lose its natural function; so do not believe the foolish who say that one must break the limb completely anew, and many fools have done this in our land; and these actions are blamed, and great harm results, and sometimes death; nevertheless, if the dislocations and tortures are recent, they should be moistened with warm water, or soft herbs are cooked, such as leaves of marsh-mallow, and roots, and honey, and similar medicines that soften: and you make an ointment with marsh-mallow silk, and confit it with tallow of ewe or olive oil, and apply the ointment on; or you take fatty figs, and grind them with colon-fennel, and similar medicines that soften.
Et aucune fois est ostee li nodacion por froter continuelment et longement a mains moistes.	And sometimes the dislocation is caused by continuous and prolonged rubbing with moist hands.
Et soit amenistrez movement au membre chescune houre.	And bring about movement in the limb every hour.
Et se li tortuositez est enveillie et endurcie, ausi com piere, et besoins est de l’oster au fer, si la covient coper jusc’a l’os, a l’incisoire subtil legierement; et mettre cusenson et estude en la cure.	And if the tortuousness is awake and hardened, like stone, and needs to be removed with iron, then it must be cut to the bone with a subtle and light incision; and apply poultice and study in the treatment.
Ci encomence li livres des dislocations	Here begins the book of dislocations
Dislocations est issue d’aucune jointe de son leu, por coi il ne se puet muevre, et est li membres mal figurez, et sent li malaides grant dolor et grant lesion.	Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
Quant dislocation vient a aucun, si le covient maintenant ramener sens targier.	When dislocation occurs in someone, one must immediately bring it back into alignment without delay.
Car s’on tarde, si enfle li leus, et par aventure si le remet on a poines au leu; por ceu ne covient mie c’on le mueve a l’oure k’il est enflez: maintes fois fait venir spame et autres dolors; toutevoie, quant ce avenra, si fai sainier lou malaide, puis le laisse, tant que li apostemes chas soit apaisiez; puis arose le membre d’aigue chaude et d’oile, puis le ramoinne legierement, et cure chescun membre si com li cure venra en son leu.	For if one delays, the area will swell and if one tries to reset it, it may do harm; therefore one should not move it at the hour that it is swollen: many times it brings on spasm and other pains; nevertheless, when this happens, let the patient be bled, then let him rest until the abscesses are suppurating; then warm the affected area with hot water and oil, then reset it gently and treat each part as the healing comes.
Et j’ai ordenez les chapistres des dislocations des lou chief jusc’a piez.	And I have ordered the chapters on dislocation from the head to the feet.
des mandibules	of the jaws
Poc avient que les mandibules soient desaluees andous, et li dislocations d’ambedous est selonc .ij. manieres: ou elles sont un poc ostees de lor leus, et mollifies un poc; ou elles sont desaluees entierement, et pendent vers lou pis, et cort li salive de la bouche qu’il ne la puet tenir, ne ne puet clore sa bouche, et envoloupe sa langue avec la parole.	Then it happens that the mandibles are dislocated on both sides, and the dislocations of both are according to two manners: either they are a little displaced from their places and softened a little; or they are completely dislocated, and hang towards the feet, and saliva flows from the mouth which he cannot hold, nor can he close his mouth, and he wraps his tongue with speech.
Quant li dislocations est petite, si revient par li em plusors disposicions.	When the dislocation is small, it returns by itself in several ways.
Et s’elle est entiere et acomplie, si covient que tu la ramoinne hastanment, et ne targier mie; et en tel maniere que li ministres teigne le chief dou malaide, et boute li mires som pochet de l’une de ses mains en la racine de la dislocation de la mandibule dedens la bouche, se li dislocations est de II pars; et li autre doi des mains soient defuer, por mettre igal; et comande au malaide qu’il les amollisse, ses mandibules, et les mueve de toutes pars.	And if it is whole and complete, then you should reset it quickly without hesitation; and in such a way that the assistant grabs the head of the patient, and puts his thumb of one hand into the mouth at the root of the dislocation of the jaw if the dislocation is on both sides; and let the other fingers be straight to provide stability; and instruct the patient to relax his jaws and move them in all directions.
Et li mires la mete igal, tant qu’elle reveigne en son leu.	And the priest looks at her equally, until she returns to her place.
Et se li ramener est griés, meismement se ce sont les .ij. mandibules ensamble, si les arose d’aigue chaude et d’oile, tant que les ramoinnes legierement; ne ne targier mie dou ramener, si com nos avons dit.	And if the dislocation is serious, especially when both mandibles are affected together, they should be soaked in warm water and oil, until they are reset slightly; do not pull on the dislocated jaw, as we have said.
Et quant elles sont ramenees igalment, et li bouche dou malaide clot bien sens mollifiier, si met sus drapelz moilliez en cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire, puis le lie legierement de molz liiens; et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ses chiés soit estans entre II cussins, si qu’il ne lou mueve ne a destre ne a senestre, ne ne s’efforce mie de maixier, mais preigne legiere viande, tant que les dolors soient ostees, et soient noees les mandibules; et puis menjuce ce qu’il vuet legierement, et ne se travaille mie d’ovrir la bouche au mengier et au boivre, tant que li mandibule soit bien noee et sanee.	And when they are brought back into alignment and the mouth of the patient is closed well without softening, then place it on moistened sheets with a cerote made from rose oil and wax, then tie it lightly with soft bandages; and let the patient sleep on his back, and his head be supported between two pillows, so that he does not move to the right or left, nor exert himself to speak, but takes light food until the pain is gone and the jaw is healed; and then he may eat whatever he wishes lightly, and not exert himself to open his mouth to eat or drink, until the jaw is well healed.
Et se les .ij. mandibules ne pueent estre remises a point a une houre, et ne sont mie converties a lor leus, si en vient fievres et sode acostumees, et par aventure solution de ventre, et par aventure vomist cole pure.	And if the two mandibles cannot be reset within an hour and are not converted to their places, then fevers and usual sores come, and perhaps stomach issues, and perhaps vomiting pure bile.
Et quant tu verras ceu, adonc saiches que c’est perdicions; et maintes fois muert cil cui il avient, en .viiij. jors.	And when you see this, then know that it is deadly; and many times the person it happens to dies within eight days.
de la forcelle	of the fork
Li forcele ne puet desaluer dou costeit dedens la continuation de li et dou pis, et est desaluee aucune fois au defuer, et bien le sent on.	The forepaw cannot be dislocated from within the continued part of it and from the foot, and is dislocated sometimes by force, and it is felt well.
Et li restauration si est que li malaides gise sovin sor son dos, et estende ses bras; et puis presse le leu forment a ta palme, et elle revenra; puis met sus l’emplaustre et lou bendeil, et l’estraint; et li chiez qui est devers lou coute ne puet desaluer; se poc non, et se il desalue aucune fois, si le ramoinne a son leu, si com nos avons dit; puis met sus l’emplaustre et le bendeil, et l’estraint, et coumande au malaide qu’il se repose tant qu’il soit sanez; et ensi meisme est ramenez li chiés de l’espale, quant il est desevrez de son leu.	And the restoration is that the patient lies on his back and extends his arms; then press the area firmly with your palm, and it will return to its place; then apply the ointment and bandage, and tie it; and the shoulder joint which is near the neck cannot dislocate; if it does, and dislocates at any time, reset it to its place as we have said; then apply the ointment and bandage, and tie it tightly, and instruct the patient to rest until he is healed; and in the same way, the shoulder joint is reset when it has been dislocated from its socket.
de la dislocation de l’espaule	of shoulder dislocation
Saiches que li espaule n’est desaluee fuer que selonc III manieres: de coi l’une est qu’ele desalue a la partie de l’assele au desoz; et li seconde est a la partie dou pis; et par aventure desalue a la partie desus, et ceu avient poc; et ne desalue mie derrier por l’espaule, et ne desalue mie dedens por les ners; et plusors fois desalue desoz vers l’assele, meismement a ces qui ont poc de char, car a ces saut ele fuer hastanment; a ces qui ont assez char, saut ele a poines, et rentre a poines.	Know that the shoulder is dislocated in three ways: one, it dislocates at the bottom part of the armpit; two, it dislocates at the top of the arm; and sometimes it dislocates at the top, but this is rare; and it does not dislocate behind the shoulder or inside for the nerves. It often dislocates under the armpit, especially in those who are thin, as it pops out easily; but in those who are well-built, it only pops out a little, and then goes back in with a slight push.
Et par aventure avient a aucuns homes percussion ou casseure, et enfle li espaule d’un aposteme chaut, et cuide qu’elle est desaluee par ceu.	And by chance it happens to some men that they receive a blow or bruise, and the shoulder swells with a hot abscess, and they think it is dislocated because of this.
Il covient donques que tu l’esprueves, tant que tu en soies certains; et adonques encomence la cure.	Then you must test it until you are certain of it, and then begin the treatment.
Et est conue li dislocations quant il est aval vers l’assele, et met difference entre l’espaule malade et la saine, et tu troveras entre lor diversiteit manifeste; et troveras au chief de l’espaule une fosse, et desoz l’assele au tochier le chief de l’espaule, ausi com se ce soit uns oes; et ne puet li malaides ramener sa main a son neis, ne movoir de nulz movemens; et ausi, s’elle est desaluee en haut, si n’est mie occultee, car tu le trueves manifestement au tochier; et ceste maniere de dislocation n’est mie fors a ramener, quant elle est novele, ou se li enfes est malaides.	And you will recognize a dislocation when it is down towards the armpit, and there will be a clear difference between the sick shoulder and the healthy one; and you will find a pit at the top of the shoulder, and under the armpit at the top of the shoulder, as if it were an egg; and the patient cannot bring their hand to their nose, nor move in any way; and also, if it is dislocated on high, it is not hidden, for you will see it clearly at the touch; and this type of dislocation is not difficult to fix when it is new, or when the child is sick.
Et li maniere est que li ministres lieve la main dou malaide en haut, puis met tes peuchas desoz l’assele, et lieve la jointure a force en haut au leu; et li ministres lieve la main, et l’estende en haut, pues le mette desoz; si venra hastanment.	And the technique is that the minister raises the sick hand, then places his fingers under the shoulder, and forces the joint upward to its place; and the minister raises the hand and extends it upward, then lowers it; this will be effective immediately.
Et s’elle ne vient si com nos avons dit em mains jors aprés, si covient ke li malaides soit baigniez en aigue chaude; et li amenistre arosement mollifiant et assouajant, si com decoction de altee et de fenugrec et de mellilote en aigue, et soit amenistree; puis soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos, et mette on desoz l’assele un sto de lainne igal, ne trop mol ne trop dur, puis mette li mires son talon sus le sto, et lieve le chief de l’espaule vertuousement, et traie la main dou malaide; et uns autres ministres teigne lou chief dou malaide, si qu’il ne se mueve aval; celle espaule revient tout maintenant, et se tu vues si le ramoinne selonc ceste maniere: et est que tu faices estre present I home qui soit plus grans que li malaides; et soit drois devers lou costeit, et boute s’espaule desoz l’assele dou malaide, et lieve l’assele en haut, si que li malaides pende en l’ar; et uns autres ministres traie la main dou malaide aval devers lou ventre.	If it does not return within a few days as we have said, then the patient should be bathed in warm water; and they should be given soothing and softening ointments, such as decoctions of alder, fenugreek, and sweet violet in water, and then they should be rubbed down; next, the patient should lie on their back, and a mattress of wool that is neither too soft nor too hard should be placed under them; then let the healer put his foot on the mattress, and gently lift the top of the shoulder, and pull the hand of the affected side; and another helper should hold the top of the shoulder so that it does not move downward; in this way, the shoulder will return right away, and you should see to it that a man who is taller than the patient stands ready; he should stand upright against the patient's side, press their shoulder under the arm of the affected side, and lift the arm up, so that the patient hangs in the air; and another helper pulls the hand of the affected side downward toward the belly.
Et se li malaides est trop legiers, si pent avec lui aucune chose pesant, et li dislocation revient maintenant.	And if the disease is too slight, one can place something heavy on it, and the dislocation will return immediately.
Et le ramoinne on ausi en autre maniere: et est c’on fiche I lonc tison en terre, dont li chiés soit ausi reons com I pistal, et ne soit ne trop gros ne trop graile; puis soit mis desoz lou malaide, mais k’il ait drapelz souef sus, et li malaides soit estans dou lonc dou fust; puis soit estendue sa main aval d’autre part forment, et li jointure revenra en son leu hastanment; et s’elle ne vuet revenir por toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si fai ceste cure: pren I tison de II bras de grant et IIII dois de large, qui ait le chief reont por mues entrer em parfont desoz l’assele, selonc ceste forme:	And one can also reset it in another way: one should insert the long tison into the ground so that the shoulder is as wide as a pistol, neither too thick nor too thin; then place it underneath the patient, but with a cloth over it, and let the patient be upright; then extend his hand below on the other side, and the joint will return to its place slowly; and if it does not return by all these things we have said, then do this cure: take a tison two arms long and four fingers wide, which has a round tip so that it may easily enter deeply underneath the shoulder, according to this form:
puis lie sus le chief dou fust drapelz souez, que li fust ne blece lou malaide, puis le met desoz l’assele dou malaide; et estende som bras sus le fust dou lonc, et lie l’ajutoire sus le fust, et lou bras au chief de la main, puis met le bras sus .i. eschillon d’une eschiele dou large, et soit estendue li mains aval, et soit laissiez li cors pendans d’autre part: li jointure reva ens maintenant.	then tie a soft cloth to the end of the stick so that the stick does not strike the patient, then place it under the shoulder blade; and extend his arm above the shoulder, and tie the shoulder under the arm, and the arm to the end of the stick; then extend the hand downward, and let the body hang from the other side: the joint will return now.
Et quant elle est ens, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient que tu mettes desoz l’assele une spere de laine igal, puis met l’emplaustre aparilliet de poudre dou molin, avec encens et aubun d’uef, sus toute l’espaule et entor, puis l’estrain desoz l’assele avenanment, et torne le liien sus l’emplaustre, et embraice la main a son col, et soit li mains demorans ensi.	And when it is back in place, however it is, you should put a sphere of wool under the shoulder blade, then apply the prepared ointment made from mill dust, with incense and egg white, over the entire shoulder and around it; then stretch it underneath the shoulder blade gently, and tie the string over the ointment, and embrace the hand to his chest, and let the arm remain like this.
Et covient qu’il menjuce poc, tant que li membres soit confortez, car il sanera plus tost; et puis menjuce plus aprés .v. jors ou .vij., et le mueve; et s’il est fermeis et il n’est mollifiez, si est sanez.	And it is necessary that he eats little, as long as the limb is comfortable, for it will heal faster; and then eat more after 5 or 7 days, and move it; and if it is stiff and not softened, then it is healed.
Et se li jointure est fuer de leu por moistor que i est venue, ou por autre cause, si covient que tu i aministres cauteres a III pertus, si com il est mis devant ou chapistre des cauteres.	And if the joint has left its place due to moisture or for any other reason, you should administer cauteries to it at three openings, as described in the chapter on cauteries.
Et se tu fais tout ceu, et il deslie aprés .vij. jors, et li jointure ne se tient, et ne puet lever som bras amont, adonc saiches que li nerf au chief de l’espaule sont copeit ou estendut ou amollis; et saiches que li jointure n’iert jamais fichie en son leu.	And if you do all this, and it dislocates after 7 days, and the joint does not hold, and he cannot lift his arm upward, then know that the nerves at the head of the shoulder are severed or stretched or softened; and know that the joint will never be firmly in its place.
Li dislocation qui est devers lou pis, et les mameles, ou derrier, si est faite par impulsion, et estendement de mains, et i aministre on autre lieure; et cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Dislocations that are towards the bottom, and in the breasts, or behind, are made by pushing and stretching with the hands, and one administers to it something else; and treat it until it is healed.Et se li dislocation est devers lou haut, et les costes, si covient qu’on le tire adés, et qu’il soit confortez a li chief del espaule, et li mameles, et li costes, et li bras, et li nerf qui vens del chief; et s’il est fermeis et ne se meut, si est sanez.
Et se aprés la sanation vient grietez au membre, et tardemens em movement, si use li malaides bain maintes fois, tant que celle grietez soit alegie, et reviegne a sa premiere nature.	And if after healing there is pain in the limb, and with movement it becomes worse over time, then the patient should use the bath many times until the pain goes away and returns to its original nature.
de la dislocation dou coute	of the dislocation of the shoulder
Saiches que li jointure dou coute est desaluee a poinnes, et a poinnes revient; et s’est desaluee de toutes pars, et meismement devant et derrier, et li dislocations n’est mie reponue, car on la voit bien et sent bien; et desalue selonc chescune figure.	You know that the joint of the shoulder is dislocated by pain, and it returns with pain; and if it is dislocated in all parts, especially in front and behind, and the dislocation is not reduced, for one can see and feel it well, and it dislocates according to each figure.
Et quant tu joins le coute malaide avec lou sain, si le pues veoir apertement.	And when you join the sick neck with the healthy one, you can see it clearly.
Car li jointure est chevee, et ne puet ploier lou bras, ne touchier son espaule a tout.	Because the joint is damaged and cannot bend the arm or touch its shoulder at all.
Et covient que tu le ramoinnes ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne, car se apostemes chaus i venoit, si seroit grief li ramener; et par aventure ne puet estre ramenez dou tout en tout, meismement quant ele est au derrier; si vaut pis que les autres dislocations, et est de plus grant dolor, et par aventure i vient li mors.	And you must reset it as soon as the hot abscess comes out, for if the hot abscess comes out, then it is painful to reset it; and by chance it may not be able to be fully reset all over, especially when it is at the back; then it is worse than other dislocations, and there is more pain, and by chance death comes.
Et li restauration si est, quant elle est telz c’on la puet ramener, que tu li estendes sa main a tes .ij. mains; et ses bras soit espandus, et les mains dou mire selonc le coute entor, desor et desoz, et boute la jointure a ses peuchas ensamble, ou a la racine de sa palme, tant qu’ele reviegne a son leu.	And the restoration is, when it can be reset, that you stretch out his hand with your two hands; and let his arms be spread out, and the hands bent according to the wrist, around, above and below, and push the joint to its roots together, or to the root of his palm, until it returns to its place.
Et se li dislocations est au devant, si revient quant il double sa main a sa main, et fier de la racine de la palme lou coute qui est desaluez.	And if the dislocation is at the front, then it returns when he bends his hand to his hand, and raises from the root of the palm the wrist which was dislocated.
Et s’il ne vuet revenir au leu, si aministre fort extension; et est que dui ministre estendent le bras, et le teignent dui ministre, si qu’il ne se mueve a l’estension; puis torne le bras de chescune part, puis que tu as envoloupeit un drapeil double lonc et large; et quant li mires a jointe la jointure a sa main, si l’oigne d’aucun oile por amolir la jointure, puis boute la jointure forment, tant qu’ele reviegne; et quant elle est au leu, si met sus emplaustre sec avec aubun d’uef, et l’estrain forment, et pent le bras au col dou malaide, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le deslie.	And if it doesn't want to go back in place, apply strong extension; and while two ministers extend the arm, another two hold it so that it does not move during the extension; then turn the arm from each side, after you have wrapped a long and wide cloth around it; and when you have joined the joint with your hand, anoint it with some oil to soften the joint, then push the joint firmly back into place, and when it is in place, apply a dry plaster with egg white, and stretch it firmly, and bind the arm to the sick neck, and leave it for a few days, then release it.
Et se li jointure est ferme en son leu, si deslie lou liien, et le laisse; et se tu vois que li jointure n’estrigne bien, si rencomence l’emplaustre et lou lien, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit fermement mis; puis le deslie.	And if the joint is firm in its place, then loosen the bandage and leave it; and if you see that the joint isn't fitting well, then re-do the plaster and the bandage, and leave it like this for some days, until it is firmly in place; then loosen it.
Et se il sent grieteit aprés le ramenement de la jointe, et elle se muet, si le baigne et frote bellement, et presse tant qu’il soit assouagiez; ou tu met sus la jointure une naige de mouton grasse, puis la laisse I jor et une nuit, puis l’oste, et lou fai entrer ou bain; et quant il sue, se li frote la jointure tempreement, puis remet la naige sus, et puis entre ou bain; et ensi fai II fois ou III, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues, si met sus fien de vaiche moiste chaufeit avec burre, et l’estrain sus; si revenra a sa disposition.	And if he feels pain after the joint is moved, and it moves, then bathe and rub it gently, and press until it is soothed; or place a fat sheep's ice pack on the joint, then leave it for a day and a night, then remove it, and let him enter the bath; and when he sweats, gently rub the joint, then put the ice pack back on, and then enter the bath; and do this two or three times until he is healed; and if you see, place moist cow dung heated with butter over it, and press it on; then it will return to its natural state.
li dislocation de la main	dislocations of the hand
Li jointure de la main desalue, et li revenue est legiere, plus que les autres jointures Toutevoie, il la covient ramener au leu hastanment, en l’oure meisme qu’ele est desaluee, ainsois que li leus soit enflez, ou qu’il i viegne aposteme chaut.	When the dislocation of the hand is healed, and the return is軽いより than other joints. Nevertheless, it must be returned to its place gently, in the same hour that it was dislocated, so that the joint is swollen or there is a hot abscess.
Et li ramenemens si est que tu mettes la main malaide sus une tauble, et estende li ministres la main, et li mires la mette igal, ensi que il mette sa paume sus l’aparance de la jointure, et la boute tant qu’elle reviegne Toutevoie, il covient que vos regardez s’il est bien a leu; adonc mette li malaides lou dos de sa main sus une tauble a l’estension et au ramenement.	And the remedy is to place the patient's hand on a table, and extend his hand, and you look at it and put it in a straight line so that he places his palm over the appearance of the joint, and press it until it returns; however, you must first ensure that it is in the correct position; then place the patient's backhand on a table for extension and movement.
Et se li dislocations est au dos de la main, si mette li malaides son dos de sa main sus la tauble, et li mires mette sa main sus cele apparance de la jointure.	If the dislocation is at the back of the hand, then put the patient's hand on a table with his palm facing upwards, and let the assistant put his hand on the affected joint.
S’elle revient maintenant, c’est bien Se ce non, si l’estrain d’emplaustres apaisans apostemes chaus, et lou laisse ensi sens rencomencier.	If it goes back into place now, that's good. If not, then apply a warm poultice to soothe the swollen joint and leave it like that without attempting to adjust it again.
Et s’il ne le puet soffrir, et tu ne la pues mettre au leu aprés aucuns jors, si demore li jointure torte; et ne nuist niant au malaide fuer que tant que li mains est amoillie, et ne puet estraindre aucune chose a tout: adonc saiches que li nerf sont copez, ou li artere; si n’i a autre engien fuer que d’estraindre par cautere delez le cas, et par aventure n’i vaut autre chose.	If he cannot bear it and you cannot put it back in place after trying several times, then leave the joint misaligned; and do not harm the patient more than is necessary as long as his hand is swollen and he cannot grip anything: then know that the nerves are cut, or the artery; there is nothing more to be done except to cauterize the wound, and perhaps that is all that is needed.
Et quant li mains est au leu, si met sus l’emplaustre que nos avons dit, puis l’estrain et le laisse .v. jors, puis le deslie et laisse ensi.	And when the hand is in place, then apply the plaster that we have mentioned, then constrict it and leave it for 5 days, then loosen it and let it be thus.
Et s’il ne la puet bien movoir, et il i a aucune grieteit, si la moille d’aigue chaude, et le frote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if he cannot move it well, and there is any swelling, then moisten it with warm water, and rub it until it is healed.
de la dislocation des dois de la main	of the dislocation of the fingers of the hand
Aucune fois sont desaluez li doi de la main a chescune part, aucune fois au dos de la palme ou au ventre; adonques estent le doi, et boute la dislocation a tes pouchés tant qu’il reviegne, puis sostien lou chief dou doi, et le pent vers la partie ou il est desjoins; et le laisse II jors, et puis le met igal celui jor; et de nut le lie, si com nos avons dit, et lou deslie de jor, et lou fai movoir, et le relie la nut; et fai ce sovent, tant qu’il soit estroit, et tout ausi fai, se il est desaluez au ventre de la main, et fai si com tu as fait ci devant, tant qu’il soit sanez; et tout ausi fai, quant il est desaluez d’autre part.	Sometimes the fingers of the hand are dislocated on one side, sometimes at the back of the palm or in the palm; then straighten the finger and push the joint back into place as far as it will go; and hold the finger tip towards the affected part, and leave it like that for two days, and then straighten it during the day, and bind it at night, and move it during the day, and do this often until it is healed. Do the same if it is dislocated in the palm of the hand, and do as described above until it is healed; and do the same if it is dislocated elsewhere.
dou desaluement de l’eschinee dou dos	from the dislocation of the head and back
Quant l’eschinee dou dos ou dou col est desaluee, ou il en i a plusors desaluees, si n’i a point de cure, car li mors haste le malaide.	When the head or neck is dislocated, there is no cure, for death comes quickly with this ailment.
Et li signes si est que li egestions saut fuer sens volunteit, ne ne la puet tenir, et maintes fois sont mollifiez aucun membre, ou les II cuixes ou li dui bras ou I Et maintes fois se muet li eschinee a IIII pars; celle qui se muet au derrier si est apelee «gilbositez»: li cure si est que tu rewarde se li gilbositez est venue d’enfance: si n’i ait point de cure ne de sanation dou tot.	And the signs are that the evacuations occur without willing them, and one cannot hold them back; and often a limb becomes paralyzed, either both legs or both arms or one leg; and often the scrotum changes to four parts; that which happens in the rear is called 'gilbositez'; the cure is that you should investigate whether the gilbositez came from childhood: if not, there is no cure or healing.
Et celle que vient de cheoir ou de percussions ou de semblans choses, dirent li ancien manieres de cures par grans paroles, ou il n’a mie en toutes grant profit; mais je l’ai abregiet selonc mon entention, et ai formez estrumens en diverses manieres.	And that which comes from falling or blows or similar things, the ancient ways of cure described in great detail, but I have abbreviated it according to my intention, and have devised instruments in diverse ways.
Je dis que en la gilbositeit que vient au pis devant, nen a engien ne santeit; et ausi cele que vient droitement en II costez, et ne puet on curer fuers que celi proprement qui vient au dos, si com je dis; et est que li malaides soit estendus sus sa faice en I leu igal, et ait de l’estrain desoz lui, qu’il ne se blece; puis fiche I tison au chief en terre forment, et I autre as piez, et lie un liien pardesoz les asseles dou malaide, et I autre as hainches, et as genous, et as chevilles; et dui ministre saichent les liiens, li uns au chief et li autres as piez, parmi les II tisons; et soient bien fermez, li tison si com nos avons dit, et li mires mette ses paumes sus l’espinee forment, tant qu’ele reviegne.	I say that in the gilbositeit which comes at the front foot, there is no healing; and also that which comes directly on both sides, and one cannot cure it other than through that which comes directly on the back, as I said; and so that the patient is stretched out on his face in one place equally, and has a restraint underneath him, so that he does not bend; then insert a torch at the head into the ground firmly, and another at the feet, and tie a ligature underneath the sores of the illness, and another at the hips, and knees, and ankles; and two servants manage the ligatures, one at the head and the other at the feet, among the torches; and they are tied firmly, the torch as we have said, and the minister puts his palms on the spine firmly, until it straightens.
Et s’elle ne revient par ceste cure, si pren une tauble de III bras de lonc, et chevé desoz la paroit, et li malaides soit en costé, et boute le chief de la tauble desoz la paroit, puis met le mileu de la tauble sus l’espinee; et mette li mires ses piez sus l’autre chief de la tauble, et presse bien, tant qu’il reviegne au leu; et se tu vues, si le fai au tornet qui torne a la main.	And if it does not return through this cure, then take a table three yards long, and lie under the wall, and let the patient be on his side, and place the head of the table under the wall; then put the middle of the table on the spine, and put the patient's feet on the other end of the table, and press well, until he returns to his place; and if you see it, do it in the turn that turns to the hand.
Et est que tu fiches II tisons au chief dou malaide d’un bras de grant, et devers les piez II autres, et ait entre chescun tison, desoure et desoz, une paume d’espaice de lonc; et ait en chescun tison I pertus, ou li tornet corre, et soient li tison fermement en terre, si qu’il ne se muevent; et entre chescuns II tisons ait I tison tornant, sor coi li liien tornent, et ait en II tornans II petis tisons d’une paume de lonc, por torner le tornet; et puis lie lou lien qui est parmi les asseles au tornet devers le chief, et l’autre liien devers les piez a l’autre tornet, et chescuns des ministres torne son tornet a tout le liien, et li maistres mette l’espinee igal si com nos avons dit.	And you fix two torches at the head of the patient's arm, and two others towards the feet, and between each torch, above and below, there should be a palm's width of space; and in each torch there should be an opening where the chain runs through, and the torches should be firmly fixed in the ground so that they do not move; and between each pair of torches there should be a turning torch, on which the chains turn, and on the two turning torches there should be two small torches, each a palm's width long, for turning the chain; then tie one end of the chain, which is among the links, to the chain towards the head, and the other end of the chain towards the feet to the other chain, and everyone of the ministers turns their chain all along the chain, and the master puts the spine even as we have said.
Et quant elle est igalz, si met sus emplaustre desiccatif avec abun d’uef, et puis les estoupes, et puis l’estele d’une tablete de III dois de lonc, que porpreigne lou leu de la gilbositeit et la partie de l’espondile sainne, puis le lie d’un liien, si com nos avons dit, et use li malaides de norrissement subtil, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’aucune chose vient en la fin de la santez, si covient aministrer medicines amollissans et asouajans, avec l’estele que nos avons dit ci devant; et aucune fois i aministre on une piece de plonc, et aucune fois vient li apparance en la derriere spondile dou dos, et cuide on que ce soit dislocations; et c’est li os qui apert, por coi on n’i doit mie avoir presumption: par aventure feroit venir la mort.	And when it is even, then put on a desiccant plaster with the yolk of an egg, and then the towels, and then the cast of a tablet three inches long, which purples the area of the hernia and the healthy part of the spine; then bind it with a ligature as we have said, and use subtle cooling remedies on the patient until he is healed. If nothing comes of this treatment, then administer softening and soothing medicines, using the cast we mentioned earlier. Sometimes they apply a piece of plaster, and sometimes the appearance occurs in the lower spine in the back, and they think it is a dislocation; but it is the bone that is exposed, so one must not have any presumption about it: otherwise it might bring about death.
des dislocations de la hainche	of hip dislocations
Saiches que as jointures de la hainche et as jointures de l’espaule ne vient fuers que dislocacions soulement, ne n’i vient mie si com as autres jointures; et li jointure de la hainche est desaluee selonc .iiij. parties: dedens et defuer ,et devant et derrier; et plus dedens c’aillors, et poc desalue devant et derrier.	You know that the joints of the hip and the shoulder only come about through dislocations, and not as with other joints; and the joint of the hip is dislocated according to four parts: within and without, and before and behind; and most within, and least dislocated before and behind.
Et li conoissance de sa dislocations dedens si est que quant on joint la jambe malaide avec la sainne, si est plus longe, et apert plus li malaides genous que li sains, et ne puet li malaides doubler son genoil au feu; et est li leus qui est delez enflez d’aposteme chaut, por ceu que li chiés de la cuixe vient lai.	And the way to recognize internal dislocation is that when the affected leg is joined with the healthy one, the affected one appears longer, and the affected knee joint appears more protruded than the healthy one, and the affected person cannot bend their knee towards the fire; and there is swelling due to a hot abscess near the hip, because the head of the thighbone has moved there.
Et li signe de celui cui il vient au defuer, si est que cist accident sont contraire a ces devant.	And the sign of him to whom it comes from without, is that this accident is contrary to those before.
Et li signes de celui cui avient au devant, si est qu’il estent bien sa jambe selonc l’acomplissement; toutevoie, ne double mie le genoil sens dolor, et s’on le vuet faire aler, si ne puet avant, et retient son urine, et enfle li angre, et quant il vait, si passe sus le talon.	And the signs of him to whom it happens in front, are that his leg is well according to the completion; nevertheless, he does not bend the knee without pain, and if one wants him to walk, he cannot, and he retains his urine, and the veins swell, and when he goes, he passes over the heel.
Et li signes de celui cui il avient derrier, si est qu’il ne puet espandre son genoil, ne doubler, et est celle jambe plus torte de l’autre, et li angre est mollifié, et est li chiés de la cuixe au leu desoz les costes.	And the signs of him to whom it happens behind, are that he cannot bend or double his knee, and that leg is more crooked than the other, and the veins are softened, and the head of the thigh is at the place below the ribs.
Li ramenemens de ceste semblance de dislocation si est que tu rewarde se li dislocations est anciainne, et elle demore selonc sa disposition, si n’i a nule cure; et n’i covient mie qu’il ait presumption.	The treatment for this kind of dislocation is that you examine whether the dislocation is old, and it remains according to its condition, then there should be no treatment; and one must not have any presumptuousness.
Et en celi dont li dislocation est fresche, et c’est des .iiij. manieres de dislocation, si te haste que tu tornes la jointe, et l’esten dedens et defuer, et la muef a destre et senestre; par aventure si revenra, et n’a mestier d’autre cure.	And for the one in which the dislocation is fresh, and there are four kinds of dislocations, you should quickly turn the joint, and stretch it in and out, and move it to the right and left; perhaps it will return, and will not need any other treatment.
Et s’il ne revient en ceste maniere, si covient que tu apareilles I ministre fort, et esten la jambe fort a II mains, ou a I liien que soit liiez sus lou genoil; et uns autres ministres estende sa main desus en teil maniere qu’il boute ses mains desoz ses asseles, puis l’estrigne d’un souef liien sus la cuixe; et uns autres tigne lou chief dou liien; et estendent amont et aval tuit a une fois, tant que li malaide soit levez de terre a une fois, et demoure pendans.	And if it does not return in this way, you must prepare a strong minister, and stretch the leg strongly with two hands, or with a strap tied above the knee; and another minister stretches his hand above in such a way that he pushes his hands under his buttocks, then binds him with a tight strap above the thigh; and another holds his head with a strap; and they all stretch upward and downward at once, so that the patient is lifted off the ground at once and remains suspended.
Ceste maniere d’estension si est commune as .iiij. semblances, et se li dislocation est revenue, si com nos avons dit, c’est bien.	This stretching method is common for four appearances, and if the dislocation has returned, as we have said, it is good.
Se ceu non, si covient mettre cure a sa semblance Quant li dislocations est au pardedens, si covient que tu sovines le malaide sus son costeit sain, puis met le liien sus la racine de la cuixe, et le leu qui est desoz l’angre, puis estent le liien en haut devers l’angre, et devers la forcele; puis preigne uns autres ministres ses bras, et embraice le gros leu de la cuixe malaide, et l’estende au defuer forment: si revenra a son leu maintenant; et ceste maniere de dislocation est plus legiere des autres.	If not, you must apply pressure to his back. When the dislocation is in the buttocks, you must support the patient on his healthy side, then place a strap above the root of the thigh, and the part beneath the anus; then tighten the strap upward toward the anus and the scrotum. Then have another minister grab his arms and squeeze the fleshy part of the thigh of the affected leg and stretch it outward forcefully: it will return to its place immediately. This type of dislocation is easier to treat than others.
Et se tu ne la pues serrer en ceste maniere que nos avons dit, si covient que tu lies les II piés dou malaide ensamble d’un fort liien souef sus les II talons, et sus les II genous, et soit li jambe malaide estendue II dois plus que li autres; puis soit pendus sus le chief d’un fust, et soit en sus de terre II bras de lonc; puis comande a I ministre qu’il embraice le chief de la cuixe, et soit uns autres ministres pendans avec le malaide, qui embraice forment la cuixe, car li jointure revient maintenant hastanment.	And if you cannot move it in this way which we have said, then tie the patient's two feet together with a strong leather strap over their two heels, and over their two knees, and let the affected leg be extended two inches more than the other; then let him be hung from the end of a pole, and let his arms hang down two arms' lengths; then command a minister to grip the head of the thigh, and have another minister hanging with the patient who grips the thigh strongly, for the joint will return quickly.
Et quant li dislocations est au defuer, si gise li malaides, si com nos avons dit en celui qui a gilbositeit, et estraigne I liien sus la jambe malaide proprement, et sus le peis ausi; puis met II tisons, I au chief et I autre as piez, puis fiche I tison entre les cuixes au malaide emmi la forme; et ait plantei de drapelz moistes entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide, puis estende chescuns ministre devers lui, et li mires mette igal a sa main la dislocation.	And when the dislocation is restored, let the patient lie down as we have said for those with hernia, and tighten the strap on the affected leg properly, and also on the foot; then put two fires, one at the head and one at the feet, then place the fire between the thighs of the patient in the middle; and have damp cloths laid on, so that he does not burn himself, then extend each minister towards him, and let the minister put his hand on the dislocation evenly.
S’elle revient, c’est boin.	If it returns, that is good.
Se ce non, met sus .ie. table, et le presse ensi com nos avons dit en la gilbositeit, et gise li malaides sus le sain costeit.	Otherwise, place him on a table and press it as we have said in the case of dislocation, and lay the patient on his healthy side.
Et quant li dislocations est devant, si covient estendre la jambe malaide hastanment, et selonc ce que j’ai dit; et mette li mires sa paine d’estre sus l’angre malaide, puis presse a l’autre main, et l’estent aval devers lou genoil.	And when the dislocation is in front, one should extend the affected leg gently, and according to what I have said; and the assistant puts his weight on the painful joint, then presses with the other hand, and pushes it downward towards the knee.
Et se li dislocations est au defuer, si ne covient pas estendre le malaide aval, ne lever sus la terre, ains covient qu’il soit ausi com se li hainche estoit desaluee au defuer, si com nos avons dit dou couchement sus les II hainches; et soit sus sa faice, et li lien estendut si com nos avons dit ci devant, et doit om presser sus la jointure a la table; et sera a point quant li malaides estendra ses jambes, et elles seront igalz; adonques ajoste les cuixes, et met l’emplaustre, et l’estrain d’un bendeil, si que li hainche ne se mueve; et se repose III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie, et met l’emplaustre sus; et se tu vois qu’elles soient igalz, si l’estrain, si com devant, et le laisse III jors; puis le deslie, et lou fai aler belement, tant que li membres soit confortez.	And if the dislocation is in the hip, he must not extend his leg downward or raise himself up from the table, but he should lie as though his hip were dislocated on the side, as we have said regarding lying on both hips; and he should lie on his face with the bandage extended as we have said before, and someone should press upon the joint on the table; and when the patient extends his legs, they should be even and parallel; then bring the thighs together, and apply the plaster, and tighten it with a bandage so that the hip does not move; and let him rest for three or four days, then loosen the bandage, and apply the plaster again. If you see that they are even, then tighten it as before, and let him rest for another three days, then loosen the bandage and have him walk comfortably until his limbs are healed.
de la dislocation dou genoil	of the dislocation of the knee
Li genous est desaluez selonc .iij. manieres: c’est a savoir, dedens et defuer, et derrier; et ne desalue point devant.	The knee is dislocated in three ways: that is, inside, outside, and behind; it is not dislocated in front.
Et li signes si est que tu comande au malaide qu’il plie sa jambe a sa cuixe, et s’ele ne s’aert a sa cuixe, saiches qu’il est desaluez; et li restauration de toutes si est que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et estende sa jambe s’il puet, et li met ton dos sus sa faice, et met son piet sus tes piez; puis pren son genoil a tes paumes, et retrai entre tes dois, puis plie les II costez dou genoil forment; et uns autres ministres estende son piet, tant que li genous reviegne a son leu, et li signes est qu’il aert bien sa jambe a sa cuixe legierement; et met l’emplastre sus, et fai aerdre la jambe a la cuixe, et les loie ensamble fort III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie; et ne se travaille mie li malaides d’aler, tant que li membres soit confortez.	And the sign is that you command the patient to bend his leg at the thigh, and if it does not stick to his thigh, then you know that he is dislocated; and the restoration of all is that you make the patient sit up straight, and extend his leg if he can, and put your back on his face, and put his foot on your feet; then take his knee in your palms, and pull between your fingers, then bend both sides of the knee gently; and another minister extends his foot so that the knee returns to its place, and the sign is that he sticks his leg to his thigh lightly; and put the plaster on, and make the leg air to the thigh, and let them heal together for three or four days, then loosen it; and the patient should not work at all until the limb is healed.
Et se li membres n’est a point, si aministre estendement fort, si com nos avons dit en la cure de la hainche, tant qu’il soit sanez	And if the member is not at all, then administer strong stretching, as we have said in the treatment of the hip, until it is healed.
de la dislocation dou talon	of the dislocation of the heel
Li talons est aucune fois esmeus, et aucune fois desaluez plenement, et dedens et defuer.	The heels are sometimes dislocated, and sometimes fully relaxed, both inside and out.
Et li signes si est que li cheville est enflee, et tent avant a la partie ou elle est desaluee: li ramenemens si est legier, et le doit on estendre legierement a ses mains quant il est esmeus soulement.	And the signs are that the ankle is swollen, and test in front of the part where it is dislocated: the movements should be light, and one should gently stretch it with their hands when it is only dislocated.
Et quant il est desaluez dou tot, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et le tigne I ministres fors par la jambe, desus la cheville; puis trai le piet a toi a ta main destre, et puis a la senestre II fois, puis l’estent en haut, et boute bellement lou piet en haut; et fai ce II fois, si com nos avons dit, em boutant et en traiant lou piet; s’elle revient, c’est bien; se ce non, si rencomence l’ovraige, car il revient; et s’il ne puet revenir ensi, si fai gesir lou malaide sor son dos sus terre, et fiche I passeil fermement en terre entre ses cuixes, et lie drapelz entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide; puis teigne li ministres la cuixe, et uns autres ministres estende lou piet a ses mains ou a I liien, k’il lie sus le col dou piet; puis estende chescuns ministres igalment, et li passelz soit adés entre les cuixes dou malaide por retenir le malaide quant on l’estent; puis mette li mires igal la dislocation a ses mains, et uns autres ministres teigne la jambe sainne au desoz, et li dislocation revenra hastanment.	And when it is completely healed, you should make the patient sit up straight, and hold his leg firmly by the ankle; then pull the foot towards you with your right hand, and then with your left hand twice, then stretch it upwards, and pull the foot upwards nicely; and do this twice, as we have said, by pushing and pulling the foot; if it comes back, that is good; if not, then start the operation again, because it will come back; and if it cannot come back like this, then make the patient lie on his back on the ground, and fix the strap firmly in the ground between his buttocks, and wind cloth around it so that it does not slip; then one minister holds the thigh, and another minister stretches the foot with his hands or with a cord tied to the neck of the foot; then each minister stretches equally, and the strap should be placed tightly between the patient's buttocks to hold him steady when he is stretched; then place the mirror evenly in his hand, and another minister holds the healthy leg from below, and the dislocation will return quickly.
Et quant elle iert a point, si met l’emplastre et estoupes sus, et l’estrain forment, et lie lou piet a la jambe, et warde les ners qui sont sus la cheville derrier, que li liiens ne soit trop estrois; puis le laisse II jors ou III, et se li liiens amolist, si l’estrain; puis le deslie au tier jor ou au quart, et deffent a aler lou malaide par IIII jors; et s’il va devant cel termine, ce n’est mie seurtez qu’il ne desalue encor.	And when it is at its worst, then place the plaster and gauzes on top, and stretch it firmly, and tie the foot to the leg, and guard the nerves that are behind the ankle joint, so that the bandages are not too tight; then leave it for two or three days, and if the bandages loosen, then stretch it again; then untie it on the third or fourth day, and the patient should be able to walk within four days; and if he walks before that time, there is no guarantee that he will not relapse.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si covient que tu l’apaises, si com nos avons dit autre part, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if painful abscesses arise, then you must soothe them as we have said elsewhere, until they heal.
des dois	of the two
Quant li doi sont desaluez, si les covient bellement estendre sens travail, et c’est legiere chose.	When the arms are dislocated, one should stretch them gently without force, and this is a minor issue.
Et se li dislocations est en aucun nout dou dos dou piet, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide sus I leu plain ou sus .ie. table tot droit, et met ton piet sus ce qui apert de ces jointures, puis presse a ton piet forment, tant qu’il reviegne; et quant il est igalz, et il n’i apert nient, si met desoz la plante dou piet une table a II chiés, puis l’estrain forment, et le laisse III jors, puis le deslie; et le fai reposer, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the dislocation is in the lower back of the foot, then you should make the patient sit upright on a flat surface or table, and place your foot upon what is visible of the joints, then press firmly upon your foot until it is restored; and when it is even again, and there is nothing protruding, then place under the sole of the foot a board with two legs, then stretch it firmly, and leave it for three days, then untie it; and let him rest until he recovers.
de plaie et de dislocation ensamble	of wounds and dislocations together
Quant plaie vient avec la dislocation, et on la vuet restorer, maintes fois avient que li malaides muert: si ne soies mie presumptuous en la cure, se tu n’es saiges en l’art et tu ne l’as useit longement, et se tu n’es pitous et misericors et tardis, ne mie hardis; et use au comencement de choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et laisse le malaide en la main Deu, se tu n’i vois esperance de santeit; et quant tu i vois esperance, si ramoinne maintenant le membre au leu, ainsois que li apostemes chaus i viegne; et quant li membres est a leu, si aministre choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et cure la plaie, si com il covient, d’oignemens desiccatis; et se avec la dislocation a brisure, et os menus desevrez, si les oste, et fai ce que nos avons dit en maladies simples; et te garde d’entrer en voie de paour, selonc ce que j’ai dit, car ce te vaut mues selonc ton Creator, et por la saveteit de t’arme et de ton cors.	When injury accompanies dislocation and you wish to restore it, many patients die; so do not be presumptuous in the treatment unless you are wise in the art and have practiced it for a long time, and unless you are compassionate and merciful and cautious, nor bold. At the outset, use warm poultices to soothe the abscess, and leave the patient in God's hand if you see no hope of recovery; but if you see hope, then immediately return the limb to its proper place, allowing the hot poultice to do its work; and when the limb is back in place, administer warm poultices to soothe the abscess and treat the wound as it should be treated with drying ointments. If there is a fracture and broken bones, set the bones and do as we have said for simple fractures; and beware of rushing into treatment out of fear, as I have said, for this can lead to harm according to your Creator, and for the safety of your soul and body.
Amen	So be it.
